GRACE, MERCY, AND PEACE, CONTAINING 1 Gods Reconciliation to Man, 2 Man's
Reconciliation to God.


By Henry Den An unworthy servant of the Church,

Not by Arms nor by power but by my spirit says the Lord of Hosts, Zach: 4.5.
LONDON, Printed for the Benefit of the City of Rochester.

A Prayer.
O Lord God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who have given commandment unto
thy Apostles and Ministers to preach the Gospel to every Creature; Bell old O
Lord the oppositions; and threatenings, which the enemies of thy Grace have
breathed forth against thy truth, and thy servants for thy truths sake. How
they gnaw their toungs for pain, and blaspheme the God of (...) not repenting
them of their deeds. Behold the troops that are assembled together against the
Lord, and against his anointed son Jesus Christ; for to to do whatsoever thy
hand and thy counsel has determined before to be done. Now let the Lord grant
unto his servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word, being
nothing terrified by the Adversary: That the light of the Grace of God, may
shine in the hearts of his people, that the man of sin and son of perdition
may be destroyed by the brightness of thy coming Amen.

Acts 10.36. Preaching Peace by Jesus Christ.


IT was our Saviors Commandment unto his Apostles Luke 10 into whatsoever
City ye come say unto them the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you verse. 9.
And into whatsoever house ye enter first say peace be unto this house, And if
the son of peace be there your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall
turn to you again verse 5.6. I am this day by the providence of the Almighty,
comea stranger to your City, And now what fitter subject, can I think of for a
stranger to speak unto strangers than the glad tidings of Peace by Jesus
Christ.

Cornelius the centurion, with his kinsmen, and near Friends, are the Auditors
Peter is the preacher. And this text a part of that sermon at the preaching
whereof the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. verse. 44. O that
the Lord would vouchsafe that the like effect may this day follow the
preaching, of the word of this life. That as many as hear me this day; may go
away, filled with the fulness of God. Peter does seem to say in effect, thus
much, you are here met together, to attend unto the word of salvation,
delivered from my mouth, I can preachto you no other gospel, then that which
was before by the Prophets declared unto the children of Israel, in due time
to be revealed (that is to say) Peace by Jesus Christ he is the Lord of all.

The Proposition from these words, is that, the Gospel, is a Doctrine of
Peace, by Jesus Christ.

This Doctrine propounded, needs not so much proof, as explication namely,
to show unto you, what manner of Peace this is which is holden forth unto you,
by the tender of the glorious Gospel. I hope you do not expect, that I should
this day declare unto you, any outward, temporal, or worldly Peace; in the
midst of these distempers, I would I might, and be yet a true Prophet. The
Peace which is the subject of the Gospel is like the Kingdom of Christ, [being
indeed a part of it] not of this world: John 18.46. The Peace which came by
Jesus Christ, is not an earthly Peace, our blessed Savior will not, that you
should entertain, or harbor such a thought, as this: Think not that I am
come to send Peace on earth, I came not to send Peace, but the sword; for I am
come to set the daughter in law against her mother in law, and a man (...)
shall be they of his own household: Math. 10.34. If any one then shall preach
unto you, that if you will embrace the Gospel, you shall have outward Peace,
and prosperity: Is not this the presuptious man speaking His own words: Is not
this the prophet prophesying in his own name, whom the Lord has not sent? If
any christian shall embrace the Gospel, in hope to attain outward felicity and
prosperity, let me tell him, his thoughts wander from the truth, and he erreth,
not knowing the Scriptures, for if any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. Mat. 16.24. And all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12. Hear we also
what Paul says. 2. Cor. 11.23.24.25. verses. In stripes above measure, in
prisons more frequent, in deaths often, of the Jews five times received I forty
stripes save one, (that is in all 195. stripes) thrice was I beaten with rods,
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I been
in the deep, in iorneying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the
city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils amongst
false brethren, In wearines and painfullnesse, in watchings often In hunger and
thirst, In fastings often, In cold and nakedness, what a catalogue of evils,
what an inventory of afflictions have we here? And yet all this and more is the
portion of a laborious Apostle. And if we will seek for a true and sincere
Minister of the Gospel, we shall, as soon find him in poverty and nakedness, as
jetting up and down the streets with attendants at his heels, we shall as soon
find him in the universitie of Newgate, or some other prison, as in great men's
houses, we shall as soon him in a cloud of reproach, as in a fat benefice or
Cathedral dignity, we shall as soon find him at the Bar accused, of heresy,
condemned for blasphemy as in the Courts of Kings, or Princes: for to the
instruction and consolation of the people of God be it spoken, they shall put
you art of their Synagouges, yea the time comes, that whosoever kills you,
will think that he does God service John 16. Seeing then that it is clear, that
it is no worldy peace, it remains yet to show you what peace this is which
the Gospel preaches. It is not an external peace, but it is internal. yea
eternal; It is a lasting, yea an everlasting peace, A peace which no tongue is
sufficient to express, nor heart to conceive it is even the love of Christ
that passes knowledge Ephesians. 3.19. It is even the peace of God which passes al.
yea angelical understanding If some great and (...) angel should undertake to
declare this peace to you am consident he would confess his abilities too
weak, how much more I that am but dust and ashes? Surely when I shall have told
you all that I am able I shall not tell you one hundredth part, and when you
shall understand and believe all that you are able, you shall not attain unto
the least part of that glory which shall hereafter be revealed; though I am not
able to speak what you desire, or the thing it self deserves, yet I will
endevout to speak what I am able: And I shall commend unto you a twofold Peace,
the first Descending, The second ascending. The first is the tidings of the
love and reconciliation of the everliving God unto the sons of men.

The second declares the reconciliation of the sons of men to the everliving
and everloving God.

To speak plain, first I will show, how God comes to be reconciled unto men.
Bear with the term reconciled although improperly spoken of him that was never
an euemy. Secondly, I will show you how we come to be reconciled unto God. For
the first How does God come to be reconciled to men?

I conceive now the drooping conscience that sits in darkness under the cloudy
apprelhension of an angry Judge, under the fearful expectation of a terrible
account, to be given unto the consuming fire, will be very attentive to hear
that which his heart so thirsts after How God may be reconciled. Oh what shall
I do, says the soul, to obtain the favor of God? What shall I do to turn
away his wrathful displeasure from me wherewith shall I come before him? or
how shall I appease him? Attend therefore and I shall declare that which thou will hardly believe, when it is told unto thee: for Lord who has believed out
report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, Isa. 53.1. And yet that
which I shall declare (if thou can believe it, will fill thy mouth with
laughter and thy longue with singing, Psalm. 126.2 Take this proposition, God is
freely, and fully reconciled to the elect, and loves them in Jesus Christ
without any previous dispositions, without any qualifications, without any
performances of conditions on their parts, unless to be polluted and finful be
a previous condition or qualification. This is a bold proposition will the
pharisee say, this is too good news, to be true will the distressed soul say.
But I say the Lord break your stony hearts, and give you an heart of flesh, that
you may submit to his righteousness. And I make no question but the glorious
grace of the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall abundantly be manifested,
The method I intend is 1 To prove the truth of this proposition 2 To answer six
objections. 3 To make application. 1 For the proof, When Eve and Adam (in whose
loins we all sinned had eaten the forbidden fruit, and were now become guilty
of condemnation. They hear the voice of God walking in the garden (which voice
was this) thou haste at en, and thou shall die) they hide thmselves from the
presence of God, amongst the trees of the garden; when man had sinned and was
in a despairing condition, having not so much wit as to think of a savior much
less the boldness to ask one at the hands of an offended God.

Now in this case behold the exceed-Love of God toward man, in giving and
manifesting the promised seed, as well to the terror of Satan; as to the
consolation of mankind. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed, and her seed, and it shall bruise his head, and thou shall
bruise his heel. Genesis 3.15 (See if I may compare the Creator, with the
creature) how the Lords bowels do yern upon man. And he cannot refrain
himself, but that (least man should have been swallowed up with sorrow) the
blessing of the promised seed, shall be first declared, before the Lord
pronounce, the least curse against man. Father Abraham receives the promise in
the uncircumcision of his flesh. And unto Adam is the promise revealed, in the
uncircumcision of his heart; but lest you should think that some qualification
in Adam, did forerun the manifestation of the promise, I will refer you unto
that place of Scripture which (I am resolved) shall never slip out of my
remembrance (and I hope the like of you) 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world
began. What (...) there, that is not comprehended in this word grace? here you
see that grace was given before the world began. Now what conditions or
qualifictions were there in us before the world began? We may safely therefore
say that the grace of our God was before all conditions, etc unto this we will
add in the next place one text, that like a diamond casts his luster in the
dark, and ministers a great measure of the spirit Ephesians. 2.4.5. God who is rich
in mercy for his great love wherewith the loved us, even when we were dead in
trespasses and sins has quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are
saved.] What if I shall now prove so bold, as to make such a stop at sins, as
shall show that that part of the sentence is referred to that which went
before, so that we may say in plain terms that God loved us with his great
Love, even when we were dead in trespasses and sins. If I shall read it thus,
the text will bear it either in the original, or in other translations. But if
any froward person shall say that I do injury in reading it thus and that
this clause [ dead in trespasses and sins ought rather to be referred to
quickened, which follows after then to the verb loved, which goes before Let
this man know that the sense will be one and the same: for when God quickened
us, then he loved us, with his great love, His love being the cause of
quickening: the effect of his Love, But thou say we were quickened when we
were, dead in trespasses and sins. Therefore we conclude, we were loved with
his graet love when we were dead in trespasses and sins For further
confirmation I must entreat you to consider what is written by the Apostle Romans
9.11.12.13 verses. For the children being not yet born neither having done good
or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand not of
works, but of him that calls, It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the
younger, as it is written Jacob have I loved, but Esau, have I hated. Now you
see Gods love set upon Jacob, where were Jacobs qualifications? he had neither
done good nor evil. Therefore it is plain that God loved him before any
qualification. But some may confess that the Lord loved him indeed, before he
had done good or evil And yet may perchance ask a question upon a supposition,
saying, suppose that after Jacob was born, he should have led a wicked and
perverse life, suppose that for some years, he should have been a notorious,
and profane person, would or could the Lord have continued his love to such a
person as this? I answer boldly yea; for Gods love and mercy, are mercies of
eternity, the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them
that fear him Psalm. 103, 17, not only to everlasting, as eternal in respect
of time to come, but also from everlasting, age etnall in respect of that which
is past, Gods mercies are not only without beginning, but also without ending,
as it is so often repeated even 26 times, Psalm. 136. his mercy endures for
ever. This is it that is written by the prophet, I the Lord, I change not,
Therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal. 3.6. Would you know the
true reason, why the sons of Jacob are nor consumed, it is this, I change not:
should the Lord change as often as we change: should his love increase and
decrease toward us, as often as our love to him, and obedience to his Majesty,
ebbeth and flows, the Lord should be more variable then the wind, more
changeable then the Moon, that the Lords love alters not, although it has
been sufficiently proved by that which has been spoken, yet to the praise of
the glory of his grace, I will proceed to show you, by more restimonies that
the Lord loves all his elect, with his great love, even then, when as they lie
weltring in their sins, and transgressions. Unto this the Holy Ghost bears
witness, Romans 5. verse. 6. When we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly. For who Christ died, them the Father and the Son
loved; but Christ died for the ungodly, that were without strength, Therefore
such were undoubtedly beloved of God. Lest we should think the first of these
propositions to be weak, it is confirmed, verse 8. God commends his love to
us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. And very worthy of
observation is that which is spoken verse 10; When we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Here we have more proved than I
have yet undertaken; for my task is to prove, that God was reconciled to us
whilst we were enemies. This text says not only so, but that we were
recontiled to God when we were enemies: But of this more shall be spoken
hereafter, only for the present we disire to have it granted, that when we were
reconciled to God, he was without all doubt reconciled to us; for our
reconciliation to him, is not the cause of his reconciliation to us, but
contrary his reconciliation to us, is the cause of our reconciliation to him,
Now let us see the argument once again, For whom Christ died: those he loved.
But Christ died for ungodly, for sinners, for enemies, Therefore he loved
ememies, sinners, ungodly. And with such a love, as is not only verbal, but
real, not in word but in deed and in truth, as does already appear by his
death, and will; yet more plainly appear those acts of love, communicated unto
us, even when we were in the state of ungodliness, in the worst estate and
condition. Let us consider that place so full of the glory of God, which is
written, Ezekiel. 16.2.3. verses, unto the 15. verse. Thou wast cast out in the
open field to the loathing of thy Person, in the day that thou wast born. And
when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto
thee in thy blood; yea, I said unto thee in thy blood, ^ive. Why does the Lord
use this Insemination, In thy blood, In thy blood? (...) it not because he
knows how hardly we are drawn to believe the glory of his grace? and how
ready we are to rob him of the honor of his infinite mercy? The Lord does as
it were say: I know you will wonder at this, that I should say, Live, before
you were washed, salted, or swadled, while you were in your blood,

But I remember the act of my grace which passed upon you even in blood. I he
Lord loved us not because we were washed and cleansed, but therefore he washed
and cleansed us, because he loved us. See the freenes of Gods love, God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son that whosoever believes
on him shall not perish but have everlasting life. Ioh. 3.16. This place is well
known unto you, it may be here lies hid something, which many of you never
discovered, namely that Christ given is the effect of Gods love, not the cause.
And that the love of God goes before the gift of his son as the cause goes
before the effect. He therefore gave his son, because he loved.

If this seem strange, that Gods love should be more ancient, in order of
causes then the gift of his son, Because that in him God does communicate all
things unto us, I answer, that Christ is God manifested to him in the flesh. 1 Timothy, 3.16. And that all the blessings of that love, wherewith the Lord loved us
eternally, are manifested only in Christ Jesus. And in him they are fully
manifested to have been for ever in the bosom of the Father: So that for us to
say or think, that Christ purchased the love of the Father for us, is that
which I am confident the redeemer of the world will not challenge unto himself.
But say (as in another case) it is not mine to give, but it was given to them,
to whom it is given before the foundation of the world was laid, This is all
that I am able to speak, unless it should be lawful for me, in so reverend a
mystery, to use a distinction, and to consider in the love of God the original
of his love, and the continuation thereof, and to say that the original of his
love was before the gift of his son, as the cause before the effect But that
the continuation of love, is to be referred unto the propriation of the
redeemer, as the effect of that sacrifice which he offered, To speak plain,
Gods love was before the gift of his son, as the cause before the effect. But
the continuation of that love, that he should loveus for ever, requires a
foregoing propitiation and satisfaction. But when we shall say thus, we fall
into a depth unsearchable, when we shall ask why the continuation of his love
should rather require a foregoing propitiation, then the original setting of
his love upon us. I confess I cannot tell what to say, for to clear this; but
tremble to speak of this glerious mystery, And desire to refer my self to the
judgment of the spiritual, who are able to judge all things, and to be
instructed by them, whether it be not safer to rest, in that which was said
before, then with subtilty of distinctions, to wade into the depth
unsearchable. We see the great love of God to us in our blood, how that he so
loved us, that he gave us his son, I will now be bold to step a step higher,
if higher may be, and to show you that God did not only love us in our blood,
with his great love; But that his love to us in our broud was as great as ever
afterward. He loved us, I say, with as great love when we were in blood and
polltion as he did afterward when we were cleansed. I know the Pharisee will
stamp at this, and say, Does God love us as well before conversion as after
conversion? Did God love Paul, with as great a love when that he persecuted the
Church, as when he preached the Gospel? I will answer boldly, yea he did, And
that I shall by the assistance of God prove unto you, against men, or de ills
who shall oppose it. That God loved us being dead in trespasses and sins, you
have heard proved: now give me leave to propound a question, Whether this
great love wherewith God loved sinners, be not his infinite love like himself?
nay, whether is it any other thing then him self? God is love. 1 Ioh. 4.16. If
this be granted that Gods love is infinite to sinners, that it is like himself,
yea, that it is himself: for love in God is not a quality: Then it will be
plain, that his love is not capable of increase or decrease, but is always
one and the same. The difference is in us, whose apprehensions do often
increase and decrease. Again, is not the love of God to be weighed by the
pledges of his love? But we shall find the greatest pledges of his love to be
given unto sinners even in the state of ungodliness. What greater pledge than
the gift of his Son? In this God commends his love, etc. as before. Romans
5.8. All the mercies of God are commendations of his love, but none like this:
All other gifts are not comparable to the gift of his Son. He thht spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. If all things were laid in one balance,
and the Son of God in the other, no man doubts, but that the Son of God
would be iufinitely beyond all things. Greater love than this has no man,
that a man lay down his life for his friend, John 15.13. But greater love has
God, in that he laid down his life for his enemies. In this was manifested the
love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the
world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God,
but that God loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins, 1 John 4.9.10. Now that the Apostle says, In this was manife sted the
love of God. And, Herein is love, he does it to this end, that he might show
unto us, that Christ was the greatest manifestation of Gods love: Hereby
perceive we the love of God, That he has laid down his life for us, 1 John
3.16. These speeches are all comparative, showing us that Gods love was
manifest in nothing more, or rather nothing so much, as in the death of his
Son. Abraham's love to God appeared in many things; but above all, in that he
denied not his Son. For now I know thai thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me, Gen, 22.12. May not we
justly say with admiration unto God, Now we know that thou love us, because
thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, Thus you see God does not
only love us before conversion, but he loves us with his great love, yea his
greatest love that ever was communicated to the creature: for greater love did
God never manifest to the creature, than that he should give his Son. This
may more fully appear by several effects of the love of God, communicated
unto men, by God, in and through his Son; before conversion, faith, etc. or
any thing in us preconsidered. He has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world. Ephesians. 1.4. Again, He has predestined us unto the adoption of
sons, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved, in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, verses 5.6.7. In
whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will,
verse 11. How many acts of God have we here comunicated by his grace unto the
creature, before repentance, faith, or conversion, or calling. We will add to
these one act of grace more communicated to the creature in the state of
ungodliness. God justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. yea take we sanctificaiion
in the common acception, may we not say God sanctisieth the ungodly. For men
are not sanctified because they are godly, but godly because they are
sanctified. Yea one thing more, even Calling it self, effectual Calling I
mean, goes before conversion, as the cause before the effect: for calling is
not an effect of conversion, but conversion is an effect of calling. It is
necessary that God call before we can hear; yea that God open the heart
before we can receive. If I did think that these things needed proof, I would
spend time about it. You see now, Predestination, Choosing, Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification, Calling, opening of the Heart, all of them
gracious acts of God, communicated unto the creature before the conversion of
the creature to God. Let us hear the Lord speaking of his own work upon the
creature, Esaias 57.18. He went on frowardly in the way of his heart; I have
seen his ways and will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore comforts
to him, and to his mourners. Whom will thou heal? O Lord whom will thou
restore? Even him whose ways I have seen. What are those ways? Even
frowardness and perverseness. He went in frowardly in the way of his heart.
See again, Esaias. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Whose sins will the Lord
blot our? Look we back unto the 22. verse, Thou have not called upon me, O
Iacoh, thou have been weary of me, O Israel, Thou have made me to serve with
thy sins, Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities, verse 24. See, Thou
have been weary of me, yea thou have wearied me. This is Iacohs qualisication.
This is Isreal's preparation. Then follows, I, even I, am he that blotteth out
thy transgressions. As if the Lord would say unto his people, as he speaks by
the prophet Ezekiel. Chap. 36.22. Say unto the house of Israel, Thus says the
Lord God, I do not this for your sake, O house of Israel, but for my holy
names sake, which ye have profaned among the Heathen, whither ye went, or as
when Israel was near the confines of Canaan The Lord speaks thus unto them by
Moses, understand therefore, that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good
land to possosse it for thy righteousness, for thou art a stiffnecked people.
Deuteronomy. 9.6. As if the Lod should say, I will blot out your transgressions. But I
would have you know the riches of my grace. It is not any thing in you that
moves me unto it. For there is nothing in you but rebellion; but I do it for
my glory sake. As the Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, Esaias 48.8.9. I
knew that thou would deal very treachercusly, and was called a
transgressour from the womb: for my names sake will I defer mine anger, and
for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off. This is all
the qualification we bring unto God, to win his love and mercy: We are
rebellious, we are profane, we are a stiff necked people. And if the Lord
should not love us, until he find lovely conditions in us, surely he must
hate us for ever: If God should not be reconciled unto us, until we be
reconciled unto him: he must continue our enemy for ever. Wherefore considering
what has been said, we will be bold to conclude to the praise of the glory of
his grace, that his love and mercy to us, is before all qualifications in us:
that his love and mercy to us, is the cause of all qualifications in us. That
his love toward us is as great before faith and conversion as after. There is
no difference in him. But some will say, peradventure we grant that God thus
loves us, as is before proved; but it may be it was because he foresaw we
would be good, repent, believe, etc. Far be it from us to entertain such
thoughts. He that well pondereth what has been said, shall well perceive,
that God does not therefore love us, because he foresaw we will repent and
believe, but therefore causes us to repent, and believe in his time, because
he loves us.

But to make this also more clear, the holy Ghost declares, That the kindness
of God toward man, appeared not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.4 5. The pattern according to
which God sets his love upon man, was not any thing save his rich mercy,
whereby it is plain, Not that we loved him, but that he loved us, 1 John 4.10.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, John 15.16. As our Father
Abraham receiceived the righteousness of faith being yet uncircumcised, and
then received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith
which he had yet being uncircumcised: So as Abraham was first righteous, and
then circumcised; not first circumcised, and then righteous: So the children of
Abraham are first beloved and then converted, not first converted and then
beloved, And as God did not account Abraham righteous because he foresaw he
would be circumcised, But therefore he gave him the sign of Circumcision
because he had made him righteous. So it is with the children of Abraham, God
does not therefore love them, because he foreseeth they will repent and
believe, but therefore he causes them in his time to repent and believe the
Gospel, because he loved them. Thus have I done with the first thing propounded
in the handling of this proposition: The second follows, namely the answer
unto the several objections. The first and greatest is this, if God love the
elect while they are yet dead in trespasses and sins, tand so love them with
his great love, and with as great a love before couversion as after, as is
before proved. then how is it said. Psalm 5.5. Thou hate all the workers of
iniquity?

And hither we may reserre many places of Scripture of like nature. If God hate
all the workers of iniquity, how can he be said to love the ungodly? Thus you
see in one short sentence, seems to be quite overthrown all that I have
hitherto spoken. To wind out of this labarinth, which some having assayed, have
further entangled themselves (with invocation unto God for the wisdom of his
holy Spirit to guide us into the truth) I will first show you what some have
said to clear this; and then I shall deliver unto you mine own judgment: And
yet, I hope, not mine own, but the judgment of the Spirit of God, and of most
of the Saints of God. First then, I find a great Cathedral Doctor (moving the
objection, and laboring to give solution) to give us this distinction; That
God hates the works, but nor the persons of his elect. I will not stand to
question, whether there may be such a distinction admitted, or no, but will
take it for grant; and yet I do believe sin to be of that hideous nature,
and the justice of God so perfect, that he cannot but hate the person, unto
whom he imputes, and upon whom he charge sin, if so be the person charged
cannot give full, perfect, and present satisfaction. And yet will I not say,
that the Son of God. upon whom all our iniquities, great and small, were
charged, was at any time, Filius odii, a son of hatred (for the father was
eternally well pleased with him) the reason is, that our sins were no sooner
charged upon him, but that he had given full and perfect satisfaction, being
the Lamh slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. Although the
soresaid distinction of person and works, should be granted, without further
question, yet give me leave to pronounce it nothing pertinent to the solution
of the Objection in hand: For the Text says not only he hates the works, but
the workers, (that is, the persons working) iniquite. Another answer is brought
to untie this knot, by a jiugling distinction of a twofold love in God, namely,
Amor benevolentiae, and, amor complacentiae, that the simple may understand,
there is in God, say they, a love of well willing, and a love of liking. Now
God (say they) loves his elect before their conversion, with the love of
well-willing, but not with the love of liking. Like unto which we hear of a
distinction not seldom, Of the love of Election, and the love of
Justification. God (say they) loves his elect with the love of Election, but
not with the love of Justification. First of all, I desire you to consider,
whether there be not more time then reason in these distinctions; the love of
Election, and the love of Justification, being not diverfities of love, or
diverse degrees of love, but diverse manifestations of one and the same infinite
love. As when a Father has conveyed an inheritance to his Son, here is no
new love from the Father to the Son, but a new manifestation of that love,
wherewith the father loved the son before. Secondly, how can it be that God
should not like the person whom he loves? There is indeed this difference
between Humane love and Divine; Men commonly love because they like: but God
likes because he loves. Man cannot but love where he likes. And I believe
(speaking of the person) God cannot but like where he loves. To make such
differences of love in God, will I fear open a gap to many foul absurdities.
But suppose that these things could be so, it will appear that God loves the
persons of his elect, not only with a love of Benevolence, but a so with a love
of Complacence and liking: For this ia the voyc of the Father from heaven, This
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. Here is a revelation of
the love of liking, I am well pleased: The Father is well pleased in his Son.
With whom? Surely with those unto whom he had given his Son, that is, all
his elect. Again, this answer, if it were beyond all exceptions, yet it is
very impertinent to the objection: For the Text does not only say, that God
loves them not with such or such a love, but in plain terms it says, that
the Lord hates them that work iniquity. Now what shall we say, that God loves
a person with infinite a love, beyond expression, or conceit, and yet at the
same time, hates the same person with that perfect hatred wherewith he hates
all the workers of iniquity. Let us take heed that we draw not a veil before
the face of God, and delude our selves and others with such frothy and
impertinent distinctions. But I have by this time bred a kind of wonder in
you; what I shall speak, seeing that which other men have said thus far, likes
me not. I answer therefore, that this clause, God hates all the workers of
iniquity, and God loves the ungodly, are both in Scripture, and therefore both
true; yet in a different sense. The first, The Lord hates all the workers of
iniquity, is the voice of the Law: the other, the Lord loves sinners, is the
voice of the Gospel, Now the Law, and the Gospel speak diverse things; the one
being the manifestation of Gods justice, tells us what we are by nature: the
other, being the manifestation of Gods mercy, tells us what we are by grace
in Jesus Christ. The Law says, that every sinner shall be accursed. The Gospel
says, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. The Law says, God
will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. The Gospel says, God
justifies the ungodly. The Law declares wrath without forgiveness: The
Gospel, Mercy, grace and peace in Jesus Christ. Thus far is the objection
answered; but yet all difficulty and scruple is not removed: For the Law, you
will say, is an eternal verity, whatsoever it says, is true. I confess it
so, and one jot or tittle thereof cannot fail. But I say, with the Apostle,
that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them only, who are under the Law,
and to none other. I say again, that the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled
by Christ for us all; yea in all that walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8.4. So that although the elect of God are sinners in the
judgment of the Law, Sense, Reason, yea and oftentimes Conscience; yet having
their sins translated unto the Son of God, (in whom they were elected) they
have the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in the Mediator, and so become to
be accounted righteous in his sight; that as God on the one side delivered the
innocent to death, as though he had been a sinner, being made countable for
our sins: So on the other side, God loves, justifies, clears the guilty
and sinners, as if they had been holy, righteous, and blameless. The sum is
this, that as Christ was no sinner indeed, and yet a sinner by imputation; so
they that are Chrisis, are no sinners by imputation, and yet sinners indeed.

Thus much for the first Objection. The second follows.

Objection 2.
If God be reconciled unto us, before all condtions, etc. How is it that our
Savior says, Matthew. 6.15. If you forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. Unto which may be joined
that which we have, Matthew. 18.35. So likewise shall my heavenly do also unto
you, if ye from your heart forgive not every on his brother their trespasses.
In which place we see, first, that unless we forgive, God will not forgive us:
Nay more, that God will reverse the act of his mercy, if after he has
forgiven us 10000. talents, we shall not forgive 100. pence, we shall be
delivered to the tormentors, until we pay the whole due. For answer to this
Objection, we must lay down two grounds; the first, That God rever reverseth
the acts of his mercy communicated to his Elect. For the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance, Romans 112.9. God is not a man that he should lie,
neither the son of man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 23.19. The second
ground, that Gods forgiveness of us is a forerunner of our forgivenes of our
brethren. And we cannot truly forgive our brethren, until we do apprehend
Gods forgiveness of us. Should not thou have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? Matthew. 18.33. And upon this ground
the Apostle presses the Ephesians unto kindness and tenderness of heart,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.3.

But then if this be so, what mean the foresaid places, which strengthen the
objection? I answer: That forgiveness is there to be taken for the
manifestation of forgiveness: Except ye forgive men, neither will your
heavenly Father so fully declare, and manifest himself unto your consciences;
and so this place pertains properly to our reconciliation with God, not unto
Gods reconciliation with us. That this is not a subtle evasion, but the truth,
appears first by a place of Scripture; secondly, by the judgment of
Interpreters upon a like place: The place of Scripture is found Luke 7.47. Her
sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much. What have we
here? that this woman's great love was the cause of remission, or that it went
before her obtaining of remission, as Bellarmine contendeth? Verily no: but it
is plain, that her remission obtained, was the cause of her love. Simon, says
our Savior, A certain creditor forgave two debtors frankly: whereof the one
ought five hundred pence, the other fifty; which of the twain will love him
most? Simon answers well, He to whom he forgave most. Our Savior makes the
application; See thou this woman? Thou love me a little, Thou have bidden
me to dinner. But when I came into thy house, thou gave me no matter for my
feet; but she, has washed my feet with her tears, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head. My head with oil thou did not anoint, but this woman
has anointed my feet with ointment. Thou see, that I have forgiven thee a
few sins, and thou love me a little, but this woman has much forgiven
her: Therefore she loved much: whereby we understand two things; first, that
her love was not the cause of forgivenes, but forgiveness a cause of her love.
Secondly, That forgiveness in this place includes the manifestation of
forgiveness: many sins are forgiven her, the sense is this, it appears
unto this woman, that I have pardoned a multitude of sins for her. This is
the Scripture.

The judgment of Interpreters in the Protestant Church, upon a like place, is
occasioned by an argument urged by Cardinal Bellarmine, and other poplings,
against the Protestants, on this wise: If, says he, the Protestants have
pardon of all their sins, in such wise as they say they have, why do they
yet pray, forgive us our trespasses? if they be already forgiven? The
Protestants answer with one consent: that they do beg at the hands of God,
greater certainty, and assurance of his grace toward them: the Petition
forgive us our trespasses, may well stand with assurance of pardon. The
condemned person that is upon the ladder, having received the pardon of a
gracious Prince, hears it read; is assured of it, and rejoices in it, yet
this person being called into the presence of the King, if he should fall down
and say, Pardon me my Lord the King; who could lay folly to his charge? So we
having received the free pardon of sin at his hand already, yet as often as we
come into his presence we cry to the glory of his grace, forgive us our
trespasses: for while we beg at the hands of God, that which we have before
received, we do magnisie his grace, that has freely given it. Again, who so
sure, and certain of pardon, but that he either needs a greater assurance, or
at least that assurance to be by Gods mercy continued. Thus much for the second
objection. The third follows. If God love us in blood and pollution, as well
before conversion, as after conversion; then to what purpose serve our faith
and good works? First, I answer this objection indirectly, by propounding one
question; whether thou think that thy faith and good works can obtain, or
procure the love and favor of God. If thou say no, then why do thou make
this objection? If thou say yea, then I demand, who shall give thee faith
and good works? Should thou expect them from any other then from the hand of
a loving God? Secondly, I answer directly, by showing thee the true office of
faith: Although faith do not procure Gods love and favor, yet is it to very
good purpose, and exceeding precious: That you may know the love of God, and be
sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. In whom after ye believed ye were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise; which is the earnest of our inheritance
unto the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory,
Ephesians. 1.13, 14. The Original reads it, In whom believing ye were sealed: so
that believing is sealing, and an earnest of the inheritance. Secondly, that
believing you who were under darkness, and in the shadow of death, and saw no
light, yet I say believing ye might rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory, receiving the end of your faith, 1 Pet. 1.8. Romans 15.13. The God of hope
fill you with all joy and peace in believing.

Thus you see your faith is to very good purpose, and yet not to that purpose,
to obtain the love and favor of God. Thus much for the office of faith; yet
do I not undertake, to set out unto you the whole office of that most precious
gift, but on (...) so much as may serve to answer the present objection. But
secondly, to what purpose serve our good works? I answer, to very good purpose
also: namely, to express our thankfulness to God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has delivered us from our enemies: That we being delivered might serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life, Luke 1.74, 75. We do not serve God to obtain deliverance by serving of
him. But of his free grace obtaining deliverance we serve him. We do not
serve God to obtain salvation, but obtaining salvation freely by Jesus Christ,
we offer up our souls and bodies, a living sacrifice of thanksgiving. I answer
further, Thy good works may be profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8. but not unto
God, who is of absolute perfection, and needs not any thing which thou can
do. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or
is it any gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? Job 22.2.3. Thus you
see the office of your faith and works. Because we say that God loves us as
well before conversion as after, do we therefore make faith and works void?
God forbid. Must I needs put out my fire, because I will not set it on the top
of the house? No, I will keep it within the chimney, which is the proper
place. Woe be to that City, where the sire shall overtop the houses: fire is
precious in the chimney, bur dangerous elsewhere. Precious is the gift of
faith, if kept within his own sphere; but if we shall begin to lift it up, and
place it in the throne of Christ, what rock more dangerous to the soul? The
Brazen Serpent was a great blessing so long as Israel looked at it by Gods
appointment, to be healed of the bitings of the fiery Serpents. But when once
Israel shall burn incense unto it, let it be Nehushtan, a piece of old cankred
brass, 2 Kin. 18.4. Thus for the third objection, the fourth follows.

If God love us with as great a love before conversion as after, then what need
we take care what we do? If we repent and believe, the Lord will love us never
the better; If we neither repent nor believe, the Lord will love us never the
worse. Answer. I can hardly vouchsafe to give an answer to this objection,
because the wise man advises, Pro. 26.4. Answer not a Fool according to his
folly, lest thou be like unto him. And yet I must give an answer, because the
wise man commands, verse 5. Answer a Fool according to his folly, lest he
be wise in his own conceit. Lest if I should pass by this objection, thou
should triumph as if thou had gotten the victory. I answer therefore with
the Apostle, Shall we sin that grace may abound, and shall we sin because we
are not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid, Ron 6.15. This objection
was moved by cavelling spirits even in the Apostles time, well nigh 1600 years
ago, and you see the answer. And now the same spirit rages in thee. But I
thought what a customer we should have of thee. Thou would make men
believe, that thou art no Iusticiary, no Papist, not one that seeks to be
justified by thy works. And yet if thy works cannot obtain Gods favor, if
they cannot procure an increase of his love, thou will presently cast off all,
and give liberty to thy flesh. Give me leave to speak plain, Thou art he that
turnest the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ into wantonness, whose end is
destruction, whose God is thy belly, whose glory is thy shame, who mindest
earthly things, Philip. 3.19. But be it known unto thee, that the grace of God
teaches (other things, namely) to deny alungodlines and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.

But I perceive by this objection, that thou accountedst this a doctrine of
liberty, to declare the free love of God in Jesus Christ: and thou think it
were better to hide this from the people, and to terrify them with Hell fire,
with wrath, and judgment, and with the fiery flashings of Mount Sinai, and to
keep them in bondage. I can hardly refrain from giving thee very evil
language, that art thus presumptuous and audacious to contradict the Lord
Jesus, who has given commandment that the Gospel of peace should be preached
to all Nations. I will spare to speak what I think, and commend unto thy
consideration the judgment of one of our own Countrymen, whose learning was by
his adversaries commended, whose constancy and patience in his martyrdom was
admired: it was John Fryth; who writes to this effect: Thou may preach hell
and damnation, and the rendering of a terrible account to a severe Judge, etc.
seven years together, and yet not make one good Christian man. He that would
make a good Christian, let the love of God be the first stone, which he lays
for the foundation. Thus he speaks. And indeed what motive to obedience so
strong as love? Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown
it, Cant. 8.7. What greater fear then that which proceeds from love? If we
have an enemy whom we hate, we sheath a sword it his bowels, or cleave his
head with a Polax, and cry him no mercy: but how careful are we not to do the
least injury to a friend? if we tread on his singer, we are sorry at the heart.
What greater aggravation of sin, then to sin against love? Were not he an
ungracious and rebellious son amongst men, who should reason thus: I have an
indulgent Father, who loves me exceedingly, deemeth nothing too good for me,
who has given me assurance and possession of his whole inheritance, therefore
I will surely neglect him, I will show my self undutifull against him, I will
no more regard his commands, or attend unto his precepts, but whatsoever will
grieve him, that will I do. What heart could not afford to cast a stone at the
head of such a son of Belial as this, to dash out his brains? For shame let
the mover of this objection blush, and hide his head, let him consider his
folly. The case is thine, thou art the man; because God abounds in free love,
mercy, and kindness, therefore thou will abound in wretchedness. I cease to
speak any farther of this to thy greater shame. The fifth objection follows,
which is indeed more mannerly than the former.

Object. 5.
If God love us, be reconciled unto us, before our faith and our conversion,
then a man may possibly dye without faith, and yet be saved.

I answer: This follows not, because God has engaged himself to the
contrary: which if he had not door, much might have been said. But we see,
he that cannot lie, has engaged himself unto his people: I will put my Law
into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them, Heb. 10.6. And all
shall know me from the least to the greatest Heb. 8.11. All thy children shall
be taught of God, John 6.54. Isaiah 54.13. So that we say, He that believes
not shall be damned. Not because his believing does alter or change his estate
before God; but because the God of truth has promised, that he will not only
give us remission, but that he will also give faith for our consolation; and so
faith becomes a note and mark of life everlasting, and final infidelity a
sure (...) of eternal condemnation; that whosoever, or whatsoever he be in
life or conversation, yet he that believes not shall be damned. Thus much for
the fifth.

Object. 6.
The sixth objection: If God love us as you say, why does he suffer us to live
in 20.50. or 60. years?

I answer: What art thou that reply against God? How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 11.33. Again, let us ask
Paul, why the Lord suffered him (being an elect and chosen vessel) to
persecute his Saints unto death and bonds, and to cause many to blaspheme; and
he will tell us, that in him first Jesus Christ might show forth all long
suffering for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life
everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16. Thirdly, thou may as well object, seeing that God
is of infinite power, why does he suffer sin in the world? if thou should,
the Lord will give answer, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Thus
far for the objections, now we come to the third thing propounded, The
application of what has been spoken.

Applicat. 1.
In the first place we will observe the difference between the true Religion
and the false, from that which has been spoken. There are many religions in
the world. And it fares with diversities of Religions, as with diversities of
opinions: there is a possibility that they may be all false, but it is
altogether impossible that they should be all true. There is but one true
Religion, but there are many false: the false Religions seeming to differ
exceedingly amongst themselves, in very many things even in the object of
worship, and in the matter, and manner; yet be they never so different, there
is one common foundation, wherein they do all agree, and wherein they differ
from the true. The true Religion propounds unto us a God in chief
reconciled, pacified, pleased, a justice already satisfied, a propitiation
made, sins taken away: and we have not one jote, not one apex in all the new
Covenant to be found of reconciling God to us, but of our reconciliation to
God: The new Covenant manifests unto us a God already reconciled to us, and
the whole ministry of reconciliation propounds our reconciliation to God.
Now this is the common character of all false religions of what sort soever,
Jews, Turks Papists, pharisaicall Protestants, Heathen, all propound in some
degree or other, an angry God, a deity not reconciled, and then prescribe
certain means and services whereby to appease his wrath, and to quench his
displeasure, and to obtain his love and favor. Man does not oftener seek
after salvation, but he naturally stumbleth upon this principle, What shall I
do to be saved? The world would be saved by doing. Martin Luther speaking of
this difference, does more than once compare the false religions unto Sampsons
foxes, Judge. 15.4. their heads looking diverse ways, but they were fastened
together by the tails. This comparison we do embrace; yet I had rather
compare them to Gentlemen's Spaniels, which are fastened together by the necks,
but loose at the tails. They differ indeed in some circumstances, but in the
main substance they agree in one. Do we not see some men contending with the
Papist, with wonderful eagerness? do we not see others tugging, and haling,
one one way, the other another, one for this ceremony, and another for that, as
though there were a mortal difference between them, yea the difference so
great, that it is sometimes the greatest reason for one side to refuse this or
that because the other uses it: Now he that shall search into the innermost
secrets of these antagonists, shall find, them that so eagerly differ about
circumstance, (who could have believed it?) to agree in substance. Like ships
that sail in the sea a great way asunder, yet all tending to one haven. All
tending to this end, to win or obtain the favor of an angry God. This that
has been spoken may prove a help to administer a spirit of discerning unto
the simple, in these distracted time, wherein the Commonwealth is not more
distracted than the Church. Now among so many diversities of opinions, how
shall we know which is the old and the good way, that we may walk in it? One
says I am Christ, another nay, but I am Christ: for thy direction, search for
that religion that abaseth man, that gives the glory of grace to God; that
propounds the free love of God in lesus Christ, without mixture of any thing
in the creature, that is the true religion, all the rest are false; that is the
true way, and strait line, all the rest are counterfeit, and crooked. This is
the first application.

The second Application is to correct our idolatrous thoughts and judgments,
that we have had of God. What foolish fancies have possessed our souls? How
often have we thought God to be like unto our selves? How many times have we
imagined an angry God, a wrath full Majesty? And sought to appease his
indignation by fasting, by praying; by alms, by tears, and such like things?
O foolish man! if his wrath should nor be before appeased, what creature could
stand in his sight? Do we not see when some Lion-like man is incensed, the
whole house trembles, not one servant, no not a son dares come into his
presence, before his wrath be over? If we so fear the unjust wrath of man,
how terrible would the just wrath of consuming fire be? what great
presumption were it for the creature to come into his presence, if his wrath
were not appeased. We complain of idolatry crept into our unhappy Nation. We
complain of bowing, of cringing, of crossing, and many such fopperies. Search
we, I beseech you, if idolatry have not hitherto crept into your hearts, if you
have not set up a great idol, and bowed unto that image, with all it
vvorshippeth. Learn to make clean the inside as well as the outside of the
cup. Learn to banish out of the soul those foolish and vain conceits: learn to
see the glory of the face of God in Jesu, and to worship him in spirit and in
truth. There cannot be greater idolatry committed, than to conceive a
possibility of gaining the love and favor of God, by works wrought in the
creature. This is as great an idol as that which was set up in the plain of
Dura, in the province of Babylon, sixty cubits high, Dan. 3. This is the Beast
that has made the whole earth to partake of her fornications.

The third Application, is to stir us up to admire the exceeding love of God,
and his wonderful goodness. Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth,
whether ever the like grace were heard of, since the mountains were framed.
Who could have expected, that the Lord should have been half so gracious? Did
we ever imagine to hear such a voice from heaven to earth, so full of grace,
so full of glory? Had the Lord propounded his love and reconciliation to us,
upon hard and difficult conditions, yet if possible, should not we have
accounted it an happiness, for what would not the distressed soul have done,
(witness the acts of our Forefathers,) for to have purchased remission, and
to have obtained the favor of God? But see, if any grace be like to this
grace: The Lord calls from heaven, unto the sons of men, by his Son Jesus,
saying: O ye sons of men, what could I have done, or what could you have
wished me to do, more then I have done? Behold, I am friends with you, I love
you truly; see, have I not given you my Son? And now I beseech you by my Son,
that you would be reconciled unto me; I am friends with you, be you friends
with me. Did we ever think to hear the God of Heaven to beseech and entreat us
to be reconciled unto God? That man should entreat God to be reconciled, was
that we might imagine; but that we should find God already reconciled, and
praying of man that he would be reconciled; this is grace beyond expression.
And as this sets forth the glorious grace of God, so does it aggravate our
unthankfulness unto God, if we shall refuse his gracious offer.

If some poor and base man, some notorious person had offended the Magistrates
of this City, whereby he had deserved severe punishment, yet the Magistrates
should send for this offender, and declare themselves satisfied, and entreat
him to shake hands with them: If now this offender should stubbornly refuse to
be reconciled to them whom he had offended, what should we think of such a
person? The case is ours, it is we that have offended God, God has not
offended us; yet now when the offended God shall declare his grace, and send
the ministry of reconciliation to us, who were offenders, if we shall now
refuse, and turn away our ears, and refuse to submit to his righteousness,
what ingratitude will this be? That we may yet more admire the grace of our
God, the Lord is pleased to use familiar expressions, to declare unto us that
it pleased God to betroath unto himself a wife, whom he would admit into so
much favor, as to call him Ishi, my Husband, Hosea 2.16. unto whom he would
vouchsafe so much honor, as to call her his Spouse, his Love, his Dove, etc.
and to betroath her unto himself for ever. Who is it unto whom the Lord
vouchsafes such grace? What person is it whom the Lord will take to be his
Spouse? Was there ever such a thing as this heard? That poverty should sue
unto riches? That deformity should sue unto beauty, is no wonder: But that a
Mighty, Rich, Beautiful, and Potent Prince, should sue unto a poor, old,
decrepit, deformed, diseased, lousy beggar, what story can witness any such
thing? And with reverence and trembling be it spoken, the mighty God of heaven
betroaths unto himself, and swears unto vile, poor, deformed, sinful,
diseased, loathsome man. When man intends to take a companion of his love,
some aim at Nobility, some at Beauty, others at Riches: these are the three
load-stones that commonly attract the liking and love of man: But it is not so
with God. Look we at the nobility of his Spouse, at her parentage, from whence
she is descended; Thy father was an Ammorite, thy mother a Hittite: she is base
borne, a daughter of whoredoms. But it may be beauty might recompense the
baseness of her birth. Look we at her beauty: her native beauty is blood and
pollution, a deformed creature; Her artificial beauty, neither washing nor
swaddling, nor salting. But peradventure, what was lacking in birth and beauty,
might be supplied in riches and plenty, (for riches make many marriages,) let
us survey her riches: Behold, in stead of an habitation, Thou wast cast out in
the open field: In stead of raiment not wherewithal to buy her wedding
garments and ornaments, nakedness, even stark nakedness, I spread the skirt of
my clothing over thee, and covered thy nakedness. Here is a Spouse that has
not wherewithal to buy her a wedding garment. O the depth of the riches of the
mercy of God! Neither noble, nor beautiful, nor rich; and yet the Lord has
set his love upon us. Nay, here is one thing exceeds all this that has been
spoken: So miserable was our condition, that it has cost the Lord a great
dowry. And the Lord must buy us unto himself, not with silver or gold, nor with
200. fore-skins of the Philistines: but with the precious blood of the Son of
God. I desire to leave you in admiration of this transcendent love, and to
pass unto the fourth Application to comfort the distressed soul.

Here are the queries of thy burdened soul answered. What goodness must I
find in me? What conditions? What qualifications, before that I believe God to
be a father to me in Christ? What must I do to be saved? Thou see here
the freeness of Gods grace, the glory of his reconciliation. And I will be
bold to say unto thee, as Moses speaks unto Israel in another case, Stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he has showed you this day,
Exodus 14.13. Or as Iehaziel speaks unto Judah in another case. Ye shall not
need to fight in this battle, set your selves, stand ye still, and see the
salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah, and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 20.17. What
shall I do to obtain the favor of God? I say, believe him favorable unto
thee, freely for his own sake. But here the poor soul will object and say,
Alas! should I believe that have not one jot of goodness in me; Nay more, that
have all manner of evil in me? I answer, Thou have as much in thee as God
requires at thy hands, to precede his love, to go before his reconciliation.
If he had said he could not love thee before such and such conditions, then
thou might have had cause to distrust his love. But thou have seen his love
to man, even dead in trespasses and sins. He came to call sinners, not
righteous to repentance: Come to him empty of all goodness, and partake of his
fullness: come to him hungry, and he shall fill thee; thirsty, and he shall
satisfy thee. O what injury do we unto the grace of God, in that we imagine
God to be like unto some niggardly man, who will not bid us welcome to his
house, unless we bring our cost with us: The Lord looks for nothing at our
hands to obtain his favor: come unto him naked, and he shall cloth thee. But
the poor soul will yet object further, and say: My case is yet worse then you
perceive: for I am not only void of goodness, I am not only full of
filthiness and abomination, but which is worst of all, I cannot leave my
sins, I cannot forsake my whoredoms and drunkenness. How often have I vowed?
How often have I promised? Yea how often have I sworn to forsake my sins, and
yet all in vain? I have returned with the Dog to the vomit, and with the
washed Sow, to wallow in the mire? What say you to my case? If I should now
come unto Christ, would he bid me welcome? If I should believe God loving unto
me, would it not be the greatest sin unto me? Must not I forsake and leave
my sins, before I believe? Must not I cast out the rubbish out of my soul,
before Christ will love me? Must I not first be washed and cleansed, before
Christ will show any favor unto me. Although the answer to this objection do
properly belong unto the second thing to be showed; (namely) man's
reconciliation to God, yet I will speak something. And I desire thee to try one
conclusion, to come unto Christ first, and leave thy sins afterward; get
power from him to forsake thine iniquities. This is the reason why thy labor
has been in vain, because thou have gone the wrong way to work, that is, to
mortify thy sin first, and to come to Christ afterward. Now how is it
possible thou should mortify thy sin before thou beleevest in his name,
when whatsoever is not of faith, is sin? Do thou think to cast out rubbish
without him? Do thou think to bind the strong man by thine own power? Thou
art deceived. Would thou mortify thy sin? See the order of the holy Ghost
Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, etc. Therefore, wherefore see verse. 1. if ye be risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above. First rise with Christ, and then
mortify. See the example of Mary, who had seven devils in her, she does not
say, If I could cast out my devils, then I would come to Christ, but she
comes and brings her seven devils with her, and the Lord casts them our
every one for her. Do thou likewise, bring thy sins with thee, and let him
cast them out for thee. If thou say, if I were washed, then I could believe,
then I could come boldly to him, I ask thee, who should wash thee? I say, come
unto him foul, and he shall make thee clean. Does not he call all that
labor, and are heavy laden, Math. 11.28. the burden and load is sin. He does
not say, Lay down your burden first, and then come unto me; but come unto me
laden, and I will give you rest.

But you will say, is it not written, that neither fornicators, nor idolaters,
nor adulterers, nor effeminate persons, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God?
1 Cor. 6.9.10. Again, is it not written, without holiness no man shall see
God, Heb. 12.14. To see God, and to inherit the kingdom of God, are nothing
else, but to believe in God, and his son Jesus Christ. But this you see
cannot be without holiness, therefore I must have holiness first, before I can
believe. I answer, the Text says not to, but without holiness no man shall
see God. If I should say, without eating and drinking no man can live; would
thou presently conclude, that I must eat and drink before I be alive? When
sense will tell thee I must be alive, before I can eat and drink. Yet this
is thy arguing, Without holiness no man shall see God, therefore we must have
holiness before we can see God. When it is evident, we must see God before we
can have holiness: for, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. But
the meaning of the place is, that Christ will not only purge the conscience,
but the conversation also of al such as come to him, that is, believe in his
name, and that a reformed conversation shall (though not go before) yet
accompany a clear apprehension of the grace of God in Christ lesus.

And thus we give an answer unto that other portion of holy Scripture,
Fornicators shall not inherit the Kingdom of GOD; not that it is to be
thought, that men must first mortify their sins, before they can come to the
Kingdom of God; but that entering into the Kingdom of God, the Lord would
vouchsafe unto them power to reform their lives. And that this is the true
sense of the place, is plain by the eleventh verse: Such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. They were such until they were
washed, and how were they washed? even in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. When the buyers and sellers had profaned the Temple, the
Lord does not stay while some body had cast them out, and then go into the
Temple afterward, but he enters into the Temple first, and making a scourge of
small cords, he drove them all out of the Temple, John 2.15.

So fares it with the Temple of thy body, that is profaned with sin, and thy
conscience that is defiled with iniquity. Thou must not think that thy
conscience must be washed first, and then the Lord to enter afterward, but
the Lord must first entor, and wash thee and purge thee by his blood, which
purges the conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14.
Therefore thou complainest, thou can not leave thy sins, I say, thou had
the more need to believe in Christ, that thou might have power to forsake
them. But poor soul, thou do object further, and say, I have been an
extortioner, a grinder of the faces of the poor, a thief, a purloyner, and
what, shall I venture to believe in Christ before I have made restitution, and
satisfaction to them whom I have wronged? Are we not taught out of the Father,
Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur oblatum; without restitution no
remission?

I answer: first, there are many things that are well spoken by the Fathers, in
one sense, which are perversely applied in another. This sentence is true in
respect of reconciliation of man to man; but not true in respect of God to man,
or man to God. As when a man shall by a lawful Church be for extortion
excommunicated, the Church ought not to receive him again until restitution
be made. And thus may we in good sense understand other passages of the
Fathers, which are otherwise perversely applied by themselves and others. Will thou deserve pardon (says Ambrose) wash away thy sins by tears. This is
good in my first sense of reconciliation of man to man, as when the Church
shall excommunicate an offender, and he shall humble himself with tears in
his eyes, he ought again to be received. But to apply this as a meares to
reconcile God to man there can be nothing more abominable.

(...) by the way, to give thee warning of the grost applications which are
made (...) the Fathers, by (...) nor what they (...) doubt: Thou (...) use thou
have not (...) say, believe first, (...) forward: for this, (...) beyond all
except (...) stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false
accusation, I restore him fourefold. If we look back to the sixth verse,
there we see that Zacheus received Christ joyfully. Zacheus was an
arch-publican, verse 2. a man that was a sinner, verse 7. yet this sinner, this
arch-publican received Christ first, (not into his house only, but into his
heart also) and then he makes restitution afterward; go and do likewise; thou
see the abundant grace of God: bove and beyond all obstacles: if thou can
believe, thou need not fear, though thou have been never so sinful. Thus
much for the fourth Application.

Applicat. 5.
The fifth: If God be so freely reconciled to us, how ought we to be easy to
be entreated to be reconciled one to another? The Lord slow to wrath, and full
of compassion, and loving kindness. Take we heed that we be not full of
wrath, and slow to compassion. God is reconciled to us before we ask; how
much more ought we to be reconciled to those that have offended us, and say,
forgive us? Oh that we had so much charity in us, as to bear one with
another, the stronger with the weaker, that unhappy differences might have an
end. Secondly, is God thus freely reconciled to us? Oh let us be entreated to
be reconciled unto him: which is the second general I have to show unto you,
What it is for man to be reconciled to God.

FINIS
RECONCILIATION OF MAN to GOD.
By HENRY DEN.
BEfore I enter to speak of Man's reconciliation to God, It is necessary that I
premise a distinction, and show you a twofold reconciliation, set out unto us
in the Scriptures. 1. Original, 2. Actual. Bear with the terms, I confess
they are not altogether so fit as I could wish: But I therefore thought fit to
use these terms, that I might parallel this distinction unto another, used by
Divines of Original and Actual sin. Original reconciliation is wrought
without us by another person, yet for us: you may call it the reconciliation of
our nature. Actual reconciliation is wrought within us, although not by our
own power. This you may call the reconciliation of our persons or consciences,
the one being the reconciliation of our nature to God, the other the
manifestation of that, and the premised reconciliation to our souls: That this
is not an unnecessary distinction you shall find by comparing some Scriptures
together: the first is Romans 5.10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son. Again, Ephesians. 2.16. That he might reconcile both
unto God into one body by the Cross having slain the enmity thereby, Col.
1.21.12. Thirdly, consider what is written, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. All things are of
God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us
the ministry of reconciliation: To wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Now compare we
these three places forementioned, with that which we find, 2 Cor. 5, 20. We are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God: In the former places the Apostle
told us we were reconciled; and in this place, he beseeches us to be
reconciled. For to take up this difference, I say that in the former he
speaks of our Original reconciliation, wherein our nature was reconciled to
God by Christ, in the second I say, he speaks of our Actual reconciliation,
wherein our consciences become reconciled to God, through the apprehension of
the reconciliation which Christ has wrought for us. First of all I must speak
of our Original reconciliation. And there I lay down this proposition, that
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, without any previous
conditions in us, or performed by us. You see it is the act of Christ upon the
Cross, it was done by his death: The Lord Christ being a common person, taking
our nature upon him, we are said to do that which he did, and to have that
done upon us which was done upon him. As in the first Adam we all sinned before
we were, or bad committed any Actual transgression: so in the second Adam we
were reconciled. As by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.19. I say we are said to
do that which he did, as to be buried with Christ, by baptism into death,
Romans 6.4. We are said to be crucified with Christ, as our old man is crucified
with him, Romans 6.6. to be dead and alive with him. Reckon ye also your selves
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 6.11. We are said to be risen with him, Coloss. 3.1. which is elegantly
set forth by the Prophet Hosea, speaking of the resurrection of Christ. He
speaks on this wise, After two days he will revive us, and the third day he
will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight, Hose. 6.2. Yet more, we are
said to be placed together in heavenly places with him, Ephesians. 2.5.6. This is
that which I call Original reconciliation. Whereby we see that not only God
was reconciled unto us, but also that our nature was reconciled unto God by the
death of his Son, without any condition, or qualification wrought in us. Thus
much for our Original reconciliation. Now follows our Actual reconciliation;
to wit, the manifestation of Gods reconciliation to us, and of the
reconciliation of our nature to God in Jesus Christ. Here I lay down this
proposition: Man's Actual reconciliation to God requires previous conditions
and qualifications to be wrought in man by the spirit of God before man can be
Actually reconciled to God, or Gods reconciliation manifested unto him. Although
this proposition need no proof, in regard that the world so far doteth on
conditions, that they will hardly admit God to be reconciled to man, without
performances in man: Surely much less will they think it possible that Man
should be reconciled unto God, without something wrought in man; yet for our
better understanding I will show you the proof of this by certain texts. As
Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God, John 3.5. Except a man be borne again he cannot see the
kingdom of God, verse. 3. To enter into, and to see the kingdom of God, is
that which I call reconciliation to God: to know the favor and love of God
toward us in Christ, requires you see the condition of being borne again of
water and of the spirit, which is (not to be baptized as the Papists would have
it) but to have such fruits and effects of Gods spirit wrought in us as purify
the heart, as water does the body. Secondly, except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you, John 6.53. Mark I
pray you, he does not say, that except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in God, or in Christ; but ye have no
life in you. Now you see we must eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood,
or else we can have no life in us. To eat his flesh and to drink his blood, is
to believe in him, to have life in you, is to know Gods favor in Jesus Christ,
as much as if he should say, except ye believe, ye cannot know Gods favor to
you in Jesus Christ. Unto this we may add in the third place: Except ye
repent ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. And to this place we may also
refer that place of which we had occasion to speak somewhat before; without
holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. not only that holiness is
concomitant or companion of our seeing of God, but that faith being a part of
(yea the first fruits of holiness) is that whereby the soul is brought to the
sight of God in Jesus Christ. But I am not willing to spend time in larger
proof, though you cannot but perceive I might be very large herein, but I will
for your better understanding, confine my self, and go on to show you in
particular, what Conditions are required in us, before we can be reconciled to
God. And here I have occasion, for the better explaining of this, to commend
unto you three sorts of conditions, 1. Antecedent. 2. Present. 3. Consequent.


Antecedent Conditions I call those which are necessarily presupposed in us
before we can submit unto God, or be reconciled unto him. They are such
conditions as may be separated from reconciliation in time, yea they are such
conditions, as are, and may be in them which are not reconciled, nor yet ever
shall be: so that they are proper, Omnibus sed non solis electis, to all the
elect, but not only to the elect. 2. Present conditions I call them, that go
before reconciliation, as the cause before the effect, yet are never separated
from reconciliation in time, but are indeed the very thing whereby the holy
spirit of God does reconcile man to God. 3. Consequent conditions I call them,
which do always follow reconciliation, as the effect the cause, although they
are inseparable in respect of time. And I therefore undertake to speak of
these (although the curious may think me blameworthy for transgressing the
rules of method) that we might be warned of a rock and shelfe; namely, that we
do not confound these conditions together, and to take those for antecedent
which are only consequent: which to my knowledge has made some souls to make
shipwreck for a time, when as they would have in them before they believe, such
conditions as are only consequents, and not antecedents of faith: First, to
speak of Antecedent conditions, which necessarily go before our
reconciliation to God: They shall be referred unto two heads, the first is the
knowledge of sin, with whatsoever is requisite unto the knoweledge of sin.
The second is the knowledge of the depth of misery by sin to be such, as we
can neither help our selves, neither is it in the power of any other creature
for to help us: but that we are undone for ever in respect of whatsoever we
can do or any other for us; for until the soul be brought to this, there is
no hope of reconciling it unto God: for you must know, that it is mere
necessity that drives us: we are by nature haters of God, and cannot be brought
to come to God in love before we perceive God to love us; such is the malignant
nature of man, that if he could make any shift in the world, he would not be
beholding to God for help: The prodigal son will never return to his
father so long as he can get clothes for his back, and meat for his belly
elsewhere; but when he is brought to that pass that he would fain have filled
his belly with husks which the swine did eat, and no man gave unto him, Luke
15.16. Then he is contented, to think of submitting to his father, but not
before, if he could have got a living by keeping of Hogs, he would not have
returned. Thus is it with man so long as he is in any hope to escape misery any
other way, there is no hope of his returning to God. They that be whole need
not the Physician, but they that are sick, Mat. 9.12.

The Pharisee thinks himself able to establish his own righteousness: and
therefore he will not submit to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.4. He cares
not a pin for Christ, he is whole; he cares not for the Physician. If any man
will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and
follow me, Luke 9.23. No man can follow Christ except he deny himself, his own
Righteousness and holiness, would you know a reason under the determinate
counsel of God; why the Publicans and Harlots received Christ, but the holy
Pharisees rejected him, (a true pattern of our days:) the Pharisees thought
themselves able to stand upon their own legs; they were alive in their
conceits, and for them to hear of righteousness in another, was too great a
disparagement unto them and their holiness; when the publicans and strumpets,
being convinced of sin, and having no righteousness of their own, they are
contented to accept it upon any terms. A rich man, he sometimes scorneth a
gift, and says nay, but I will buy it, I will give satisfaction for it: but
the poor naked man is glad to receive what he wants. Thus before the soul of
man be brought to be reconciled unto God, it is necessary that it see it self
a sinful creature; yea so sinful, That neither crying nor howling can wash it
away; yea so sinful, that no correction or amendment of life is able to make
satisfaction.

Thus far of the antecedent conditions: which as I said before, are proper to
all; but not only to them that are reconciled to God: for these that I have
showed hitherto, may be found in the not reconciled, even as in the reconciled:
yea, in the reprobate, even as in the elect. The second sort of conditions are
present, which go before reconciliation, as the cause before the effect; but is
never separated from it; as being the thing I say, whereby the holy Spirit of
God does actually reconcile the soul to God. Of this sort I find but one only
condition; namely, of faith, or believing. Here are two things to be pondered.
The first, That without believing, the soul (remaining in the body) cannot be
reconciled unto God. The second, That by believing, the soul is actually
reconciled unto God. For the first, it is proved. He that believes not the
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36. To be
reconciled to God, is to see life, therefore he that believes not, shall not
be reconciled to God: but the apprehension of the wrath of God shall torment
his wakened conscience. He that believes not, shall not see life; he shall see
nothing but wrath. Secondly, He that believes not God, has made him a liar, 1
John 5.10. That is, has accounted him a liar. Now, who can find in his heart
to be reconciled to a liar? Whereby it is plain, that without, or before faith,
man cannot be reconciled unto God. For the second, that by believing, the soul
becomes to be reconsiled unto God: is proved; He that has received his
testimony, has set to his seal that God is true. John 3.33. As many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name, John 1.12. Whosoever believes, has power to cry,
Abba Father. And to this place, we refer that known text, Romans 5.1. Therefore
being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
And this is the proper office of faith, (as it justifies) to reconcile the
soul and conscience unto God, and to make us at peace with him, by assuring us
of his favor and good will toward us, in Jesus Christ, manifested, in that
God gave his only Son to be a propitiation for our sins, and to satisfy
whatsoever the justice of God required at his hands. And this is our receiving
of Christ, our putting on of Christ, and our living by faith (if we take faith
for believing.) And thus much of the second condition which is present: Now
follows the third sort of conditions, which are consequent unto our
reconciliation, and things that accompany our salvation. These conditions are
first, Joy in the Holy Ghost. Secondly, Love to God and his Church. Thirdly,
New obedience in newness of spirit, and not in oldnesse of the letter.

First, Joy in the Holy Ghost, is a necessary consequent, and an inseparble
companion to our reconciliation by faith; as appears by that which has been
spoken before, touching joying in believing, with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. And indeed, how can it be that it should be otherwise: can the men of
this world hear of great possessions fallen unto them, without joyfulnesse? How
then is it possible, that the children of the living God, can come to the
apprehension of the fatherly love of God in Christ, but they must needs sing a
new song, yea, break forth into singing, and cry aloud, with the blessed
Virgin, saying, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior, Luke 1.46. If I could this day bring you happy tidings of
reconciliation between King and Parliament, (which the God of heaven effect,)
what joy would this work in the hearts of every man here present? How much more
shall the tidings of eternal peace by Jesus Christ, affect the soul with
extraordinary comfort. Here what the Lord speaks concerning the new Jerusalem,
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, etc. Rev. 21.4. Let others think what they
will; I firmly believe the new Jerusalem, to be the glorious kingdom of Jesus
Christ, (which is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost)
advanced in the conscience: and hither also are to be referred those glorious
things that are spoken of the City of our God, by the Gospel Prophet, in these
words, The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall fly away, Isay 35.10. This is the promise of our
Savior, Your sorrow shall be turned into joy, John 16.20. This is the office
of the Holy Ghost, To be the Comforter, to speak peace and joy unto his people.
And therefore amongst the sundry precious gifts, which are declared to be the
fruits of Gods Spirit, joy, is not the least, Gal. 5.22. This also is the lot
and inheritance of the Saints of God: for we read not of any converts in the
Scripture, but we also read of the joy of Gods Spirit replenishing their
souls: They, (even they) who were pricked in their hearts, and knew not what
to do, do not eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, Acts
2.46. The Eunuch returns rejoicing, Acts 8.39. Samarias conversion causes
great joy in that City, Acts 8.8.

But why do I stay on particulars, let us hear the Apostle for all; We also
joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement, Romans 5.11. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God: And more, we
glory in tribulation also, Verse 2.3. Can the Sun be without her light? can the
fire be without heat? Then also may the called of God, the reconciled to the
Father, be without joy and peace in believing. Can a man stop the ebbing or
flowing of the water? then may the souls of the reconciled to God be deprived
of those floods of comforts, which flow from fountains of comforts, into the
subject of comforts, the souls of the people reconciled to God. This is the
first effect of reconciliation, joy, and peace. The second follows; which is,
Love to God: Love is also an inseparable consequent of man's reconciliation: can
man behold the beauty of God, and the glory of his face in Jesus Christ? And
the soul not be ravished with love. See the love of the reconciled to God, in
that garden of sweet expressions, the Book of Canticles; Stay me with flagons,
comfort me with apples, for I am sick with love, Cant. 2.5. The love of the
reconciled to God, it is a great love: Many sins are forgiven her, for she
loved much, Luke 7. A love taking great delight and contentment in the object
beloved; My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His
head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a Raven, his
mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely' Cant. 5.10. etc. Again, it is a
restless love, that canfind no content, can take no rest (nonot in her bed) if
she may not enjoy the presence of her beloved. By night on my bed I sought him
whom my soul loved, I sought him, but I found him not, I will rise now and go
about the City, etc. Cant. 3.1.2. That this love is an inseparable consequent,
a daily companion of man's reconciliation to God, will be plain, when we
shall see how the Holy Ghost, describing unto us the called of God, sets
them forth by this token of love unto Almighty God: Eye has not seen, nor ear
has not heard, etc. the things which God has prepared for them that love him,
1 Cor. 2.9. We know that all things work together for good to them that love
God, Romans 8.28. This ornament of love is like the garment of diverse colors,
with which all the Kings daughters, which were Virgins, were apparrelled, 2 Samuel 13.18. If a Woman be seen in the streets without a party colored
garment, it is concluded, that she is either none of the Kings daughters, or at
least no Virgin: so is this ornament of love (I say) that thing, wherewith all
the people of God, reconciled to him, are adorned; if we see a soul
altogether stripped of this ornament, we conclude, They are not in the number of
Gods people; or at least not reconciled. Therefore the Holy ghost concludes; He
that loves not, knows not God, 1 Ioh. 4.8. And as on the affirmative,
pronounces, Grace be on all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ, in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. So also on the negative, If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Thus you see the
consequents of our reconciliation, inseparably conjoined together, so that no
creature shall be able to put them asunder: you have seen Peace to the
brethren, and love, with faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 6.23. The third consquent is new obedience in newnes of the spirit: As
peace, and joy, and love follow, and attend upon faith, so is new obedience an
attendant of love. This is the love of God, that we keep his Commondements, 1 John 5.3. If you love me keep my Commandments, Ioh. 14.15. If a man love me,
he will keep my words, verse 23. This is that which I had occasion to speak of
before, that the holy Spirit of God does not only cleanse the conscience, but
in some measure the conversation also: This is that which I said before,
Without holiness no man shall see God, and drunkards shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God: I say again, that Christ entering into the soul, shall drive
out whatsoever is profane, and draw up the soul by the cords of love unto new
obedience: And to this place we refer hatred of sin, love of virtue, a godly
sorrow for transgression committed, revenge upon our selves, for the things
that are past, and a jealous care for that which is to come. But of these
particularly I cannot speak; for as Rome was not built on a day, so neither
can it be pulled down in an hour (I mean the Doctrine of Rome.) And here I would
have made an end of speaking of the consequents of our Reconciliation, but that
I fear the timorous soul will be ready to say, In thus saying you have filled
my heart with sorrow: The consequents of our reconciliation being laid down, I
confess they are true; but alas, when I cast an eye back upon mine own soul,
I find my joy and comfort little, my love to be less than my joy, and my
obedience to be least of all. This, this puts my heart in fear, and makes my
soul to tremble. I answer, what is it that thou fear, O thou of little
faith? Thou answerest, thou art afraid, that God is not thy God, that he is
not reconciled unto thee: See thy error, these things cannot be signs that
God is not reconciled unto thee; but they are signs, that thou art not fully
reconciled unto God, but that thy faith is weak like the bulrush, that thy joy
is as little as thy faith, and that thy love and obedience is as imperfect as
thy joy. Measure not the reconciliation of God to thy soul, by the perfection
of thy obedience: for in so doing thou plungest thy soul into miferable
doubts. But seeing the imperfection, not of Gods reconciliation to thee, but of
thy reconciliation to God, cry thou unto the Throne of grace, Lord increase my
faith, and make my love and obedience, my joy, and peace, to abound more and
more, through the spirit of our God, and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And thus have I now done with the Antecedent, the present, and consequent
conditions, of our reconciliation to God. The next thing that I intend is to
make Application.

It has been hitherto mine endeavor, to declare unto you the mystery of
salvation, and to imitate the skillful Limbner, to give unto every Limb and
part, not only his due proportion, but also his due place, and not to set the
head where the foot should be, or the foot where the head: I may peradventure
to many seem guilty, of that crime which was laid against the Apostle, to turn
the world upside down, and to place that in the bottom, which others make the
top of the building, and to set that upon the roof, which others lay for a
foundation: But I submit my self to the judgment of the word: Consider we
what has been spoken, of Gods reconciliation to us without all conditions; of
our reconciliation to God, original and actual: and now let us see, if these
dstinctions be founded (as it is before proved) upon the holy Scriptures, of
the Prophets and Apostles, whether they be not blameworthy that make no
difference at all between these two, but confounding heaven and earth together,
the Creature with the Creator, do most absurdly apply those things which are
antecedents, or causes of our reconciliation unto God, to be causes of Gods
reconciliation unto us, drawing a veil before the free grace of God, and
keeping the soul from settling upon a sure foundation: The Lord complained of
the Prophets of old (the false Prophets) that they pudled the waters with their
feet.) When water is pudled, it is not water; but water and dirt mingled
together: In a puddle no man can discern whether it be deep or shallow: water
is Doctrine, pudling is confounding of things together, without division or
separation: O that our days were free from this complaint! O ye Pastors of
the Lords flock, that feed his heritage; Be you contented to bear the word of
admonition, from the meanest of the servants of God. Look back upon the waters,
that ye have made the heritage of the Lord to drink: Consider the pastures,
which you have set before them: have you not made the LORDS sheep become a prey
(sometimes to presumption, sometimes to despair) by your Doctrine? Have you
not made the souls of the righteous sad, and the soul of the wicked to
rejoice? Consider your ways I pray you: Have you not many a time confounded
the conditions of our reconciliation to God, making that to be the case, which
is the effect, and that to be the effect, which is the cause? Let me beseech
you to weigh these things, and to endeavor that your Doctrine may be the light
of the World, that it may be clear as the Crystal, proceeding from the
throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. You sheep of the pasture of the
Lord, the God of his inheritance, know, it your duty aptly to distinguish these
things in your own Consciences, that you may enjoy the brightness of the
glory, of the grace of God, set up in your souls, if you search into the
reason of your many years bondage, of your miserable doubting, you shall find
your disease, in that which has been spoken, and I hope the remedy also: The
Lord give you understanding.

The second Application, may show unto us the difference, between the
reconciled, and the not reconciled: Although both may be objects of the grace
of God, both beloved of the everlasting Father: yet shall you find a vast
difference, if you look either upon their Conversations, or their Consciences.
The difference of Conscience is, the not reconciled, have a defiled, and
polluted Conscience. A Conscience that is either seared, and fitted with
Atheistical carelessness, or at the best, sitting in darkness and the shadow
of death, seeing no light, Matthew. 4.16. when as the consciences of the
reconciled, do enjoy the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus.
Secondly, the conversation of the people not reconciled, is either a
conversation polluted with Pharisaicall righteousness, and blind zeal, (for
all zealous persons are not reconciled to God) seeking to establish its own
righteousness in the sight of God: or else a conversation, according to the
course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air; the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience; A conversation in the
lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians.
2.2, 3.

The third Application, shows us an open door, for the easy understanding
and plain reconciliation of many places of Scripture, which seem so exceeding
different, as if no way of reconciling could be found. Let us learn to
distinguish, when God speaks of his reconciliation to us, and when he
speaks of our reconciliation to him. Let us learn to distinguish, between the
thing, and the manifestation of the thing: the want of which distinction,
breeds an horrible confusion in the interpretation of holy Scripture; To give
an instance, it is written, Galat. 3.26. Ye are all the Children of God by
faith in Jesus Christ. It is written again, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba
Father. In this last place, the Holy ghost declares sonship to be the cause of
giving the Spirit, as also he declares it to be an eternal grace of God,
communicated unto his people, Having predestined us unto the Adoption of
sons, by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. But then if this be so, how are we said to
be sons of God by faith, etc? I answer, the one speaks of the thing it self,
or of Gods reconciliation to us; The other of the manifestation of the thing,
or our reconciliation to God. Again, if the grace of adoption be an eternal
grace, how is it said, we are borne again by the Word? 1 Pet. 1.23. and
begotten by the Word? James 1.18. I answer, these places are to be understood
of the manifestation of Adoption, not of the act of Adoption it self: And that
this is so, is plain, God has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. A lively hope is the
thing, unto which we are begotten. And that it is ordinary in Scripture, to
call the manifestation of things, by the names of the things themselves, will
be plain by two places, (I might bring two hundred) the first is Ierem. 1.10.
I have this day set thee over the nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out,
to put down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to plant.
How does poor Jeremy destroy Nations? Even by declaring the judgments of God
in the overthrow of Nations. And thus does he plant, by declaring the merciful
promises of God in the restoration of Nations.

The second place is, Ioh. 20.23. Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and
whose sins ye retain, they are retained. How do the Apostles remit and retain
sins, but by declaring Gods gracious remission to every one that believes,
etc.

But some may object and say, why does not the Lord speak in plain terms? I
answer who art thou that wilt correct the Lord, and teach him to speak? I
answer again, in our Saviors words, when his Disciples ask the question, Why
speak thou unto them in Parables? Mat. 13.10. His answer is, Because it is
given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to them it is
not given. As if he should have said, in respect of you, that are my people, I
need not to speak more plain; for you (being taught of God) are able to
understand the mysteries of the kingdom. In respect of others: I will not speak
more plain, because to them it is not given to understand the mysteries of the
kingdom. Thus far for the application: I now draw to an end: only I will give
you the Skeleto or Map of that which has been delivered in a few words.
Consider we the causes of Gods reconciliation, as it stands manifested to us in
Christ. Secondly, the causes of our reconciliation to God.

Gods reconciliation to us. 1 Efficient, Gods love. 2 Material, Christ's
righteousness. 3 Formal, Imputation of righteousness. 4 Final, Gods glory,
man's salvation.

Our recodciliation to God, Efficient, Principal H. Ghost, instrumen. tall
faith. Material, Christ's righteousness. Formal, Apprehension of Christ's
righteousness by faith. Final, Gods glory, and man's consolation.

Consider we the difference of these two in their causes. The final cause of
Gods reconciliation to us, is salvation; the final cause of our reconciliation
to God is, consolation. The Lord fill you with his Spirit, that the
apprehension of Gods salvation may fill you with eternal consolation. Amen.

FINIS.

