THE HANDMAID OF REPENTANCE. OR, A SHORT TREATISE OF RESTITVTION.

Written by ARTH: DENT, Minister of Gods word at Southshoobery in ESSEX.

As a necessary Appendix to his Sermon of Repentance.

Printed for Thomas Thorp. 1614.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
THE zealous care of that religious and learned Teacher Mr. Dent, toward the
edification of Gods house, in the exhortation of his people unto holiness of
life; as it has sufficiently approved it self to the general view of the
World in diverse worthy works of his now extant: so by the consent of many
devout and judicious Christians, it has not in any one piece or other of his
doing, more fully and truly expressed it self; than in that Sermon which
himself first preached, and afterward caused to be published, upon
Repentance. It might have been supposed, that this delicate Age of ours would
scarcely have put on so rough a garment. But the virtuous cunning of that
excellent Artist, had so thick ouerlaced the same with heavenly promises and
comfortable persuasions: that although at the first assaying thereof, it found
it self inwardly pricked and perturbed; yet after a little wearing, and by
daily use, the straightness thereof became both profitable and pleasing, and
it rejoiced not a little to be so happily deceived. Behold here another piece
of Work, made by the same hand, A short Treatise of Restitution: Array thy
self likewise (good Christian) with this Vesture; being indeed an Ornament,
which will make the rest of thy clothing appear more gracious. This is the
true Touchstone which tries thy repentance; and gives thee to God and the
world either a true Christian, or a counfeit. Be not afraid to use it: but as
thou have vouchsafed the former, of Repentance, to wear in thine heart, and
have thereby no doubt (if thou be a Christian) received great consolation; so
let this latter, of Restitution, be as a Posie in thine hand, to thy more
assured and greater comfort. This is the furniture which renders the guest
acceptable at the heavenly marriage. If then thou desire to be welcome to
that Feast, enter thus suited. Now forasmuch as this so necessary and
Christianlike a work, penned by so singular a Minister of the Gospel, and so
much conducting to eternal bliss, has by Gods goodness come unto my hands:
and considering that Repentance is of small force where Restitution is wanting,
as being the only Key which opens the way unto Remission; I held my self
bound in Christian Charity, to communicate the same unto my Brethren. Such
Talents must not be hid, but put to usury, that they may be increast with
profit. Praise God for the Author of so good a work; and use it to the
rectifying of thine own conscience, that God may be glorified; which is the
accomplishment of my desire. Farewell in the Lord.

A TREATISE OF RESTITVTION.
Matter.
THe matter subject of Restitution is threefold: the first, satisfaction for
things taken from the Owner: the second, of damage sustained; the third, of
injuries offered. In all these Cases, a careful Christian ought to make
Restitution, in manner and form as hereafter follows: these circumstances
considered.

Circumstances.
Who, and to whom,
what, and how much,
Where, when, and how,
thou should restore,
Consider well:
this will thee teach
A Lesson good,
for rich and poor.
Manner.
Touching the first part of matter taken, we must understand, That things be
taken from the owner two ways: viz. either violently, or voluntarily: as by
rapine, theft, etc. voluntarily, as when a man borrowing any thing, receives
it at the owners hands. As the taking the one, is injurious: so the detaining
of the other, is malicious.

Having thus breefely spoken of the matter, wherein Restitution is to be made:
let us now proceed to entreat of the circumstances, and that most breefely, in
order, thus.

Persons who.
Every one is bound to make Restitution, who has been the cause of wrongful
taking: and where the persons are many, every one ought to restore.

Ten ways may a man be the cause of wrongful taking another man's goods, for
which he is to make restitution.

1
He must restore
that others goods does take;
As he also
that substitute does make.
The Usurer,
his Servant sends for bands,
To wound a man,
another he commands.
The Masters here
the Servants do compel,
Not to obey,
as much as to rebel.
Therefore in these,
the Master is to blame
For Servants faults;
amends then make for shame.
2
Or does approve
what in his name was done,
He must restore;
and not the time prolong:
Of rash attempts,
Repentance follows soon.
3
Ill counsel often
moves many one to ill:
Therefore beware;
to counsel is to kill.
4
Consent, as cause,
in mischief must be taken:
Therefore it is good,
ill counsel were forsaken.
5
Beware of praise:
commend not one in sin*
One mischief done,
another does begin.
6
He that in ill
with others has a share;
To make amends,
in conscience must prepare.
7
He that receives,
from theft will not refrain,
8
Stolen goods concealed,
embolden Thieves again.
9
Not to resist,
or stay a bad intent
10
Is judged as much,
as for to give consent.
Persons to whom Restitution is to be made.
If the thing taken or withheld, be any man's proper goods only; then it
must be restored to the right owner. But in case a public person, either
Civil or Ecclesiastical, wast or make spoil of things belonging to their
place: Restitution must be made unto the place, whereunto the matter belongs.

If the owner be not known, or if one cannot have free and safe access unto
him: then it ought to be given unto the poor.

If a man be bound to make restitution for things unjustly taken, as in usury:
Restitution ought to be made to the party damnified. So that these two things
concur; unjust taking, and damage ensuing thereupon. In so much that he which
steals a pawn from a Marchant-man, ought to restore it to the Merchant:
notwithstanding, in the Court of Conscience he might restore it to the owner;
so as the Merchant were not thereby damnified.

Owners dead.
If the person, to whom Restitution ought to be made be dead: it shall be given
to his heirs.

Unknown.
If the person, from whom any thing has been stolen, be not known, after
that a man has done his endeavor by diligent inquiry: then the thing shall be
given to Christ in his poor members, Our times cannot like such curiosity.
as Lord of the whole world.

If the owner be far distant, and the thing withheld, may easily and
faithfully be sent unto him: if the matter be of great value, it ought to be
sent unto the owner, at the costs and charges of the wrongful detainer: if it
cannot be sent unto him, and the matter be of small account, it may be given
to his Kinsfolk, or to the use of some Hospital, at the discretion of some
honest person; with this Prouiso, that when the owner comes, it shall be
restored unto him.

Usurers.
If an Usurer be in conscience moved, to restore the money taken by Usury; and
the parties, to whom Restitution ought to be made, be removed from the place
where the Usurer dwells: then the Money may be returned at their own charges;
Too good to be true.
but if the Usurer remove, then at his charges.

Mad men.
The owners ought not always to have their own restored: namely, when it
might turn to their own harm; as a a sword taken from a mad man: but it may
be reserved for his heirs.

Dishonest.
Things taken upon dishonest conditions, need not to be restored, unless they
be gotten by craft or violence; or taken from him, that has no right to
alienate them.

Game.
Things gotten by Game, are of like nature: yet in both, the parties may be
counseled to give them to the poor.

Things found.
Things found, which never had owner, or who never was known in the memory of
man, or that ears not for them; are his that finds them.

Treasure.
Concerning Treasure, the right owner whereof is not known: if a man find it
in his own ground, it is the finders: if it be found in another man's ground,
half of it is the owners of the ground; the other half is his that found it.

If treasure be found in another man's ground, by diligent search, with consent
or license of him that owes the ground; it is his that finds it, because the
other will not seek it. If a man seek for treasure, against the will, or
without the license of him that owes the ground: it wholly belongs to the owner
of the ground.

If a man know there is treasure in another man's ground, and buy the ground: it
seems, that the treasure is the buyers. As for those Customs and laws,
whereby treasure found belongs to the Prince; Note.
I purpose not to meddle, neither do I speak any thing in this whole
discourse that is prejudicial to the Laws. Let the learned Lawyers discuss
such cases. Yet Laws grounded upon reason, ought in conscience to be regarded.

What a man must restore.
Things in their property and kind, as also damages, are to be restored.

If the thing it self be to be had, let it be restored, unless the fear of
scandal or other danger should ensue: In this case men must beware, that they
become not Fellons of their own goods; especially, if after his goods be taken
he have made any pursuit, by raising hue and cry: otherwise, the matter being
secret betwixt the taker and the owner; a man may without danger receive his
own again, as some think. Lamb.
then may the worth thereof be restored, at the discretion of some honest
person. If the thing it self cannot be had, or be made worse, the like may
be restored.

Whosoever has another man's good, is bound to restore it; whether he have it
by good means or otherwise.

Things bought bona fide.
If a man buy an Horse, thinking it to be his that sels him, Our laws are
otherwise, grounded on this: Rather a mischeese, than an inconvenience.
and is not: if he shall afterward sell the Horse to another; he is bound to
restore the gain, and no more.

Given.
If a stolen Horse be given a man, and he afterward sell him: Note.
he ought to restore the price fully: if he keep him, he is bound to restore
him without any price to the owner. Yet he may have action against the seller
howsoever.

Mala fide.
If a man buy ought by evil means, upon a greedy intent of gain: he is bound
to give the thing, if he have it; or the value, if he have it not, together
with the gains he has got thereby. And although it be stolen from him; yet is
he not free from Restitution.

Goods preserved.
A man, taking the goods of another, only with intent to save it from spoil or
perishing; may lawfully demand his expenses.

Of hindrances.
If one violently or unlawfully stay or hinder another from obtaining of any
commodity, he is chargeable with the damage.

A man, letting another from the lawful dispatch of his honest business, or
duty; is bound to make amends, at the discretion of some honest person.

Creditors.
He that hinders a Creditor by unlawful means (that he cannot demand his
debt of the debtor) by delivering him out of prison, by rescue, or other
unlawful means: and generally, he that is cause of damage to another
(especially of set purpose) if the damage be certain, is liable to all; if
uncertain, as an honest man shall award.

Goods perishing in another man's hands.
If another man's goods perish in his hands, through whose default they are not
restored to the Owner, if the goods should nevertheless have perished in the
owners hands; in this case he is not bound to make satisfaction.

But it is otherwise, if the Goods remaining with the owner had not perished:
or if the owner was about to sell them before; or otherwise, to convert them to
his own benefit and commodity.

A man flying from his own goods.
If a man through poverty depart or fly his own house, and from his goods: he
is bound in conscience to restore, and satisfy for his debts, when he comes to
better state, and shall be able.

Life, Limbs, etc.
In those damages that ensue upon a man's death, wounding, hurting, imprisoning,
defaming, etc. Restitution is to be made at the discretion of honest persons;
and according to the power and ability of the party.

Who so defloureth a maiden, either by seducing or by violence, is bound either
to marry her, or to make her amends at the discretion of some honest person. If
he promised to marry her, he is bound to do it, unless some great scandal
or slander should follow thereupon. But in case she will not marry him, or her
Father be unwilling; then he shall satifie her, as some honest man shall award:
but if she was willing to the fact, he is free from both.

How much ought to be restored.
If the quantity of the matter taken, or of damage sustained, be certain; he is
bound to satisfy as much: if it be uncertain, as in injuries and wrongs, then
as much as an honest person shall appoint, according to the circumstances of
the offense, etc.

He that possesses any thing that is another, whereby he is enriched, ought
to restore it wholly, and the increase thereof: deducting out his expenses, for
getting, keeping, and preserving the same, and fruits thereof.

Legacies.
The reason of him that pays not Legacies due many years before: who ought
to make restitution for the commodities detained.

Where Restitution is to be made.
If Restitution be necessary for ought unlawfully taken from another:
restitution must be made, where the owner may be kept indemnified; if
otherwise, where the thing was had.

Of the time of Restitution.
A man having ought that is another, Note ^ well.
is bound forthwith to make Restitution. Touching this word ( forthwith)
understand it thus, That a man be fully resolved, and purpose, to restore as
soon as conveniently he can. As concerning the performance of his purpose, and
the effecting of his intent, He ought to do it in time convenient; due
circumstances considered.

Three things may excuse a man, from making present restitution.

1
First, the will of the owner granting delay.

2
Secondly, ignorance of the reasonableness of right, or of the fact.

3
Thirdly, want of ability. Touching which point, the opinion of the learned
rises upon six conclusions.

1
The first is, That a man may in extreme necessity, not having any thing, but
only things necessary for his own life, and his, is not bound to make present
restitution: because at that time all things are common.

2
The second is; He that by making Restitution could not live, according as
becomes his estate, although the owner not being in the like or greater
necessity, will not grant time: yet is he not bound to make present
Restitution. Notwithstanding, he ought to beware, that he make no needless
expenses: otherwise in reason he could not be excused.

3
The third is, when restitution should turn to the owners harm, either in
respect of his body, or his soul, if restitution were made: he ought not
presently to do it.

4
The fourth is, if the same should tend to a public danger, or were against a
public commodity.

5
The fifth is, if it were likely to turn to the loss of the Restorers good
name, the danger of his life or soul, or if thereupon should follow some
grievous sin: present restitution ought not to be made, because these are
greater damages.

6
The sixth is, if present restitution should more hurt the debtor, than profit
the Creditor. As if an Artificer, being in debt, should sell his tools or
instruments of his occupation, whereby he gets his living: in this case he
ought not to make present restitution; because in reason he ought to have time
given him. It should be otherwise if the Creditor were in like state: Note.
because no man ought to hurt another for his own benefit. It is otherwise
where a man deferreth to restore, only for lucre sake, and not upon necessity.
Note also, that if delay should be hurtful to the Creditor: although a man
should avoid the great^r loss in his proper goods; yet at the least, the
Debtor must keep him losselesse.

What order and manner is to be kept in making Restitution.
He that is able, ought to make restitution to all, without respect of order,
or delay of time.

He that cannot restore to all, let him first restore things certain before
uncertain.

Amongst things certain, let those first be restored which are in their own
kind, and another man's; as goods committed to keep, and things bought and not
paid for: then, other goods in order, as the Laws and Statutes do appoint. If
it be not against the Law of Nature: and in case there be sundry and manifold
opinions; the safest is to be followed.

Takers of Money upon use.
He that has taken Money upon Usury, if he have not so much goods as to
satisfy for other lawful contracts, and the Usurer too; is bound first to
satisfy for his lawful Contracts, with these two conditions: the first, That
the things taken to use, be not in their proper kind, as pawns (for these ought
to be restored to the owners paying the Money;) the second, if by such
Contracts the party was not made poorer, to pay his former usury: as in the
promise of a dowry it might befall, whereby hs might become poorer. In this and
the like cases, lawful Contracts must give place.

Uncertain goods.
If the goods to be restored be uncertain: then godly counsel and honest
advise must direct, evermore provided, that men, in great distress pitied, be
not by sufferance emboldened to bad attemps.

Secret things.
Things secretly taken to use, ought carefully to be restored, that the
parties honest reputation and good name be not hurt: but public usury ought
publicly to be restored, for by restitution a good name is recovered.

Good fame and name.
If one defame another by just course of Law, there no Restitution lies: but
if he do it unjustly and untruly, let him make amends, by acknowledging that
he spoke untruly, or concealed the truth. When words repeated may do more
harm then good, there ought to be none acknowledgement.

If a man's good name cannot be recovered, restitution is to be made some other
way: and the damage that has ensued upon defamation, ought to be satisfied;
at the discretion of some honest person. The like may be said of slanderous
libels: and the restitution ought to be made there, where the slander was
raised, whether publicly or privately, etc.

If thou find any thing belonging to an other man, and make not
restitution thereof unto him: the very withholding is mere rapine. For herein
thou have performed thy uttermost; and have not done more, because thou
could not. To deny a man that which is his own, is all one as if thou had
taken it from him.

If thou confess thy self an offender, in taking and detaining an other man's
goods, and thereof outwardly repent thee: yet if, having it in thy power to
make restitution, thou still detain them; thy repentance, howsoever thou
make show thereof, is not true, but fained. But without true repentance there
is no remission: and his repentance is good indeed, which restores the cause
thereof to the right owners; always provided that the Penitent have the
ability to perform it.

Many account it no sin at all, to detain an other man's goods if they chance
to find them: upon this ground, That GOD has sent them; and therefore to
whom should they restore them? But let such men know, That it is a sin not
much differing from theft, to withhold from the Owner even that which they
find.

He is bound to restore the damage, that another sustaineth, which being
thereunto obliged by his office or place, does not hinder the same; as is the
case of a Judge, a Father, or Tutor: except the hazard of his own affairs,
which he ought to prefer before other men's, be the cause of his omission. But
he that hereunto is not tied by his office, is free from such obligation.

A witness being lawfully examined, and concealing the truth, or not speaking
the whole truth, is bound to satisfy the damage sustained by reason of such
his concealment or silence.

He that fraudulently occupies another man's ground, is bound to satisfy for
the fruits received, which otherwise the Owner himself might have gathered,
deducting only his necessary expenses, and consideration of his pains,
taken, and bestowed upon it. But the case is otherwise, in profit arising by
use of another man's money: for Restitution thereof is not to be made, unless it
may appear that the Owner himself could have gotten so much by it.

He that makes a lawful promise, and does not perform it; ought to satisfy
for Damage, following upon the breach of it.

He that takes any reward to do evil, if he have not done it, ought to make
Restitution; but if it be committed, he is at liberty: howbeit S. Augustine be
of opinion in his 54. Epistle: That an Advocate is bound to restore his Fee
taken, for the defense of a bad matter.

He that hinders another in the free donation or collation of a Benefice, so
it be done without violence and fraud; is not bound at all to satisfy for it;
because as yet no right of title thereunto is gotten: Likewise he that
procures a will to be altered, and that with a crafty intention; yet because
there is no settled right thereof, as being in the power of the testator to
change it; the party so doing needs not to make any satisfaction: according
to sundry men's opinions.

But others there are of a contrary judgment, affirming, That such men are
worthily bound to make Restitution, because they offend against the rule of
Justice.

Things committed contrary to Charity, yet according to Justice; require
neither Restitution nor Satisfaction.

Where two men have hurt one another alike: where two parties have defamed each
other: there is no satisfaction to be awarded.

The seafaring man is not bound to restore those things, that he casts into
the Sea; which being kept aboard might be lost notwithstanding, and be
occasion of the loss both of ship and passengers.

Neither is he bound to make Restitution; who after long and diligent search
for his Creditor, and not finding him, distributeth his Debt among the poor:
if it be done by authority of a Judge, and not of too great moment.

The heir of an executed murderer, is bound to restore the damage sustained by
the heir of the murdered; yea although the party damnified be not urgent.

Debt kept back from a spend thrift, and reserved either to help him in his
extremity, or to the use of his heirs, is not of necessity to be paid unto
the Prodigal. Some there are notwithstanding of a contrary opinion, that
positiuely hold, That it ought to be restored unto him; and in like case to any
other, howsoever they abuse their own: as long as his or their neighbor be
not wronged by it.

He that has any thing in custody which is stolen from a thief, ought to
restore it to the right Owner; unless the fear of death restrain him.

So much is to be restored, as is received. For Restitution makes an evenness.

Stolen goods bought with an evil conscience, ought to be restored: yea
although by Law the sale may be justified.

It is not lawful to detain any thing from the Owner, any longer, than till
we find opportunity to restore it.

Of three the most especial degrees of repentance, this of Restitution is the
most supreme: like as in the three Theological virtues, Charity obtains the
highest place. And this dignity is principally attributed unto them above the
rest of their associates, in respect of the end.

For as Faith without Charity is dead: so Repentance without Restitution is a
vapor; neither of them conducing to the proposed end. Suffer not thy self
therefore to be carried away, either by thine own frailty, or the suggestion
of Satan, from performing this most necessary and Christian duty. For
indeed, as Charity demonstrates Faith: so Restitution makes Charity perfect.
And how can he think to be at peace with GOD, that makes no satisfaction for
wrong doing? Such men's sorrow for their sin is all one with that of Cains,
who in the guilt of his conscience confessing his offense, made it
(collaterally) his request, That no man might kill him. This corporal death is
it which they fear: the spiritual death they respect not. Verily I am
persuaded, That with such men, the old heathen Sillius is of far more credit
than any of the holy Writers either of the old or new Testament. His opinion
was, that by denying God and his power he thriued the better. And can we judge
otherwise of this generation, that make iniquity their practice, and seat
themselves in the chair of Scorners? God send them better minds, if they be
not already delivered over into reprobate sense, that they may cry God mercy,
and obtain it, by rendering to every man that which is his own. With such
sacrifice God is pleased, better then with the fat of bullockes. But now
briefly to conclude: as I first intended no long discourse, so I will make a
short end.

The Conclusion.
GEnerally in all cases, where the state, person or fame of any man suffers
detriment or loss, there ought the party delinquent to make Restitution. But
in these days, Detention of other men's goods has got such an habit amongst
the most sort of people, through the long use and practice of it: that it is
not only reputed no sin at all; but even those few, whom Gods holy Spirit
touches with a true feeling of their offenses in this kind, and thereby
moves them to make this holy and religious satisfaction, are by those that
would seem wise in this point, accounted mere fools and of too scrupulous a
conscience. Hence oftentimes it comes to pass, that not only themselves
run headlong on in their wicked courses; but others also by their means are
drawn to the same ungodliness. Amongst the rest of many frivolous excuses,
which carnal men are wont to allege against this spiritual counsel of
Restitution; there is a politic shame or disgrace pretended, which of
necessity must light upon the party restoring.

Now to avoid this shame, which puts sin to flight, and avails greatly to
the perfecting of the new Man within us: they stop their ears at all godly
admonition and heap one sin upon another; first, doing wickedly, and
afterward taking delight therein. Restitution therefore to these kind of
people, is a most unwelcome guest: they may ill abide to see her in the
company of others; and therefore by no means will entertain her themselves.
But let them sooth their own opinions, and set light by Gods judgments as
long as pleases them: the less shame they have in this world before men, of
their close and unjust gettings, and the less account they make of Restitution
or making amends here; the greater will be their horror and confusion in the
next, and the stricter reckoning will God exact at their hands. For such
persons this Treatise was not framed, as being a Pearl not to be cast before
such Swine. To the children of God in Christ Jesus, it is directed, that are
capable of goodness through him, and enabled to bring forth fruits worthy of
amendment of life; that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. To
them it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and to walk in
his ways. In brief therefore I address my self to you my dear brethren:
exhorting you to seal up unto your souls and consciences the assurance of the
hope that is in you, by putting off the Old Man, and putting on the New;
walking before God in holiness and vprightnes of living, as becomes his
children: For the attaining whereof, to the glory of God, and the good of his
Church; I thought it very behouefull to write this short Discourse upon
Restitution; which is so especial a part of Christian duty, and yet in these
times so little regarded. Thus wishing from my very heart. That all men would
beware how they offer wrong, and after offenses past to make satisfaction:
likewise that those which suffer wrong, would not be carried headlong to seek
revenge, but always endeavor to preserve unity in the bond of peace; I commend
these my labors, such as they be, to your Christian considerations: desiring
God, so to imprint the meditation hereof in your minds, that if you have
gotten any thing wrongfully, you may be moved with Zacheus to make Restitution:

Laus Deo.

