THOMAS OF Reading. OR, The six worthy yeomen of the West.

Now the fourth time corrected and enlarged By T. D.



Printed at London for T. P. 1612.

The pleasant History of the six worthy Yeomen of the West.
IN the days of King Henry the first, who was the first king that instituted
the high court of Parliament, there lived nine men, which for the trade of
Clothing, were famous throughout all England. Which Art in those dais was held
in high reputation, both in respect of the great riches that thereby was gotten,
as also of the benefit it brought to the whole Common wealth: the younger sons
of knights and gentlemen, to whom their fathers would leave no lands, were most
commonly preferred to learn this trade, to the end that thereby they might li^e
in good estate, and dri^e forth their days in prosperity.

Among all Crafts, this was the only chief, for that it was the greatest
merchandise, by the which our Country became famous through all Nations. And
it was verily thought, that the one ha^^e of the people in the landli^ed in
those days thereby, and in such good sort, that in the Commonwealth there was
few or no beggars at all: poor people, whom God lightly blesses with most
children, did by means of this occupation so order them, that by the time that
they were come to be six or seven years of age, they were able to get their
own bread: Idleness was then banished our coast, so that it was a rare thing
to hear of a thief in those days. Therefore it was not without cause that
Clothiers were then both honored and loved, among whom these nine persons in
this Kings days were of great credit, viz. Thomas Cole of Reading, Gray of
Gloucester, Sutton of Salisburie, Fitzallen of Worcester, (commonly called
William of Worcester) ^om Dove of Exceter, and Simon of South hampton, alias
Sup-broath: who were by the King called, The ^ixe worthy husbands of the West.
Then were there three living in the North, that is to say, Cutbert of Kendall,
Hodgekins of Hallifax, and Martin Byram of Manchester. Every one of these kept
a great number of servants at work, spinners, carders, weauers, fullers,
diars, sheeremen, and rowers, to the great admiration of all those that came
into their houses to behold them.

Now you shall understand, these gallant Clothiers, by reason of their dwelling
places, separated themselves in three several companies: Gray of Gloucester,
William of Worcester, and Thomas of Reading, because their iorny to London was
all one way, they conuerced commonly together. And Dove of Exceter, Sutton of
Salisburie and Simon of South-hampton, they in like sort kept company the one
with the other, meeting ever altogether at Bazingstoke: and the ^ji northern
Clothiers did the like, who commonly did not meet, till they came to Bosoms
Inn in London.

Moreover, for the love and delight that these western men had each in others
company, they did so provide, that their waines and themselves would ever meet
upon one day in London at Iarrats hall, surnamed the Giant, for that he
surpassed all other men of that age, both in stature and strength: whose
meriments and memorable deeds, I will set down unto you in this following
discourse.

How King Henry sought the savor of all his subjects, especially of the
Clothiers. Chap. 1.
THis King Henry, who for his great learning and wisdom was called
Beauclarke, being the third son to the renowned Conqueror: after the death of
his brother William Rufus, took upon him the government of this land, in the
absence of his second brother Robert Duke of Normandy, who at this time was at
wars against the Infidels, and was chosen King of Jerusalem, the which he,
for the love he bare to his own country, refused* and with great honor
returned from the holy Land; of whose coming when King Henry understood,
knowing he would make claim to the crown, sought by all means possible to
win the goodwill of his Nobility and to get the favor of the Commons by
courtesy: for the obtaining whereof he did them many favors thereby the
better to strengthen himself against his brother.

It chanced on a time, as he, with one of his sons, and diverse of his
Nobility, rode from London toward Wales, to appease the fury of the Welshmen,
which then began to raise themselves in arms against his authority, that he
met with a great number of Waine^ laden with cloth, coming to London; and
seeing them still drive on one after another so many together, demanded whose
they were: the Waine-men answered in this sort: Coals of Reading (quoth they.)
Then by and by the King asked an other, saying: Whose cloth is all this? Old
Coals (quoth he:) and again anon after he asked the same question to other,
and still they answered, Old Coals. And it is to be remembered, that the King
met them in such a place, so narrow and straight, that he with all the rest of
his train, were feign to stand up close to the hedge, whilst the carts passed
by, the which at that time being in number above two hundred, was near hand an
hour ere the King could get room to be gone: so that by his long stay, he
began to be displeased, although the admiration of that sight did much
qualify his furi^; but breaking out in discontent, by reason of his stay, he
^^d, he thought old Cole had got a Commission for all the car^s in the
Country to carry his cloth. And how if he have (quoth one of the Wainemen)
does that grieve you, good sir? Yea good sir, said our King, what say you to
that? The fellow seeing the king (in asking that question) to bend his brows,
though he knew not what he was, yet being abasht, he answered thus: Why sir; if
you be angry, no body can hinder you; for possible sir, you have Anger at
commandment. The king seeing him in uttering of his words to quiver and quake,
laughed heartily at him, as well in respect of his simple answer, as at his
fear: and so soon after the last waine went by, which gave present passage
unto him and his Nobles: and thereupon entering into communication of the
commodity of clothing, the king gave order at his home return, to have Old
Cole brought before his Majesty, to the intent he might have conference with
him, noting him to be a subject of great ability. But by that time he came
within a mile of Stanes, he met an other company of waines in like sort laden
with cloth, whereby the King was driven into a further admiration: and
demanding whose they were, answer was made in this sort: They be goodman
Suttons of Salisbury, good sir: and by that time a score of them were past, he
asked again, saying: whose are these? Suttons of Salisbury (quoth they) and so
still, as often as the King asks that question, they answered, Suttons of
Salisbury. God send me many such Suttons, said the king. And thus the farther
he traveled westward, more waines and more he met continually: upon which
occasion he said to his Nobles. That it would never grieve a King to die for
the defense of a fertile country and faithful subjects. I always thought
(quoth he) that Englands valor was more than her wealth, yet now I see her
wealth sufficient to maintain her valor, which I will seek to cherish in all
I may, and with my Sword keep my self in possession of that I have. Kings and
Lovers can brook no partners, and therefore let my brother Robert think, that
although he was heir to England by birth, yet I am King by possession. All
his favorers I must account my foes, and will serve them as I did the
ungrateful earl of Shrewsbury, whose lands I have seized, and banished his
body. But now we will leave the King to his ^ourney into Wales, and waiting his
home return, in the mean time tell you of the meeting of these jolly
Clothiers at London.

How William of Worcester, Gray of Gloucester, and old Cole of Reading, met all
together at Reading, and of their communication by the way as they ^ode to
London. Chap. 2.
When Gray of Gloucester, and William of Worcester were come to Reading,
according to their custom, they always called old Cole to have his company to
London, who also duly attended their coming, having provided a good breakefast
for them: and when they had well refreshed themselves, they took their horses
and rode on toward the City: and in their journey William of Worcester asked
them if they had not heard of the Earl of Moraigne his escape out of the land:
what is he fled quoth Gray? I muse much of that matter, being in such great
regard with the king as he was: but I pray you, do you not know the cause of
his going quoth, Cole? The common report, quoth Gray, is this that the covetous
earl, who through a greedy desire, never left begging of the King for one thing
or other, and his request being now denied him, of mere obstinacy and wilful
frowardness, has banished himself out of the land, and quite forsaken the
Country of Cornwall, having made a vow never to set foot within England
again, and as report goes, he with the late banished Earl of Shrowsbury, have
joined themselves with Robert duke of Normandy, against the king, the which
action of theirs has inflamed the kings wrath, that their Ladies with their
children are quite turned out of doors succorlesse and friendlesse, so that as
it is told me, they wander up and down the country like forlorn people, and
although many do pity them, yet few do relieve them.

A lamentable hearing, quoth William of Worcester and with that casting their eyes
aside, they espied Tom Dove with the rest of his companions come riding to
meet them, who as soon as they were come thither, fell into such pleasant
discourses, as did shorten the way they had to Colebroke, where always at
their coming toward London they dined: and being entered into their Inn,
according to old custom, good chaere was provided for them: for these
Clothiers were the cheifest ghests that traveled along the way: and this was
as sure as an act of Parliament, that Tom Dove could not digest his meat
without music, nor drink wine with out women, so that his hostess being a
merry wench, would often times call in two or three of her neighbors wi^es to
keep him company, where, ere they parted, they were made as pleasant as P^es.
And this being a continual custom amongst them when they came thither, at
length the women's husbands began to take exceptions at their wi^es going
thither: whereupon great controversy grew between them, in such sort, that
when they were most restrained, then they had most desire to work their
wills: now gip (quoth they) must we so be tied to our task, that we may not
drink with our friends? ste, fie, upon these yellow hose, will no other die
serve your turn? have we thus long vin your wines, and do you now mistrust
us? verily you eat two much salt, and that makes you grow choleric, badde
livers judge all other the like, but in faith you shall not bridle us so like
Asses, but we will go to our friends, when we are sent for, and do you what
you can. Well quoth their husbands, if you be so headstrong, we will teme you,
it is the duty of honest women to obey their husbands sayings. And of honest
men (quoth they) to think well of their wives; but who do sooner inpeach
their credit, then their husbands, charging them, if they do but smile, that
they are subtle, and if they do but wink, they account, them willy, if sad
of countenance, then sullen, if they be froward, then are they counted shrewes,
and sheepish, if they be gentle: if a woman keep her house, then you will say
she is melancholy, if she walk abroad, then you call her a gadder, a
Puritan, if she be pretise, and a wanton, if she be pleasant; so there is no
woman in the world that knows how to please you, that was think our selves
accursed to be married wives, living with so many woes. These men, of whose
company you forwarne us, are (for aught that ever we saw) both honest and
courteous, and in wealth far beyond your selves; then what reason is there,
why we should refrain to vsite them? is their good will so much to be requited
with scorn, that their cost may not be counteruayled with our company? if a
woman be disposed to play light of love, alas, alas, do you think that you can
prevent her? Nay, we will abide by it, that the restraint of liberty inforceth
women to belewd: for where a woman cannot be trusted, she cannot think her
self beloved, and if not beloved, what cause has she to care for such a one^
therefore husbands, reform your opinions, and do not work your own woes,
with our discredit, These Clothiers, we tell you are tolly fellows, and but in
respect of our courtesy, they would scorn out company.

The men hearing their wines so well to plendfor themselves, knew not how to
answer, but said, they would put the burden on their consciences, if they dealt
unjustly with them, and so left them to their own wills. The women having
thus conquered their husbands conceits, would not leave the favor of their
friends for frownts, and as about the rest Tom Dove was the most pleasantest,
so was he had in most reputation with the women, who for his sake made this
Song.

Welcome to town, Tom Dove, Tom Dove,
The merriest man alive,
Thy company still we love, we love,
God grant thee well to thrive,
And never will depart from thee,
For better or wor^e, my joy,
For thou shall still have our good will;
Gods blessing on my sweet Boy.
This song went up and down through the whole country, and at length became a
dance among the common sort, so that Tom Dove, for his mirth and good
fellowship, was famous in every place. Now when they came to London, they were
welcome to the host larrat the Giant and as soon as they were alighted, they
were saluted by the Merchants, who waited their coming thither, and always
prepared for them a costly supper, where they commonly made their bargain, and
upon every bargain made, they still used to send some tokens to the Clothiers
wives. The next morning they went to the hal, where they met the Northern
clothiers, who greeted one another in this sort, What, my masters of the West,
well met: what cheer? what theere? Even the best cheer our Marchantes could
make us, (quoth Gray.) Then you could not choose but fare well, quoth Hogekins:
and you be weary of our company, adien, quoth Sutton, Not so, said Martin but
shall we not have a game ere we go? Yes faith for a hundred pounds. Well
said, old Cole, said they: and with that Cole and Gray went to the dice with
Martin and Hogekins; and the dice running on Hogekins side, Coals money began
to waste. Now by the Mass, quoth Cole, my money shrinks as had as northern
cloth. When they had played long, Gray stepped to it and recovered again the
money that Cole had lost. But while they were thus playing, the rest being
delighted in contrary matters, every man satisfied his own humor.

Tom Dove called for music, William of Worcester for wine, Sutton set his
delight in hearing merry tales, Simon of South-hampton got him into the
kitchen, and to the pottage pot he goes, for he esteemed more of a mess of
pottage, than of a venison pastie. Now sir, Cutbert of Kendall was of another
mind, for no meat pleased him so well as mutton, such as was laced in a red
petticoate. And you shall understand, that always when they went to dice, they
got into Bosoms Inn, which was so called of his name that kept it, who being
a foul slouen, went always with his no^s in his bosom, and one hand in his
pocket, the other on his staff, figuring forth a description of cold winter,
for he always wore two coats, two caps, two or three pair of stockings, and
a high pair of shoes, over the which he drew on a great pair of lined
s^ippers, and yet he would often complain of cold, wherefore of all men generally
he was called Old Bosom, and his house Bosoms Inn.

This lump of cold ice had lately married a young wife, who was as wily as she
was wanton, and in her company did Cutbert only delight, and the better to
make passage to his love, be would often thus commune with her: I muse good
wife, quoth he. Good wife, quoth she? Uerily sir, in mine opinion, there is
none good but good, and therefore call me Mistress. Then said Cutbert, Fair
Mistress, I have often mused that you being so proper a woman, could fi^d in
your heart for to match with such a greas^e Carle as this, an evil mannered
mate, a foul lump of kitchen stuff, and such a one as is indeed a scorn of
men; how can you like him that all women mislikes? or love such a loathsome
creature? me thinks verily it should grieve you to lend him a kiss, much more
to lie with him. Indeed sir, quoth she, I had but hard fortune in this respect,
but my friends would have it so and truly my liking and my love toward him are
alike, he never had the one, nor never shall get the other: yet I may say to
you, before I married him, there were diverse proper young men that were suitors
unto me, who loved me as their lines, and glad was he that could get my
company, those were my golden days, wherein my pleasure abounded, but these
are my years of care and grief, wherein my sorrows exceed. Now no man
regards me, no man cares for me, and albeit in secret they might bear me good
will, yet who dares show it? and this is a double grief, he carries over me so
jealous a mind. that I cannot look at a man, but presently he accuses me of
inconstancy, although (I protest) without cause.

And in troth quoth Cutb. he should have cause to complain for somewhat, were I
as you. As sure as I live, and so he shall, quoth she, if he do not change his
bias. Cutb. hearing her say so, began to grow further in requesting her
favor, wishing he might be her servant and secret friend, and the better to
obtain his desire, he gave her diverse gifts, insomuch that she began something
to listen unto him: and albeit she liked well of his speeches, yet would she
blame him, and take him up very short sometimes for the same, till in the end,
Cutbert showed himself to be desperate, saying he would drown himself rather
then live in her disdain. O my sweet heart not so, quoth she, God forbid I
should be the death of any man: Comfort thy self, kind Cutbert, and take this
kiss in token of further kindness, and if thou will have my favor, thou must
be wise and circumspect, and in my husbands sight I would always have thee to
find fault with my doings, blame my bad huswifery, disprayse my person, and
take exceptions at every thing, whereby he will be as well pleased, as Simon of
South-hampton with a mess of Pottage.

De^re mistrsse quoth he, I will fulfill your charge to the uttermost, so that
you will not take my jest in earnest. She answered, Thy foulest speeches I
will esteem the fairest and take every dispraise to be a praise from thee,
turning ^ch word to the contrary: and so for this time adieu, good Cutb. for
supper time draws near, and it is meet for me to look for my meat. With that
down comes old Bo^ome, calling his wife, saying, Ho Wiinifred, is supper ready?
they have done playing above: Therefore let the Chamberlain cover the table.
By and by husband, quoth. she, it shall be done straight way. How now my masters
who wins, quoth. Cutb. Our money walks to the west, quoth. Martin: Cole has won
forty li. of me, and Gray has gotten well: the best is quoth, Hogekins, they will
pay for our supper: Then let us have good store of sack, quoth Sutton. Content,
said Cole, for I promise you, I strive not to grow rich by diceplaying,
therefore call for what you will, I will pay for all. Yea said Simon!
Chamberlain, I pray thee bring a whole potle of pottage for me, Now Tom Dove
had all the Fiddlers at a beck of his finger, which follow him up and down the
city, as diligent as little Chickens after a hen, and made a vow, that there
should want no music. And at that time, there lived in London a musician of
great reputation, named Reior, who kept his servants in such costly garments,
that they might seem to come before any Prince. Their Coats were all of one
color; and it is said, that afterward the nobility of this Land, noting it for
a seemly sight, used in like manner to keep their men all in one livery. This
Reior was the most skilfullest musician that lived at that time* whose wealth
was very great, so that all the instruments whereon his servants played, were
richly garnished with studdes of silver, and some gold: the bows belonging to
their Uiolins were all likewise of pure silver. He was also for his wisdom
called to great office in the city, who also builded (at his own cost, the
priory and hospital of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, his servants being the
best confort in the City, were by Tom Dove appointed to play before the young
princes. Then supper being brought to the board they all sat down, and by and
by after comes up their host, who took his place among them and anon after,
the goodwife in a red piticoat and a wastcoat, comes among them as white as a
Lilly, saying, My masters, you are welcome, I pray you be merry. Thus falling
close to their meat, when they had well fed, they found leisure to talk one
with another: at what time Cutb. began thus to find fault, Ywis, my host,
quoth he* you have a wise huswife to your wife, here is meat dressed of a new
fashion. God sends meat, and the devil sends cooks. Why what ailes the meat,
quoth she; serves it not your turn? better men then yourselfe are content
withal, but a paultry companion is ever worst to please. Away, you fluttish
thing, quoth. Cutb. your husband has a sweet jewel of you: I marvel such a
grave ancient man would match himself with such a young giglot, that has as
much handsomenes in her as good huswifry, which is just nothing at all. Well
sir, said she, in regard of my husbands presence I am loath to aggrauate anger,
otherwise I would tell thee thy own. Go to, what need all this, quoth the
company? in good faith. Gutb. you are too blame, you find fault where none is.
Tush, I must speak my mind, quoth Cutbert, I cannot dissemble, I trust the
goodman thinks never the worse of me, so I have his good will, what the foul
evil care I for his wifes. Enough, quoth Tom Dove, let us with music remove
these brabbles, we mean to be merry, and not melancholy. Then said old Cole,
Now trust me Cutbert, we will have our hostess and you friends ere we part:
here, woman, I drink to you, and regard not his words, for he is brabling
wheresoever he comes. Quoth the woman, nothing grieves me so much, as that he
should thus openly check me, if he had found any thing amiss, he might have
spied a better time to tell me of it then now, ywis he need not thrust my had
huswifery into my husbands head, I live not so quietly with him, God wot: and
with that she wept. Come Cutb. quoth they drink to her, and shake hands and
be friends. Come on, you puling baggage, quoth he, I drink to you here will
you pledge me and shake hands? No quoth she) I will see thee choakt first,
shake hands with thee! I will shake hands with the devil as soon: Go to, said
her husband, you shall shake hands with him then, if you will not shake hands,
I Will shake you: what, you young huswife! Well husband said she, it becomes a
woman to obey her husband in regard whereof, I drink to him. That's well said
quoth the company: and so she took her leave and went down. And within a while
after, they paid the shot, and departed thence to Garrata hall, where they went
to their lodging; and the next day they took their way homeward all together:
and coming to Colebroke, they took up their lodging: and it was Coals custom
to deliver his money to the good wife of the house to keep it til morning,
which in the end turned to his utter destruction, as hereafter shallbe showed.

How Grayes wife of Gloucester, with one or two more of her neighbors, went to
the fair, where servants came to be hired, and how she took the Earl of
Shrewesburies Daughter into her service. Chap. 3.
IT was wont to be an old custom in Gloucestershire, that at a certain time
in the year, all such young men and maidens as were out of service, resorted
to a fair that was kept near Gloucester* there to be ready for any that would
come to hire them, the young men stood all on arow on the one side, and the
maidens on the other. It came to pass, that the Earl of Shrewsburyes
daughter, whose father was lately banished, being driven into great distress,
and weary with travail, as one whose delicate life was never used to such
toil* sat her down upon the high way side, making this lamentation.

O false and deceitful world, quoth she! who is in thee that wishes not to be rid
of thee, for thy extreamities are great? Thou art deceitful to all, and trusty
to none. Fortune is thy the sur er who is like thy self, wavering and
unconstant, she sets up tyrants beats down kings, gives shame to some
and renown to others: Fortune gives these evils, and we see it not: with her
hands she touches us, and we feel it not, she treads us underfoot, and we
know it not: she speaks in our ears, and we hear her not: she cries aloud,
and we understand her not: And why? because we know her not until misery does
make her manifest.

Ah my dear father, well may thou do. Of all misfortunes it is most unhappy
to be fortunate: and by this misfortune came my fall. Was ever good Lady
brought to this extremity? What is become of my rare Jewels, my rich array, my
sumptus us ^^^^, my waiting servants, my many friends, and all my vain
pleasures? my pleasure is banished by displeasure, my friends fled like foes, my
servants gome, my feasting turned to fasting, my rich array consumed to rags,
and my jewels deck out my chiefest enemies: therefore of all things the mean
estate is best, poverty with surety, is better than honor mixed with fear:
^^^ing God has allotted me to this misery of life, I will frame my heart to
embrace humility, and carry a mind answerable to my misfortunes, fle on this
vain title of Ladyship, how little does it avail the distressed? No, no, I
must therefore forget my birth and parentage and think no more on my fathers
house, where I was wont to be served, now will I learn to serve, and plain
Meg shall be my name: good Lord grant I may get a good service, nay any service
shall serve, where I may have meat, drink and apparel. She had no sooner
spoke these words, but she espied a couple of maidens more coming toward her;
who were going to the fair; and bidding her good morrow, asked her if she went
to the fair. Yea mary quoth she, I am a poor man's child that is out of service,
and I hear that at the Statute folks do come of purpose to hire servants.
True it is said the maidens, and thither go we for the same purpose, and would
be glad of your company. With a good will, and I am right glad of yours, said
she, beseeching you good maidens you will do me the favor, to tell me what
service were best for me; for the more too blame my parents, they would never
put me forth to know any thing. Why what can you do (quoth the maidens) can you
brew and bake, make butter and cheese, and reap corn well? No verily said
Margaret, but I would be right glad to learn to do any thing whatsoever it be.
If you could spin or card said another, you might do excellent well with a
clothier, for they are the best services that I know, there you shall be sure
to fare well, and to live merrily.

Then Margaret wept saying (alas) what shall I do? I was never brought up to
these things. What can you do nothing quoth they? No truly (quoth she) that is
good for any thing, but I can read, and write and sow, some skill I have in
my needle, and a little on my Lute: but this, I see will profit me nothing Good
Lord, quoth they, are you bookish? we did never hear of a maid before that
could read and write. And although you can do no other thing, yet possibly you
may get a service, if you can behave your self mannerly. I pray you quoth.
another, seeing you are bookish, will you do so much as to read a love letter
that is sent me* for I was at a friends of mine with it, and he was not at
home, and so I know not what is in it. I pray you let me see it quoth Margaret,
and I will show you. Whereupon she reads as follows.

O Ienny my joy, I die for thy love,
And now I hear say that thou do remove:
And therefore, Ienney, I pray thee recite
Where I shall meet thee soon at night.
For why, with my master no more will I stay,
But for thy love I will run away,
O Ienny, Ienny, thou puttst me to pain,
That thou no longer wilt here remain.
I will weareout my shoes of Neats Leather,
But thou and I will meet together,
And in spite of Fortune, Rat, or Mouse,
We will dwell in one house.
For who does not esteem of thee,
Shall have no service done of me:
Therefore good Ienny, have a care
To meet poor Fragment at the fair.
Now alas, good soul (quoth Ienny) I think he be the kindest young man in the
world. The rest answered, that he seemed no less, and surely it appears that
he is a pretty witty fellow quoth one of them, how finely he has written his
letter in time, trust me, I will give you a good thing, and let me have a copy
of it to send to my sweet heart: that you shall, with all my heart and so coming
to the fair, they took up their standing.

Within a while after, goodwife Gray of Gloucester came ^hither to store her
self of diverse commodities and when she had boght what she would, she told
her neighbor she had great need of a maid servant or twain: therefore quoth she,
good neighbor go with me and let me have your opinion. With a good will, said
her neighbor, and together they went, and looking and viewing the maidens over,
she took special notice of Margaret. Believe me, quoth she, there stands a
very proper maiden, and one of a modest and comely countenance. Uerily, said
her neighbor, so she is, as ever I looked upon.

The maiden seeing them to view her so well, was so abashed, that a scarlet
color ouerspred her lilly cheeks; which the woman perceiving, came unto her,
and asked if she were willing to serve. The maid with a low courtesy, and a
most gentle speech, answered it was the only cause of her coming. Can you
spinne or card, said goodwife Gray? Truly Dame, said she, though my cunning
therein be but small, my goodwil to learn is great, and I trust, my diligence
shall content you. What wages will you take, quoth good wife Gray? I will
refer that, said Margaret, to your conscience and courtesy, desiring no more
than what I shall deserve. Then asking what country woman she was the maiden
wept, saying, Ah good Dame, I was untimely borne in Shropshire, of poor
parents, and yet not so needy as unfortunate, but death having ended their
sorrows, has left me to the cruelty of these enuions times, to finish my
parents tragedy with my troubles. What maiden! quoth her Dame, have you a care to
do your business, and to live in Gods fear, and you shall have no care to
regard Fortunes frowns and so they went home together.

Now, so soon as the goodman saw her, he asked his wife where she had that
maiden She said, at the fair. Why then quoth he thou have brought all the
f^^re away and I doubt it were better for us, to send the fair to another
town, than to keep the fair here. Why man, quoth she, what mean you by that?
Woman I mean this, that she will prove a Loadstone, to draw the hearts of al my
men after her, and so we shall have wise service done of all sides. Then said
his wife, I hope husband, Margaret will have a better care both to her own
credit, and our commodity then so, and let me alone to looks to such matters.
Is thy name Margaret (quoth her master?) proper is thy name to thy person, for
thou art a pearl indeed, orient, and rich in beauty.

His wife hearing him say so, began to change her opinion: What husband (quoth
she) is the wind at that door? Begin you to like your maid so well? I doubt I
had most need to look to your self: before God, I had rather then an angel I
had chosen some other: but hear you maid you shall pack hence, I will not
nourish a snake in my bosom, and therefore get you gone, I will none of you
provide a service where you may.

The maiden hearing her say so, fell down on her knees, and besought her
saying. O sweet dame, be not so cruel to me, to turn me out of doors now:
alas, I know not where to go, or what to do, if you forsake me. O let not the
fading beauty of my face dispoyle me of your favor: for rather then that shall
hinder my service, this my knife shall soon dissigure my face, and I will
banish beauty as my greatest enemy. And with that her abundant tears stopped
her speech, that she could not utter one word more.

The woman seeing this could not harbor anger longer, nor could her master
stay in the roonie for weeping? Well Margaret, said her dame (little knowing
that a Lady kneeled before her) using thy self well, I will keep thee and
thou shall have my good will, if thou govern thy self with wisdom; and so she
sent her about her business. Her husband coming to supper said, ^ow now!
wife, art thou so doubtful of me, that thou have put away thy maiden? I wis
(quoth. she) you are a wise man, to stand praising of a maids beauty before her
face. and you a wise woman (quoth. he) to grow iealo^s without a cause. So to
supper they went, and because Margaret showed her self of finest behavior
above the rest, she was appointed to wait on the table. And it is to be
understood, that Gray did never eat his meat alone but still had some of his
neighbors with him before whom he called his maid, saying, Margaret, come
hither. Now because there was another of the same name in the house, she made
answers, I callnot you maiden, quoth he, but Margaret with the lilly white
hand. After which time she was ever called so.

How the Kings majesty sent for the Clothiers, and of the sundry favors which
he did them. Chap. 4.
KIng Henry providing for his voyage into France, against King Lewis and Robert
Duke of Normandy his own brother, committed the government of the Realm in
his absence, to the Bishop of Salisbury, a man of great wisdom and learning,
whom the King esteemed highly, and afterward he thought good to send for the
chief Clothiers of England who according to the kings appointment came to the
court, and having license to come before his Majesty, he spoke to this effect.

The strength of a king is the love and friendship of his people, and he
gouerns over his Realm most surely, that rules justice with mercy, for he
ought to fear many, whom many do fear* therefore the governors of the common
wealth ought to observe two special precepts, the one is, that they so
maintain the profit of the commons, that whatsoever in their calling they do,
they refer it thereunto: the other, that they be always as well careful
over the whole common wea^th, as over any part thereof, lest while they uphold
the one, the other be brought to utter decay.

And for as much as I do understand, and have partly seen, that you the
Clothiers of England are no small benefit to the wealth public, I thought it
good to know from your own mouths, if there be any thing not yet granted that
may benefit you or any other thing to be removed that does hurt you.

The great desire I have to maintain you in your trades, has moved me
hereunto. Therefore boldly say what you would have in the one thing or the
other, and I wlil grant it you.

With that, they all fell down upon their knees, and desired God to save his
Majesty, and with all, requested three days respit to put in their answer:
which was granted, And thereupon they departed.

When the Clothiers had well considered of these matters, at length they
thought meet to request of his Majesty for their first benefit, that all the
Cloth measures, through the land might be of one length, whereas to their great
disadvantage before, every good town had a several measure, the difficulty
thereof was such, that they could not keep them in memory, nor know how to
keep their reckonings. The second thing whereof they found themselves grieved,
was this, that the people would not take cracked money, though it were never so
good silver: whereupon it came to pass, that the Clothiers and diverse other
receiving great sums of money, to take among it much cracked money, it served
them to no use, because it would not go current, but lay upon their hands
without profit or benefit, whereof they prayed reformation. The third was a
grief, whereof Hodgekins of Halyfax complained, and that was, that whereas the
town of Halyfax lived altogether upon clothing, and by the reason of false
borderers and other evil minded persons, they were often robbed, and had their
clothes carried out of their fields, where they were drying, that it would
please his Majesty to grant the town this privilege, that whosoever he was
that was taken stealing their cloth, might presently without any further trial
be hanged up. When the day of their appearance approached, the Clothiers came
before the King, and delivered up their petition in writing, which his Majesty
most graciously perusing, said, he was ready to fulfill their request: and
therefore for the first point of their petition, he called for a staff to be
brought him, and measuring thereupon the just length of his own arm,
delivered it to the clothiers, saying, This measure shall be called a yard, and
no other measure thoughout all the Realm of England shall be used for the
same, and by this shall men buy and sell, and we will so provide, that
whosoever he be that abuses our subjects by any false measure, that he shall
not only pay a fine for the same to the king, but also have his body punnished
by imprisonment. And as concerning the second point of your petition, because
of my sudden departure out of the land, I know not better how to ease you of
this grief (of cracked money) this decree I make, because they account cracked
money not current I say, none shall be current but cracked money. And therefore I
will give present charge, that all the money through the land shall be ^^it, and
so you shall suffer no loss.

But now for your last request for the town of Halyfax, where by thieves your
clothes are so often stolen from you, seeing the laws already provided in that
case are not sufficient to keep men in awe, it is indeed high time to have
sharper punishment for them.

With that Hodgekins unmannerly interrupted the King, saying in broad Northern
speech, Yea good faith, may Liege, the faule eule of may saul, gif^ any thing
will keep them whiat, till the karles be hangde up by the cragge. What the dul^
care they for boaring their eyne, sea lang as they may gae groping up and down
the country like fause lizar lownes, begging and craking?

The king smiling to hear this rough hewne fellow make this reply: Content
thee Hodgekins, for we will have redress for all: and albeit that hanging of
men was never seen in England, yet seeing the corrupt world is grown more
bold in all wickedness, I think it not amiss to ordain this death for such
malefactors: and peculiarly to the town of Hallifaxe I give this privilege,
that whosoever they find stealing their cloth, being taken with the goods, that
without further judgment they shall be hanged up.

Thus (said our king) have I granted what you request, and if heareafter you
find any other thing that may be good for you, it shall be granted; for no
longer would I desire to live among you, then I have care for the good of the
commonwealth: at which word ended, the King rose from his royal throne, while
the clothiers on their knees prayed for both his health and happy success, and
showed themselves most thankful for his highness favor. His majesty bending
his body toward them, said that at his home return, he would (by the grace of
God) visit them.

How the Clothiers had provided a sumptuous feast for the Kings sonues, prince
William and prince Richard at Ger^ards hall, showing also what chance befell
Cutbert of Kendall at that same instant. Chap. 5.
THe Clothiers departing from the court in a merry mind, joyful of their good
success, each one to other praised and magnified the Kings great wisdom and
virtue* commending also his affability and gentle disposition, so that
Hodgekins affirmed on his faith, that he had rather speak to the Kings
majesty, than to many Justices of peace. Indeed (said Cole) he is a most mild
and merciful prince, and I pray God he may long reign over us. Amen said the
rest.

Then said Cole, My masters, shall we forget the great courtesy of the Kings
sons, those sweet and gentle princes* that still showed us favor in our
suite? in my opinion it were reason to gratify them in some sort, that we may
not utterly be condemned of ingratitude: wherefore (if you think good) we will
prepare a banquet for them at our host Garrats, who as you know, has a fair
house, and goodly rooms: Besides, the man himself is of a most courageous
mind and good behavior, sufficient to entertain a prince; his wife also is a
dainty fine, Cook: all which considered, I know not a fitter place in London.
It Is true, quoth Sutton and if the rest be content, I iam pleased it shall be so.
At this they all answered, Yea, for (quoth they) it will not be passing forty
shillings apeece, and that we shall recover in our cracked money.

Being thus agreed, the feast wae prepared. Tom Dove quoth they, we will commit
the providing of music to thee: and I said Cole will inuit diverse of our
merchants and their wives to the same. That is well remembered, said Gray. Upon
this they called to their host and hostess* showing their determinati^n, who
most willingly said, all things should be made ready, but I would have two days
liberty, said the good wife, to prepare my house and other things. Content,
said the Clothiers, in the mean spare we will bid our gests, and dispatch our
other affairs. But Simon of Southhampton charged his hostise, that in any case
she should not forget to make good store of pottage. It shall be done quoth
she.

It is be to remembered, that while this preparation was in hand, that Cutbert
of Kendal had not forgot his kindness to his hostise of Bosoms Inn. Therefore
finding time convenient when her husband was ouerseeing his haymakers, he
greeted her in this sort, Sweet hostess, though I were the last time I was in
town, over bold with you, yet I hope it was not so offensive to you, as you
made show for. Bold my Cut quoth she? thou have vowed thy self my servant, and
so being, you are not to be blamed for doing what I wild you. By my honesty, I
could not choose but smile to my self, so soon as I was out of their sight, to
think how prettily you began your brabble. But now, quoth he, we will change
our chidings to kissings, and it vexes me that these cherry lips should be
subject to such a Lobcocke as thy husband.

Subject to him quoth she! In faith sir, no, I will have my lips at as much
liberty as my tongue, the one to say what I list, and the other to touch whom I
like: In troth, shall I tell thee, Cutbert, y^ churles breath smells so strong,
that I care as much for kissing of him, as for looking on him it is such a
misshapen mizer, and such a bundle of beastlynesse, that I can never think on
him without spitting Fie upon him. I would my friends had carried me to my
grave, when they went with me to the Church, to make him my husband. And so
shedding a few dissembling tears* she stopped. What my sweet mistress (quoth
he) weep you? Nay sit down by my side, and I will sing thee one of my country
Iigges to make thee merry. Will thou in faith (quoth she)? Yes verily, said
Cutbert: and in troth, quoth she, if you fall a singing, I will sing with you.
That is well, you can so suddenly change your notes, quoth Cut. then have at it.

Man. LOng have I loved this bonny Less,
yet durst not show the same.

Woe. Therein you proved your self an Ass,


Man. I was the more too blame.
Yet still will I remain to thee,
Trang dilly do, trang dilly,
Thy friend and lover secretly.

Wom. Thou art my own sweet bully.


Man But when shall I enjoy thee,
delight of thy fair love?

Woe. Even when thou see that fortune does
all manner lets remove.

Man O, I will fold thee in my arms,
Trang dilly do, trang dilly,
And keep thee so from sudden harms.

Wom. Thou art my own sweet bully.


Wom. My husband he is gone from home*
you know it very well.

Man But when will he return again?


VVo In troth I cannot tell:
If long he keep him out of sight,
Trang dilly do, trang dilly.
Be sure thou shall have thy delight.

Man Thou art my bonny lassy*


While they were singing this song, her husband being on a sudden come home,
stood secretly in a corner and heard all, and blessing himself with both his
hands, said O abominable dissimulation, monstrous hypocrisy, and are you in
this humor? can you brawle together and sing together? Well quoth he, I will
let them alone, and see a little more of their knavery. Never did Catte watch
Mouse so narrowely, as I will watch them: And so going into the Kitchen, he
asked his wife if it were not dinner time. Even by and by, husband (quoth she)
the meat will be ready. Presently after comes in Hodgekins and Martin, who
straight asked for Cutbert of Kendall. Answer was made, that he was in his
Chamber. So when they had called him, they went to dinner: then they requested
that their host and hostess would sit with them.

Husband, said she, you may go if you please: but as for me, I will desire
pardon. Nay, good wife, go up said her husband. What woman, you must bear with
your ghests. Why husband, quoth. she, do you think that any can bear the flerts
and trumps which that Northern tike gave me the last time he was in town? now
God forgive me, I had as liefe see the devil as see him: Therefore good
husband* go up your self, and let me alone, for in faith, I shall never abide
that Jack while I live.

Upon these words away went her husband, and though he said little he thought
the more. Now when he came up, his ghests bade him welcome. I pray you sit
down, good mine host, quoth they, where is your wife* what will not she sit
with us? No verily said he, the foolish woman has taken such a displeasure
against Cutbert, that she swears she will never come in his company Is it so,
said the other? then trust me we are well agreed. And I swear by my fathers
sale, quoth he, that were it not more for good will o you, than love to her, I
would never come to your house more. I believe it well, said old Bosom. And so
with other communication they drove out the time, till Dinner was ended.

After they were risen, Martin and Hodgekins got them forth about their
affairs, but Cutb. took his host by the hand, saying, My host, I Will go talk
with your wife; for my part I thought we had been friends: but seeing her
stomach is so big and her heart so great, I will see what she will say to me;
and with that he s^ept into the kitchen, saying, God speed you hostise. It
must be when you are away the^, said she. What is your reason said the other?
Because God never comes where knaves are present. Gip gooddy draggletaile quoth
he, had I such a wife* I would present her tallow face to the devil for a
candle. With that she bent her brows, and like a fury of hell began to fly at
him saying. Why, you gag-toothd Jack, you blinking companion, get thee out of
my Kitchen quickly, or with my powdered Beef br^th, I will make your pate as
^alde as a Friars.

Get me gone, quoth he? thou shall not bid me twice: out you durty heels, you
will make your husbands hair gr^we through his hood I doubt; and with that he
got him into the Hall, and sat him down on the bench by his host, to whom he
said: It Is pity my host, that your aged years that loves quietness, should be
troubled with such a scolding queen. I, God help me God help me quoth the old
man; and so went toward the Stable; which his wife watching, suddenly stepped out
and gave Cutbert a kiss.

Within an hour after, the old man craftily called for his Nag to ride to
field: but as soon as he was gone, Cutbert and his Hostess were such good
friends, that they got into one of the Ware houses, and ^ockt the door to
them: but her husband having set a spy for the purpose, suddenly turned back,
and called for a capcase which lay in the Warehouse. The servant could not find
the key by any means. Whereupon he called to have y^ lock broke open. Which
they within hearing, opened the door of their own accord. So soon as her
husband spied her in that place, with admiration he said O, the passion of my
heart, what do you here? what you two that cannot abide one another? what make
you so close together? is your chiding and railing, brabling and brawling, come
to this? O what dissemblers are these! Why* my host quoth. Cutbert what need you
take the matter so hot? I gave a Cheese to my country man Hodgekins, to lay
up, and delivered it to your wife to be kept* and then is it not reason, that
she should come and seek me my Cheese? O, quoth* the old man, belike the door
was locked, because the cheese should not run away. The door said his wife
unknown to us clapped to it self, and having a spring lock, was presently fast.
Well, hus-wife, quoth. he; I will give you as much credit as a Crocadile; but as
for your companion I will teach him to come hither to look cheeses.

And with that he caused his men to take him presently, and to bind him hand
and foot. Which being done, they drew him up in a basket into the smokie lover
of the hall, and there they did let him hang all that night, even till the next
day dinner time, when he should have been at the banquet with the princes: for
neither Hodgekins nor Martin could entreat their inflamed host to let him
down.

And in such a heat was he driven with drawing him up* that he was feign to
cast off his gowns, his coats, and two pair of his stockings, to cool
himself, making a vow he should hang there vij. years except the kings sons
came in person to beg his pardon, which most of all grieved Cutbert. When Cole
and the rest of the western yeomen ^eard hereof, they could not choose but
laugh, to think that he was so taken t^^dy.

The young princes having given promise to be with the clothiers kept their
hour, but when all the rest went to give them entertainment, Simon was so busy
in supping his pottage, that he could not spare so much time. Which when the
princes saw, with a smiling countenance they said, Sup Simon, there is good
breath, or else beshrew our hostess: quoth he, never looking behind him to see
who spoke, till the prince clapped him on the shoulder. But good Lord, how blanke
he was when he spied them knowing not how to excuse the matter.

Well, the princes having ended their banquet, Garrat coms, and with one of his
hands took the table of 16 foot long quite from the ground over their heads,
from before the princes, and set it on the other side of the hall, to the great
admiration of all them that beheld it.

The princes being then ready to depart, the Clothiers moved them in pleasant
manner, to be good to one of their company, that did neither sit, lie, nor
stand. Then he must needs hang, quoth the princes. And so he does, most excellent
princes quoth they; and therewithal told them the whole matter. When they heard
the story, down to Bosoms inn they go, where looking up into the roose,
spied poor Cutbert pinned up in a basket, and almost smoked to death, who
although he were greatly ashamed, yet most pitifully desired that they would
get him released.

What is his trespass, said the prince? Nothing if it shall like your Grace quoth
he, but for loking for a chief. But he could not find it without my wife, said
the good man: the villain had lately dined with mutton, and could not digest
his meat without cheese, for which cause I have made him to fast these twenty
hours, to the end he may have a better stomach to eat his dinner, then to
use dalliance.

Let me entreat you quoth the prince, to release him: and if ever hereafter
you catch him in the corn, clappe him in the pownd. Your Grace shall request
or command any thing at my hand, said the old man; and so Cutbert was let
down unbound: but when he was loose, he vowed never to come within that house
more. And it is said, the old man ^osome ordain^, that in remembrance of this
deed every year once all such as came thither to ask for cheeses should be so
served: which thing is to this day kept.

How Simons wife of South-hampton being wholly bent to pride and pleasure,
requested her husband to see London, which being granted, how she got good
wife Sutton of Salisbury to go with her, who took Crab to go along with them,
and how he prophesied of many things. Chap. 6.
THe Clothiers being all come from London, Suttons wife of Southhampton who was
with her husband very merry and pleasant, brake her mind unto him in this sort.

Good Lord husband, will you never be so kind as let me go to London with you?
shall I be pend up in South-hampton, like a patrat in a cage, or a capon in a
coope? I would request no more of you in lieu of all my pains, carke and care,
but to have one weeks time to see that fair city: what is this life if it be
not mixed with some delight? and what delight is more pleasing than to see the
fashions and manners of unknown places? Therefore good husband, if thou love
me, deny not this simple request You know I am no common gadder, nor have often
troubled you with travel. God knows, this may be the last thing that ever I
shall request at your hands.

Woman quoth he, I would willingly satisfy your desire, but you know it is not
convenient for both of us to be abroad, our charge is great, and therefore our
care ought not to be small. If you will go your self, one of my men shall go
with you, and money enough you shall have in your purse: but to go with you my
self, you see my business will not permit me.

Husband said she, I accept your gentle offer, and it may be I shall entreat my
gossip Sutton to go along with me. I shall be glad quoth her husband, prepare
your self when you will.

When she had obtained this license, she sent her man Wessell to Salisbury, ^o
know of good wife Sutton if she would keep her company to London. Suttons wife
being as willing to go, as she was to request, never rested till she had gotten
leave of her husband; the which when she had obtained, casting in her mind
their pleasure would be small, being but they twain; thereupon the wily woman
sent letters by collerick Crack her man, both to Grayes wife, and F^^zallens
wife, that they would meet them at Reading; who liking well of the match,
consented and did so provide that they met according to promise at Reading, and
from thence with Coals wife they went al together, with each of them a man to
London, each one taking up their lodging with a several friend.

When the Merchants of London understood they were in town, they ira^^ited
them every day home to their own houses, where they had delicate good cheer:
and when they went abroad to see the commodityes of the City, the Merchants
wives ever bore them company, being attyred most dainty and fine: which when
the Clothiers wives did see, it grieved their hearts they had not the like.

Now when they were brought into Cheapeside, there with great wonder they
beheld the shops of the Goldsmiths; and on the other side, the wealthy Mercers,
whose shops shined of al sorts of colored silks; in Watlingstreete, they
viewed the great number of Drapers in Saint Martines, Shoomakers, at Saint
Nicholas church, the flesh shambles, at the end of the old change, the
fishmongers; in Candleweeke street the Weauers, then came into the Jews
street, where all the Jews did inhabit; then went they to Blackwel hall,
where the country clothiers did use to meet.

Afterward they proceeded, and came to S. Paul's church, whose steeple was so
hye, that it seemed to pierce the clouds, on the top whereof, was a great and
mighty whethercocke, of clean silver, the which notwithstanding seemed as
small as a sparrow to men's eyes, it stood so exceeding high, the which goodly
weathercocke was afterward stolen away, by a cunning cripple, who found means
one night to climb up to the top of the steeple, and took it down, with
the which, and a great sum of money which he had got together by begging in
his life tune, he builded a gate on the North-west side of the city, which to
this day is called Criple gate.

From thence they went to the Tower of London, which was builded by Julius
Caesar, who was Emperor of Rome. And there they beheld salt and wine, which
had lain there ever since the Romans invaded this land, which was many years
before our Savior Christ was borne, the wine was grown so thick that it
might have bin cut like a ielley. And in that place also they saw money that
was made of leather, which in ancient time went current amongst the people.

When they had to their great contentation beheld all this, they repaired to
their lodgings, having also a sumptuous supper ordained for them, with all
delight that might be. And you shall understand that when the country weauers,
which came up with their dames, saw the weauers of Candlewikestreet, they had
great desire presently to have some conference with them, and thus one began to
challenge the other for workmanship, quoth VVeasell, i will work with any of you
all for a crown, take it if you dare, and he that makes his yeard of cloth
soonest, shall have it. You shall be wrought withal, said the other, and if it
were for ten crowns; but we will make this bargain, that each of us shall
wind their own quilles. Content quoth VVeasell: and so to work they went,
but VVesel lost. Whereupon another of them took the matter in hand, who lost
likewise: so that the London weauers triumphed against the country, casting
forth diverse frumps.

Alas poor fellows, quoth they, your hearts are good, but your hands are ill.
^ush, the fault was in their legs, quoth another, pray you friend were you
not borne at home? Why do you ask quoth VVeasell? because, said he, the
biggest place of your leg is next to your shoe.

Cutbert hearing this, being choleric of nature, chafed like a man of law at
the bar, and he wagers with them four crowns to twain, the others agreed, to
work they go: but erab conquered them all. Whereupon, the London weauers were
nipt in the head like birds, and had not a word to say.

Now says Crab as we have lost nothing, so you have won nothing, and because I
know, ye cannot be right weauers, except you be good fellows, therefore if you
will go with us, we will bestow the ale upon you. That is spoken like a good
fellow and like a weauer, quoth the other. So along they went as it were to the
sign of the red Cross.

When they were set down, and had drunk well, they began merrily to prattle,
and to ertoll Crab to the skies. Whereupon Crab protested, that he would come
and dwell among them. Nay, that must not be, said a London weauer? the king
has given us privilege, that none shall live among us, but such as serve seven
years in London. With that Crab, according to his old manner of prophesing,
said thus:

THe day is very near at hand,
When as a King of this fair land
Shall privilege you more then so:
The^ weauers shall in scarlet go.
And to one brotherhood be brought,
The first that is in London wrought,
When other tradesmen by your fame,
Shall covet all to do the same.
Then shall you all live wondrous well,
But this one thing I shall you tell:
The day will come before the doom,
In Candleweeke street shall stand no loome.
Nor any weauer dwelling there,
But men that shall more credit bear:
For clothing shall be sore decayed,
And men undone that the that trade.
And yo^ the day some ^en shall see,
This (...) shall raised be,
Whenas Bay liffe of Sarum town,
Shall buy and purchase Bishops down.
When there never man did sow,
Great store of goodly corn shall grow?
And woad, that makes all colors sound
Shall spring upon that barren ground.
At that same day I tell you plain,
Who so alive does then remain,
A proper maiden there shall see,
Within the town of Salisbury.
Of favor sweet, of nature kind,
With goodly eyes, and yet stark blind,
This poor blind maiden I do say.
In age shall go in rich array.
And he that takes her to his wife
Shall lead a joyful happy life,
The wealthiest Clothier shall he be,
That ever was in that country.
But clothing kept as it has been
In London never shall be seen:
For weauers then the most shall win,
That work for clothing next the skin.
Til pride the commonwealth does peele,
And causes huswiues leave their wheel.
Then poverty upon each side
Unto those workmen shall be tide
At that time, from an Egles nest,
That proudly builded in the West,
A sort shall come with cunning hand,
To bring strange weauing in this land.
And by their gains that great will fall,
They shall maynetaine the weauers hall:
But long they shall not flourish so,
But folly will them overthrow.
And men shall count it mickle shame,
To bear that kind of Weauers name,
And this as sure will come to pass,
As here is ale within this glass.
When the silly souls that sat about him heard him speak in this sort, they
admired, and honored Crabbe for the same. Why my masters, said VVeasel, do you
wonder at these words? he will tell you twenty of these tales, for which cause
we call him our canuas Prophet: his attire fits his title, said they, and we
never heard the like in our lives; and if this should be true, it would be
strange. Doubt not but it will be true, quoth. Weasel, for i will tell you what, he
did but once see our Nick, kis Nel, and presently he powered out this rhyme.

That kis^e O Nel, God give the joy,
Will nine months hence breed thee a boy.
And I Will tell you what, you shall hear: we kept reckoning and it fell out as
just as Jones buttockes on a close stool, for which cause, our maids durst
never kiss a man in his sight: upon this they broke company, and went every
one about his business, the London weauers to their frames, and the country
fellows to their dames, who after their great banqueting and meriment went
every one home to their own houses, though with less money then they brought
out, yet with more pride.

Especially Simons wife of South-hampton, who told the rest of her gossips,
that she saw no reason, but that their husbands should mainetaine them,
as well as the Merchants did their wives: for I tell you what, quoth she, we are
as proper women (in my conceit) as the proudest of them all, as handsome of
body, as fair of face, our legs as well made, and our feet as fine: then what
reason is there (seeing our husbands are of as good wealth) but we should be
as well maintained?

You say true gossip, said S^ttons wife: trust me, it made me blush, to see
them brave it out so gallantly, and we to go so homely: but before God, said
the other, I will have my husband to buy me a London gown, or in faith he
shall have little quiet: so shall mine, said another, and mine too, quoth. the
third: and all of them sung the same note: so that when they came home, their
husbands had no little to do: Especially Simon, whose wife daily lay at him for
London apparel, to whom he said, Good woman, be content, let us go according
to our place and ability: what will the Bailiffes think, if I should prancke
thee up like a Peacocke, and thou in thy attire surpass their wives? they
would either think I were mad, or else that I had more money then I could
well use: consider I pray thee good wife, that such as are in their youth
wasters, do prove in their age stark beggars.

Beside that, it is enough to raise me up in the Kings books; for many times,
men's coffers are judged by their garments: why, we are country folks, and must
keep our selves in good compass: gray russet, and good homespun cloth does
best become us; I tell thee wife, it were as indecent for us to go like
Londoners, as it is for Londoners to go like courtiers.

What a coil keep you, quoth she? are not we Gods creatures as well as
Londoners? and the Kings subjects, as well as they? then finding our wealth to
be as good as theirs, why should we not go as gay as Londoners? No husband,
no^, here is the fault, we are kept without it, only because our husbands are
not so kind as Londoners: why man, a Cobbler there, keeps his wife better then
the best Clothier in this country: nay, I will affirm it, that the London
Oysterwiues, and the very Kitchin-staffe cryers, do exceed us in their Sundays
attire: nay, more then that, I did see the Waterbearers wife which belongs to
one of our Merchants, come in with a Tankered of water on her shoulder, and yet
half a dozen gold rings on her fingers. You may then think, wife (quoth he)
she got them not with idleness.

But wife, you must consider what London is, the chief and capital City of
all the land, a place on the which all strangers cast their eyes, it is (wife)
the Kings chamber, and his Majesty's royal seat: ^o that City repaires of all
Nations under heaven. Therefore it is most meet and convenient, that the
citizens of such a City should not go in their apparel like Peasants, but
for the credit of our country, wear such seemly habites, as do carry
gravity and comeliness in the eyes of all beholders, But if we of the country
went so (quoth she) were it not as great credit for the land as the other?
Woman quoth her husband, it is altogether needless, and in diverse respects it may
not be. Why then I pray you, quoth she, let us go dwell at London. A word soon
spoken, said her husband, but not so easy to be performed: therefore wife, I
pray thee hold thy prating, for thy talk is foolish: yea, yea husband, your
old churlish conditions will never be left, you keep me here like a drudge
and a droyle, and so you may keep your money in your purse, you care not for
your credit, but before I will go so like a shepherdess, I will first go^
naked: and I tell you plain, I scorn it greatly, that you should clappe a gray
gown on my back, as if I had not brought you two pence: before I was married
you swore I should have any thing that I requested, but now all is forgotten.
And in saying this, she went in, and soon after she was so sick that needs
she must go to bed: and when she was laid, she drove out that night with many
grievous groans, sighing and sobbing, and no rest she could take God wot. And
in the morning when she should rise, the good soul fell down in a swowne,
which put her maidens in a great flight, who running down to their master
cried out, Alas, alas, our Dame is dead, our Dame is dead. The good man hearing
this, ran up in all haste, and there fell to rubbing and chafing of her
temples, sending for aqua vitae, and saying, Ah my sweet heart, speak to me,
good wife, alack, alack, call in the neighbors, you queanes quoth he. With
that she lift up her head, fetching a great groan and presently swouned
again, and much ado iwis, he had to keep life in her: but when she was come
to her self, How do thou wife quoth he? What will thou have? for Gods sake tell
me if thou have a mind to any thing, thou shall have it. Away dissembler (quoth
she) how can I believe thee? thou have said as much to me an hundred times, and
deceived me, it is thy churlishness that has killd my heart, never was woman
matched to so unkind a man.

Nay good wife, blame me not without cause; God knows how dearly I love thee.
Love me! no, no, thou did never carry my love but on the tip of thy tongue,
quoth she, I dare swear thou desire nothing so much as my death, and for my
part, I would to God thou ha^st thy desire: but be content, I shall not trouble
thee long: and with that fetching a ^^gh, she swouned and gave a great gr^ane.
The man seeing her in this cafe was wondrous woe: but so soon as they had
recovered her he said, O my dear wife, if any had conceit has ingendered this
sickness, let me know it; or if thou know any thing that may procure thy
health, let me understand thereof, and I protest thou shall have it, if it cost
me all that ever I have.

O husband, quoth she, how may I credit your words, when for a paltry su^e of
apparel you denied me? Well wife quoth he, thou shall have apparel or any
thing else thou will request, if God send thee once health. O husband, if I may
find you so kind, I shall think my self the happiest woman in the world; thy
words have greatly comforted my heart, me thinks if I had it, I could drink a
good draught of renish wine. Well, wine was sent for: O Lord said she, that I
had a piece of a chickin, I feel my stomach desirous of some meat. Glad am I
of that said her husband, and so the woman within a few days after was very
well.

But you shall understand, that her husband was feign to dress her London like
ere he could get her quiet neither would it please her, except the stuff were
bought in Cheapeside, for out of Cheapside nothing would content her, were it
never so good: insomuch that if she thought a tailer of Cheapside made not her
gown, she would swear it was quite spoiled.

And having thus won her husband to her will, when the rest of the Clothiers
wives heard thereof, they would be suited in the like sort too: so that ever
since, the wives of Southhampton, Salisbury, of Gloucester, Worcester, and
Reading, went all as gallant and as brave as any Londoners wives.

How the Clothiers sent the King aid into France, and how he ouereame his
brother Robert, and brought him into England, and how the Clothiers feasted his
Majesty and his son at Reading. Chap. 7.
THe Kings majesty being at the wars in France, against Lewis the French
king, and duke Robert of Normandy, sending for diverse supplies of soldiers out
of England, the Clothiers at their own proper cost set out a great number, and
sent them over to the King.

Which Roger Bishop of Salisbury, who governed the realm in the Kings absence,
did always certify the King thereof, with his letters written in their
commendations.

And afterward it came to pass, that God sent his Highness victory over his
enemies, and having taken his brother prisoner, brought him most joyfully with
him into England, and appointed him to be kept in Cardife castle prisoner, yet
with this favor, that he might hunt and hawke where he would up and down the
country, and in this sort he lived a good while, of whom we will speak more
at large hereafter.

The King being thus come home, after his winters rest, he made his summers
progress into the west country, to take a view of all the chief towns:
whereof the Clothiers being advertised, they made great preparation against his
coming, because he had promised to visit them all.

And when his Grace came to Reading, he was entertained and received with great
joy and triumph: Thomas Cole being the chief man of regard in all the town,
the king honored his house with his princely presence, where during the kings
abode, he, and his son, and nobles were highly feasted.

Where the king beheld the great number of people, that was by that one man
maintained in work, whose hearty affection and love toward his majesty did
well appear, as well by their outward countenances, as their gifts presented
unto him. But of Cole himself the king was so well persuaded, that he
committed much trust to him, and put him in great authority in the town.
Furthermore the king said, That for the love which those people bore to him
living, that he would lay his bones among them when he was dead. For I know not
said he where they may be better bestowed, till the blessed day of
resurrection, than among these my friends which are like to be happy partakers
of the same.

Whereupon his Majesty caused there to be builded a most goodly and famous
Abbey: in which he might show his deuetion to God, by increasing his service,
and leave example to other his successors to do the like. Likewise within the
town he after builded a fair and goodly castle, in the which he often kept
his court, which was a place of his chief residence during his life saying to
the Clothiers, that seeing he found them such faithful subjects, he would be
their neighbor, and dwell among them.

After his Majesty's royal feasting at Reading, he proceeded in progress, til
he had visited the whole west countries, being wondrously delighted, to see
those people so diligent to apply their business: and conuning to Salisbury,
the Bishop received his Majesty with great joy, and with triumph attended on
his Grace to his palace, where his Highness lodged.

There Sutton the Clothier presented his Highness with a broad cloth, of so
fine a thread, and exceeding good workma^ship, and therewithal of so fair a
color, as his Grace gave commendation thereof, and as it is said, he held it
in such high estimation, that thereof he made his parliament robes, and the
first parliament that ever was in England, was graced with the Kings person in
those robes, in requital whereof his highness afterward yielded Sutton many
princely favors.

And it is to be remembered, that Simon of Southhampton (seeing the King had
ouerpast the place where he dwelt) came with his wife and servants to
Salisbury, and against the K. going forth of that city, he caused a most
pleasant arbor to be made upon the top of the hill leading to Shaftesburie,
beset all with red and white roses, in such sort, that not any part of the
timber could be seen, within the which sat a maiden attired like a Queen,
attended on by a fair train of maidens, who at the kings approach presented
him with a Garland of sweet stoures, yielding him such honor as the Ladies of
Rome were wont to do to their Princes after their victories: which the King
took in gracious part, and for his farewell from that country, they bore him
company over part of the Plain, with the sound of diverse sweet instruments of
music. All which when his Grace understood was done at the cost of a
Clothier, he said he was the most honored by those me^, above all the mean
subjects in his la^d: and so his highness past on to Exceter, having given great
rewards to these maidens.

Thomas Dove and the residue of the Clothiers, against his Graces coming
thither* had ordained diverse sumptuous shows; first, there was one that
represented the person of Augustus Caesar the Emperor, who commanded after the
Roman invasion, that their City should be called Augustus, after his own
name, which beforetime was called Isea, and of latter years, Exeter.

There his Majesty was royally feasted seven days together, at the only cost
of Clothiers, but the diverse delights and sundry pastimes which they made
there before the King* and his Nobles, is too long here to be rehearsed. And
therefore I will ouerpasse them, to avoid tediousnes.

His grace then coasting along the country, at last came to Gloucester, an
ancient City, which was builded by Glove a British King, who named it after
his own name, Gloucester. Here was his majesty entertained by Gray the
Clothier, who professed himself to be of that ancient family of Grayes, whose
first Original issued out of the ancient and honorable Castle and town of
Rithin.

Here was the King most bountifully feasted, having in his company his brother
Robert (although his prisoner the same time.) And his Grace being desirous to
see the maidens card and spinne, they were of purpose set to their work,
among whom was fair Margaret with the white hand, whose excellent beauty
having pea^st the eyes of that amorous Duke, it made such an impression in his
heart, that afterward he could never forget her: and so vehemently was his
affection kindled, that he could take no rest, till by writing he had bewrayed
his mind: but of this we will speak more in an other place: and the King at
his departure said, that to gratify them, he would make his son Robert their
Earl, who was the first Earl that ever was in Gloucester.

Now when his Grace was come from thence, he went to Worcester, where William
Fitz-allen made preparation in all honorable sort to receive him, which man
being borne of great parentage, was not to learn how to entertain his
Majesty, being descended of that famous family, whose patrimony lay about the
town of Oswestry. which town his predecessors had enclosed with stately
walls of stone,

Although adverse fortune had so grievously frowned on some of them, that their
children were feign to become tradesmen, whose hands were to them instead of
lands, notwithstanding God raised again the fame of this man, both by his
great wealth and also in his posterity, whose eldest son Henry, the Kings
god-son, became afterward the Mayor of London, who was the first Mayor that
ever was in that City, who governed the same 23. years: and then his son
Roger Fitz-allen was the second Mayor.

The Princely pleasures that in Worcester were shown the king, were many and
marvelous, and in no place had his Majesty received more delight then here; for
the which at his departure he did show himself very thankful. Now when his
Grace had thus taken view of all his good towns Westward and in that progress
had visited these clothiers, he returned to London with great joy of all his
commons.

How Hodgekins of Halifax came to the Court, and complained to the King, that
his privilege was nothing worth, because when they found any offender they
could not get a hangman to execute him: And how by a Friar a gin was devised to
chop off men's heads of it self. Chap. 8.
AFter that Hogekins had got the privilege for the town of Halifax, to hang up
such thieves as stole their cloth in the night, presently without any further
judgment, all the clothiers of the town were exceeding glad, and persuaded
themselves, y^ now their goods would be safe all night, without watching them
at al, so that whereas before, the town maintained certain watchmen to keep
their cloth by night, they were hereupon dismissed as a thing needless to be
done, supposing with themselves, that seeing they should be straight hanged
that were ^ound faulty in this point, y^ no man would be so d^sperate to
enterprise any such act. And indeed the matter being noysed through the whole
country, that they were straight to be hanged that did use such theeuery, it
made many lewd livers to refrain such theeuery.

Nevertheless, there was at that same time living. a notable These named
Wallis, whom in the North they called Mighty Wallis, in regard of his valor
and manhood: This man being most subtle in such kind of knavery, having heard
of this late privilege, and therewithal of the towns security, said that
once he would venture his neck for a pack of Northern cloth* and therefore
coming to one or two of his companions, he asked if they would be partners in
his adventure, and if (quoth he) you will herein hazard your bodies, you shall
be sha^ers in all our booties.

At length by many persuasions the men consented: whereupon late in the night,
they got them all to a Farriours shop, and called up the folks of the house.
What the foul ill wa^^ you have (quoth they) at this time of the night*?
Wallis answered, saying, good fellows, we would have you to remove the shoes
of our Horses feet, and set them on again, and for your pains, you shall be
well pleased. The Smith at length was persuaded, and when he had plucked off all
the shoes from their horses feet, they would needs have them all set on
again. quite contrary with the ca^kins forward, y^ should stand backward. How
fay, fay man, quoth the Smith. are you ^^ck fules? what the deell do you mean
to break your crags? good faith I tro the men be wood. Not so, Smith quoth they,
do thou as we ^id thee, and tho^ shall have thy money: for it is an old
Proverb,

Be it better, or be it worse
Please you the man that bears the purse.
Good faith and see I ^all, quoth. the Smith, and so did as he was willed. When
Wallis had thus caused their Horses to be shod, to Hallifax they went, where
they without any let laded their Horses with cloth, and so departed a contrary
way.

In the morning, so soon as the clothiers came to the field, they found that
they were robbed* whereupon one ran to another to tell these tidings. Now when
Hogekins heard thereof, rising up in haste, ^e wild his neighbors to mark and
see, if they could not desc^ie either the footesteps of men or Horses. Which
being done, they perceived that horses had bin there, and s^ king to pursue
them by their footesteps, they went a clean contrary way, by reason that the
horses were shod backward and when in vain they had long persube them, they
returned, being never the ^eere. Now Wallis used his feate so long, that at
length he was taken, and two more with him: whereupon according to the
privilege of the Town, they put Halters about the thieves necks presently to
hang them up.

When they were come to the place appointed. Wallis and the rest being out of
all hope to escape death, prepared themselves patiently to suffer the rigor of
the law. And there with the rest laying open the lewdness of his life,
grievously lamenting for his sins, at length commending their souls to God,
they yielded their bodies to the grave, with which sight the people were
greatly moved with pity, because they had never seen men come to hanging
before: but when they should have been tied up, Hodgekins willed one of his
neighbors to play the Hangmans part, who would not by any means do it,
although he was a very poor man, who for his pains should have been possessed
of all their apparel. When he would not yield to y^ office, one of those which
had his cloth stolen, was commanded to do the deed but he in like manner would
not, saying: When I have the skill to make a man, I will hang a man, if it
chance my workmanship do not like me.

And thus from one to another, the office of the Hangman was poasted off. At
last a Rogue came by* whom they would have compelled to have done that deed.
Nay, my Masters, quoth. he not so: but as you have got a Privilege for the Town,
so you were best to procure a Commission to make a hangman, or else you are
like to be without for me. Neighbor Hogekins quoth one, I pray you do this
office your self, you have had most loss and therefore you should be the most
readiest to hang them your self No not I (quoth Hodgekins) though my loss
were ten times greater than it is, notwithstanding look which of these thieves
will take vppen him to hang the other, shall have his life saved, otherwise
they shall all to prison till I can provide a hangman.

When Wallis saw the matter brought to this pass, he began stoutly to reply,
saying, My masters of the town of Halifax, though your privilege stretch to
hang up men presently that are found stealing your goods, yet it gives you no
warrant to imprison them till you provide them a hangman, my self with these
my fellows have here yielded our selves to satisfy the Law, and if it be not
performed, the fault is yours and not ours, and therefore we humbly take our
leave: from the gallows the xviij of August. And with that he leapt from the
ladder, and cast the halter at Hodgekins face.

When the Clothiers saw this, they knew not what to say, but taking them by the
sleeves* entreated to have their own again. Not so quoth Wallis, you get not
the value of a plack or a ^awby: we have stolen your cloth, then why do you not
hang us* Here we have made our selves ready, and if you will not hang us, choose.
A plague on you quoth he, you have hindered me God knows what, I made account
to dine this day in heaven, and you keep me here on earth where there is not a
quarter of that good cheer. The foul evil take you all, I was fully provided
to give the gallows a box on the ear, and now God knows when I shall be in so
good a mind again: and so he with the rest of his companions departed.

When Hodgekins saw, that notwithstanding their theeuery, how they flowted at
their lenity, he was much moved in mind: and as he stood in his dumps, chewing
his cud, making his dinner with a dish of melancholy, a gray Friar reverently
saluted him in this sort: All hail* goodman Hodgekins, happiness and health
be ever with you, and to all suppressors of lewd livers, God send everlasting
joys.

I am sorry goodman Hodgekins, that the great privilege which our King gave to
this town, comes to no greater purpose: better far had it bin, that it had
never been granted, then so lightly regarded: the town has suffered through
their own yee^ishnes, an everlasting reproach this day, only because foolish
pity has hindered justice.

Consider, that compassion is not to be had upon thieves and robbers: pity
only ^ppertayneth to the virtuous sort, who are overwhelmed with the waves of
misery and mischaunce. What great cause of boldness have you given to bad
livers, by letting these fellows thus to escape, and how shall you now keep
your goods in safety, seeing you fulfill not the law which should be your
defense? never think that thieves will make any conscience to carry away your
goods, when they find themselves in no danger of death, who have more cause to
praise your pity, then to commend your wisdom: wherefore in time seek to
prevent the ensuing evil.

For my own part, I have that care of your good, that I would work al good
means for your benefit, and yet not so much in respect of your profit, as for
the desire I have to uphold justice, and seeing I find you and the rest so
womanish, that you could not find in your hearts to hang a thief, I have
devised how to make a gin, that shall cut off their heads without man's help,
and if the King will allow thereof.

When Hogekins heard this he was somewhat comforted in mind, and said to the
Friar, that if by his cunning he would perform it he would once again make
suite to the King to have his grant for the same. The Friar willed him to have
no doubt in him: and so when he had devised it, he got a Carpenter to frame it
out of hand.

Hodgekins in the mean time posted up to the Court, and told his Majesty that
the privilege of Halifax was not worth a pudding Why so, said our King?
Because, quoth Hodgekins, we can get never a hangman to trusse our thieves, but
if it shall like your good Grace, (quoth he) there is a feat Friar, that will
make us a device, which shall without the hand of man cut off the cragges of
all such Carles, if your Majesty will please to allow thereof.

The King understanding the full effect of the matter, at length granted his
petition: whereupon till this day, it is observed in Halifax, that such as are
taken stealing of their cloth have their heads choyt off with the same gin.

How the Bailifes of London could get no man to be a catch pole, and how
certain Flemings took that office upon them, whereof many of them were fled
into this Realm, by reason of certain waters that had drowned a great part of
their country. Chap. 9.
THe City of London being at this time governed by Bayliffes, it came to pass,
that in a certain fray two of their catch-poles were killed, for at that time
they had not the name of ^ergeants, and you shall understand, that their office
was then so much hated and detested of Englishmen, that none of them would take
it upon him so that the Bayliffes were glad to get any man whatsoever, and to
give him certain wages to perform that office.

It came to pass, as I said before, that two of their officers, by arresting
of a man, were at one instant slain, by means whereof the Bayliffes were
enforced to seek others to put in their rooms, but by no means could they get
any, wherefore according to their wonted manner, they made proclamation, that if
there were any man that would present himself before them, he should not only
be settled in that office during their lives, but also should have such
maintenance and allowance, as for such men was by the City provided: and
notwithstanding that it was an office most necessary in the commonwealth, yet
did the poorest wretch despise it, that lived in any estimation among his
neighbors.

At last a couple of Flemings, which were fled into this land, by reason that
their country was drowned with the sea, hearing the proclamation, offered
themselves unto the Bailiffes, to serve in this place, who were presently
received and accepted, and according to order had garments given the^, which
were of ij. colors, blue and red, their coats, breeches and stockings, whereby
they were known and discerned from other men.

Within half a year after, it came to pass, that Thomas Dove of Exeter came
up to London, who having by his iollity and good fellowship, brought himself
greatly behind hand, was in danger to diverse men of the city, among the
rest, one of his creditors fee^d an officer to arrest him. The dutch man that
had not been long experienced in such matters, and hearing how many of his
fellows had bin killed for attempting to arrest men, stood quiuering and
quaking in a corner of the street to watch for Tom Dove, and having long
waited, at length he spien him; whereupon he prepared his mace ready, and with
a pale countenance proceeded to do his office, at what time coming behind the
man, suddenly with his mace he knocked him on the pate, saying. I arrest you,
giving him such a blow, that he felld him to the ground.

The catchpole thinking he had killed the man, he left his Mace behind him and
ran away: the creditor he ran after him calling and crying that he should
turn again: But the Fleming would not by any means come back, but got him
quite out of the city, and took sanctuary at Westminster.

Dove being come to himself, arose, and went to his inn, no man hindering his
passage, being not a little glad he so escaped the danger. Yet nevertheless,
at his next coming to London, another catchpole met with him, and arrested him
in the Kings name.

Dove being dismayed at this mischievous chance, knew not what to do: at last he
requested the catchpole that he would not violently cast him in prison, but
stay till such time as he could send for a friend to be his surety; and
although kindness in a catchpole be rare, yet was he won with fair words to do
him this favor: whereupon Dove desired one to go to his host Iarrat, who
immediately came unto him and offered himself to be Doves surely.

The Officer, who never saw this man before, was much amazed at his sight: for
Iarrat was a great and a mighty man of body, of countenance grim, and exceeding
high of stature, so that the catchpole was wonderfully afraid, asking if he
could find never a surety but the devil, most fearfully entreating him to
con^ure him away, and he would do Dove any favor. What, will you not take my
word quoth Iarrat? sir quoth the Catchpole, if twere for any matter in hell, I would
take your word as soon as any devils in that place, but seeing it is for a
matter on earth, I would gladly have a surety.

Why thou whoreson criket (quoth Iarrat) thou magget a pie, thou spinner, thou
paultry spider, do thou take me for a Devil? Sir, take my word, I charge
thee, for this man, or else goodman butterfly, I Will make thee repent it. The
officer, while he was in the house, said he was content, but so sone as he came
into the street, he cried, saying: Help, help, good neighbors, or else the
Devil will carry away my prisoner: notwithstanding, there was not one man
would stir to be the Catchpoles aid. Which when he saw, he took fast hold
on Thomas Dove, and would not by any means let him go.

Ia^ret seeing this, made no more to do; but coming to the officer, gave him
such a fillippe on the forehead with his finger, that he felld the poor
Fleming to the ground and while he lay in the street stretching his heels,
Iarret took Dove under his arm and carried him home where he thought himself
as safe as king Charlemaine in mount Alben.

The next morning Iarret conveyed Dove out of town, who afterward kept him in
the country, and came no more in the Catehpoles claws.

How Duke Robert came a wooing to Margaret with the white hand, and how he
appointed to come and steal her away from her masters, Chap. 10.
THE beautiful Margaret, who had now dwelt with her dame the space of four
years, was highly regarded and secretly loved of many gallant Gentlemen of the
country, but of two especially, Duke Robert, and Sir William Ferris. It
chanced on a time, that fair Margaret with many other of her Masters folks,
went a hay-making, attired in a red stamell petticoate, and a broad strawne
hatte upon her head, she had a hay forke, and in her lap she bore her
breakfast. As she went along, Duke Robert, with one or two of his keepers, met
with her, whose amiable sight did now anewe kindle the secret fire of love.
which long lay smothering in his heart, Wherefore meeting her so happily, he
saluted her thus friendly.

Fair maid, good morrow, are you walking so diligently to your labor? Needs
must the weather be fair, where the sun shines so clear, and the hay wholesome
that is dried with such splendant rays. Renowned and most notable Duke (quoth.
she) poor harvest folks pray for fair weather, and it is the laborers
comfort to see his work prosper, and the more happy may we count the day, that
is blessed with your princely presence: but more happy said the Duke, are they
which are conversant in thy company. But let me entreat thee to turn back to
thy matters with me, and commit thy forke to some that are fitter for such
toil: trust me, me thinks thy dame is too much ill aduis^e, in setting thee to
such homely business. I muse thou can endure this vile beseeming servitude,
whose delicate limbs were never framed to prove such painful experimentes.

Albeit, quoth she, it becomes not me to control your iudicical thoughts,
yet, were you not the Duke, I would say, your opinion deceived you: though your
fair eyes seem c^eere yet I deemed them imperfect* if they cast before your
mind any shadow or spark of beauty in me: But I rather think, because it has
been an old saying, that women are proud to hear themselves praised, that
you either speak this, to drive away the time, or to wring me from my too
apparent imperfections. But I humbly entreat pardon, too long have I foreflowed
my business, and shewue my self oner bold in your presence: and therewith,
with a courtly grace, bending her knees to the courteous Duke, she went forward
to the fie^^, and the Duke to the town of Gloucester.

When he came thither, he made his keeper great cheer, entreating them they
would give him respite to be a while with old Gray; for we twain must have a
game or two, quoth he: and for my safe return. I gage to you my princely word,
that as I am a true Knight and a Gentleman, I will return saf^ to your charge
again.

The keepers being content, the Duke departed, and with old Gray goes to the
field, to peruse the workefolkes, where while Gray found himself busy in many
matters, he took opportunity to talkewith Margaret She who by his letters
before was privy to his purpose, gest before hand the cause of his coming: to
whom he spoke to this effect.

Fair maid. I did long since manifest my love to theeby my letter; tell me
therefore, were it not better to be a Duchess then a drudge? a Lady of high
reputation, then a servant of simple degree? with me thou might live in
plasure, where here thou drawest thy days forth in pain; by my love thou
should be made Lady of great treasures: where now thou art poor and
beggarly; all manner of delights should them attend on thee, and whatsoever thy
heart desired, thou should have: wherefore seeing it lies in thy own choice,
make thy self happy, by consenting to my suite.

Sir (quoth she) I confess your love deserves a Ladies favor, your affection a
faithful friend, such a one as should make but one heart and mind of two
hearts and bodies; but far unfit is it that y^ Turtle should match with the
Eagle; though her love be never so pure, her wings are unfit to mount so
high. While Thales gazed on the ftarres, he stumbled in a pit. And they that
clime unadvisedly, catch a fall suddenly; what avails high dignity in time of
adversity? it neither helps the sorrow of the heart* nor remoues the bodies
misery: as for wealth and treasure, what are they, but fortunes baits to bring
men in danger? good for nothing but to make people forget the^ selves: and
whereas you alle^ge poverty to be a henderer of the hearts comfort, I find it
in my self contraty, knowing more surety to rest under a simple habit, then a
royal robe: and verily there is none in the world poor, but they that think
themselves poor* for such as are endued with content, are rich having nothing
else: but he that is possessed with riches, without content, is most wretched
and miserable. Wherefore most noble Duke, albeit I account my life unworthy of
your least favor yet I would desire you to match your love to your like, and
let me rest to my ^ake, a^^ use my Forke for my living,

Consider, save Margaret (quoth he) that it lies no^ in man's power to place his
love where he ^s^, being the work of an high deity. A bird was never seen in
Pontus, nor true love in a fleeting mind; never shall I remove the affection of
my heart, which in nature resembles the stoue Abiston* whose fire can never be
cooled: wherefore sweet maiden give not obstinate denial, where gentle
acceptance ought to be received.

Fair sir quoth she) consider what high displeasure may rise by a rash match,
what danger a Kings frowns may breed, my worthless matching with your royalty,
may perhaps regaine your liberty, and hazard my life; then call to mind how
little you should enjoy your love, or I my wedded Lord.

The Duke at these words made this reply, that if she consented, she should not
dread any danger. The thunder (quoth he) is driven away by ringing of belles,
the Lions wrath qualified by a yielding body: how much more a brothers anger
with a brothers entreaty? By me he has received many favors, and never yet did
he requite any one of them: and who is ignorant that the princely crown which
adorneth his head, is my right? all which I am content he shall still enjoy, so
he requito my kindness. But if he should not, then would I be like those men
(that eating of the tree Lutes) forget the country where they were borne, and
never more should this clime cover my head, but with thee would I live in a
strange land, being better content with an egg in thy company, then with all
the delicates in England.

The maiden hearing this, who with many other words was long wooed, at last
consented; where yielding to him her heart with her hand, he departed,
appointing to certify her from Cardiffe Castle what determination he
would-follow: so taking his leave of Gray, he went to his brothers, and with
them posted to Cardiffe.

Now it is to be remembered, that sir William Ferres within a day or two after
came unto Graies house, as it was his ordinary custom, but not so much I wis
for Graies company, as for the mind he had to Margaret his maid, who although
he were a married man, and had a fair Lady to his wife, yet he laid hard siege
to the fort of this maidens chastity, having with many fair words sought to
allure her, and by the offer of sundry rich gifts to tempt her. But when she
saw, that by a hundred denials she could not be rid of him, she now chanced on
a sudden to give him such an answer, a^ drove him from a deceit into such a
conceit, as never after that time he troubled her.

Sir William Ferrers being very importunate to have her grant his desire, and
when after sundry assaults she gave him still the repulse, he would needs know
the reason why she would not love him: quoth he, If thou did consider who
he is that seeks thy favor, what pleasure he may do thee by his purse, and
what credit by his countenance, thou would never stand on such nice points.
If I be thy friend, who dares be thy foe? and what is he that will once call
thy name in question for any thing? therefore sweet gerle, be better advised,
and refuse not my offer being so large.

Truly u^t William (quoth she) though there be many reasons to make me deny
your suite, yet is there one about the rest that causes me I cannot love you.
Now I pray thee, my wench, let me know that quoth he, and I will amend it what
soever it be. Pardon me sir, said Margaret, if I should speak my mind, it would
possibly offend you, and do me no pleasure, because it is a defect in Nature,
which no physic may cure. Sir William hearing her say so, being abashed at
her speech, said, Fair Margaret, let me (if I may obtain no more at thy
hands) yet entreat thee to know what this defect should be. I am not wry neckt*
crook-legd, stub footed lame-handed, nor bleare-eied: what can make this
mislike: I never knew any body that took exceptions at my person before.

And the more sorry am I quoth she, that I was so malapert to speak it, but
pardon my presumption, good sir William, I would I had been like the Storke
tonguelesse, then should I never have caused your dis quiet. Nay, sweet
Margaret, quoth he, tell me dear love, I commend thy singleness of heart,
good Margaret speak. Good sir William let it rest quoth she, I know you will
not believe it when I have revealed it, neither is it a thing that you can
help: and yet such is my foolishness, had it not been for that, I think
verily I had granted your suite ere now. But seeing you urge me so much to
know what it is, I will tell you: it is sir, your ill favored great nose* that
hangs sagging so loathsomly to your lips that I cannot find in my heart so
much as to kiss you.

What my nose quoth he? is my nose so great and I never knew it? Certainly I
thought my nose to be as comely as any man's: but this it is, we are al apt to
think well of our selves, and a great deal better than we ought: but let me
see, (my nose!) by the mass ^is tru^, I do now feel it my self: Good Lord,
how was I blinded before? Hereupon it is certain, that the knight was driven
into such a conceit, as none could persuade him but his nose was so great
indeed; his Lady, or any other that spoke to the contrary, he would say they
were flatterers, and that they lied, insomuch that he would be ready to strike
some of them that commended or spoke well of his nose. If they were men of
worship or any other that contraried him in his opinion, he would swear they
flowted him, and be ready to challenge them the field. He became so ashamed of
himself, that after that day he would never go abroud, whereby Margaret was
well rid of his company.

On a time, a wise and grave gentleman seeing him grounded in his conceit so
strongly, gave his Lady counsel, not to contrary him therein but rather say
that she would seek out some cunning Physician to cure him: for, said he, as
sir William has taken this conceit of himself, so is he like never to bear
other opinion, till his own conceit does remove it, the which must be wisely
wrought to bring it to pass.

Whereupon the Lady having conferred with a Physician that bare a great name in
the country, he undertook to remove this fond conceit by his skill. The day
being appointed when the Physician should come, and the knight being told
thereof, for very joy ^e would go forth to meet him, when a woman of the
town saw the knight, having heard what rumor went because of his nose, she
looked very steadfastly upon him: the knight casting his eye upon her, seeing
her to gaze so wistly in his face, with an angry countenance, said thus to her,
Why how now good huswife, can you not get you about your business? The woman
being a shrewish queen, answered him cuttedly. No mary can I not qo she. No,
you drab* What is the cause, said the knight? Because quoth she, your nose
stands in my way. Where with the knight being very angry, and abashed, went
back again to his house.

The Physician being come, he had filled a certain bladder with sheep blood,
and conveyed it into his fleeue, where at the issue of the bladder he had put
in a piece of a swans quid through the which the blood should run out of the
bladder so close by his hand, that he bolding the knight by the nose, it might
not be perceived, but that it issued thence. All things being prepared he told
the knight, that by a foul corrupt blood wherewith the veins of his nose were
ouercharged, his impediment did grow, therefore ^d he, to have redress for
this disease you must have a vein opned in your nose. whence this foul
corruption must be taken; whereupon it will follow, that your nose will fall
again to his natural proportion, and never shall you be croubled with this
grief any more, and thereupon will I gage mylife.

I pray you master doctor said the knight, is my nose so big as you make it?
With reverence I may speak it, said the physician, to tell the truth, and
avoid flattery, I never saw a more misshapen nose so foul to ^ight. Lo you
now Madam, quoth the knight, this is you that said my nose was as well. as
handsome, and as comely a nose as any man's.

Alas sir quoth she I spoke it (God wot) because you should not grieve at it,
nor take my words in ill part, neither did it indeed become me to mislike of
your nose.

All this we will quickly remedy* said the physician, have no doubt: and with
that, he very orderly pricked him in the nose, but not in any vein whereby he
might bleed: and presently having a trick finely to unstop the quill, the
blood ran into abason in great abundance: and when the bladder was empty, and
the basin almost full the Physician seemed to close the vein, and asked him
how he felt his nose, showing the great quantity of filthy blood which from
thence he had taken.

The knight be holding it with great wonder, said he thought that no man in the
world had been troubled with such abundance of corrupt blood in his whole
body, as lay in his misshapen nose, and therewithal he began to touch and
handle his nose, saying, that he felt it mightily assuaged. Immediately a glass
was brought wherein he might behold himself. Yea mary quoth he now I praise God,
I see my nose is come into some reasonable proportion, and I feel my self
very well eased of the burden thereof; but if it continue thus, that's all. I
will warrant your worship, said the physician, for ever being troubled with the
like again. Whereupon the knight received great joy, and the Doctor a high
reward.

How Thomas of Reading was murdered at his hoasts house of Colebrooke, who also
had murdered many before him, how their wickedness was at length revealed. Cha.
11.
THomas of Reading having many occasions to come to London, as well about his
own affairs, as also the kings business, being in a great office under his
Majesty, it chanced on a time, that his host and hostess of Colebrook, who
through covetousness had murdered many of their ghests, and having every time he
came thither great store of his money to lay up, appointed him to be the next
fat pig that should be killed: For it is to be understood, that when they
plotted the murder of any man, this was always their term, the man to his
wife and the woman to her husband, Wife, there is now a fat pig to be had, if
you want one. Whereupon she would answer thus, I pray you put him in the
hogstie till to morrow. This was, when any man came thither alone without
others in his company, and they saw he had great store of money.

This man should be then laid in the chamber right over the kitchen, which was
a fair chamber, and better set out then any other in the house; the best
bedsted therein, though it were little and low, yet was it most cunningly
carved, and fair to the eye: the feet whereof were fast naild to the chamber
floor, in such sort, that it could not in any wise fall, the bed that lay
therein was fast sowed to the sides of the bedsted: Moreover, that part of the
chamber whereupon this bed and bedsteed stood, was made in such sort that by
the pulling out of two iron pinnes below in the kitchen, it was to be let down
and taken up by a draw bridge, or in manner of a trappe door: moreover in the
kitchen, directly under the place where this should fall: was a mighty great
caldron, wherein they used to seethe their liquor when they went to brewing.
Now, the men appointed for the slaughter, were laid into this bed and in the
dead time of the night when they were sound a sleep hy plucking out the fore
said iron pinns, down would the man fall out of his bed into the boiling
caldron, and all the clothes that were upon him: where being suddenly scalded
and drowned, he was never able to cry or speak one word.

Then had they a little ladder ever standing ready in the kitchen, by the which
they presently mounted into the said chamber, and there closely took away the
man's apparel, as also his money, in his male or capcase: and then lifting up
the said falling floor which hung by hinges, they made it fast as before.

The dead body would they take presently out of the Caldron and throw it down
the river, which ran near unto their house, whereby they escaped all danger.

Now if in the morning any of the rest of the ghests that had talked with the
murdered man over eve, chanst to ask for him, as having occasion to ride the
same way that he should have done, the goodman would answer, that he took:
horse a good while before day, and that he himself did set him forward: the
horse the goodman would also take out of the stable, and convey him to a
hay-barne of his, that stood from his house a mile or two, whereof himself did
always keep the keys full charily, and when any hay was to be brought from
thence, with his own hands he would deliver it: then, before the horse should
go from thence, he would dismarke him: as it he ware a long tail, he would
make him curtall, or else crop his ears, or cut his maine, or put out one of
his eyes; and by this means he kept himself a long time unknown.

Now Thomas of Reading as I said before, being marked, and kept for a fat pig,
he was laid in the same chamber of death but by reason Gray of Gloucester
chaunst also to come that: night, he escaped scalding.

The next time he came, he was laid there again, but before he fell asleep,
or was warm in his bed, one came riding through the town, and cried
piteously, that London was al on a fire, and that it had burned down Thomas
Beckets house in West cheap, and a great number more in the same street^, and
yet (quoth he) the fire is not quenched.

Which tidings when Thomas of Reading heard, he was very sorrowful, for of the
same Becket that day had he received a great piece of money, and had left in
his house many of his writtings and some that appertained to the king also:
therefore there was no nay but he would ride back again to London presently, to
see how the matter stood; thereupon making himself ready, departed. This
cross fortune caused his host to frown, nevertheless y^ next time (quoth
he) will pay for all.

Notwithstanding, God so wrought, y^ they were prevented then likewise, by
reason of a great ^ray that happened in the house betwixt a couple y^ fell out at
Dice, insomuch as the murderers themselves were enforced to call him up, being a
man in great authority, that he might set the house in quietness, out of the
which by means of this quarrel, they doubted to lose many things.

Another time when he should have been laid in the same place he fell so
sick, that he requested to have some body to watch with him, whereby also they
could not bring their vile purpuse to pass. But hard it is to escape the ill
fortunes whereunto a man is allotted: for albeit that y^ next time that he came
to London his horse stumbled and broke one of his legs, as he should ride
ho^ewa^d, yet hired he another to hasten his own death: for there was no
remedy but he should go to Colbrook that night: but by the way he was so heavy
a sleep, that he could scant keep himself ^^ the ^^ddle; and when he came
near unto the Town his nose burst out suddenly ableeding

Well, to his Inn he came, and so heavy was his heart, that he could eat no
meat: his host and hoastise hearing he was so Melanchely, came up to cheer
him, saying, Jesus, Master Cole, what ails you to night? never did we see you
thus sad before: will it please you to have a quart of burnd sack? With a good
will (quoth he) and would ^o God Thomas Dove were her, he would surely make me
merry, and we should lack no music: but I am sorry for the man withal my
heart, that he is come so far behind hand: but alas, so much can every man
say, but what good does it him? No no, it is not words can help a man in this
case, the man had need of other relief then so. Let me see: I have but one
child in the world and that is my daughter, and half that I have is hers, the
other half my wifes. What then? shall I be good to no body but them? In
conscience, my wealth is too much for a couple to possess, and what is our
Religion without charity? And to whom is charity more to be shown then to
decayed householders?

Good my host lend me a pen and ink, and some paper, for I will write a
letter unto the poor man straight, and something I will give him: that alms
which a man bestows with his own hands he shall be sure to have delivered, and
God knows how long I shall live.

With that, his hoastise dissemblingly answered, saying. Doubt not. Master
Cole, you are like enough by the course of nature to live many years. God
knows (quoth he) I never found my heart so heavy before. By this time, pen,
ink and paper was brought, setting himself to writing, as follows.

In the name of God, Amen I bequeath my soul to God, and my body to the
ground, my goods equally between my wife Elenor, and Isabel my daughter. Item
I give to Thomas Dove of Exeter one hundred pounds, nay that is too little, I
give to Thomas Dove two hundred pounds, in money, to be paid unto him presently
upon his demand thereof by my said wife and daughter.

Ha, how say you my host (quoth he) is not this well? I pray you read it. His
host looking thereon, said, why Master Cole, what have you written h^^e? you
said you would write a letter, but me thinks you have made a will, what need
have you to do thus? thanks be to God, you may live many fair years. It Is
true (quoth Cole) if it please God, and I trust this writing cannot shorten my
days: but let me see, have I made a will? Now I promise you, I did verily
purpose to write a letter: notwithstanding. I have written that that God put
into my mind: but look once again my host, fs it not written there, that Dove
shall have two hundred pounds, to be paid when he comes to demand it? yes
indeed, said his host. Well then, all is well said Cole, and it shall go as it
is for me. I will not bestow the new writting thereof any more.

Then folding it up, he sealed it, desiring that his host would send it to
Exeter. He promised that he would, notwithstanding Cole was not so satisfied:
but after some pause, he would needs hire one to carry it. And so sitting down
sadly in his chair again, upon a sudden he burst forth a weeping: they
demanding the cause thereof he spoke as follows:

No cause of these tears I know: but it comes now into my mind (said Cole)
when I set toward this my last journey to London, how my daughter took on,
what a coy^e she kept to have me stay: and I could not be rid of the little
baggage a long time, she did so hang about me: when her mother by violence
took her away, she cried out most mainely, O my father, my father, I shall
never see him again.

Alas, pretty soul, said his hostess, this was but mere kindness in the
girl, and it seems she is very fond of you. But alas, why should you
grieve at this? you must consider that it was but childishness. I, it is
indeed, said Cole, and with that he began to nod. Then they asked him if he
would go to bed. No said he, although I am heavy, I have no mind to go to bed
at all. With that certain musicions of the town came to the chamber, and
knowing Master Cole was there, drue out their instruments, and very solemnly
began to play.

This music comes very well (said Cole) and when he had listened a while
thereunto. he said, Me thinks these instruments sound like the ring of S. Mary
Outries bells, but the base drownes all the rest: and in my ear it goes like a
bell y^ rings a forenoones knell, for Gods sake let them leave off, and bear
them this simple reward. The musicions being gone, his host asked if now it
would please him to go to bed; for (quoth he) it is welneare eleven of the
clock.

With that, Cole beholding his host and hostess earnestly, began to start
back, saying, what aile you ^o look so like pale death? good Lord, what have
you done, that your hands are thus bloody? what my hands, said his host? Why
you may see they are neither bloody nor foul: either your eyes do greatly
dazell, or else fancies of a troubled mind do delude you.

Alas my host, you may see, said he, how weak my wits are, I never had my
head so idle before. Come, let me drink once more, and then I will to bed, and
trouble you no longer. With that he made himself unready, and his hostess was
very diligent to warm a kerchefe, and put it about his head. Good Lord said he
I am not sick, I praise God, but such an alteration I find in my self as I
never did before.

With that the scritch owl cried pitteously, and anon after the night raven
sat croking hard by his window, Jesus have mercy upon me. quoth he, what an ill
favored cry do yonder carrion birds make! and therewithal he laid him down
in his bed, from whence he never rose again.

His host and hostess, that all this while noted his troubled mind, began to
commune betwixt themselves thereof. And the man said, he knew not what were
best to be done. By my consent (quoth he) the matter should pass, for I think
it is not best to meddle on him. What man (quoth she) faint you now? have you
done so many, and do you shrink at this? Then showing him a great deal of
gold which Cole had left with her, she said, Wpuld it not grieve a bodies heart
to loose this? hang the old churl, what should be do living any longer? he
has too much, and we have too little: ^ut husband, let the thing be done and
then this is our own.

Her wicked counsel was followed, and when they had listened at his chamber
door, they heard the man sound asleep. All is safe, quoth they, and down
into the kitchen they go, their servants being all in bed, and pulling out
the iron pins, down fell the bed, and the man dropped out into the boiling
caldron. He being dead, they betwixt them cast his body into the river, his
clothes they hid away, and made all things as it should be: but when he came to
the stable to convey thence Coals horse, the stable door being open, the horse
had got loose, and with a part of the halter about his neck, and straw trussed
under his belly, as the ostlers had dressed him ore eeue, he was gone out at
the back side, which led into a great field joining to the house, and so
leaping diverse hedges, being alu^^ie stond horse, had got into a ground where a
mare was grasing, with whom he kept such a coile, that they got into the high
way, where one of the town meeting them, knew the mare, and brought her and
the hurse to the man that owd her.

In the mean space the Musicians had been at the Inn, and in requit all of
their euenings gift, they intended to give Cole some music in the morning,
The goodman told them he took horse before day: likewise there was a guest in
the house that would have borne him company to Reading; unto whom the host
also answered, that he himself set him upon horse back, and that he went long
ago. Anon comes the man that owed the mare, inquiring up and down to know
and if none of them missed a horse, who said no. At last he came to the sign
of the Crane where Cole lay: and calling the hostlers he demanded of them if
they lackt none: they said no. Why then said the man, I perceive my mare is
good for something; for if I send her to field single, she wilcome home double:
thus it passed on all that day and the night following. But the next day after,
Coals wife musing that her husband came not home, sent one of her men on
horseback, to see if he could meet him; and if (quoth she) you meet him not
betwixt this and Colebrooke, ask for him at the Crane, but if you find him not
there, then ride to London; for I doubt he is either sick, or else some
mischance has fallen unto him.

The fellow did so, and asking for him at Colebrooke, they answered, he went
homeward from thence such a day. The servant musing what should be become of
his master, and making much inquiry in the town for him; at length one told
him of a hor^e that was found on the high way, and no man knew wh^nce he came.
He going to see the horse, knew him presently* and to the Crane he goes with
him. The host of the house perceiving this, was blanke, and that night fled
secretly away. The fellow going unto the Justice desired his help, presently
after word was brought that Iarman of the Crane was gone; then all man said he
had surely made Cole away: and the musitions told what Iarman said to them when
they would have given Cole music. Then the woman being apprehended and
examined confessed the truth. Iarman soon after was taken in Winsor forest. He
and his wife were both hanged after they had laid open al these things before
expressed. Also he confessed, that he being a carpenter made that false falling
floor, and how his wife devised it. And how they had murdered by that means lx.
persons. And yet notwithstanding all the money which they had gotten thereby,
they prospered not, but at their death were found very far in debt.

When the king heard of this murder, he was for the space of vij. days so
sorrowful and heavy as he would not hear any suite, giving also
commandment, that the house should quite be consumed with fire wherein Cole
was murdered, and that no man should ever build upon that cursed ground.

Coals substance at his death was exceeding great, he had daily in his house an
hundred men servants and xl. maids; he maintaind beside above two or three
hundred people, spinners and carders, and a great many other householders. His
wife after never married; and at her death she bestowed a mighty sum of
money toward the maintaining of the new builded monastery. Her daughter was
most richly married to a gentleman of great worship, by whom she had many
children. And some fay, that the river whereinto Cole was cast, did ever since
carry the name of Cole, being called, The river of Cole, and the town of
Colebrooke.

How diverse of the Clothiers wives went to the churching of Suttons wife of
Salisbury, and of their meriments. Cha. 12.
SVttons wife of Salisbury which had lately bin delluered of a son, against
her going to Church, prepared great theare: at what time Suttons wife of
South-hampton came thither, and so did diverse other of the Clothiers wives,
only i^ make merry at this Churching feast: and whilst these Dames sat at
the ^able, Crab. VVeasell, and Wren waited on the board, and as the old
Proverb speaks, Many women many words* so ^ellit out at that time: for there
was her, wherein he requested, that she would be ready to meet him in the
forest, betwixt Cardiffe and Gloucester.

The young Lady having secretly received his message, unknown to her master or
dame, in a morning betime made her ready and got forth, walking to the
appointed place, where her love should meet her.

During her abode there, and thinking long ere her lone came, she entered into
diverse passions, which indeed presaged some disaster fortune to follow. O my
dear Love, said she, how slack art thou in perfourming thy promise* why do
not thy deeds agree with thy inditing? see, these are* thy words, Come my dear
Margaret, and with Cupids swift wings fly to thy friend, be now as nimble in
thy footing, as the Camels of Bractria, that run an hundred miles a day, I
will wait and stay for thee, so I stay not too long. There is no country like
Austria for ambling horses, and to carry thee I have got one.

O my Love (quoth she) here am I, but where art thou? O why do thou play
the trewant with Time, who like the wind slides away unseen? An ambling
gennet of Spain is toe flow to serve our turns. A flying horse, for flying
Lovers were most meet. And thus casting many looks through the Siluane
shades, up and down to epsy him, she thought every minuse, an hour, till she
might see him, sometimes she would wish herself a bird, that she might fly
through the air to meet him, or a pretty squirell no clime the highest tree to
discry his coming: but finding her wishes vain, she began thus to excuse him
and persuaded her self, saying.

How much too blame am I, to find fault with my friend? Alas men that lack
their liberty, must come when they can, not when they would, poor prisoners
cannot do what they desire, and then why should I be so hasty? Therefore if
safely I may lay me down* I will beguile unquiet thoughts with quiet s^eere:
it is said that Galino breeds no Serpents, nor does Englands forests nourish
Bears or Lions, therefore without hurt I hope I may test a while. Thus leaving
fair Margaret in a sweet slumber, we will return to Duke Robert, who had
thus plotted his escape from his keepers.

Having liberty of the King to hawke and hunt, he determined on a day, as he
should follow the chase, to leave the hounds to the Heart, and the hunters to
their horns and being busse in their sport, himself would fly, which he
performed at that is time, when he appointed Margaret to meet him, and so
coming to the place, his Horse all in a water, and himself in a sweat,
finding his Love a sleep, he awaked her with a kiss, saying. Arise, fair
Margaret, now comes the time wherein thou shall be made a Queen: and
presently setting her on horseback he posted away.

Now when the Keepers saw they had lost his company, and that at the killing of
the game, he was not present, they were among themselves in such a mutiny, that
they were ready one to stabbe another. It was thy fault, said one, that he thus
escapt from us, that had more mind of thy pleasure, then of thy prisoner, and
by this means we are all undone. The other said as much to him* that he had
thought he had followed him in the chase: but leaving at last this contention,
the one posted up to the King. while the others coasted up and down the
country to search for the Duke, who having killed his horse in traueling, was
most unhappily met on foot with fair Margaret, ere he could come to any
Town, where he might for money have another. But when he spyed his Keepers
come to take him, he desired Margaret to make shiftfor her self, and to seek
to escape them. But she being of a contrary mind, said, she would live and dye
with him.

The Duke seeing himself ready to be surprised, drew out his sword, and said,
he would buy his liberty with his life, before he would yield to be any more a
prisoner; and thereupon began a great fight betwixt them, insomuch that the
Duke had killed two of them: but himself being ^ore wounded, and faint with
euermuch bleeding, at length fe^^ down, being not able any longer ^o stand:
and by this means the good Duke was taken with his fair love, and both of
them cammitted to prison.

But in the mean space, when Graies wife had mist her maid, and saw she was
quite gone, she made great lamentation for her among her neighbors: for she*
loved her as dearly as any child that ever she bore of her own body. O
Margaret (quoth the) what cause had thou thus to leave me? if thou did it
mislike of any thing why did thou not tell me? If thy wages were too little,
I would have mended it: If thy apparel had been too simple, thou should
have had better: If thy work had been too great. I would have had help for
thee.

Farewell. my sweet Meg, the best servant that ever came in any man's house
many may I have of thy name, but never any of thy nature, thy deligence is much
in thy hands I laid the whole government of my house, and thereby eased my
self of that care which now will ^umber me.

Here she has left me my keys unto my chests, but my comfort is gone with
her presence, every gentle word that she was wont to speak, comes now into my
mind, her courteous behavior shall I never forget: with how sweet and modest
a countenance would she qualify my ouer-hasty nature? It repents my ha^t that
ever I spoke foul word unto her. O Meg, were thou here again, I would never
chide thee more: but I was an unworthy dame for such a servant: what will
become of me now, if I should chance to be sick, seeing she is gone, that was
wont to be both my Apoticarie and Physician?

Well, quoth her neighbors, there is no remedy now, but to rest content, you
shall one day hear of her, doubt you not and think this, that she was not so
good, but you may get another as good, and therefore do not take it so heavily.
O neighbor, blame me not to grieve, seeing I have lost so great a jewel, and
sure I am persuaded, that scant in a bodies life time, they shall meet with
the like.

I protest, I would circuit England round about on my bare feet to meet with
her again. O, my Meg was surely stole away from me, else would she not have
gone in such sort. Her husband on the other side grieved as much, and rested
not night nor day riding up and down to seek her: but she, poor soul, is
fast locked up in prison, and therefore cannot be met withal.

But when the King understood of his brothe^^ escape, he was marvelous wrath,
giving great charge and commandment when he was taken, that both his ^ies
should be put out, and he kept in prison till his dying day; appoynting also,
that the maid should lose her life for presumption in loving him.

This matter being rumored over all England, it came to the ears of Gray and
his wife, who hearing that Margaret also was there in prison appointed to die,
the good aged woman never rested til she came to the court, where kneeling
before the King, with many tears she besought his Majesty to spare the maidens
life, saying, Most royal king consider I humbly beseech you, that the duke
your brother was able to entice any woman to his love, much more a seely
maiden, especially promising her marriage, to make her a Lady, a Duchess, or
a Queen, who would refuse such an offer, when at the instant they might get
both a princely husband and a high dignity? if death be a Lovers guerdon, then
what is due to hatred? I am in my heart persuaded, that had my poor Margaret
thought it would have bred your highness displeasure, she would never have
bought his love so dear. Had your Grace made it known to your commons, that
it was unlawful for any to marry the duke your brother, who would have
attempted such an action? if she had wilfully disobeyed your Graces
commandment, she might have bin thought worthy of death; but seeing ignorantly
she offended. I beseech your Grace recall the sentence, and let me still enjoy
my servant, for never will I rise till your Majesty have granted my petition.

His Highness, who was of nature merciful, be holding the woman's abundant
tears, took pity on her, and granted her suite; which being obtained, she
went home with all haste possible. And from thence, she with her husband taking
their iorny to Cardiffe castle, they came at that very instant when the maiden
was led toward her death, who went in most joyful sort to the same, saying*
that they were not worthy to be accounted true Lovers, that were not willing to
die for love: and so with a smiling countenance she passed on, as if she had
eaten Apium Ri^us, which causes a man to die laughing: but her dame Gray
seeing her, fell about her neck, and with many kisses embraced her, saying,
Thou shall not die my wench, but go home with me, and for thy delivery,
behold here the Kings letters; and with that she delivered them up to the
governor of the Castle, who reading them found these words written: We pardon
the maids life, and grant her liberty, but let her not pass, till she see
her lovers ^ies put out, which we will have you to do in such sort, that not
only the sight may perish, but the eye continue fair, for which cause I have
sent down doctor Piero that he may execute the same.

The governor of the Castle having read the Kings letter, said thus to the
maiden. The Kings majesty has pardoned thy life, and allowed thy liberty. but
you must not pass before you see your lovers eyes put out. O sir, said the
maiden, mistake not your self, they are my eyes that must be put out, and not
the Dukes: as his offense grew by my means, so I being guilty, ought to
receive the punishment.

The kings commandment must be fulfilled, said the governor: and therewithal
D Robert was brought forth, who hearing that he must lose his eyes, said thus:
the noble mind is never conquered by grief, nor overcome by mischance: but as
the Heart renews his age by eating the serpent, so does a man lengthen his
life with devouring sorrow: my eyes have offended the King, and they must be
punished, my heart is in as great fault, why is not that killed?

The Kings majesty said the governor. spares your life of mere love, and only
is content to satisfy the Law with the loss of your eyes, wherefore take in
good part this punishment and think you have deserved greater than is granted.

With this Margaret cried out, saying, O my dear love, most gentle Prince,
well may you wish that I had never bin borne, who by seeing of me must lose
your sight; but happy should I count my self, if it so please the King, that
I might redeem thy eyes to my self, or else, that being an equal offender, I
might receive equal punishment: had thou sustained this smart for some ^u.
or Princess of high blood, it might with the more ease be borne, but to endure
it for such a one as I, it must needs cause atreble grief to be increased.

Content thee fair Margaret said the duke, for honor ought to be given to
virtue, and not riches: for glory, honor, nobility and riches, without virtue,
are but clokes of maliciousnes. And now let me take my leave of thy beauty, for
never must I behold thy face: notwithstanding I account my eyes well lost, in
that I do forgo them for so peerlesse a paragon. Now fair heavens, farewell,
the Sun, Moon and Stars shall I in this world never behold again; and
farewell also the fruitful earth: well may I feel thee, but those poor
windows of my body are now denied to view thee any more: and though the world
has never bin my foe, yet will I bid it farewell too, and farewell all my
friends; whiles I live here in this world, I must suppose to sleep, and wake
when I come in heaven, where I hope to see you all again. Yet had it pleased
the King, I had rather have lost my life than my eyes. Life, why what is it but
a flower, a bubble in the water, a spanne long, and full of misery? of such
small account is life, that every soldier will sell it for six pence. And
trust me I do now detest life, worse than a goat does hate basil.

With that the Doctor prepared his instrument, and being ready to set to the
Dukes eyes, he said, O stay master doctor, till I have conveyed my loves
countenance down into my heart: Come hither my sweet, and let me give thee my
last kiss, while my eyes may direct me to thy cherry lips. Then embracing
her in his arms, he said, O that I might give thee a kiss of xx years long,
and to satisfy my greedy eyes with thy fair sight: yet it does somewhat
content me because thou art present at my punishment, that I may hold thee by
the hand, the comfort my heart at the sudden prick of my eye.

This being said, the Doctor performed his duty, and so put out the cristall
sight; at what time D. Robert started up, and with a most manly courage said, I
must thank his Majesty, that though he depriueth me of my sight, yet he
leaves me eyes to weep for my sins. But so soon as Margaret beheld the
deed, she fell down in a swowne, and much ado her dame had to recover her
life: which when the duke understood, he was wondrous woe, groaping for her
with his bleeding eyes* saying. O where is my love? for Gods sake have regard
to her. And I pray you most heartily good goodwife Gray, let her have this
favor for my sake, that she may be used kindly. And with that the Keepers led
him into the castle, and Margaret was carried away wondrous sick and ill: but
her dame was most tender over her, and would suffer her to lack nothing. When
she was somewhat well recovered, her dame ^ray set her on horse back: and at
her coming to Gloucester there was no small joy.

How Tom Dove being fallen to decay, was forsaken of his friends, and despised
of his servants: and how in the end he was raised again through the liberatity
of the Clothiers. Chap. 14.
SUch as seek the pleasure of this world, follow a shadow wherein is no
substance: and as the adder Aspis tickleth a man to death so does vain
pleasure flatter us, till it makes us forget God, and consume our substance, as
by Tom Dove it is apparent, who had through a free heart, and a liberal mind
wasted his wealth, and look how his goods consumed, so his friends fled from
him: And albeit he had been of great ability, and thereby dove good unto many,
yet no man regarded him in his poverty, but casting a scornful countenance
upon him, they passed by him with slender salutation: neither would any of his
old acquaintance do him good, or pleasure him the value of a farthing; his
former friendship done to them was quite forgot, and he made of as much
account, as Job when he sat on the dunghill.

Now when his wicked servants saw him in this disgrace with the world, they on
the other side began to disdain him. Notwithstanding that he (to his great
cost) had long time brought them up, yet did they nothing regard it, but
behind his back in most scornful sort derided him, and both in their words
and actions greatly abuse him, reverence they would do none unto him but when
they spoke, it was in such malapert sort, as would grieve an honest mind to
hear it.

At last it came to pass, that breaking out into mere contempt, they said
they would stay no longer with him, and that it was a great discredit to them,
to serve a person so beggarly: whereupon they thought it convenient to seek
for their benefits elsewhere. When the distressed man found the matter so
plain, being in great grief, he spoke thus unto them. Now do I find, to my
sorrow, the small trust that is in this false world. Why my masters (quoth he)
have you so much forgotten my former prosperity, that you nothing regard my
present necessity? in your wants I forsook you not, in your sickness I left you
not, nor despised you in your great poverty: it is not unknown, though you do
not consider it, that I took some of you up in the high way, other some from
your needy parents, and brought the rest from mere beggary to a house of
bounty, where from paltry boys, I brought you up to man's estate, and have, to
my great cost, taught you a trade, whereby you may live like men. And in
requital of all my ^urteste, cost and good will, will you now on a sudden
forsake me? is this the best recompense that you can find in your hearts to
yield me?

This is far from the minds of honest servants. The fierce Lion is kind to
those that do him good: pluck but one thorn out of his foot, and for the
same he will show manifold favors. The wild Bull will not overthrow his Dam:
and the very Dragons are dutiful to their nourishers. Be better advised, and
call to mind, I beseech you, that I have not plucked a thorn out of your feet,
but drawn your whole bodies out of perils, and when you had no means to help
your selves, I only was your support, and he, that when all other forsook you
did comfort you in all your extemities.

And what of all this, quoth one of them? because you took us up poor, does
it therefore follow, that we must be your slaves? We are youngmen, and for
our parts, we are no further to regard your profit, then it may stand with our
preferment: Why should we lose our benefit, to pleasure you? If you taught us
our trade, and brought us up from boys to men, you had our service for it,
whereby you made no small benefit, if you had as well used it, as we got it.
But if you be poor, you may thank your self, being a just scourge for your
prodigality, and it is my opinion plain, that to stay with you, is the next
way to make us, like you, neither able to help our selves, nor our friends
therefore in brief, come pay me my wages, for I will not stay, let the rest
do as they will for I am resolved.

Well said his Master if needs thou will be gone, here is part of thy wages in
hand, and the rest, so soon as God sends it, thou shall have it: and with
that, turning to the rest. he said. Let me yet entreat you to stay and leave me
not al^ogether destitute of help: by your labors must I live, and without you
I know not what to do. Consider therefore my need, and regard my great
charge. And if for my sake you will do nothing, take compassion on my poor
children, stay my sliding foot, and let me not utterly fall through your
flying from me.

Tush (quoth they) what do you talk to us* we can have better wages and serve
a man of credit. where our fare shall be far better, and our gains greater:
therefore the world might count us right coxcomes, if we should forsake our
profit, to pleasure you: therefore adieu, God send you more money, for you are
like to have no more men: and thus they departed.

When they were gone, within a while after they met one with another, saying
What cheer? are you all come a way: In faith I what should we do else (quoth
they; but hear'st thou, sir, have thou got thy wages? Not yet says ye other
but I shall have it, and that is a good, it is but ^. shillings, Say thou so
(quoth he now I see thou art one of God almighties idiots, Why so, says the
other? Because (quoth he) thou will be fed with shales: but I Will tell thee on
thing, t were best for thee quickly to arrest him, lest some other doing it
before there be nothing left to pay thy debt hold thy peace, fair words make
fools feign and it is an old saying One bird in hand is worth two in bush: if
thou do not arrest him preseutly. I will not give thee two pence for thy ten
shillings. How shall I come by him (quoth the other)? Give me but two pots of
ale, and I Will betray him says he. So they being agreed, this smooth* faced
Judas comes to his late Master and told him that a friend of his at the door
would speak with him. The vnmistrusting man thinking no evil. went to the
door, where preseently an Officer arrested him at his man's suite.

The poor man seeing this, being stricken into a sudden ^or row, in the grief
of his heart spoke to this effect: Ah thou lewd fellow, art thou the first man
that seeks to augment my misery? Have I thus long given the^ bread, to breed
my ^uerthrow? and nourisht thee in thy need, to work my destruction? Full
little did I think, when thou so often did dippe thy false fingers in my
dish, that I gave food to my chiefest foe: but what booteth complaints in
these extremes? go wife, quoth he unto my neighbors, and see if thou can get
any of them to be my bail. But in vain was her pains spent. Then he sent her
to his kins^olks* and they dented him: to his brother, and he would not come at
him, so that there was no shift, but to prison he must: but as he was going, a
messenger met him, with a letter from Master Cole. wherein as you heard, he had
promised him two hundred pounds: which when the poor man read, he greatly
rejoiced, and showing the same to the officer, he was content, to take his own
word. Whereupon ^om Dove went presently to Reading, where, at his coming he
found all the rest of the Clothiers lamenting Coals untimely death, where the
woeful widow paid him the money, by which deed all the rest of the Clothiers
were induced to do something for Dove. And thereupon one gave him ten pounds,
another twenty, another thirty pounds, to begin the world anew: and by this
means (together with the blessing of God) he grew into greater credit then
ever he was before. And riches being thus come upon him, his former friends
came fawning unto him, and when he had no need of them, then every one was
ready to proffer him kindness. His wicked servants also that disdained him in
his distress, were after glad to come creeping unto him, entreating with cappe
and knee for his favor and friendship. And albeit he seemed to forgive their
trespasses done against him, yet he would often say, he would never trust them
for a straw. And thus he ever after lived in great wealth and prosperity,
doing much good to the poor. and at his death, left to his children great
lands.

How fatre Margaret made her estate and high birth known to her master and
dame: and for the entire love she bore to Duke Robert, made a vow never to
marry, but became a Nun in the Abbey at Gloucester. Chap. 15.
AFter fair Margaret was come again to Gloucester, never did she behold the
clear day, but with a weeping eye: and so great was the sorrow which she
conceived for the loss of Duke Robert her faithful Lover, that she utterly
despised all the pleasures of this life, and at last bewraid her self in this
sort unto her Dame.

O my good Master and Dame, too long have I dissembled my parentage from you,
whom the froward distinies do pursue to deserved punishment. The woeful
daughter am I of the unhappy Earl of Shrewsbury, who ever since his
banishment have done nothing but drawn mischance after me: wherefore let me
entreat you (dear Master and Dame to have your good wills, to spend the
remnant of my life in, some blessed Monastery.

When Gray and his wife heard this, they wondered greatly, as well at her birth,
as at her strange demand. Whereupon her dame knew not how to call her, whether
Maiden or Madam, but said O good Lord, are you a Lady and I knew it not? I am
sorry that I knew it not before. But when the folks of the house heard that
Margaret was a Lady, there was no small alteration: and moreover her Dame said,
that she had thought to have had a match between her and her son: And by
many persuasions did seek to withdraw her from being a Nun saying in this
manner, What Margaret, thou art young and fair the* world (no doubt) has
better fortune for thee, whereby thou may leave an honorable issue behind
thee, in whom thou may live after death.

These and many other reasons did they allege unto her, but all in vain, she
making this reply, Who knows not that this world gives the pleasure of an
hour, but the sorrow of many days? for it pays ever that which it
promises, which is nothing else but continual trouble and vexation of the
mind. Do you think, if I had the offer and choice of y^ mightiest princes of
Christendom, that I could match my self better then to my Lord Jesus? No no,
he is my husband, to whom I yield my self both body and soul, giving to him
my heart, my love, and most firm affection: I have ouerlong loved this vile
world? therefore I beseech you farther dissuade me not.

When her friends by no means could alter her opinion, the matter was made
known to his Majesty, who against the time that she should be received into
the monastery, came to Glaucester with most part of his Nobility, to honor
her action with his princely presence.

All things being therefore prepared the young Lady was in most princely wise
attired in a gown of pure white satin, her kertle of the same, imbrodered
with gold about the skirts, in most curious sort, her head was garnished with
gold, pearls, and precious stones, having her hair like threeds of burnisht
gold, hanging down behind her, in manner of a princely bride: about her iuory
neck jewels of inestimable price were hung, and her handwreasts were compassed
about with bracelets or bright shining diamonds.

The streets through the which she should pass, were pleasantly decked with
green taken boughs. Then came the young Lady most like an heavenly Angel out
of her masters house; at what time all the bells in Gloucester were solemnly
rung, she being led betwixt the Kings majesty, having on his royal robes and
imperial crown, and the chief Bishop wearing his Miter, in a Cope of cloth
of gold, over her head a Canopy of white silk, fringed about in princely
manner: before her went an hundred priests singing, and after her all the
chief Ladies of the land: then all the wives and maidens of Gloucester
followed, with an innumerable sort of people on every side standing to behold
her. In this sort she passed on to the cathedral church, where she was brought
to the Nunry gate.

The Lady Abbess received her: where the beautiful maiden kneeling down, made
her prayer in sight of all the people: then with her own hands she undid her
virgins fair gown, and took it off, and gave it away to the poor: after
that, her kertle, then her jewels, bracelets and rings, saying. Farewell the
pride and vanity of this world. The ornaments of her head were the next she
gave away: and then was she led on one side, where she was stripped, and
instead of her smock of soft silk, had a smock of rough hair put upon her.

Then came one with a pair of sheares, and cut off her golden colored locks,
and with dust and ashes all bestrewd her head and face. Which being done, she
was brought again into the peopls sight barefoot and barelegd, to whom she said:
Now farewell the world, farewell the pleasures of this life, farewell my Lord
the King, and to the Dukes sweet love farewell; now shall my eyes weep for my
former transgressions, and no more shall my tongue talk of vanity: farewell my
good master and dame, and farewell all good people.

With which words she was taken away, and never after seen abroad. When duke
Robert heard thereof, he desired that at his death, his body might be buried
in Gloucester: in that town, quoth he, where first my clear eyes beheld the
heavenly beuty of my love, and where for my sake she forsook the world: which
was performed accordingly.

The King also at his death requested to be buried at Reading, for the great
love he bare to that place, amongst those Clothiers, who living, were his
hearts comfort. Gray dying wondrous wealthy, gave land to the monastery,
whereinto Margaret was taken. William. Fitzallen also died a most rich man,
having builded many houses for the poor, whose son Henry after was the first
Mayor that ever was in London.

Sutton of Sailsbury did also at his death much-good, and gave an hundred it.
to be yearly lent to poor weauers of the town to the worlds end, Simon of
South-hampton gave a most bounteous gift toward the building of a monastery
at Winchester. Hodgekins of Halifax did also great good, and so did Cutbert of
Kendall, who had married xx: ij couples out of his own house, giving each of
them x. li. to begin the world withal. Martin Byram of Manchester gave
toward the building of a free school in Manchester, a great mass of money.
And thus (gentle Reader) have I finished my Story of these worthy men,
desiring thee to take my pains in good part, which will encourage me to
greater matters perceiving this courteously accepted.

FINIS.

