THE NEW CREATVRE.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS, IANVARY 17. 1619.

By Stephen Denison, Minister of Gods word, at Katherine Kree Church, in the
City of London.

2. COR. 5. 17. Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

GAL. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in great Woodstreete.

1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR SEBASTIAN HARVEY Knight, Lord Mayor of the
honorable City of London:
STEPHEN DENISON wishes increase of all saving grace in this world, and
eternal glory and happiness in the world to come.
Right Honorable,
THE doctrine of Repentance and of the new Creature, is very necessary in all
places, and for all assemblies. This doctrine is fit for all persons; it is fit
for men of high degree, to cause them to bethink themselves. It is fit for men
of low degree, to cause them to know themselves. It is fit for the true
judicious hearer, to cause him to add practice to his knowledge. And it is fit
for the itching care or curious hearer, to teach him the true use of hearing
Sermons, which is, not to have his uncircumcised ear carnally pleased, but
rather to have his poor soul regenerated, edified, and refreshed. With Joel
1. 2.
this doctrine was Joel sent unto the old men, and to all the inhabitants of the
land. With this doctrine was Jonas sent Jonas 3. 4.
unto Nineue, Forty days, and Nineue shall be destroyed. With this doctrine
was Christ himself sent unto the John 3. 3.
lost sheep of the house of Israel: Except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God. And with this doctrine is this weak messenger or small
Treatise sent into the world at this time. I desire that it might do much good
unto the souls of Gods elect* which if it do, I do unfeignedly confess, it is
not in respect of any worth or sufficiency that is in the author, but merely by
Gods free blessing following my poor and weak endeavors.

The reasons which have moved me to make this doctrine and Sermon public, are
these, viz.

First, the consideration of the necessity of it: for what is more necessary
then to understand the mystery of regeneration? without which no flesh can be
saved.

Secondly, the consideration of the general extent of this doctrine: for it
concerns not only them which heard the Sermon, but also all others; for God
exhorts Act. 17. 30.
all men to repent.

Thirdly, the desire of diverse holy Christians, whose earnest and godly request
I desire to fulfill to my power.

And in that I do commend unto your Honor, these my poor endeavors contained
in this book, it is:

First, because your Honor was an eare-witnesse of this Sermon, enduring the
coldness of the season, to hear it with much attention.

Secondly, because your Honor has purchased to your self a good report among
men, by your inst and upright carriage in that worthy place and calling
whereunto you are called*

Thirdly, because your Honor has had, and I hope will have unto the end, a
singular care of Gods Sabbath, that it may not be profaned by the lewdness of
men, which are more set upon their own gain and pleasure, then in any sort
upon Gods glory: which desire not only to sin themselves, but also to make
Christian magistrates partakers of their sins, by giving license and liberty
unto them.

Fourthly, that I might hereby testify my love unfeigned unto this famous
City; for the which I will always pray, that God would turn his judgments
from it, and prevent it with his liberal blessings, especially in heavenly
things in Christ.

I beseech your Honor to accept this Treatise, which I offer as the widows
mite, to be cast into Gods treasury. And so I will pray the very God of 1.
These. 5. 23.
peace to sanctify you wholly; and that your whole spirit, and soul, and
body, may be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Your Honors in all things in the Lord, Stephen Denison.

THE NEW CREATVRE.
EZEKIEL 18. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, o
house of Israel?
AT the five and twentieth verse of this present Chapter, the Prophet Ezekiel
tells us, that the house of Israel had complained against the Lord, that his
ways were not equal. Unto the which impudent, saucy, and blasphemous
complaint, the Lord in his own most just defense gives a double answer: first
in the 26 and 27 verses, in these words: If a righteous man for saketh his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies in them: for the iniquity
that he has done, shall he die. Again, when the wicked man turns away from
his wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is equal and
right, he shall save his soul alive. As though the Lord should say: He that
condemns the impenitent, though formerly never so righteous in show; and he
that justifies the penitent, though formerly never so wretched in deed, his
ways must needs be equal. But God does all this: Therefore his ways must
needs be equal. The second answer which the Lord gives to the former unjust
complaint, is contained in the words of my text: Cast away from you all your
transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, etc. As though it were said: He
which offers you life and salvation, upon condition of repentance and
amendment for the time to come, his ways must needs be equal. But God
offers you this offer. Therefore his ways must needs be equal.

Cast away all your transgressions, etc. The parts of this text are two, to
wit, an exhortation, and an expostulatio^; or a counsel, and a reason. In the
exhortation or counsel, the Church of God is taught, first, what to avoid, in
these words, Cast away all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed.
Secondly, what to labor fot, in the words following, And make you a new heart
and a new spirit. And the expostulation or reason, is taken from the danger
that will ensue if the counsel be rejected, in these words, For why will ye
die, o house of Israel?

Cast away from you all your transgressions.
Cast away: by this is meant a final forsaking of sin; yea such a forsaking is
here understood, as is with an holy detestation or indignation: much like unto
that speech of the Prophet Isa. 30. 22.
Isaiah, Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and
the ornament of thy moulten images of gold: thou (...)ast them away as a
polluted cloth: thou shall say unto it, Get thee bence.

All your transgressions. The word in the original signifies properly slips,
or failings, or lesser sins. Whereby is not meant, that the Church must only
cast away or forsake her smaller sins, and retain her greater; for that were
with the Pharisees Mat. 23. 24.
to strain out a gnat, and to swallow a Camel: but by transgressions in this
text (by a Synecdoche, part being put for the whole) we are to understand all
sin, from the greatest to the least; from gross, crying, reigning sin,
even to our very infirmities. The like figure is to be observed in the words of
the third commandment, Thou shall not take the name Exodus 20. 7
of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, etc.
Where it is not meant, that we should only make conscience of taking Gods name
in vain by light use in common talk, and in the mean time make no conscience
of perjury before a magistrate: but the true meaning and scope of the
commandment is, to teach us to make conscience of all profanation of Gods
name, even from the very sins of perjury and blasphemy, to the least oath.
Even so in my text, by transgressions we are to understand all sins, both
great and small. For we must not favor or abet our selves in our very
infirmities.

And make you a new heart and a new spirit. By heart and spirit here is meant
the whole inner man. For by the heart is meant the memory the will, the
affections, and the conscience; and by the spirit is meant the spirit of the
mind, or the understanding. So that that which God requires here to be
renewed, is the whole inner man: according to that holy Pro. 23. 26.
Proverb, My son give me thine heart. But here a question may be demanded: Will
God therefore be content with the bare renewing of the inner man? or is he
indifferent, whether the outward man be renewed or no? Not so: 1. Cor. 6. 20
For we are bought with a price: therefore we must glorify God both in our
bodies and in our spirits: for they are Gods. But the Lord names the inner
man, because the true renouation begins there, namely at the heart and in the
mind. Secondly, because God knew full well, that if once the inner man were
thoroughly renewed, the outward man would quickly be reformed. According to that
speech of our Mat. 23. 26.
blessed Savior to the Pharisee: Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which
is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

Why will ye die? There is a threefold death mentioned in the holy Scriptures:
First, natural, and that is nothing else but a separation for a time of the
soul from the body. Secondly, spiritual, and that is a separation of the
soul from the life of God. Thirdly, eternal, and that is a final separation
both of body and soul, from the comfortable presence of God. Of the first kind
of death, is spoken in Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men to die once. Of the
second, is spoken in Luke 15. 32. This thy brother was dead, and is alive
again. Of the third is made mention in Reu. 21. 8. The fearful, and
unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers,
and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone: which is the second death. My text is meant of the
third kind of death: why will ye die? that is, why will ye incur the danger
of the second death, which is eternal damnation both of soul and body, to be
tormented with the Devil and his Angels for ever.

O house of Israel. By the house of Israel in this place, is meant the Church
of God both among the Jews and among the Gentiles. For the name Israel is
given to both peoples, in Gal. 6. 16. And I am sure the matter of the
exhortation concerns us Gentiles as much as ever it did the Jews. For I
appeal to every man's conscience: have not we as great need to be exhorted to
cast away all our transgressions, as ever had the Jews? Have not we as much
need to be stirred up to become new creatures, as ever had the Jews? Judge we
in our selves. Furthermore, this name Israel is taken from the Patriarch Jacob,
who was named Israel by Genesis 32. 28.
the Angel which wrastled with him, because as a Prince he had prevailed with
God. And it is a very fit name for all Gods people, because they are a
generation that can wrestle with God in prayer, and also prevail. Thus much of
the literal meaning of the words.

Cast away all your transgressions. Before I come to the points of doctrine
which I principally aim at, two questions are first to be answered: First,
whether repentance be in a man's own power or no, because the Church is here
exhorted, as by her own action, to cast away her transgressions, and to make
her self a new heart and a new spirit? And the second question is, whether a
man have free will or no? because it is said here, Why will ye die, o house of
Israel? As seeming to imply, that it was in the free choice of Israel her
self, whether she would be saved or damned.

Concerning the first question, I answer, that true repentance, or that
repentance which is never to be repented of, it is not in man's power, but it is
the especial gift of God: according to that in 2. Tim. 2. 25. In meekness
instructing them that oppose themselves, proving if God peradventure will give
them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth. And furthermore, every
unregenerate person, man or woman, Ier. 13. 23.
is a very black More, yea a Leopard: and therefore as the black More cannot
change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots, no more can any unregenerate person
do good, which is accustomed to do evil. We do not deny, but natural men and
women may attain Mat. 27. 3.
some degree of sorrow, as Judas did; and some degree of outward humiliation, 1.
Kin. 21. 29 Exodus 9. 27
as Ahab did; and some degree of confession, as Pharao did; and some degree of
the restraining spirit, as Abimelech did; and some degree of Genesis 20. 6.
satisfaction unto men for injuries done, as the same Judas did. But to Mat. 27.
5.
the saving sight of sin, or to the contrite spirit, which God will not
despise; or sound inward mortification unto sin, which is by the Spirit; or to
true conscience of sin, and loving endeavor after righteousness: hereunto a
mere natural person can never attain by his own natural strength. For it
is spiritually, and not naturally attained: it is the work of God, and not of
man. And therefore Ephraim is heard bemoning himself to God in these terms,
Turn thou me, and I Ier. 31. 18.
shall be turned: for thou art the Lord my God. Wherein he does secretly
acknowledge, that he had not repentance in his own power, but that it was the
gift of God.

But here remains still another difficulty. For it may be objected further:
If repentance be not in a man's own power, then why does God exhort us here to
cast off all our iniquities, and to make our selves new hearts and new spirits?
God does not this because he presupposes an ability in us to perform that
which he requires; but because he himself is ready to do that for us, which he
requires at our hands. For the word of God is not as the word of man, to wit, a
bare sound or voice; but being joined with the Spirit, it offers grace, and
effects that in the hearts of the elect in some measure, which it does
require. As we read concerning Thomas, Ioh. 20. 27. 28. Christ's word commanded
Thomas not to be infidelious but believing, and the same word wrought faith in
him to believe: so that he immediately fell down at Jesus feets, and said unto
him, Thou art my God and my Lord.

Concerning the second question, which is, whether a man have free will,
because it is said, Why will ye die? To this I answer, a man or woman may have
a free choice in things civil and indifferent: thus, if any one be invited to
a feast, he is at his own choice whether he will go or no; and if he go, he is
at his own choice of what dishes he will taste or eat: according to that in 1.
Cor. 10. 27. If any one that believes not, bid thee to a feast; and if thou will go etc. But to make choice, or to refuse to go to a feast, or to make
choice to feed moderately for conscience sake, or for Gods glory, this is
immediately from God the fountain of all holiness. For we are not 2. Cor. 3. 5.
sufficient to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God. Again, that a Christian has in some measure a freed will after
conversion, though not an absolute free will, we do not gainsay: for Christ
came to proclaim liberty to the captives, and Esai. 61. 1.
the opening of the prison to them that 2. Cor. 3. 17
are bound. And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But to say,
that a man has absolute freedom, and that he has power of himself, without
the Spirit, to will that which is good, and to nill that which is evil; Phil.
2. 13.
to affirm this we cannot. For it is God which gives both to will and to do,
of his good pleasure. We have not free will before conversion: For every
imagination Genesis 6. 5.
of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil continually. And, in us, Romans 7.
18.
that is, in our flesh, abides nothing which is good. Neither have we free Ioh.
15. 5. 4.
will after conversion: For without Christ can we do nothing. And, As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the vine, no more can we,
except we abide in Christ.

And therefore we Christians have just cause to reject the doctrine of Popery,
as in other points fundamental, as namely in the doctrine of iustificaton by a
man's own merits; and in the doctrine of praying, or giving divine worship unto
Saints and Angels; and in the doctrine of Purgatory; and in the doctrine of
the Popes authority to dispense with sin, or to forgive sin; in the doctrine
of Transsubstantiation; in the doctrine of the Popes power to dethrone
Christian Kings, etc. As we have, I say, just cause to reject these vain
inventions, with innumerable other Antichristian traditions: so likewise we
have just cause to dissent from the Papists and new vpstart Arminians in the
doctrine of Free will. And the doctrine of Free will, in that sense as it is
maintained by Papists and Arminians, is so much the more to be abhorred: first
because it denies the doctrine of the erernall truth of God concerning
election and reprobation; maintaining that one person is not elected more then
another, except it be for foreseen faith or foreseen works. Contrary unto
that in Romans 9. 11. For the children being not yet borne, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand,
not of works, but of him that calls, it was said unto her, The elder shall
serve the younger: as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

Secondly, the doctrine of freewill is so much the more to be rejected, because
it derogates from the glory of God, and makes a man his own savior: for if
a man have absolute power of himself, by his own will to be saved or damned,
then if he be saved, he may thank himself and not God. Thirdly, if the
doctrine of freewill were received, then we must also grant, that there is no
assurance of salvation in this life: contrary to that in 2. Pet. 1. 10. Make
your calling and election sure. Yea we must grant also, that a Christian might
fall finally and totally from saving grace: contrary to that in Math. 16. 18.
The gates of hell shall not prevail, etc. and thus one gross absurdity being
granted, a thousand would follow. The reason therefore that God expostulates
thus with his Church, Why will ye die? is not to implie any freewill in us, but
rather to intimate a great frowardness in us unto that which is good, and a
desperate forwardness and pronenesse unto that which is evil. Why will ye
die? that is, why will ye desperately resist the Spirit when he offers grace
unto you? and why will ye wilfully rush into sin as the horse into the
battle, and so incur the danger of damnation, when ye are sufficiently
forewarned? Thus much for the meaning of the words and matter.

Cast away from you all your transgressions. I purpose not to collect all the
doctrines which I might out of this text, because the time would be too short
for so large a discourse. I will therefore (if God will) insist only upon such
points as stand best with the scope of the holy Ghost in this text or portion
of Scripture, and which I think to be the most necessary doctrines concerning
the time and place.

Cast away from you all your transgressions. Where note, that it is not said,
lay by all your transgressions for a time, but cast them away. Again, it is
not said, cast away some of your transgressions, or such transgressions which
you can best spare, but cast away all, even to your very infirmities.

1. Doctrine.
Whence observe we, That a true penitent sinner must not not favor or allow
himself in any sin or transgression whatsoever, but he must be content to
part with all, yea with his best-beloued sins: he must cast away all his
transgressions whereby he has transgressed.

For the proof of which point, I commend unto you these places of Scripture
following:

Ezechiel 18. 30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin.

Math. 18. 8. 9. Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off,
and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather then having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting
fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is
better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then having two eyes to
be cast into hell fire.

2. Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God.

Heb. 12. 1. Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.

By all which places of holy Scriptures, and by many other, it is clear and
manifest, that it will not serve our turns, to forsake some sins upon our
conversion, but we must be content to part with all, yea with our best beloved
sins.

For further euidencing of this necessary truth, consider we the examples of
former Conuerts: when the 1. Cor. 6. 9.
Corinthians were converted, they washed themselves by the clean waters of Gods
Spirit, from their uncleanness, theft, covetousness, reuilings, extortions,
and the like.

When the Thessalonians were 1. These. 1. 9.
converted, they turned from idols to serve the true and living God, and to
look for his Son from heaven. And so for particular persons.

Math. 9. 9.
When Matthew was converted, he left the receipt of custom: when Zaccheus was
converted, he left his Luke 19. 8.
forged cauillation: when the hard hearted iaylour was converted, he Act. 16. 33.
ceased to deal cruelly with poor prisoners: when Moses was converted, he
abhorred the vanities of Pharaoes Heb. 11. 33.
Court.

Reason 1.
By all which examples and many other mentioned in the word of God, it is
evident that a true Convert or penitent person must turn, not from some, but
from all his sins.

And great reason there is that a man or woman should turn from all iniquity.

First, in respect of God himself, for Jehovah is a God of purer eyes then to
behold Hab. 1. 13.
evil, he cannot look on iniquity, as says the Prophet. He abhors all
iniquity, his jealousy smoaketh against all sin, and especially against
that sin after which we have gone a whoring from God. And therefore whosoever
they be that desire to get into Gods favor, they must of necessity forsake
their beloved sin, which is Gods corriuall.

Reason 2.
Secondly, a Christian must forsake all sin. For every sin is 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
Iam* 2. 10.
the transgression of the Law: and he that shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offends in one point, he is guilty of all. For howsoever he breaks not
every link of the chain by this or that particular sin, yet he may be truly
said to break the chain, if he break any link at all of it. So that though
a man sin not particularly against every Commandment, yet by favoring and
allowing himself in this or that particular breach of the Law, he is guilty
of the breach of all Gods Commandments, because he offends against the
authority and integrity of the whole Law. And therefore whosoever they be that
love and respect Gods Law, they must of necessity break off their beloved
sins. For the sound love of the word and the love of sin, can no more stand
together then the Arc and Dagon.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, a Christian must forsake all sin in respect of sin it self. For
what is any sin but the very work of the devil? and therefore to 1. Io^. 3.
8.
be abhorred. What is any sin but a fruit of the filthy flesh? and therefore
Gal. 5. 19.
worthy to be hated. Yea what is any sin but very filthiness it self? as it
is termed 2. Cor. 7. 1. Yea what is any sin but the vomit of a dog and filthy
mire? as Peter phraseth it in his 2. Epistle 2. Chapter: and therefore what
just cause has every Christian to forsake and abandon all sin?

Reason 4.
Fourthly, every Christian ought to forsake all sin, yea even his beloved
sin, in respect of the danger that will accrue unto him, if he do not forsake
it. He that will not forsake his sin, he remains under the Romans 1. 18.
wrath of God. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. He that will not forsake his sin, he
is continually subject to Gods Psalm. 68. 21.
vengeance in this world, for God will wound the hairie scalpe of such an one as
goes on in his wickedness. He that will not forsake his sin, he shall never
enter into the kingdom of heaven, according to that in Gal. 5. 21. Of which I
tell you before, as I have also told you before, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Lastly, he which will not forsake his
beloved sin, he shall be sure to have his portion in the lake Reu. 21. 8.
that burns with fire and brimstone; he shall not be able to stand in
judgment, Psalm. 1. 5.
yea he shall desire the very mountains to fall upon him, to hide him from the
wrath of the Lamb. And therefore whosoever they be that desire to escape these
dangers, they must of necessity break off their beloved sins.

5. Reason.
Fifthly, every Christian ought to break off his beloved sin in respect of
the good which he shall reap thereby: and the true Christian shall receive
infinite benefit by the forsaking of sin. For first, if he will touch no
unclean thing, God will 2. Cor. 6. 17
receive him for his child.

Secondly, if he will forsake all his sins, be shall be made fit for Gods
service, as for prayer, hearing Gods word, receiving the Sacrament: whereas
otherwise if he forsake not sin, he is unfit for all these; for if we regard
wickedness in our hearts, Psalm. 66. 18.
God will not regard our seeming devotion, but it is abomination to him.

Thirdly, if a Christian will forsake his beloved sin, he shall have peace of
conscience, which he shall never have unless he forsake his sin. For Isay
57. 21.
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

Fourthly, if a Christian forsake his sin, he shall profit by the word; Luke
8. 14.
whereas otherwise the word is choked by the venime of his beloved sin.

Fifthly, if a Christian forsake his Isay 1. 16.
sin, he shall have fellowship with God and joy in the holy Ghost; whereas if
he forsake nor his sin, he Ephesians. 2. 12.
remains an alien to God; and in very laughter his heart shall be sorrowful.
Pro. 14. 13.

Sixthly, if a Christian forsake his beloved sin, he shall approve the truth
of his repentance, whereas otherwise his repentance is no better then the
repentance of Herod. For Herod was content to do many Mark 6.
things at the preaching of John Baptist, but he would not forsake his Herodias:
and therefore his obedience was no obedience, and his repentance no repentance.

1. Objection. Pro. 24. 16.
But does not the righteous man fall seven times a day? and do we not in many
things offend all? are we not Iam. 3. 2.
all sinners? is there any man that lives and sins not? Therefore what
necessity is there that any man should endeavor to purge himself from all
sin?

Answer.
It is very true that we are all sinners, For if we say we have no sin, we
lie, and speak not the truth; but there is great difference betwixt sins of
infirmity whereunto the children of God are subject, and sins of presumption
whereunto the wicked are given.

First, sins of infirmity are committed upon the sudden, by a present and
unexpected temptation, as we see in the example of David, Psalm. 116. 11. I said
in my haste, all men are liers. But a sin of presumption is committed with
premeditation and plotting. For the wicked deuiseth mischief upon his bed; he
sets himself upon a way that is not good, etc. Psalm. 36. 4.

Secondly, a sin of infirmity is done unwillingly, with much striving
against the flesh, yea with the very hatred of the sin committed: as we see
in the example of blessed Paul, Romans 7. 15. That which I do, I allow not: for
what I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that do I. Whereas on the
contrary, a sin of presumption is committed willingly, with the whole heart,
with great delight, yea even with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. Who being past
feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness: to work all
uncleanness with greediness.

Thirdly, a sin of infirmity is commonly committed in things of a lower
nature. For few of the children of God after conversion (as I suppose) do fall
so grossly as did David and Peter. The child of God after regeneration may be
assailed with evil thoughts, and may be subject to like passions as others
are: yea idle words may sometimes slip from them at unawares, and some failings
there may be in their actions and dealings: and they may also come short in the
well performing of holy duties and the like. But a sin of presumption is
usually committed with an high hand in gross matters. Romans 3. 13. Their
throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit; the
poison of aspes is under their lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood, etc.

Fourthly, a sin of infirmity is commonly of ignorance, as was the sin of
Peter when rashly he desired that three Tabernacles might be made, one for
Christ, one for Moses, Mark 9. 6.
and one for Elias, not knowing what he said; whereas a sin of presumption is
always against the light of knowledge. For the wicked knowing the judgment of
God (that they which do such things are worthy of death) not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them. Romans 1. 32.

Fifthly, a sin of infirmity when it is known, it is presently repented of,
and is more carefully shunned and bewar'd of for the time to come: as we see in
the example of holy Job, in his fortieth chapter, and fourth and fifth verses:
who perceiving that he had been too bold with God, presently upon the sight of
his sin breaks out into these terms of repentance, Behold I am vile, what
shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once have I spoken, but
I will not answer again: yea twice, but I will proceed no further. Whereas on
the contrary a sin of presumption is commonly made a trade of, and continued
in, yea many times defended and boasted of. The children of Israel made a trade
of provoking God unto anger in the wilderness, and continued therein forty
years, Psalm. 95. 10. The wicked idolaters offer to defend their offering of
cakes to the Queen of heaven, Ier. 44. 17. And the ungodly boasts of his
hearts desire. Psalm. 10. 3.

Now therefore considering what great difference there is betwixt sins of
infirmity and sins of presumption, let no man deceive himself in being
encouraged to live in his gross sins of presumption, because the true
children of God, sore against their wills, are subject to many slips and
imperfections.

2. Objection.
I am convinced in my conscience (may some say) that I ought to live better
then I do, and that I ought to break off my best-beloued sins: but may I not
do this hereafter? what necessity is there of present amendment? Answer.
To this I answer: It is not for thee (my poor brother) to put off thy
repentance from day to day; and that for diverse weighty reasons.

First, because God himself calls upon thee for present repentance: To Heb.
3. 7.
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation,
and in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

Secondly, because through procrastination thine heart may be made hard and
impenitent, as is implied in Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

Thirdly, because thy life is frail and uncertain; thou know not what a
day may bring forth; thou may be alive and in health to day, and dead and
buried by to morrow: therefore it behooves thee to repent whilst thou have yet
time.

Fourthly, there be (no doubt) multitudes at this instant in hell fire for
deferring their repentance, notwithstanding that they purposed, as thou do,
to repent hereafter. And therefore, lest thou be like such foolish virgins, and
lest thou also come to that place of torment, thou must not only repent, and
cast away all thy transgressions whereby thou have transgressed; but this thou
must do to day, without any minutes procrastination.

3. Objection.
I am content (will some happily say) to part with whatsoever I am convinced of
to be a sin; but how shall I be convinced of sin, or by what means may I
come to find out Answ.
my beloved sin? I answer, if thou know not (my Christian brother) thy
beloved sin, which every man does more easily know then forsake, take these
few directions for the finding out of thy sin:

First, pray unto God (but pray fervently, and in the name of Christ) that he
would vouchsafe to discover unto thee thy sins. For it is the Spirit John 16. 8.
of God which conuinceth the world of sin; and he is that eye-salue which must
cause thee to see.

Secondly, thou must be very conversant in Gods word, but especially in the
reading of the Law of God: Romans 3. 20
for by the Law comes the knowledge I am. 1. 23.
of sin. And the Law is that true cristall glass, wherein thou may discern
and see thy ugly deformities.

Thirdly, thou must carefully observe the checkes of thy conscience. For if
thou have not feared thy conscience; with an hot iron, it will at one time or
other check thee for thy beloved sin; and thine own heart will smite thee,
as David's heart smote him, when he had cut off the lap of Saul's garment.

Fourthly, thou must be content to suffer the word of exhortation from thy
Minister, from thy friend, yea from thy very enemy, if thou desire to come to
the sight of thy sin. Many times others see more in us, then we can see in our
selves. How came David to the sight of his sin, but by Nathan 2. Sam. 12.
the Prophet his ministry?

Use 1.
Now having proved unto you at large the truth of the doctrine, namely, that a
true convert must turn, not from some, but from all his sins: the use of the
point is, first to condemn the practice of gross hypocrites, unto whom sin is
sweet, and they hide it Job 20. 12.
under their tongues: which with Saul spare their fat sins of pleasure and
profit; and learn of Naaman to say, Lord be merciful unto us in these sins;
when in the mean time they never mean to forsake them. But I leave such to
their just condemnation, unless they repent.

2. Use.
Secondly, it serves for exhortation, to excite every one of you, and mine own
soul also, to forsake all sin. Let Ministers learn to beware of false
doctrine, and bad example, lest many thereby be defiled. Let Lawyers learn to
beware of bribes, to pervert judgment and justice. Let Magistrates learn to
beware of too much severity toward some, and of too much partiality toward
others. Let tradesmen learn to break off all fraud and deceit, and all
shameful secret corruptions of their particular callings. In a word, let every
man and woman, rich and poor, young and old, one and other, learn to cast off
all their transgressions, whereby they have transgressed. And that we may
obtain the happy victory against our especial corruptions, these rules are
to be observed with all carfulness.

First, we must daily examine our selves: for thus says the Lord of hoasts by
the Prophet, Consider your Agg. 1. 12.
ways; and by his beloved Disciple, Remember from whence thou art fallen Reu.
2. 5.
.

Secondly, we must daily confess them, and bemoane our selves daily for them
to God; yea we must condemn our selves for them, and desire strength against
them by prayer. All this did Paul for the removing of the messenger of Satan,
which was 2. Cor. 12. 7*
sent to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12. 7.

Thirdly, we must daily renew our covenant with God, vowing against our sins,
as David did; I have sworn, Psalm. 119. 106.
and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous indgements. A resolute
vow and steadfast resolution, are notable preservatives against all sin.

Fourthly, we must be very conversant in the use of Gods ordinances, to wit, of
praying, advised reading, frequent hearing, prepared receiving of the Lords
Supper, etc. Diligence in these things is an especial means, with the help
of Gods Spirit, to mortify any sin.

Fifthly, we must avoid the company of such as have been the instruments of
Satan formerly to allure us to sin. For in vain shall we purpose to keep the
commandments of our God, unless with David we say to our Psa. 119. 115
graceless companions, Depart from me ye wicked.

3. Use.
Thirdly, considering that all sin must be cast off, it may serve more
particularly for the instruction both of Ministers and Magistrates. Of us
Ministers; we must hereby be excited to take diligent notice of the sins that
reign in this land, and especially amongst that people of which God has made
us overseers: and let us without respect of persons endeavor to subdue all sin.
Let us not fear the rich, not favor our benefactors. Let us not desire to
speak pleasing things, but profitable things. Let us Cause Jerusalem Ezekiel. 16.
2.
to know all her abominations. Let us deliver our selves from
bloudguiltinesse, by giving warning; and so When the chief Shepherd shall
appear, 1. Pet. 5. 4.
we shall receive the crown of glory, which fades not away.

Secondly, this may serve for the instruction of all such as are in authority
either in Church or Commonwealth: they must labor to suppress to their power
all sin; but especially such sins as reign in this Land, and in this famous
City of London. Let Ecclesiastical power suppress all heresy and schism,
such as are Popery, Arminianisme, Anabaptisme, Familisme, deprauing of the
Sabbath, and such like. Let the maintainers of these cursed sects be sharply
censured, and sought out, and diligently enquired after. Let these skulking
foxes be taken; for these are they that spoil this vine, persuading unstable
souls to desperate separation.

Here likewise let the secular Magistrate learn to suppress and punish the
gross abuses of the time, such as are, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, theft,
whoredom, drunkenness, idleness, and innumerable other. For because Eccles.
8. 11.
sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the heart
of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. Let Magistrates learn of
Nebuchadnezzar to punish swearers and blasphemers; for he (though an heathen)
made a solemn decree, Dan. 3. 29.
That every people, nation and language, which should speak any thing amiss
against the God of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, should be cut in pieces,
and their houses should be made a dunghill. Surely this heathen man may justly
rise up in judgment against us professed Christians, in that we suffer the
glorious and fearful Name of God, and the precious blood and sacred wounds of
Jesus Christ, so commonly and ordinarily to be profaned and blasphemed. Let
Magistrates learn of Nehemiah to be zealous Neh. 13. 21.
for the Lords Sabbath; that as he threatened to lay hands on all such as broke
the Sabbath by their selling wares on that blessed day, so they would take
notice of the profanation of the Sabbath in every kind, and labor to
suppress all abuses, and not to give the least tolleration at the request of
any, for any carnal liberty: knowing the ill disposition of man's nature, that
if it have an inch, it will take an elne. Let Magistrates therefore learn of
Phinees, to execute severe judgment Psalm. 106. 30.
upon the adulterer and the whore. Let them not wink at filthy houses, nor
street and field adulteries, but let them take with Phinees the iaueline of
justice, and suppress these gross enormities for the which the Hos. 4. 3.
land mourns. Let Magistrates learn to suppress all deceit among tradesmen,
and let them not suffer the throat of the Commonwealth to be unnaturally cut
by her own children nor by strangers. Let Magistrates learn to suppress that
common and ordinary sin of drunkenness, and for the same purpose to
suppress the superfluous number of Tauernes and Alehouses, which too
ordinarily are houses of disorder and cages of unclean birds; and let them
strengthen the hands of under-officers, which may narrowly look unto the
abuses and disorders of such places. Let Magistrates learn to suppress the
Sodomiticall sin of idleness, and therefore let them endeavor to restrain
those sturdy beggars which are able to work, and will not; and for this purpose
let them remember the rule of the blessed Apostle, If there be any that will
not work, 2. These. 3. 10.
let him not eat. And here I wish that a more Christian care might be taken of
certain poor children, which take up their lodging in the cold streets, and
many of them are found dead in the morning. I pray God their blood be not one
day required at the hands of those that should see these things reformed. In a
word (because time would be too short to enter upon all particulars,) let
Magistrates learn of David, to destroy all Psalm. 101 8
the wicked of the land, that they may cut off all wicked doers from the City
of the Lord. And for the same purpose let them have an especial care of the
choice of under-officers, for Exodus 18. 2.
the bad choice of them is the bane of all justice.

4. Use.
Fourthly and lastly, considering that a true Convert must cast away all his
transgressions, therefore let the profane stageplayer forsake his unlawful
youth-polluting trade, and betake himself to some lawful calling: remembering
that every Christian Ephesians. 4. 28.
is bound to work with his hands the thing which is good. Let the scoffer at
religion and religious persons, which cries down all holiness and fear of
God under the color of a hell invented nickname, cease from Esaias 28. 22.
his Ismaelitish mocking, lest his bonds increase. Let the covetous person
cease from his covetousness, considering that it is not frugality or good
husbandry, as the devil would make him believe, but it is idolatry, odious
Col. 3. 5. Psalm. 10. 3. 1. Cor. 6. 10.
to God, hateful to men, and in it self damnable, as the Scripture speaks.
Let the proud person cease from pride, both in heart and countenance, and
speech, and apparel, both in respect of outward gifts and inward gifts; and
the rather, first because pride is one of the six things Pro. 6. 17.
which God abhors: Secondly, because God will visit the sin of pride in
apparel even in Princes children, Zeph. 1. 8.
and much more in others which will content themselves with no fashion in
apparel, nor with any natural countenance, but will needs have a painted face
of their own making, because they like it better to be like 2. Kin. 9. 30
unto that strumpet Iesabel, then to conform themselves after the modest manner
of holy women. Let the malicious person cease from his malice, knowing that it
is murder in the 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
sight of God; let him cease to hate his brother in his heart; let him cease
to curse another, lest it light upon Psalm. 109. 17
himself; let him cease to seek revenge, either cunningly or openly, either
under pretense of law or otherwise, knowing that vengance belongs Romans 12. 19
to God, and he will repay. Let the deceitful person cease to live by his
wits (as he terms it,) let him not get his living by carding, dicing, bowling,
cosening, periuring, and such like forged cauillation; knowing that 1. These.
4. 6.
God is auenger of all such things. Let the usurer learn to forsake his usury
though it be a gainefull sin.

First, because he has no warrant for his practice from any one place of Gods
word truly and faithfully understood.

Secondly, because the word of God, does expressly condemn his practice in
diverse places, as in Psalm. 15. 5. Ezekiel 18. 13. Luke 6. 35. and in many
other texts of holy Scripture.

Thirdly, because it is a matter of evil report, and ever was so, both amongst
Christians and heathens.

Fourthly, because it is maintained with a trembling conscience: many usurers
doubting, some upon their deathbeds repenting, and others after conversion
turning from the practice of vsuty, acknowledging that when they were usurers,
they were in the way to hell and destruction.

Fifthly, because the usurer lives by the sweat of another man's brows, whereas
it were Christian honesty for a man to live by his own labor.

Sixthly, because usury is the cause of idleness, it is the cause that men give
over their lawful trades and commendable employment in the common wealth, and
live idly; or else give themselves to running to stageplayes, or bowling, or
vicious life, or to such like epicurisme.

I do not purpose solemnly to handle this controversy concerning usury in this
short Treatise. For otherwise I would see what could be pleaded for this Baall,
and would easily (as I hope) give a Christian answer unto such as desire not to
be contentious, but to be resolved in the case of their conscience. But I may
not stand upon this point at large at this time. I rather aim to speak at
large upon the point of usury if I live to come to the handling of the eight
Commandment, whereof usury is a breach. In a word, let the factious person
avoid schism, and let him pray for, and endeavor the peace of Jerusalem. Let
the hypocrite avoid his hypocrisy, knowing that God is not mocked, yea let
him be assured that Eccl. 12. 14.
God will bring all things to judgment, yea every secret sin. Let the
slanderer cease from slandering, knowing Deuteronomy. 27. 24
that he which smites his brother secretly is accursed. Let us all cast away
all our transgressions whereby we have transgressed. Thus much of the first
doctrine or instruction.

And make you a new heart and a new spirit. Now we come to the second branch of
the divine counsel given unto the Church in this text: and that is the grace
which the Church must labor for, to wit, a new heart and a new spirit. And the
doctrine hence to be noted, is, that It is the part and duty of every 2.
Doctrine.
true Convert, not only not to favor himself in any one corruption
whatsoever; but also he must become a new creature in true saving grace. And
this blessed renouation must not only be in the reforming of the outward man,
as of the speech, countenance, apparel, behavior, and such like; but it must
be in the inner man, in the understanding, memory, will, affections and
conscience: it must be in the heart and in the spirit. For indeed God requires
truth in the inward parts. And Psalm. 51. 6.
howsoever man looks on the outward appearance, and contents himself with it,
yet God beholds the 1. Sam. 16. 7*
heart. No service will please God, unless Ioh. 4. 24.
it be in spirit and troth. To this purpose also Paul speaks notably in Ephesians.
4. 22. That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of
your mind: and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. And unto this may be added that other place
in 2. Cor. 5. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old
things are passed away, behold, all things are become new. By both which places
it is manifest, that it is not sufficient to cease to be old, but there must
be also a renewing. It is not sufficient for a Convert to cast away all his
transgressions whereby he has transgressed, but also he must make him a new
heart and a new spirit.

Now concerning the new creature, or state of renouation, which is a great
Evangelical mystery, I propound these necessary points to be considered of:
First, what necessity there is of this renouation. Secondly, by what means it
is wrought. Thirdly, by what degrees. Fourthly, what be the concomitants of it.
Fifthly, concerning the constancy.

1. Point.
Concerning the necessity of this inward renouation or regeneration, we are to
consider, first, that without it no flesh can be saved: for Christ himself
says, Except ye be converted, Mat. 18. 3.
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And again he says, Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God. Again, we are all vassals of Satan by nature, and are taken of him 2.
Tim. 2. 26
at his will: and therefore it is necessary that we should be set free out of
spiritual bondage by virtue of regeneration. Again, by nature all the
faculties of our souls are out of frame, our members being the members Romans 6.
19
of unrighteousness: and therefore it is necessary that we should be set in
joint again by regeneration. Lastly, without regeneration our very sacrifices,
our prayers, our hearing the word, our alms, our civil lives, are unpleasing
to God. For as much Romans 8. 8.
as they that are in the flesh (that is, unregenerate) cannot please God, as the
blessed Apostle speaks.

Use. Let every man and woman lay to heart this necessity; and let them not
deceive themselves with that fond conceit, that if they live ciuilly, and pay
every man his own, and go to the Church as others do, that then they shall
surely be saved, though they remain as ignorant of regeneration as ever was
Nicodemus. I tell you nay: for unless you be regenerate and borne again, you
remain in danger of eternal condemnation, you remain the very slaves of
Satan; and the best things that you do or can do in your natural condition,
are abominable and odious to God.

2. Point.
Concerning the means whereby regeneration is wrought, we are to note first,
that the efficient cause of it is not man, nor Angel, but Gods Spirit. There is
no creature in heaven nor earth that can convert a soul by his own power:
this work belongs to God alone: for we are borne not of blood, nor of the will
of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God; as S. John speaks in his
first chap. and 13. verse. And therefore the whole glory of the admirable work
of regeneration is due to God alone, and is not to be ascribed to any creature.

Secondly, the most ordinary isntrumental cause (not to speak of the
extraordinary means) which God uses for the conversion of souls, is the word
of God, especially preached: as appears by these places of Scripture:

Psalm 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul.

1. Cor. 4. 15. For though you have ten thousand instructors, yet have ye not
many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

James 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we should
be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.

1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the
word of God, which lives and endures for ever.

By all which places, and many more, it is evident, that the especial
isntrumental cause of regeneration is the holy word of God contained in the
Canonical Scriptures. Whereby it appears, what infinite wrong the Pope does
unto the souls of the common people, by withholding from them the use of the
Scriptures: and also what enemies they are unto Christ's kingdom and to men's
salvation, which labor to their power to suppress and extinguish the
powerful preaching of Gods word. Lastly, this should teach us to glorify God
for the plenty of preaching in this Land, but especially in this City: for
hereby there is good hope of the conversion of many souls. And let us always,
as we have all just cause, pray against Popery, and that not only in respect
of the bloudthirstinesse of that religion, displayed in that most barbarous
plot of the gunpowder treason, but also because it seeks to deprive us of the
use of Gods word, the especial instrument of man's salvation.

3. Point.
Concerning the degrees whereby regeneration is most commonly wrought, they are
these following:

First, the holy Ghost quickens the soul which it does convert, finding it
dead in trespasses and sins. Thus it quickened the prodigal son, Luke 15. 32.
This thy brother was dead, and is alive again: and thus he quickened the
Ephesians, in the fifth Chapter of that Epistle, the eighth verse; and in the
second Chapter, the first verse. Where we are to note, that the soul is not
said to be dead by nature, or to be quickened by regeneration, because the
soul is destitute of all life, but because naturally it is an alien from the
life of God, as Paul speaks in Ephesians. 4. 18. God does not exercise the life of
grace in the soul of any unregenerate person, as he does in the hearts of
those that are regenerate. And this first act of regeneration or spiritual
quickening, is termed in Scriptures, Reu. 20. 6.
the first resurrection. First, because as in the day of the general
resurrection, Many that sleep in the dust shall awake, Dan. 12. 2: so by
virtue of this first resurrection, many that sleep in sin shall awake to live
righteously. 1. Cor. 15. 34. Secondly, as in the general resurrection the
bodies of the Saints shall be made like unto the glorious body of Christ
himself, Philip. 3. 21: so by virtue of this first resurrection the souls of
the Saints come to bear the image and stamp of God himself, being made holy
as he is holy, Ephesians. 4. 24. And hereby a man or woman may try whether they be
regenerate and quickened or no, if they will but examine whether they be awake
to live righteously or no, and whether they bear Gods image in true holiness
or no. If these things be in thee, thou art undoubtedly quickened; if not, thou
remainest still but a dead man.

The second degree whereby regeneration stand up from the dead, then immediately
Christ gives us light, Ephesians. 5. 14. the God which commanded light to shine out
of darkness begins to shine in our hearts, 2. Cor. 4. 6. Yea then the day
of salvation begins to dawne, and the daystarre of saving knowledge to arise
in our hearts. 2. Pet. 1. 19. By virtue of this heavenly light a man or woman
is brought to see in some measure the danger of their natural state, and what
need they have of repentance, and of Christ, and of Gods mercy, and of inward
purging from their corruptions; and what reason they have of denying
themselves, carrying about with them such a mass of corruption, whereof now
they are aware. Where it is to be noted, that the reprobate may in some measure
be enlightened also. He may have so much light as to leave him without excuse.
This is manifest out of Heb. 6. 4. where it is said of the apostates and final
backsliders, that they were once enlightened. But the difference is, first, the
child of God is enlightened and quickened: but the reprobate is only
enlightened and not quickened; for he remains still an alien from the life of
God. Ephesians. 4. 18. Secondly, the elect are enlightened to see their sin, as
we see in the example of Paul, Romans 7. 27. I see another law in my members,
etc. but the reprobate are enlightened especially to behold the danger of sin,
and the punishment of the same; as we see in the example of Cain, Genesis 4. 13.
My punishment is greater then I can bear. Thirdly, the elect are enlightened
to amendment, as we see in the example of Job, in his 40 Chapter, fifth verse,
I have spoken once, but I will do so no more; or I will not answer. But the
reprobate are enlightened to despair, and to desperate courses. As we see in
the example of Judas, Math. 27. 5. who so soon as he was enlightened to see
the danger of his estate, went immediately, and desperately hanged himself. And
hereby we may examine and try our selves, whether we be sauingly enlightened or
no. For if we be enlightened and quickened, if we be brought to the sight of
our secret corruptions, and to amendment, then it is a comfortable sign, that
we are sauingly enlightened; otherwise we remain in darkness unto this hour.

Peter's sermon, Acts 2. 37. it is said that they were pricked in their hearts;
and the city sinner when she was regenerate, she stood behind Christ at his
feet weeping, Luke 7. 38. The like may be said of Peter and diverse others.

Where also it is carefully to be observed, that the very reprobate may have a
kind of sorrow, and may hang down their heads like a bulrush for a time, Esaias
58. 5. Is it such a fast that I require, that a man should afflict his soul
for a day? etc. But the difference is, first the elect mourn for the offense
against God, as we see in the example of David, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee,
against thee only have I sinned. But the reprobate mourn especially in
respect of the punishment, as we see in the example of Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27.
who when he saw the judgments of God upon him, and upon his land, could then
confess with a seeming sorrow, that He and his people were wicked. Secondly,
the elect mourn with a godly sorrow unto repentance not to be repented of, as
we see in the example of the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7. 10: but the reprobate
sorrow with a worldly sorrow that causes death. Thirdly, the elect mourn, but
with some grounds of hope. For they know in the midst of their sorrow, that
their sin is not greater then can be forgiven, unless it be in case of
temptation: they know also that Gods mercy is greater then their sin; and
that the blood of Jesus Christ is able to wash them from all iniquity: and so
by these general grounds at the least in the midst of their sorrow, they
sustain their heart in some degree of hope: but the reprobate mourn as men
quite bereft of all hope, thinking their sins to be greater then can be
forgiven.

And hereby also we may try our selves whether we have sauingly sorrowed for
sin or no. For if we have sorrowed for the sin, as well as for the
punishment; and if we have sorrowed to repentance and amendment; and lastly,
if we have sorrowed in hope, it is a good sign that our sorrow is true.
Otherwise our sorrow is not the true sorrow of the Convert, but rather the
worldly sorrow of the wicked.

The fourth degree whereby regeneration is commonly wrought, is the spiritual
hunger and thirst after righteousness. The convert soul thirsts and pants
after Christ, As the heart brayeth after the rivers of waters. Psalm. 42. 1.
If God would give riches, honors, pleasures, and not Christ, they would be
accounted as dung and dross, Phil. 3. 7. And the child of God thirsts after
Christ, not only in respect of his benefits, and to serve his own turn, but
also out of love to Christ his person, in respect of his excellencies.
Whereupon the Church is said to be sick of love to Christ, Cant. 5. 8. And to
this degree no reprobate in the world attaineth. For to love Christ for
himself, and to love his glorious appearing, is peculiar to the elect, and to
such as shall receive the crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 6.

Secondly, as the true Convert thirsts after Christ, so likewise he longs
after the word and sacraments, as appears by the example of the 3000 in Acts
2. 42. who presently upon their conversion continued in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers.

Now the reprobate and wicked may attain a kind of desire after the word, but
it is either with Eve, merely to get knowledge, or with Simon Magus to make
gain, or with the Pharisee to get a name; or with the carnal Gospellers
amongst the Corinthians, for affectation to the person of him that delivers it.
Or if it be for any taste of sweetness which they find in the word, then that
taste lasts but for a season. As the phantasticke Jews could rejoice in John
Baptists light for a season, Ioh. 5. 35. whereas the true Convert loves the
word for it self, and continues in the study of it, and endeavors to attain
saving grace by it, laboring to bring forth the fruits in holy practice.

The sift degree whereby regeneration Paul so soon as he was converted, he
ceased persecuting Gods Church, Act. 9. The like may be said of Zaccheus and
diverse others. Where we must note, that the reprobate and wicked may abstain
from many sins, as well as the true Convert: as appears by the example of
the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. I thank God I am not as other men, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, etc. But the difference is, the true convert declines from
sin by virtue of the sanctifying Spirit of God; he is washed by the Spirit of
our God, 1. Cor. 6. 10. 11: But the wicked abstaineth only by the restraining
spirit, as we see in the example of Abimelech, Genesis 20. 6. I have kept thee,
etc.

Secondly, the true Convert is content to part with all his sins, even with his
beloved sins, as we see in the example of David, Psalm. 119. 101: I have
refrained my feet from every evil way. But the wicked person is like Herod,
he will not part with his Herodias or darling sin, Mark. 6. 20.

Thirdly, the true Convert forsakes sin for conscience sake, as we see in the
example of Joseph, Genes. 39. How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? whereas the wicked shunneth sin, not for conscience, but either
for fear of men, or for fear of shame, or for fear of hell, or in respect of
saving charges, or the like: as we see in the example of the high Priests, who
would feign have been meddling with Christ, but they did forbear, howbeit not
for conscience sake, but for fear of the people. Mat. 21. 46
Let all Christians examine themselves by these differences, whether their
declining from sin be the right declining or no.

The sixth degree whereby regeneration is wrought and perfected, is, full
assurance of Gods favor. For when the holy Ghost has in some good measure
sanctified the heart, and made it pliable to Gods will in universal obedience,
then it becomes the Spirit of adoption, crying, Abba, Father in our hearts, and
testifying together with our spirits that we are the children of God, Romans 8.
15. 16. Where we must also note, that the very wicked may have a kind of
persuasion of Gods favor toward them, as they seem to have in 1 Thessalonians. 5.
3* which cry Peace and safety. But the difference is; first, the assurance of
the elect is wrought by the Spirit of adoption; but the persuasion of the
wicked is not so, but is wrought rather by Satan which lulleth them asleep.
Secondly, the assurance of the elect has a sure foundation, to wit, the
promises of the Gospel, the mercy of God, and Christ: but the persuasion of
the wicked is grounded upon the sandy foundation of his own merits. Thirdly,
the assurance of the elect breeds an especial care to please God: but the
persuasion of the wicked breeds carnal security and boldness to sin.

4. Point.
The fourth general point propounded concerning this great mystery of
regeneration, is touching the concomitants of this grace. And the concomitants
or things acco^panying this grace of regeneration, are these:

First, an universal change. For there is none truly regenerated, but they are
truly changed, yea universally changed, All things are become 2. Cor. 5. 17
new with them: yea they are changed 2. Cor. 3. 18
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. Where we are to note,
that the very reprobate may also be changed; as we read of Saul, that God gave
1. Sam. 10. 9
him another heart. But the change in the reprobate is far different from the
change wrought in the elect. For the change in the reprobate, is but in common
gifts of the Spirit, as we see in Saul, he was changed only to prophecy, or
to rule; whereas the elect are changed by special and saving gifts, as, to be
regenerate, sauingly to 1. Pet. 1. 23. Phil. 1. 29. 2. Cor. 7. 10.
believe, to repent with repentance never to be repented of, etc. Secondly, the
reprobates are changed but only in part; they are like Ephraim, or as a cake
baked on the one side: but the elect are universally changed, both inwardly and
outwardly; in judgment, will, affections, conscience, conversation, outward
behavior, and the like.

Secondly, the second concomitant of regeneration, is the combat between the
flesh and the spirit. For there is none truly regenerate, but they have a
combat within them. Thus it was with Paul, who found in himself after
regeneration, a law rebelling against the law of his mind, Ro^. 7. 18. Where we
must also note, that the very reprobate may have a kind of reluctation, by
virtue of the light of their natural consciences; as we see in the example of
Pilate, he was loath to condemn Christ, he had a kind of John 19. 12
striving within him, yea he sought to release him. But the difference is, the
reprobate have a striving against sin, either in respect of the shame of sin,
or in respect of the fear of hell fire, or for such like carnal ends; so that
their striving is not the combat of the flesh and the spirit, but the combat of
the flesh and the flesh: whereas the elect have a striving against sin, for
conscience sake, and in love to God. Genesis 39. ^.


Thirdly, the third concomitant of regeneration, is fruitfulness. There be
none truly regenerate, but they are made fruitful. We might instance for the
proof of this point, in the example of Zaccheus, and many other. Where
observe, that the wicked and unregenerate may do many seeming good works, as we
see in the example of the Barbarians, who laded Paul with things necessary,
Acts 28. 10. But the difference is, the reprobate and wicked do many seeming
good Luke 6. 33.
works, either mercenarily to receive the like again, or vaingloriously for the
praise of men, or superstitiously Mat. 23. 5. Isay 58. 5.
with opinion of merit. Whereas the elect do good works unto such as are not
able to requite them, and that in true sincerity and humility, not seeking
their own praise, but Gods glory, confessing when they have done all that they
can, that they are unprofitable servants.

Fourthly, the fourth concomitant of regeneration, is the matter of
persecution. For there is none regenerate to live godly in Christ Jesus, but
they must suffer persecution in one kind or in another, as Paul speaks in 2.
Tim. 3. 9. Where we are also to note, that the very wicked may suffer for their
profession; yea and suffer many things for the truths sake also, as Paul
implies in 1. Cor. 13. 3. that they that are without love, may give their
bodies to be burned: and as we see in the examples of Papists, Arrians, and
other wretched heretics, which sometimes are ready to lay down their lives
for their profession sake. But the difference is in the cause of suffering: for
it is not the suffering, but the cause of suffering, that makes the Martyr. The
wicked and unregenerate suffer commonly for error, and not for the truth; or if
at any time for the truth, then it is not for love of the truth it self, but
for some other byrespect: whereas the elect child of God suffers for the truth
it self, and that in love to the same, and with zeal of Gods glory.

5. Point.
The fifth and last general point propounded concerning the mystery of
regeneration, is concerning the constancy of the same. For we are to know, that
a man or woman being once regenerate, they are for ever regenerate; and being
once made the children of God by adoption, they are for ever the children of
God.

For the proof of this point, I commend unto you these places of Scripture
following:

1. Ioh. 3. 9. His seed remains in him.

1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne again, not of mortal seed.

Romans 11. 29. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

Ioh. 14. 16. The Comforter shall remain with you for ever.

Romans 11. 1. Has God cast away his people? God forbid.

Psalm. 37. 28. The Lord forsakes not his Saints.

By all which places, and many other, it is manifest that they which are once
effectually called, and truly regenerate, and have received the Spirit of
adoption, they are for ever the children of God.

Reason 1.
And the reason is, first, because God is constant, both in his decree, for the
foundation of God remains sure, having 2. Tim. 2. 19
this seal, The Lord knows who are his; and in his love, for whom he loves,
he loves to the end, Ioh. 13. 1.

Reason 2.
Secondly, because God has promised that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against his Church, Math. 16. 18. and Gods promises are Yea and Amen, as we
know.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, because God is able to preserve his children to the end: He is
stronger then all, and none is able to pluck the weakest babe in Christ out
Ioh. 10. ^9.
of the hands of the blessed Father.

Objection.
And if any Papist or Arminian shall object the examples of Judas or Demas, or
the stony ground; or of many Professors that turn carnal, etc. To this I
answer, that those that finally and totally fall away from the truth, They were
never of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us, 1.
Ioh. 2. 19. These might possibly receive certain common gifts of the Spirit,
as to be enlightened, etc. but they never were truly regenerate.

Answ.
We do not deny but the true child of God may be much weakened concerning the
degree of true saving grace which formerly he has felt: which comes to pass
either by the neglect of the public and private means of salvation, or with
David by relapse into sin: but to fall totally from all saving grace, or
finally without any recovery, this we confidently deny, according to that in
Micha 7. 8. Rejoice not against me, o mine enemy: for though I fall, I shall
arise, etc.

Thus I have passed through the five necessary points concerning regeneration;
and have first showed unto you the necessity, secondly the means, thirdly the
degrees, fourthly the concomitants, fifthly the constancy of this famous work
of regeneration. Fan your selves by that which has been spoken; consider
what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

For why will ye die, o house of Israel?
Now I come to the last part of the text, which is the expostulation or reason:
Why will ye die? From whence I observe, that Man's destruction is of 3. Doctrine.
himself. For else why should God expostulate with his Church in this place?
Why will ye die?

For the proof of which point, take these places following:

Hos. 13. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self; but thy help is of me.

Prou. 6. 32. He that commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding:
he that does it, destroys his own soul.

Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in
thy sight: that thou might be just when thou speak, and pure when thou
iudgest.

1. Reason.
And it must needs be, that destruction is of a man's self, and not of God;
first, because God created man perfect at the first, and gave him free will to
stand if he would; and man having free will in Adam to stand, yet willingly and
wilfully eat of the forbidden fruit, and lost both himself and his
posterity, and the freedom of his will.

2. Reason.
Secondly, destruction must needs be of a man's self, and not of God, because
God has sent a sufficient redemption by the means of his own Son; and has
commanded it to be Mark. 16. 15
preached to every creature: yea he has commanded us to believe in Christ,
whom he has sent, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. And therefore if when a pardon is offered, we
wilfully refuse it, then our destruction is of our selves.

3. Reason.
Thirdly, God has given unto us a most powerful word, yea a word which is
able to save our souls, I am. 1. 21; and therefore if we neglect or despise so
great salvation, the blood is upon our own heads.

4. Reason.
Fourthly, God gives sufficient warning, by his threatenings out of the word,
and by his just judgments showed upon others: and therefore if we will take no
warning, neither by threats, nor by judgments, nor by signs from heaven, we
shall worthily perish without mercy.

5. Reason.
Fifthly, God gives unto man sufficient time of repentance; as he gave unto the
old world in the days of Noah, an hundred and twenty years, Genesis 6. 3. And
therefore if with cursed Iesabel we have time given to repent, and repent not,
we shall justly perish with her, Reu. 2. 21. 22.

6. Reason.
Sixthly, what could have been done more unto the vineyard of our souls, then
what has been done? Isa. 5. 4. And therefore if after all digging, and
dunging, and pruning, we remain still barren, we shall justly be hewne down,
and cast into the fire.

Objection.
But what say you then to these places of Scripture, which manifestly confirm
the doctrine of reprobatio^?

Romans 9. 11. 12. 13. For the children being not yet borne, neither having done
any good nor evil: it was said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

Jude 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation.

Ier. 6. 30. Reprobate silver shall men call them: for the Lord has rejected
them.

Answer.
We acknowledge the truth of these holy places; we acknowledge also the truth
of the doctrine of reprobation, to wit, that God as the mighty Potter, having
absolute authority of the lump of mankind, has made some vessels to honor,
and some to dishonor; and that of his own free will, for the declaring of his
power, and manifesting of his justice, Romans 9. 23.

But here it is carefully to be observed, that howsoever a man's reprobation be
of God, yet his destruction is of himself; and that for these reasons:

First, because howsoever God in his justice and wisdom does reprobate many,
and that before the foundation of the world was cast; yet he throws no man
nor woman, young nor old into hell, before they come to their personal
appearance before Christ, and be found guilty at the bar of Gods judgment
seat, of sin either actual, or at the least original, 2. Cor. 5. 10.

Secondly, though God do reprobate men and women, yet he does not tempt or
enforce any man or woman to sin for the accomplishing of his own decree. For
God tempts no man; as James speaks in his first Chap. v. 13. And it were
hellish blasphemy to affirm, that God were in any sort the author of sin.

2 Objection.
If destruction be of a man's self, then it seems that he has free will to
be saved if he will, contrary unto that which was delivered before.

Answer.
Man indeed in Adam had once free will, as well as he had the lively image of
God; but now having lost it, he may justly be condemned for the loss of it:
and now he has no further will unto good then he is moved by Gods Spirit; nor
further power against evil, then he is preserved by the power of God through
faith.

3. Objection
Yea but it might seem still, that a man's destruction is of God, because he
does not restrain men from sin, nor prevent them with his grace. For is not he
guilty of a child's death, that sees it run toward a pit, and stays it not,
when there is power in his hand to do it?

Answer.
We must not measure God who is above the Law, by man under the Law. A man in
this case is indeed guilty, because he is bound by the Law to save life if he
can; but God is a free worker, it is in him to have mercy on whom he will; it
is also lawful Romans 9.
for him to do what he will with Math. 20.
his own, for he is bound to no man.

1. Use.
Considering therefore that a man's and woman's destruction is of themselves, this
shows what spiteful enemies we are to our selves. We make our selves liable
to Gods wrath, we bring upon our selves judgments in this world, we wilfully
lose heaven, and the comfortable presence of God, and Christ, and of blessed
Saints and Angels; yea we purchase to our selves eternal torment in hell fire
with the devil and his angels, in that horrible dark and deep pit which the
devils themselves do tremble to think upon. O consider this all ye that forget
God, and which sport and delight your selves in your sinful courses, which
drink iniquity as the Ox drinks water, which drink I say, and are never
satisfied: O why will ye die, ye poor house of Israel?

2* Use.
Let all good Christians learn, that as the wicked and ungodly do diligently
work out their own damnation, so to be careful on the contrary to work out
their salvation; and this they shall do by the power of God, and not by their
own power, or by any thing in themselves.

First, if they be careful to use all the means which God has appointed for
the working of saving faith, and the nourishing of the same in their hearts.

Secondly, if they labor in all the parts of repentance, if they daily examine
themselves, if they daily humble their souls for their sins, if they daily
labor for mortification, and if they endeavor to serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their lives.

And for this purpose take these few directions: Let every Christian which
desires to grow in grace be careful of Gods public ordinances. Let them
hear Gods word with Marie, acknowledging that to be the Luke 10. 41.
better part; but let them not under that pretense quite cast off their
particular lawful callings, and so live inordinately, contrary to the rule of
the Apostle in 2. These. 3. 12. Now them that are such, we command and exhort by
our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own
bread. And concerning the right hearing of Gods word, take these rules, before
thou repairest to Gods house. First, prepare thy self with repentance, and
with an hearty purpose of amendment of life. For otherwise if thou come to
Gods house with thine hands full of blood, God may justly say unto thee: What
have thou to do, to tread within my Courts? Isaiah 1. 12. Secondly, prepare thy
self by reading some part of Gods word, according to the example of the
Eunuch, Act. 8. 30. who was well prepared to hear Philip preach, when he had
prepared himself first by reading the Prophet Isaiah. Thirdly, prepare thy
self for public hearing by private prayer, praying for thy self, for the
Minister, and for the Congregation: beseeching God of his mercy to open unto
Ephesians. 6. 19.
the Minister the door of utterance, and to thy self and the rest of the Acts
14. 27.
Congregation the door of faith. Fourthly, repair unto Gods house with an
honest heart, not to see fashions, not to carpe at the Minister, not upon
custom, not to be noted to be religious, nor for fear of ma^s law: but go with
a true desire to worship God, and to reap to thy own soul eternal benefit;
according to the example of the Church in Isay. 2. 3: which says, Come, let us
go up to the house of the Lord: he will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths.

Fifthly, when thou art come to the Church, hearken with all diligence and
reverence to Gods word, according to the example of Lydia, who attended to the
doctrine of Paul, and Acts 16. 14.
was converted. Beware of gazing in the time of Gods ordinance, lest Satan tempt
thee. Beware of sleeping in the Congregation, lest God show his judgment and
execute his vengeance upon thee, as he did upon Eutychus. Acts 20. 9.
Take heed of praying and reading other matters in the sermon time, when thou
should attend unto the preaching, lest thou offer the Eccles. 5. 1.
sacrifice of fools. Remember that there is a time for all things, and every
Eccles. 3. 1.
thing ought to be done in its fit time and season. Sixthly, after thou have
heard the word, meditate thoroughly of the points delivered, lest Satan come and
steal the good seed out of thine heart; examine thy self by that which was
preached; and if thou find thy self rebuked for sin, let that rebuke
prevail with thee to repentance and amendment.

Also when thou have heard Gods word, mark the directions, and practice them:
For, not the hearers but the doers of the Law are just before God, Romans 2. 13.
And concerning the promises, apply them to thy self if thou find thy self
capable, that is, if thou endeuourest to keep the condition of them: and
indeed the word will profit thee nothing, unless thou have faith to apply it,
Heb. 4. 2.

Secondly, that thou may work out thine own salvation, be careful
frequently and often to be partaker with Gods Church of the Lords Supper. For
the Sacrament worthily John 6. 55.
received is meat indeed, and drink indeed. Thou must not think it sufficient
to receive the Sacrament once or twice by the year, but think it an especial
favor of God if thou may receive it often; always provided that thou be
prepared thereunto, with knowledge, faith, repentance, and charity.

Thirdly, be careful also of private duties, read the Canonical Scriptures
diligently: refresh thy soul morning and evening with some Chapter of Gods
word. The King himself is not exempted from this holy duty, but the Lord would
have his word to be with him, that he might read therein all the days of his
life, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. And concerning reading Gods word in private, observe these
directions if thou would profit. First, lift up thine heart by prayer
before thou read. Secondly, read with diligent heed, according to that of
Math. 24. 15. Let him that reads, consider it. Desire not to read fast, but
sure. Also examine thy self by that which thou read; and ruminate or
meditate, that thou may extract nourishment and comfort out of that which
thou read. Thirdly, read the word in order, not here a Chapter and there a
Chapter; but begin at the beginning of a book, and leave it not off until by
degrees thou have passed through it. Fourthly, if thou read a difficult
place, take diligent notice of it, that thou may ask the judgment of
others, especially of Gods Ministers, concerning the meaning.

Fourthly, if thou desire to work out thine own salvation, and not wilfully
to run upon thine own destruction, be diligent of private prayer. If thou
be a master of a family, pray with thy family, and instruct it, that thou
and thine house may serve the Lord: according to the example of Joshua, in the
last chapter of that book, the 15 verse. Let every one also in the family pray
apart and in secret, according to the examples of David and Daniel, which made
conscience to pray constantly thrice every day, to wit, morning, evening, and
at noone, Psalm. 55. 17. Dan. 6. 10.

Fifthly and lastly, if thou desire to work out thy salvation, walk worthy
of thy holy calling whereunto thou art called. Let thy conversation be
answerable to thy profession: endeavor to live holily toward God, righteously
toward men, and soberly concerning thy self. Thus thou shall glorify God,
adorn the Gospel of Christ, and purchase to thy self through Gods free
mercy and Christ's merits, an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, which
fades not away, reserved in heaven for thee. Unto the which glorious
inheritance, he bring us which has so dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ the
righteous; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three glorious persons,
but one God, be ascribed, as most due, all honor and glory, from this time
forth unto all eternity. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

