VVEST-VVARD HOE. As it has been diverse times Acted by the Children of Paul's.

Written by Tho: Decker, and John Webster.

Printed at London, and to be sold by John Hodget^ dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard. 1607.

VVEST-VVARD HOE
SCAENE LONDON,
Actus Primus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Mistress Birdlime and Taylour. BIrdlime. Stay Taylour, This is the House,
pray thee look the gown be not rufled: as for the Jewels and Precious Stones,
I know where to find them ready presently. She that must wear this gown if
she will receive it, is Master Iustinianos wife (the Italian Merchant) my good
old Lord and Master, that has been a Tylter this twenty year, has sent it.
Mum Tailor, you are a kind of Bawd. Tailor, if this Gentlewomans Husband
should chance to be in the way now, you shall tell him that I keep a
Hot-house in Gunpowder Ally (near crouched Friars) and that I have brought
home his wives foul Linen, and to color my knavery the better, I have here
three or four kinds of complexion, which I will make show of to sell unto
her: the young Gentlewoman has a good City wit, I can tell you, she has red
in the Italian Courtyer, that it is a special ornament to gentlewomen to have
skill in painting.


Taylour. Is my Lord acquainted with her?


Bird. O, I.


Tailor. Faith Mistress Birdlime I do not commend my Lords choice so well: now
me thinks he were better to set up a Dairy, and to keep half a score of
lusty wholesome honest Country Wenches.


Bird. Honest Coun^rey Wenches, in what hundred shall a man find two of that
simple virtue?


Tay. Or to love some Lady, there were equality and coherence.


Bir. Tailor, you talk like an ass, I tell thee there is equality enough
between a Lady and a City dame, if their hair be but of a color: name you
any one thing that your citizens wi^e coms sho^t of to your Lady. They have as
pure Linen, as choice painting, lou^ green Greese in spring, Mallard and
Teale in the fall, and Woodcocke in winter. Your Citizens wife learnes nothing
but fopperies of your Lady, but your Lady or Iustice-a-peace Madam, carries
high wit from the City, namely, to receive all and pay all: to awe their
Husbands, to check their Husbands, to control their husbands; nay, they have
the trick ont to be sick for a new gown, or a Carcanet, or a Diamond, or so:
and I wist this is better wit, then to l^ar^e how to wear a Scotch
Farthingale: nay more.

Enter Prentise. Here comes one of the servants: you remember Tailor that I am
deaf: observe that.


Tailor. I thou art in that like one of our young ^ull^s, that will not
understand any wrong is done him, because he dares not answer it.


Bird. By your leave Batcheller: is the gentlewoman your Mi^tris stirring?


Prent. Yes she is moving.


Bird. What says he?


Tailor. She is up.


Bird. Where Is the Gentleman your Master, pray you?


Pr. Where many women desire to have their husbands, abroad.


Bird. I am very thick of hearing.


Prent. Why abroad? you smell of the Bawd.


Bird. I pray you tell her here is an old Gentlewoman would speak with her.


Prent. So.


Tay. What, will you be deaf to the gentlewoman when she comes to?


Bird. O no, she is acquainted well enough with my kn^uery.

En^^r the Merchants Wi^e. She comes.

How do you sweet Lady?


Ma. Wife. Lady.


Bird. By Gods me I hope to call you Lady ear you dye, what mistress do you
sleep well on nights.


M. Wife. Sleep, Ias quietly as a Clyent having great business with Lawyers.


Bir. Come, I am come to you about the old suit: my good Lord and master has
sent you a velvet gown h^are: do you like the color? three p^le, a pretty
fantastical trimming, I would God you would say it by my troth. I dreamt last
night, you looked so prettily, so sweetly, me thought so like the wisest Lady of
them al, in a velvet gown.


M. Wife. What Is the forepart?


Bird. A very pretty stuff, I know not the name of your forepart, but it is of a
hair color.


M. Wife. That it was my hard fortune, being so well brought up, having so
great a portion to my marriage, to match so unluckily? Why my husband and his
whole credit is not worth my apparel, well, I shall undergo a strange repo^t
in leaving my husband.


Bird. Tush, if you respect your credit, never think of that, for beauty
couets tich appatell, ^hoyce diet, excellent Physic, ^o German Clock no
Mathematical Ingin: whatsoever requires so much reparation as a woman's face,
and what means has your Husband to allow sweet Docter Glister-pipe, his
pention. I have heard that you have threescore Smocks, that co^t three pounds
a Smock, will these smockes ever hold out with your husband? no, your linen
and your apparel must turn over a new^lease* I can tell you.


Tay. O admirable Bawd? O excellent Birdline?


Bird. I have heard he loved you before you were ma^ryed intyrely, what of
that? I have ever found it most true in mine own experyenc^, that they which
are most violent dotards before their marryage are most voluntary Coucouldes
after. Many are honest, either because they have not wist, or because they
have* not opportunity to be dishonest, and this Italian your Husbands
Countryman, holds it impo^^ible any of their Ladies should be excellent witty,
and not make the uttermost use of their beauty, will you be a fool then?


M. Wife Thou do persuade me to Ill, very well.


Bird. You are nice and p^euish, how long will you hold out think you? not so
long as Ostend. Enter Iustiniano the Merchant. 'Passion of me, your husband?
Remember that I am deaf, and that I come to sell you complexion: truly
Mi^tris I will deal very reasonably with you.


Just. What are you? Say ye?


Bird. I forsooth.


Just. What my most happy wife?


Ma. Wife Why your I^aliousie?


Just. Iealiousie: in faith I do not fear to loose that I have lost already:
What are you?


Bird. Please your good worship I am a poor Gentlewoman, that cast away my
self upon an unthrifty Captain, that lives now in Ireland, I am ^aine to
pick out a poor living with selling complexion, to keep the frailty (as they
say) honest.


Iusti. What Is he? complexion to? you are a bawd.


Bird. I thank your good worship for it.


Just. Do not I know these tricks,
That which thou make a color for thy sin,
Has been thy first undoing? painting, painting.

Bird. I have of all sorts forsooth? Here is the burned powder of a Hogs
Iaw-bone, to be laid with the Oil of white Poppy, an excellen^ ^^cus to kill
Morphew, weed out Freckles, and a most excellent groundwork for painting;
Here is Ginimo^y likewise burnt, and puluerized, to be mingled with the juice
of Lymmons, sublimate Mercury, and two spoonefuls of the flowers of Brimstone,
a most excellent receite to cure the flushing in the face.


Iusti. Do you hear, if you have any business to dispatch with that deaf
goodness there, pray you take leave: opportunity, that which most of you long
for (though you never be with Child) opportunity? I Will find some idle business
in the mean time, I will, I will in truth, you shall not need fear me, or you
may speak French, most of your kinds can understand French: god buy you. Being
certain thou art false: sleep, sleep my brain, for doubt was only that,
which fed my pain.

Exit Just.
Ma. Wife. You see what a hell I live in, I am resolved to leave him.


Bird. O the most fortunat Gentlewoman, that will be so wise, and so, so
provident, the Caroche shall come.


M. Wife. At what hour?


Bird. Just when women and vintners are a cuni^ring at midnight. O the
entertainment my Lord will make you, sweet Wines, lusty diet, perfumed linen,
soft beds, O most fortunat Gentlewoman.


Enter Iustiniano. Just. Have you done? have you dispatch? it is well, and in
troth what was the motion?


M. Wife. Motion, what motion?


Iusti. Motion, why like the motion in law, that stays for a day of hearing,
yours for a night of hearing. Come lets not have Apri^l in your eyes I pray
you, it shows a wanton month follows your weeping? Love a woman for her
tea^es? Let a man love Oist^rs for their water, for women though they should
weep ^cour enough to serve a Dyer, or a Brewer, yet they may be as stale as
Wenches, that travail every second tide between Graves end, and Billingsga^e.


Ma. Wife. This madness shows very well.


Just. Why look you, I am wondrous merry, can any man discern by my face,
that I am a Cuckold? I have known many suspected for men of this misfortune;
when they have walked through the streets, wear their hats ore their
eyebrows, like pollitick pen^houses, which commonly make the shop of a
Mercer, or a Linen Draper, as dark as a room in Bedlam. His cloak shrouding
his face, as if he were a Neopolitan that had lost his beard in April, and if
he wa'k through the street, or any other narrow read (as it is rate to meet a
Cuckold) he duckes at the penthouses, like an Ancient that dares not flourish
at the oath taking of the Praetor, for fear of the signe-posts? Wife, wife, do
I any of these? Come what news from his Lordship? has not his Lordships virtue
once gone against the hair, and coueted corners.


M. Wife. Sir, by my soul I will be plain with you.


Just. Except the forehead dear wife, except the forehead.


Ma. Wife. The Gentleman you spoke of has often solicited my love, and has
received from me most chaste denials.


Just. I, I, provoking resistance, it is as if you come to buy wares in the
City, bid money fort, your Mercer, or Goldsmiths says, truly I cannot take
it, lets his customer pass his stall; next, nay perhaps two, or three, but if
he find he is not prone to return of himself, he calls him back, and back,
and takes his money: so you my dear wife, (O the policy of women, and
Tradsmen: they will bite at any thing.)


M. Wife. What would you have me do? all your plate and most part of your
Jewels are at pawn, besides I hear you have made over all your esta^e to men
in the Town here? What would you have me do? would you have me turn common
sinner, or sell my apparel to my wastcoat and become a Landresse?


Just. No Landresse dear wife, though your credit would go far with
Gentlemen for taking up of Linen: no Landresse?


M. Wife. Come, come, I will speak as my misfortune prompts me, Iealiousie
has undone many a Citizen, it has undone you, and me. You married me from
the ^eruice of an honorable Lady, and you knew what matches I might have had,
what would you have me to do? I would I had never seen your eyes, your eyes.


Just. Very good, very good.


M. Wife. Your prodigality, your diceing, your riding abroad, your consorting
your self with Noble men, your building a summer house has undone us, has
undone us? What would you have me do?


Iusti. Any thing: I have sold my House, and the wares int? I am going for
Stoad next tide, what will you do now wife?


Ma. Wife. Have you indeed?


Just. I by this light als one, I have done as some Citizens at thirty, and
most heirs at three and twenty, made all away, why do you not ask me now
what you shall do?


Ma. Wife. I have no counsel in your voiag^, neither shall you have any in
mine.


Just. To his Lordship: will you not wife?


Ma. Wif. Even whether my misfortune leads me.


Iusti. Go, no longer will I make my care thy prison.


M. Wife. O my fate; well sir, you shall answer for this sin which you force
me to; fare you well, let not the world condemn me, if I seek for mine own
maintenance.


Just. So, so.


M. Wife. Do not send me any letters; do not seek any reconcilement. By this
light I Will receive none, if you will send me my apparel so, if not choose, I
hope we shall neare-meete more.

Exit Ma. Wife.
Iusti. So, farewell the acquaintance of all the mad Devils that haunt
Iealiousie, why should a man be such an ass to play the antic for his wives
appetite? Immagine that I, or any other great man have on a velvet Nightcap,
and put case that this nightcap be to little for my ears or forehead, can any
man tell me where my Nightcap wringes me, except I besuch an ass to
proclaim it; Well, I do play the fool with my misfortune very hand somly. I
am glad that I am certain of my wives dishonesty; for a secret strumpet, is
like mines prepared to ruin goodly buildings. Farewell my care, I have told my
wife I am going for Stoad; that's not my course, for I resolve to take some
shape upon me, and to live disguised here in the City; they say for one
Cuckolde to know that his friend is in the like head-ake, and to give him
counsel, is as if there were two partners, the one to be arrested, the other
to bail him: my estate is made oue^ to. My friends, that do verily believe, I
mean to leave England. Have amongst you City dames? You that are indeed the
fittest, and most proper persons for a Comedy, nor let the world lay any
imputation upon my disguise, for Court, City, and Country, are merely as
maskes one to the other, envied of some, laughed at of others, and so to my
comicall business.

Exit Iustinian^.
Enter Master Tenter^ooke, his Wife, Master Monopoly, a Scri^ener and a
Casheire. Ten. Moll.


Moll. What would heart?


Tenter. Where Is my Casheire, are the sums right? Are the bonds sealed?


Servant. Yea sir.


Tent. Will you have the bags sealed?


Mono. O no sir, I must disburs instantly* we that be Courtyers have more
plac^s to send money to, then the devil has to send his spirits: there is a
great deal of light gold.


Tent. O sir, twill away in play, and you will stay till to morrow you shall
have it all in new sovereigns.


Money. No, in-troth it is no matter, twill a way in play, let me see the bond?
let me see when this money is to be paid? the tenth of August. The first day
that I must tender this money, is the first of Dog-daies.


Scriue. I fear twill be hot staying for you in London then.


Tent. Scriuener, take home the bond with you. Will you stay to dinner sir?
Have you any Partridge Moll?


Moll. No in-troth heart, but an excellent pickeld Goose, a new service: pray
you stay.


Mono. Sooth I cannot: by this light I am so infinitely, so vnboundably
beholding to you?


Tent. Well Signior, I Will leave you; My cloak there?


Moll. When will you come home heart?


Tent. In Troth self I know not, a friend of yours and mine has broke.


Moll. Who sir?


Tent. Master Iustini^no the Italian.


Moll. Broke sir.


Tent. Yea sooth, I was offered forty yesterday upon the Exchange, to assure a
hundred.


Mol. By my troth I am sorry.


Tent. And his wife is gone to the party.


Mol. Gone to the party? O wicked creature?


Tent. Farewell good master Monopoly, I pre-thee visit me of^n.

Exit Tenter.
Mono. Little Moll, send away the fellow?


Mol. Phill. Phillip.


Servant. Here forsooth.


Moll. Go into Bucklers-bury and fetch me two ounces of preserved Melounes,
look there be no Tobacco taken in the shop when he weighes it.


Ser. I forsooth.


Mono. What do you eat preserved Melonnes for Moll?


Mol. In Troth for the shaking of the heart, I have here sometime such a
shaking, and downwards such a kind of earthquake (as it were.)


Mono. Do you hear, let your man carry home my money to the ordinary, and lay
it in my Chamber, but let him not tell my host that it is money: I owe him but
forty pound, and the Rogue is hasty, he will follow me when he thinks I have
money, and pry into me as Crows perch upon Carrion, and when he has found it
out, prey upon me as Heraldes do upon Funerals.


Mol. Come, come, you owe much money in Town: when you have forfeited your
bond, I shall near see you more?


Mono. You are a Monky, I Will pay him for's day: I Will see you tomorrow to.


Moll. By my troth I love you very honestly, you were never the gentleman
offered any vnciuility to me, which is strange methinks in one that comes from
beyond Seas, would I had given a Thousand pound I could not love thee so.


Mono. Do you hear, you shall feign some scuruy disease or other, and go to
the Bath next spring, Enter Mistress Honisuckle, and Mistress Wafer. I Will meet
you there.


Honey. By your leave sweet mistress Tenterhooke.


Mol. O, how do partner?


Mono. Gentlewomen I stayed for a most happy wind, and now the (...) your
sweet, sweet lips, should set me going: good mistress Honisuckle; good mistress
Wafer, good mistress Tenterhooke, I will pray for you, that neither riuallshippe
in loves, pureness of painting, or riding out of town, not acquainting each
other withit, be a cause your sweet beautyes do fall out, and rail one upon
another.


Wafer. Rail sir, we do not use to rail.


Mono. Why mistress, railing is your mother tongue as well as lying.


Honey. But, do you think we can fall out?


Mono. In troth beauties (as one spoke seriously) that there was no inheritance
in the amity of Princes, so think I of Women, too often interviewes amongst
women, as amongst Princes, breeds envy often to others fortune, there is only in
the amity of women an estate for will, and every puny knows that is no
certain inheritance.


Wafer. You are merry sir.


Mono. So may I leave you most fortunat gentlewoman.

Exit.
Moll. Love shoots hear.


Waf. Tenterhooke, what Gentleman is that gone out, is he a man?


Honey. O God and an excellent Trumpetter, He came lately from the university,
and loves City dames only for their victuals, he has an excellent trick to
keep Lobsters and Crabs sweet in summer, and calls it a devise to prolong the
days of shel-fish, for which I do suspect he has been Clarke to some
Noblemans kitchen. I have heard he never loves any Wench, tell she be as
stale as Frenchmen eat their wild foul, I shall anger her.


Mol. How stale good Mistress nimble-wit?


Honey. Why as stale as a Country Ostes, an Exchange Sempster, or a Court
Landresse.


Mol. He is your consin, how your tongue runs?


Honey. Talk and make a noise, no matter to what purpose, I have learned that
with going to puritan Lectures. I was yesterday at a banquet, will you discharge
my ruffes of some wafers, and how does thy husband Wafer?


Waf. Faith very well.


Honey. He is just like a Torch bearer to Maskers, he wears good clothes, and
is rankt in good company, but he does nothing: thou art feign to take al, and
pay all.


Mol. The more happy she, would I could make such an ass of my husband to. I
hear say he breeds thy child in his teeth every year.


Waf. In faith he does.


Honey. By my troth it is pity but the fool should have the other two pains
incident to the head.


Waf. What are they?


Honey. Why the head-ake and horne-ake. I heard say that he would have had thee
nursed thy Child thy self to.


Waf. That he would truly.


Honr. Why there is the policy of husbands to keep their Wines in. I do assure
you if a Woman of any markeable face in the World give her Child suck,
look how many wrinckles be in the Nipple of her breast, so many will be in
her forheade by that time twelve month: but sir, we are come to acquaint
thee with an excellent secret: we two learn to write.


Mol. To write?


Honey. Yes believe it, and we have the finest School master, a kind of
Precision, and yet an honest knave to: by my troth if thou be a good wench
let him teach thee, thou may send him of any arrant, and trust him with any
secret; nay, to see how demurely he will bear himself before our husbands,
and how iocand when their backs are turned.


Mol. For Gods love let me see him.


Waf. To morrow we will send him to thee: til then sweet Tenterhook we leave
thee, wishing thou may have the fortune to change thy name often.


Mol. How? change my name?


Waf. I, for thieves and widows love to shift many names, and make sweet use
of it to.


Mol. O you are a wag indeed. Good Wafer remember my school master. Farewell
good Hon^suckle.


Honey. Farewell Tenterhooke.


Exeu^^. Actus Secundus
Scaena Prima.
Enter Boniface a prentice brushing his Masters cloak and Cappe. singing
Enter Master Honisuckle in his nightcap trussing himself. Honey. Beniface,
make an end of my cloak and Cap.


Bon. I have dispatch em Sir: both of them lie flat at your mercy.


Honey. Fore-god me thinks my joints are nimbler every Morning since I came
over then they were before. In France when I rise, I was so stiff, and so
stark, I would ha sworn my Legs had been wodden pegs: a Constable new chosen
kept not such a peripateticall gate: But now I Am as Lymber as an Antiant that
has flourisht in the rain, and as Active as a Norfolk tumbler.


Bon. You may see, what change of pasture is able to do.


Honey. It makes fat Calves in Rumny Marsh, and lean knaves in London:
therefore Boniface keep your ground: Gods my pity, my forehead has more
cromples, then the back part of a counselors gown, when another rides upon
his neck at the bar: Boniface take my helmet: give your mistress my
nightcap. Are my Antlers swollen so big that my biggen pinches my brows. So,
request her to make my headpiece a little wyder.


Bon. How much wider sir.


Honey. I can allow her almost an y^ch: go, tell her so, very near an inch.


Bon. If she be a right Citizens wife, now her Husband has given her an inch,
she will take an ell, or a yard at least.

Exit.
Enter Signior Iustiniano the Merchant, like a writing Mecanicall Pedant. Honey.
Master Parenthesis! Salve, Salve Domine.


Iusti. Salve tu quoque Iubeo te saluere plurimum.


Hon. No more Plurimums if you love me, lattin whole-meate^ are now minced,
and serude in for English Gallimafries: Let us therefore cut out our vplandish
Neates tongues, and talk like regenerate Britains.


Just. Your worship is welcome to England: I powrd out Orisons for your
arrival.


Honey. Thanks good master Parenthesis: and Que nouelles: what news flutters
abroad? do Iack-dawes dung the top of Paul's Steeple still.


Iusti. The more is the pity, if any dawes do come into the temple, as I fear
they do.


Honey. They say Charing-crosse is falue down, since I went to Rochell: but
that's no such wonder, it was old, and stood awry (as most part of the world can
tell.) And tho it lack vnder-propping, yet (like great fellows at a wrestling)
when their heels are once flying up, no man will save em; down they fall,
and there let them lie, tho they were bigger then the Guard: Charing-crosse was
old, and old things must shrink as well as new Northern cloth.


Just. Your worship is in the right way verily: they must so, but a number of
better things between Westminster bridge and temple bar both of a
worshipful, and honorable erection, are fallen to decay, and have suffered
putrefaction, since Charing fell, that were not of half so long standing as
the poor wry-neckt Monument.


Honey. Whose within there? One of you call up your mistress! tell her heeres her
writing Schoolmaster. I had not thought master Parenthesis you had bin such an
early stirrer.


Iusti. Sir, your vulgar and foure-peny-pen-men, that like your London
Sempsters keep open shop, and sell learning by retaile, may keep their beds,
and lie at their pleasure: But we that edify in private, and traffic by whole
sale, must be up with the lark, because like Country Atturnies, we are to
shuffle up many matters in a for-enoone. Certes master Honisuckle, I would
sing Laus Deo, so I may but please al those that come under my fingers: for it
is my duty and function, Perdy, to be fervent in my vocation.


Ho. Your hand: I am glad our City has so good, so necessary, and so laborious
a member in it: we lack painful and expert penmen amongst us. Master
Parenthesis you teach many of our Merchants sir, do you not?


Just. Both Wives, Maids, and Daughters: and I thank God, the very worst of
them lie by very good men's sides: I pick out a poor living amongst em, and I
am thankful for it.


Ho. Trust me I am not sorry: how long have you exercizd this quality?


Just. Come Michaell-tide next, this thirteen year.


Ho. And how does my wife profit under you sir? hope you to do any any good
upon her.


Just. Master Honisuckle I am in great hope she shall fructify: I will do my
best for my part: I can do no more then another man can.


Honey. Pray sir ply her, for she is capable of any thing.


Just. So far as my poor tallent can stretch, It shall not be hidden from her.


Honey. Does she hold her pen well yet?


Iusti. She leanes somewhat too hard upon herpen yet sir, but practice and
animaduersion will break her from that.


Honey. Then she grubs her pen.


Iusti. Its but my pains to mend the neb again.


Honey. And where abouts is she now master Parenthesis? She was talking of
you this morning, and commending you in her bed, and told me she was past her
letters.


Just. Truly sir she took her letters very suddenly: and is now in her Minoms.


Honey. I would she were in her Crotchets too master Parenthesis: ha-ha, I must
talk merrily sir.


Iusti. Sir so long as your mirth be void of all Squirrility, it is not unfit
for your calling: I trust ere few days be at an end to have her fall to her
joining: for she has her letters ad vnguem: her A. her great B. and her great
C. very right D. and E. dilicate: her double F. of a good length, but that it
straddels a little to wide: at the G. very cunning.


Honey. Her H. is full like mine: a goodly big H.


Iusti. But her: double LL is well: her O. of a reasonable Size: at her p. and
q. neither Marchantes Daughter, Aldermans Wife, young country Gentlewoman, nor
Courtiers Mistress, can match her.


Honey. And how herv.


Just. You sir, She fetches up you best of al: her single you she ca^ fashion
two or three ways: but her double you, is as I would wish it.


Ho. And faith who takes it faster; my wife, or mistress Tenterhook?


Just. Oh! Your wife by ods: she will take more in one hour, then I can fasten
either upon mistress Tenterbooke, or mistress Wafer, or Mistress Flapdragon (the
Brewers wife) in three.


Enter Iudyth, Honysuckle his wife. Honey. Do not thy cheeks burn sweet
chuckaby, for we are talking of thee.


Iud. No goodness I warrant: you have few Citizens speak well of their wives
behind their backs: but to their faces thei^e cog worse and be more suppliant,
then Clyents that sue in forma paper: how does my master? troth I am a very
trewant: have you your Ruler about you master? for look you, I go clean awry.


Iusti. A small fault: most of my scholars do so: look you sir, do not you
think your wife will mend: mark her dashes, and her strokes, and her
breakings, and her bendings?


Honey. She knows what I have promised her if she do mende: ^ay by my fay
Jude, this is well, if you would not fly out thus, but keep your line.


Iud. I shall in time when my hand is in: have you a new pen for me Master,
for by my truly, my old one is stark naught, and will cast no inck: whether are
you going lamb?


Honey. To the Custom House: to the Change, to my VVarehouse, to diverse places.


Iud. Good Cole tarry not past eleven, for you turn my stomak then from my
dinner.


Honey. I will make more have home, then a Stipendary Swizzer does after he is
paid, fare you well Master Parenthesis.


Iud. I am so troubled with the rheum too: Mouse what is good fort?


Honey. How often have I told you, you must get a patch. I must hence.

Exit.
Iud. I think when als done I must follow his counsel, and take a patch, I
have had one long ere this, but for disfiguring my face: yet I had noted that a
masticke patch upon some women's Temples, has bin the very rhe^wme of beauty.


Just. Is he departed? Is old Nestor marched into Troy?


Iud. Yes you mad Greek: the Gentleman's gone.


Just. Why then clap up coppy-bookes: down with pens, hang up inckhornes, and
now my sweet Honisuckle, see what goldenwinged Be from Hybla, flies humming,
with Crura thymo plena, which he will empty in the Hiue of your bosom.


Iud. From whom.


Just. At the skirte of that sheet in black work is wrought his name, break
not up the wildfoule, till anon, and then feed upon him in private: there is
other irons in the fire: more sackes are coming to the Mill, O you sweet
temptations of the sons of Adam, I commend you, extol you, magnify you:
Were I a Poet by Hipocrene I swear, (which was a certain Well where all the
Muses watered) and by Pernassus eke I swear, I would ^ime you to death with
praises, for that you can be content to lie with old men all night for their
money, and walk to your gardens with young men in the day time for your pleasure:
Oh you delicat damnations: you do but as I wud do: were I the proprest,
sweetest, plumpest, Cherry-cheekt, Corrall-lipt woman in a kingdom, I would
not dance after one man's pipe.


Iud. And why?


Just. Especially after an old man's.


Iud. And why, pray!


Just. Especially after an old Citizens.


Iud. Still, and why.


Just. Marry because the Suburbs, and those without the bars, have more
privilege then they within the freedom: what need one woman do ate upon one
Man? Or one man be mad like Orlando for one woman.


Iud. Troth it is true, considering how much flesh is in every Shambles.


Just. Why should I long to eat of Bakers bread only, when there is so much
Sifting, and bolting, and grynding in every corner of the City; men and women
are borne, and come running into the world faster then Coaches do into
Cheap Side upon Simon and Iudes day: and are eaten up by Death faster, then
Mutton and porridge in a term time. Who would pin their hearts to any Sleeue:
this world is like a Mynt, we are no sooner cast into the fire, taken out again,
hamerd, stamped, and made Current, but presently we are changde: the new Money
(like a new Drab) is caught at by Dutch, Spanish, Welsh, French, Scotch, and
English: but the old cracked King Harry groates are shoueld up, feel bruzing,
and battring, clipping, and melting, they smoke sort.


Iud. The worlds an Arrant naughty-pack I see, and is a very scuruy world.


Just. Scuruy? worse then the conscience of a Broomeman, that carries out new
ware, and brings home old shoes: a naughty-packe? Why there is no Minute, no
thought of time passes, but some villainy or other is a brewing: why, even now,
now, at holding up of this finger, and before the turning down of this, some
are murdring, some lying with their maids, some picking of pockets, some
cutting purses, some cheating, some weying out bribes. In this City some wives
are Cuckolding some Husbands. In yonder Village some farmers are now-now
grynding the Iawbones of the poor: therefore sweet Scholar, sugared Mistress
Honisuckle, take Summer before you, and lay hold of it? why, even now must you
and I hatch an egg of iniquity.


Iud. Troth master I think thou will prove a very knave.


Just. Its the fault of many that fight under this band.


Iud. I shall love a Puritans face the worse whilst I live for that Copy of
thy countenance.


Just. We are all wethercocks, and must follow the wind of the present: from
the byas.


Iud. Change a bowl then.


Just. I will so; and now for a good cast: there is the Knight, sir Gos^n
Glo-worme.


Iud. He Is a Knight made out of wax.


Just. He took up Silks upon his bond I confess: nay more, he is a knight in
print: but let his knighthood be of what stamp it will, from him come I, to
entreat you, and Mistress Wafer, and mistress Tenterhook, being both my
scholars, and your honest pew fellows, to meet him this afternoon at the
Rhenesh-wine-house ith Stillyard. Captain Whirlepoole will be there, young
Lynstock the Alder-mans Son and Heir, there too, will you steal forth, and
taste of a Dutch Bun, and a Keg of Sturgeon.


Iud. What excuse shall I coin now?


Just. Few excuses: You must to the pawn to buy Lawne: to Saint Martins for
Lace; to the Garden: to the Glasse-house; to your Gossips: to the Powlters:
else take out an old ruff, and go to your Sempsters: excuses? Why, they are
more ripe then medlers at Christmas.


Iud. I Will come. The hour.


Just. Two: the way-through Paul's: every wench take a pillar, there clap on
your Maskes: your men will be behind you, and before your prayers be half
don, be before you, and man you out at several doors. You Will be there?


Iud. If I breath.

Exit.
Iud. Farewell. So: now must I go set the the other Wenches the self same Copy.
A rare Scholemaister, for all kind of hands, I. Oh: What strange curses are
powered down with one blessing? Do all tread on the heel? Have all the art to
hood-winke wise men thus? And (like those builders of Babels Tower) to speak
unknown tongues. Of all (save by their husbands) understood: Well, if (as Iuy
bout the Elm does twine)

All wives love clipping, there is no fault in mine.
But if the world lay speechles, even the dead
Would rise, and thus cry out from yawning graves,
Women make men, or Fools, or Beasts, or Slaves.
Exit.
Scaena 2.
Enter Earl and Mistress Birdlime. Earl. Her answer! talk in music: Will she
come?


Bird. Oh my sides ache in my loins, in my bones? I ha more need of a posset of
sack, and lie in my bed and sweat, than to talk in music: no honest woman
would run hurrying up and down thus and undo her self for a man of honor,
without reason? I am so lame, every foot that I set to the ground went to my
heart. I thought I had bin at Mum-chance my bones ratled so with iaunting? had it
not bin for a friend in a corner. Takes Aqua-vitae. I had kicked up my heels.


Earl. Minister comfort to me, Will she come.


Bird. All the Castles of comfort that I can put you into is this, that the
jealous wittal her husband, came (like a mad Ox) belowing in whilst I was
there. Oh I ha lost my sweet breath with trotting.


Earl. Death to my heart? her husband? What says he?


Bird. The freeze-lerkin Rascal out with his purse, and called me plain Bawd to
my face.


Earl. Affliction to me, then thouspak'st not to her?


Bird. I spoke to her, as Clients do to Lawiers without money (to no purpose)
but I Will speak with him, and hamper him to, if eue^ he fall into my clutches:
I Will make the yel^ow-hammer her husband know, (for all he is an Italian) that
there is a difference between a cogging Baud and an honest motherly gentlewoman.
Now, what cold whetstonesly over your stomacher? will you have some of my Aqua?
Why my Lord.


Earl. Thou have killed me with thy words.


Bird. I see bashful lovers and young bullockes are knocked down at a blow:
Come, come* drink this draught of Cynamon water, and pluck up your spirits:
up with em, up with em. Do you hear, the whiting mop has nibled.


Earl. Ha?


B^rd. Oh? I thought I should fetch you: you can Ha at that: I Will make you Hem
anon. As I Am a sinner I think you will find the sweetest, sweetest bedfellow of
her. Oh! she looks so sugredly, so simpringly, so gingerly, so amarously, so
amiably. Such a red lip, such a White foreheade, such a black eye, such a
full cheek, and such a goodly little nose, now she is in that French gown,
Scotch falls, Scotch bum, and Italian head-tire you sent her, and is such an
intycing shee-witch, carrying the charms of your Jewels about her. O^^!


Earl. Did she receive them? speak: Here Is is golden keys T'vnlock thy lips.
Did she vouchsa^e to take them?


Bird. Did she vouchsafe to take them, there is a question: you shall find she did
vouchsafe: The troath is my Lord, I got her to my house, there she put off
her own cloths my Lord and put on yours my Lord, provided her a Coach, Searched
the middle I Will in Pawles, and with three Elizabeth twelue-pences pressed three
knaves my L. hirde three Liueries in Long-lane, to man her: for all which so God
mend me, I Am to pay this night before Sunset.


Earl, This shower shall fill them al^raine in their laps, what golden drops
thou will.


Bird. Alas my Lord, I do but receive it with one hand, to pay it away with
another, I Am but your Baily.


Earl. Where is she?


Bird. In the green velvet Chamber; the poor sinful creature pants like a
pigeon under the hands of a Hawke, therefore use her like a woman my Lord: use
her honestly my Lord, for alas she is but a Nouice, and a very green thing.


Earl. Farewell: I Will in unto her.


Bird. Fie vpont, that were not for your honor: you know gentlewomen use to
come to Lords chambers, and not Lords to the Gentlewomens; I Would not have her
think you are such a Rank-ryder: walk you here: I Will becken, you shall see i will
fetch her with a wet finger?


Earl. Do so.


Bird. Hyst? why sweet heart, mistress Iustiniano, why pretty soul tread
softly, and come into this room: here be rushes, you need not fear the
creaking of your cork shoes. Enter Mistress Iustiniano. So, well said, there is
his honor. I have business my Lord, very now the marks are set up: I Will get me
(...) score off, and give Aim.

Exit.
Earl. Yare welcome: Sweety'are welcome. Bless my hand
With the soft touch of yours: Can you be Cruel
To one so Prostrate to you? Even my Heart,
My Happiness, and State lie at your feet:
My Hopes me flattered that the field was won,
That you had yielded, (tho you Conquer me)
And that all Marble scales that bard your eyes
From throwing light on mine, were quite taken off,
By the Cunning Woman's hand, that Works for me,
Why therefore do you wound me now with frowns?
Why do you fly me? Do not exercise
The Art of woman on me? I Am already
Your Captive: Sweet! Are these your hate, or ^eares.

Mist. Just. I wonder lust can hang at such white hairs.

Earl. You give my love ill names, It is not lust:
Lawless desires well tempred may seem Just
A thousand mornings with the early Sun, mine eyes have from your windows
watched to steal brightness from those. As often upon the days that Consecrated
to devotion are, Within the Holy Temple have I stood disguised, waiting your
presence: and when your hands went up toward heaven to draw some blessing
down, Mine (as if all my Nerves by yours did move,)

Begged in dum Signs some pity for my Love,
And thus being feasted only with your fight,
I went more pleased then sickmen with fresh health,
Rich men with Honor, Beggars do with wealth.

Mist. Just. Part now so pleased, for now you more Enjoy me.

Earl. O you do wish me Physic to destroy me.

Mist, Just. I have already leapt beyond the bounds of modesty, In piecing out
my wings with borrowed feathers: but you sent a Sorceres so perfect in her
trade, that did so lively breath forth your passionate Accents, and could draw
a Lover languishing so piercingly, that her charms wrought upon me, and in
pity of your sick heart which she did Counterfeit, (Oh she is a subtle Beldam!)
See I clothed my limbs (thus Player-like in Rich Attyres, not fitting mine
estate, and am come forth, but why I know not?


Earl. Will you Love me?


Mist. Just. Yes,
If you can clear me of a debt that's due but to one Man,
I Will pay my heart to thee.

Earl. Whose that?

Mist. Just. My Husband.

Earl. Vmh.

Mist Just. The sums so great
I know a kingdom cannot answer it,
And therefore I beseech you good my Lord,
To take this gilding off, which is your own,
And henceforth cease to throw out golden hooks
To choke mine honor: tho my husbands poor,
I Will rather beg for him, then be your Whore.

Earl. Against beauty you plot treason, if you suffer tears to do violence to so
fair a Cheek. That face was nere made to look pale with want. Dwell here
and be the Sovereign of my fortunes. Thus shall you go attired.


Mist. Just. Till lust be tired. I must take leave my Lord.


Earl. Sweet Creature stay,
My Cofers shall be yours, my Servants yours,
My self will be your servant, and I swear by that which I hould^ dear in
you, your beauty (and which I Will not profane) you shall live here as free from
base wrong, as you are from blackenesse, so you will deigne, but let me enjoy
your sight, Answer me will you.


Mist. Just. I will think vpont.


Earl. Unless you shall perceive, that al my thoughts, and al my actions be
to you devoted, and that I very justly earne your love, Let me not taste it.


Mist. Just. I will think upon it.


Earl. But when you find my merits of full weight, will you accept their worth.


Mist Just. I Will think vpont.
I Would speak with the old woman.

Earl. She shall come,
Joys that are borne unlooked for, are borne dumb.
Exit.
Mist. Just. Po^erty, thou bane of Chastity,
Poison of beauty, Broker of Mayden-heades,
I see when Force, nor Wit can scale the hold, Wealth must. Sheel^ nere be won,
that defies go^de.

But lives there such a creature: Oh it is rare.
To find a woman chaste, that's poor and fair.

Enter Bird^^me. Bird. Now lamb! has not his Honor dealt like an honest
Nobleman with you. I can tell you. you shall not find him a Templer, nor one of
these cogging Cattern pear-coloured-beards, that by their good (...) wou^d have
no pretty woman escape them.


Mistress. Just. Thou art a very bawd: thou art a Devil
Cast in a reverend shape; thou stale damnation!
Why have thou me intist from mine own Paradise,
To steal fruit in a barren wilderness.

Bird. Bawd and devil, and stale damnation! Will women's tounges (like Bakers
legs) never go straight.


Mistress. Just. Had thy Circaean Magic me transformd
Into that sensual shape for which thou Coniurst,
And that I were turned common Veuturer,
I could not love this old man.

Bird. This old man, vmh: this old man? do his hoarye hairs stick in your
stomach? yet methinkes his silver hairs should move you, they may serve to
make you Bodkins: Does his age grieve you? fool? Is not old wine wholesommest,
old Pippines toothsommest, old wood burn brightest, old Linen wash whitest,
old soldiers Sweet-hart are surest, and old Lovers are soundest. I hatried
both.


Mistress. Just. So will not I.


Bird. Youd have some young perfumed beardles Gallants board you, that spits al
his brains out ats tongues end, wud you not?


Mistress. Just. N^, none at al, not any.


Bird. None at al? what do you make there then? why are you a burden to the
worlds conscience, and an eie-sore to well given me^, I dare pawn m^ gown and
all the beds in my house, and all the gettings in Michaelmas term next to a
Tavern token, that thou shall never be an innocent.


Mistress. Just. Who are so?


Bird. Fools? why then are you so precize: your husbands down the wind and will
you like a haglers Arrow, be down the weather, Strike whilst the iron is hot. A
woman when there be roses in her cheeks, Cherries on her lips, Ciuet in her
breath, Iuory in her teeth, Lyllyes in her hand, and Lickorish in her heart,
why she is like a play. If new very good company, very good company, but if
stale, like old Ieronimo: go by, go by. Therefore as I said before, strike.
Besides: you must think that the commodity of beauty was not made to lie dead
upon any young woman's hands: if your husband have given up his Cloak, let
another take measure of you in his Ierkin: for as the Cobbler, in the night time
walks with his Lantern, the Merchant, and the Lawyer with his Link, and the
Courtier with his Torch: So every lip has his Lettice to himself: the Lob has
his Less, the Collier his Dowdy, the Western- man his Pug, the Seruing-man
his Punke, the student his Nun in white Friars, the Puritan his Sister, and the
Lord his Lady: which worshipful vocation may fall upon you, if you will but
strike whilst the Iron is hot.


Mist. Just. Witch: thus I break thy Spells: Were I kept brave, On a Kings
cost, I am but a Kings slave.

Exit.
Bird. I see, that as Frenchmen love to be bold, Flemings to be drunk,
Welchmen to be called Brittons, and Irishmen to be Costermongers, so, Cocknyes,
(especially Shee-Cocknies) love not Aq^a-vite when tis-good for them.


Enter Monopoly. Mo. Saw you my uncle?


Bird. I saw him even now going the way of all flesh (that's to say) toward
the Kitchen: heeres a letter to your worship from the party.


Mono. What party?


Bird. The Tenterbook your wanton.


Mono. From her? Fewh? pray thee stretch me no more upon your Tenterhook: pox
on her? Are there no Pottecariesith Town to send her Phisick-bils to, but me:
She Is not troubled with the green sickness still, Is she?


Bird. The yellow I aundis, as the Doctor tells me: troth she is as good a peat:
she is fallen away so, that she is nothing but bare skin and bone: for the Turtle
so mournes for you.


Mono. In black?


Bird. In black? you shall find both black and blew if you look under her eyes.


Mo. Well: sing over her ditty when I Am in tune,


Bird. Nay, but will you send her a Box of Mithridatum and Dragon water, I
mean some restoratiue words. Good Master Monopoly yo^ know how welcome yare
to the City, and will you master Monopoly, keep out of the City; I know you
cannot, would you saw how the poor gentlewoman lies.


Mo. Why how lies she?


Bird. Troth as the way lies over Gads-hill, very dangerous: you would pity a
woman's case if you saw her: write to her some treatise of pacification.


Mono. I Will write to her to morrow.


Bird. To morrow; she will not sleep then but tumble, and if she might have it
to night, it would better please her.


Mo. Perhaps I Will doot to night, farewell.


By. If you doot to night, it would better please her then to morrow.


Mo. Gods so, do hear, I Am to sup this night at the Lion in Sh^redich with
certain gallants: can thou not draw forth some dilicate face, that I ha not
seen, and bring it thither, wut thou?


Bird. All the painters in London shall not fit for color as I can; but we
shall have some swaggering?


Mo. All as civil (by this sight) as Lawyers.


Bird. But I tell you, she is not so common as Lawyers, that I mean to betray
to your Table: for as I Am a Sinner, she is a Knights Cozen; a Yorkshire
gentlwoman, and only speaks a little broad, but of very good carriage.


Mono. Nay that's no matter, we can speak as broad as she? but wut bring her?


Bird. You shall call her Cozen, do you see: two men shall wait upon her, and
I Will come in by chance: but shall not the party be there?


Mono. Which party?


Bird. The writer of that simple hand.


Mon. Not for as many Angels as there be letters in her Paper: Speak not of
me to her, nor our meeting if you love me: wut come?


Bird. Mum, I Will come.


Mono. Farewell.


Bird. Good Master Monopoly, I hope to see you one day a man of great credit.


Mo. If I be, I Will build Chimnies with Tobacco but I Will smoke some: and be sure
Bird. I Will stick wool upon thy back.


Bird. Thanks sir, I know you will, for all the kindred of the Monopolies are
held to be great Fleecers.


Exeunt. Enter sir Gozlin: Lynstocke, Whirlepoole, and the three Citizens
wives maskt, Iudyth, Mabell, and Clare. Goz. So draw those Curtains; and lets
see the pictures under ^m.


Lyn. Welcome to the Stilliard fair Ladies.


All 3. Thanks good master Lynstocke.


Whirl. Hans: some wine Hans.


Enter Hans with cloth and Buns. Hans. Yaw, yaw, you sall hebben it mester:
Old vine, or new vine?

Goz. Speak women.


Iud. New wine good sir Gozlin: wine in the must, good Dutchman, for must is
best for us women.


Hans. New vine? vell: two pots of new vine.

Exit Hans.
Iud An honest Butterbox: for if it be old, there is none of it coms into my
belly.


Mab. Why Tenterhooke pray thee lets dance friskin, and be merry.


Lin. Thou art so troubled with Monopolies, they so hang at thy heart stringes.


Cla. Pox a my heart then.


Enter Hans with Wine. Iud. I and mine too, if any Courtier of them all set up
his gallows there: wench use him as thou do thy pantables, scorn to let him
kiss thy heel, for he feeds thee with nothing but Court holy bread, good
words, and cares not for thee: sir Gozlin, will you taste a Dutch whatch you
callum.


Mab. Here master Lynstocke, half mine is yours. Bun, Bun, Bun, Bun.


Enter Parenthesis. Par. Which room? where are they? woe ho, ho, ho, so, ho
boys.


Goz. Sfoot whose that? lock our room.


Par. Not till I am in: and then lock out the devil tho he come in the shape
of a puritan.


All 3. Scholemaister, welcome? welcome in troth?


Par. Who would not be scratcht with the briars and brambles to have such burs
sticking on his breeches: Save you gentlemen: O noble Knight.


Goz More wine Hans.


Par. Am not I (gentlemen) a Ferret of the right hair, that can make three
Conies bolt at a clap into your pursenets? ha? little do their 3. husbands
dream what coppies I am setting their wives now? were not a rare Jest if they
should come sneaking upon us like a horrible noise of Fiddlers.


Iud. Troth I Would not care: let em come: I Would tell em, weed h^ none of their dull
Music.


Mab. Here mistress Tenterhooke.


Clar. Thanks good mistress Wafer.


Par. Whose there? Peepers: Intelligencers: E^esdroppers.


Omni. Vds foot, throw a pot ats head?


Par. Oh Lord? O Gentlemen, Knight, Ladies, that may be, Citizens wives that
are, shift for your selves, for a pair of your husbands heads are knocking
together with Hans his, and inquiring for you. Omni. Keep the door locked.


Iud. Oh I, do, do: and let sir Gozlin (because he has bin in the low
Countries) swear go^z Sacrament, and drive them away with broken Dutch.


Pa. Here Is a wench has simple Sparks in her: she is my pupile Gallants:
Good-god? I see a man is not sure that his wife is in the Chamber, tho his own
fingers hung on the Padlocke: Trap-doores, false Drabs, and Spring-lockes, may
cozen a Co^y of Constables. How the silly Husbands might here ha been guld
with Flemish money: Come: drink up Rhene, Thames and Meander dry, There Is Nobody.


Iud. Ah thou ungodly master.


Par. I did but make a false fire, to try your valor, because you cried let em
come. By this glass of woman's wine, I^would not ha seen their Spirits walk
here, to be dubd deputy of a Ward, I, they would ha Chronicled me for a Fox
in a Lambs skin: But come: Is this merry Midsomer night agreed upon? when shall
it be? where shall it be?


Lynst. Why faith to morrow at night.


Whirle. We Will take a Coach and ride to Ham, or so.


Tent. O fie vpont: a Coach? I cannot abide to be iolted.


Mab. Yet most of your Citizens wives love iolting?


Goz. What say you to B^ack-wall, or Lime-house?


Iud. Every room there smells to much of Tar.


Lynst. Lets to mine host Dogbolts at Brainford then, there you are out of
eyes, out of ears* private rooms, sweet Ly^nen, winking attendance, and what
cheer you will?


Omni. Content, to Bramford?


Mab. I, I, lets go by water, for sir Gozlin I have heard you say you love to
go by water.


Iud. But wenches, with what pullies shall we slide with some ^lenly excuse,
out of our husbands suspicion, being gone Westward for smelts all night.


Par. That's the block now we all stumble at: Wind up that ^^ring well, and
all the consorts in tune.


Iud. Why then goodman scrape^ it is wound up, I have it. Sir Wafer, thy
childs at nurse, if you that are the men could provide some wise ass that
could keep his countenance.


Par. Nay if he be an Ass he will keep his countenance.


Iud. I, but I mean, one that could set out his tale with audacity, and say
that the child were sick, and near stagger at it: That last should serve all
our feet.


Whir. But where will that wise Ass be found now?


Par. I see I Am borne still to draw Dun out ath mire for you: that wise beast
will I be. I Will be that Ass that shall groan under the burden of that
abominable lie. Heaven pardon me, and pray God the infant be not punished fort.
Let me see: I Will break out in some filthy shape like a Thrasher, or a Thatcher,
or a Sowg^lder, or something: and speak dreamingly, and swear how the child
pukes, and eats nothing (as perhaps it does not) and lies at the mercy of God,
(as all children and old^folkes do) and then scholar Wafer, play you your
part.


Mab. Fear not me, for a veny or two?


Par. Where will you meet ith morning?


Goz. At some Tavern near the waterside, that's private.


Par. The Greyhound, the Greyhound in Blackfriars, an excellent Randeuous.


Lin. Content the Greyhound by eight?


Par. And then you may whip forth two first, and two next, on a sudden, and
take Boat at Bridewell Dock most privately.


Omni. Beet so: a good place?


Par. I Will go make ready my rusticall properties: let me see scholar hie you
home, for your child shall be sick within this half hour.

Exit.
Enter Birdlime. Iud. It Is the vprightest dealing man? Gods my pity, whose
yonder?


Bird. I Am bold to press my self under the Colors of of your company,
hearing that Gentlewoman was in the room: A word mistress?


Clar. How now, what says he?


Goz. Zounds what she? a Bawd, bith Lord Is It not?


Mab. No indeed, sir Gozlin she is a very honest woman, and a Mid-wi^e.


Clar. At the Lion in Shoredich? And would he not read it? nor write to me? I Will
poison his Supper?


Bird. But no words that I bewrayd him.


Clar. Gentlemen I must be gone. I cannot stay in faith: pardon me: I Will meet
to morrow: come Nurse, cannot tarry by this element.


Goz. Mother, you: Grannam drink ere you go. Bird: I am going to a woman's
labor, indeed sir, cannot stay.


Exeunt. Amb. I hold my life the blacke-beard her husband whissels for her.


Iud. A reckoning: Break one, break all.


Goz. Here Hans, draw not, I Will draw for all as I Am true knight.


Iud. Let him: amongst women this does stand for law, the worthiest man (tho he
be fool) must draw.


Exeunt. Actus Tertius
Scaena Prima.
Enter master Tenterhooke and his wife. Tent. What book is that sweet heart?


Mist. Ten. Why the book of bonds that are due to you.


Tent. Come, what do you with it? Why do you trouble your self to take care
about my business?


Mist. Ten. Why sir, does not that which concerns you, concern me. You told me
Monopoly had discharged his bond, I find by the book of accounts here, that
it is not canceld. Ear I would suffer such a cheating companion to laugh at
me, I Would see him hanged I* Good sweet heart as ever you loved me, as ever my
bed was pleasing to you, arrest the knave, we were never beholding to him for
a pin, but for eating up our victuals. Good Mouse enter an action against him.


Ten. In troth love I may do the gentleman much discredit, and besides it may
be other actions may fall very heavy upon him.


Mist. Tent. Hang him, to see the dishonesty of the knave.


Tent. O wise, good words: A Courtier, A gentleman.


Mist. Tent. Why may not a Gentleman be a knave, that were strange in faith:
but as I was a saying, to see the dishonesty of him, that would never come
since he received the money to visit us you know. Master Tenterhook he has
hung long upon you. Master Tenterhooke as I am virtuous you shall arrest him.


Tent. Why, I know not when he will come to Town.


Mist. Te. He Is in town: this night he sups at the Lion in Shoaredich, good
husband enter your action, and make have to the Lion presently, there is an
honest fellow (Sergeant Ambush) will do it in a trice, he never salutes a man
in Courtesy, but he catches him as if he would arrest him. Good heart let
Seriant Ambush ly in wait for him.


Tent. Well at thy entreaty I will do it. Give me my Cloak there, buy a linck
and meet me at the Counter in Woodstreete; busse me Moll.


Mist. Tent. Why now you love me. I Will go to bed sweet heart.


Tent: Do not sleep till I come Moll.

Exit Tent.
Mist. Tent: No lamb, baa sheep, if a woman will be free in this intricate
laborinth of a husband, let her marry a man of a melancholy complexion, she
shall not be much troubled with him. By my sooth my Husband has a hand as dry
as his brains, and a breath as strong as six common gardens. Well my husband
is gone to arrest Monopoly. I have dealt with a Sargeant privately, to entreat
him, pretending that he is my Aunts Son, by this means shall I see my young
gallant that in this has played his part. When they owe money in the City once,
they deal with their Lawyers by atturny, follow the Court though the Court do
them not the grace to allow them their dyer. O the wit of a woman when she is
put to the pinch.

Exit Mistress Tenterhook.
Enter master Tenterhooke, Sergeant Ambush, and yeoman Clutch. Ten. Come
Sergeant Ambush, come yeoman Clutch, yons the Tavern* the Gentleman will come
out presently: thou art resolute.


Amb. Who I, I carry fire and sword that fight for me, hear, and hear. I know
most of the knaves about London, and most of the Thieves to, I thank God* and
good intelligence.


Tent. I wonder thou do not turn Broker then.


Amb. Pew; I have bin a Broker already; for I was first a Puritan, then a
Banquerout, then a Broker, then a Fencer, and then Sergeant, were not these
Trades would make a man honest? peace the door opes, wheel about yeoman
Clutch.


Enter Whirlepoole, Linstocke, and Monopoly vnbrast. Mono. And ear I come to
sup in this Tavern again. There Is no more attendance then in a Iaile, and there
had bin a Punk ot two in the company then we should not have bin rid of the
drawers: now were I in an excellent humor to go to a valting house* I would
break down all their Glass-windowes, hew in pieces all their join stools,
tear silk petticotes, ruffle their Periwigges, and spoil their Painting, O
the Gods what I could do: I could undergo fifteen bawds by this darkness, or if
I could meet one of these Varlets that were Pannier ally on their baks
(Sergeants) I would make them scud so fast from me, that they should think it a
shorter way between this and Ludgate, then a condemned Cu^purse thinks it
between Newgate and Tyburne.


Lynst. You are for no action to night.


Whirl. No I Will to bed.


Mono. Am not I drunk now: Implentur veteris bacchi, pi^quisque Tobacco.


Whirle. Faith we are all heated.


Mono. Captain Whirlepoole when wilt come to Court and dine with me?


Whirl. One of these days Frank, but I Will get me two Gaunlets for ^eare I
lose my fingers in the dishes, their be excellent shauers I hear in the most
of your under offices? I protest I have often come thither, sat down drawn,
my knife, and ear I could say grace all the meat has bin gone. I have risen,
and departed thence as hungry, as ever came Country Atturny from Westminster?
Good night honest Frank, do not swagger with the watch Frank.


Exeunt. Tenter. So now they are gone you may take him.


Amb. Sir I arrest you?


Mono. Arrest me, at whose suite you varlets?


Clouch. At master Tenterhookes.


Mono. Why you varlets dare you arrest one of the Court.


Amb. Come will you be quiet sir?


Mo. Pray thee good yeoman call the gentlemen back again. There Is a Gentleman
has carried a hundred pound of mine home with him to his lodging, because I
dare not carry it over the fields, I Will discharge it presently.


Amb. That's a trick sir, you would procure a reskue.


Mono. Catchpole do you see, I will have the hair of your head and beard
shaued off for this, and ear I catch you at Grayes Inn by this light law.


Amb. Come will you march.


Mono. Are you Sergeants Christians? Sir thou look like a good pittyfull
rascal, and thou art a tall man to it seems, thou have backed many a man in
thy time I warrant.


Amb. I have had many a man by the back sir.


Mono. Welsaide in-troth, I love your quality, las it is needful every man
should come by his own* but as God mend m^ gentlemen I have not one cross
about me, only you two. Might not you let a Gentlemen pass out of your
hands, and say you saw him not? Is there not such a kind of mercy in you now
and then my Masters, as I live, if you come to my lodging to morrow morning,
I Will give you five brace of Angels? good yeoman persuade your graduat here: I
know some of you to be honest faithful Drunkards, respect a poor Gentleman in
my case.


Ten Come, it will not serve your turn, Officers look to him, upon your perril.


Mono. Do you hear sir, you see I am in the hands of a couple of Ravens here,
as you are a Gentleman lend me forty shillings, let me not live if I do not pay
you the forfeiture of the whole bond, and never plead Conscience.


Tent. Not a penny, not a penny: God night sir.

Exit Tenter.
Mono. Well, a man ought not to sweat by any thing in the hands of Sergeants
but by silver, and because my pocket is no lawful Justice to Minister any such
oath unto me, I will patiently encounter the Counter. Which is the dearest
ward in Prison Sergeant! the knights ward?


Amb. No sir, the Masters side.


Mono. Well the knight is above the master though his Table be worse furnished:
I Will go thither.


Amb. Come sir, I must use you kindly the Gentleman's Wife that has arrested
you.


Mono. I what of her.


Amb. She says you are her Antes son.


Mono. I, am?


Amb. She takes on so pitifully for your Arresting, it was much against her will
(good Gentlewoma^) that this affliction lighted upon you.


Mono. She has reason, if she respect her poor kindred.


Amb. You shall not go to prison.


Mono. Honest Sergeant, Conscionable Officer, did I forget my self even now, a
vice that sticks to me always when I am drunk to abuse my best friends: where
did buy this buffe? Let me not live but I Will give thee a good suite of
durance, Will thou take my bond Sergeant? Where Is a Scriuener, a Scriuener good
Yeoman? you shall have my sword and hangers to pay him.


Amb. Not so Sir: but you shall be prisoner in my house: I do not think but
that your Cousin will visit you there in the morning, and take order for you.


Mono. Well said; wast not a most treacherous part to arrest a man in the
night* and when he is almost drunk, when he has not his wits about him to
remember which of his friends is in the Subsedy: Come did I abuse you, I
recant, you are as necessary in a city as Tumblers in Norfolk, Sumners in
Lancashire, or Rake-hels in an Army*


Enter Parenthesis like a Colliar, and a Boy. Just. Buy any small Coal, buy
any small Coal.


Boy. Collier, Collier?


Just. What say boy.


Boy Ware the Pillory.


Just. O boy the pillory assures many a man that he is no cukold, for how
impossible wear it a man should thrust his head through so small a Loope-ho'e
if his foreheade were brauncht boy?


Boy Collier: how came the goose to be put upon you, ha?


Just. I Will tell thee, the Term lying at Winchester in Henry the Thirds days,
and many French Women coming out of the Isle of Wight thither (as it has
always been seen) though the Isle of Wight could not of long time neither in
dure Foxes nor Lawyers. yet it could brook the more dreadful Cockatrice, there
were many Punkes in the Town (as you know our Term is their Term) your
Farmers that would spend but three pence on his ordinary, would lavish half
a Crown on his Leachery: and many men (Calves as they were) would ride in a
Farmers foul boots before breakefast, the commonst sinner had more fluttering
about her, then a fresh punke has when she comes to a Town of Garrison, or to
a university. Captains, Scholars, Seruingmen, Jurors, Clarks, Townsmen, and
the Blacke-guarde used all to one Ordinarye, and most of them were called to a
pitiful reckoning* for before two returns of Michaelmas, Surgeons were full
of business, the care of most secrecy grew as common as Lice in Ireland, or as
scabbes in France. One of my Tribe a Collier carried in his Cart 40. maimed
soldiers to Salsbury, looking as pitifully as Dutchmen first made drunk,
then carried to bee-heading. Every one that met him cried, ware the Goose
Collier, and from that day to this, there is a record to be seen at Croiden, how
that pitiful wa^tage which in deed was virtue in the Collier, that all that
time would carry no Coals, laid this Imputation on all the posterity.


Boy. You are full of tricks Colliar.


Just. Boy where dwells master Wafer?


Boy. Why hear! what would? I am one of his Iuvinals?


Just. Has he not a child at nursse at More-clacke?


Boy. Yes, do thou dwell there?


Just. That I do, the Child is wondrous sick: I was wild to acquaint thy
master and Mistress with it.


Boy. I Will up and tell them presently.


Just. So, if al should fail me, I could turn Collier. O the villainy of this
age, how full of secrecy and silence (contrary to the opinion of the world)
have I ever found most women. I have sat a whole afternoon many times by my
wife, and looked upon her eyes, and felt if her pulses have beat, when I have
named a suspected love, yet all this while have not drawn from her the least
scruple of confession. I have lain awake a thousand nights, thinking she would
have revealed somewhat in her dreams, and when she has begun to speak any
thing in her sleep, I have iog'd he^, and cried I sweet heart. But when will
your love come, or what did he say to thee over the stall? Or what did he do
to thee in the Garden-chamber? Or when will he send to thee any letters, or when
will thou send to him any money, what an idle coxcombe jealousy will make a man.
Enter Wafer and his wife. Well, this is my comfort that here comes a creature
of the same head-peece.


Mist Waf. O my sweet Child, where is the Collier?


Just. Here forsooth.


Mist Waf. Run into Bucklers burry for two ounces of Draggon water, so^e Sperma
(...) and Treakle. What is it sick of Coliar? ^ burning Fever?


Just. Faith mistress I do not know the infirmity of it: will you buy any small
Coal, say you?


waf. Prithee go in and empty them, come be not so impatient.


Mist waf. I, I, I, if you had groand fort as I have done you would have bin
more natural. Take my riding hat, and my kirtle there: I Will away presently?


waf. You will not go to night, I am sure.


Mist wafer. As I live but I will.


Waf. Faith sweet heart I have great business to night, stay til to morrow and
I Will go with you.


Mist waf. No sir I will not hinder your business. I see how little you respect
the fruits of your own body. I shall find some body to bear me company.


VVaf. Well, I will defer my business for once, and go with thee.


Mist waf. By this light but you shall not, you shall not hit me in the teeth that
I was your hindrance, will you to Bucklers burry sir?


Waf. Come you are a fool leave yeur weeping.

Exit Waf*
Mist Waf. You shall not go with me as I live.


Just* Puple.


Mist. Waf. Exc^llent master.


Just. Admirable Mistress, how happy be our Englishwomen that are not troubled
with Jealous husbands; why your Italians in general are so Sunburned with these
Dog-daies, that your great Lady there thinks her husband loves her not if he
be not ^ealious: what confirms the liberty of our women more in England, then
the Italian Proverb, which says if there were a bridge over the narrow Seas,
all the women in Italy would show their husbands a Million of light pair of
heels, and fly over into England.


Mist. Waf. The time of our meeting? Come?


Just. Seven.


Mist. Waf. The place.


Just. In Blacke-Friers, there take Water, keep a loofe from the shore, on
with your Masks, up with your sails, and Westward Hoe


Mist. Waf. So.

Exit Mistress Wafer.
Just. O the quick apprehension of women, the'ile groape out a man's meaning
presently, well, it rests now that I discover my self in my true shape to these
Gentlewomens husbands: for though I have played the fool a little to beguile
the memory of mine own misfortune, I would not play the knave, though I be
taken for a Banquerout, but indeed as in other things, so in that, the world
is much deceived in me, for I have yet three thousand pounds in the hands of a
sufficient friend, and all my debts discharged. I have received here a letter
from my wife* directed to S^ode, wherein she most repenta^tly entreats my
return, with protestation to give me assured trial of her honesty. I cannot
tell what to think of it, but I will put it to the test, there is a great
strife between beauty, and Chastity, and that which pleases many is neue^
free from ^emtation: as for Jealousy, it makes many Cuckoldes, many fools,
and many banquerouts: It may have abused me and not my wifes honesty: I Will try
it: but first to my secure and do^ing Companion.

Exit.
Enter Monopoly and Mistress Tenterhooke^ Mono. I beseech you Mistress
Tenterhooke,
Before God I Will be sick if you will not be merry.

Mist. Tent. You are a sweet Beagle.


Mono. Come, because I kept from Town a little, let me not live if I did not
hear the sickness was in Town very hot: In troth thy hair is of an excellent
color since I saw it. O those bright tresses like to threads of gold.


M^st. Tent. Lie, and ashes, suffer much in the city for that comparison.


Mono. Here Is an honest Gentleman will be here by and by, was borne at Foolham:
his name is Gos^^ng Gloo-worme.


Mist Tent. I know him, what is he?


Mono. He is a Knight: what aild your husband to be so hasty to arrest me.


Mist Tent. Shall I speak truly? shall I speak not like a woman.


Mono. Why not like a woman.


Mist Tent. Because women's tongues are like to c^ocks, if they go too fast they
never go true, it was I that got my husband to arrest thee, I have.


Mono. I am beholding to you.


Mist Tent. For sooth I could not come to the speech of you, I think you may
be spoken with all now.


Mono. I thank you, I hope you will bail me Cousin?


Mist Tent. And yet why should I speak with you, I protest I love my husband


Mono. Tush let not any young woman love a man in years too well.


Mist Tent. Why? Mono Because heel dye before he can requi^e it.


Mono. I have acquainted Wafer and Honysuckle with it, and they allow my wit
for it extremely. Enter Ambush. O honest Sergeant


Amb. Welcome good mistress Tenterhooke.


Mist Tent. Sergeant I must needs have my Cousin go a little Way out of Town
with me and to secure thee, here are two Diamonds, they are worth two hundred
pound, keep them til I return him.


Amb. Well it is good security.


Mist Tent. Do not come in my husbands sight in the mean time


Enter Whirle, Glo-worme, Gozling, Linstocke, Mistress Honnysuckle, and Mistress
Wafer. Amb. Welcome Gallants.


Whirl. How now Monopoly Arrested?


Mono. O my little Honysuckle art come to visit a Prisoner?


Mist Honey. Yes faith as Gentlemen visit Merchants, to fare well, or as Poets
young quaint R^uellers, to laugh at them. Sirrah if I were some foolish
Justice, if I would not beg thy wit never trust me.


Mist Tent. Why I pray you?


Mist Honey. Because it has bin conceald all this while, but come shall we to
boat, we are furnished for attendants as Ladies are, We have our fools, and our
Vshers.


Sir. Goz. I thank you Madame, I shall meet your wit in the close one day.


Mist. Waf. Sir, thou know my husband keeps a Kennell of hounds?


Mist. Honey. Yes.


Whirl. Does thy husband love venery?


Mist. Waf. Venery?


Whirl. I, hunting, and venery are words of one signification.


Mist Waf. Your two husband, and he have made a match to go find a Hare about
Busty Causy.


Mist. Tent. They Will keep an excellent house till we come home again.


Mist. Ho. O excellent, a Spanish dinner, a Pilcher, and a Dutch supper, butter
and Onions.


Lynst. O thou art a mad wench.


Mist. Tent. Sergeant carry this ell of Cambrick to mistress Bird. tell her but
that it is a rough tide, and that she fears the water, she should have gone
with us.


Sir Goz. O thou have an excellent wit.


Whirl. To Boat hay?


Mist. Honey. Sir Gozlin? I do take it your legs are married.


Sir Goz. Why mistress?


Mist. Honi. They look so thin upon it.


Sir Goz. Ever since I measurd with your husband, I have shrunk in the cal^e.


Mist. Honey. And yet you have a sweet tooth in your head.


Sir Goz. O well dealt for the Calves head, you may talk what you will of
legs, and rising in the small, and swelling beneath the garter. But it is certain
when lank thighs brought long stockings out of fashion, the Courtiers Leg,
and his slender tilting staff grew both of a bigness. Come for Brainford.


Exeunt. Actus Quartus
Scaena Prima.
Enter Mistress Bir^^ime and Luce. Bird. Good morrow mistress Luce: how did you
take your rest to night? how does your good worship like your lodging? what
will you have to breakfast?


Luce. A pox of the Knight that was here last night, he promised to have sent
me some wild foul; he was drunk I Will bestewed else.


Bird. Why do not you think he will send them?


Luce. Hang them: ^^s no more in fashion for them to keep their promises, then
it is for men to pay their debtes. He will lie faster then a Dog tro^s: what a
filthy knocking was at door last night; some puny Inn-a-court-men, I Will hold my
contribution.


Bird. Yes in troth were they, civil gentlemen without beards, b^t to say the
truth, I did take exceptions at their knocking: took them a side and said to
them: Gentlemen this is not well, that you should come in this habit, Cloakes
and Rapiers, Boots and Spurs, I protest to you, those that be your Ancientes in
the house would have come to my house in their Caps and Gowns, ciuilly, and
modestly. I promise you they might have bin taken for Citizens, but that they
talk more liker fools. Who knocks there? up into your Chamber. Enter master
Honisuckle. Who are you, some man of credit? that you come in m^fled thus.


Honi. Whose above?


Bird. Let me see your face first. O master Honisuckle, why the old party: the
old party.


Honi. Pew I will not go up to her: no body else?


Enter Christian. Bird. As I live will you give me some Sack? where is
Opportunity.


Honi. What do call her?


Bird. Her name is Christian, but mistress Luce cannot abide that name, and so
she calls her Oppertunity.


Honi. Very good, good.


Bird. Is It a shilling, bring the rest in Aqua vit^.
Come shals go to Noddy.

Honi. I and thou will for half an hour.


Bird. Here are the Cards? deal, God send me Dcces and Aces with a Court
Card, and I shall get by it.


Honi. That can make thee nothing.


Bird. Yes if I have a coat Card turn up.


Honi. I show four games?


Bird. By my troth I must show all and little enough to, six games: play your
single game, I shall double with you anon.

Pray you lend me some silver to count my games?
How now is it good Sack?

Enter Christian. Chri: There Is a gentleman at door would speak with you.


Ho: Gods so, I will not be seen by any means.


Enter Tenterhook. Bird: Into that closet then? What another mufler?


Ten. How do thou mistress Birdlime?


Bird. Master Tenterhook^ the party is above in the dining Chamber.


Tent. Above.


Bird. All alone?


Honi. Is he gone up? who wast I pray thee?


Bird. By this sack I will not tell you I say that yo^ were a contry Gentleman,
or a Citizen that has a young wife, or an Inn of Chauncery Man, should I
tell you? Pardon me; this Sack tastes of Horse flesh, I warrant you the leg of
a dead horse hangs in the But of Sack to keep it quick?


Honey. I beseech thee good Mistress Birdlime tell me who it was.


Bird. O God sir we are sworn to secrecy as well as Surgeons. Come drink to
me, and lets to our game.


Tenterhooke and Luce above. Tent. Who am I?


Luce. You, pray you vnblind me, Captain Whirlpoole, no master Lynstock: pray
vnblind me, you are not sir Gozling Glo-worme, for he we^res no Ringes of his
fingers! Master Freeze-leather, O your are George the drawer at the Miter,
pray you vnblinde me, Captain Puckfoist, Master Counterpaine the Lawier,
what the devil mean you, beshrew your heart you have a very dry hand, are you
not mine host Dog-bolt of Brainford, Mistress Birdlyme, master Honysuckle,
Master Wafer.


Tent. What the last of al your Clients.


Luce. O how do thou good Cousin.


Tent. I you have many Cosins.


Luce. Faith I can name many that I do not know, and suppose I did know them
what then? I will suffer one to keep me in diet, another in apparel; another
in Physic; another to pay my house rent. I am just of the Nature of Alcumy; I
will suffer every plodding fool to spend money upon me, marry none but some
worthy friend to enjoy my more retired and useful faithfulness.


Tent. Your love, your love.


Luce. O I, it is the curse that is laid upon our quallitie, what we gleane
from others we lavish upon some trothlesse welfac'd younger Brother, that Loves
us only for maintenance.


Tent. Have a good ^earme Luce?


Luce. A pox on the Term, and n^w I think o^t, says a gentleman last night
let the pox be in the Town seven year, Westminster never breeds Cob-webs,
and yet it is as catching as the plagu, though not also general, there be a
thousand bragging lackes in* London, that will protest they can wrest comfort
from me when (I swear) not one of them know wheather my palm be moiste or
not: In troth I love thee: You promised me seven Else of Cambrick. Wafer knocks
and enters, Whose that knocks?


Honi. What, more Sacks to the Myl, I Will to my old retireme^t.


Bird. How does your good worship, Passion of my heart, what shift shall I make.
How has your good worcester. done, a long time?


Waf. Very well God ^^mercy.


Bird. Your good worsh. I think be riding out of town.


Waf. Yes believe me, I love to be once a week a horseback, for methinks
nothing sets a man out, better than a Horse.


Bird. It Is certain, nothing sets a woman out better than a man.


Waf. What, is mist. Luce above?


Bird. Yes truly.


Waf. Not any company with her.


Bird. Company? Shall I say to your good worship and not lie, she has had no
company (let me see how long it was since your Worcester. was hear) you w^t to a
Butchers feast at Cuckolds-hauen the next day after Saint Lukes day. Not this
fortnight, in good truth.


Waf. Alas, good soul.


Bird. And why was it? Go to, go to, I think you know better than I* The wench
asks every day when will M. wafer be here: And if Knights ask for her,
she cries out at stayre-hed, As you love my life let em not come up, I Will do my
self vyolence if they enter: Have not you promised her somewhat?


waf. Faith, I think she loves me.


Bird. Loves: Well, wud you knew what I know, then you wud say somewhat. In good
faith she is very poor, all her gowns are at pawn: she owes me five pound for
her diet, besides 40. sh. I lent her to redeem two half silk Kirtles from the
Brokers, And do you think she needed be in debt thus, if she thought not of
Some^body.


Waf. Good honest Wench.


Bird. Nay in troth, she is now entering into bond for 5. pounds more, the
Scriuener is but new gone up to take ber bond.


wafer Come, let her not enter into bond, I Will lend her 5. pound, i will pay the
rest of her debts, Call down the Scriuener?


Bird. I pray you when he comes down, stand mufled, and I Will tell him you are
her brother.


Waf. If a man have a good honest wench, that lives wholly to his use, let him
not see her want.


Exit Bird. and enter above. Bird. O, mist. Luce, mist. Luce, you are the most
unfortunate gentlewoman that ever breathde: your young wild brother came newly
out of the Country, he calls me Bawd, swears I keep a Bawdy house, says
his sister is turned whore, and that he will kill, and slay any man that he
finds in her company.


Tent. What conuayance will you make with mistress Birdlime.


Luce. O God let him not come up, it is the swaggringst wild-oats.


Bird. I have pacified him somewhat, for I told him, that you were a Scriuener
come to take a band of her, now as you go ^oorth say she might have had so much
money if she had pleased, and say, she is an honest Gentlewoman and al will be
well.


Tent. Enough, farewell good Luce.


Btrd. Come change your voice, and muffle you.


Luce. What trick should this be, I have never a brother, I^e hold my life some
franker customer is come, that she slides him off so smoothly.


Enter Tenterhooke and Birdlime. Tent. The Gentlewoman is an honest Gentlewoman
as any is in London, and should have had thrice as much money upon her single
bond for the good report I hear of her.


Waf. No sir her friends can furnish her with money.


Tent. By this light I should know that voice, Wafer, od'sfoote are you the
Gentlewomans Brother?


Waf. Are your turned a Scriuener Tenterhooke?


Bird. I am spoild.


Waf. Tricks of mistress Birdlyme by this light.


Enter Honysuckle. H^ny. Hoick Covert, hoick covert, why Gentlemen is this your
hunting?


Tent. A Consort, what make you here Honysuckle?


Honey. Nay what make you two hear, O excellent mistress Bird. thou have more
tricks in thee then a Punke has V^ckles, cosins, Brothers. Sons or Fathers:
an infinite Company.


Bird. If I did it not to make your good worships merry, never ^el^eue me, I
will drink to your worship a glass of Sack.


Enter Iustiniano. Just. God save you.


Honey and Waf. Master Iustiniano welcome from St^ad.


Just. Why Gentlemen I never came there.


Tent. Never there ^ where have you bin then?


Just. Mary your daily guest I thank you.


Omn. Ours.


Just. I yours.

I was the pedant that learnt your wives to write, I was the Colliar that
brought you news your child was sick, but the truth is, for ought I know,
the Child is in health, and your wives are gone to make merry at Brainford.


Waf. By my troth good wenches, they little dream where we are now*


Just. You little dream what gallants are with them.


Tent. Gallants with them! I de laugh at that.


Just. Four Gallants by this light, May* Monopoly is one of them.


Tent. Monopoly? I de laugh at that in faith.


Just. Would you laugh at that! why do ye laugh at it then, they are there by
this time, I cannot stay to give you more particular intelligence: I have
received a letter from my wife hear, if you will call me at Putney, I Will bear
you company.


Tent. Od'sfoot what a Rogue is Sergeant Ambush, I Will undo him by this light.


Just. I met Sergeant Ambush, and wild him come to this house to you presently,
so Gentlemen I leave you ^ Bawd I have nothing to say to you now; do not think
to much in so dangerous a matter for in women's matters it is more dangerous to
stand long deliberating* then before a battai^e.

Exit Iusti.
Waf. This fellows poverty has made him an arrant knave.


Bird. will your worship drink any Aquavitae?


Tent. Apox on your Aquavitae. Monopoly, that my wife urged me to arrest gone to
Brainford. Enter Ambush. here is comes the varlet.


Amb. I am come si^ to know your pleasure.


Tent. What has Monopoly paid the money yet?


Amb. No sir, but he sent for money.


Tent. You have not carried him to the counter, he is at your house still.


Amb: O Lord I sir as melancholic etc.


Tent. You lie like an arrant varlet, by this candle I laugh at the jest


Bird. And yet he is ready to cry.


Tent. He Is gone with my wife to Brainford, and there be any Law in England
I Will tickle ye for this.


Amb. Do your worst, for I have good security and I care not, besides it was
his cousin your wines pleasure that he should go along with her.


Tent. Hoy day, her cousin, ^el sir, your security.


Amb. Why sir two Diamonds here.

Tent. O my heart: my wives two Diamonds,
Well, you will go along and instifie this.

Enter Luce. Amb. That I will sir.


Luce. Who am I?


Tent. What the Murrion care I who you are, hold off your Fingers, or I Will cut
them with this Diamond.


Luce. I Will see em in faith,

So, I Will keep these Diamonds tell I have my silk gown, and six else of
Cambricke.


Tent. By this light you shall not.


Luce. No, what do you think you have Fops in hand, sue me for them.


waf. and Honey. As you respect your credit lets go.


Tent. Good Luce as you love me let me have them, it stands upon my Credit,
thou shall have any thing, take my pursse.


Luce. I will not be crossed in my humor sir.


Tent. You are a damned filthy punke, what an unfortunate Rogue was I, that ever
I came into this house.


Bird. Do not spurn any body in my house you were best.


Tent. Well, well.


Bird. Excellent Luce, the getting of these two Diamondes mai^ chance to save
the Gentlewomens credit; thou heardst all.


Luce. O I, and by my troath pittye them, what a filthy Knave was that betrayed
them.


Bird. One that put me into pitiful fear, master I^stiniano here has laid
lurking like a sheep-biter, and in my knowledge has drawn these gentlewomen
to this misfortune: but I Will down to Queene-hiue, and the Watermen which were
wont to carry you to Lambeth Marsh, shall carry me thither: It may be I may
come before them; I think I shall pray more, what for sear of the water, and
for my good success then I did this tweluemonth.


Scaena 2
Enter the Earl and three Seruingmen. Earl. Have you perfumed this Chamber?


Omn. Yes my Lord.


Ear. The banquet?


Omn. It stands ready.


Ear. Go, let music
Charm with her excellent voice an awful scilence
Through all this building, that her sphaery soul
May (on the wings of Air) in thousand forms
Inuisibly fly, yet be inioy'd. Away.

1 Ser. Does my Lord mean to Conjure that he draws this strange Characters.


2 Ser. He does: but we shall see neither the Spirit that rises, nor the Circle
it rises in.


3 Ser. Twould make our hair stand up an end if we should, come fools come,
meddle not with his matters, Lords may do any thing.


Exeunt Ear. This night shall my desires be amply Crowned,
And al those powers, that taste of man in us,
Shall now aspire that point of happiness,
Beyond which, sensual eyes never look, (sweet pleasure!)
Delicious pleasure? Earths Supreamest good,
The spring of blood, tho it dry up our blood.
Rob me of that, (tho to be drunk with pleasure,
As rank excess even in best things is bad;
Turns man into a beast) yet that being gone,
A horse and this (the goodliest shape) al one.
We feed: wear rich attires: and strive to cleave
The stars with Marble Towers, fight battles: Spend
Our blood to buy us names: and in Iron hold
Will we eat roots, to imprison fugitive gold:
But to do thus, what Spell can us excite,
This the strong Magic of our appetite:
To feast which richly, life it self undoes,
Whoo'd not die thus? to see, and then to choose
Why even those that starve in Voluntary wants,
And to advance the mind, keep the flesh poor,
The world Inioying them, they not the world,
Wud they do this, but that they are proud to suck
A sweetness from such sowrenes; let em so,
The torrent of my appetite shall flow
With happier stream. A woman! Oh, the Spirit
And extract of Creation! This, this night,
The Sun shall envy. What cold checks our blood?
Her body is the Chariot of my soul,
Her eyes my bodies light, which if I want,
Life wants, or if possess, I undo her;
Turn her into a devil, whom I adore,
By scorching her with the hot steeme of lust,
It Is but a minutes pleasure: and the sin
Scarce acted is repented. Shun it than:
O he that can Abs^aine, is more than man!
Tush. Resolu'st thou to do ill: be not precize
Who writes of Virtue best, are slaves to vize,
Music The music sounds all arum to my blood,
What Is bad I follow, yet I see what is good.

Whi^st the song is heard. The Earl draws a Curten and sets forth a Banquet:
he then Exit, and Enters presently with Parenthesis attird like his wife maskt:
leads him to the table, places him in a chair, and in dumb signs, Courts
him, til the song be done. Ear. Fair! be not doubly maskt: with that and night,
Beauty (like gold) being used becomes more bright.

Par. Will it please your Lordship to ^it, I shall receive small pleasure if I see
your Lordship stand.


Ear: Witch, hag, what art thou proud damnation?


Par: A Merchants wife.


Ear: Fury who raizd thee up, what come thou for!


Par: For a banquet.


Ear: I am abused, deluded: Speak what art thou?
Vds death speak, or i will kill thee: in that habit
I looked to find an Angel, but thy face,
Shows thou art a Devil.

Par: My fa^e is as God made it my Lord: I am no devil unless women be devils,
but men find em not so, for they daily hunte for them.


Ear: What art thou that do cozen me thus?


Par: A Merchants wife I say: Iustinianos wife. She, whom that long burding
piece of yours, I mean that Wicked mother Birdlyme caught for your honor. Why
my Lord, has your Lordshippe forgot how ye courted me last morning.


Ear. The devil I did.


Par. Kissed me last morning.


Ear. Succubus* not thee.


Par. Gave me this Jewel last morning.


Ear. Not to thee Harpy.


Par. To me upon mine honesty, swore you would build me a lodging by the
Thames side with a watergate to it: or else take me a lodging in Cole-harbor.


Ear. I swore so.


Par. Or keep me in a Laborinth as Harry kept Ro^amond where the Minotaure my
husband should not enter.


Ear. I swear so, but Gypsy not to thee?


Par. To me upon my honor, hard was the siege, which you laid to the Crystal
walls of my chastity, but I held out you know: but because I cannot be too
stony hearted, I yielded my Lord, by this token my Lord (which token lies at my
heart like lead) but by this token my Lord, that this night you should commit
that sin which we al know with me.


Ear. The^?


Par. Do I look ugly, that you put thee upon me: did I give you my hand to
horn my head, that's to say my husband, and is it com to thee: is my face a
filthy^^ face, now it is yours, then when it was his: or have I two faces under
one hoode. I confess I have laid mine eyes in brine, and that may change the
copy. But my Lord I know what I am.


Ear. A Sorceres^e, thou shall witch mine ears no more,
If thou can pray, doot quickly for thou die.

Par. I can pray but I will not die, thou lie:
My Lord there drops your Lady; And now know,
Thou unseasonable Lecher, I am her husband
Whom thou would make whore, read: she speaks there thus,
Unless I came to her, her hand should free
Her Chastity from blemish, proud I was
Of her brave mind, I came, and seeing what slavery
Poverty, and the frai^tie of her Sex
H^d, and was like to make her Subject to,
I begd that she would die, my suite was granted,
I poisoned her, thy lust there strikes her dead,
Horns feared, plague worse, than sticking on the head.

Ear. Oh God thou have undone thy self and me,
None live to match this piece, thou art to bloody,
Yet for her sake, whom I Will embalme with tears,
This Act with her I bury, and to quit
Thy loss of such a Jewel, thou shall share
My living with me, Come embrace.

Par. My Lord.

Earl. Vilaine, dambd merciless slave, I Will torture thee
To every ynch of flesh: what ho: help, whose there?
Enter Ser^^ngmen. Come hither: here is a murderer, bind him. How now,
What noise is this.

Enter the 1. Serui^gmen. 1 Ser. My Lord there are three Citizens face me
down, that here is one master Parenthesis a schoolemaister with your Lordship
and desire he may be forth-comming to em.


Par. That borrowed name is mine. Sh^ft for your selves:
Away, shift for your selves; fly, I am taken.

Ear. Why should they fly thou Skreech-owle.

Par. I will tell thee,
Those three are partners with me in the murder,
We four commixt the poison, shift for your selves.

Ear. Stops mouth, and drag him back: entreat em enter.
Enter the three Citizens. O what a conflict feel I in my blood,
I would I were less great to be more good:
You Are welcome, wherefore came you! guard the doors;
When I behold that object, al my senses
Revolt from reason, he that offers flight,
Drops down a Coarse.

Al. 3. a Coarse?

1. Ser. I a coarse, do you scorn to be worms meat more then she?

Par. See Gentlemen, the Italian that does scorn,
Beneath the Moon, no baseness like the horn,
Has powered through all the veins of yon chaste bosom,
Strong poison to preserve it from that plague,
This flesh'y Lord: he doted on my wife,
He would have wrought on her and played on me.
But to pare off these brims, I cut off her,
And guld him with this lie, that you had hands
Dipped in her blood with mine, but this I did,
That his staind age and name might not be hid.
My Act (tho vild) the world shall crown a^ just,
I shall dye eleere, when he lives soyld with lust:
But come: rise Moll. Awake sweet Moll, thou have played
The woman rarely, counterfetted well.

1. Ser. Sure she has nine lives.

Par. See, Lucrece is not slain,
Her eyes which lust called Suns, have their first beams,
And all these fr^ghtments are but idle dreams:
Yet (before Jove) she had her knife prepared
To let his blood forth ere it should run black?
Do not these open cuts now, cool your back?
Methinkes they should: when Vice sees with broad eyes
Her ugly form, she does h^rselfe despise.

Ear. Mirror of dames, I look upon thee now,
As men long blind, (having recovered sight)
Amazd: scarce able are to endure the lig^t:
Mine own shame strikes me dumb: hence forth the book
I Will read shall be thy mind, and not thy look.

Honey. I would either we were at Braineford to see our wiue^, or our wives
here to see this Pageant.


Tent. So would I, I stand upon thorns.


Ear. The jewels which I gave you: wear: your fortunes,
I Will raise on golden Pillars: fare you well,
Lust in old age like burnt straw, does even choke
The kiudlers, and consumes, in stinking Smoke.
Exit.
P^r. You may follow your Lord by the smoke, Badgers.


1. Ser. If fortune had fauord him, we might have followed you by the horns.


Par. Fortune favors fools, your Lords a wise Lord: So: how now? ha? This is
that makes me fat now, is it not Rats-bane to you Gentlemen, as pap was to
Nestor, but I know the invisible sins of your wives hang at your eye-lides, and
that makes you so heavy headed.


Tent. If I do take em napping I know what I Will do.


Honi. I Will nap some of them.


Tent. That villain Monopoly, and that sir Gozlin treads em all.


Wafer. Wud I might come to that ^reading.


Par. Ha ha, sownd I: come Moll: the book of the siedge of Oftend, writ by one
that dropped in the action, will never sell so well, as a report of the siedge
between this Gr^^e, this wicked elder and ^hy self, an impression of you two,
would away in a May-morning: was it ever heard that such tyrings, were brought
away from a Lord by any wench but thee Moll, without paying, unless the wench
connycatcht him? go thy thy ways: if all the great Turks Concubins were but
like thee, the ten-penny-infidell should never need keep so many geldings to
ney ouerem: come shall this Western voyage hold my hearts?


All3. Yes, yes.


Par. Yes, yes: Sfoot you speak as if you had no hearts, and look as if you
were going westward indeed: to see how plain dealing women can pull down
men: Moll you will help us to catch Smelts too?


Mist. Just. If you be pleased.


Par. Never better since I wore a Smock.


Honi. I fear our oars have given us the bag.


Wafer. Good, I Would laughed at that.


Par. If they have, would where is might give them the Bottle: come march whilst
the women double their files: Married men fee, there is comfort: the Moons up:
fore Don Pha^us, I doubt we shall have a Frost this night, her horns are so
sharp: do you not feel it bite.


Tent. I do, I Am sure.


Par. But we will sit upon one another skir^^ith Boat, and lie close in straw,
like the hoary Courtier. Set on to Brainford now: where if you meet frail
wi^es, Nere swear against horns, invaine dame Nature strives.


Exeunt. Actus Quintus
Scaena Prima.
Enter Monopoly, Whirlepoole, Lynstock, and their (...), I^dyth, Mabell, and
Clare, their H^ts off. Mono. Why Chamberlin? will not these Fiddlers be drawn
forth? are they not in tune yet? Or are the Rogues a fraid ath Statute, and
dare not travel so far without a passe-port?


Whir. What Chamberlin?


Lynst. Where Is mine host? what Chamberlin.


Enter Chamber^in. Cham. Anon sir, here sir, at hand sir.


Mono. Where Is this noise? what a lousy Towns this? Has Brainford no music
int.


Cham. They are but rozining sir, and they will scrape themselves into your
company presently.


Mono. Plague a their Cats guts, and their scraping: do not see women here,
and can wethinkst thou be without a noise then?


Cha. The troth is sir, one of the poor instruments caught a sore mischance
last night: his most base bridge fell down, and belike they are making a
gathering for the reparations of that.


Whir. When they come, lets have em with apox.


Cham. Well sir, you shall sir.


Mo. Stay Chamberlin: where is our knight sir Gozlin? where is sir Gozlin.


Cham. Troth sir, my master, and sir Gozlin are guzling: they are dabling
together fathom deep: the Knight has drunk so much Health to the Gentleman
yonder, on his knees, that he has almost lost the use of his legs.


Iud. O for love, let none of em enter our room, fie.


Mab. I wud not have em cast up their accounts here, for more then they mean
to be drunk this tweluemonth.


Cla. Good Chamberlin keep them and their Helthes out of our company. I
warrant you, their Helthes shall not hu^t you.

Exit.
Mo. I, well said: they are none of our giving: let em keep their own quarter:
Nay I told you the man would soake him if he were ten Knights: if he were a
Knight of Gold theyd fetch him over.


Cla. Out upon him?


Whirl. There Is a Liefetennant and a Captain amongst em too.


Mo: Nay, then look to have some body l^e on the earth fort: Its ordinary for
your Liefe tennant to be drunk with your Captain, and your Capten to cast
with your Knight.


Cla: Did you never hear how sir Fabian Scarerow (even such another) took me
up one night before my husband being in wine.


Mab. No indeed, how was it?


Cla. But I think I took him down with a witness,


Iud. How? Good Tenterhooke.


Cla. Nay I Will have all your ear^s take part of it.


Omni. Come, on then.


Cla: Hevsd to freequent me and my Husband diverse times* And at last comes he
out one morning to my husband, and says, master Tenterhooke says he, I must
trouble you to lend me200. pound about a commodity which I am to deal in, and
what was that comm^dity but his knighthood.


Omn. So.


Cla. Why you shall Master Scarcrow says my good man: So within a little
while after, Master Fabian was created Knight.


Mono. Created a Knight! that's no good heraldry: you must say dubd.


Cla. And why not Created pray.


Omn. I well done, put him down ats own weapon.


Cla. Not Created, why al things have their being by creation.


Lynst. Yes by my faith is it.


Cla. But to return to my tale.


Whirl. I mary: mark now.


Cla. When he had climbed up this costly ladder of preferment, he disburses the
money back again very honorably: comes home, and was by my husband invited to
supper: There supt with us besides, another Gentleman incident to the Court,
one that had bespoke me of my husband to help me into the banqueting house
and see the reuelling: a young Gentleman, and that wagge (our schoolemaister)
marster Parenthesis, for I remember he said grace, methinks I see him yet, how
he turned up the white a'th eye, when he came to the last Gasp, and that he
was almost past Grace.


Mab. Nay he can doot.


Cla. All supper time, my New-minted knight, made Wine the wagon to his meat,
for it ran down his throat so fast, that before my Chambermaid had taken
half up, he was not scarce able to stand.


Mono. A general fault at Citizens tables.


Cla. And I thinking to play upon him, asked him, Sir Fabian Scarcrow quoth I,
what pretty Gentlewoman will you raise up now to stal her your Lady? but he like
a foul-mouthd man, swore zounds I Will stal never a punke in England. A Lady,
there is two many already: O fie Sir Fabian (quoth I) will you call her that shall
be your wife such an odious name! and then he sets out a throat and swore again
(like a stinking breathd knight as he was) that women were like horse.


Iud. and Mub. O filthy knave.


Cla. Theyde break over any hedge to change their pasture, the it were worse:
Fie man fie, (says the Gentlewoman.)


mono. Very good.


Cla. And he bristling up his beard to rail at her too, I cut him over the
thumbs thus: why sir Fabian Searcrow did I incese my husband to lend you so
much money upon your bare word, and do you backbite my friends, and me so our
faces! I thought you had had more perseverance; if you bore a Knightly and a
degenerous mind you would scorn it: you had wont to be more deformable amongst
women: Fie, that you will be so humorsome: here was Nobodie so egregious toward
you sir Fabian! and thus in good sadness, I gave him the best words I could
pick out to make him ashamd of his doings.


Whrl. And how took he this Correction.


Cla. Very heavily: for he slept presently vpont: and in the morning was the
sorriest Knight, and I warrant is so to this day, that lives by bread in
England.


mono. To fee what wine and women can do, the one makes a man not to have a
word to throw at a Dog, the other makes a man to eat his own words tho they
were never so filthy.


Whirl. I see these Fiddlers cannot build up their bridge, that some Music
may come over us.


Lynst. No faith they are drunk too, what shals do therefore.


mono. Sit up at Cards al night?


mab. That's Serning man's fashion.


Whirl. Drink burnt wine and Eggs then?


Iud. That's an exercise for your sub-burbe wenches.


Cla. No no, lets set upon our posset and so march to bed, for I begin to wax
light with having my Natural sleep p^ld^out a mineeies.


Omn. Agreed: beet so, the sack posset and to bed.


mono. What Chamberlain? I must take a pipe of Tobacco.


3. Woman. Not here, not here, not here.


mab. I Will rather love a man that takes a purse, then him that takes Tobacco.


Cla. By my little finger I Will break al your pipes, and burn the Case, and the
box too, and you draw out your stinking smoakeafore me.


m^no. Prithee good mist^^^ (...), I Will ha done in a trice.


mono. Do you long to have me swoune?


mono. I Will use but half a pipe in troth.


Cla. Do you long to see me lie at your feet!


mono. Smell toot: ^i^ perfumed.


Cla. Oh God? Oh God? you anger me: you stir my blood: you move me: you make me
spoil a good face with frowning at you: this was ever your fashion, so to
smoke my Husband when you come home, that I could not abide him in mine eye:
he was a moate in it me thought a month after: pray spawle in another room:
fie, fie, fie.


Mo. Well, well, come, we will for once feed her humor.


Iud. Get two rooms off at least if you love us.


Mab. Three, three, mai^^er Lynstocke three.


Lin. Sfoote we will dance to Norwich, and take it there, if you will stay till we
return again? Heeres a stir, you will ill abide a fiery face, that cannot endure a
smoaky nose.


Mo. Come lets satisfy our appetite.


Whi. And that will be hard for us, but we will do our best.


Ex^^nt. Cla. So: are they departed? What string may we three think that
these three gallants harp upon, by bringing us to this sinful town of
Brainford? ha?


Iud. I know what string they would harp upon, if they could put us into the
righ tune.


Mab. I know what one of em buz'd in mine ear, till like a These in a Candle,
he made mine ears burn, but I swore to say nothing.


Cla. I know as verily they hope, and brag one to another, that this night
they will row westward in our husbands whirries, as we hope to be rowd to London
to morrow morning in a pair of oars. But wenches lets be wise, and make
Rookes of them that I warrant are now setting pursenets to conycatch us.


Both. Content.


Cla. They shall know that Cit^izens wi^es have wit enough to out strip twenty
such guls; tho we are me^^y, lets not be mad: be as wanton as new married
wives, as fantastic and light headed to the eye, as fether-makers, but as
pure about the heart, as if we dwelt amongst em in Black Friars.


Mab. We Will eat and drink with em.


Clar. Oh yes: eat with em as hungetly as soldiers: drink* as if we were
Froes: talk as freely as Iestors, but do as little as misers. Who (like dry
Nurses) have great breasts but give no milk. It were better we should laugh
at their popin-^ayes, then live in fear of their prating tongues: tho we lie
all night out of the City, they shall not find country wenches of us: but
since we ha brought em thus far into a fools Paradise, leave em int: the Jest
shall be a stock to maintain us and our pewfellowes in laughing at christnings,
cryings out, and vpsittings this 12. month: how say you wenches, have I set the
Sadle on the right horse.


Boath. O twill be excellent.


Mab. But how shall we shift em off?


Cla. Not as ill debtors do their Creditors (with good words) but as Lawyers
do their Clyents when their ouerthrown, by some new knauish trick: and thus it
shall be: one of us must dislemble to be suddenly very sick.


Iud. I Will be she.


Clar. Nay, tho we can all dissemble well, yet I Will be she: for men are so
jealous, or rather envious of one another happiness (Especially in this out
of town g^ssipings) that he who shall miss his hen, if he be a right Cock
^ndeede, will watch the other from treading.


Mab. That's certain, I know that by my self.


Cla. And like Esops Dog, unless himself might eat hay, will lie in the
manger and starve: but heel hinder the horse from eating any: besides it will
be as good as a Welsh hook for you to keep out the other at the Staves end:
for you may boldly stand upon this point, that vnle^se every man's heels may
be tript up, you scor^e to play at football.


Iud. That's certaine^ peace I hear them spitting after their Tobacco.


Cla. A chair, a chair, one of you keep as great a coil and calling, and as
if you ran for a midwife: tho'ther hold ^y head: whylst I cut my lace.


Mab. Passion of me? master Monopoly, master Linstock^ and you be men, help
to daw mistress Tenterhooke: O quickly, quickly, she is sick and taken with an
Agony.


Enter as she cries Monopohe, Whirlepoole, and Lynstocke, Omni. Sick? How? how
now? what is the matter?


Monop. Sweet Clare call up thy spirits.


Clare. O master Monop^ly, my spirits will not comet a my calling, I am
terrible and Ill: Sure, sure, I Am struck with some wicked planet, for it (...)
my very heart: Oh I feel my self worse and worse.


Mono. Some burnt Sack for her good wenche^: or possit drink, pox a this Rogue
Chamberlin, one of you call him: how her pulses beat: a draught of Cynamon
water now for her, were better than two Tankerdes out of the Thames: how now?
Ha.


Cla. Ill, ill, ill, ill, ill.


Mono. I Am accursed to spend money in this Town of iniquity: there is no good
thing ever comes out of it: and it stands upon such musty ground, by reason of
the River, that I cannot see how a tender woman can do well int, Sfoot? Sick
now? cast down now it is come to the push.


Cla. My mind misgiues me that als not sound at London.


Whirle. Pox on em that be not sound, what need that touch you?


Cla. I fear you will never carry me thither.


Omni. Puh, puh, say not so.


Cla. Pray let my clothes be utterly undone, and then lay me in my bed.


Lynst. Walk up and down a little.


Cla. O master Lynstock, it is no walking will serve my turn: have me to bed
good sweet Mistress Honisuckle, I doubt that old Hag Gillian of Braineford has
bewitched me.


Mono. Look to her good wenches.


Mab. I so we will, and to you too: this was excellent.


Exeunt. whirle. This is strange.


Lynst. Villainous spiteful luck: no matter, th, other two hold ^yas.


Whirle. Peace, mark how he is nipt: nothing greeues me so much as that poor
Pyramus here must have a wall this night between him and his Thisbe.


Mono. No remedy trusty Troylus: and it greeues me as much, that you will want
your false Cressida to night, for heeres no sir Pandarus to usher you into your
Chamber.


Lynst. I Will somon a parlee to one of the Wenches, and see how all goes.


Mono. No whispring with the common enemy by this Iron: he sees the Devil that
sees how all goes amongst the women to night: Nay Sfoot? If I stand piping till
you dance, damn me.


Lyn. Why you will let me call to em but at the keyhole.


Mono. Puh, good master Lynstocke, I Will not stand by whilst you give Fire at
your Key-holes? I Will hold no Trencher till an other ^eedes: no stirrup till
another gets up: be no doore-keeper. I ha not been so often at Court, but I
know what the backside of the Hangings are made of I Will trust none under a
piece of Tapistry, viz. a Couerlet.


Whirl. What will you say if the Wenches do this to gull us?


Mono. No matter, I Will not be doubly guld, by them and by you: go, will you
take the lease of the next chamber and do as I do.


Both. And what is that?


Mono. Any villainy in your company, but nothing out on it will you sit up, or
lie by'te.


Whirl. Nay lie sure, for lying is most in fashion.


Mono. Troth then; I Will have you before me.


Booth. It shall be youres.


Mono. Yours in faith: I Will play Ianus with two faces and look a squinte both
ways for one night.


Lyn. Well Sir, you shall be our dore-keeper.


Mono. Since we must swim, lets leap into one flood,
We Will either be all naught, or else all good.

Exeunt. Enter a noise of Fiddlers, following the Chamberlyn. Cham. Come, come,
come, follow me, follow me. I warrant you ha lost more by not falling into a
sound last night, than ever you got at one Job since it pleased to make you a
noise: I can tell you, gold is no money with them: follow me and fum, as you
go; you shall put something into their ears, whilst I provide to put
something into their bellies. Follow close and sum --


Exeunt. Enter Sir Gozlin and Bird-lime pulled along by him. Goz. What kin art
thou to Long- Meg of Westminster? thou art like her.


Bird. Somewhat a like Sir at a blush, nothing a kin Sir, saving in height of
mind, and that she was a goodly Woman.


Goz. Mary Anbree, do not you know me? had not I a ^ight of this sweet
Phisnomy at Renish-wine house! ha last day ith Stilliard ha! whither art bound
Galley-foist? whether art bound? whence come thou female yeoman -- a the guard?


Bird. From London Sir.


Goz. Do come to keep the door Ascapart.


Bird. My reparations hither is to speak with the Gentlewoman here that drunk
with your worship at the Dutchhouse of meeting.


Goz. Drunk with me, you lie, not drunk with me: but 'faith what would
with the Women? they are a bed: art not a midwife? one of hem told me thou
were a night woman.


Music within: the Fiddlers. Bird. I ha brought some women a bed, in my time
Sir.


Goz. I and some yong-men too, have not Pandora? how now! where is this noise.


Bird. I Will commit your worship.


Goz. To the Stocks? art a Justice? shall not commit me: dance first 'faith,
why scrapers, appear under the wenches Comicall Window, byth' Lord! Vds
Daggers? cannot sin be set a shore once in a reign upon your Country
quarters, but it must have fidling? what set of Villains are you, you
perpetual Ragamuffins?


Fid. The Town Consort Sir.


Gaz. Consort with a pox? cannot the shaking of the sheets be danced without
your Town piping? nay then let al hell rore


Fid. I beseech you Sir, put up yours, and we will put up ours:


Goz. Play you louzie Hungarians: see, look the Maipole is set up, we will dance
about it: keep this circle Maquerelle.


Bird. I am no Mackrell, and i will keep no Circles.


Goz. Play, life of Pharao play, the Bawd shall teach me a Scotch Iigge.


Bird. Bawd! I defy thee and thy Iigges whats^euer thou art: were I in place
where, I Would make thee prove thy words.


Goz. I wud prove 'hem Mother best be trust: why do not I know you Granam? and
that Suger-loafe? ha! do I not Magar^.


Bird. I am none of your Megges, do not nickname me so: I will not be nickt.


Goz. You will not: you will not: how many of my name (of the Glowormes) have
paid for your furred Gowns, thou Woman's broker.


Bird. No Sir, I scorn to be beholding to any Glo-worme that lives upon
Earth for my furre: I can keep my self warm without Glowormes.


Goz. Can sing Wood-pecker? come sing and wake 'hem.


Bird. Wud you should well know it, I am no singing Woman.


Goz. Howl then! sfoote sing, or howl, or I Will break your Estrich Egshell
there.


Bird. My Egg hurts not you, what do you mean to fl^rish so.


Goz. Sing Madge, Madge, sing Owlet.


Bird. How can I sing with such a sour face -- I am haunted with a caugh and
cannot sing.


Goz. One of your Instruments Mowntibankes, come, here clutch: clutch.


Bird. Alas Sir, I Am an old woman, and know not how to clutch an instrument.


Goz. Look mark too and fro as I (...) it: make a noise: its no matter: any
hunts up, to waken vice.


Bird. I shall never rub it in tune.


Goz. Will you scrape?


Biod. So you will let me go into the parties, I will saw, and make a noise.


Goz. Do then: shatt into the parties, and part 'hem: shat my lean Lana.


Bird. If I must needs play the Fool in my old days, let me have the
biggest instrument, because I can hold that best: I shall cough like a broken
winded horse, if I gape once to sing once.


Goz. No matter cough out thy Lungs.


Bird. No Sir, tho I Am old, and worme-eaten I Am not so rotten --

Coughes. A SONG. Will your worship be rid of me now.


Goz. Feign, as rich-mens heirs would be of their gowtye dads: that's the
hot-house, where your parties are sweating: amble: go, tell the He parties I
have sent 'hem a Maste (...) their ship.


Bird. Yes forsooth I Will do your errand.

Exit.
Goz. Half musty still by thundering Jove: with what wedge of villainy might I
cleave out an hour or two? Fiddlers, come: strike up. march before me, the
Chamberlain shall put a Crown for you into his bill of Items: you shall sing
bawdie songs under every window ith Town: up will the Clownes start, down
come the Wenches, we will set the Men a fighting the Women a scolding, the Dogs
a barking, you shall go on fidling, and I follow dancing Lantara: curry your
instruments: play and away.

Exit.
Enter Tenter-hooke, Hony-suckle, Wafer, Parenthesis, and his wife with Ambush
and C^amberlayn. Honey. Serieant Ambush, as thou art an honest fellow, scowte in
some back room, till the watchword be given for fallying forth.


Amb. Duns the Mouse.

Exit.
Tent. -- A little low-woman say thou, -- in a Veluet-cappe-and one of 'him
in a Beauer? brother Honny-suckle, and brother Wafer, hark -- they are they.


Waf, But art sure their husbands are a bed with 'hem?


Cha. I think so Sir, I know not, I left 'hem together in one room: and what
division fell amongst 'hem, the fates can descouer not I.


Tent. Leave us good Chamberlain, we are some of their friends: leave us good
Chamberlain: be merry a little: leave us honest Chamberlain -- Exit. We are
abuzd, we are bought and sold in Brainford Market; never did the sickness of
one belyed nurse-child, stick so cold to the hearts of three Fathers: never
were three innocent Citizens so horribly, so abhominably wrung under the
withers.


Both. What shall we do? how shall we help our selves?


Honey. How shall we pull this thorn out off our foot before it rancle?


Tent. Yes, yes, yes, well enough; one of us stay here to watch do you see: to
watch: have an eye, have an ear. I and my brother Wafer, and May.
Iustiniano, will set the town in an insurrection, bring hither the Constable,
and his Bill^^^, break open upon hem, take 'hem in their wickedness, and put
'hem to their (...).


Both. Agreed.


Par. Ha, ha, purgation.


Tent. We Will have 'hem before some Country Justice of Coram (for we scome to
be bound to the Peace) and this Justice shall draw his Sword in our defense, if
we find 'hem to be Malefactors we will ticle 'hem.


Honey. Agreed: do not say, but (...) come.


Par. Are you mad? do you know what you do? whether will you run?


All 3, To set the Town an an uproar.


Par. An uproar ^ will you make the Towne^^men think, that Londoners never come
hither but upon Saint (...) night? Say you should rattle up the Constable:
thrash all the Country together, hedge in the house with Flayles, Pike-staues,
and Pitch-forkes, take your wives napping, these Western Smelts nibling, and
that like so many (...); every Smith should discover his Venus dancing with
Mars, (...) this plaster cure the head-ake.


Tent. I, it wood.


All 3. Nay it should.


Par. Nego, Nego, no no, it shall be proved unto you, your heads would ache
worse: when women are proclaimed to be light, they strive to be more ^ight,
for who dare disprove a Proclamation.


Tent. I but when light Wives make heavy husbands, let these husbands play mad
Hamlet; and cry revenge, come, and (...) do so.


Mist. Just. Pray stay, be not so heady at my entreaty.


Par. My wife (...) you, and I entreat you to have mercy on your (...), though
you have none over the women. I Will tell you a tale: this last Christmas a
Citizen and his wife (as it might be one of you) were invited to the Reuells
one night at one of the (...) a Court: the husband (having business) trusts
his wife thither to take up a room for him before: she did so: but before
she went; doubts a rising, what blocks her husband would stumble at, to
hinder his entrance, It was consulted upon, by what token, by what trick,, by
what banner, or brooch he should be known to be he when he wrapped at the
Gate:


All 3. Very good.


Par. The crowd he was told would be greater, their clamors greater, and able
to droune the throats of a shoule of fish wives: he himself therefore (...) an
excellent watchword, and the sigue at which he would hang out himself, should
be a horn: he would wind his horn, and that should give 'hem warning that he
was come.


All. 3. So.


Par. The torchmen and (...) had an Item to receaiue him: he comes, ringes out
his horn with an allarum, enters with a showte, all the house rises (thinking
some sowgelder pressed in) his wife blushed, the company Iested, the simple man
like a beggar going to the stocks laughed, as not being sencible of his own
disgrace, and hereupon the punyes set down this decre that no man shall
hereafter come to laugh at their reuells (if his wife be entered before him)
unless he carry his horn about him


Waf. I Will not trouble them.


Par. So if you trompet a broad and preach at the market cross, you wives
shame, it is your own shame.


All. What shall we do then!


Par. Take my council, I Will ask no fee sort: bar out host: banish mine hosts,
beat a way the Chamberlin, let the ost^ers walk, enter you the ch^mbers
peaceably, lock the doors gingerly, look upon your wives woefully, but upon
the euill-doers, most wickedly.


Tent. What shall we reap by this.


Par. An excellent harvest, this, you shall hear the poor
mouse-trapt-guilty-gentlemen call for mercy; your wives you shall see kneelig
at your feet, and weeping, and wringing, and blushing, and cursing Brainford
and crying pardona may pardona may, pardona may, whilst you have the choice to
stand either as Judges to condemn 'hem, beadles to torment 'hem, or confessors
to absolved 'hem: And what a glory will it be for you 3. to kiss your wives
like forgetful husbands, to exhort and forgive the young men like pitiful
fathers; then to call for ^ares, then to cry hay for London, then to make a
Supper, then to drown all in Sack and Sugar, then to go to bed, and then to
rise and open shop, where you may ask any man what he lacks with your cap off,
and none shall perceive whether the brims wring you.


Tent. We Will raise no towns.


Honey. No, no, lets knock first.


Wa. I that's best I Will somon a parle. --


knocks Cla. Whose there? have you stock fish in hand that you beat so hard:
who are you?


Tent. that's my wife; let Instiniano speak for all they know our Tongues.


Cla. What a murren aile these colts, to keep such a kicking? Monopoly.


Par. Yes.


Cla. Is M. Lynstock up too, and the Captain.


Par. Both are in the field: will you open your door?


Cla. O you are proper Gamsters to bring false dice with you fro London to
cheat your selves. Is It possible that 3 shallowe women should gul. 3. such
Gallants.


Tent. What means this.


Cla. Have we defied you upon the walls all night to open our gates to you ith
morning. Our honest husbands they (silly me^) lie praying in their beds now,
that the water under us may not be rough, the tilt that couers us may not be
rent, and the straw about our feet may keep our pretty legs warm. I warrant
they walk upon Queen-hiue (as Leander did for Hero) to watch for our landing,
and should we wrong such kind hearts? wud we might ever be trobled with the
toothache the.


Tent. This thing that makes fools of us thus, is my wife.


Knockes. Mab. I, I knock your bellies full, we hugg one another a bed and lie
laughing till we tickle again to remember how we sent you a Bat-fowling.


Waf. An Almond Pa^^at: that is my Mabs voice, I know by the sound.


Par. Sfoote you ha spoild half already, and you will spoil al, if you dam not
up your (...) villainy! nothing but villainy, I Am afraid they have smelt your
breaths at the key hole, and now they set you to catch Flou^ders, whilst in the
mean^ time, the con^^piscentious Ma^efactors make 'em ready and take London
napping.


Al 3. I Will not be guld so


Ten. Show your selves to be men, and break open doors.


Par. Break open doors, and show your selves to be beasts: if you break open
doors, your wives may lay flat burglary to your charge.


Honey. Lay a pudding; burglarie.


Par, Will you then turn Coridons because you are among ^lowns? shall it be
said you have no brains being in Brainford.


M. Parenthesis we will enter and set upon 'em.


Par, Well do so: but enter not so that all the country may cry shame of your
doings: knock 'hem down, burst open Erebus, and bring an old house over your
heads if you do.


Waf. No matter, we will bear it of with head and shoulders. (...)


Mab. You cannot enter indeed la, gods my pittikin our 3 husbands somon a
parlee; let that long old woman either creep under the bed or else stand
upright behind the painted cloth.

Exit.
Waf. Do you hear: you Mabel:


Mab. Lets never hide our heads now, for we are descouered.


Honey. But all this while, my Hony-suckle appears not.


Par. Why then two of them have pitched their tents there and yours lies in
Ambuscado with your enemy there.


Honey. Stand upon your guard there, whilst I batter here.


knock Mono. Who Is there?


Par. Hold, I Will speak in a small voice like one of the women; here is a friend:
are you up? rize, rize; stir, stir.


Mono. Vds foot, what Weasell are you? are you going to catch Quails, that
you bring your pipes with you. I Will see what troubled Ghost it is that cannot
sleep.


Looks out. Tent. O May. Monopoly God save you.


Mono. Amen, for the last time I saw you, the Devil was at mine elbow in
Buffe, what! 3 merry men, and 3. merry men, and 3. me^ry men be we too,


Hon. How does my wife M. Monop.


Mono. Who? my overthwart neighbor: passing well: this is kindly don: Sir
Gozlin is not far from you: we will join our Armi^s presently, here be rare
fields to walk in-Captaine rize, Captain Lynstock bestir your stumps, for the
Philestins are upon us

Exit.
Tent. This Monopoly is an arrant knave, a cogging knave, for all he is a
Courtier, if Monopoly be sufferd to ride up and down with other men's wi^es,
he will vn-do both City and Country.


Enter the three wives. Par. Mol, mask thy self, they shall not know thee.


All 3. How now sweet hearts, what make you he^.


Waf. Not that which you make here.


Tent. Mary you make Bulls of your husbands.


Cla. Buzzards do we not? out you yellow infirmities: do al flowers show in
your eyes like Columbines.


Waf. Wife what says the Collier? is not thy Soul blacker then his coals?
how does the child? how does my flesh and blood wife?


Mab. Your flesh and blood is very well recovered now mouse-


Waf. I know it is: the Collier has a sack-full of news to empty.


Tent. Clare Where be your two ringes with Diamonds?


Clare, At hand sir, here with a wet finger.


Tent. I dreamt you had lost hem -- what a profane varlet is this shoulder
clapper, to lie thus upon my wife and herringes.


Enter Monopoly, Whyrlpoole and Lynstock. All. 3. Save you gentlemen;


Tent. Honey. Waf. And you and our wives from you.


Mono. Your wives have ^aude themselves for one.


Tent. May. Monopoly, tho I meet you in h^e Germany, I hope you can
understand broken English, have you dischargd your debt.


Mono. yes Sir: with a duble charge, your Harpy that set his ten commandemets
upon my back had 2. Dyamondes to save him harmles.


Tent. of you Sir.


Mono. Me Sir, do you think there be no dyamond courtiers.


Enter. Ambush, Tent. Sargent Ambush issue forth, Monopoly I Will cut off your
conuoy may, Sargant Amb^sh, I charge you as you hope to receive comfort from
the smell of Mace speak not like a Sargent, but deal honestly, of whom had
you the dyamondes.


Amb. Of your wife Sir if I Am an honest man.


Cla. Of me you peuter-buttoned rascal.


Mono. Siria you that live by nothing but the carrion of poult^y.


Cla. School Ma^ster hark heither.


Mono. Where are my lems and precious stones that were my bale.


Amb. Forth coming Sir tho your money is not, your crediter has hem.


Par. Excellent; peace, why M. Tenterhooke, if the dyamondes be of the reported
value, I Will pay your money receive em, keep 'hem till May. Monopoly be fatter
ith purse: for May. Monopoly I know you will not be long empty Mast. Monopoly.


Cla. Let him have 'hem good Ten^erhooke, where are they.


Tent. At home, I locked hem up. --


Enter Birdlime. Bird. No indeed for-sooth, I locked 'hem up, and those are they
your wife has, and those are they your husband (like a bad liver as he is)
would have given to a (...) of mine, (that lies in my house to take physic) to
have committed sleshly treason with her.


Tent. I at your house -- you old --


Bird. You perdy, and that honest batchiler, never call me old for the matter.


Iud. Motherly woman he is my husband and no Batchelers buttons are at his
doublett


Bird. las, I speak Innocently and that lean gentleman set in his staff
there: But as I Am a sinner, both I and the young woman had an eye to the main
chance, and tho they brought more a bout 'hem than capten Candishis voyage came
to, they should not, nor could not (unless I had bin a naughty woman) have
entered the straytes.


All. 3. Have we smelt you out foxes.


Cla. Do you come after us with hue and cry when you are the thieves your
Selves.


Iud. Murder I see cannot be hid, but if this old Sybill of yours speak
oracles, for my part, I Will be like an Almanacke that threatens nothing but
foulewether.


Tent. That bawd has bin dambd. 500 times, and is her word to be taken.


Par. To be dambd once is enough, for any one of her coat.


Bird. Why Sir. what is my coat that you fit thus upon my Scirts.


Par. Thy Coat is an ancient Coat, one of the seven deadly sins, put thy
coat first to making; but do you hear, you mother of Iniquity, you that can
loose and find your ears when you list go, sail with the rest of your
baudie-traffikers to the place of sixe-penny Sinfulness the subvrbes.


Bird. I scorn the Sinfulness of any subvrbes in Christendom it is well known I
have vp-rizers and downe-lyers within the City, night by night, like a
profane fellow as thou art.


Par. Right, I know thou have, I Will tell you Gentle-folkes, there is more resort
to this Fortune Tellers, then of forlorn wives married to old husbands, and of
Greene-sicknesse Wenches that can get no husbands to the house of a wise-Woman.
She has tricks to keep a vaulting house under the Laws nose.


Bird. Thou do the Laws nose wrong to belly me so.


Prr. For either a cunning woman has a Chamber in her house or a Physician, or
a picture maker, or an Attorney, because all these are good Clokes for the
rain. And then if the female party that is cliented aboue-Staires, be young,
She Is a Squires daughter of low degree, that lies there for physic, or comes
up tobe placed with a Countess: if of middle age, she is a Widow, and has suits
at the term or so.


Iud. O fie upon her, burn the witch out of our company.


Cla. Lets hem her out off Brainford, if she get not the faster to London.


Mab. O no, for Gods sake, rather hem her out off London and let her keep in
Brainford still.


Bird. No you cannot hem me out of London; had I known this your rings should
ha bin poxt er -- I wud ha touched 'hem: I will take a pair of Oars, and leave
you.

Exit.
Par. Let that ruin of intemperance be rakt up in dust and ashes, and now
tell me, if you had raised the Town, had not the tiles tumbled upon your
heads: for you see your Wives are chaste, these Gentlemen civil, all is but a
merriment, all but a May Game; she has her Diamonds, you shall have your money
the child is recovered, the false Collier discovered, they came to Brainford to
be merry, you were caught in Bird-lime; and therefore set the Hares-head
against the Goose-giblets, put all instruments in tune, and every husband play
music upon the lips of his Wife whilst I begin first.


Omt. Come wenches be it so,


Cla. Mist. Iustiniano is it you were ashamed all this while of showing your
face, is she your wife Schoolemaister.


Par Look you, your Schoole-maister has bin in France, and lost his hair, no
more Parenthesis now, but Iustiniano, I will now play the Merchant with you.
Look not strange at her, nor at me, the story of us both, shall be as good,
as an old wives tale, to cut off our way to London. Enter Chamberlain, How now?


Cham. Alas Sir, the Knight yonder Sir Gozlin has almost his throat cut by
Powlterers and Townes-men and rascals, and all the Noise that went with him
poor fellows have their Fidle-cases pulled over their ears.


Omn. Is Sir Gozlin hurt?


Cham. Not much hurt Sir, but he bleedes like a Pig, for his crowne's cracked.


Iud. Then has he been twice cut ith head since we landed, once with a
Pottle-po^and now with old iron.


Par. Gentlemen hasten to his rescue some, whilst others call for Oars.


Omn, Away then to London.


Par. Farewell Brainford.
Gold that buys health, can never be ill spent,
Nor hours laid out in harmless meryment.

Exeunt. Finis Act. Quint.
SONG.
Oars, Oars, Oars, Oars:
To London hay, to London hay:
Hoist up sails and lets away,
for the safest bay
For us to land is London shores.
Oars, Oars, Oars, Oars:
Quickly shall we get to Land,
If you, if you, if you,
Lend us but half a hand.
O lend us half a hand.
Exeunt. FINIS.

