No Parliament POWDER.

BUT SHOT AND POWDER for the Pope.

AND For all his Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Friars, Monks; the Masters and
great Doctors of Sorbonne.

Sent to his Vn-Holynesse, and them all, for a Newe-yeares gift. 1609.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Ieffrey Chorleton, and are to be
sold at the great North door of Paul's Church. An. Dom. 1609. (*)

TO MASTER RObert Harryson, and Master Edward Paltocke, Gentlemen; Two of his
Majesty's Cursisters, of his high Court of Chauncerie.
THAT this may be reputed a great boldness in me, (Gentlemen) not having so much
as seen either of you, to stamp your names in the fore head of sopoore a
Pamphlet; I deny not, and crave favor for this presumption, offending but in
an error of courtesy and honest affection, not any wilful or peremptory pride,
impudently to prejudice your worth, or any way to procure your misconstruction.
Because this fault (if a fault it may be termed) in former times, has been
desired of the best, and thought to be the purest gold, that beautified the
richest Diadems in the world: Scholars to honor Princes with their painful
labors, and Princes honoring Scholars, with respect and thankful
acceptance. Beside, that learned saying of divine Saint Augustine, S. Aug. in.
Enchirid. ad.
speaks sufficiently unto you both, in my just excuse: Lau. Cap. 10. and De
Ciuit.
Inuisa diligere possumus, incognita nequaqam. Unseen men may be beloved, but
unknown, Dei Lib. 22. Cap. 1.
very hardly. And yet men have been very familiarly known, to them that never
had any sight of them; Arist. Lib. 2.
by the splendour of their virtues, Elench. Cap.
renown of their actions, their learned writings, Vlt. Plato. 4. de legibus.
Et in Protag.
and such like noat-worthye qualities, Which (as Sir Thomas Moore was wont to
say) Do make men that are sundered by many miles, Sir Thomas Moore in his Vtop.
to have dispute, conference, and loving intercourse together, even as he
seemed to have with Cornelius Agrippa.

And that you both (worthy Gentlemen) although as yet unseen, are not
unknown to me; let me resolve you, by this moral ensuing example, which was
the first motive to this presumption, and is the only argument, to plead your
much better merit. A young Grafte, growing sometime in an vnkindlye ground,
where it neither had the Suns warmth, or the least favor of any weather,
but, by the envious Master of the ground, was not only unrespected, but
thrown out (by his will) to have prosperity in no place: First, by one of
you, the poor, though not vnpittied Plant, was kindly respected, and admitted
to have fresh grows in his Garden. Until such time, as, finding an other
soil, (I will not say more fertile, but of answerable fruitfulness:) with
his own hand it was thither trans-planted, and there, by the other of you, so
carefully husbanded; as I know not which of you I should most commend, for
humanity, courtesy, and loving affability.

Now, in regard, that (though not at the first, but since those tempestuous
times) that Grafte has (by some peculyer propriety) appertayned unto me, and
does still enjoy the fruition of both your woonted favors: In such manner as
I could best devise, to clear my self of ingratitude, and (in some measure)
to answer your great merit; I have sent you a sillye New-yeeres gift, better
in proof, than outward appearance, and more worth in regarding, then in the
bare reading. It has no other suit unto you, or further expectation; but that
God may bless the continuance of your kindness, where already it has been
liberallye bestowed: And the poor Plant to thrive no otherwise, but as it may
daily prosper in your good opinions. Then, you both, to measure my love
equally toward you, in the even Scale of your friendly construction; Which I
will further study to deserve, though ability can therein (no way) comprehend
my earnest desire.

Yours in all affection, PHILAGATHVS.

TO THE RELIGIOUS, devout, and godly Pastors, Elders and Brethren, of the
French and Dutch Churches in London; Grace, mercy and peace, in our Lord Jesus
Christ.
Having had some small experience, of your zealous love to Gods truth, and
daily care for preserving the same, in most Christian and religious manner among
you: I could not but express some fruit of mine unfeigned affection toward
you. And, as a true testimony thereof, I send you this learned and worthy
labor, as a poor New-yeares gift, which was first written by a brother of
yours in our Lord Jesus, and by me instructed to speak our native English
tongue. For I did account it, as a wrong or injury done to you, that a work
of such worth, receiving his original from Gods reformed Cburch among you:
should here be made public, and you to have no acquaintance at all
therewith, or interest therein. To prevent which inconvenience, in the bonds of
Christian love and amity, I dutifully have directed it unto you, desiring
(according to the high deserving merit thereof) that it may not only have
acceptance among you, but that it may likewise find favor in your houses and
families, where it may do more good, then easly can be imagined. So,
entreating your best construction, of this my very sudden, yet honest
boldness: I commit you all, my self, and this my poor pains, to that
measure of blessedness, which it shall please our Lord God (in mercy) to
bestow upon us.

Your loving well-willer, PHILAGATHVS.

To King Abgarus, and to his worthy Confederates, the Lords GAMALIEL and
IAYRVS, most excellent gracious Princes, faithful friends to our sovereign
Messiah and Reedemer, our Lord Jesus Christ.
IF at this instant we consider well, the estate and condition of Gods Church,
we may evidently perceive, that, what our Lord Jesus has foretold and
promised, is most truly fulfilled and accomplished. For, having warned us of
the afflictions and troubles of his Church: yet afterward he promised, to be
always with her, Matthew. 28. 40.
even to the consummation of the world. As for her afflictions, wrapped up in
so many several persecutions, troubles and divisions: there is no man but does
perfectly know them; and, that our Lord God in his mercy has assisted her, The
troubles of the church have been cruel and terrible in our time.
preserving her even in the midst of all her enemies. Whereby we plainly see,
that his promise is truly kept; especially since he never leaves her
unprovided of his seconding aids and good means: to the end she may not be
devoured of Lions and ravenous Wolves, whom (in his just judgment) he has
permitted, to rush in upon her, as representing those persons, which heretofore
have hated, maligned and persecuted her.

Do we not (at this day) behold many successors to Pilate? Pilate, Judas,
Cayphas and Simon Magus, seem not yet to be dead: for they have successors
inow, that do what they can against Jesus Christ.
Others, that are Lieutenants to Judas? Others, Vizegerents to Cayphas? And
others, the mere Vicars to Simon the Sorcerer? All which together (as it were)
do yet torment and persecute the Church of God, intending to exterminate it
wholely, to the end there might be no more memory thereof. But the Lord our
God, against whom there is no wisdom, counsel or providence, knows how to
wink (for a while) at the impudence of such fools; And, to the end his
Church should not stagger in the midst of the way: Prou. 21.
he has raised up (in our time) many lively figures of those ancient friends
to his Gospel. God never leaves his Church without friends, and to maintain
the same keeps his promise.
I will not compare you to any of the Apostles, although it cannot be denied;
But that God has given us vessels of honor, into whose mouths he has put
his sword, that cuts on both-sides.

Concerning the excellency of your selves, I dare boldly say, that one of you
does lively represent, Matthew. 22. 9.
the good king Abgarus: who being desirous to express his love to Jesus
Christ, Hisio. Eccle.
offered him all assistance and favor, lib. 1.
when so graciously he invited him into his house. King Abgarus a faithful
lover of Jesus Christ.
The second has done the duty and office of good Gamaliell, a Prince and
Doctor of the Law, also a secret disciple of Jesus Christ, evermore favoring
and furthering his cause. Acts 5. 41.
The third is nothing inferior to prince Iayrus; on whom, Gameliel, Prince and
Doctor, and secret disciple of Jesus.
even as Jesus bestowed the raising of his daughter from death to life: so has
he raised up you, most miraculously preserving your life, from the
blood-thirstie throats of wolves.

Now most renowned and worthy personages altogether, Mark. 5 41.
having collected a brief disputation of the faith, Jayrus a prince of Israel,
converted to the Gospel, received a great benefit from Iesus-God will not be
approved by men's inventions.
touching the principal Articles thereof, the more gladly I undertook this
Argument, to the end, that thereby might clearly be discerned, the difference
on both sides, and which of them holds the iustest cause before God, who craves
no approbation by men's inventions, let them be shadowed and colored, by
whatsoever shows of sanctity and good intention. For his word will not endure
addition, change or diminution: nay, the very Angels of heaven are to be
suspected in that cause. Wherefore, according to the example of S. Luke, Deuteronomy.
4. 12.
writing his Gospel to to the beloved Theophilus: Galat. 1. 8.
I dedicate and present unto you, this small Christian resolution, S. Luke in
his Praeface, writes his Gospel to Theophilus a man of great authority.
most humbly beseeching you, that you would embrace and defend the same, as
already you have most religiously begun to do. For the Lord God has chosen
you, as his vessels of honor, and principal members of his Church, to be
served by you, to his honor and glory: to the end, that his name may be
sanctified, and his kingdom every where to come, The Church has great vessels
of honor at this present time, God be praised therefore.
as we pray daily it may be increased: and we to live under obedience and
protection thereof. I likewise pray from the bottom of my heart, that you all
may prosper in felicitic, and most happy contentment. From Egypt, near the red
Sea: in expectation of the year 666. against Babylon. Mat. 6. 10. The Church
of God is yet in Egypt, but it is near to the red Sea, to pass from thence,
expecting the year 666. Apo. 13.


Your very meanest, most humble and obedient Servant for ever. Dena Kol, borne
blind, but recovering sight by Jesus.

To the most magnanimous Lord, and Christian Knight: his most humble and
obedient Servant wishes grace, peace, and all blessedness in our Lord Jesus
Christ.
Having a long time considred the contentious difference, between the true
eternal light, and the foul horrid darkness of Beliall: Psalm. 19.
by grace and assistance of him, Math. 25.
that gives wisdom to the simplest, I boldly undertook summarily to gather,
a Christian warlike encounter, with the proud Roman Praelate, that so
audaciously lifts up himself against Jesus Christ. Which when I had
accomplished, after I had imparted the same, to diverse of good knowledge and
learning, to whom I am unworthy to be termed a Scholar: their advise
ouer-ruled me, not to hide or bury this poor tallent in the earth. Upon
further consideration, to decorate and adorn the labor, with some honorable
title and favor: I dedicated and presented it to three most illustrious
Personages, very great and excellent vessels of honor, and endeared servants
to our Lord Jesus. Now, because I am not ignorant, that you are to them all a
most ancient, loyal and firm friend: my humble supplication to you, is, to
receive likewise this poor penny into your protection, to note with what coin
it is stamped on both sides, and to try which of them is false or counterfeit,
and whether of them is pure metal, 1. These. 6.
and acceptable in the sight of God. On whose part I pray you may long continue
as his Champion, Matthew. 24.
and I to remain in your favor and good regard: Ephe. 6.
according as the Apostle requires in good servants toward their masters. Tit.
1.
From Egypt, near to the red Sea, Apoc. 13.
expecting the year 666. against Babylon.

Your most humble and obedient Servant for ever. Dena Kol: borne blind, but
illumined by Jesus.

An advertisement to the Christian Reader, how to make use of these defensive
Arms against Popery, how to employ this Powder and Shot, against the Pope,
his Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, and Masters of Sorbone. etc.
FRiendly Reader, although we may (to our grief) behold, that in many places
of Christendom, the buildings and labors of the Apostles are much demolished
and ruined: Good Ministers are the Masons of Gods Church.
yet to comfort us again, our Lord God has raised many good Masons and
excellent worke-men, to reestablish the same in the former form and estate. 2.
Cor. 11.
Whose pains (God be praised therefore) we may daily see, by the plenty of
good books and learned endeavors, that show themselves in this clear light of
the Gospel, each man laboring about the building, according to the gift and
measure he has received of our Lord. I am not ignorant likewise, that diverse
men of great reading and experience, have very amply discoursed on the
difference, between the Pope of Rome, and our Lord Jesus Christ; delivering
the true title and right of the one, and as apparently reproouing the shameful
insolence of the other: 1. Tit. 3. 6.
wherefore my pains employed in the same argument, Neophytes, are as Nouices
in faith, or young beginners, that have no other defense, put Pa, pa, like young
children.
may appear but as a repetition of their former actions. But when this small
travail of mine with judgment and advise shall be considered on, those former
labors (perhaps) may be found not so apt and commodious for diverse Neophytes:
young Scholars, newly instructed in matters of faith, that as children feeding
on milk, most usually can cry but Pa, Pa. As much to say, as that they will
defend themselves always, by the faith of their Fathers and Predecessors: not
having any other warant or buckler, But thus did our fathers, being utterly
ignorant, both how they were instructed, and who were their true Fathers and
guiders in the faith.

In regard whereof, as the weakest and most vnworthe labourer, to trauile in
the business of Gods building, I have collected this little Volume,
principally applying the same to such as are not for strong meats, but (as
children) are to be fed with spiritual milk, for their better digesting the
word of God hereafter. But if they will not forget their childish custom, Such
as willingly convert to the Gospel, do often cry Pa, Pa. but they are children.
or cease from Infants behavior, crying yet Pa, Pa: why then, they shall
find, their true fathers and lawful Seniors, not only the Apostles
themselves, but likewise the ancient Fathers and Doctors of Gods Church, from
whom, their bad Nurses had good hope to hide and hood-wincke them still, in
their old Popish wolves skins, but that (God be thanked) the truth in them
has clearly appeared, even to beat these pretenders, with their own staves
and weapons, The Papists are beaten with their own weapons.
as we use it for a common Proverb.

And this is the maine reason, of publishing this Shot and Powder against the
Pope, by way of Antithesis or comparison in opposition, for better
distinguishing the right of either part. And because (in justice) the Apostles
do deserve the chief and eminent place, The order and method observed in the
book.
we prefer them to lead the way in every cause, and then the Pope follows
with his allegations, uprightly and without any partialtie. Commend both me and
this work to God in thy prayers, and desire his blessing on it for general
benefit. From Egypt, near the red Sea, this year of grace 1608. Attending the
yeerre 666. against Babylon.

Sentences extracted out of the sacred Scriptures, which are especially to be
noted, for more justly judging the cause on both parties.
John 12. 48.
HE that refuses me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him:
the word the I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last day.

Galat. 1. 8.
Though that we, or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we have preached unto you; let him be accursed.

Jam. 1 21.
Receive with meekness the word that is grafted in you, which is able to save
your souls.

2. Tim. 2. 14. 16. 23.
Strive not about words, which is to no profit, but to the perverting of the
hearers. Stay also profane and vain babbling* Put away foolish and unlearned
questions, knowing that they engender strifes.

Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
You shall put nothing unto the word which I have commanded you, neither shall
you take ought there from.

Deuteronomy. 12. 8. 32.
You shall not do after all these things that we do hear this day; that is,
every man whatsoever seems him good in his own eyes. Whatsoever I command
you, take heed you do it, thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought
therefrom.

Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
The Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not
commanded him to speak; or that speaks in the name of other Gods; even the
same Prophet shall die.

Ezech. 20. 18, 19.
Walk not in the ordinances of your Fathers, neither observe their manners, nor
defile your selves with their Idols. I am the Lord your God, walk in my
statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them.

Prou. 14. 12.
There is a way that seems right to man, but the issues thereof are the ways
of death.

Prou. 12. 15.
The way of a fool, is right in his own eyes, but he that hears council,
is wise.

Other notable and important Sentences, collected out of the holy doctors and
ancient Fathers of the Church, which do both admonish and instruct all men of
sound judgment and understanding: how to censure in the cause between these
parties, as also which of them ought to be embraced and defended, as the
infallible, best and most certain testimony before God.
Saint Hierome upon the Prophet Micheas, Chap. 7. Tom. 6.
CHrist is the head of all men, and Christ is head of the Church. Many are in
the Church, that depart not from Jesus Christ, and yet will speak against him.
They that are reputed to be in his house, that is to say, in the Church, fall
out often times to be his enemies. And though they part not from the head, yet
they will speak ill of their head; because both without the Master, and
without the Lords grace, they dare promise (in their own judgment) knowledge
of the Scriptures. Whereas indeed they are but only puffed up, understanding
nothing; but do languish about questions, contentions, and strifes of words,
who if they be truly in the house, are yet mere enemies to truth and the
house.

S. Cyprian ad Magnum. Lib. 1. Epist. 6.
THis ought to be admired, yea, and greiued at with an holy indignation, There
be diverse busy in the Church, that fight against the Church.
that Christans should give assistance to Antichrists: and that preuaricatours
and betrayers of the Church, should hold firm abiding in the Church, against
the Church.

S. Chrysostom upon S. Matthew. Chap. 24 Hom. 49.
ALl heresies are the army or band of Antichrist, Antichrist with all his band,
holds strong power in the Church, against the the Church.
especially those that get place in the Church, and presumes to be in the holy
place, where it would seem to be held in reckoning, as if it were the word of
truth. But it is the abomination of desolation, even the battalion of
Antichrist, which has yielded up the souls of many men, very desolate of God.

S. Hierome agaiust Pelagius.
Wise Philosophers, VVolrdly wisdom is enemy to Gods Church.
Patriarckes of Heretics have polluted the purity of the Church by perverse
doctrine.

S. Chrysostom in his imperfect work on S. Matthew. Cap. 23.
IT is a matter behoouefull, that the people should go to all Doctors and
teachers, We ought to hear each one, but to persevere in Jesus Christ.
and enquire of them, where pure truth is to be had, and where it is corrupted.
For it is not prohibited to know that which all men do confess, and to elect
the best. And the Apostle says: Try all things, 1. These. 5. 11. 21.
and keep that which is good.

S. Hierome his Prediction, accomplished in our time, as it is written in his
sixth Tome, on the Prophecy of Nahum, Chap. 3. upon these words. O King of
Assure, thy shepherds do sleep.
AT the coming of Jesus Christ, There is no one so blind, but he perceives
this prediction day by day accomplished.
and of the word of God, and in the coming of Niniuies consummation
(heretofore the fair strompet:) the people shall arise and walk, that before
had slept under their Masters: And they shall go to the Mountains of the
Scriptures, and there they shall find the hills, to wit, Moses and Joshua the
son of Nun. The holy and ancient Scriptures, are the hills toward which the
people, fled in this time of desolation.
The hills, which are the Prophets, the mountains of the new Testament,
namely, the Apostles and the Evangelists. And when they shall be fled to such
hills, and have conuersed in reading with such manner of hills: there will be
found none to teach (for the harvest truly is great, and the laborers very
few in number) then shall their study be praised, The people are praised for
studying at the Mountains, and the ignorance of the seducing Masters, is
poynted at with the finger.
because they fled unto the hills. And the sloth and ignorance of the other
Masters shall be repooued.

The same S. Hierome, on the 86. Psalm. Tome. 8.
ALthough any one should be holy (after the Apostles) albeit he should be
learned: After the Apostles, none have authority.
yet has he no authority, because that the Lord is declared in the
Scriptures, of the people, Galat. 2.
and of Princes that have been, and not by that which is in themselves.

The same upon Jeremy, Chap. 6. Tome. 9,
THe error of our Forefathers, nor of the greatest, is to be followed, but
the authority of the Scriptures ought to be followed, and the commandments;
of God, which only do instruct.

The same on the Prophet Micheas, Chap. 6. Tome. 6.
Truth begets poverty, It is well seen that liars are rich, and they which
hear the word of truth, are poor and persecuted.
and lying engendereth riches.

The several Arguments handled in this small Volume.
Of the Lords Supper. Of one only Mediator. Of Purgatory. Of Confession. Of
the Church. Of Freewill. Of Marriage, and of Vows. Of Fasting, and of Meats.
Of Images.
A Declaration of the great graces, virtues and properties of the Mass: which
being well considered on, is much more worth then an invaluable treasure.

The Sentence of interruption or stay of proceeding between both sides.

An Antithesis of Gods Commandments and the Popes.

The Approbation of the Popes Commandments, against God and his holy word.

The Generation of Antichrist, the Desolator, and Son of the Devil.

The Baptism of Antichrist. etc.

OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
Jesus Christ, Judge and PRESIDENT.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them. Matthew. 18. 20. And as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said:
Take, eat, this is my body. Also he took the Cup, and when he had given
thanks, he gave it them, saying: Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood of
the New Testament, that is shed for many, for the remission of sins. Matthew.
26. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
The APOSTLES of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and his CHVRCH.
AS our Lord JESUS has done, John 13. 13.
so will we do, Math. 10. 24.
without altering any thing of his holy Institution. Heb. 7. 9. 10.
For the Disciples are not wiser then their Master. Wherefore, as we have
received the holy Supper of our Lord, even so do we believe and teach, and in
the selfsame manner will we receive and administer the same. As for your
Mass, it is unknown to us, because it is your Sacrament and sacrifice, and
not that which was instituted by our Lord. For we are well assured, that Jesus
Christ has consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified, by one sole
sacrifice and only oblation of his body.

The Pope, and his Church.
Our holy Mass is the same Sacrament, Toto titu. de celebra. Missar. and de
consecrat. Did. 2.
which is one Sacrifice for the redemption of the living and the dead. For of
all sacrifices, this is the best and most excellent: wherein, at the voice of
the Priest, heaven opens, and thence Jesus Christ with his Angels descends
down, who are all there assistant.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
Our Lord Jesus has long since admonished us, Math. 14. 7.
not to listen unto such as say; Behold, here is Christ, Galat. 1. 8.
and there is Christ. And although an Angel from heaven should proclaim your
newly forged Transubstantion to us, John 6. 20.
we would hold him for accursed. For by faith (truly and only) do we eat the
body of Jesus Christ, and drink his blood in spirit, which quickens, for
the flesh profits nothing. Thus do we receive these words of our Lord, which
he has said to be spirit and life.

The Pope, and his Church.
IT ought to be believed, S. Thomas Aquinas in 3. pars summae.
upon pain of everlasting damnation, that (very suddenly) the bread and wine
are transubstantiated, and converted into the true body, natural and precious
blood of Jesus Christ: even as great, as gross, and as large, as it was in the
womb of his mother, and on the Cross.

The holy Doctors, and Fathers of Gods Church.
S. Augustine, The Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the holy Doctors
thereof.
Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Cyprian, Ireneus, Origin,
Hilarious, Athanasius, Tertulian, and many others.

The Lords, Signeurs and masters of the Popes Church.
Gratian with his Decretals; The Popes Church, and my Lords the great Masters
of Sorbone.
Gregory with his Decretals; the graund master of the Sentences, S. Thomas of
Aquine; John Bonaduenture; Raymondus, Petrus Comestor; Johannes Scotus, and
many others.

The Apostles, and Gods Church*
AS the holy Apostles did receive it from our Lord Jesus Christ; 1. Cor. 11. 23.
Even so have they delivered it unto us. Wherefore we will not demolish or cast
down their building: we are ignorant of your Transubstantiation, being
certain, that ignorance thereof, is knowledge agreeable unto GOD. Nor have we
any want of testimony concerning the Apostles doctrine, which the Doctors of
the Church received from them, as is easily discerned by that which they have
written. Saint Augustine, an ancient and faithful Doctor, both understood and
believed this holy Sacrament, as you may perceive by his own Exposition,
speaking thus. S. August cont. Adima^tus. Epist. 12. and sup. Leuit. 7. 9. 57.
I can interpret, that this commandment consists in a sign, for our Lord
made no difficulty in his saying; This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body. He instructs these things to be said (even as he spoke by figure)
in sign and by signification. For the thing which is signified, of Custom, is
to be called by the name of the thing signified. Saint Ambrose also says: Thou
receiuest the Sacrament, S. Ambrose, lib. de Sacra^. cap. 1. Et super 1. cor.
cap. 11.
for the similitude of the flesh and of the blood of Christ: But thou obtainest
the grace of his true nature, and by receiving the bread in this kind, Et lib.
de admist.
thou do participate of his divine substance.

And even as in Baptism thou have received the similitude of death: in like
manner do thou drink in the Sacrament, the similitude of the precious blood
of Christ. Saint Hierome says: S. Hierom. super cap. 28. de S. Matthew.
Like as Melchisedech the sovereign Sacrificer of God, performed in the figure
hereof, offering the bread and wine: even so Jesus Christ, represents the
verity of his body and of his blood.

The Pope, and his Church.
ANd such is the alteration, that the bread is no longer bread; nor is the wine
any longer wine, or do contain any thing of their own nature: For they are
really converted into the substance of the natural body of Jesus Christ. These
are the Popes bombards and artillery thundered against Gods invincible truth.
As more amply and divinely is written in our holy Decretals and Canons: and
specially by the venerable Father, S. Thomas of Aquine, In tertia part summae,
and in quarto sententiarum. Toto titu. de Celebrat. Missar. extra. Et de
concrat. Distin. 2. Et in Clement. de reliq. and venerat. Sanct. And in many
other places.

I Thomas of Aquine, All Popery has more listened to this man, to renew and
overthrow the holy Supper, then to maintain the true institution thereof. Yet
you hear what this man says.
am constrained to speak this truth, as I have written in my Sum, pars 3.
in the 46. addition, Article 6. in this manner. Because that the Church is
founded upon Faith and the Sacraments; it appertains not to the masters of
the Church, to make any new Articles of Faith, or create any new Sacraments,
or remove or take away them that are made. For therein is the excellency and
power, which appertains only to Jesus Christ, who is the foundation of the
Church.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
D OUR Lord Jesus Christ did never teach us any such fables, but flatly has
forbidden us to give any credit to them. S. August. in Quinquag.
And S. Augustine, (well instructed in Gods own School) Says. Until such
time as the world shall be finished, Psalm. 54. Et ad Darda^. Epist. 67. and in
3. lib. de doctri.
our Lord Jesus shall continually remain above, but his truth abides here
with us. For it behooves, that the body wherewith he is risen, christi. Et sup.
should be in a certain place: but his truth is every where spread abroad.
Joan tract. 30 Et in 2. Quinquag. psalm. 96.
For we must not imagine, that Jesus Christ is every where dispersed,
according to the form and substance of his body. And we ought in such sort to
maintain his divinity, that we do not destroy his humane nature.

It ensues not therefore, All that which is in God, is not God, that is to
say: the humanity of Christ, is not his divinity, neither is his divinity,
his humanity.
that all that is in God, is God. For to take and eat his very body, may seem,
that he commanded a thing unlawful, or an offense. It is then by a figure
commanded us, how to communicate in the Passion of our Lord, and lovingly and
profitably to preserve in our memory, that his flesh was wounded and crucified
for us: And the words of Jesus Christ, are spirit and life, For the word is
not made flesh, as converted into flesh: but it is united to the flesh without
confounding the substance.
as if he should say: understand spiritually what I have said unto you. You
shall not eat this body which you behold, nor shall you drink the blood
which shall be shed, by them that must crucify me. I have commanded you a
Sacrament spiritually understood: For it is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing. All this has this learned Doctor written, and in
many other places very amply. Nevertheless, God and man is but one Jesus
Christ, who holds always the true nature of man glorious and immortal.


And to the end it may not appear, that this man only was of this opinion:
we are willing to allege the sayings of many other holy Fathers, as of S.
Chrysostom, speaking thus.

Christ has ordained the Table of his holy Supper, to the end, S. Chrisost.
sup.
that in this Sacrament, he might show us daily bread and wine, Psalm. 21. Et
sup. Matthew.
as the similitude of his body and blood, Cap. 5. Homil. 8. ad Caesar.
for the nature of the wine remains ever.

The like says, Monach.
S. Dionisius, Ireneus and Origin, who have all with one consent and accord
written the very same: Iren. lib. cont.
as is to be seen in the Book called the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, Valens.
cap. 34 Origin. super Matt. cap. 26. hom. 83. and super Leuit.
and diverse others.

Moreover, we will not conceal the Nicene Council, Hom. 7.
wherein it was decreed as follows.

We are not bound to matters here beneath, The Council of Nice, taught first,
and very divinely: how we ought to eat the Lords body, and drink his precious
blood.
as the bread and wine proposed on the Lords table. But we must (by faith)
lift up your spirits on high. Considering, and understanding, that the Lamb of
God, taking away the sins of the world, is in this holy Table: who is not
offered in sacrifice by Priests, after the manner of beasts. And, in taking his
precious body and blood; we believe, these are the signs of our resurrection.

You see here the testimony of many holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church:
who received this doctrine from the Apostles in this manner so truly, as they
are not to be gainsaid.

The Pope, and his Church.
THe Priest having an intention to consecrate, Fabulous Aesope could recount no
merier tales then this seducing Scotus does.
saying but four or five words (leaving Enim) upon all the bread which is in
the Market, and upon all the wine which is in a Sellar: immediately, all the
breads and and wines are converted and transubstantiated, into the natural
body and blood of Christ. So says our learned Master, Ioannes Scotus, in
quarto sententiarum.

I Gelasius Pope of Rome, Gelasius a man learned, was elected Bishop of Rome,
in the year of Christ 493.
have no way approved your Transubstantiation. For I will never unsay that
which I have written against Eutichus and Nestorius, Heretics, to wit. The
Sacraments of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, which we receive, are divine
things. We may then well know, that in his time, Transubstantiation was not
forged or received into Gods church: as he very well declares in his own
writings.
Therefore, we are made partakers (by them) of the divine nature: and yet
notwithstanding, the substance of bread and wine do not cease to be there
still. And surely, the Image and similitude of Christ's body and blood, are
celebrated in the action of the mysteries. It is then evidently shown unto us,
what we ought to understand in Jesus Christ our Lord.

I Venerable Bede, will never receive your Transubstantiation, for I will never
revoke that which I have written, upon the 22. Chapter of Saint Luke, namely.
Jesus Christ has left the Sacraments of his flesh and blood, Venerable Bede
was not altogether popish, for he did not believe Transubstantiation.
under the figures of bread and wine, in stead of the flesh and blood of the
Lamb. To the end, that he might show himself to be he, to whom our Lord
had sworn, and never would repent him; Thou art the everlasting Sacrificer.

I Drhumatus, This Monk has written heereon very learnedly. And me thinks
that all Benedictines should not defend Transubstantiation.
Monk of the holy Order of S. Benedict, can no way approve your
Transubstantiation. For I will never deny what I have commented upon S. Matthew.
to wit. The wine does cherish and augment our blood, for this cause is not the
blood of Christ improperly figured thereby. Because, whatsoever comes of him
to us, does cherish us with a true and perfect joy, and increases all our
happiness. Our Lord gave to his Disciples, the Sacrament of his body, For it
was not as yet forged in S. Benets time, who gave them better doctrine then
they will follow.
in remission of their sins, and to preserve charity among them. To the end,
that keeping this act of his in their remembrance, they might affixe in figure,
what he had done for them, and never cast this charity into oblivion, This is
my body, that is to say, in a Sacrament.

I Adrain, This Pope is like unto Saul, who albeit he could do nothing. yet he
would prophecy among the Prophets.
Pope of Rome, notwithstanding the ordinances of my Predecessors: yet, as I
have written in my fourth book, I confess, that the Church ought to know,
that she is not Mistress, but Minister of the Sacraments. And that she cannot
institute any form of Sacraments, no more then she can abolish any divine Law.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THe Disciple cannot be more perfect, Matthew. 10. 24.
or wiser then his Master: it is sufficient for him, that he is as he is. In
regard whereof, we will neither diminish, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
nor ad any thing to the institution of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ; whom
we will only hear, John 13. 15.
and following his example (as he has commanded us) we will receive and
administer the holy Sacrament of his Supper, under the two kinds of bread and
wine, nor dare we do otherwise, without offering sacrilege.

The Council of Basil understood our Lords will well enough, when they
ordained, that Lay people should communicate in both kinds. And S. Cyprian
directly opposes himself, to any such contradiction of Jesus Christ,
affirming it to be full of sacrilege, in his sermon to repentant sinners, and
these are his words. S. Cyprian Sermon. ad peccator. poenitent.
How shall we exhort the people, to spend their blood for the confession of
Christ, if we do deny them his blood, for whom they are to combat? Or how
shall we make them able, to drink of the cup of Martyrdom, except we first
admit them to drink of our Lords Cup? Moreover, our Lord Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, did never teach or command us, to hide or keep close the bread
of the holy Supper, or to carry it about hither and thither. For the Church
having been always obedient to his doctrine, will never do so. And that full
well understood S. S. Clem. in Epist. 2. ad Jacobum. Et in Can. tribus de
consecrat.
Clemens, speaking thus. As many Hosts as will suffice the people, are to be
offered at the Altar. If there shall any remain, or be left, they are not to
be kept until the morrow: but by diligence of the Clerks (with fear and
trembling) they are to be received and eaten. Did. 3.
And Origin also opposes himself against this superstitious vice, which would
have intruded it self into the Church in his time, he says. Origin. sup.
Our Lord has not ordained or appointed, that the bread should be kept until
the morrow, Leuit. Chap. 7.
which he purposed to give to his Disciples; but he said unto them: Take, and
eat. Behold then, how we will follow and imitate the Church of God, without
declining to the right hand, or to the left.

The Pope, and his Church.
THe Sacrament of the Altar, ought to be taken in bread and wine, of the
Priests only. But to Lay people, it is to be given under the kind of bread
only. Tit. de consecrat, Distinct. 2. Concerning them that be sick, the body
of Jesus Christ ought to be carried to them with great devotion, solemnity and
reverence. For this is the commandment of God, and of his Church.

I Gelasius, I can hardly number Gelasius, in rank of the Roman Popes: for
he has opposed himself against a number of their blaphemies.
Pope of Rome, do oppose my self against your ordinance, and will by no
means approve it. For I will never contradict that which I have written in the
Canon Comperimus, de consecrat. Distinct. 2. speaking thus. We have
understood, that there are some, who receiving only the body of our Lord, do
abstain from the Chalice; wherein, because they sin through superstition,
they ought to receive the Sacraments together, or else to be rejected from
them quite. For the division of so great a mystery, cannot be committed
without notorious sacrilege.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
IN regard that worms, The Popes Sacrament had been longer observed and
adored, if they had known cunning to hide aad dissemble the corruption and
wretched subjection thereof. But yet the better to compass their purpose, they
have kept it in Boxes and Pixes. But God has permitted all for the best.
Mice, Spiders, and other creatures, may and do eat your Transubstantiated
bread, which being kept over long, corrupts and putrifieth of it self:
hereby it may be manifestly known, that the sign of the Sacrament, is not the
thing signified thereby: that is to say. That the bread which is a sign (as
has bin sufficiently proved already, and according as our Lord has willed)
cannot thus be converted, or transubsta^tiated into his natural body. For it
were a great and fearful blasphemy, to say, that the body of Jesus Christ
should be subject to putrefaction, corruption, or the teeth of brute beasts.
Hence would ensue, that Christ should be less sufficient, and more inferior
in power and virtue, then were the Gods and Idols of the Gentiles. For they
defended themselves, and spoke by the cunning of him, who (through Gods just
judgment) did hoodwinke and blind the poor credulous world, raising belief
of such a transubstantiation, Psalm. 16. 4.
after he had once newly forged it in his own shop.

Now the Church of God, Mark. 16. 16.
being instructed by the sanctified spirit, believes much more wisely, namely.
That Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, being no more subjected to death. For
he is glorified, immortal and incorruptible; sitting now at the right hand of
God his Father: from whence he will not descend, until such time as he shall
come to judge both quick and dead, and render to every one according to his
works. Then will he punish most grievously, these correcters and falsifiers
of his word, that have changed and ouerturned the institution form and true
manner of his Sacraments. And he will judge the horrible slander of our
adversaries, who do unjustly accuse us, to doubt of Gods power, and deny that
he cannot convert the bread into the body of his son Jesus Christ. The will
and power of God do never disagree in themselves.
But in this Article and difference of the Supper, we pretend no disputation of
Gods power: which we believe and confess to be infinite and incomprehensible.
God can do all things, as being almighty, but he will not use his absolute
power, against that which he has long since promised, having so willed and
commanded For God is never contrary to himself.
For herein only lies our controversy, that the will of God is such,
according to the testimony of his own holy word: By the which we prove
clearly, that we do receive and eat by faith, and spiritually, the very body
and precious blood of Jesus Christ. This confession is incorruptible, not
subject to worms, Mice, Spiders, or to be burned in the fire: which being
eternal, is prepared for all them, that shall breath, forth such blasphemies
against our Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

The Pope, and his Church.
Our holy Father the Pope, supreme head and President in the Council of
Orleance, has ordained and decreed, as it is written in the fifth Chapter to be
seen. That if the body of Jesus Christ, be received and vomited by a sick
body; Most horrible words, that our Lords body should be subject to
putrefaction, and to be eaten of beasts, or to be burned. The Arc of the
covenant, which was but a figure of Christ, would not suffer it self to be so
used:
If (by humane frailty) no person can be found, that will lick up and receive
the same again, I mean the same body of Jesus Christ so disgorged: That then
that body of our Lord is to be burned, and the ashes thereof put among the
Relics. Also, if the body of Jesus Christ be lost, or rotten, by ouer-bad
smell or age; it shall be burned, and the ashes laid upon the Altar.

Moreover, if the body of Jesus Christ, by the eating of Mice or Spiders, do
become much lessened, impaired, or gnawed by biting, or if the very worm be
found in it: For it caused all their deaths, that approached near it* 1. Sam.
5. 11.
It shall be burned. But if there do remain any part of Christ's body, which
is not gnawen, or much out of order: it is more safely done, to take and eat
that. Nevertheless, if it be greatly gnawen, Much greater reason is there for
the bread, what it might do, if it were converted and transubstantiated into
Christ's true body.
rotten and impaired, by some vermin or putrefaction: It shall incontinently
be burned, and the sacred ashes, shall be reverently put and kept among the
Relics.

Such is our holy ordinance, which we will have to be observed upon pain of
Excommunication: As most amply we have ordained and decreed, in the said
Council, and caused to be written under the title of Consecration, But we must
confess, that the sign of the Sacrament, being thus abused, is not the thing
signified thereby.
the second distinction. And yet much more clearly in the Cautells of our holy
Mass.

OF ONE ONLY MEDIATOVR.
There is one MEDIATOVR between God and man, which is the man CHRIST JESUS. 1.
Tim. 2. 5. We have one Advocate with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the just. And he
is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only; but also for the
sins of the whole world. 1. John. 1. 2.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THat is not the Church of God, John 14. 10. 1. John 2. 1. 2.
which (beside both reproouing and changing his word) cannot so content it
self; Romans 1. 4. 1. Tim. 4.
but also disalloweth the sufficiency of one only Advocate and Mediator,
sole God, and searcher of all hearts. For the Apostles, and the whole Church
after them, did reject all other Advocates and Mediators: contenting
themselves with Jesus Christ only, who prays for us, as most evidently is
testified unto us in the Scriptures, and is likewise to be seen in the
writings of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church.

And because we are to handle this point somewhat briefly, S. Ambrose sup.
Epist. ad Romans cap. 1. S. August. sup. 1. Epist. S. Joan. tract. 1. and 2. Et
cont. Parme. Lib. 2. Chap. 6. 8. Et in Quinquag. Psalm. 94. and 108.
Saint Ambrose, delivering the word for the whole Church, speaks thus. There
has been a miserable custom, in saying; that men might go of, and by
themselves, to God, even as by Earls and Princes, they can make way to Kings.
Is there any man so mad, or forgetful of his own salvation, to attribute a
Kings honor to a Prince or an Earl? Why, we see, that if any man should dare
but to speak this of his own King, of good right he ought to be condemned, as
guilty of treason. Shall not they then be held for much more faulty, as dare
attribute the honor of Gods name, to creatures? And, in leaving our Lord shall
honor such as are but servants with themselves? Though men in Kings Courts,
are in more eminent place then others: yet in the King of Kings Court, the
greatest and meanest are all but servants, and the poorest as soon heard as
the proudest, and sooner too. For this cause, men gain access to a King, by
means of Princes and Lords, because the king himself is but a man, and knows
not otherwise how to deal in matters faithfully, concerning his commonwealth.
But, to gain the favor of God, from whom nothing can be hidden; because he
knows the hearts of all men, their works, wants or whatsoever: There needs no
other favorite, to present our supplication by, but only an humble, contrite
and repentant heart.

These are the words of this worthy Father. With him do consent many other
Doctors of the Church, affirming it to be blasphemy and sacrilege, to have
any other Advocate, Mediator or Intercessour, but Jesus Christ only. If any
man shall make doubt hereof, let him read what is learnedly written by diverse
to this purpose, especially by S. Chr^sostome, S. August. lib. de vera Relig.
cap. vlt. Et sup. Joan. tract. 23 chap. 5. Et de eiu^t. D^i lib. 10. 28. chap.
27. Et in lib. de cur. atque mort. cap. 13. Epiphan. lib. 2. Com. 2. and cont.
Collyrid. lib. 3. Tom. 2. haeres. 79. S. Chrysostom. in his imperfect work upon
Matthew. Chap. 2. Hom. 2. S. Hierom. Com. sup. Eze^. cap. 16. Eccles. Hist. lib.
5. Chap. 15.
and S. Augustine who do manifestly speak thus. Although we are full of all
evils, poor and miserable sinners: yet notwithstanding, we have no need of any
Patrons or Advocates, but only Jesus Christ; by whom our prayers are agreeable
before God. S. Augustine teaches us, to honor the Saints, as creatures and
vessels of honor: without attributing any thing else to them, in matters that
appertain to God only, he says. We ought by no means to direct our prayers
to the Saints which are in heaven: because they can be no searchers of our
hearts, neither have they any knowledge of our necessities. For it is
impossible, that they should in any thing be helpful to the living; when they
know nothing that is done in this life.

Consequently them we say, that we ought not to dedicate Temples, Altars or
other things to Saints: for we cannot be made happy or blessed by them. Then
the sum of all is, that as we have but one only everliving God, who will not
give his glory unto any other: Even so we have but one only Savior,
Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ, by whom and in whom, we beg and have all
things, which are needful for us.

The Pope, and his Church.
IT is ordained and decreed, by the great high Bishop, Head of our holy Mother
the Church; that not only Jesus Christ is our Mediator: It ensues then, that
creatures deceased, know our hearts: which is false.
But likewise the blessed Virgin Marie, and all the Saints that are in heaven.
In regard whereof, we ought to pray and inuoke their help in our wants and
necessities, as our Mediators and Intercessours between God and us. For, by
their prayers and merits, For there is is none but God only, who is the
searcher of all men's secrets.
we shall obtain heaven.

He that has any affairs toward a Prince, prepares himself first to some
person of his house, to deliver the message for him, because by himself alone,
he cannot be heard. Psalm. 7. 9.
Even so, the blessed Virgin Marie our Advocate, and all the Saints of heaven,
Romans 8. 25.
do carry our petitions to God, Note, that whosoever will read the Prayer of S.
Claude, shall find it most singular, and worthy to be learned by heart; to be
preserved from the Fever Quintain.
and humbly entreat him for our necessities: and God does never refuse the
Saints, for their merits are of great virtue and efficacy; For in so doing,
we can never fail. As it is written in the title; De reliquis and venerat.
Sanctor. And in many other places of the holy right Canon. And especially, the
prayer of my Lord S. Claude, is very singular and acceptable to God, after the
holy prayers of the blessed Virgin Marie, our principal Aduocatesse.

I John Gerson, This Scholar of Caiphas, has not bin much ill tutord in his.
School.
will never gainsay that which I have written, in my first part of the
Examination of doctrines, speaking thus. The first truth should be so firm,
that any simple man, not authorized, may be thereby so excellently instructed
in holy Letters: For there is maintained firmly, that Romes great Pontifex is
not able to sin, and that he can never err.
That a man ought rather to believe in his assertion, in the cause of
instruction; then in the doctrine of the Pope. For it appears, that a man
ought rather to believe the Gospel, then the Pope. If then, such a man do
teach some verity to be contained in the Gospel, What say ye then to a
she-Pope; Hyldebrand a Sorcerer; 2. Syluester* one a second devil; And the
other held, that our souls are mortal, because otherwise, a man could tell,
that Popes cannot err.
concerning, whether the Pope does, or may greatly err: it is manifest, whose
judgment ought to be preferred. And if it happened, that a general Council
should be celebrated, and such a man (so well instructed) should be present
there among them; If it should chance that (either through malice or
ignorance) the greater part should decline, and be opposite against the
Gospel: Such a Lay man might oppose himself against the said general
Council. This is also proved by the Canon Pudenda. 24. Quest. 1. And in the
Canon, Si Papa. Distinct. 40.

OF PVRGATORIE.
Verily verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me; has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death to life. John 5. 24. We have deliverance through his
blood, that is, forgiveness of sins. Having reconciled all things unto
himself, and to set at peace through the blood of his Cross, both the things
in earth, and the things in heaven. Coloss. 1. 14. 20. God has sent his Son,
to be a satisfaction for our sins. 1. John 4. 10. To him that loved us, and
has washed us from our sins, in his blood, etc. Apoc. 1. 5.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THE true and faithful Church of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 25. 34
knows, and understands his word. Hebre. 1. 10.
And it yields no other testemonie, Coloss. 1 14. 20.
but of two ways only, 1. John. 4. 10.
heaven and hell. Apoc. 1. 5.
Whosoever therefore shall invent any other beside, shall never enter into the
others happiness. For no other Purgatory do we believe and confess, then the
only and most precious blood, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: who (in
himself) has made a full purgatition of our sins, and by his blood we have
deliverance, and absolute remission of them. For he that loved us, has washed
and made us clean from all, being sent from God his Father, to be the
satisfaction for all our sins. Concerning that which S. Paul says; 1. Cor.
3. 13.
That every man's work shall be revealed by the fire: This fire is very
falsely understood to be Purgatory. For the Apostle speaks in that place,
of the fire of tribulation, of the Cross and persecutions in this world,
whereby our Lord examineth and tries who are is.

And that it is so, S. Augustine has faithfully expounded this passage in many
places, S. August. in Enchirid. ad Lauren. cap. 28 and Lib 21. de Ciuit. Dei.
cap. 26. Et in tract. de Fide and O per. chap. 16.
saying. Some do believe, that all those which have not forsaken the name of
Christ, and have been baptized in his Church, and have not been cut off from
it by some schism or heresy, that in whatsoever sins they have lived, and
have not defaced them by repentance, or redeemed them by alms deeds; They that
believe the fire of Purgatory, are deceived in humane benevolence, not
understanding the holy Scriptures, which render no other testimoni, but of the
sufficient purgation made by the precious blood of Jesus Christ only.
But have continued in them usually, even to the last day of their life: They
shall be saved by fire. Howbeit, according to the greatness of their sins,
the fire shall be but diuturnall and not eternal. But me thinks, they which
do so believe, and yet are Catholics, are deceived by humane benevolence. For
if we do enquire for such matter of the divine Scriptures: they make no other
answer, but Christ's death only, and the shedding of his most precious blood.
You hear now what this holy Father says, that they which believe a
Purgatory, being forged against the word of God: are merely deceived by the
conceit of humane benevolence.

The Pope, and his Church.
Our Mother holy Church, Mahomet in his Alchoran, confesses Purgatory as the
Pope does.
does make no doubt at all, but that there is a Purgatory fire, burning for
times and limitation, which purges and extenuateth those sins: the guilt
whereof is forgiven, but not the pain or penalty. Since both of them then do
agree in that faith: it is not to be doubted, but they shall both receive
reward alike.
Let every one be therefore persuaded, that the sacred Scriptures, do render
us good testimony of four places; to wit, Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, and the
Limboes. And whosoever does not believe these 4. places, he shall not escape,
because he has been foretold of them. And holy Saint Paul, the great witness
of this verity, was not willing to conceal such a secret from us, 1. Cor. 3.
13.
for he says. That the fire shall approve the works of every one, This
venerable Master Raymond, was so well skild in the holy Scriptures, as he knew
not to allege any thing, but Canons, and such shot. But that which hefi^^
says, is better proved by Esa. 43. 25
and that they shall be saved by fire.

I Raymondus, Preacher of the Papal Church, will not oppose my self against
the faith of Purgatory. Nevertheless, I firmly do believe, and without any
doubt, that God does not use to pardon sins by halfes: But by his grace, he
either pardons all, or none at all. I do not speak this as of my self, for
it is written, and approved by the holy Canons: according to the testimony of
the gloss, on the Chap. Maiores causas, de Baptismo and eius effectu extra.
Mich. 7. 18.
Where it is said, that the great goodness of God does not pardon a part or
moitie: John 3. 36.
For when a man comes to God with sighs and tears, Romans 8. 6. etc.
he forgiueth all, where it is proved, that Christ's blood is the entire and
sufficient purging, satisfaction and remission of sins, which God gives not by
halfes, but wholly and fully, for the love of his son Jesus.
or else nothing.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
WE read that Satan being come to tempt Christ in the wilderness, he
proposed testimonies to him out of holy Scripture, expounding them falsely,
only to deceive him. But he that could answer him so well, Matthew. 4 4. 1.
Pet. 3. 15.
has taught us also to answer in his name, Matthew. 5. 16. 25.
and to render a reason of our Faith, to all such as shall question us therein.
Wherefore we say, that that place in S. Matthew, of the Prisoner, if he will
not agree with his adversary; is understood of the reconciliation and
agreement that ought to be, S. Ambrose sup. Luc. chap. 12. S. Chris. sup.
Matthew. chap. 5. Hom^. 10. Hillar. and Theo. in Can. Chrysostom. sup. Matthew. Chap.
12. homil. 6. Grego. sup. Job. chap. 29. Et in Moral. lib. ^8. Chap. 17. Et in
can. Did. 14. S. Hierom. in Epist. ad Cher. Et in praesat. de Prouer. Et in
Prolog. Galat.
between such as are in strifes of Law and such like variances. And so is it
expounded by diverse holy Doctors, without making any mention at all of
Purgatory. As namely, S. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hyllarius and Theophylact.

Touching that text, which speaks of the sin against the holy Ghost, S.
Chrysostom in his Exposition thereof, speaks thus. Because this sin can
not be said to be venial in you: therefore it shall be punished greiuously in
you, both in this life, and that which is to come. It is very friuolously done
then, to fordge a Purgatory out of this testimony, which speaks only of
the remission of the fault, and not of the pain. And your Purgatory, is so
much the rather invented, for the pain only. As for the Books of the
Macchabees, they are not authentical nor received in the Hebrew Canon: For
they are numbered with the Apocripha; As S. Augustine, Hierome, Gregory, with
the Council of Laodicea, who do all confess those Books not to be
authentical, neither have they any authority, to prove any thing by, that is
in controversy. Moreover, if we look well into the sacred Scriptures, it is
very easy to be found, that the fire of Purgatory was first of all forged in
the devils Shop: and he has stretched it out to the uttermost, only to
annihilate the sovereign virtue, and merit of Christ's most precious blood.

The Pope, and his Church.
WE have three evident witnesses in the Scripture, that do make the fire of
Purgatory most certain to us. The first is, where it is written of the
prisoner, Matthew. 5. 25. 26.
who not being accorded and agreed with his adversary, should never be
suffered to depart out of prison, Luke 12. 59.
until he had fully satisfied, and paid the utmost farthing. Which cannot
otherwise be understood, but only of the prison of Purgatory: wherein full
satisfaction is to be made, 2. Mac. 12. 27
before any parting thence will be permited. Moreover, Behold the subtle
means, invented to bring water to the mill of Rome. But the wise children of
God (accounted to be fools in this world) will never bring their corn to this
Mill, because it keeps too bad an noise.
the sin against the holy Ghost, is never pardoned in this world, nor in the
world to come: Ergo, it follows, that some sin is to be pardoned in the
other world.

Lastly, the authentical book of the Macchabees, does say, that it is an holy
and wholesome thing to pray for the dead, to the end, that they may be
delivered from their sins. Behold here how Purgatory is divinely approved,
and by long and ancient Custom received into our Mother holy Church.
Wherefore all these being well considered, there is not any doubt to be made
thereof: But rather we ought to pay unto God, that he would save us by this
holy fire of Purgatory. Out of which we shall be very soon delivered, by the
celebration of Masses, Anniuersaries, Oblations, Vigils, Commendations,
Prayers, and Alms deeds. Amen.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
K WE will yet further testify our former speeches, by the Expositions of many
ancient Doctors and Fathers, that neither confess or make any mention of this
Purgatory fire: but have written and taught the contrary. Especially, Saint
Augustine, S. August. lib. 18. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 3 8. Et in lib. 2. de doct.
Christ. Council. Laodicea. cap. 59.
writing to Macedonius, Epist 54. These are his words. There is no other place
for correction of manners, but in this life: For after it is ended, every one
shall receive what he has purchased in this world, there the mercy of God
remains for them that have bin here repentant. But in the world to come,
penitence does profit nothing at all. And in the 13. Book of the City of
God, and 9. Chapter, he writes thus* The souls of the good, being severed
from their bodies, are in rest, and no other doubt is to be made thereof. But
the souls of the wicked are punished, until such time as their bodies shall
be raised: and then the good shall go to life eternal, and the others to
everlasting death. S. Cyprian was not of any contrary opinion, S. Cyprian in
Sermon. de mort. sapient. 2. 4.
for he speaks thus. We are not to think, that the death of the wicked,
should be of like form and condition to that of the good: The good are called
to rest and comfort; the unjust to pains and grievous torments. On a sudden,
is saftie given to the faithful, and torments to the unbelievers. Moreover,
these holy Doctors and Fathers, S. Ambrose, S. Ambrose do bon. de mort. Tom.
1. cap. 2. S. Hierom. sup. Gal. cap. 6. Et in Eccles. Tom. 7. cap. 9. Et sup.
Esaias. ca. 65. Epipha. lib. 1. Tom. 1. haeres. 69. sup. Cantic. S. Cyprian cont.
Demet. tract. 1. S. Chrisost. 2. sermon. de Lazar.
Hierome, and Chrysostom, do contradict not any point of their precedent
opinions, but are all of the same consent, with Epiphanius, speaking thus. It
is neither Fasting nor Alms, penitence nor justice, good or evil, that after
death does hurt or help. For then there is no further place for repentance,
nor any more effects of satisfaction.

Behold then, what the faithful Church does believe, with her learned Doctors
and Fathers; To hold worthless their judgment, it were impious and shameful,
or to condemn and curse them for Heretics. Is not this (then) honor done to
Saints, when thus we remember to imitate their example? To conclude then, the
Council held at Toledo can testify, if we do ill, in rejecting prayers for
the dead: For it was there forbidden as unprofitable, and fruitlessely invented.

The Pope, and his Church, with the Council of Toledo.
NOtwithstanding all that which has been said before, we having assembled
our selves at the Council of Toledo: have ordained and decreed this present
ordinance, Singing for dead is vain, idle, and consequently grounded on sin:
for of every idle word we shall yield an account before God.
which we will have to be firmly kept, and established for ever, as follows.

We command, that such as depart out of this life, by the divine vocation; shall
be carried to the earth with Psalms sung before them, and other Songs of the
Singers. For we do altogether forbid those prayers at Funerals, which were
wont to be commonly sung for the dead. It shall therefore suffice, that you give
to the dead bodies of Christians, the service of divine Songs, in hope of their
resurrection. This is written in the 3. 22. and 23. Chapters of the said
Council of Toledo; And likewise stands allowed in the Decretals of Gratian.

I Panormitanus, This man is like unto Cayphas, that spoke well but not of
himself.
Cardinal of Rome, will not oppose my self against the Papale Ordinanees.
Nevertheless, in matters that do concern Faith, the saying of a Lay man,
ought to be preferred both with the Popes saying, and before it. If it be more
probable, and by better authority, both of the old and new Testament, it then
goes beyond the Popes opinion and judgment.

According as I have written, upon the Chapter; Significasti extra de elect.
And as in other places and Canons, the very same is to be seen.

OF CONFESSION UNTO GOD ONLY.
I have acknowledged my sin unto thee, and have not hid mine iniquity. I will
confess against my self my wickedness unto thee Lord, and thou forgauest the
punishment of my sin. Psalm. 32. 5. Against thee only have I sinned, and done
evil in thy sight. Psalm. 51. 4. O God be merciful to me a sinner. This man
departed to his house justified. Luke 18. 13. 14.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THE holy Scripture teaches us very evidently, Psalm. 32. 5.
that for a man to confess his sin to man, Psalm. 51. 4.
is not any way necessary, James. 5. 16.
and consequently, Coloss. 4. 2.
that such kind of confession is merely invented; over and above Gods
commandment To whom only our sins ought to be confessed, because against
him only and his holy commandments, we have offended. S. James says:
Acknowledge your faults one to another. But how? not to the Popes Priests,
they are not called by the name of one another. They that are not wilfully
blinded, may well perceive, that Saint James in that place, speaks of
reconcilation with our neighbor. As Saint Paul in like manner well understood
the same, saying. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel to another. Even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.

Moreover, It is not above three hundred years, since the Pope of Rome
constrained his Popelings to confess in the care.
we are not ignorant, that Auricular confession, being only brought in by men,
without any warrant out of Gods word: was put in use at Constantinople, until
such time as it gave occasion of committing whoredom, which made it to be
abolished. And afterward it was renewed again, by Nectarius Bishop of the same
place. For in the time of Pope Innocent. the third, or very little before, none
were obliged to confess to Priests, about the year. 1200. Hist. tripart. cap.
2.
Likewise, the Hystories do declare, before Pope Innocent the third, no body
was bound to confess in the ear of a Priest. Therefore, without building
upon men's inventions, we will make no Confession of our sins, but unto God
only.

For the Apostles, and the whole Church after them, did never do any
otherwise, as many holy Doctors do render sound testemonie. Especily Saint
Augustine, S. August. in lib. 10. de confess. cap. 2.
speaking thus. What have I then to do with men, that they should hear my
confessions, as if they could help me of my afflictions? It is a curious
case, to know another man's life, and be careless in correcting our own.
Wherefore should they demand to know what I am, when they will not be willing
to hear what they are themselves? Saint Chrysostom likewise was not
forgetful, S: Chrysostom, Heb. cap. 12. hom. 3. Tom. 4 and supra. Psa. 52. Tom.
2. E. in Sermon. de Poenitent. Tom. 6. Et de incomprehen. Not. dei, hom. 5. Et
and in 4. Tom. de Lazar. Et in hom. 12. de Cananit.
to advertise us herein very amply, to the end that we should not subject
our consciences, unto such a servitude, as God himself would never have us
bound in; and thus speaks he. Confess thy sins, to the end that thou may
deface them. If thou be confounded or ashamed, to tell an other man that thou
have sinned, tell it daily then to thine own soul. I do not say, that thou
should confess to a servant like unto thy self, that so he may reproach
thee: but tell them to God only, that only can help them: It suffices, that
God alone sees and hears thee. I would not have thee confess thy sins to a
man, Ezech. 20. 16.
who afterward may disgrace and defame thee, by publishing thy faults: But
show thy wounds and soars to God, who is the only good Physician.

You see what these good Fathers have taught us, yielding themselves obedient
and conformable to the doctrine of the Apostles: whom only, and none else
beside them, will we believe, allow or imitate. For they have given us the
word of God holily and purely, which being no way imperfect, enstructeth us
suificiently in all things necessary for our salvation. Therefore, all men
else, be they never so holy or wise; Nay, were they Angels of heaven, Galat.
^: 8.
they can declare nor command us any thing: but what is divinely written, in
the authentical Books of the holy Prophets and Apostles.

The Pope, and his Church.
Our holy father the Pope, enioyneth and commands it to every one, The Popes
Priests are Lieutenants to him their God: of who^ S. Paul speaks. 2. Cor.
chap. 4. 4.
being of years and discretion, to confess himself to God, and to man
Priest his Lieutenant, all his secret and manifest sins, with good devotion,
repentance and contrition, and that at the least once a year. Otherwise, our
said holy father declares the^ all to be heretics very pernicious, wholly
rebellious, and disobedient to this his present ordinance. The Pope is more
then his Bishops, and his Bishops more then their Priests, and all of the^
shall be known by their fruits Mat. 7, 16.
For hereby he has reserved to his holy and Apostolical seat, diverse great
and enormous sins, and knows, and absolueth them by his sole authority and
power, more then all other Bishops can do. And to those Bishops he has
reserved and given more might, to know, discern and absolve sins; then to
other simple priests, who are much less in authority and potencie, It is not
read that Christ did ever constrain any one to believe in him, or to confess
before him, or his Apostles, nor did they ever any such act.
then the Bishops are. As more amply is contained and recited, in the holy
Canons and decrees, but especially in the Chapter: Omnis vtriusque sexus de
poenitentia and remissione extra.

Moreover, every Bishop and Curate ought to constrain and compel every one,
every year, at Easter at the least, throughout their Diocesses and Parishes,
to present themselves before them, or their Lieutenants and vicars, Contrary
to the 19. Psalm. verse. 12.
to make a full, entire and general confession of all their sins, secret and
manifest. And then are they to enjoin them such penance and satisfaction, as
they shall think meet to be expedient and necessary, The Priests are not
called one another (as in S. Iam.) they received no such name in Baptism.
for the salvation of their souls. If it shall happen otherwise, that the
Parishioners will not be herein obedient to their Prelates: Our Mother holy
church then straightly commands, that they be chased out, and excommunicated
like to Judas. Because they will not perform the commandment of God,
declared unto us by Saint James, sayding: Confess your sins one to another.
Jam. 5. 16.


OF THE CHVRCH.
The house of the living GOD, that is the Church, the pillar and ground of
truth. 2. Tim 3. 15.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
WE believe one holy Church, Catholic and universal, the house of the living
God, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
washed and cleansed in his precious blood, he being the only head and spouse
thereof, even Jesus Christ. Nor do we believe any other head, but him only:
for all other that are founded on him, are members incorporated into his
Church. Now, by his just judgment, he has permitted, Colos. 1. 9.
that Antechrist should intrude himself, and sit in the Temple of God, Ephesians.
1. 12.
as God, showing himself, that he is God; For he exalts himself above all
that is called God, and will be worshipped for God. This is the reason, why (by
the craft of Satan) he has taken such boldness upon him, as to dispense
against the Gospels, and destroy the holy commandments of God, and his word;
which we believe (notwithstanding) shall endure for ever.

But he that fights against so strong a foundation, declares himself to be
Gods enemy, and Antechrist manifestly. Dan. 7. 21.
As, after many testimonies of sacred Scriptures. Esaias. 42 18.
Saint Gregory himself does give us a good advertisement, S. Greg. lib. 4
Epist. 76. ad Man. and lib 7, Epist. 194. and lib. 6. Epist. 188.
saying. It is sacrilege, and a foretelling of Antechrists coming, t^
constitute an universal Bishop of the whole Church. For if he that names
himself universal, S. Hilar. cont. Auxentius.
do fall, the whole Church is overthrown. S. Bern. super Ca^tic.
And proceeding on still to the same purpose, Sermon. 33. and in sermon. de co^uer.
S. Paul.
he concludes thus. I boldly say, that whosoever calls himself universal
Bishop, or desires to be so named: S. Aug. super Io^n. hom. 50. Or^g. super
Matthew. hom. 2 Can. Pudenda 24. quaest. 1
is the forerunner of Antechrist, in that he prefers himself (in his own
pride) before and above all other.

Behold now how God has suffered, that these devilish Cautelles of the man of
sin, should be made manifest even by themselves: Ca^. St Papa. Did. 1.
even those that he thought to defend and cover himself withal. S. Aug. lib. 3.
de Baptism.
As we could much more amply discover, as well by the testimony of the word
of God: Cap. 3. etc.
as by the expositions of many holy Fathers of the Church. The Pope making
himself to be universal Bishop of the Church, declares himself to be
Antechrist:
But the faithful Reader, making acceptaunce of this our slender travel, may
(if please him) have access to the Fathers themselves, as, for his more ease,
we have quoated them in the Margent.

The Pope, and his Church.
Our holy Father the Pope, is instituted of God, to be head and universal
Prince of his holy Church, having received the keys thereof: with entire,
full and incomprehensible power, S. Augustine says that if Christ gave the
keys to Peter alone, then the Church has no keys after him: But as he
answered for all, so he received the keys with all. Hom. 11. and 124. and
super Joan. hom. 50.
to bind and loose, pardon and retain all sins, yea, in such sort and
manner, as there is no one that dare say to him, wherefore do thou this, or
that? For it is an indubitable verity, yea, altogether invincible, that our
holy father the Pope, the great successor of Saint Peter, has such power and
authority, as he may judge the whole world, but he is not to be censured, or
judged by any person. And his power is so great and admirable, that he can
dispense against the Gospels, against the word of God, and consequently against
all the Apostles doctrine, yea, and against the right of nature. As it is most
amply written and recited, The Pope has in such sort dispensed against the
Gospels, as they are buried, and wholly abolished in his Church. In which, we
may contemplate the great mercy of God, according to Dan. 7. and 2. These. 2.
in the holy Decretales, and in the Cano^ Lector, cum Glos. 34. Did. Canon
Presbiter, cum Glos. 82. Did. Apostolorum, 17. Quaest. 4. Canon Si quis. Did.
40. Canon Si Papa Did. 26. Et eadem Canon, satis cano. simplici. Can.
Incipitis.

OF FREE WILL.
Verily, verily I say unto you, that whosoever commits sin, he is the
servant of sin. John. 8. 34. It is God which works in you, both the will
and the deed, even of his own good pleasure. Phil. 2. 1^. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves, to think any good thing as of our selves; but all
our sufficiency is of God. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
IN this matter, we may justly answer, S. August. 30. lib. de hom. 41. Et de
verb.
as S. Hierome did, writhing against Pelagius, saying thus. The Philosophers,
the Patriarchs of Heretics, Apost. 13. sermon. Et in Enchirid. ad Laure^. Cap.
29.
by perverse doctrine, have polluted the purity of the Church. Moreover, in
regard of our purposed brevity, S. Hierm. in Com. sup. Hier. cap. 23.
it shall suffice us to allege S. Augustine, with whom do many Fathers
consent, in detestation of the Pelagian heresy, S. Greg. sup. Psalm. 7.
which our adversaries do so boldly maintain. These are his words: S. Bern.
in lib. de lib. arbit. and in hom. de Annun. Virg. Ma.
We cannot consent with them, who by over great pride, do labor to exalt and
advance a freedom of will: for in their so doing, they are the cause of more
evil then good, and they but strive to overthrow men. But we in humility do
consider that which the Apostle says: Phil. 2. 13.
It is God which works in us, both the will and the deed, Tit. 3. 6.
according to his own good pleasure. And we render thanks to our Lord and
redeemer, who without any former merits in us, has healed our wounds and
ulcers, and reconciled us to God: having redeemed us from captivity, and has
brought us out of darkness into light, and called us from death to life.

The Pope, and his Church.
WE do constantly mainetaine and confess, Eccles. 15. 14.
a liberal and Free Will, S. Augustine says in many places, that we have a
Free Will to do evil. lib. de verb. Apost.
not only in the state of innocence, but likewise in the state of corruption
with sin. For it is written; That God made man right, and left him in the
hand of his council, to do what he would. Sermon 13.
So that man, being richly furnished, with this noble, Free Will is the heresy
of Aristotle, and of all them that use it as a buckler for their faith.
francke and Free Will; might work of himself good or evil, even by his own
motion, and can merit the first grace of congruitie. As more amply is written
and declared, by our Master of the Sentences, and others, in their several
Expositions.

OF MARRIAGE AND OF VOWS.
It were good for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless, to avoid
fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her husband.
1. Cor. 7. 12. Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Hebrews 13. 4. My praise shall be
of thee in the great Congregation, my Vows will I perform before them that
fear thee. Psalm. 32. 25.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
SAINT Paul, being a vessel of Election; does assure us, that Marriage is
honorable among all, Hebru. 13. 4.
and the bed undefiled. But your holy Father tells us the contrary, to wit;
that Marriage cannot be without uncleanness, and carnal filthiness. Now,
which of these two shall we say to be the false witness? As for S. Paul, we
are very certain, Saint Paul can not but be a truer witness, then the Pope.
that his testimony proceeded from the spirit of God: in regard whereof, we
will rather give faith to him, then to your holy Father; although he be
seated in Gods Temple for God, and shows himself as if he were God. Of who^
likewise the Apostle speaks. 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3
That in the latter times, there shall some depart from the faith, and shall
give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils. Speaking lies
through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot iron;
Forbidding to marry.

The Pope, and his Church.
Our Mother, holy Church, following our holy Father her universal Head, In 4.
Sentent.
considering advisedly, that Marriage could not be performed without
uncleanness, Did. 7. cap. 7.
pollution and carnal immundicitie. Can. Cum societas. 27.
For this cause, Quaest. 2.
has justly and holily prohibited and forbidden, and so does still forbid
Marriage to Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons: for they are tied and obliged to
a vow of chastity, from which no man can free or deliver them.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THe Church of God did never learn of Jesus Christ, nor of his Apostles, to
forbid holy and honorable Marriage to any person whatsoever: except to such as
are named in the 18. Chapter of Leuiticus. Therefore we will not receive any
such doctrine of devils. For the holy Apostles were diverse of them married, and
such as lawfully succeeded after them: Eusebius. 1. 3.
according as Saint Clemens testifies, cap. 2.
writing against them that contemned Marriage, S. Clem* lib. 7.
where he says. Hist. tripart.
Will they likewise reprove the Apostles S. Peter and S. Philip, lib. 2 cap.
14.
for having wives, and had their daughters married? Can. Nicen. 31. Did.
Moreover, many Councels would not so wander from the Apostles doctrine, Can.
Si quis Did. 28.
as at any time to forbid marriage to Priests and Ministers of the Church: Can.
Si quis virorum, Did. 30.
but rather did excommunicate all such, as sought to bring in such inventions
of deuillish doctrine. Can. Quoniam Did. 31.
As the Councels of Nice, Can. Qudam. Did* 27.
of Gangres, of Constantinople, of Anticira, and the Canon of the Apostles.
Can. Apost. cap. 6.
Shall we accuse or condemn those holy Fathers and Doctors, with the whole
Church, Who so pleases to read the histories, shall find, that in the time
of king Jews, the second, Priests were then married in France.
and their good Councels, to justify your vn-holy Pope and his ordinances? Can
you any way prove him, to be a better man, or more illumined by God, then all
the Apostles and ancient Fathers of the Church were? Or that he is more able,
and can justly condemn them, to have erred and lost the Faith? And that your
great high Priest, was therefore sent of God, to reprove their doctrine, to
overthrow and demolish all their ancient and divine building? Wherefore,
concerning this point of Marriage, Origin. super Matthew. hom. 13.
by you so idely contradicted; we will conclude with S. Origin, and S. Ambrose:
That virginity may be well wished and desired, S. Ambr. Lib. 1. de Virg.
but not commanded. For, as he else where says: Things that are not in our
power, are more to be desired, then commanded.

The Pope, and his Church.
Moreover, Cousins do lawfully take their Cousins in marriage, as well by
permission of divine right, as civil.
our aforesaid Mother holy Church, has ordained diverse impeachments, whereby a
man is hindered from marriage, as, in natural and spiritual affinity. For
Cousins may not mary with their Cousins, nor kindred their God-children, except
by dispensation. Likewise there is a certain time, Leuit. 18. Et Instit. de
Justin. de nup. filij duorum fratrum.
wherein none at all are permitted to mary. As more at large is set down and
recorded, in our holy Decretals and Canons. Canon. Affini. Canon. Multum. 35.
Quest. 2. Canon. Non oportet. Canon. Omnium placet. Did. 32. Canon.
Interuenit, Can Placuit. Can. licite. 32. Quest. 2.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
NOw as concerning invented vows, Romans 10. 4.
having some conformity with the ceremonial vows of the ancient Law: Acts.
15. 17.
It is most certain, that Jesus Christ, Galat. 5. 1.
being the end and accomplishment of the Law, Romans 14. 23.
has delivered us from them, as from all other sacrifices. S. Ambr. sup.
Wherefore, according to the doctrine of S. Paul; 1. Cor. cap. 7.
We will stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, S.
August. Lib. 6. de Confess.
and not be entangled again with the servitude of meu. cap. 2. Et in Lib. de
Virg.
If therefore we make any Vows or promises to God, cap. 40.
they ought to be orderly grounded upon his word, S. Cypr. Lib. 1.
to the end that so they may be approved of him. Epist. 11.
For whatsoever is not of faith, Council. Tolet. 8
is sin. Which implies thus much, Et Gangre. in Galat. etc.
That whatsoever we do after our own fantasies, thinking them to be well done,
and have no warrant or authority therefore out of Gods word: All such things
(we say) are sin, and displeasing to God. This then being well considered,
we will maintain this saying of S. Ambrose: That no person is to be
compelled, least by forbidding things that are lawful, they fall and offend in
matt^rs unlawful.

The Pope, and his Church,
COncerning Vows, Papists bind themselves to God by these three vows, and
one of them they will not observe, for riches makes them rebel against God.
our Mother holy Church has ordained, and straitely does command, that they
should be rendered to God faultlesse. Vows are great and many in number, but
there are three only principal and substantial, as namely, Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience. Whosoever therefore shall vow any one of these
three, he is thereto perpetually bound all his life time. As very meruailously
and most divinely it is declared, by our graund Master of the Sentences.

I Pope Pius, This Pope spoke as he meant, and as he felt in his own frailty.
surnamed Aeneas Syluius, do say, and will maintain, that, in good right, and
for good cause, the Marriage of Priests was taken away and forbidden: but
surely, for better cause, it should be restored to them again, if men's
infirmities be duly considered.

OF FASTING AND OF MEATS.
Meat makes us not the more acceptable to GOD; for neither if we eat, have
we the more, neither if we eat not, have we the less. But take heed, least
by any means, this power of yours be an occasion of falling, to them that are
weak. 1. Cor. 8. 8. 9.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THe Church of GOD reprooueth not Fasting, Luke 11. 39.
when it is done according to his divine word. Romans 14. 9.
For our Lord commands us, 1. Pet. 4. 7.
not to offend our hearts with gluttony and drunkenness: And Saint Peter
tells us, that sobriety is the means to withstand the devil.
Nevertheless, we will not entertain superstitious and fantastic Fastings,
Gal. 5. 1.
to deprive us of the liberty that we have in Jesus Christ. True fasting is
approved of God.
We do undoubtedly confess, that Jesus Christ, his Apostles, and the whole
Church have fasted; but we find no time by them defined and limited, neither
the difference of days, or any interdiction of meats, which to forbid, is
the doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim. 4. 1.
as S. Paul says. For at all times it is permitted, 1. Cor. 10. 9. 15.
to eat of all meats that are sold in the Shambles, without inquiring for
conscience sake.

S. Athanasius speaks plainly, S Athan lib. de exposit. sup.
That such as do abstain from meats, Hebr. cap. 13.
do profit as much thereby, as those that separate themselves from true Faith.
Mat. 15.
S. Spiridon Bishop of Cyprus, Hist. tripart.
says. That he durst freely eat flesh in the Lent time, lib. 10. cap. 10.
when others did abstain from it; because he was a Christian. S. Hierome
writes. That we ought neither to decline to the right hand, nor to the left:
S. Hier. in Com. sup. Malach. 1. cap.
For to fall from the right hand, is to abstain from those meats, which God
has created for our use.

Shall we then say, that the whole Church has erred, and your holy Father is
just and perfect only? The Councels of Bracharensis, Council. Brachar. 2. Did.
10.
the 2. of Toledo, the 13. And the Popes Martin and Eleutherius, excommunicated
all them, Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 3. and 11.
that abstained from eating any meats whatsoever, S. Orige. sup.
which were convenient for the nature of man. Leuit. cap. 6. hom. 10.
Moreover, we are not ignorant, that the Law and obligation of Fasting, S.
August. de mor. Eccles. and ad Jesul. Epist. 86.
was first of all imposed by Montanus the Heretic; as he was reproved
thereof, by Apolonius the Martyr of Christ.

Therefore, in consideration of what has bin before alleged, we cannot
otherwise choose, but conclude with this saying of Saint Augustine. S. August
ad Jasulan. Epist. 86.
Contemplating in true heat of zeal, the divine and Apostolical writings of
the old, as also the whole new Testament: I see that Fasting is recommended,
but find it no where defined, by the commandment of our Lord, or of his
Apostles, either at what time, or on what days, we are to fast, or not to
fast. Wherefore, I understand hereby, that the commandment of Fasting does
gain us no righteousness, By Fasting, we cannot be ever the more righteous:
but thereby we may prepare our selves only, for the service of God the more
freely, then when we are filled with meats beyond measure.
which inwardly is the beauty of the Kings daughter. Thus you see, how
religiously the Church has used to fast, for our better preparation to Gods
divine service: and this Rule, with glad desires we will observe and imitate,
rejecting your Popish Fasting as superstitious. For it is like unto that
Custom of the Jews, which our Lord God held in great detestation, and
reproved them for it by the Prophet Esaias. To the end therefore, that such
reproach may not fall upon us, we rather covet to fast as the Saints,
Prophets, Apostles, and holy Fathers of the Church have done before us, then to
decline either to the right hand or left, with false seducers.

The Pope, and his Church.
OUR first Father sinned through gurmandise or gluttony. Abstinence was
enjoined him by GOD, which he having broken and transgressed, was excluded and
cursed of God. Wherefore, our Mother holy Church, following the example of God,
of his son Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles: commands to Fast, and use
abstinence, upon some certain days ordained for that purpose, under pain of
sinning deadly. And to the end, that no one shall plead ignorance of this holy
Ordinance: Montanus the Heretic was the first that compelled men to fast:
Wherein the Pope is his successor.
She gives it forth publicly to be known, that in these times, as of
Lent, Vigils, the four quarterly times, Frydayes and Saturdayes, she
commands to be kept fasting, and to abstain from meats, as flesh, Milk,
Butter, and other white meats, but most especially in the holy time of Lent.
Histor. Ecclesia lib. 5. cap. 11.
And whosoever shall be so bold, as to transgress her ordinance, he shall be
reputed the child of perdition, and by all our holy Fathers shall be
excommunicated. As more at large is declared and set down in our holy
Decretals, and Ecclesiastical Canons. Can. Statuimus. Did. 4. Canon. Statui.
Did. 75. Et toto titulo de obseruat. leiunior. extr.

OF IMAGES.
Take heed unto your selves, least you forget the covenant of the Lord your
God, which he made with you: And least ye make you any graven Image, or
likeness of anything, as the Lord thy God has charged thee. For the Lord thy
God is a consuming fire, and a jealous God. Deuteronomy. 4. 23. 24. Cursed be the man,
that shall make any carved or molten Image, for it is an abomination unto the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
The Apostles, and Gods Church.
THe Church of God, has not so slenderly profited in his School, but that she
knows very well; Deu. 4. 23 24
that she ought rather to obey her GOD, Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
then men. Exodus 20. 4. 5.
Your Roman Pope, with his younger purple Priests, and others of the like
condition, commands to honor, yea, to adore Images. But our Lord, who
aloude has delivered himself, to be a jealous God; forbids us to make any
manner of Image, in semblance or similitude whatsoever, for any respect of
service due to him. To which of these two then, shall we be obedient? The
Prophet David does admonish, that it is very dangerous, Psalm. 5^. 5.
to obey men rather then God, saying: That he scatters the mouths of them
that are men-pleasers. we will then rather listen to our Lords voice, then to
the man of sin, although he have seated himself in Gods Temple, 2. These. 2.
7.
for God, and showing himself even as if he were God: yet being become mute,
and like unto his Images, he has quitted and resigned his office of
instruction to Images, and has given them his peculiar power to instruct such
are ignorant, tearming them to be Laymens books. But we, joining with the
royal Psalmist, Psalm. 97. 7.
do say: Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, Psalm. 115. 8.
and glory in Idols. They that make them, Psalm. 135. 18.
are like unto them, so are all that trust in them.

The Pope, and his Church.
THe great and sovereign high Priest of Rome, has so well ordained in his
Church, as well for the learned as the ignorant; as there remains nothing to
be further ordered. The law of God gives wisdom to the simple, and not dead
Images.
To such as are Clearks and of knowledge, he has permitted to read, and
exercise themselves in books. But for the ignorant and unlearned, that are not
able to understand spiritual matters, Psalm. 19. 7.
he (of his benign grace) has permitted, to study and practice their
salvation, by Images painted and carved, which is a matter very easy for them
to do. Wherefore, according to his holy ordinance, The word of God commands
altogether the contrary.
it is commanded, that all kinds of Images and representations, shall be
erected and placed in Christian Temples and Churches; which it shall not be
amiss for the people, to honor, cloth with garments, Exodus 20. 4.
and set lights before; yea, and to give them all humble reverence, in honor
of those Saints that they do represent. As it is better, and more divinely
declared, in the holy Decretalls and Canons, and especially, In Can. Perlatum,
and Can. Imagines de consecrat. Did. 2.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
YOur holy Father the Pope, would have you to be taught and instructed by
those dead Images: Hab. 2. 18. 19
But we have God and his Prophets, that make answer for us, saying: What
profits the Image? For the maker thereof has made it an Image, and a teacher
of lies: though he that made it, trust therein, when he makes dumb Idols.
Woe be unto him that says to the Wood, Awake, and to the dumb stone; Rise up,
shall it teach thee? And Hieromie says: In this point only they doat, Hier.
10. 8.
and are foolish, for the stock is a doctrine of vanity. What is he then,
that would be instructed by such masters? As concerning the second Nicene
Council, which was in the time of Charlemaigne: Satan was President in the
second Nicene council.
we confess, that Satan sat there among them, and being the head of such an
assembly, he made his members answerable to himself. To whom very aptly may
be applied that saying of Saint Paul. Romans 1. 22. 23, 25.
When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools. For they turned
the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the Image of a
corruptible man. And the truth of God, unto a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature, forsaking the Creator.

The Pope, and his Church,
IN our former recited Canons, is declared, how a Bishop of Marseilles, The
Bishop of Marseilles, was reproved for doing the commandment of God.
having broken down and defaced the Images in his Dioces: was therefore most
justly reproved and controlled by our holy Father, because he durst
transgress against his holy ordinance. Moreover, we will not hide in secret,
Wherein appears, that God has evermore reserved some one or other, to
maintain his faithful service, according to his word, and not according to
the liking of men.
or conceal in silence, the second Nicene Council, accomplished in the time
of the most Christian Prince Charlemaigne, and assembled by commandment of
Irene, Governor of the Empire, who ordained and decreed: That not only it was
good and profitable for Christians, to have Images in their Temples, but also
that they ought to honor and adore them with all reverence. And to the end,
that it may be more perfectly known, what fruit and goodness was gathered by
that holy Council, as also, that the virtue and authority there of may the
morefully be understood: we are willing in large and ample manner, to recite
the testimonies, sentences and opinions, alleged by the holy Bishops and
Doctors assembled in that Council. According as more at large is contained in
the Book of Charlemaignes refutation.

First of all, John, Ambassador of the East Churches, speaks thus. God has
created man after his own Image: Ergo, we ought to have Images. For it is
written: show me thy face, for it is fair and lovely. An other Bishop says:
No man lights a Candle, to hide it under a bushel: Ergo, Images ought to be
had.

An other Doctor says. Here was an assembly of learned judgments, blind
leaders to the blind. It was marvel, that the very stones did not start up
at so horrible opinions, contrary to the divine truth: which they seeking to
exterminate altogether, labored but in vain. For the Lord will preserve his
truth for ever. Psalm. 145. 18.
Lord, the brightness of thy face is imprinted upon us: Ergo, We must have
Images. And after many other good and memorable verdicts, Theodosius Bishop of
Mira, concludes thus. These testimonies are clear and evident, that not only
Images are to be had, but also, that they ought to be adored and honored. For
my Archdeacon so thinks and believes. I Theodosius, Bishop of Mira do say,
that I excommunicate all such, as will not worship Images. And an other Bishop
says. That all the calamities and adversities, which happened to the Grecians,
and people of the East, was, because they would not worship Images. Another
Bishop says: Seeing that perfumes and incense is bestowed on the Images of
Emperors: we ought to bestow much more upon the Images of Saints.

Constance, Bishop of Constance in Cyprus, says and delivers this great and
admirable sentence. Concerning my self, I do protest, that we ought to give
equal honor and reverence, and in as ample manner to the Images of Saints,
as to the holy Trinity in Heaven. And whosoever is not of mine opinion: I
excomunicate, and send him among the Manicheans and Marcionites. And assuredly,
all the holy Assembly of the Council found this opinion to be very good,
whereupon, they concluded with him in the approbation thereof, and all together
after him, said, Amen.

John, We may well say, that of this holy Assembly, which S. Paul speaks, 2.
Ambassador of the Eastern Churches, gives this notable opinion. It were
much better, to have all the Stews and Brothell-houses of the whole world, to
be kept in one City, then to reject the service of Saints Images. Cor. 4.
4. The God of this world has blinded the understanding of infidels, that the
light of the Gospel should not shine unto them.
And it is manifest, that the Samaritanes were worse then Heretics, but they
that reject the Images of Saints, are much worse then the Samaritanes. And all
concluding with this opinion, the end and resolution of the whole Council,
was determinatly set down, as follows. We being assembled in the Name of
GOD, do will and command, that this holy Council and Decretall, shall be
perpetually observed in the Church: And do excommunicate all gain sayers, as
rebels and disobeyers hereof. And to enlarge the treasure of our Mother holy
Church, we give full Jubilee of Pardons of all sins, to all such as shall
daily have the Image of JESUS CHRIST, and do Sacrifice, honor, and reverence
thereto. Amen.

Behold how these holy Fathers, and religious Doctors, being wholly
inspired with the holy Ghost, have governed our Mother, holy Church, whom we
will believe and imitate, and in her Faith both live and dye.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
LET us come now and consider a little on the subject of this Council. May it
be called holy? Or can it be said to be approved of God? Surely, nothing
less. For if it were presented to Turks and Saracines, undoubtedly it would
be highly detested even of them. Therefore we may well say, that never was
that false Propher and Heretic Mahomet, Mahomet the false Prophet has not so
much blasphemed in his Alchoran, as these Bishops did in this Nicene Council.
so beastly blinded, as these gross conceited Bishops conclusions were in this
Council, to value in equal manner, the adoration of Images, with the worship
of one only true God in Trinity of persons. O poor miserable world, plunged
in all error, darkness, and ignorance! It was wonderful, that in those times
some man was not found, in Gods behalf, to whippe those Heretics, those
Marchant-sellers of Cockle and Darnell: As Jesus Christ did the Merchants out
of the Temple, that deserved it not half so much as these blaspemers did. But
let them be assured, that truth has ever prevailed against such impiety
practiced and warranted, in those diabolical Councels: and that our Lord God
will be avenged on the sons of men, delivering them over in his judgment, to
be led by strong delusions, ^. Thessalonians 2. 11.
and to believe lies. That all they might be damned, which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Behold what words are written by
that vessel of Election, proceeding from the spirit of God: which should
astonish and make them tremble, that dare lift up their horns against God;
Against whom there is no wisdom, neither under standing nor council. Prou.
21. 30.


Moreover, not to digress from our purpose, if such a Monopoly of Satan,
combined with his whole band (by Gods secret permission) did then get the day
for once against Jesus Christ: Should it therefore be concluded, that the whole
Church of God, God for the space of 600.
following the doctrine of her master and his Apostles, has erred; in
forbidding and pulling down all Images and Idols? years suffered no Images in
Temples: but* because they have since been permitted and adored, it folioweth
not therefore, that the first Church was heretical, and this is now more
illumined by God, being altogether contrary to him.
Which being permitted by an unchristian Council, to be adored and
worshipped, ought (nevertheless) to be gain said, broken and defaced, as
appears by three other holy Councels, who in this point differed not from
Apostolical doctrine. If weread the Council of Constantinople, celebrated by
Constantine the fifth; the second Council of Toledo, and likewise the
Elibertine Council, the 36. Decretal: it will be found, that all these three
did decree as hereafter follows.

It is concluded, that there shall be no pictures or paintings in Churches, The
Counsels of Constantinople, Toledo 2. and Elibertine, detested and forbad
Images, and whosoever accepted of the^, were held as strangers to the Church of
God.
to the end, that no reverence or adoration may be given to painted walls.
And after follows. We are very willing to admonish the Faithful, that so
much as in them lies, they should hinder the having of any Images in their
houses. And if they feared their servants yielding to them: yet at least, they
should keep themselves pure, from being corrupted by the^. Wherein if they
would not be obedient, they should be accounted as strangers to the Church of
God. Thus did these holy Fathers in their Councels, maintain all pure Doctrine
in the Church, without forging any novell constitutions against the word of God.

The Pope, and his Church.
COncerning all other differences and questions, besides the case before
declared, we do wholly repose our selves upon the holy Counsels, Decretals
and Canons; as more prolixly and cathegorically they are explycated, by our
Masters of the venerable College of Sorbonne; and especially, by the graund
Master of the Sentences. The Apostles are less and inferior, to the great
Rabines of Sorbo une.
All which together, do very well deliver to every understanding, the Articles
and Questions proposed in that holy Council. With whom, we have iudiciously
and divinely concluded and resolved, to our great honor and glory, O
insupportable blasphemy, God has revealed more to seducers, then to his
Apostles and Evangelists.
and to the confusion of our adversaries. Notwithstanding all oppositions what
soever, alleged on the Apostles behalf, by the Doctors of the Church. For
among us, we hold it as an indubitable verity, and invincible (according to
the Gospels testimony;) That all things which were necessary for our
salvation, Mahomet in his Alchoran says the same: therefore, both these do
bend themselves against Jesus Christ, who with the spirit of his mouth shall
consume them both.
were not revealed to the Apostles, neither have they written them all.
Wherefore it has followed very necessarily, that those things which the
Apostles omitted, and left out; we should afterward obtain, and divinely
find finished, in the supplement of our holy traditions and ordinances* Which
we will and command, to be perpetually observed, and as sincerely regarded, as
those of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles; and that under pain of deadly
sin, excommunication, and eternal damnation.

The Apostles, and Gods Church.
But if holy Epiphanius, aman of God, and very highly renowned in his time,
Epiphanius a man of great renown in the Primitive Church, defaced the Image of
Jesus Christ S Hierome speaking of him, says.
were living in these days, he should have work enough to do, in breaking
down an infinite number of Idols and Images; as very manfully (in Gods cause)
he did, in the City of Bethell. According as himself writes, in an Epistle
to John Bishop of Jerusalem, his words are these.

And when I entered to pray, That he was so respected in his time, that even
Heretics themselves did him bonour and reverence.
I found there a sail, or great cloth hanging at the door, figured and
painted, having an Image, as of Jesus Christ, or some other Saint, for I could
not bethink me well, whose Image it should be. But when I beheld in the
Church of Jesus Christ, an Image of a man hanging, against the authority of
the sacred Scriptures: Trent it in pieces, and gave council to the keepers of
the place, rather to bestow the same cloth, on some poor dead body for
burial, then to let it so offend the consciences of any. It were better to do
the works of charity, then hang up images in Christian Churches.


What now can your pontifical high Priest of Rome allege, against so many
excellent persons, as flourished in those days in the Church of God? S.
Augustine did not forbear to affirm it constantly, that it was an execrable
herefie, S. August. in Catalog. de haeres. Et in lib. 4. de Ciuit. Dei. Cap. 9.
and 11. Et super Psalm. 113.
to give any honor to the Images of Jesus Christ, or of the Saints. For, as
he himself says. In looking upon Images, no man can pray or worship as
he ought to do: but he will be touched, as if his thoughts were carried
thence, where his hope is to be heard, and his suit granted.

All these things being duly and religiously considered, to the ouerture of
your Roman Priests pride: we do and will conclude with the whole Church of
God, That according to his commandment, we ought to honor and worship him in
spirit and truth, Esaias. 40. 18.
and not by any invented visible things, commanded without authority of his
holy word, the which we know, Dan. 7. 25.
and believe shall remain for ever. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
And we hope shortly to see, that thereby the great man of sin shall be
smitten and overthrown, even he that exalts himself against God, in his
Temple. Which we humbly desire, for the honor and great glory of his name, to
the end it may be sanctified, Matthew. 9. 32.
and his Kingdom come; John. 17. 3.
that so, all men on earth may learn the way to life everlasting, which is, by
knowing and confessing one only God, and him whom he has sent, his only
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

And concerning that false couerture, alleged by our adversaries, that Christ
revealed not all things needful for our salvation, John 16. 13.
to his Apostles. This was true, before they had received the sanctified
Spirit, on the day of Pentecost. But after they were filled with the holy
Ghost, Galat. 1. 12.
and instructed of him: the promise of Jesus Christ was accomplished, that the
holy Spirit should reveal unto them, whatsoever he had said, and should
lead them into all truth. This being done and accomplished, they wrote the
word of God, and have left the same unto us, clean, holy and pure, sufficient
to guide and direct us to everlasting life. We are not bound then to hear any
other, but the Apostles: For all men else whatsoever, be they holy, wise, or
very Angels of heaven: they may not declare, or command us any other Gospel,
but that which is divinely written, in the authentical Books of the holy
Prophets and Apostles. And no man, S. Hierom.
how wise or learned soever he be, has any authority, Tom. 8.
after the Apostles, as Saint Hierome says. Psalm. 86.


Moreover, Romans 8. 18.
albeit we should be unjustly reproved, persecuted, Psalm. 44. 3.
condemned, yea, and murdered of men, 1. Pet. 3. 14.
in the quarrel of God: yet notwithstanding, having our only hope in him,
Matthew. 5. 10.
who has called us to that honor; We are to rejoice and be glad, when we are
persecuted and hated for his Names sake. Not doubting, but in his good time,
and when he pleases, his strong and powerful arm, shall free and deliver
us, from all servitude of our adversaries. As always hitherto he has done,
in fulfilling his promise to his holy Prophets and Apostles. Therefore, to that
everliving Lord God, be given all honor and glory, praise and power, world
without end. Amen.

Si hoc consilium out opus ex hominibus est, Acts. 5. 38. 39.
dissoluentur. Si vero ex Deo est, non poteritis dissoluere.
If this counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught.
But if it be of God, you cannot destroy it.
The Pope, and his Church.
Now we have good and great occasion, to render thanks to God, who has made
us victorious over our adversaries; whom we do excommunicate and curse, as
pernicious and damnable Heretics: because they will not be obedient to our
holy ordinances, but do fondly cleave to, and stand upon the Gospels, and the
doctrine of the Apostles, who are not able to be understood of any man, without
our holy Glosses and expositions. For the rest, let us not forget to speak
somewhat, in the behalf of our holy Mass, That, look how much our heretical
adversaries do labor to confound and ouerthrowit: The way of a fool is right
in his own eyes, but the wise will hear the counsel of God: who teaches a
quite contrary way.
So much the more powerfully will we strive, to defend and maintain it, even
unto blood and death. For which cause, we have commanded to publish abroad, the
great graces, virtues and properties of the most holy Mass: According to the
testimony of that reverend man, Master Jacques of Spain, solemn Doctor in
divinity.

The Copy whereof, Pro. 12. 15.
we will have exhibited and given to every one, that shall continually have
good devotion to the most holy Mass, and shall live and die in the true faith
thereof. Amen.

M. IAQVES OF SPAIN.
A Copy containing the great graces, virtues, and properties of the most holy
Mass: which being well contemplated, and considered on, are more worthy to be
esteemed, then an invaluable treasure.
MAster Jacques of Spain, This Copy is to be approved by Saint Paul. Gal. 5. 2
and by Moses Deuteronomy. 18. 9. and by Justinian the Emperor, lib. 1. de summa Tri.
and fide Cati.
solemn doctor in Divinity, recounteth in his works, that Saint Augustine
and other Doctors do hold this conclusion. That if he which hears Mass
devoutly, has either bought, or taken money for so much land, as may be walked
on during the time a Mass is saying, and shall give that money to the poor:
This dreamer of Spain, this doctor in all duncerie, is a true imitatour of
Zidkiah, the prophet of the Idol Baal. For even as with the two horns of
iron, he deceived Achab, that miserable king and his people: In the like
manner, with the horn of the Pope, and that other horn of Sorbonne, does he
labor to seduce and deceive kings, people, and nations, making them to dote
upon his Idol Baal. For preservation and maintenance whereof, there is nothing
else taught, but invented dreams, and lies of hypocrisy and Idolatry of
devils, which blinds the poor seducers, and by them are others seduced, even
by the means of greediness rooted in all evil: in coveting of which, they
err in faith. 1. Tim. 4. 6. 1. King. 22. 11. To such men appertains
properly, that which is written.
yet he shall not merit so much thereby, as by his devout hearing of that
Mass.

Secondly, he that as this day hears Mass devoutly, and hops to hear
another to morrow, with the same devotion: look what sins he commits
between those two Masses, are pardoned him by true confession, which our Lord
will grant him before his death.

Thirdly, after a man has heard Mass, his feeding yields the greater
benefit to his body, nor can he want ought all that whole day, but shall be
filled with all things needful to nature.

Fourthly, All venial sins newly committed and false oaths sworn in haste,
or through ignorance: having a purpose to confess them, they are blotted quite
out, by the merit of hearing a Mass devoutly.

Fifthly, every pace or step a man takes, in going to hear a Mass, are
counted and numbered by his good Angel, to be rewarded before God.

Saint Bernard says, that our chiefest Christian virtue, is, to hear Mass
devoutly. For it is of such great efficacy and dignity: as the very hearing
of a Mass, is much more worth to a man, then if he went in Pilgrimage over the
whole world, or gave all his goods for Gods sake.

Saint Hierome says: That when we cause a Mass to be said, for a soul
departed, and in Purgatory; so long as the Mass endures, so long that soul
feels no pain.

Saint Augustine says: That all the while a man hears Mass, he shall not
grow old, neither be any jot enfeebled: And beholding the body of our Lord
devoutly, he shall not that day die any sudden death. But if he should die,
that day, and were excommunicated, yet he shall not be damned.

S. Paul says; That the prayer of the head, is more worth then that of the
members. If it be so then, that the Mass is the prayer of our Lord, being the
head, and we are his members then the Mass is much more auailable, then all
the prayers that we all can make.

Saint Bede says: That if a woman great with child, do hear Mass on the
day of her travel, she shall be delivered without any pain. They are apt to
avarice, and have taken gifts, and are perverted in judgment, as is approved
by Saint Luke 17. and 1. Sam. 8. Ergo, a man should sell all his goods, and
give that money to have Masses said and sung for him: Which is the sole Butt
they shoot at. But S. Hierom was never of that mind, to utter such blasphemy:
The Spanish doctor does be lie him, and finds it in his own Book of dreams.
For both he and S. Aug. have said the contrary, as you have read before. The
Mass is the cause to get women with child, and, in hope of pardon thereby,
make shipwreck of their souls The lier alleges S. Luke, who is flatly
against him, saying, That, of men used, is abomination before God. No man, be
he never so learned and holy, has authority after the Apostles: Much less
Saint Gregory, being blind in Gods cause. And Saint Jerome says, sup. Prop.
Mich. Cap. 7. Tom. 6. says. They that are blown up with pride against Gods
word, do make themselves sworn enemy to his eternal truth. etc.


Saint Luke the Evangelist says; That a sinner, having true contrition for his
sins, and a will to hear Mass devoutly, and (that day) to be confessed:
although he die, yet he shall be saved.

Saint Gregory says: That every Mass devoutly celebrated, conuerteth a
sinner unto God, and delivers a soul out of Purgatory: And it is more worth
to him that said it, or procured it to be said; then a thousand Masses after
their death.

The venerable Masters of Sorbonne, have granted leave and permission, to
imprint this said Copy, to Jews Heruaut, Booke-seller, dwelling at Paris on
the Mill-bridge, at the sigue of Saint Jews. August. 22. 1608.

The Sentence of Interruption or stay of proceeding, between both sides: taken
out of the Registers, of the sovereign high Court of Heavenly Parliament.
DElay and respite is granted between both these parties, Eccles. 3. 14.
until the fullness of time, when the earth shall be without faith, Dan. 7.
23. 2. These. 2. 7.
and has reached to the full height of all her vices. Luke. 18. 12.
Then shall be evidently seen, Apoe. 18. 9. 1. Cor. 7. 11.
that the Ancient of days shall be the Judge, Apoc. 22. 5.
and the Stone hewn out of the Mountain, Apoc. 21. 7.
without hands; shall bruise the head of the man of sin; Dan, 7. 2.
who is surnamed the Son of perdition, Romans 11. 7.
nourished in the house of iniquity. And because the time is very short,
sooner then can be imagined: he shall be cast down to great punishments, by
the arrest and irreuocable sentence of the Spirit, in the mouth of the Lamb
without blemish. And consequently, peaceable and powerful government, shall
be given to the Saints, by the most high for evermore. To whom be all honor,
glory, praise and dominion, worlds without end.

Ecce venio cito.

Veni Domine Jesus.

An Antithesis of Gods Commandments, and those devised by the Pope..
The Commandments of God our Creator, by Moses. Exodus 20.
OPen your ears, lift up your hearts,
You people dull and slow to hear:
List the commandments of thy God,
Receive them with all awe and fear.
I am (says he) thy heavenly God,
That brought thee from captivity:
And out of Pharaohs servile bonds.
Thou shall have n'ere a God but me.
No graven Image shall thou make,
Of any thing what e're it be:
To honor, reverence or adore,
I am a God of jealousy.
His reverend Name take not in vain,
Swear not thereby, or it despise:
For guiltless he shall not escape,
That wrongs his name in any wise.
Labor fix days, but on the seventh,
Do not thy mind with toil molest:
But thou and thine take quiet ease,
Thy God himself that day did rest.
Honor thy Parents that thee bred,
And brought thee up so carefully:
That in the Land where thou do live,
Thy days God may prolong thereby.
Kill not, nor murder do commit,
From foul Adultery turn thy face:
Steal not, nor be a witness false
Against thy neighbor, in no case.
Covet not thou thy neighbors house,
His wife, his servants, man or maid:
His Ox, his Ass, his other goods,
Or what may not thine own be said.
O Lord, these heavenly Laws of thine,
Effectually let us embrace:
To keep them all, our hearts incline,
Assisted by thy spirit of grace.
FINIS.
The Popes Commandments.
The Commandments of our adversary the devil, instructed and daily put in
practice, by his good Scholar the Pope.
OPen your ears, listen to me,
My people quick and apt to hear:
I give you laws, was never the like,
Believe them, without doubt or fear.
I am the very God on earth,
Nor have thou any else but me:
Believe it, and no further seek,
For straightly I forbid it thee.
Erect all kind of Images,
For therein shall thou please me best:
And such as will not worship them,
With bitter curses I detest.
In special reverence hold my name,
Honor it, and adore it still:
To swear by God, blaspheme or lie,
I can absolve thee, and I will.
On working days, I have made Feasts
Of Saints, to give thee ease and rest:
Honor those days, pray to those Saints,
Hear Mass, and have thy hearts request,
Father and Mother both renounce,
Ere thou from my Religion swerue:
It Is the first rule that I direct
To Friars and Nuns, that me do serve.
Kill, murder, steal, lie and defame,
Commit adultery, incest, rape:
Purchase thy Pardon, be absolude,
And from all Laws thou shall escape.
Covet thy Neighbors goods, or Wife,
Or whatsoever is not thine:
Bring gold and silver, Offer them,
My Pardon cleares thee, for thy Fine.
All such, as shall these laws observe,
And holy Mother Church obey:
Shall Heaven at my hands deserve,
Or, down to Hell without delay.
FINIS.
The trial and probation of the Popes Commandments, he being the enemy to
God and his word.
Experience makes the truest proof of all things, and thereby may easily be
discerned at the very first sight: how the Pope makes war against God, with
his invented Ordinances, contrary to the Scriptures.
THE Pope commands, that al his Laws are to be embraced by all men, as
proceeding from heaven, 19 Did. C. Stomnes. He forbids also, that any
doubt or question shall be made, or whatsoever he does, says or ordains,
whether it be good or lawful. 17. Q. 4. Nemini. Did. 3. S. ex persona. Wherein
he declares, that his whole drift and intent is, utterly to deface and make
forgotten, the Laws of GOD, to establish his own dreams and idle follies.
Which are more pernicious to men, then any other plague can be; because he
constituteth the salvation of their souls, only upon merits, and not upon the
only grace of God, enlarged unto us in Jesus Christ.

The Popes Canons are most of them in this tune. I am Gods Lieutenant upon
earth, C. Quanto. de translat. Also, I am upon the Chair of pre-eminence, and
have rule over all flesh De sepul. sup. Chap. Also, All Roman Princes have
adored my seat. De iureiu. in Clement. Romana in princ. Also, I have the rule
of all the earth. For it belongs to me, to judge all things, and to no man to
judge me, nor my judgment. 9. Q. 3. C. Cuncta nemo aliorum facta. Hereby may
be observed, that most falsely he attributes to himself, the title of Gods
Lieutenant, and yet does notwithstanding, usurp his whole authority; yea,
even above God: in that he countermandeth what God commands, and commands
what God forbids.

His Ensigns or Colors, do describe both himself, and his whole army, even
like unto Nabuchodonosor, who after he had made and erected his Idols,
commanded that every one should do honor to them, upon pain to be thrown
into the fiery furnace, as were Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago. Dan. 3. 21.
Now, albeit that all the Popes stratagems, wherewith he has hitherto deceived
the world, have been discovered, even as Daniel revealed that of the Idol
Bells Priests, whereby they kept the deluded people in their Idolatry: yet
nevertheless, he supporteth his adoration of Images, by executing his
cruellrage against them, that refuse to worship them.

When the Popes ordinances are received of men, and allowed to be good; it is
not to be doubted, but that God loses his right and credit with them. For no
man can serve two masters, especially, when they are contrary one to the
other. Now, whereas God requires all authority in heaven, and on earth, as his
own in due right: The Pope opposes himself against it, and says: That every
one is subject to the high Priest of Rome, upon pain of damnation, and ought
to obey what soever he says. Extra de maiori, and ob. Did. C. Vnam sanctam.
Again, All glory, honor, magnificence, as well in dignities as in offices;
houses and abiliments, is given unto us, 96. Did. Constantinus. And as
concerning oaths, he says. We do absolve all spiritual persons, of all
oaths that they have sworn, 15. Q. 8. Omni. And yet we see for all this, that
all, swearings, for swearings and blasphemies, are permitted in Popery.

He declares in deeds, what he will not confess in plain words, to wit;
That sloth and idleness is best pleasing to him, wherein he allows what
God expressly forbids. But herein he proceeds very cautelously, for this
commandment and all other, he builds upon a man's good will and intention, as
if that were more certain, then that which God has pronounced with his own
mouth. Yet hereupon he establishe than other most horrible blasphemy, worthy
to be hurlde into the lowest hell; namely, the Mass, the very height of all
evils.

Herein may you discern, what fruit or benefit ensues by this good
intention, which is said to be full of all sanctity and Religion. For no one
can observe this rule, without renouncing father and mother, and not only to
renounce or disauow them, but likewise to ransack and quite strip them, of all
their goods and substance, thereby to get the young Nouice, or sweet Sister
Nun, into a Cloister or Monastery, I will not say into a brothel of sin.
There, to utter blasphemy against God, violating his holy, just and lawful
commandments, and be detained as a Swine in the Stie, in loose lubricities,
and wicked impieties, a breuiate of the Popes Religion.

We (says the Pope) do grant plenarie remission of all sins, to all such,
as in the year of Jubilee, shall come to Rome, to gain the said Jubilee,
Sixtus. 4. Quemadmodum. Also he says, We will and command, that those things
which are not lawful to be demanded, shall be paid unto us: For it is
lawful to receive that, which is dishonest to be demanded. 18. Did. de
culigijs. 13. Q. 2. Quaest. Placuit. etc. Quam pie. But the tribute and
revenues, which he receives weekly of the Stews in Rome, Auignon, and many
other places, as also the ransoms made unto him, for murders, thefts, and
other abuses; exceeds computation, but do witness him, to be the nursing
father of all iniquities.

He grants leave and license, to dispense likewise with all inward wicked
affections, and all is one to him, whether they think ill or well, or daily
fall from bad to worse; so that coin come in apace to his Coffers. For he
fears nor to vaunt, that he can dispense with whatsoever God has ordained
34. Distin. Lector. and 15. Q. 6. Iuratos and extrauag. de voto, and voti
redempt per totum. Behold here likewise, what other vilde abuses he dispe^seth
withal.

Marriage may be contracted, These valuations and prices are set down,
according to the true estimate of our English money here current.
in the third degree of consanguinitie, or affinity: for four pounds three
shillings, four pence.

A lewe may have a Synagogue in his house, or erect a new public Synagogue:
for thirty pound seven shillings, six pence.

One may exercise the office at the Altar, to say or sing Mass, and administer
the Sacrament, though he were never Priested, for nine pounds, two shillings,
nine pence.

One may beat a Priest, or a Clearke, for six pounds, two shillings.

Parracide is quitted and absolved, for thirty pounds, two shillings, eight
pence, And Popes do make greater benefit of such murders, committed upon the
father or mother, then of beating or wounding, nay killing a Priest or Clearke.

An Infant may be murdered, for eight pounds, four shillings, four pence.

A woman may receive a portion, to destroy the child in her womb, and be
absolved, for six pounds, six shillings.

A woman may be a Witch, or Enchantresse, and do great hurt thereby: for seven
pounds, six shillings, four pence.

Absolution may be obtained for Heresy, before the party have abiured it: for
thirty six pounds, nine shillings, four pence.

A man may be a Boutefeux, commit Sacrilege, Theft, rape, perjury and such
like sins, for thirty pounds, twelve shillings, four pence, severally paid.

A Clearke may be absolved, for whordome, yea, though it be with a Nun, or
any woman of his own kindred or parentage: for thirty six pound, three
shillings, nine pence.

Beside, such whordome or incest committed, absolution likewise is to be had
for Sodomie, or coupling with a bruit beast: It may be dispensed withal, and
the party enjoy both his orders, and hold his benefices: for thirty six
pound, twelve shillings, two pence, severally paid.

A Nun that has carnally offended with many men, either in her Cloister, or
abroad: may be ree nabled into the dignities of the same order, yea, if it were
the Abbess herself: for thirty six pound, nine shillings, four pence.

These I am well assured of, have been dispensed withal, at these several
sums of money, being so rateably known, and set down, for every such
offense. Over and above which ordinary prices, he that carries the Pardons
and dispensations about, has another allowance, wherein his holiness likewise
has the largest share: and the Bishops, Abbots, Pardonners, etc. do divide the
other moitie among them, amounting yearly to no mean sum.

Many more such sins, and their several dispensations, I could set down:
but I refer you to a Book called, The Popes Shop, wherein they are at
large discovered.

The Generation of Antechrist the Destroyer: Son of the Devil.
THe Devil begat Darkness;
Darkness begat Ignorance;
Ignorance begat Error, and his Brethren;
Error begat Freewill, Arrogancy, and Selfe-conceite;
Free Will begat Merit;
Merit begat Forgetfulness of grace;
Forgetfulness of grace begat Transgression;
Transgression begat Distrust;
Distrust begat Satisfaction;
Satisfaction begat the Sacrifice of the Mass;
The Sacrifice of the Mass begat Anointing of Priests;
Priests Anointing begat Superstition;
Superstition begat Hypocrisy the King;
Hypocrisy begat Gain by Offerings;
Gain begat Purgatory;
Purgatory begat the foundation of Anniuersaries.
Foundation of Anniuersaries begat the Churches Patrimony;
The Churches Patrimony begat Mammon of Iniquity;
Mammon of Iniquity begat Abundance;
Abundance begat Ease;
Ease begat Cruelty;
Cruelty begat Dominion;
Dominion begat Pomp;
Pomp begat Ambition.
Ambition begat Symonie;
Symonie begat the Pope and the Cardinals his Brethren, in the transmigration
of Babylon.
The Pope begat the Mystery of iniquity;
The Mystery of iniquity begat Sophistical Divinity;
Sophistical Divinity begat Reiection of the holy Scriptures;
Reiection of the holy Scriptures begat Tyranny;
Tyranny begat Slaughter of the Saints;
Slaughter of the Saints begat contempt of God;
Contempt of God begat Dispensation;
Dispensation begat Liberty to sin;
Liberty to sin begat Abomination;
Abomination begat Confusion;
Confusion begat Labor of mind;
Labor of mind begat Disputation for the search of Truth;
And Truth has revealed Ante christ the Destroier.
THE BAPTISM OF ANTECHRIST.
ANTECHRIST being bred and borne in Rome, there was great pomp and triumphall
preparation made for his solemn baptising. And the streets being thick set
with Torch-bearers at noone day, which near hand obscured bright day light, by
such an infinite number being lighted all the way: They marched a long to S.
Peter's Church, in this manner. An ancient grave matrone, named Lady Custom,
walked on foremost. After her, with a sober pace, and demure countenance,
followed Worldly Wisdom, bearing the Salt, Cream, and Spittle, to baptize
the Infant. Then came Madame Hypocrisy, holding her head somewhat down, as
having very special care of the Child: And she carried the water to fit the
intended business. Subbornation went next, bearing the Towell, which was all
beset with precious stones, and round imbrodered with the fires of Purgatory,
which was described in very antique great carracters. Then under a sumptuous
Cannopie, came Abuse the Godfather, who carried the Child, being attended on
by Heresy and Tyranny, two hard-fauoured Ladies, and they held up the
corners of the linen couerture behind. Error, an old, thick, square, goutie
Lord, so big, as his legs could scarce supporte his body, he being the
other Godfather; made what haste he could after the rest. Dame Avarice, and
Dame Symonie, being the appointed God mothers, followed close after, in a very
sad and serious consultation. Then came the Roman Burgesses, named Human
Traditions; with whom walked Idolatry and Blasphemy, and they, with the rest
of the quiere, sung very solemnly. Now, to glad the people the more, and in
sign also of liberality, the Jubilee, which had been sold before at a very
dear rate; was proclaimed freely, and Bulls and Pardons were now as cheap as
strawing herbs.

When they came to name the child, striving to have it a name of immortal
renown; there happened to grow a great difference among them, and every one
strove to please his own appetite. One would have him to be named Holy
Mother; An other thought it more fit to call him Holy Father. Hypocrisy would
have him to be termed, The supreme Bishop: But the Gossips named him, The
Servant of Servants. Idolatry said it were better to call him, God on earth.
When the Priest, that was to perform the solemnity, saw no likelyhoode of any
other agreement, but the contention still to grow on more and more: He
concluded, to exercise his own authority, and bethinking him on a name, that
might both fit, and answer all their hope; He Christened him, and named him;
THE POPE.

FINIS.

