The demau^des Joyous.


Demand. who bare ye best burden that ever was borne.. That bare ye ass wha^
our lady fled with our lord in to egypt. Demand. where became ye ass that
our lady rode upon.. Adams mother de de ete her. Demand. who was Adams mother..
The earth. Demand. what space is from ye hy est space of the se to the
depest.. But a stones cast Demand. wha^ autecryst is come in to this world
what thing shall be hardest to him to know.. A hand barowe / for of that he
shall not know which end shall goo before. Demand. How many calves tails
behooves to reche from the earth to the sky.. No More but one and it be long
enough. De maunde ^ How many holy days be there i the year ye neuerfall on the
sondayes.. There be eight that is to were ye three holy days after Eester. iii.
after whytsondaye / the holy ascencyon day / and corpus crysty day. Demand.
which ben ye trulyest told things in the world.. Those be ye steyres of
chambres and houses. Demand. which part of asergeau^ te love ye best to
ward you.. His heles. Demand. which is the best wood and leest burnt.
Vynes. Demand. which is the most profitable be and that men eteth leest
of.. That is bees. De maunde. which is the brodest water and leest Ieoperdye
to pass over.. The dew. Demand. what things is it that the more that one
drynketh ye less he shall pysse.. It is fartes and fyestes / for Who that
drynketh a hondreth thousand they shall never pysse a drop. Demand what
thing is it that never was nor ne^^^ shall be.. Never mouse made her nest in a
cattes ere. Demand. why drive men dogs out of the church.. Because they
come not up and offer. Demand. why come dogs so often to the church..
Because when they se the aulters covered they wene their masters goo thither to
dinner. Demand. why does a dog thourne him thryes about or ye he lies him
down.. Because he knows not his beds head from the fete. Demand. why
do men make an oven in the town.. For because they can not make the town in
the oven. Demand. what be is it that has her tail between her eyes.. it
is a catte when she lycketh her arse. Demand. which is the most cleynelyest
lefe among all other leaves.. it is holly leaves / for no body will not wype
his arse with them. Demand. who was he that let the first farte at rome..
That was the arse. Demand. How may a man know or perceive acowe in a flock
of sheep.. By syghte. Demand. what thing is it that has horns at the
arse.. It is a sack. Demand. what alms is worst bestowed that men give..
That is to a blind man / for as he has any thing given him / he would with
good will se him hanged hy the neck that gave it him. Demand. wherefore set
the^ upon church steples more a cock than a hen.. if men should set there
a hen seh would lay eggs / and tehy would fall upon men's hedes. Demand
what thing is it that has none end.. A bowl. Demand. what wode is it
that ne^ (...) rest upon.. The claper of a lazers dysshe. D^^au^de how would
ye say two pater nosters for your friends soul / and god never made but one
pater noster.. Say one two times. Demand which ben the most profitable
saints in the church.. They that stand in ye glass wyndowes / for they keep
out ye wind for wasting of the light. Demand. what people be they ye never
go a processyon.. They be those that ring ye belles ein ye mean season.
Demand what is it ye freseth never.. That is hot water. Demand. what
thing is that / yt is most lykest unto a horse.. That is a mare. Demand.
wherefore be there not as many women contained in ye dance of poules as there
be men.. By cause a women is so ferefull of heart that she had lever dance
among quycke folk than deed. Demand which is the clenlyest occupacyon that
is.. That is a dauber / for he may neither shyte nor ete till he has washed
his hands. Demand. what day in the year ben the flies most aferde.. That
is on palm sunday wha^ they se every body have an handeful of palm in their
hand / they wene it is to kill them with. Demand what time of the year may
maidens most with their honest fyest in the church.. In lent season / for
than every saints nose and face is covered so that they smell no thing
Demand. what thing is it the less it is the more it is dredde.. A bridge.
Demand. wherefore is it that young children weep as soon as ever they ben
borne.. Because their mother is no more maiden. Demand. wherefore is it that
an ass has so great (...).. Because het mother put no begin on her heed in
her yought. Demand what is it that is a write and is no man / and he do the
that no man can / and yet it serves both god and man,. That is a be.
Demand. which was first ye hen or ye egg.. The hen wha^ god made her.
Demand. why do the an ox or a cow lie.. Because she can not fytte. Demand
what people be they that love not in no wise to be prayed for.. They be beggars
and poor people wha^ men say god help them when they ask aims. Demand How
many stra was go to a gose nest.. None for lack of fete. Demand. what time
in the year bears a gose most feders.. when the gander is upon her back.
Demand what was he that flewe the fourth part of the world.. Cayne when
that he slew his brother abell in the which time was but four persons in the
world. Demand. what was he that was be gotten or his fader / and borne or his
mother / and had the maydenhede of his beldame.. That was Abell Demand. what
three things be they that the world is most mayntened by.. That is to were by
words erbes and stones. why with words man worshyppeth god / and as of erbes
that is all manner of corn that man is fed with / and as stones one is that
gryndeth the corn and the other increases the world. De. what is ye aege of
a field mous.. Ayere And a hedge may stand three mous lives / and the life of a
dog is the term of three hedges standing and the life of a horse is three
dogs lives / and the life of a man is three horse lives / and the life of a
gose is three men's lives / and ye life of a swanns (...) and the life of a
swalowe is three swanne lives and the life of an egle is three swalowes lives /
and the life of a serpent is three egles lives / and the life of a raven is three
serpents lives / and the life of a heart is three ravens lives / and an oak
grows. v. hondreth year / and it stands in one state five hondreth year and
it fades five hondreth year beside the rote why the doubleth three times
eueryche of the three aeges a foresaid. Demand. A man had three daughters of
three aeges / which daughters he delivered to sell certain apples / and he
took to the ledest daughter. l. apples / and to the second. xxx. apples / and
to the youngest ten apples / and all these three sold in like many for a penny /
and brought home in like much money now how many sold each of them for a
penny.. The youngest sold first seven for a penny / and the other two systers
sold after the same price / than ye eldest sister had one odd apple left /
and the second sister two / and the youngest thrs apples / now these apples
lyked the byer so well that in contynent he came again to the youngest sister
and bought of her three apples after three pens a piece / than had she ten pens /
and the secon be thought she would keep the same price / and sold her two
apples for three pens a piece and than had she ten pens / and ye eldest sold her
one apple for three pens / and than had she ten pens / thus sold they in like
many apples for a penny and brought home in like much money. Demand. what
man is he that geteth his living bacwarde. res. That is rope maker. Demand.
what people be the that geteth their living moo^^ merylyest.. Tho be prestes
and fullers / for one syngeth and the other daunceth. Demand. what is he that
made all and sold all / and he ye bought all lost all. Asmyth made an all
and sold it / and the shomaker ye bought it lost it. Demand whether is it
bett to live by theft or by alms deeds.. The reward of theft is to behanged
/ and if thou ly ue by alms deeds that is by beggars tordes *

Thus ends ye Demaundes Joyous Enprynted at London in Flete stre te at the
sign of the son by me wynkynde word. In the year of our lord a M. CCCCC.
and xi. *

wynkyn de word
printer's device of Wynkyn de Word


