A PLATFORM, MADE FOR THE PROOF OF Gods providence:

That is, for examining of the truth of this doctrine, whether God by his
providence rule all things generally, and every creature and action
particularly.

By Arthur Dent

LONDON. Printed by Ed. Allde for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in
Paternoster-rowe, at the sign of the Sun. 1608.

A platform made for ^he proof of Gods providence: that is, for the examining
of the truth of this doctrine, whether God by his providence, rule all things
generally, and every creature, and action particularly.
IT were to be wished that all Christians did understand, that, which with
mouth they confess, when they rehearse the articles of their faith, ^thered
out of the Apostles doctrine.

The Confession is breife, and every ^orde in it very significant, and well
^nderstood, would root all heresies out ^our minds.

The principles of Religion are therein contained, and if he be but a weak^
Philosopher, that is ignorant in the principles of Philosophy, and it be a
shame for all artificers to be ignoran^ in the grounds of those arts they
profess, it is a greater shame for us Christians to make show of christianity,
an^ yet to be ignorant in the rudiments o^ our Religion.

I would to God that every one, tha^ has the name of a christian, did
thoroughly understand, and were fully instructe^ in them, then needed not I
labor (...) much, for the proof of this doctrine.

For every one of us, when we do confess God to be almighty, do acknowledge
that he by his providence rule^ every thing: and that we may kno^ what we
say, I purpose chiefly to hand these two points:

First that Christ the Son (...) God, has the self same prouiden^ that God
the Father has: Second^ that the providence of God, does g^uerne all things
generally, and eue^ special thing specially.

And yet in handling these two, I (...) not recite all that may be said
touching this matter, but only touch some chief points, summarily which may
help you the better to understand the large and learned tracts, that many
notable men have written hereof. For the first:

That Christ the Son of God does govern all things as well, as God the
Father, is proved by reason, example, and authority.
BY reason, if God by his wisdom made the world: that is, if that the
Eternal wisdom of God, which is his word, the everlasting Son of God, was
present with God, when he made the world: he is also with him in governing the
world: but he was with God ^hen made the world, therefore he is ^ith him in
governing of it.

The equity of the first proposition is grounded upon most strong reason:

For as God created the world by his wisdom, so it is not to be believed,
that God governs the world without his wisdom, otherwise he should govern
by chance.

The second proposition is proved by the testimony of the Apostle Hebr. 1. by
whom also he made the worlds.

By example, Genesis 48. verse 13. 14. 15. Then took Joseph them both, Ephraim in
his right hand toward Isreal's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand
toward Isreal's right hand, so he brought them unto him.

But Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it on Ephraims head, which
was the younger, and his left hand upon Manassehs head (directing his hands on
purpose) for Manasseh was the elder.

Also he blessed Joseph, and said, the God before whom my fathers Abraham, and
Izack did walk, the God which has fed me all my life long unto this day.

In which words Jacob acknowledges Gods providence to stretch to particular
men, even to himself.

Then it follows as verse: 5. 16. The Angel which has delivered me from all
evil, bless the children, and let my name be named upon them, and the name of
my fathers Abraham, and Izack, that they may grow as fish, into a multitude in
mids of the earth. In these words, the holy Patriarch Jacob gives that
particular providence to the Angel, which in the former verse he had given to
God: And that by the name of Angel he understands no ^reature, is hereby
proved, in that he affirms, that this Angel had power to bless: saying to
him, Bless the children: He then is the Angel, whom Jacob was wont to call,
the Angel of the Lord, that is the Son of God.

Therefore in this place Jacob attributes a providence over all things and
persons, to the Angel: that is the Son of God, as well as to God the Father.

By authority John. 5. verse 17. My Father works and I work: This work
that Christ speaks of, is not to be understood of the creation only, but
also of ye governing of al things created.

For this particle (hitherto) shows that he meant not only that first work
of his in creating all things with his Father, but also another work, which he
daily excerciseth, which cannot be understood of any other, then of governing
all things with his Father.

But here we must observe this rule, that the works of the Trinity are
undivided.

Therefore that which is the Fathers work, is the work also of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost.

That the Son of God does the same works that the Father does, is already
proved: the same is to be affirmed also of the holy Ghost, by the warrant of
Gods word, as by that I read in the 139. Psalm Whether shall I go from the
Spirit? or whether shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend into Heaven,
thou art there: If I lie down in Hell thou art there: let me take the wings
of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, yet thither shall
thine hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me: Thus is the first point
briefly proved, that Christ the Son of God, and the holy Ghost, do govern
all things as well as God the Father.

Now to the second: that God by his providence governs all and every thing.

There are very many that can willingly grant, that God by his providence
governs all things in general, but that every particular thing is ruled by
the same, they deny: with these men therefore I mind to deal somewhat
largely, though not so learnedly, as the cause requires: (and who is able to
handle it worthily?) Philosophers have in this point had sundry opinions:
Epicurus said, that all things were ruled by chance and fortune, and that God
lived idly, and at ease in the Heavens: which opinion, as impious, all men in
words condemn, and yet so we live that our lives are evident proofs against
us, that in heart and soul we embrace it.

For surely if we thought better of God then Epicurus did, we would not walk
so directly in Epicurus paths as we do, or live so licentiously as though God
regarded us not.

The Peripatetickes, and other sort of Philosophers, broched another opinion,
teaching that those things which are above the Heavens, are moved, guided, and
governed by God himself: but those things that are under the circle of the
Moon, are governed partly by chance and fortune, partly by the counsels and
devises of men, and partly by a brutish, or senseless force of nature.

There is a third opinion of the Stoickes, which is that all things are ruled by
fate or destiny, that is by a secret order, and link of causes: in which
chain, all things are so surely tied, that both God himself and man are
straighted within those bounds.

This was a very dainty opinion in the judgment of the Poets: who to excuse
the weakness of their God Jupiter, fained that he wept, for that he was so
hindered by the force of destiny, that he could not set Sarpedo at liberty.

The fourth opinion is Platoes, who grants that God by his providence rules
all things in general, which afterward God commiteth to petty Gods, half
Gods, and Devils, who have the charge and care of particular things: From these
four opinions, spring all other whatsoever, touching Gods providence: and
there is no one opinion, which may not easily be reduced to one of these.

But some of us (even of us Christians) flying one danger, run into another:
and for that they dare not deny that God by his providence rules all things,
yet will they not grant, that by it, he governs every particular thing,
least they should thereby be driven (as they think) to some absurdities: thus
whilst they would avoid absurdity, they commit impiety and fall away from the
truth most dangerously: But far be this from your heart (Right worshipful)
and that it may never possess you: avoid the cause that works it in them,
which is ignorance of the word of God: and for that God in great mercy has
kindled in your heart a desire of knowledge, quench not that godly desire in
you, but pursue hotely with hearty and fervent prayer, after knowledge, and you
shall find it. And if you shall find it, you shall certainly know, that there
will no absurdity be enforced upon any doctrine grounded upon Gods word, and
that you need not fear this doctrine, as they do: I will first discourse
briefly of the truth of it, and will prove, that God governs by his
providence all things generally, and every particular thing particularly: then
will I answer to all those chief objections which are brought against it, and
by which some vain men think to make the doctrine absurd. To the first:

For that this argument has been diversely handled, and men have been very
curious in discoursing thereof: especially since what way soever they wind
themselves, many absurdities do seem to follow them: it will be best I think
for me to keep me in the high beaten way, least seeking by ways, I wander out
of the way: I mean to discourse so of this doctrine, as I am taught in the
word of God, and then diligently to remove all those things what soever they
be, not beseming ye most pure nature of God, which in ye judgment of men,
shall some hereof to follow.

But if my ignorance were so great, that I could not remove these
inconveniences: yet not withstanding, are you and all Christians bound to
receive with all humility this true doctrine: and to blame me not, the
doctrine, if I be not able to clear it of all those things, which in the
judgment of man may seem absurd: And although it is not my purpose, to
examine all, that Philosophers and others say against the governing of every
thing by the providence of God, yet in my mind, all that they can say against
it, may by this one argument be easily overthrown. If he be a God (which they
all confess, and though they would deny it, yet may it easily be proved
against them) he is a most perfect thing: but that which is most perfect, has
nothing perfecter then it self, neither can we imagine any thing to be more
perfect, then that which of it self, is truly and absolutely most perfect:
therefore there is nothing, neither can we imagine any thing to be more perfect
then God: here upon I infer, if God did not govern al things in general, and
every thing in particular, we might well imagine that there was something more
perfect then God: eue^ such a diety, which had charge and care of every
particular thing: but it is showed that no such diety or Godhead cau be
imagined.

It is false therefore, that they hereupon would infer that God by his
providence rules not every particular thing, and the contrary is true, which
we teach: for else surely that God, which they dream of to live idleis, and at
ease, and to have no care of any thing, as they babble, is not in truth a God,
but as Tullye sometime said of their master Epicurus, so say I of them, that
they in words acknowledge a God* but in truth deny that there is any. But
leaving Philosophers, let us see what the Scripture teaches us: the first
place I will use for the proof of this Doctrine, I take out of ye Epistle to
the Hebrews the 1. Chapter. verse. 3. where it is said of the Son of God,
that He bears up, that is, moves and governs all things by his mighty
word: he that grants that he rules all things, excepteth no one thing from
his government: we may then well conclude out of this place of God, that God
governs all, and every thing.

But lest I should leave any starting hole for the adversary to wind out at,
let us further see what the Scripture teaches us of the governing of every
particular thing by Gods providence.

Neither will I heap up many places, but content my self with a few examples,
out of which the truth of this doctrine may be gathered.

And thus I do endeavor to prove it briefly: All the creatures of God are
either endued with the gift of free choice, or else want this liberty of
choice: they that have it, are Angels, both good and evil, and men also both
good and evil: they that want this liberty of choice, are all other living
things created by God, and also those his creatures which have no life: and yet
of all these creatures, God has a special care, so as he disposes of every
one of them according to his pleasure.

The book of Job, and the Psalms, do very often handle this argument, so that
if I should gather out of them all their proofs, I should write out almost
their whole books: yet some I will bring, and leave the rest for you to
gather, hoping it will be a means to bring you to the often reading of them.

In the 147. Psalm the Prophet says thus of God, that the covers the Heaven
with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow
upon the mountains: But the clouds, the rain, and the grass are things
without soul and life, and yet by his wonderful providence he drives, and
rules at his pleasure the clouds in the air: he sends the rain down upon
the earth, and he makes the grass to grow: In the 148. Psalm. the Prophet
says, that fire and hail, snow, and vapors, stormy winds do execute his
word, and what is it to execute the word of God, but to be ruled and govern
by his word, it is to be at his beck and pleasure: Again, in the 135.
Psalm, it is said, that whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and
in earth, in the Sea, and all the depthes: he brings up the clouds from the
ends of the earth, and makes the lightnings with the rain, he draws forth
the winds out of his treasures: and Christ our Savior in the 6. of Math.
bids us learn how the Lillies of the field do grow, they labor not
neither spin: and a little afterward he tells us, that God does cloth the
grass of the field: these few places prove that God has a provident care, to
keep and govern even his lifelesse creatures, not only generally, but also
particularly: as clouds, rain, winds, grass, fire, hail, snow, vapors,
lillies, and such like: the like provident care he has for other of his
creatures, whom he has endued with the life and sense, but not with reason
and that liberty of choice, whereof I spoke before: We read in the 147.
Psalm that God gives to beasts their food, and to the young Ravens that cry:
and in the 104. Psalm verse. 14. the Prophet says, that God causes grass to
grow for the cattle, and afterward in the 27. verse he says, that all
beasts, fowls, and fishes, wait upon thee O Lord that thou may give them
food in due season: thou give it to them, and they gather it, thou openest
thy hand and they are silled with good things: This also our Savior Christ
affirms in the 6. of Matthew, saying, behold the fowls of the Heaven, for
they sow not, neither reap, nor carye into the barnes: yet your heavenly
Father feeds them. And in the 10. of Math. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a
farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father?
meaning God: by these few places you may see it sufficiently proved, that God
has a prouide^t care of every particular creature, upon whom he has not
bestowed y^ free liberty of choice, whether they have not life, or have life
and sense and want reason. Now as for those creatures to whom God has given
that gift of free choice, which I said were Angels and men, some do think,
that God in truth has a special provident care over man, whom he made after
his own Image and likeness: but not over other creatures: which opinion how
false it is, you may easily gather out of that I have already written. Others
do make this to be the difference between man and man, that God takes a
special care of the godly, but casts away all care of the wicked: but the
word of God does manifestly overthrow this opinion: In the 5. of Math. Christ
our Savior teaches us, that our heavenly Father makes his Sun to arise on
the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust: And Paul in
his first Epistle to Timothy the 4. chapter, says that God is Savior of al
men, specially of those that believe: whereof I gather that God has a special
care of those that are his, but yet not so, as that he leaves ye wicked to be
ruled by chance and fortune: for if God have a care of those things and
creatures that the wicked possess, as of their cattle, grass, and corn, and
such like: surely he provides also for them, the owners and masters of those
creatures: neither can he be provident and careful for the godly, but he must
also govern, and rule the wicked according to the pleasure of his divine
power. For as a Prince and General of an army is not only careful for the
troops and companies of Soldiers that be in his host: but also for munitio^
and vittaile necessary for the^, that he may have his army so furnished, that
it may be a terror to the enemy, and may keep them amongst whom he lies
encamped in such dutiful obedience, that they may be ready to do whatsoever
his Captains and officers command them: so can it not be that God does
provide for his Church, but he must also moderate and govern all those things,
without which his Church cannot be here upon the earth.

Such things as appartaine to the nourishment, clothing, safe and quiet
harboring of the members of the Church: They therefore who are not of the true
Church, are yet, for the benifit of Gods Church, to be ruled by his providence,
so are the Patriarchs said to have found favor in the eyes of infidelles,
for that the Lord did rule and move the hearts of infidelles, which way it
pleased him.

Now how God rules not only every particular man, but also all the several
actions of men, is proved by that which is in the 16 of the Proverbs, Commit
thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed: And by that also
which is in the 4. of James: go to now ye that say, to day or to morrow we
will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell and
get gain: and yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow: for what is your
life? it is even a vapor, it appears for a little time, and afterward
vanquisheth away: for that we ought to say, if the Lord will, and if we live
we will do this or that: Thus James speaking of the actions or doings of men,
affirms that God rules them all, so that without his will we can do
nothing, no not so much as pass from one place to another: and Paul coufesseth
that he was often hindered and stayed by God, that he could not go to those
Churches he purposed, until he had his journey granted him by the will of
God: God therefore rules all the several actions of all men. I will use only
two examples, to illustrate and make plain this most true doctrine, that God
governs the several actions of all men, both good and bad: In the history
of Joseph many things to this purpose are to be found: the end of that
history was that which Joseph spoke of, Genesis 50. you thought evil against
me says he to his brethren, but God disposed it to good: In this history
these men and their several actions are to be wayed: First father Jacob, then
the brethren of Joseph, Joseph himself, the Ishmaelites to whom he was sold,
that light huswife his mistress Putiphars wife, Pharao and his servants: the
actions of all these persons are diverse and very different one from another,
some of them were laudable, others detestable, and yet some of those better
then others, and some of those actions neither to be altogether allowed nor
dispraised, and yet as Joseph witnesses, God by his providence rules and
disposes them all, both men and their actions to Joseph's good.

So as David says, Psalm 105. that God sent a man before them, Joseph was
sold for a slave: For so God governs the wicked actions of those men, that
the most perverse practices of Joseph's brethren, the shameless and beastly
part of Putiphar^ wife, and other heavy actions, had a most happy end: so
that even those things that they did to Joseph, purposing by them utterly to
destroy him, brought Joseph to great honor: so mighty and wonderful is God,
that he is able to make the light to shine out of darkness more-ouer in the
last chapter of the prophecy of Jonas, we shall see how wonderfully God does
not only govern men, but also all manner of creatures sensible and insensible:
for I read that Jonah went out of the City of Nineveh, and sat on the East
side of ye City, and there made him a booth and sat under it in the shadow
till he might se what should be don to the City: and the Lord prepared a Gourd,
and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head,
and deliver him from his grief: so Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd. But
God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the Gourd
that it withered: and when the Sun did arise, God prepared also a fervent
East wind, and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and
wished in his heart to dye, and said It is better for me to dye then to live:
in this that I have written out of Jonas we have these things to way: First
Jonah a man, the most excellentest creature, the other baser creatures, as the
Gourd, the worm, and the wind: The worm is a creature that has life in it,
and is of that kind of beasts that be divided in their bodies, the head and
breast from their belly and tail, the Gourd and the wind they are creatures
without life, and yet you see how God by his providence rules and moves at
his pleasure all these creatures. If Epicurus had been at this sight, he would
have ascribed all to chance: if Aristotle, to natural causes: if Chrysippus
or Zeno Stoics, to fate and to destiny: if Plato to some petty god: and
amongst them all there had not been one word of the truth of God.

But the holy Ghost attributes the course of governing all these things to God
alone, who prepared them all for Jonah his good: for by these means, Jonah
that was wandering, was set in the right way, as if you will read the chapter
you may see more fully of that which I have already written. I may safely
conclude, that both all the creatures which want the gift of choice, and all
they that have it, are governed and ruled by God, by his most high and mighty
providence.

Of the Angels, which I placed at the first amongst those creatures, that have
the liberty of choice, I will write now the less, hoping that I shall have
this back again to view, polish, and enlarge: but their name teaches us that
they are ruled by God him self, for they are called Angeli Angels, that is,
messengers sent from God: and in the Epistle to the Hebrews are called the
ministers, and servants of God.

Thus much for the first part, that is for the truth of this doctrine, that
God by his providence ruled all things in general, and every particular thing
in particular.

Now come I to that I promised to handle in the second place, namely to the
unfolding and answering of those arguments which are made against this
doctrine. The first argument they make is this: God cannot govern all things
generally, and every creature and action without exeeding toil and grief of
mind: But if agrees with the nature of God, that he rest in quiet and be free
from all labors: Therefore God does not govern all and every particular thing.

To this argument drawn thus from the nature of God, I answer, that their
first proposition is false, which is that God cannot govern all things
generally and particularly without exceeding foil, and grief of mind: but
for that I will not only deny it as false, but show the reasons that move me
so to do, you must know that there are diverse kinds of actions, some are
natural, some are violent other some mean: that is neither altogether
natural, nor altogether violent: natural actions are they that do flow from
the principles of nature it self, without any help elsewhere: such are the
round motions of the heavens, the flowing and ebbing of the sea, that light
things do of their natural lightness mount upward, heavy things fall
downward, that we breath and such like: these actions are done without any
labor, because they move of themselves without any other help: Other actions
there are, which are done by force, and therefore are called violent, as by
force to make a stone mount upward, whose nature is to fall downward. And such
like violent actions, which cannot long last as Aristotle teaches, because
they are done with ^orce. There is another sort of actions which I called
mean, whose beginnings are of nature, but yet they cannot be done unless they
be helped by some other means, as to eat, to drink, to walk, and such like.
But now that, that God does, he does without labor, because he does it
naturally, and therefore most freely: again, there is no force that can
compel God, and therefore he works of himself freely without any
compulsion: neither is he troubled with greifes, but governs all things
according to the rule of his will: neither is there any thing more agreeable to
the nature of God, then to govern, and preserve the whole world, even with
the word of his power.

A second argument of theirs is this, It is an unmeet thing for God, and
clean repugnant to his nature, to entermeddle in filthy, and unclean matters
but he cannot govern every several creature, and their actions, but he must
entermeddle with many unclean, and filthy matters: therefore he does not
govern them.

I deny the second proposition, which is, that God cannot govern every
several creature and their actions, but he must mingle himself with many
unclean, and filthy matters: For that amongst the creatures, and their
actions, there are many unclean things: this consequence, though it be the
ground of the proposition is false, for although the power of God is in all
his creatures, and ruled all, yet does it not therefore follow, that the nature
of God does entermeddle with the vnpure actions of his creatures, which may be
made plain by this similitude: the Sun of all visible creatures most
excellent (man only excepted) does most set forth the glory of God* it does
shine in every place, so that it shines often upon the dunghill, and though
the beams thereof do heat the dunghill, as they do all other places, and
things which they pierce, Yet for all that the Sun is not polluted with the
defilements and uncleanness of it, neither does the substance of the beams of
the Sun mingle it self with those things which it pearceth.

When one laid this in Diogenes his dish, that he went into a stews or
brothels house, why says he the Sun comes thither also, and yet is not
defiled therewith: thereby showing, yt a wife and godly man though he enter into
unclean and filthy places, and come into the company of filthy persons,
does not forthwith toyne himself to their filthiness, neither is infected
with their vices: If therefore this Philosopher could enter into the stews,
and come forth again unspotted with their uncleanness, so that their
filthiness could not fasten upon him: much loss is God (whose nature is most
pure and simple in governing of his creatures) insected with their filthiness.
There is a third objection, which they thus frame: Every wise and good
governor, unless he be greatly hindered* brings his work that he frames,
and that thing that he rules to a good, perfect and wished end: this may be
proved by many examples, as by the example of a skillful Pilot, who directs
and brings his ship to the purposed haven, and such like: but nothing can let
God from perfecting his works, and yet many of his creatures, as many
monsters, mad men, lame, are imperfect. Therefore God rules not every
generation and conception: to unloose this knot we must remember this
distinction of order: there are two sorts of orders or courses that God takes
in governing all things: the one of them we may call ordinary, which God does
often use, the other extraordinary, with which order though we be not
acquainted, yet does God himself know the cause why he so works: and yet of
this may we not conclude, that God in his works is contrary to himself: for
if to us there appear some dinersitie and difference in the government of all
things by God, certainly that difference is not of Gods rule, but of the
unstable judgment of our troubled minds: for Gods works are not to be
balanced by our judgments, which are deceauable, and for the most part untrue:
Augustine proposed the example of two children, one of which is dutiful and
loving to his father, the other is a wicked stubberne child: both their
fathers are deadly sick, the good child prays earnestly unto God, to deliver
his father from his sickness: the graceles graft thinks every hour twenty
until his father be breathless: both their fathers died and that according to
Gods appointement and direction.

But now that child that prayed for the prolonging of his fathers life, highly
pleased God: and yet it pleased not God, that his father should live any
longer: and again, that child that longed for his fathers death, as highly
displeased God, and yet it was Gods pleasure that his father too should dye:
how comes it to pass, that that which pleases God may displease him also,
and that which displeases him, please him? as he was pleased with the good
child's kindness, but not pleased that his father should live: and again
displeased with ye unnatural part of the lewd child, and yet pleased with his
fathers death.

Surely there is in God a certain secret ordinance which yet is just, and a
certain ordinance open and manifested, which also is righteous: But certain
idle companions to draw both Augustine and us into hatred, for this doctrine,
object against us, that they cannot perceive in God this double will, which we
speak of, to wit, a secret and a revealed will: for they say we all know and
you confess, that God is most plain without all show of doubleness, and
therefore his will must be also as plain, and even so is it, though we cannot
comprehend it: but let them first answer to that which Augustine and we have
proposed, and ^ill they, nill they, they must ack^owledge with us, that this
difference ^f will, of which I have spoken, is not ^roperly in God, but in us,
who ac^ording to our reach and capacity mea^ure divine matters: and therefore
in ^espect of us and of our capacity, there se^^eth to be this difference in
the will of God: According to our censure and judgment, we will judge the
birth of ^onsters, mad men, and crooked men, ^o be an imperfect work of God:
but in ^he judgment of God their creation is most perfect and absolute.

If Aristotle were asked what the ^ause were of their imperfections and ^e
formities, he would answer yt they ^roceeded of a defect, and want in nature.
But Christ says otherwise of the man that was borne blind in the 9. of John.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God
should be showed on him: that is, that ^od might be glorified by him. Now since
the last end of al things is the glory of God, and since all those things are
to be accounted perfect, which attain to their desired end, and since the
glory of God more appears by the imperfections of some of his creatures,
then if he had made them all in one form and perfection, surely we may not
judge any of his works imperfect: I grant that if they be considered in
themselves, there will appear in them some imperfection: but when they are
referred to the glory of God, if they illustrate and set it forth, they are
even therefore to be accounted perfect: for if no man should be mad, if none
deformed, none lame, none blind, we would ascribe the perfection of our
birth, which we perceived that all men have necessarily either to nature or to
our parents: and we would easily slip into this opinion, that we had our
solues also of our parents: but since there appears such a diversity in the
outward sormes of creatures, the providence of God does more clearly appear
by that their difference in shape. In the judgment of man, many flies and
worms, and all sort of serpents are reputed not only unprofitable but also
hurtful: But the Lord (as Moses shows in his song) calls them his
treasures, out of which, he draws vengeance for his enemies, as arrows out
of a quiver.

These were the shafts he shook Pharao with: with these Antiochus, with these
Herod was punished: who therefore will account them unprofitable, or who
superfluous, since the Lord him self has such uses to put them to?

There are also in the^ many profitable things for man, whereof some we know
not, other some the Physicians know, as Nicander and others have very learnedly
written of them: Ancient learned Chrysostom in his tenth Homily upon Genesis,
used this similitude: ^f (says he) in earthly matters when we see these
things that be done, approved by grave and mighty men, we mislike not their
censure nor gainsay it, but prefer their judgment before our own: how much
more should we carry the same mind of all visible creatures, which we know
that God the creator of all things made? That since we have received his
censure of them all, that all that he made was weary good, let us suspende our
judgments and bury them in silence, and let us not dare to prefer the
judgments of all men before the Lords: and we may persuade our selves with
strong and sufficient arguments, that the Lord made all things in great wisdom
and mercy, and in a word, that the Lord made nothing unadvisedly or without
cause: but though we know not the causes of his works, because of the
weakness of our understandings: yet has he made all things according to his
wisdom and mos^ mighty mercy.

Thus far Chrysostom: If therefore by the testimony of Aristotle, nature
made nothing in vain, As that m^ who was utterly ignorant of true religion
affirmed of nature, which he yet iudge^ to be both blind and brutish: how much
more are we bound to attribut^ unto the most wise creator of all things this
perfection in his creation, that he made nothing in vain, but all things in
great wisdom: since all his worke^ redounded to his glory, which is the last,
and the chiefest end of all things, and by the common consent of all men, every
thing is judged either perfect or imperfect, by the attaining of his end?
There is a fourth argument, thus made against the providence of God: If God who
is most wise and righteous in his judgments, do govern all things, and every
particular thing there should not be so great troubles in common wealths, and
specially in the Church, whereof the Lord has a special care, for that it is
his Sanctuary: but both in Church and commonwealth there is great
unquietness, so that all laws both divine and humane are openly violated:
good men most cruelly are delte withal, evil men do rejoice and triumph in
their wickedness without controlement: God therefore governs not all things
that are in commonwealths and in the Churches.

This argument thus drawn from the nature of Gods justice (which seems to be
contrary to his government by his providence, if he should see, moderate, and
suffer all these outrages and disorders) is one of the chiefest proppes of
Epicurus his opinion: And this argument troubles many that now live, and daily
labor to bring Epicurus name in obloquie with all men, and yet are content to
live like Epicures: and this argument also the Turks, and our capital enemies
(the papists) object most against us: and sure it carries such weight with it,
that David confesses that he was so astonished, that his feet were almost gone:
and his steps had welnere slipped, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked,
and punishments and hard entertainment of the godly, until he went into the
sanctuary of God: then understood he their end, that is until David entered
into Gods school, and learned by his word and holy spirit, that he ordered
all things most wisely, and justly. After Pomp^y had been put to the worst in
the battle fought betwixt Caesar and him, in the confines of Pharsalos, and
escaped by flight to Mytilene, he went to Cratippus, and disputed with the
Philosopher in his garden, whether he thought there was any God which by his
providence ruled in earth: and for that before in very bad quarrels ^ee had had
most prosperous success, as when he had subdued, and in battle vanquished
the inhabitants of the East part of the world, and was now in a most good
cause overcome, stripped of his army, and forced to fly away himself alone
most shamefully: he hereof gathered that God regarded not what was ^one amongst
men, but yt all things were ^one by chance. Thus does the wise me^ of (...)
world judge and speak of such events. But the holy ghost teaches us to judge
^ar otherwise of them: When Moses in his song Deuteronomy. 32. was to deliver to the
people the threatenings of God, if they were disobedient, which afterward the
^ebellious Israelites felt, he uses this preface: Perfect is the work of the
migh^ie God: for all his ways are judgment: God is true and without
wickedness, just and righteous is he: teaching hereby that whatsoever the world
does prate of the causes of afflictions, that God with great wisdom, does
send forth of his treasures all sorts of calamities: some-time by them to
punish the wicked, sometime to exercise the godly with them. For the sins of
the people the hipocrite does reign: that is, tirant^ sit in the throne of
Justice, which under pretense of executing justice, ar^ but hipocrites and
oppress the people: Job 34. verse 30.

Woe be to thee (says the Prophet Isaiah) which spoilest, for thou shall be
spoiled: And indeed, one tyra^t plagueth another, and though tyrants be a
plague to all nations and Kingdoms yet are they themselves in due time in like
sort punished by other tyrants* In the person of Sennacherib the judgments of
God are very lively set forth by the prophet Isaiah in the tenth Chapter of his
prophecy: The Lord stirs up the King of the Assirians to punish the eastern
people: Sennacherib was a wicked man, and he is a scourge to wicked people, yea
he cruelly vexed the people of God, he spoileth almost all Palestina, he
beseigeth Jerusalem the chief City of that country: And thus says God of him
by the Prophet in that place: O A shur the rod of my wrath and the staff in
their hands is mine indignation: I will send him to a dissembling nation, and I
will give him a charge against the people of my wrath, to take the spoil, and
to take the pray, and to tread them underfoot like the mire in the street.
But he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so: and so forth. And
a little after, thus says God by the Prophet of him: But when the Lord has
accomplished all his work upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem, I will visit the
fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and his glorious and proud
looks, Because he said, by the power of min own hand have I done it, and by
my wisdom, because I am wise: And a little after this, thus says the Prophet,
Shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? If Pompey had
looked on this example, thus laid forth by the Prophet, he might have been
better occupied and instructed, the^ he was by his toying with Cratippus: and
this would have taught him, that thought the Lord suffers tyrants to be for
a time a plague to any nation, yet in his appointed time he suffers them to
be punished by other tyrants, and to have the same measure that they measured
unto others: Now if we compare Sennacherib, and Pompey that gloried in this
Little The great: which name Silla gave him for his victories: we shall find
many things a like in their histories. Both of them was an are in the hand of
God to strike the people of the East: both of them destroyed Palestina, and
afflicted the people of God: Sennacherib deseiged Jerusalem, Pompey took it,
the Assirian was put to flight by an Angel, and was slain in his temple, that
is in his sanctuary, by his own Sons: Pompey was put to flight by Caesar,
and flying to Ptolomie King of Egypt, whose father being dispossessed of his
Kingdom, he had restored again to his crown, and therefore Ptolomie should
have been as a son unto Pompey, was there in Egypt with him miserably slain.
So unsearchable are the ways of Gods judgments: for that which Michah
speaks of the Caldeans in the 4. chap. of his prophecy: They know not the
thoughts of the Lord, they understand not his counsel, therefore they shall be
thrashed as sheaues in the barn, may be spoken of all these Giants and proud
tyrants, who for that they know not the counsel of the Lord, shall in his
appointed time bear the punishment of their pride: Neither does the holy
Ghost teach us, that the wicked only are punished, but that the Church of God
is also afflicted though for another end and purpose: And there may many
reasons be brought, to show why the Church of God is subject to so many
calamities, but I will at this time allege only three, by which as by many
other we may know, that the Lord in truth and judgment, does exercise his
Church with afflictions. The first is that so long as we carry about with us
this burden of corruption, we are not only subject to sin, but do
continually by sinning provoke the Lord to deals in justice with us: And
therefore it is agreeable to the justice of God, that we be chastened of the
Lord with a fatherly rod, which may keep us in obedience: yea we must all say
with Jeremy in the third chapter of his Lamentations, verse 22. It is the Lords
mercies, that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

My second reason is this: It is best for us to be humbled under the mighty
hand of God: for we know how feirce and haughty minded we are by nature, so
that it is necessary for us, that God keep us under his schooling, and so
have us in some awe: Therefore David says in the 119. Psalm, ver. 67. Before
I was afflicted I went astray: but now I keep thy word. And ver. 71. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. The
third reason is delivered by Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians the
11. Chapter verse 32. When we are judged we are chastned of the Lord, because
we would not be condemned with the world: Therefore let us conclude this whole
discourse with Moses thus: The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous,
neither let us measure them according to our own conceit and judgments which
are very deceauable, but let us know that the godly are punished for their
sins they daily commit, that they may be humbled, and that they perish not
with the wicked: but God in punishing the wicked, does show and open the
treasures of his long sufferance, patience and justice: but when he afficteth
us, he makes us like to his own Son Christ, and stirs up in us an
earnest desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

Let us in the mean time give our selves to hearty and earnest prayers, praying
continually with the Saints of God:

Come Lord Jesus, yea come quickly. Amen. Amen.


