A Sermon of repentance.

A very godly and profitable Sermon, preached at Lee in Essex, by Arthur Deuteronomy,
Minister of Gods word. And published at the request of sundry Godly and well
disposed persons. 1581. the 7. of March.

Jonah. chap. 2. ver. 8. They that wait upon lying vanities, Forsake their
own mercy. Imprinted at London for John Harison, and are to be sold at the
white Greihound in Paul's Churchyard* 1582.

To the Reader.
ALthough I was most unwilling that this poor Talent and travail of mine,
should ever have been broched abroad, and come to light: both because it may
seem as a Candle lighted at no one day: as also because many other men's
doings might more worthily a great deal have been published, and committed
unto letters: Yet because diverse which heard it preached with a lively voice,
were very instant, yea, and more then importunate with me to have it
published, using such reasons as I could not well gainesay, I did at the last
yield to their request, and so this untimely fruit is come abroad, to be
sold in open markettes. Let no man be offended that I have not strained my
self to fly an high pitch, to foam out the froth of man's wisdom, and to make
a great show of learning, by blowing the bladder of vanity, till it burst with
swelling. For that is not my use. I seek especial the salvation of the simple
and ignorant, and therefore stoop down to their reach and capacity.
Therefore I beseech thee gentle Reader, accept my good meaning: Read this
without prejudice, like it as thou profitest, so shalt thou have praise of
God, and comfort in thy conscience.

A. D.
The Text.
Luke. 13. 5. I tell you nay: but except you repent you shall likewise perish.
THE occasion of these words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was
because there were certain that showed him of the Galileans, whose blood
Pilate had mingled with their own Sacrifices: That is, murdered them as they
were sacrificing: and so their blood was mingled with the blood of the beasts
which were sacrificed. Those men therefore, though that these Galileans were
greater sinners then all other Galileans, because they had suffered such
things. And that those xviii. also, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell and
slew them, were sinners above all men, that dwelte in Jerusalem. Wherein they
did utter a secret corruption naturally engendered in all men, that is very
sharply to see into the sins of others, and severely to censure the^: but in
the mean while to flatter themselves, and to be blindfold in seeing their
own sins. For these men thought, because the like judgments did not fall
upon them, therefore they were safe enough, they were not so great sinners but
rather highly in the favor of GOD. According as many do falsely suppose, that
those are always the worst sort of people whom God does most strike, and
press with his punishing hand, having forgotten that God does not keep an
ordinary rate here below, to punish every man as he is worst, or to favor
and cocker him as he is best, but only takes some examples as he thinks
good, for the instruction and advertisement of all others, and to be as it were
looking glasses, wherein every man may see his own face, yea, and his own
cause handeled, and that God is a seuers revenger of sin, that all men may
learn by the example of some, to tremble and beware, least peradventure they
be worthily constrained to keep their own turns, and to know what they
have deserved. These men which brought these news to our Savior Christ, had
not taken forth this lesson, whereupon our Savior in iustlye occasioned to
correct their erroneous, and sinister Judgment, and to teach them that they
must not rejoice at the just punishment of others, but rather to be
instructed thereby to repentance.

And further to signify, that God does not always most punish the most
notorious offenders, as Murderers, Thieves, Robbers, Whoremaisters,
Blasphemers, Quarrellers, Scoffers, and such like, but reserueth them unto the
judgment of the great day, and as it weere fatteth them against the day of
slaughter: and therefore he answers them negatiuely, and says nay, or not
so, but except you repent, you shall all likewise perish: as if he should say,
are you of this opinion indeed, that only monstrous Sinners are punished in
this world, and others let alone: or that the Galileans, and these eighteen
upon whom the Tower in Siloa^ fell, were greater sinners then all others? Or
do you think because the same Judgments have not light upon you, therefore
you shall steal away in the dark, and escape the Judgment of God? No, no, you
are deceived. For I say unto you, that, except you mourn and lament for your
sins, and fall to some agreement with God in time (you I say, even you which
are so ready to condemn others, and justify your selves) shall not only
perish with the like judgments in this present world, but be everlastingly
condemned in the world to come. So that our Savior in so saying, does thunder
down a most dreadful sentence upon all our heads: for he concludes and
sets it down, that all men living upon the face of the earth, whether they
be high or low, rich or poor, young or old, noble or unnoble, learned or
unlearned, simple or polyticke, of what estate, degree, and condition soever
they be living, and dying without repentance, shall perish: and be damned in
hell fire for ever: The Scriptures are full of such Thunderboltes: John. 3.
18. He that believes not is damned already. And 2. Cor. 13. verse. 5. Prove
your selves whether you are in the Faith, examine your selves. Know ye not
your own selves that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Where
the Apostle flatly sets down, that all those which have not Christ
dwelling in their hearts by faith which is the household sister of repentance,
are no better then reprobates, castawayes, and condemned persons. But because
the most people in those days are groslye deceived in repentance, both
concerning what it is, what it means, what it woorketh, what be the
qualities, and conditions of it, which be the causes, and which be the lets and
hindrances, and also why, when, and wherefore we should repent. Therefore I
have in present infent to teach first what is repentance. Secondly, which be
his qualities and effects. Thirdly, when we should repense. Fourthly,
wherefore we should repent. And last of all what lets us from Repentance:
which order, and method of teaching although some may mislike (as indeed
with me it is not ordinary,) yet considering the matter I have in hand, I
think it not inconvenient. But the matter. Repentance is an inward sorrowing,
and continual mourninge of the heart and conscience for sin joined with
faith and both inward, and outward amendment: Inward I say in changing the
thoughts and affections of the heart: and outward in changing the words,
and works from evil to good. This repentance no doubt was in David, who
when he was covertly reproved by the prophet Nathan, and his sins laid before
his eyes, did not stubbornly defend them, and so iustle against God: nor yet
secretly excuse them, and daube them over, but cried out in the bitterness of
his heart: I have sinned, and thereupon made the 51. Psalm. A Psalm indeed
full of dolor and heaviness: Wherein the Prophet bewayleth his falls,
lamenteth his sins, and prays even for a new heart, and a new spirit,
new thoughts, new affections, new purposes of amendment of life. So that in
David we may see an inward sorrowing, a lasting grief (as the book of
Psalms does every where declare, which lays him out as it were in an
Anotamie) yea, and great reformation, both in inward, and outward sins.
Here therefore behold what is Repentance. Likewise S. Peter through
infirmity having denied his Lord and Master Christ, and being punched of his
own conscience, and wakened with the alaram of a poor Cocks crowing, went
out of the Court of Pilate with a heavy heart weeping bitterly, and ever
after stoutly professing Christ even unto the death. See then what is
Repentance. The Prophets in the old Testament exhortinge ye rebellious Jews
unto Repentance, use commonly an Hebrew verb which signifies turn ye, or
return ye and come back again, by the which Metaphore is meant, that like as
a man that is strayed far out of his way, must turn quite back again the
contrary way: So those yt have strayed from the ways of Godliness, to the way
of sin, must come back again, as fast as ever they went forward, and
altogether change the course of their life: so that Repentance is an earnest
turninge unto God with all our heart, soul, and mind. Saint John Baptist,
and the Apostles in the New Testament exhorting unto Repentance, use a Greek
word which signifies a changing of the mind afterward, or afterwitte, so
that those which through their folly and want of former wit, have slipped
into the deep pit, and dangerous gulf of sin, when they come to
themselves, and have recovered their wits, will be wise afterward, and take
heed they never come there again according to the Proneth: The burnt child
will take heed of the Fire. By this time I hope you see what is repentance. It
is not every sorrow, but sorrow for sin, not for some sin, but for all
sin, not for an hour, but for ever, not for a day, but continually, not for
a week, but as long as we live. Some think every sorrow is repentance: but
so should worldlinges repent. Some think every little pante for sin is
repentance: so should Pharaoh repent. Some think all weeping and lamenting
for sin is repentance: so should Esau, Judas and Caine, repent. Some think
every little humbling of our selves is repentance: but so should Achab repent.
Some think yt good words, and good purposes is Repentance: but so should
every sick man repent. Some think ye reformation of words and deeds, is
Repentance: but so should civil men repent. Some think that cry God mercy
is repentance: and so should every fool repent. You see therefore hows many
are deceived in repentance: but if you will see what it is indeed, look
back to yt which has been said before. For he that will repent in good
earnest, must not hang down his head like a Bulrushe for a day only, and so
have done, nor cry from the teeth outward, Lord have mercy on me, and so
away: but he must make a back reckoning with diligente consideration of his
former life. As did the Prophet David. Psalm. 119. ver. 59. I have considered my
ways and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. So must every one that means
to repent sink aside into some corner or out place, that there he may have
room enough to beat his own conscience, and to make his heart smart for his
sins, by aggrauation thereof, and weighing all the circumstances, as in the
9. of Daniel: The Church of God confesses her sin, not lightlye but with
wonderful great exaggeration, and heaping of one thing to another. So that
it is not enough to say I have sinned, but to say I have most traitrously
sinned, I have most obstinatly, carelessly, and rebelliously sinned, I have
mo^strously offended in such a place, in such a hour, in such company, in
such a day. In such a corner in the dark I committed adultery closly, when I
thought none had seen me: In such a Chamber I defiled my neighbors wife?
mine own conscience does accuse me of it. In such and such company I have
been drunk, I have spoken and railed against Gods word, I have mocked the
preachers, I have spared no oaths, nor filthy speech, and now O Lord, Lord,
what an vgley monster, and wretched villain am I. Here I stand before thy
presence all naked, blind, wounded, poor, wretched, and miserable, having
deserved a thousand damnations, if thou should enter into judgment, and
try the law with me. Therefore I beseech thee show pity, and compassion
upon me. Ancient my wounds with the oil of mercy: restore me my sight,
cloth my nakedness, enrich me that am poor, strengthen me that am weak: help
me that am fallen: oh bid me not farewell. The infant overcomes his mother
with crying, the child his father with weeping, and the servant his master by
entreaty, and wilt not you be entreated O Lord? Thus I say if every man would
speak in his conscience to God, and thus narrowly or more narrowly, examine
himself, undoubtedly he were in the way of repentance.

But alas it is a world to see how the blind Bussards, and crooked
cancrewormes of this world, go awrye from this rule, deceiving themselves with
the bare title and naked name of repentance. Many in deed can talk of it: but
few walk it it. Many speak of it: but few feel it. Many describe it: but
few know it. It is hid and locked up from the world, and revealed only to
Gods children. Many think they have caught it, when they have but the shadow of
it. It is so high that few can reach it. It is so deep that few can come to
the bottom of it. It is so narrow that few can pearce into it. So wide that
few can comprehend it. So slippery that few can hold it. So scerete that few
can find it. Therefore my dear brethren, I beseech you let us pray unto our
God, that he would reveal unto us this mystery which is hid from the world,
that we may truly see it, and know it, find it, and feel it to our endless
comfort, through Christ Jesus: which grace he grant us.

But now to the second point concerning the qualities, and fruits of
repentance. One special quality of repentance is always to bring with it
remission sins: for where true repentance (...) before, there remission of
sins must ^^cessarily follow after, not that repentance deserves remission
of sin: but because where God worket^ repentance, there he pardons sin
because of his promise. At in Ezech. 1827. When the wicked turns away from
his wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and
right, he shall save his soul alive. And again, Esaias. 55. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him. So here we see to whom
forgiveness of sins, and the mercies of God belongs: Namely to the
penitent sinners, to those that leave sin, and embrace Godliness: to those
that forsake his own ways, and imaginations, and turn unto the Lord. And as
for such as walk on in their own ways, and follow ye delights of sin without
any sorrow, or purpose to leave them, they have nothing to do with the mercy
of God: and though Jesus Christ had ^^^^red an hundred deaths (which could
not be) yet shall no unpenitent sinner have remission of his sins by his
death, nor any other benefits of his Passion, for they belong only to his
Church, and chosen people here upon the earth. He therefore that is not of the
Church, he that is not grafted into Christ by faith, he that is not a member of
his mystical hody, can enjoy nothing by Christ's death. If any man abide not in
me, he is east forth as a branch, and withers, and men gather them, and
cast them into the fire, and they burn. John 15. 9. We read in the 29. of
Deuteronomie, How God barreth all stubburne sinners from his mercy, and does
most terrible shoot out against them. He that hears the words of this
curse, and blesses him self in his heart, saying, I shall have peace although
I walk according to the stubburnnes of our own heart, thus adding
drunkenness to thirste: the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but then the
wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that manne, and every
curse that is written in this book, shall light upon him. So that God says
plainly, he has no mercy for such as walk in the vain delights of sin,
and in the stubbornes of their own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, that
is one horrible sin to another. Yet for all this it is a wonder to see, how ye
blind worms of this earth deceive the^ selves. For they think whatsoever they
say, whatsoever they do, be it good, be it evil, whether they repent, or not
repent, yet they shall be saved by christ's death, as though they would make it a
baud to their sins, and so work that villainy against Christ. I hope to be
saved by Christ's death, as well as the best of them all says some. But where is
thy repentance thou miserable wretch? Do thou think that Gods mercy is
common to all? and Christ's death a baude for thy sins? No no, when it
conuneth to the vpshotte, thou shall stop short. For it will prove far
otherwise: for thou shall find Gods mercy turned into Justice: and Christ's
death into Wormwood: because thou hatedst knowledge, and choosedst not the
fear of the Lord. Thus you see my dear brethren, that Repentance must
needs go before forgiveness of sins, and where it leads not the way,
there the gates of Gods mercy are shut up, and this is the first quality of
repentance. It has also another condition and that is, to alter and change
men from that they were before, not in the substance and proportion of the
body: but in the qualities and conditions of the mind. For whosoever has
truly repented, you shall by and by see a most marvelous, and wonderful
change in him, so that he will not do as he has done, nor speak as he has
spoken, nor company as he has companied, nor play the good fellow (as they
term it) as he was wont to do, nor run to the same excess of riot he was
wont. And this is it that amazeth the world, and causes them to bristle and
foam at the mouth like wild Bores, and to speak evil of them that are turned
unto God. For the world loves his own, and cannot abide that GOD should
pluck one feather from his Wings, But repentance does violently pull men out
of the claws of Satan, and change them from the conditions of the world, for
it makes of proud, humble, of hurtefull, harmless, of cruel, meek, of
Wolves, Lambs, of Lions, Sheep, of adulterers, Chaste livers, of Drunkardes,
sober men, of Swearers, reverent speakers, of Haters, Lovers, of Despisers,
Imbracers, of Scoffers, Followers, of Earthly, Heavenly, of Devils, Saints.
All this works Repentance. Paul traveled toward Damascus, a Woolfe, a
Persecuter, a bloodsucker, an hater, a despiser: but ere he came there, he was
quite changed, and clean of an other mind. So mighty was he that met him by
the way: When Jesus Christ sent down the holy Ghost upon his Disciples,
according to his promise, there were some scoffers at Jerusalem, which mocked
and said, they are full of new wine: But the same men cried out by and by after,
men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved. Here was a most wonderful and
sudden change. See then the force of Repentance, when God strikes it into
the heart of man, and drives the nail to the head as they say. It effects
that which all the wisdom and policy of man, is not able to bring to pass,
no when they have prolled he^her and thither, and ^^ide their heads together,
and sought all the corners of their wits, yet can they not tell which way to
turn their hand, or where to begin to change the heart of a man, and to
convert him to God. Therefore Repentance is stronger then all the whole
world, and woorketh that which all men with their natural wits, (...)
heads, and deep devises can not compass for the conversion of a Sinner, is a
work supernatural. Here then we have a glass to behold our selves in,
whethereuer we have Repented or no. For if we find not this change and
alteration in us, we have not repented, and so consequently remain under
Damnation. Therefore, let every man look unto himself, for mark how much
he is changed, and altered from his former evil ways, so much has he
repented. And he that is the same man he was three, four, eight, nay thictie
years ago, surely, surely, he has not repented, and therefore abides in
damnation. I marvel then how those men, which never felt any change, or
alteration wrought in them, nay, whose consciences tell them, that they are not
changed,ne know what it means, can have any hope of salvation: Unless
peradventure they believe not this doctrine, or think it to be false. But I
will send over these men to such as have been in the like case they now are,
and yet thought they might do well enough for all that, although both blind
in Judgment, and corrupt in conversation. I have known and do know men,
which before their conversion, and inward change, were counted as honest men,
as ever brake bread, and as substantial men as any could be, as true
dealers, upright livers, and good housekeepers as any of their neighbors,
yea, and they had the same opinion of them selves too: And yet notwithstanding
when they have felt Repentance woorkinge this change and alteration in them,
through the power of the Spirit, at the preaching of the word, and when they
have had new hearts given then to discern better, and new eyes to see
better, as men come out of a dampe, have wondered and marueiled at the palpable
and gross darkness they were in before, and have burst forth into these
words, that they would not be in the same case they were before, no not for all the worlds goods, for if they should have died in that case, they were
sure they should have been damned: But I pray you what case were they in
before, were they not good honest men, and well accounted of, and honest
livers, and well taken wheresoever they came? Surely they were so taken in the
world, but now they think far otherwise of themselves, their eyes being
opened, and their Judgments enlightened, for now they see that they saw not
before, now they understand yt God condemns many, whom the world
justifies. Me thinks this example should make civil and worldely men see
and suspecte themselves, and know their own misery before God. For these men
were as good as they before their conversion, and yet afterward confess yt
they were plunged in the Bottom of Hell, and drowned in the deapth of
Damnation. He that has ears to hear, let him hear, and he that has eyes to
see let him see: For if men will still sooth them selves for all this, that
they shall be saved without feeling any change, or work of repentance:

It will cost them full dear in the end, for Christ^s words will prove
true, that whosoever repents not shall be damned, that is, whosoever does
not feel in him self what is Repentance, and find in him self the qualities
thereof that he condemned. For where Repentance is, there be the qualities of
Repentance, and where the qualities be absent, there is no true repentance.
So that where Christ says, Except ye repent ye shall all perish? It is all
one, as if he had said, except ye know the truth of Repentance, except ye
can prove unto your consciences the forgiveness of your sins, except you
feel a change and alteration in the bottom of your heart, of all your former
lewd ways and misdemeanour, you shall surely perish and be damned. But let us
yet a little further search out ye qualities of Repentance, the Apostle in the
seventh Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians sets down seven
natable qualities, and effects of Repentance. The first of them he names
Care. For behold says he, this thing that you have been godly sorry what Care
it has wrought in you, that is, an earnest study, and as it were a taking
thought to please God. For where true Repentance has once wrought, there
follows great care afterward. Care I say to live in the obedience of God,
Care to keep a good conscience, Care to reform our housholdes: Care to
instruct Wives, Children and Servants in the knoweledge of GOD: Care to pray
with them Morning and Evening: and generallye Care to perform all duties
belonging unto God, so that Repentance is not a careless, but a careful
thing. Let not men think therefore, that although they welter in the
carelessness of the flesh, and sleep in security all the days of their life,
yet their repentance is good enough, yea and though they spend whole days,
Hightes, Months and Years in vanities, Plays and pastimes, in Idleness,
fond, delight, pleasure, and voluptuousness, in negligence of all duties,
forgetfulness of God, and contempt of all good things: Yet for all this they
repent for their sins, and hope to be saved as well as any other. But alas
how can these things stand together, to repent for sin, and to delight in
sin, to hate sin, and love sin. to fly from sin, and to follow after
sin. But these men I perceive, would feign make Saint Paul a liar. For he
says, a m^^ has never repented, except he be careful afterward to please
God. They say they do repent, and have repented: although they live never so
wretchedly, and carelessly. But when all licencious and lewd livers, filthy
whoremongers, beastly belligoddes, and careless caitiffes, come to the kingdom
of God, and are saved: then shall these men also come with them to be saved by
careless repentance.

The next quality and effect of Repentance is named, clearing of our selves,
that is, discharging of our selves, when sin does accuse us, and lay
things to our charge, for when sin and Satan does terrify the conscience
of ye poor penitent sinner, by and by he flees unto God and asks
forgiveness through Jesus Christ, and so clears himself, and makes his
Apology against sin, and Satan, like as a man that is presented into the
Court, upon suspicion of whoredom, or any other notorious crime, must clear
himself by witnesses, of that which is laid to his charge. So the conscience
that is cited by Satan before the Justice, and Judgment of seat of God,
clears it self by Repentance, and asks forgiveness through Jesus Christ.
So that here we may see a wonderful fruit of a penitente conscience, it
cannot abide the accusations of sin: It can not be quiet till it be
reconciled unto God: and so have peace within it self. For this is to be
noted in the godly man, that when he has committed any sin, and his
conscience tells him of it, by and by he feels Lead within him, and is
all heavy, and can not fleepe quietly, till he have got into some corner,
where he may mourn, and lament to the full, and confess, and lay open
himself unto God, and so clear him self through Christ Jesus, his conscience
bearing him witness that his sin is forgiven. Whereas contrariwise the ungodly
man, when his conscience accuses him of sin, he dispatcheth away all such
thoughts, and treads them under foot, and by and by calls for a pair of
Cards, or Tables, and some merry companion to drive away the time, and to put
out all such thoughts out of his head, and so indeed he increases them
more and more, and causes them rankle inwardly.

The third quality is called indign^^^ on, that is, a mortal and deadly
hatred against sin, as when a man does shu^der and shake, and as it were
grynde h^^ teeth at the remembrance of his sins for this is always in the
penitent person to loath and abhor all sin from his heart both his own
sins, and the sins of ^ther, and to hate it as the Devil himself, which is
the Author of it, and to fly from it, as from the very cutthroate, and hang^
man of his soul, and to know it to be the only thing that blinds, that
hardens, that separateth from God, and procures all plagues, and diseases,
both of body and soul against us. Therefore he spitteth at it in defiance,
and disdaineth it, and stops his nose at the stincke of it, wheresoever he
smells it.

The fourth thing is fear, which is a certain awe of God, when a man is
afraid to displease him. For the penitente person fears always, and being
privy to his own infirmity and weakness (when God never so little withdraws
his grace, and leaves him alone) works his Salvation with fear and
trembling. He will not presume upon former grace to commit any sin, nor
flatter himself in the mercy of God, and in the things that he has already
tasted of God, to yield to some little sin, thinking he may do that, and be
the child of God well enough, because some of Gods children have fallen into
greater, but rather he trembles at the least motion of sin, and is afraid of
the temptations, which Satan trumpeth in his way, and is afraid when the
temptations of sin are upon him* to satisfy the hunger of sin, but rather
he fights against sin, when sin fights against him, and presents the
fear of God before his eyes (as godly Joseph in the assault of Putiphars wife)
to be as it were a Tower of defense and Welspring of life, to avoid the snares
of Death.

The fifth thing is Desire, that is a hungring, and thirsting after
righteousness.

For the penitent man is ravished with desire of good things. He desires to
be every day better then other: He desires to leave every day some sin: He
desires to pray. He desires new knoweledge, and new understanding of
heavenly things. He desires to hear Sermons, and will strain himself to
hear the^. He desires the company of the godly, he thinks him self in
heaven, when he is amongst them. He desires the salvation of his very
enemies, and prays for them. All these and many other such like desires are
in the penitent man.

The first quality is zeal, which consists in the earnest embracing of
virtue, and hatred of vice, so that the penitent person, is zealous in every
good thing. Zealous of Gods glory in all places, in all companies, and amongst
all persons, he cannot abide that Gods honor should be impeached, or his name
blasphemed, or his glory trampled under foot by wicked me^, but he will open
his mouth to reprove the wicked, and stand stoutly in the defense of Gods
glory. He is not like these Atheistes, and dissemblers, which are always as
is the company, that is godly emongst the Godly: A Protestant amongst
Protestants: wicked amongst the wicked, a Papist amongst Papists, a
worldling amongst worldlinges, and a Swearer amongst Swearers, a Weathercocke
that turns with every wind. The penitent man I say, is not of this stamp,
but he is constant and zealous in all good things. He is zealous both against
the pleasures and profits of sin, though he might win a whole world, or
pleasure himself never so much, by committing a sin against God, yet will he
refuse it, for he has learned from Christ's mouth, that it shall not profit a
man to win all the whole world, and to loose his own soul.

The last thing is Revenge, that is, the penitent person is so offended, with
the sin he has committed, that he will be revenged of himself for it. As
for example, if he have offended in gluttony, he will Revenge himself by
fasting two or three days after: If he have offended in whoredom, he will be
revenged of his lusts, by haltring, and bridling them ever after: If he have
offended in covetous catching and polling of other men's goods, he will he
revenged of himself by restitution, as was godly and penitent Zacheus, and
this in deed is a special fruit of Repentance, to reform our selves in
(...) things, wherein we have most offended. Now then you see (my dear
brethren) what lies in the belly of repentance, and which be her inwardes, so
that we must needs now come to the vnlasu^ng, and vnbowelling of Christ's
words. Except ye repent says he, ye shall all perish, that is: except ye
have this forenamed care, you shall all be damned: Except ye have this clearing
of your selves, you shall be damned: Except you have this indignation, you
shall all he damned: except you, have this fear, you shall be damned: Except you
have this desire, you shall a^ be damned: Except you have this zeal, you shall
all be damned. Except you have this revenge, you shall all be damned.

For our Savior Christ does not speak of the bare name of Repentance* But
of Repentance withal his ^urn^^^re, and appurtenances: so that who so ever has
not Repentance with all his qualities and effects, or at least some measure
of them, he has no Repentance indeed, and therefore shall be damned. For
except ye repent ye shall all perish. But me thinks I here some man say.
Here is nothing but damnation, damnation.

You preach nothing but the law: Let us hear of the Gospel. My brethren I
protest unto you, that I speak of love, whatsoever I speak, I desire the
salvation of you all, if I could win but two in all this congregation, I would
count my self happy, and think that God had greatly blessed my labors.

And undoubtedly, if I knew any nearer way to bring you unto GOD, then by
preaching the Law, to make you know your selves, surely, surely, I would use
it. Or if I could be persuaded, that the preaching of the Gospel, and mercy
would do you more good: you should hear of nothing, but Gospel, Gospel,
mercy, mercy: But alas, I see that every careless, and every ignorant man
presumes upon Gods mercy, I see that every filthy liver, and notorious
blasphemer abuses Gods mercy, in applying it to him self without Repentance,
so that they would make Gods mercy a cloak for their sins, I see that
every man would feign be flattered in his sin, and hear of it no more, but
have the Gospel preached, which in deed belongs not unto them, continuing in
their stubburnes: but only to the penitent sinner, which forsakes himself,
and groneth, and pants under the burden of his sin. Therefore, when I see
you humbled with the conscience of your sins, and groan and pant under the
burden of them, when I see your faces blubbered with weping, and your hearts
mollified, and sorrowing with care, then will I comfort you, and cease to
preach the law. But I pray you, will you steal, murder, and commit
adultery, and yet hear of mercy? Will ye Mock, Swear, blaspheme, and Rail,
and yet hear of mercy? Will you serve sin, hate virtue, and follow your
own lusts, and yet hear of mercy? Would you have Plasters before you have
wounds: Would you have Physic, before you be sick? Would you be let blood,
before you have need? Would you not account him a foolish Physician, that will
minister Physic to a whole man? Would you not think him an unskillful
Surgion, that will apply a gentle salve to an old festered sore, and not
rather Corsie it? Then know my brethren, that because you are full of gross
humors, you must have strong purgations: Because ye are full of old festered
wounds, you must have Corasiue Salues, for that is the best for you, and the
speediest way to recover your health, and for as much as you be rough
Horses: you must have a rough rider: And hard knobbie timber, must have hard
wedges, and hard strokes with a beetle. We preach the Law to drive you to
Christ, We preach Judgments, to make you seek Mercy: We preach
damnation, to bring you to salvation. But to preach Mercy and forgiveness,
before men see their sins, or know their miseries by the preaching of the
Law, is to preach the Gospel unprofitably. For, he that is ignorant of the
Law, knows not what misery is in himself: nor what mercy is in God.

What father is there, who if his child should play the stubborn boy, and
disobey him in every thing he commanded, would stroke his head, and say he
were a good boy, and not rather severely correct him, and whippe him with a
rod? What master will commend his servant for doing what he list, and not
what he commands him? even so we may not disobey and do evil, and look to
he flattered too, and not rather chidden. Let us know then that although God
use searing, launcing, corzing, and searching of the bones, and other violent
remedies, yet in the mean while he procures our health by them. And let us
further understand, that forasmuch as there is none other means to draw us
unto salvation, but by cleansing of al our vices, and the same cleansing can
not be done, but by violence, when we be warned by the doctrine of the Law, so
as our own consciences accuse us.

Although we like well to be now and then flattered, and soothed, yet let us
seek to be spoken unto earnestly, and to have our faults told us, and to be
made ashamed of them, and to have our vnhonesty discovered, and not desire to
be pleased. For it were the next way, to make us rotte in our own filthiness, if
we should hold it so in secret: and it would cost us dear the setting on, if
we should be so flattered by men, and in the mean season the heavenly Judge
shall thunder down upon us.

Therefore, when any man comes to a Sermon, let him first and foremost make
his reckoning to be rebuked, as meet is, and let him understand, that it is
for his profit that he is not soothed. And if he have itching ears, let him
lay them away from him, assuring himself that else he is foreclosed, so as
he shall never receive the doctrine to his profit and instruction. And let
him be content to have his soars rubbed and bewraied, that he may be brought
to that, which is for his welfare. If a man please a sick body, what shall
become of him, shall he give him drink every minute of an hour? Shall he
give him wine whereas he should give him water? Shall he give him Sallets? It
were the next way to poison him. To be short, it is certain that a man
does always seek his own death, when he would have men to sooth him. But
now which is better either that he which has the ordering of a sick man,
should yield to all his desires, or that he should bridle him,
notwithstanding that he chafe and gnashe his teeth, because he may not have
his own will in his desires? You see therefore how dangerous a thing it is to
flatter, and raise up men with the preaching of mercy: before they have bin
cast down with the sense of Gods Judgments. Cease therefore to open your
mouths to make hue and cry over the Country, saying: they preach nothing but
the Law, the Law, damnation, damnation, unless ye will take in Christ too,
and make him one of the number, and accuse him of want of wisdom, because he
preaches and cries out, that whosoever repents not, shall be condemned. For
my part I preach the Gospel, to whom the Gospel belongs, and the Law to
whom the Law belongs. I preach Mercy to whom Mercy belongs, and
Judgment to whom Judgment appertains. And therefore hold your peace, and
be content to be ruled by the wisdom of God. But now let us proceed to the
third general point, which is the time when we should Repent.

The holy Ghost in the Scriptures points us to the present time, and
exhorts us to make that the time of our Repentance, as Ioell. 2. 12.
Therefore also now the Lord says, turn you unto me with all your heart,
with fasting, with weying and with mourning. Likewise in the 3. Chap. to the
Hebrews, exhort one another while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened, through the deceiptfulnesse of sin. And in the same Chapter. To day
if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts as in the provocation. So
that now, even now, eue^ now, is ye time of our Repentance. Now whilst he
calls, now whilst he speaks, now whilst he knocks, let us now
therefore hear: let us now therefore obey: Let us now therefore redeem this
day this present Wednesday, which have foreslowed so many days, which have
so long hardened our hearts, which have let so many good things run out, and
spill besides. Let us take up this day and make it the day of our repentance.
Although we could never be moved with any Sermon hitherto, yet let us now be
moved once at last. Let us now say, this shall be my day of Repentance, I will
defer it no longer. But now will I turn unto my God, and forsake all my
former wicked ways, and mine own imaginations, I will now change the course
of my life, and begin all new again. I will be acquainted with Gods word,
and take counsel there how to do, and how to behave my self in every action.
I will not only reform my self, but also my whole household, Wife, Children,
and Servants, according unto the same. Thus my dear Brethren, I beseech you
purpose in your hearts without any further delay, and be not like to
Epicures, and sla^ckgraces, which say youth will be youthful, and youth will
have his course, and what should we make it so holy, when we are young, tushe,
there needs but a sigh an hour before death, let us be merry now, we shall
never be younger, we will Repent when we are old. As though poor souls,
they had repentance in their sleeue, and at their commandment, and that they
could repent when they list. No, no, these fellows shall pay for their
presumption. For God will give them over to hardenes of heart, and
impenitencie, because they took so much upon them, and made so long delays,
that in the mean season they might enjoy the profits and pleasures of sin.
Therefore good brethren, let us not put it off from day to day, but let us now
seek the Lord whilst he may be found, and call upon him whilst he is
near: let us take time while time is, for time and tide tarrieth for no man.
Let us know this to be the time of our visitation. Our Savior Christ wept
over Jerusalem, because they knew not the time of their visitation. He
reproves the Jews, because they could discern the face of the Sky, but
could not discern the signs of the times. And surely in the end it will
turn to our destruction, if we will not know this to be the day of mercy,
the time of Grace, wherein God stretches forth his hand unto us, and
wisdom cries out in the streets.

Therefore, now whilst we have the light, let us walk as children of the
light: the night comes when no man can work. It shall be too late to
call for mercy after this life, when the gates of mercy are shut up, and
Repentance will be too late. Oh dear christians, let us remember the five
foolish Virgins, which because they forslowed the time, had heaven gates
barred up against them. Let us also remember the fearful and doleful example
of the rich Glutton, which being in Hell torments yelled, and yelped for the
least ease and help that might be, and could not have it. An hundred thousand
times therefore, better it is for us to leave our sins now to mourn for them
now, and now to Repent, then hereafter alas when it shall be too late. Better
now a great deal to take some pain, to strain our selves to leave our
sins, and to make our heart smarte for them, then to be condemned for ever,
and to cry in the bottom of Hell, we have wearied our selves in the way of
wickedness and Destruction, and we have gone through dangerous ways: But we
have not known the way of the Lord. What has pride profited us? Or what
profit has the Pomp of riches brought us? All these things are possed away
like a shadow, and as a Paste that passes by. We have set our selves against
the children of God, we had them in derision, and in a parable of reproach: We
fools thought their life madness, and their end without honor: but lo they
are counted emongst the children of God, and their portion is emonge the
Saints. Therefore let us know the time of our calling, and let us not be
worse the^ the fowls of the air, the Storke knows her appointed time: the
Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallowe observe the time of their coming. The
Husbandman takes his times. The Mariner watches his tide. Therefore let us
also take the time, and turn unto the Lord whilst it is said to day, which
grace God grant us.

Now let us return unto the fourth point, concerning the causes which may
move us unto Repentance. Herein I have observed nine especial things. First,
the great mercy of God, leads us unto Repentance. As Romans 2. The
bountifulness of God leads us unto Repentance, says the Apostle. God does
continually follow us with his mercies and benefits, both concerning our
souls and bodies, we have no good thing which we have not received at his
hands, we hold all that we have of him, and to him we are beholding for all.
Great is his mercy toward our bodies, but much greater toward our souls,
and every mercy and benefit, either toward soul or body, calls us to
repenaunce. He gives us meat, drink, and clothing, these call us to
repentance: He keeps us at his own costs and charges here below, this
calls us to Repentance: the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, calls us to
Repentance. The birds of the air, the fishes of the Sea, and the fruits of
the earth cry out upon us, both loud, and shrill: Repent, repent. All
creatures move us to Repentance. Our creation calls, our redemption cries,
our sanctification knocks, and our Election moves to Repentance. What
could God do more for his vineyard, y^ he has not done? Therefore let us
repent.

Secondly, the judgments of God move us unto repentance, for all ye
thunderbolts, plagues, and punishments which God has thrown down upon
obstinate sinners, from the beginning of ye world, are so many warning pieces
unto us, to awake us out of the dead sleep of sin, and to prick us to
Repentance. As in the 1. Cor. 10. When the Apostle has cited diverse great
judgments of God against the old Israelites for diverse sins, he
concludes: now all these things came unto them for examples, and were written
to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. So that all the
Judgments we read of in the Scriptures, are so many admonitions, and as it
were carteropes to draw us to Repentance. All the judgments we have read
of, heard of, do see and hear of every day, knock and with mayn strokes beat
down right upon our consciences to repentance. The ugly monsters, strange
byrthes, fiery constellations, unknown Cometes, sudden deaths, marvelous
droughtes, unwonted snowes, horrible inundations, foreign wonders, strange
apparitions, threatening of heaven above, we streaming and shooting fire,
trembling of the earth under our feet, and our houses over our heads, as of
late days. What are al these but as it were great Cranes with beams, and Cable
Ropes, to draw us up to the Lord by Repentance.

Thirdly, the word of God haleth us to repentance. For as God in old time sent
his Prophets both early and late, to call the rebellious Jews to Repentance:
so he sends abroad his preachers, and messengers in those days, to sound up
the trumpe of his word, and to ring the sweet bell of Aaron emongst the^ to
awake the^ to repentance, but alas how lightly are they regarded? Who hears
their voice? But surely this is the last remedy yt God has appointed, and if
this will not move us to repentance, if this will not cure us, then are we
altogether incurable.

Fourthly, the infinite number of sins we have committed, ought to be so
many spurs in our sides to prick us to repentance. It is sufficient says
Saint Peter, that we have spent the time past of our life after the lusts of
the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lustres, drunkenness, gluttony,
drinkinges, and abominable Idolatries. Therefore it is time now to repent. Oh
that men would look back to themselves, and consider themselves as they were
forty, thirty, twenty, or ten years ago. Oh that they would call to mind
their open and secret sins, and me thinks it should make their heart bleed
within their belly to think upon them. Oh yt they would consider how much time
they have misspent, and how many good things they have neglected, and altogether
omitted.

Fifthly, the shortness of our life calls earnestly upon us to repent. The
time of our life is sixty years, and ten, and if they be of strength eighty
years, yet the strength is but labor and sorrow, so it is cut off quickly,
and we fly away says the Prophet David, we have spent our years as a thought,
Therefore he adds. Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Our life for the shortness and inconstancy of it in the
scripture is compared to grass, to a vapor to smoke, and to a Weauers shuttle
which glideth away swiftly. Even so the days of man pass away no man knows
how. Man is of short continuance says Job, and full of trouble. Experience
teaches, that to day a man to morrow none. Hence away we must al, here is no
abiding place for us, how soon we know not. Therefore let us repent.

Sixthly, the small number of those which shall be saved: ought to thrust us
forward to repentance. Strive to enter in at the narrow gate, for many I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able says Christ Luke. 13.
24. And in an other place he says, the gate is straight, and the way narrow
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. If men would consider
of this, it would make them look better about them, and try with them selves,
whether they be of that small number or no.

Seventhly, Death threatens us, who is very terrible to the flesh, and the
remembrance of it very bitter to a man that is soused, and soked in the
pleasures of this world. It flattereth no man, it regards not persons, it
weighs not friendship, it cares not for rewards, it is very grim, ugly,
and cruel, and kills down right where it hitteth. Therefore let us repent.

Eighthly, the day of judgment and second appearing of the Son of man ought
to quicken us. The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt
with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up,
seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolue^ what manner of persons
ought ye to be in holy conversation and Godliness says S. Pet. 2. 3. The Lord
Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty angels in flaming
fire, rendering vengeance unto them that know not God, and obey not unto the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle. 2. These. 1. I saw says
Saint John. Apoc. 20. A great white Throne, and one that sat on it, from whose
face fled away both the earth and the heaven, and their place was no more
found. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before GOD: and the
books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life,
and the dead were judged of those things, which were written in the books
according to their works. And the Sea gave up her dead, which were in her,
and death and hell delivered up the dead, which were in them, and they were
judged every man according to his works. In these places we see both the
sodainnesse, the fearfulness, and glory of Christ's coming. For he shall not
come poorly, and contemptuously as in his first visitation, but he shall come
very princely, royally, and triumphantly, to the great terror of all his
enemies, when a consuming fire shall go before him, and ten thousand thousands
of Angels wait upon him: at what time the Kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondsman, and every freeman shall hyde themselves in dens, and amongst the
rocks of the mountains and say to the rocks and mountains fall on us, and
hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Apoc.
6. Therefore let us repent.

The last thing is Hell torments then the which nothing is more intolerable.
Therefore says Christ, Mark. 9. If thine hand cause thee to offend, cut it
off: It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, then having two hands to
go into Hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where the worm
dies not, and the fire never goes out. The Scripture speaks very terribly
to our senses, concerning the estate of the damned persons calling it hell fire,
damnation, the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. In 30. cha.
of the prophecy of Esai, it is called Tropheth, and it is even prepared of
old, it is even prepared for ye king: he has made deep and large, ye burning
thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord like a River of Brimstone
does kindle it: these speeches are terrible to our senses, and may
maruellously amaze us. But if I had the tongue of an hundred men nay of an
hundred Angels, yet were I not able to utter them, as some shall one day feel
them, much less were you able to conceive the^. If all the tortures and cruel
torments that can be devised by the wit of man, were executed upon some one,
yet were it nothing to this. We poor wretches think there is no pain to a
Collike, or a cruel Ague. But if all Collikes, Agues, and all other strange
diseases could possibly light upon one man, yet were it but a fleabiting to
that which is to come. The pain is endless, easelesse, and remediless. The
days of their hellish torments shall never wear ^ut, nor their years come to
an end, the longer they continue, the less hope have they. When as many years
are expired, as there be men in the world, and stars in the heavens, when as
many thousand years are ended, as there be stones, and sands by the Sea shore,
yet still there be ten hundred thousand times so many more to come: Those that
will not now be moved in hearing, shall then be crushed to pieces in feeling. Al
dronkards, swearers, whoremongers, usurers, extortioners, liers, mockers,
contemners, secure persons, jolly fellows, roisting ruffians, lusty bloudes,
the brave laddes of this world, and all other unbelievers shall one day be
apprehended, and arraigned before the bar of Gods tribunal seat, where the
Majesty of GOD shall stand above them, with a naked sword of vengeance, and a
scepter of Justice. The Devil that old Satanas shall stand on the one side to
accuse them, and their own conscience on the other side to condemn the^, and
the gasping gulf of Hell underneath them, ready to swallow them up for
evermore, Then shall the dreadful sentence of eternal woe, and damnation
proceed against them* Go, ye cursed into hell fire, etc. There they shall
drink as a just recompense for their iniquity, the bitter cup of Gods
eternal wrath and indignation, in the kingdom of darkness, and in the fearful
presence of Satan, and all the cursed enemies of Gods grace, where the
doleful Droome of Gods anger shall ever sound through their ears, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, where shall be confusion, woe, and
endless lamentation. Their gripes shall be so great, their groans so deep,
and their garboiles so intolerable, that they shall grinne like a Dog in their
infernal conu^lsions, and with howling, and yelling cry out, woe, and alas
that ever I was borne: Oh that I had never been borne, or that my mother had
borne me a Tode. For then should my condition have bin better then it is.
Cursed was the time I was begot in. The hour I was conceived in, and the day
that I sucked my mothers paps. Cursed I was always, cursed I am, and cursed I
shall be for evermore. Woe, woe, how great is my tormente, whose heart does
not melte, whose ears do not glowe, whose hairs do not sta^nd upon his
head, to hear these things. Therefore dear brethren let us repent. If the
mercy of God cannot allure us; let his Judgments scarre us. If his
Judgments cannot scarre us, let his word move us: If his word cannot move
us, let our sins amaze us: If our sins cannot amaze us, let the shortness of
our life dampe us: if the shortness of our life cannot da^^^e us, let the small
number of those that shall be saved affray us: if that cannot affray us, let
death terrify us: if death cannot terrify us, let the day of Judgment shake
us: if that cannot shake us, yet let Hell torments shudder us, and rent us in
years. For verily verily my brethren, if none of al those ca^ prevail, if we
will not for all this repent, but be obstinate, then we shall all peri^^e and
be damned, according to Christ's words. Now let us proceed to speak of those
things, which let and ^inder us from Repentance, which indeed although they
be in number infinite, yet at this time I will lay forth seven especial
lettes; and hindrances unto Repentance.

The first is unbelief, that is, when men will not believe those things tha^t
are spoken and proved unto them, out of the word of God. This is it yt vomiteth
up all good things, and poysoneth the very intrals of a man, and keeps all
good graces from us. As appears. Math. 13. 58. He did not many great
works there for their vnbeleefes sake. And the 4. to the Hebrews, it is
said, Unto us was the Gospel preached, as also unto them, but the word that
they heard profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those
that heard it. So that here we may see, although we hear never so much, yet
if we bring not faith with us, we shall never profit unto Repentance. For
unbelief takes up our hearts for Satan, and refuses all the wholesome
doctrine of salvation, and does so harden them in the ways of sin: that in
the end they become paste feeling, and cannot be touched one whit, either with
the judgments or mercies of God: But count the one as blasts of wynd: and
make the other a covert for their filthiness. You shall note some men, who
when they have heard their sins straightly ripped up by the word of God,
and their just damnation proved by the same, without speedy, and earnest
repentance, will break out into these words of unbelief. If it be as the says
God help us, I hope it is not so, I trust I shall do well enough for all
this, as long as I have a good faith in God, and do in body no harm, shall
I leave my pleasures, and my profits for their sayings? What, do they think
none shall be saved, but such as read the Scriptures, and hear Sermons? God
forbid but those which do not go to hear sermons, should be saved as well
as they. Why may not one serve God as well at home in his house, having good
Books and good Prayers, as by coming to the Church to hear sermons, and
service? Alas these men stand too much in their own light, and betray what
folly and ignoranc^ is in the^. For they do think to be saved by any other
means the^ God has appointed. Or when God has avouched any thing in his
word, will they accept against it, and so make God a liar? When God has once
set down a thing, and proved it to their faces will they yet reply? When God
has told us that the preaching of the word, is the ordinary means of our
salvation, shall we hope to be saved although we contemn it, and never or very
seldom hear it? Is not this plain infidelity and unbelief, that when God
says one thing, we will say another: when God says, yea, we will say no I
hope not so. Yes surely, that is it, that stops the way unto Gods graces,
and barreth us out from repentance.

The second let is the presumption of Gods mercy, for if men be sharply
reproved for their sins, and exhorted unto repentance, by and by they take
covert, saying. God is merciful, God is merciful, as though God were made all
of mercy, and that there were no justice in him at al: and thus the wicked make
Gods mercy an occasion to sin, which thing the Prophet Nahum in the first
of his Prophecy does sharply reprove. The Lord says he, is slow to anger,
but he is great in power, and will not surely clear the wicked. But because I
have spoken before of this presuming and misapplying of Gods mercy, I will
here pass it over, willing you to note it as one special let unto repentance.

The third hinderance is the example of the multitude, for that does harden,
and imbolden men unto sin. As when many birds flicker and flock together,
they fall upon the net without any fear, but one or two alone will be afraid.
Even so the example of many, and many sin companions do imbolden men to run
through ye snares of Satan without any mistrust. Therefore it is said in Exodus
23. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil. This is the thing that
hinders a great number from God, for they never look up unto God, or to his
word, but stare upon the common doings of most men, and examples of the
world, thinking if they do as the most men do, as their forefathers have done
before them, they are Cocksure and of an eue^ ground. And hereupon arises
their devilish Proverb, do as the most men do, and ye fewest will speak of
you, but they have forgotten S. Paul's rule. Rom, 12. Fashion not your selves
like unto this world. These fellows that stand upon the multitude will reason
thus: We see none of ye great ones of the world, none of the noble, none of the
rich, none of the wise, and prudent receive this doctrine, but only a few
shackrags and beggarly rascals, and therefore it is a token that it is nothing
worth, and that it is doubtful, and not for us to (...) withal. Lote what
thoughts may creep in our head ^es, and how slily Satan may trumpe in our
way, and blindfold us, and lead us away in ye dark, by doting us with the
example of ye multitude: Therefore let us take heed of those pitfalles, which
Satan lays in out way, and not be carried away with these thoughts and
reasons. The wicked bear themselves in hand that they shall win the game, and
that the goal goes on their side, and there is nothing but crowing long
before it be day, and great triumphing emongst them before any stroke be
stricken, and that because we be but a handful of people, and they a great
multitude, and that in a manner the whole world agrees we them to practice our
death. Thus the devil does cast a mist before their eyes, and closly lead them
away from repentance. Therefore ^eere brethren, let us stand fast in the word
of the Lord, and not be carried away, or bowed quite down with this raging
stream of the multitude: but let us know it to be one special engine of
Satan, whereby he drives us from repentance.

The fourth let unto repentance is long custom of sin. For that takes away
all sense and feeling of sin, and making it as (...) were another nature unto
us: So that we may as well alter nature as shake it of, when it is once thus
soldred unto us through long custom. Therefore it is said Iere. 13. 23. Can
the blake-More change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? the^ may ye also do
good that are accustomed to do evil. Here the Prophet affirms, that it is as
hard to cure an old disease that is bred in the bone and to remedy a sin
that has been hatched, and brought up with us, as to wash a black-more
white, or to change the spots of a Leopard, which cannot be with out destroying
of nature. And surely, try it who will, he shall find it as hard a matter
to leave an old custom, whether it be of sw^^ring, of gaming, of lying, of
whoring, of evil company, or of any other sin, as to wash an Ethiopian.
Therefore it is written, Prou. 27. Though thou should bray a fool in a
mortar, emonge whea^e brayed with a pestell, yet will not his foolishnes depart
from him. So that as long as we are in custom with sin, the door of
repentance is barred up against be.

The fifth hinderance is long escaping of punishment for the wicked thereby are
sta^^^ed in sin, and driven of from repentance, even as an old thief that
has stolen a long time, and escapes both prison, and gallows, is animated
more boldly to proceed in his wickedness, thinking he shall so always
escape. So many filthy and loose livers go forward in their abominations
without repentance, thinking that because God does not incontine^tly punish
them, and show some manifest judgments and sign of his wrath upon them,
therefore they shall be acquitted for altogether. Whereas contrariwise, if God
should by and by strike the down as soon as they had sinned by thundering upon
one, and lightning upon another, and raining fire, and brimstone upon the third
it would make them afraid. Hereupon it is said in Pet. 2. 3. 4. This first
understand that there shall come in the last days mockers, which will walk
after their lusts, and say where is the promise of his coming? For since the
fathers died al things continue alike from the beginning of the creation. But
let these men well know, that when God has delayed along time, and prolonged
the term, of the wicked, at length he will show yt although^ he waited for
their repentance, yet he fo^^gate not their misdeedes, but registre^ them
before him, and packed them up (...) a great heap, to increase the terror o^
his wrath.

The sixth hinderance is the beholding (...) other men's ends. For when some me^
that have lived a wicked, and an vngratiou^ life, and have been notorious
sinners even to the worldward, so that every man cou^ point at them: yet, if
upon their death (...) they can say a few good words, and cry God mercy, and
say their prayers, and for give all the world, and so die quietly: It is
merueilous to hear how the foolish people of the world will exalt them, and
iustifye them saying, he made a very good end, as any man could make, and
died as qui^^ as a Lamb, and set all things in good or^^^ before he died.
Hereupon an other w^^ked and monstrous verlet is encouraged (...) sin. For
thinks he, such a man lived (...) loosely as I, or any man else, and yet
(...) made a very good end, and why may not I do so too? But alas these men's
eye^ are bleared. For to die quietly is no to (...) (...), to cry God mercy
for fashion, is not to have God merciful, to say a few ^^^yers with teeth
outward, is not to die in the faith of Christ, for many may do all this, and
yet die miserably.

The last let is hope of long life, for while men feed, and besette them
selves in this hope, they wax dronken in sin, and defer the day of Repentance.
As the rich man in the Luke. 12. dreaming of his long life cast off all
thought of God, and of the other life, and of Christ's coming, and of
Repentance, and all good things, and sayid within himself: Soul thou have
much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy
pastime. Thus the bleareyed men of this world, choke up Repentance, and quite
smother it, by doting themselves with hope of long life. Therefore my dear
brethren, I beseech you by the mecies of God in the bowels of Jesus Christ,
that none of all these common lets may stay you from speedy, and unfeigned
Repentance. But that you may ouerstride them all, least unhappily you being
found without Repentance, and taken tardie in your sins, should all perish,
and be damned according to Christ's sentence. Wh^^^ fore in conclusion, let us
with godly E^chias be afraid of Gods threateninges, sorrow aforehand, stand in
awe of GOD examine our conscience, mourn for our sins, and lament inwardly,
that when the wicked which have swimmed in pleasures here below, shall enter
into their eternal pains, we may then, I say there, have everlasting peace,
and rest, that when Jesus Christ shall appear from heaven with all his holy
Angels, we may have crowns of glory, and victory clapped on our heads, and
reign with our God, and our savior his son, and all his Saints and
Angels, in the midst of all joy* in the heavens for evermore. To the which
joy he bring us all, which has so bearely bought us, Jesus Christ the
righteous: to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory,
praise, power, empire, and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

