A SERMON of Gods Providence.

Uery godly and profitable: Preached at Southshoobery in Essex, by Arthur Dent,
Minister of Gods word.

The third impression.

John. 19 verse. 10. 11. Then said Pylate unto him, speak thou not unto me,
know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to lose
thee. Jesus answered, thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above. Imprinted at London for John UUright. 1609.

A platform made for ^e proof of Gods prouidente, that is, ^r the examining
of the truth of this (...)ctrine, whether God by his providence, rule all
things generally, and every creature, and action particularly.
Text.
(...)lotte is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof, is of the
Lord. Prou. 10. 33.
IT were to be wished that all Christians did understand, that, which with
mouth they confess, when they rehearse the articles of their (...)th, gathered
out of the Apostles (...)ine.

The Consession is brief, and every (...)rde in it very significant, and well
(...)erstood, would root all heresies out ^ur minds.

The principles of religion are ther^ contained, and if he be but a w^^
Philosopher, that is ignorant in ^ principles of Philosophy, and if it b^ shame
for all artificers to be ignor^ in the grounds of those arts they profess, it
is a greater shame for us Christians to make show of christianity, a^ yet to be
ignorant in the rudimen to our Religion.

I would to God that every one, ^^ has the name of a christian, did thoroughly
understand, and were fully instruct in them, then needed not I labor much, for
the proof of this doctrine.

For every one of us, when we do o^fesse God to be almighty, do acknowledge
that he by his providence rul^ every thing: and that we may knew what we say,
I purpose chiefly to hadle these two points.

First that Christ the Son of G^^ has the self same providence, the God the
Father has: Secondly, t^^ the providence of God, does goue^^^ all things
generally, and every spec^^ thing specially.

And yet in handling these two, I ^^ not recite all that may be said touching
his matter, but only touch some chief points summarily, which may help ^n
the better to understand the large and learned tracts, that many notable ^en
have written hereof. For the first:

That Christ the Son of GOD does gouern^ all things as well as God the
Father, is proved by reason, example, and authority.
BY reason; if God by his wisdom made the world: that is, if that the eternal
wisdom of God, which is his word, the everlasting Son of God, was present
with God, when he made the world: he is also with him in governing the world:
but he was with God when he made the world, therefore he is with him in
governing of it.

The equity of the first proposition is grounded upon most strong reason:

For as God created the world by his wisdom, so it is not to be believed, that
God governs the world without his wisdom, otherwise he should govern by
chance.

The second proposition is pr^^ed by the testimony of the Apostle. Heb. 1. by
whom also he made the worlds.

By example, Genesis 48. verse. 13. 14. 15. Then took Joseph them both, Ephrain^
in his right hand toward Isreal's left hand, Manasseth in his left hand toward
Isreal's right hand, so he brought them unto him.

But Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it on Ephraims head which
was the younger, and his left hand upon Manassehs head (directing his hands on
purpose) for Manasseh was the elder.

Also he blessed Joseph, and said the GOD before whom my Fathers Abraham and
Isack did walk, the God which has fed me al my life lo^gvnto this day*

In which words Jacob acknowle^geth Gods providence to stretch particular men,
even to himself.

Then it follows as verse: 5. 26. The Angel which has delivered me from ^ll
evil, bless the children, and let my name be named upon them, and the name
of my Fathers Abraham, and Izacke, that they may grow as fish, into ^ multitude
in midst of the earth. In these words, the holy Patriarch Jacob gives that
particular providence to y^ Angel, which in the former verse he had given to
God: And that by the ^ame of Angel he understands no treature, is hereby
proved, in that he ^ffirmeth, that this angel had power to ^^esse: saying to
him, Bless the children: He then is the angel, whom Jacob was wont to call,
the angel of the Lord, that is the Son of God.

Therefore in this place Jacob attributes a providence over al things and
persons, to the angel: that is the Son of God, as well as to God the Father.

By authority John 5. ver. 17. My Father works and I work: This works that
Christ speaks of, is not to be vn^erstood of the creation only, but also of
the governing of al things created.

For this particle (hitherto) shows that he meant not only that first work
of his in creating all things with his Father, but also another work, which he
daily excerciseth, which cannot be understood of any other then of governing
all things with his Father.

But here we must observe this rule that the works of the Trinity are
undivided.

Therefore that which is the Fathers work is the work also of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost.

That the Son of GOD does the same works that the Father does, is already
proved: the same is to be affirmed also of the holy Ghost, by the warrant of
Gods word, as by that I read in the 139. Psame Whether shall I go from the
Spirit? or whether shall I fly from thy presence? If ascend into Heaven, thou
art there: If I lie down in hell thou art there: let me take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, yet thither shall thine
hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me: Thus is the first point briesly*
proved, that Christ the Son of God, and the holy Ghost, do govern all
things as well as God the Father.

Now to the second: that God by his providence governs all and every thing.

There are very many that can willingly grant, that God by his providence
governs all things in general, but that every particularthing is ruled by the
same, they deny: with these men therefore I mind to deal some what largely,
though not so learnedly, as the cause requires: (and who is able to handle it
worthily?) Philosophers have in this point had sundry opinions: Epicurus said,
that all things were ruled by chance and fortune, and that God lived idelly,
and at ease in the Heavens: which opinion, as impious, all men in words
condemn, and yet so we live that our lives are evident proofs against us,
that in heart and soul we embrace it.

For surely if we thought any better of GOD then Epicurus did, we would not
walk so directly in Epicurus paths as we do, or live so licentiously as though
God regarded us not.

The Periapatetickes, and other sort of Philosophers, broched another opinion,
teaching that those things which are above the Heavens, are moved, guided and
governed by God himself: but those things that are under the circle of the
Moon, are governed partly by chance and fortune, partly by the counsels and
devises of men, and partly by a brutish* or senceles force of nature.

There is a third opinion of the Stoics, which is that all things are ruled by
fate or destiny, that is by a secret order and link of causes: in which
chain, all things are so surely tied, that both God himself and man are
straighted within those bounds.

This was a very dainty opinion in the judgment of the Poets: who to excuse
the weakness of their God Jupiter, fained that he wept, for that he was so
hindered by the force of destiny, that he could not set Sarpedo at liberty.

The fourth opinion is Platoes, who grants that God by his providence rules
all things in general, which afterward God co^miteth to petty Gods, half
Gods, and devils, who have the charge and care of particular things: From
these four opinions spring all other whatsoever, touching Gods providence: and
there is no one opinion, which may not easily be reduced to one of these.

But some of us (even of us Christians) flying one danger, run into another:
and for that they dare not deny that God by his providence rules al things,
yet will they not grant, that by it, he governs every particular thing,
least they should thereby be driven (as they think) to some absurdities: thus
whilst they would avoid absurdity, they commit impiety and fall away from the
truth most dangerously: But far be this from your heart (Right worshipful)
and that it may never possess you: avoid the cause that works it in them,
which is ignorance of the word of God: and for that God in great mercy has
kindled in your heart a desire of knowledge, quench not that godly desire, in
you, but pursue hotly with hearty and fervent prayer, after knowledge, and you
shall find it: and if you shall find it, you shal^certainely know* that there
will no absurdity be enforced upon any doctrine grounded upon Gods word, and
that you need not fear this doctrine, as they do: I will first discourse
briefly of the truth of it, and will prove, that God governs by his providence
al things generally, and every particular thing particularly: then will I
answer to al those chief objections which are brought against it, and by
which some vain men think to make the doctrine absurd. To the first:

For that this argument has been diversely handled, and men have been very
curious in discoursing thereof: espetially since what way soever they wind
themselves, many absurdities do seem to follow them: it will be best I think
for me to keep me in the high beaten way, least seeking by-ways, I wander out
of the way: I mean to discourse so of this doctrine, as I am taught in the
word of God* and then diligently to remove al those things whatsoever they be
not beseeming the most pure nature of God, which in the judgment of man, shall
seem hereof to follow.

But if my ignorance were so great, that I could not remove these
inconveniences: yet notwithstanding, are you and all Christians bound to
receive with all humility this true doctrine: and to blame me, not the
doctrine, if I be not able to clear it o^ ^^l those things, which in the
judgment of man may seem absurd: And although it is not my purpose, to
examine all, that Philosophers and others say against the governing of every
thing by the prouidenc^ of God, yet in my mind, all that they ca^ say against
it, may by this one argument be easily overthrown. If he be a God (which they
all confess, and though they would deny it, yet may it easily be proved
against them) he is a most perfect thing: but y^ which is most perfect has
nothing perfecter then it self, neither can we imagine any thing to be more
perfect, then that which of it self is truly and absolutely most perfect:
therefore there is nothing* neither can we imagine any thing to be more perfect
then God: hereupon I infer, if God did not govern al things in general, and
every thing in particular, we might well imagine that there was something
more perfect then God: even such a deity, which had charge and care of every
particular thing: but it is showed y^ no such deity or Godhead ca^ be imagined.

It is false therefore, that they hereupon would infe(...) that God by his
providence rules no^ every particular thing and the contrary is true, which we
teach: for else surely that God, which they dream of to live idly, and at
case, and to have no care of any thing, as they babble, is not in truth a God,
but as Tully sometime said of their master Epicurus so say I of them, that they
in words acknowledge a God, but in truth deny y^ there is any. But leaving
Philosophers let us see what the Scripture teaches us: the first place I will
use for y^ proof of this doctrine, I take out of the Epistle to the Hebrews
the 1. Chapt. verse. 3. where it is said of the son of God, that He bears
up, that is, moves and governs all things by his mighty word: he that
grants that he rules al things, excepteth no one thing from his government:
We may then well conclude out of this place of God, that God governs all, and
every thing.

But least I should leave any starting hole for the adversary to wind out at,
let us further see what the Scripture teaches us of the governing of every
particular thing by Gods providence.

Neither will I heap up many places, but content my self with a few
examples, out of which the truth of this doctrine may be gathered.

And thus I do endeavor to prove it briefly: All the creatures of God are
either endued with y^ gift of free choice, or else want this liberty of choice:
they that have it, are Angels, both good and evil, and men also both good and
evil: they that want this liberty of choice, are all other living things
created by God, and also those his creatures, which have no life: and yet of
all these creatures, God has a special care, so as he disposes of every one
of them according to his pleasure.

The book of Job, and the Psalms, do very often handle this argument, so that
if I should gather out of them all their proofs, I should write out almost
their whole books: yet some I will bring, and leave the rest for you to
gather, hoping it will be a means to bring you to the often reading of them.

In the 147. Psalm the Prophet says thus of God, hat he covers the Heaven
with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow
upon the Mountains* But the clouds, the rain, and the grass are things
without soul and life, and yet by his wonderful providence he drives, and
rules at his pleasure the clouds in the air: he sends the rain down upon
the earth, and he makes the grass to grow: In the 148. Psalm the Prophet
says, that fire and hail, snow, and vapors, stormy winds do execute his
word, and what is it to execute the word of God, but to be ruled and governed
by his word? it is to be at his beck and pleasure: Again, in the 135. Psalm,
it is said, that whatsoever pleased ^he Lord, that did he in Heaven and in
earth, in the Sea* and all the depthes: he brings up the Clouds from the
ends of the earth, and makes the lightnings with the rain, he draws ^^rth
the winds out of his treasures* (...)d Christ our Savior in the ^^^^ Math.
bids us learn how the Lil^ies of the field do grow, they labor ^ot,
neither spin: and a little afterward ^e tells us, that God does cloth the
grass of the field* these ^ew places ^rooue that God has a provident ^are, ^o
keep and govern even his lifelesse creatures, not only generally, but also
particularly: as clouds, rain, winds, crasse, fire, hail, snow, vapors,
lillies, and such like: the like provident care he has for other of his
creatures, whom he has endued with ^^fe and sense, but not with reason, and
that liberty of choice, whereof I spoke before: Was read in the 147. Psalm,
that GOD gives to beasts their food, and to the young Rauen^ that cric: and
in the 104. Psalm verse 14. the Prophet says, that GOD causes grass to
grow for the Cattle, and afterward in the 27. verse he says that all beasts,
fowls, and fishes, wait upon thee O Lord that thou may give them food in
due season: Thou give it to them, and they gather it, thou (...) penest thy
hand and they are fille^ with good things* This also our Savior Christ
affirms in the 6. of (...) th^w, saying, behold the sowles of (...) heaven,
for they sow not, neither reap(...) no^ carry into the barnes: yet y^^
Heavenly good Father feeds the^ And in the ^0. of Math. Are not (...)
Sparrowes sold for ^ farthing and o(...) them shall not fall on the ground wit^
^ut your Father? meaning God: by the ^ew places you may see it sufficien^
proved, that GOD has a prouide^ care of every particular creature, v^ on whom
he has not bestowed the (...) liberty of choice, whether they ha^^ not life,
or have life and sense and w^^ reason. Now as for those creatures (...) whom
God has given that gift of fr^^ choice, which I said were Angels an^ m^n, some
do think, that God in tru^^ has a special provident care ou^^ man whom he
made after his own (...) image and likeness: but not over other creatures:
which opinion how false (...) is you may easily gather out of that (...) have
already written. Others do mak^ this to be the difference between man (...)
man, that God takes a special care of ^he godly, but casts away all care of
^he wicked: but the word of God does manifestly overthrow this opinion: In the
5. of Matthew. Christ our Savior teaches us, that our heavenly Father makes
the Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends reign on the just and
unjust. And Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy the 4. chapter, says that God
is Savior of all men specially of those that believe: whereof I gather that God
has a special care of those that are his, but yet not so, as that he ^aueth
y^ wicked to be ruled by chance and fortune: for if God have a care of those
things and creatures y^ the wicked ^o^^esse, as of their cattle, grass, and
^orne and such like: surely he proui^eth also for them, the owners and matters
of th^se creatures: neither can he (...) provident and careful for the god^*
but he must also govern and rule ^e wicked according to the pleasure of (...)
divine power. For as a Prince and General of an Army is not ^nely careful
for the Troops and companies of Soldiers that be in his host: but also for
mumtion and vittaile necessary for them, that he may have his army so
furnished, that it may be a terror to the enemy, and may keep them amongst
whom he lies encamped in such dutiful obedience, that they may be ready to
do whatso^uer his Captains and officers command them: so can it not be that
God does provide for his Church, but he most, also moderate and govern all
those things, without which his Church cannot be here upon the earth.

Such things as appertain to the nourishment, clothing, safe and quie(...)
harboring of the members of th(...) Church: They therefore who ar(...) not of
the true Church, are yet, for th(...) benefit of Gods Church, to be ruled (...)
his providence, so are the Patriarch(...) said to have found favor in the
eye(...) of infidels, for that the Lord did ru(...) and move the hearts of
infidels, whic(...) way it pleased him.

Now how God rules not one(...) every particular man, but also all th(...)
several actions of men, is proved (...) (...)t which is in the 16. of the
Pro^^rbs, commit thy works unto the lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed:
and by that also which is in the 4. of (...)es: go to now ye that say. to day
(...) tomorrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and
^uy and sell and get gain: and yet ye cannot tell what shall be tomorrow: for
what is your life? it is even a vapor, it appears for a little time, and
afterward vanishes away: for that we ought to say, if the Lord will, and if
we live we will do this or that: Thus James speaking of the act^^ns (...)
doings of men, affirms that God ^^leth them all, so that without his ^ill we
can do nothing, no not so ^uch as pass from one place to another: and Paul
confesses that he was ^^ten hindered and staid by God, that ^e could not go to
those Churches he ^^rposed, until he had his journey ^^anted him by the will
of God: God ^^erefore rules all the several actions (...)ll men. I will use
only two exam(...), to illustrate and make plain this ^^st true doctrine, y^
God governs the several actions of all men, (...) good and bad: In the
history of Iose(...) many things to this purpose are to (...) found. The end of
that history w(...) that which Joseph spoke of, Genesi. (...) you thought evil
against me says (...) to his brethren, but God disposed it (...) good: In
this history these men (...) their several actions are to be way (...) First
father Jacob, then the breath(...) of Joseph, Joseph himself, the Ish(...)
clites to whom he was sold, that (...) huswife his mistress. Putiphars w(...)
Pharao and his servants: the acti(...) of ^ll these persons are diverse and
(...) different one from another, so(...) them were laudable, others dete(...)
ble, and yet some of those better (...) others, and some of those actions (...)
there to be altogether allowed no(...) praised, and yet as Joseph witness(...)
God by his providence rules and (...) poseth them all both men and (...)
actions to Joseph's good.

So as David says, Psalm 105. (...) God sent a man before them, Io(...) was
sold for a slave: For so God (...) uemeth the wicked actions of th(...) men,
that the most peru^^se practices of Joseph's brethren, the shameless and
beastly part of Putiphars wife, and other heavy actions, had a most happy end:
So that even those things that they did to Joseph, purposing by the^ utterly to
destry him, brought Joseph to great honor: so mighty and wonderful is God,
that he is able to wake the light to shine out of darkness. Moreover in the
last chapter of the prophecy of Jonas, we shall see how wonderfully God does
not only go^erne men, but also al manner of Crea^ures sensible and insensible:
for I read^ that Jonas went out of the city of Ni(...)y, and sat on the
East Side of the city, (...) there made him a booth and sat under (...)t in
the shadow til he might see what should be done to the City: and the Lord
(...)epared a Gourd, and made it come us (...)er Jonas, that it migh^be a
shadow (...)er his head, and deliver him from (...)s grief: So Jonas was
exceeding (...)ad of the Gourd. But God prep^(...)d a worm when the morning
bo(...) to rise the next day, and it smote (...)e Gourd that it withered: and
(...) the Sun did arise, God prepared also a seruent East wind, and the
Sun beat upon the head of Jonah* that he fainted, and wished in his heart
to die, and said It is better for me to die then to live: in this that I have
written out of Jonas we have these things to way: First Jonah a man, the most
excellentest creature, the other baser creatures, as the Gourd, the worm, and
the winde^ the worm is a creature that has life in it and is of that kind of
beasts that be denided in their bodies, the head and breast from their belly
and tail, the Gourd and the wind they are creatures without life, and yet you
see how God by his providence rules and moves at his pleasure all th^se
creatures. If Epicurus had been at this fight, he would have ascribed all to
chance: if Aristotle, t(...)atut all causes: if Chrysippus or Zeno Stoics, to
fate and destiny: if Plato to some petty God: and amongst them all there had
not been ^ne word of the truth of God.

But the holy Ghost attributes the ^^urse of governing al th^se things to God
alone, who p^^^ared them a^ for Jonah his good: for by these means, Jonah that
was wandering was set in the right way, as if you will read the chapter you may
see more fully of that which I have already written* I may safely conclude,
that both all the creatures which want the gift of choice, and all they that
have it, are governed and* ruled by God, by his most high and might^ providence.

Of the Angels, which I placed at the first amongst these creatures, that have
the liberty of choice, I will write now the less, hoping that I shall have this
back again to view, polish, and enlarge: but their name teaches us that they
are ruled by God him self, for they are called Angeli Angels, that is,
messengers sent from God: and in the Epistle to the Hebrews are called the
ministers, and servants of God.

Thus much for the first part, that is for the truth of this doctrine, that God
by his providence ruled al things in general, and every particular thing in
particular.

Now I come to that ^ promised to handle in the (...) place, namely to the
unfolding and answering of those arguments which are made against this
doctrine. The first argument they make is this: God cannot govern all things
generally, and every creature and action without exceeding toil and grief of
mind: But it agreeeth with the nature of God, that he rest in quiet and be
free from all labors: Therefore God does not govern all and every particular
thing.

To this argument drawn thus from the nature of God, I answer, that their
first proposition is false, which is that God cannot govern all things
generally and particularly without exceeding toil, and grief of mind: but
for that I will not only deny it as false, but show the reasons that m^^ue me
so to do, you must know that there are diverse kinds of actions, ^ome are
natural, some are violent, other some mean: that is neither altogether
natural, nor altogether violent: natural actions are they that do slow from the
principles of nature it self, without any help elsewhere: such are the round
motions of the heavens, the flowing and ebbing of the Sea, th^^ light things do
of their natural lightness mount upward, heau^ things all downward, that we
breath and such like: these actions are done without any labor, because they
move of themselu^s without any other help: Other actions there are, which are
done by, force, and therefore are called violent* as by force to make a stone
mount upward, whose nature is to fall downward* And such like violent actions,
which cannot long last as Aristotle ^eacheth, because they are done with force.
There is another sort of actions which I called mean, whose beginnings are of
nature, but yet they cannot be done unless they be helped by some other
means, as to eat, to drink, to walk, and such like. But now that, that God
does, he does without labor, because ^^^ he does it naturally, and therefore
most ^reely: again, there is no force that can compel GOD, and therefore he
works of himself freely, and without any compulsion: neither is he trobled
with griefs, but governs all things according to the rule of his will:
neither is there any thing more agreeable to the nature of God, then to
govern, and preserve the whole world, even with the word of his power.

A second argument of theirs is this, It is an unmeet thing for God, and
clean repugnant to his nature, to entermeddle in filthy, and unclean matters:
but he cannot govern every several creature, and their actions, but he must
entermeddle with many unclean and filthy matters* therefore he does not
govern them.

I deny the second proposition, which is, that God cannot govern every several
creature and their actions, but he must mingle himself with many unclean, and
filthy matters: For that amongst the creatures, and their actions, there are
many unclean things: this consequence, though it be the ground of the
proposition is false, for although the power of God is in all his creatures,
and rules all, yet does it not therefore follow, that the nature of God does
entermeddle with the ^^pure actions of his creatures, which may be made plain
by this similitude: the Sun of all visible creatures most excellent (man
only excepted (does most set forth the glory of God: it does shine in every
place, so that it shines often upon the dunghill, and though the beams thereof
do heat the dunghill, as they do all other places, and things which they
pierce: Yet for all that the Sun is not polluted with the defilements and
uncleanness of it, neither does the substance of the beams of the Sun mingle
it self with those things which it pierces.

When one laid this in Diogenes his dish* that he went into a stews or
brothel-house, why says he the Sun comes thither also, and yet is not
defiled therewith: thereby showing, yt a wise and godly man though he enter
into unclean and filthy places, and come into the company of filthy persons,
does not forthwith ^o^n^ himself to their filthiness, neither is infected with
their vices: If therefore this Philosopher could enter into the stews, and
come forth again unspotted with their uncleanness, so that their filthiness
could not fasten upon him: much less is God (whose nature is most pure and
simple in governing of his creatures) infected with their filthiness. There is
a third objection, which they thus frame: Every wise and good governor,
unless he be greatly hindered; brings his work that he fram^th, and that
thing that he rules to a good; perfect and wished end: This may be proved by
many examples, as by the example of a skillful Pilot, who directs and
brings his ship to the purposed haven, and such like: but nothing can let God
from perfecting his works, and yet many of his creatures, as many monsters,
mad men, lame, are imperfect. Therefore God rules not every generation and
conception: To unloose this knot we must remember this dis*tinction of order:
there are two sorts of orders or courses ye God takes in governing all things:
the one of them we may call ordinary* which God does often use, the other
extraordinary with which order though we be not acquainted, yet does God
himself know the cause why he so works: and yet of this may we not
conclude, that God in his works is contrary to himself: for if so us there
appear some diversity and difference in the government of all things by God,
certainly that difference is not of Gods rule, but of the unstable judgment
of our troubled minds: for Gods works are not to be balanced by our
judgments, which are deceivable, and for the most part untrue: Augustine
proposed the example of two children, one of which is dutiful and loving to his
father, the other is a wicked stubborn child: both their fathers are deadly
sick, the good child prays earnestly unto God* to deliver his father from
his sickness: y^ graceles graft thinks every hour twenty until his father be
breathless: both their fathers died and that according to Gods appointment and
direction.

But now that child that prayed for the prolonging of his fathers life highly
pleased GOD: and yet it pleased not GOD, that his father should live any
longer: And again, that child that longed for his fathers death, as highly
di^^^eased God, and yet it* was Gods pleasure that his father too should die:
how comes it to pass, that that which pl^aseth GOD may displease him also,
and that which displeases him, please him? as he was pleased with the good
child's kindness, but not pleased that his father should liue^ and again
displeased with the unnatural part of the lewd child, and yet pleases with
his fathers death.

Surely there is in God a certain secret ordinance which yet is just, and a
certain ordinance open and manifested, which also is righteous; But certain
idle companions to draw both Augustine and us into hatre^, for this doctrine,
object against us, that they cannot perceive in God this double will, which we
speak of, to wit, a secret and a revealed will: for they say we all know and
you confess, that God is most plain without all show of do^^^^nesse, and
therefore his will must be also as plain, and ^uen so is it, though we cannot
comprehend it: but let them first answer to that which Augustine and we have
proposed, and (...)ill they, nill they, they must acknowledge with us, that
this differance of (...)ill, of which I have spoken, is not (...)operly in God,
but in us, who according to our reach and capacity, mea^^re divine matters: and
therefore in (...)espect of us and of our capacity, ther^ ^eemeth to be th^^
difference in the will (...) God: According to our censure and ^^dgement, we
will judge the birth (...) monsters, mad men and crooked men, (...) be an
imperfect work of God, but* (...) the judgment of God their creation (...)
most perfect and absolute.

If Aristotle were asked what the (...)use were of their imperfections and
(...)eformities, he would answer that (...)ey proceeded of a defect and want
in (...)ture. But Christ says otherwise of (...)e man that was borne blind in
the 9. (...) John. Neither has this man sinned, (...)or his parents, but that
the works of (...)OD should be showed on him: that (...), that God might be
glorified by him. (...)ow since y^ last end of al things is the (...)ory of
God, and since al things are to (...) accounted perfect, which attain to their
desired end, and since the glory God more appears by the imperfections of
some of his creatures, the(...) he had made them all of one form (...)
perfection, surely we may not judge(...)ny of his works imperfect: I gr(...) y^
if they be considered in themselue(...) there will appear in them some i(...)
perfection: but when they are refer(...) to the glory of God, if they
illustra(...) and set it forth, they are even therefo(...) to be accounted
perfect: for if no m(...) should be mad, if none deformed, no(...) ^ame, none
blind, we would ascri(...) the perfection of our birth, which w(...) perceive
that all men have necessar(...) either to nature or to our parents: a(...) we
would easily slip into this opinio(...) that we had our solues also of our
p(...)rents: but since there appears su(...) a diversity in the outward
form^s (...) creatures, the providence of God ^o(...) more clearly appear by
that their difference in shape. In the judgment (...) man, many flies and
worms, an^ (...) sort of serpents are reputed not one(...) unprofitable but
also hurtful: B(...) the Lord (^s Moses ^h^weth in (...) (...)ng) calls them
his treasures, out (...)f which he draws vengeance for (...)s enemies, as
arrows out of a qui(...)er.

These were the shafts he shook (...)harao with; With these Antiochus,
(...)ith these Herod was also punished: (...)ho therefore will account them
un(...)ofitable, or who superfluous, since (...)e Lord himself has such uses
to (...)t them to?

There are also in the^ many profitable (...)ings for man, whereof some we know
(...)t, other-some the Physicians know, (...) Nicander and others have very
lear(...)dly written of them: Ancient lear(...)d Chrysostom in his tenth
Homily (...)pon Genesis, used this similitude: (says he) in earthly matters
when (...)e see these things that be done, ap(...)oued by grave and mighty
men, (...)e mislike not their censure, not (...)in-say it, but prefer their
judgment before our own: how much more (...)uld we carry the same mind of
all (...)ble creatures, which we know that* (...)d the Creator of all things
made* (...)at since we have received his censure of them all, that all that
h(...) made was very good, let us suspe(...) our judgments and bury them in
silenc(...) and let us not dare to prefer the judgments of al men before the
Lords: a(...) we may persuade our selves wi(...) strong and sufficient
arguments, th(...) the Lord made all things in great w(...) dome and mercy, and
in a word, th(...) the Lord made nothing unadvised or without cause: but
though we kno(...) not the causes of his works, beca(...) of the weakness of
our vnderstan^ings: yet has he made all things (...)cording to his wisdom and
most mi(...)ty mercy.

Thus far Chrysostom: If the(...)fore by the testimony of Aristotle, (...)
ture made nothing in vain. As y^ m(...) who was utterly ignorant of true
r^gion, affirmed of nature, which he (...) judged to be both blind and brutish:
ho(...) much more are we bound to attrib(...) unto the most wise creator of all
thin(...) this ^erfection in his creation* that made nothing in vain, but all
thy(...) in great wisdom: since all his worcester(...) redounded to his glory, which
is (...)st, and the chiefest end of all things, (...)d by the common consent of
all men, ^^ery thing is judged either perfect or ^^perfect, by the attaining of
his end? ^here is a fourth argument, thus made ^^ainst the providence of God:
If God (...)ho is most wise and righteous in his ^^dgements, do govern all
things, and ^^ery particular thing, there should not (...) so great troubles in
common wealths, ^^d specially in the Church, whereof ^^e Lord has a special
care, for that it (...) his Sanctuary: but both in Church ^^d commonwealth
there is great vn^^ietnesse, so that all laws both divine ^^d humane are openly
violated: good ^en most cruelly are dealt withal, e^ill men do rejoice and
triumph in ^^eir wickedness without controle^^ent: God therefore governs not
all ^^ings that are in commonwealths ^^d in the Churches.

This argument thus drawn from ^^e nature of Gods justice (which see^eth to be
contrary to his government (...) his providence, if he should see, mo^^rate and
suffer all these outrages and (...)orders) is one of the chiefest props of
Epicurus his opinion and this arg^ment troubled many that now live(...) daily
labor to bring Epicurus name (...) obloquy with all men, and yet are content to
liue-like Epicures: and this arg^ment also the Lurkes, and our cap^tall enemies
(the papists) object m(...) against us: and sure it carries s(...) weight with
it, that David confess(...) y^ he was so astonished, that his feet we(...)
almost gone: and his steps had w(...) near slipped, when he saw the
prospe(...)ty of the wicked, and punishments a(...) hard entertainment of the
godly, v^till he went into the sanctuary of G(...) then understood he their
end, that until David entered into Gods school and learned by his word and holy
spirit he ordered al things most wisely, a(...) justly. After Pompey had bin
put t(...) worst in the battle fought betw(...) Caesar and him, in the
consines of Ph(...)salos, and escaped by flight to Mytele(...) he went to
Cratippus, and disput(...) with the Philosopher in his Guard(...) whither he
thought there was a(...) God which by his providence ruled earth: and for that
before in very (...) (...)uarels he had had most prosperous (...)ccesse, as
when he had subdued, and in (...)aitaile vanquished the inhabitants ^f the East
part of the world, and was (...)ow in a most good cause overcome, (...)ripped
off his army, and forc^d to fly a^ay himself alone most shamfully: he ^ere of
gathred that God regarded not that was done amongst men, but y^ al things were
done by chance: thus does (...) wise men of y^ world judge and speak of ^uch
eue^ts. But ye holy Ghost teaches ^s to judge far otherwise of the^: when
Moses in his song Deu. 32. was to de(...)uer to the people the threatenings of
God, if they were disobedient, which ^fterward ye rebellions Israelits felt,
^ee uses this preface: perfect is the work of the mighty God: for all his
ways are judgment: God is true and without wickedness, just and righteous is
(...)e: teaching hereby that whatsoever (...)e world does prate of the causes
of ^fflictions, that GOD with great ^isdome, does send forth of his
trea(...)res all sorts of calamities: some(...)me by them to punish the
wick(...), sometime to exercise the Godly with them. For the sins of the
people the hipocrite does reign: That is, t^ rants sit in the throne of
Justic^ which under pretense of executi^ justice, are but hipocrites and
oppre^^ the people: Job. 34. verse 30.

Woe be to thee (says the Proph^ Isaiah) which spoylest, for thou sha^ be
spoiled: And indeed, one tyra^ plagueth another, and though tyrant be a plague
to al nations and kingdome^ yet are they themselves in due tim^ in like sort
punished by other tyrant^ In the person of Sennache^ib y^ iudg^ments of God are
very lively set for by the Prophet Isaiah in the te^ Chapter of his prophesse:
The Lo^ stirs up the king of the Assirians punish the eastern people:
Sennach rib was a wicked man, and he is asco^^ to wicked people, yea he cruelly
ver^ the people of God, he spoileth almo^ all Palestina, he bes^egeth Ierusal^
the chief City of that Country: A^ thus says God of him by the Proph^ in
that place: O Ashur the rod of ^ wrath and the staff in their hands my
indignation: I will send him t^ dissembling nation, and I will give him a
charge against the people of my wrath, to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them underfoot like the mire of the street. But he
thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so: and so forth. And a
little after, thus says God by the Prophet of him: But when the Lord has
accomplished all his work upon Mount Sion, and Jerusalem, I will visit the
fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and his glorious and proud
looks, Because he said, by the power of mine own hand have I done it, and by
my wisdom because I am wise: And a little after this, thus says the Prophet,
shall the axe boaste it self against him that heweth therewith? If Pompey had
looked on this example, thus laid forth by the Prophet, he might have b^ne
better occupied and instructed then he was by his toring with Cratippus: And
this would have taught him, that though the Lord suffers tyrants to be for a
time a plague to an^ nation, yet in his appointed time he suffers them to be
punished by other tirants, and to have the same measure that they measured unto
others: Now if we compare Sennacherib, and Pompey that gloried in this title
The great: which name Silla gave him for his victories: we shall find many
things alike in their histories. Both of them was an axe in the hand of God to
strike the people of the East: Both of them destroyed Palestina, and afflicted
the people of God: Sennachetib besieged Jerusalem, Pompey took it, the
Assirian was put to flight by an Angel and was slain in his Temple, that is in
his Sanctuarr, by his own Sons: Pompey was put to flight by Caesar* and
flying to Ptolomy King of Egypt, whose father being dispossessed of his
kingdom, he had restored again to his crown, and therefore Ptolomy should
have been as a son unto Pompey, was there in Egypt with him miserably
slain. So unsearchable are the ways of Gods judgments: for that which Michah
speaks of the Caldeans in the 4. chap. of his propheste: (They know not the
thought^ of the Lord, they understand not his council; therefore they shall
be thrashed as sheaues is the barn, (may be spoken of all these Giants and
proud tyrants, who for that they knowt not the counsel of the Lord, shall in
his appointed time bear the punishment of their pride: Neither does the holy
Ghost teach us, that the wicked only are punished, but that the church of God
is also afflicted though for another end and purpose: And there may many
reasons be brought, to show why the church of God is subject to so many
calamities, but I will at this time allege only three, by which as by many
other we may know, that the Lord in truth and judgment, does exercise his
church with afflictions. The first is y^ so long as we carry about with us this
burden of corruption, we are not only subject to sin, but do continually by
sinning provoke the Lord to deal in justice with us: And therefore it is
agreeable to the justice of GOD, that we be chastned of the Lord with a
fatherly rod, which may keep us in obedience: Yea we must all say with Jeremy
in the third chapter of his Lamentations, verse 22. It is the Lords mercies,
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

My second reason is this: It is best for us to be humbled under the mighty
hand of God: for we know how fierce and haughty minded we are by nature, so
that it is necessary for us, that God keep us under his schooling, and so have
us in some awe: therefore David says in the 1. 19. Psalm. ver: 67. Before I was
afflicted I went astrav: but now I keep thy word, and ver: 71. It is good for
me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. The third
reason is delivered by Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians the 11.
Chapter, verse. 32. When we are judged we are chastned of the Lord, because we
would not be condemned with the world: Therefore let us conclude this whole
discourse with Moses thus: The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous,
neither let us measure them according to our own conceit and judgments which
are very deceivable, but let us know that the Godly are punished for their
sins they daily commit, that they may be humbled, and that they perish not
with the wicked: but God in punishing the wicked, does show and open the
treasures of his long sufferance, patience and justice: but when he afflicts
us, he makes us like to his own Son Christ, and stirs up in us an
earnest desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

Let us in the mean time give our selves to hearty and earnest prayers, praying
continually with the Saints of God.

Come Lord JESUS, yea come quickly,
Amen* Amen.

