An Answer to the Supplication.

Against him, who seeming to give the King counsel to become a Catholic,
indeuoureth to stir up his good Subjects unto rebellion.

Faithfully translated out of French by E. A.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop right over
against the great South door of Paul's. 1591.

An Answer to the Supplication exhibited unto the King.
IHaue read the advice given unto the K. under the name of a Supplication, that
he would vouchsafe to become a Catholic, wherein I have found nothing
concerning a Supplication, but the bare title. The rest is even the same that
the Author does promise. Sir, It is a second war that lights on your
arms, by those who imitating the first christians, have acknowledged you to be
their King. Whereto he should have added, that such a second was of more
dangerous consequence then the first, because in the first, they that took
part were only the fools, doltes, idiots and wicked persons. The commons by
the furious inducement of a heap of Friars and monks, that fight rather for
their wallet then for their faith, and the great ones to make way to their
ambition. But in this they that term themselves the kings faithful and good
servants, do furnish instructions and remembrances wherewith under the
pretense of a request to wythdrawe the virtuous from their vowed obedience and
fidelity. Examine this discourse by piece meal, and you shall find many
brave points: and examine it in general, and you shall find as many stabs with
a dagger to overthrow the King, and so consequently the state. The Author
terms himself a Catholic, the kings good subject, zealous for the common
wealth, all this, to pleasure him, I am content to believe. But had he been a
free catholic, he should have addressed his request to God, not to the King.
Or if a good subject desirous of public peace, he should have opened his
reasons unto him particularly, and not have spread them amongst the people,
whereas contrariwise this request never came to his hands for whom it is
said to be made, but runs amongst those that need no praying, of whom one
sort are rebels, another, ready to rebellion, and the third, such as are of a
timorous conscience. The first, seeing the king is not yet become a Catholic
do delight in these remonstrances as a parcel iustificatory of their
rebellion: the second notwithstanding whatsoever their semblant are nothing
sorry for them: and the last does hang in suspense, as men never brought up in
the auncientie of the church, so that whether it be by art, or by hap, this
Supplication has course among us, and the fruit thereof tends not to edefie
the king, but to make some of his folowers malcontents, and so adventure to
cause them to change their copies.

He may, will you say, save him self by becoming a Catholic. But I tell you,
it is not a matter to be cast in a mould. But he had promised his Nobility
that he would take some pains therein within six months, who may be grieved
to see those months turned into six years. Good God, is not this a mere
slander? made he that promise simply? No truly. What then? That he would
summon either a general or national counsel within six months, or sooner
if possibly he could, to the end to follow and observe whatsoever should
therein be decreede. Have his ennemies since affoorded him one quarter of an
hours respite to tend thereto? While they were busy would you have wished
him to have tended to discourses, and in the mean time to have undone and lost
himself, as Jerusalem was lost while the Jews busy about the exercise of
the ceremonies of their sabbath, not willing or daring to defend themselves,
fell upon the edges of the Rom^^nes swords? Has he not a ready example of
this fault before his face? For if after the death of the two brethren the late
king had resolutely taken arms, and so given the rebels no leisure to bethink
themselves, the affairs of our France had been in better state by the one
half. But, O hard hap, we loytered about the goodly Orations at the closing up
of the states at Bloys, with magnifical preparation, and while we set our whole
delight upon this theater, we perceived not that 7. days before the city of
Paris through the inducements and practices of the Sorbonists had abandoned the
kings obedience. Howbeit you the good and faithful servant of the king (you
would think I should mock in terming you so) have quietly shipped in these
two words, That the Nobility would grieve to see their six months turned
into six years, as if through frivolous delays the king longed after such
lingering. After the same manner as you seek to make him believe, that in his
desired conference he seeks to be persuaded by five or six, who within these
three days departed from our church, most of them shamefully: These be your
own words, a matter that he never imagined, as having referred the conclusion
of this cause to such a counsel as is aforesaid. But certainly since ye would
needs have this war to light upon our kings neck, it had bin your part to
have fought with good weapons, and not with deeds which you have slanderously
invented.

But who be those noble men that have given you commission to use this speech
to the king? Are they the same that were at the camp at S. Clauds the 14. of
August 1589. in whose hands the K. promised within six months to assemble a
good, free and lawful counsel, to the end to follow whatsoever should therein
be concluded? They are bound to the king by word, signed, sealed and
exemplified in the Parliament, and are not simply gentlemen only, but even the
Princes of the blood, dukes, peers, officers of the crown, and many other
notable personages. Al who have promised him all service and obedience upon his
oath and promise, that within the time by him prescribed he would make this
assembly. A promise which in itself employed a quiet condition of possibility,
for no man ever meant to bind himself to a thing impossible, neither is there
any so senseless, as not to see that the lingering which now appears in the
execution of this promise, is not by him sought or desired, but springs out
of these troubles. But why should we suppose that these do complain,
considering we yet see them continue in the same devotion, and that not they
only have embraced the kings just querrell, but also many other dukes,
marqueses earls, barons and lords, who in respect of their absence having not
signed, have notwithstanding hasted to come unto him with great trains and
concourse of people, to hasard their bodies, lives, and goods in his service.
Al these do know that the six months are expired, yet do not thereupon
impute any thing to the king, neither are so far deuoide of consideration as
to wish him to enter into our Church by any other way then was capitulated
amongst them, and to the same end also was the lord of Luxembourg chosen to go
to the Pope to give him to understand of all that was passed, which he
acknowledged to be just, holy, and most lawful. I do not here tell you of
those housedoues and dormice, who in their houses do watch on which side the
storm may light, to the end to apply themselves to the other: for these men I
account as cyphres, so that if you have no other then those, you might much
better for your honors sake have suppressed your request.

Well, on, to you do I now denounce war even as you have done to the king,
for I am of the number of those Catholics whom you speak of in the beginning
of your petition, who imitating the ancient christians, do continue in his
obedience. If you be as you say, so catholic, so good a subject unto the king,
such a lover of public peace (for I must yet return to our first point) since
you will read a lesson to our master of that which you think to appertain
to his duty, ought you not also to have done the like to the people of that
that belonged to them? It is a matter that you forgot not for lack of notice,
for it is one of the first dishes where with you have served our king, when you
told him that his good subjects did imitate the ancient Christians: yet stayed
you so suddenly that your word dyed so soon as it was borne: and such a word,
as being well disgested in good men's consciences, would procure a general peace
throughout the realm. Let us therefore begin here by our selves: let us
read to our selves a lecture of our duties to our king, so being grown wise
in our own duties, we may the better endeavor by supplications, advice, or
other fair speeches, to teach him that which we think meet for him to do.

First, I am of opinion, that every good citizen should wish there were but
one religion in ouery well ordered common wealth, and every good Christian that
there were no exercise of any other theuthecathol. apost. religion. That is the
same wherein we have been of all antiquity brought up in France: the same
wherein we were baptized: the same wherein we should live and die, as being the
spring and assurance of our salvation under the banner of our savior Jesus
Christ. God has given us a king of an other religion then ours, yet a
virtuous, valiant, noble, wise and just prince, such a one as accompanyeth all
his actions with the fear of God. Where the Wise man says, that the fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, I suppose he meant, that the fear of
God is the ground of all religion. Nevertheless, if he were other, if a
Nabuchod^nozer, who was the greatest scourge unto the house of God, ye^ were it
our parts to do for him the same that the Prophet Baruch exhorted the
children of Israel to do for the said Nabuchodonozer, that is, to love,
honor, and obey him, and to remember him in our prayers: and why* Because God
has given him us, and will have us to have such a one, whether to be revenged
of us for our sins, or to prove the steadfastness of our faith, or upon any
other reason which he will not any should know but himself. When our Lord
said, Give unto Caesar that belongs unto Caesar, etc. Peter in one of his
Epistles etc. Paul to the Romans, and to Titus commanded the christians to
pray to God for the earthly powers and to obey them, they knew that all the
kings, monarchs, and princes of those days were heathen, as were all the
other the emperors from Augustus to Constantine the great, yea Constance the
son of Constantine, albeit a christian, was infected with the heresy of
Arriux, and Julian his successor from christianity returned unto his
Idolatry, all which notwithstanding, we still obeyed them. For the proposition
of our Christianity imported that we ought rather to obey the vice-emperour
then the inferior judge, the emperor then the vice-emperour, and God then the
emperor, because upon the one depended only the loss of goods and life,
things perishable and transitory: on the other, eternal damnation of our
souls: to be brief, that the good christian should make a buckler of his life
against such assaults as might be delivered him by the emperor, when he
contrarieth the honor of God, but that in all other things we owe him our
obedience. This was the trophee erected by our fathers. Read S. Cyprian, S.
Hierom, S. Augustine, and especially Tertullian the ancientest of them all,
where he writes to Scapula the governor of Affrike. We, said he, do in all,
and through all obey the emperor, we acknowledge him to be our sovereign
Lord, we willingly pay him tributes, aides, and subsidies. One only thing we
desire to obtain of him, that is, that he will permit us to line in peace of
conscience. The like says he in his Apology: and above all things in this
general obedience, he will not that the christian stray one tittle from the
common course of his religion, but that rather he should abide all kind of
forments: and this is it that he does at large discourse upon in his treaty of
the crown of a soldier. And to the end you should not think that they lived
so because force so commanded, you shall find that T. of Aquine, one of our
chief school divines discoursing upon this article, is of opinion, that of
whatsoever religion the prince be, yet the subject ought to obey him, also that
there is one only cause that may dispense with the oath of sidelitie. vz. when
from christianity the prince declineth to paganism, wherein likewise he is
gainesaide by antiquity: for it is certain that the christians never doubted
to obey Julian the Apostata. Yea that great Saint Martin the holy buckler of
our France was under his pay five whole years while he was a Catechist, that
is, during the time of his probation, wherein such as were disposed to make
profession of our religion were strictest in their actions. This is, in my
opinion, the lesson you should have taught the French nation, and which now I
do deliver in manner of a supply to the second line of your Supplication: for
being so careful for the salvation of the kings soul, you should not have
neglected the rest of France. A lesson as catholic and holy as the heresy is
detestable, that has course among the Leaguers, vz. to uphold that because
our kings religion is contrary to ours, we lawfully may not only deny him our
obedience, but also leauy war against him. For were their opinion true, we
must condemn the whole doctrine of the primitive Church, we must condemn S.
Peter and S. Paul, yea we must condemn the great patron and foundation of our
religion Jesus Christ: yet it is such an heresy as slideth into the hearts of
those that are taken to be the honestest men: for your self do seem to be
somewhat spotted there with, since of set purpose you omitted this principal
piece, which would greatly have enriched your work. How then? Will I dissuade
the king from becoming a Catholic, because I teach his subjects to obey him?
God forbid. The tipe of all my desires tend to see him united in the same
religion with us: but to tell you true, I could wish that neither you nor I had
undertaken the vnweauing of this web. It is very dangerous to become an
arbitrator in the causes and opinions of a mighty king, especially in an
argument of so great consequence as this, withal considering the diversity of
humors amongst us at this day. Stand you upon this, that the king ought to
become a catholic? In have post have, as you do, unless he follow your
counsel, sundry tickelish souls will strait imagine that it proceeds of
want of devotion, and minds to feed his faithful subjects with delays in
respect of his promise at his coming to the crown, and so shall you perhaps
be the cause of a new commotion against him. But let me uphold the contrary,
and I shall provide some conceit for diverse slippery minds, that by his
consent I am under hand taught by those of his religion to play this part:
which will be a new preparation to mistrust, a matter no less dangerous then
the other: and wythall it will be thought that in heart I profess an other
religion then the same that outwardly I exercise. Neither you nor I are
Lisippus or Apelles, that we should represent Alexander in imagery or picture.
I mean we are not sufficient to discourse upon this high point that aims
both at religion and the state: nevertheless, since you, abusing the liberty of
the time wherein every one thinks it lawful to do what he list, seeming to
bring a medcine for the state, do bring poison: I believe the better sort will
not mislike that I also do take leave to bring in a counterpoyson. I will tell
you then, that I am of opinion that the K. become a catholic, and that as
soon as it may please God to give him grace (for it is a blessing that
proceeds from God, not from us) but that he should so become upon the mould
that you prescribe him, I do not think that any good servant to God or the
king can so think good. I pray thee Reader have patience to the end, and be
not dated at this first step. Our religion is the holiest, etc. I will begin
with this word Holy, which is the first point of your reason: for as for the
rest which concerns the reputation, profit and necessity thereof, al your
subtilties are vain in the sight of God, which notwithstanding I will
discourse upon in their places as I think meet.

Our king must become a catholic because our religion is the best: I tell you
again he must, but not a state Catholic, such a one as you would frame him,
that is to say, a Prince that shall abandon his religion, that shall
henceforth go to mass. that upon the solemn festiualles shall communicate
with us in the holy sacrament, so to content his people with fair shows, but
in heart shall scorn all our ceremonies, for so shall you form us a king
without religion, who before in the profession of his own reposed his whole
confidence in God. For why should not I imagine that you would make him such
a one, even you who term his zeal and devotion in this behalf, when he
offers to submit himself to the ordinances and decrees of a good counsel
which himself will procure, sometimes ceremonial, sometimes courtizanicall. In
the religion that he professes he does with his whole heart confess one God,
and abhors by gestures only to acknowledge him. Upon a request exhibited by
his princes and great lords that he would vouchsafe to become a Catholic, he
besought them not to wish in him a rash alteration of his religion, but rather
that with ripe deliberation he might be by our men instructed, not in gross,
as you wish, but particularly and by peece-meale. A matter that he desired, not
upon courtezany or ceremony, but for that he could not so easily as you, jest
with his conscience, for, if need be, upon his conversion, he will do open
penance for his error. This manner of dealing do you mislike, and would have
him at unawares and blinfolde take our part, and this do you term a miracle.
But for my part my spirit is over dull to digest this great metamorphosis of
the conscience. Yet know I that God wrought a greater miracle in the
conversion of S. Paul: but in our church there never was but one S. Paul, whom
God had especially chosen to be his trumpet to all the nations of the Gentiles.
Thus may we see how every man misconstrueth the Scriptures, and for the most
part applies them to cover his own impiety. To this purpose I remember that
in the time of S. Cyprian sundry ecclesiastical persons admitted to lodge with
them, some of their kindred to guide, and as they said, to ouersee their
housesholde affairs. But this great and holy parson misliking this use, as
knowing the inconvenience that in process of time might grow thereof, they
for their defenses alleged the example of the Virgins Mary and S. John, who
dwelt together after the death and passion of our savior Jesus Christ. Oh
wretches (cried this holy man) dare you gather any consequence of the
particular blessing of these two excellent souls, therewyth for to cover your
impudicities. There is no example to be taken of those examples. Bring in the
mystery of the conversion of Saint Paul to strengthen your advice, and al
Macheuellian princes shall hereafter become S. Paul's.

But, the people (say you) are troubled with a sickness of mind: they fear
least the king continuing in this state wherein he now is, should suppress the
Catholic religion: and therefore there is no other remedy for that disease,
but that he become a Catholic. First, who is the people that you speak of?
Have you searched into the hearts of all the kings good and loyal subjects?
You will grant me as I suppose, that all these Princes and great Lords that
have subscribed the aforementioned declaration that he made, are none of them:
as also that they are not those who since without subscribing have come to
yield him their due service, neither such as accompanied them. Proceed
throughout the rest of the people which are many, and how know you that they
are troubled with this disease of the mind, that you should so boldly assure
our king thereof? If you should be disaduowed what would you say? And seek you
any greater disaduow them three answers written against you? The quiddities of
your Supplication might peradventure breed this mischief in some weak
minds, but not in any such as have any more certain information of the
affairs both of God and the world: and wythall think that for every one that
is of your mind there be an hundred of a contrary opinion. And to tell you the
truth, you flatter your self, and do measure others by the mete* wand of your
opinions: yet God grant I do say truth, and that it be your opinion, and not
rather a sly subtilty to wythdrawe the good and loyal Catholics from their
vowed obedience to the king. Moreover, you go about to daunt the king with an
imaginary fear of the people, whereas he in his soul is sufficiently
terrefied with the fear of God. He fears, and in good reason, least if he
should mock his Master, as you wish him to do, his Master would afterward
mock him: he who otherwhiles has received such favor and graces of God, that
all the harms of others have turned to his profit. You may make of your
conscience a cameleon, that turns into as many colors as it sees obiectes.
But the kings conscience is not made after any such fashion: he thinks that
man to have no soul that can so easily play with his soul: that he is utterly
void of religion, that can frame his religion according to the diversity of
reigns: to be brief, that he is the same Ecebolius mentioned in the
Ecclesiastical history.

But you have none (say you) but the nobility to take your part, your enemy
has the Communaltie, and ye know that one Julius Caesar with the assistance
of the Communaltie defeated Pompey and all the Nobility of Rome. Oh stay man,
you judge boldly of our estate, and do not consider that the policy of our
France, heretofore called Gall, does far differ from that of the Romans. For
evermore, even in the days of your Caesar, and that by his own testimony the
force of this nation depended upon the Nobility. A custom which by
succession of time and age is converted into nature, so that at this day the
Duke of Mayenne with all his rebellious towns and popular power, does but
ward our blows, and is driven to the end to reign in France to become the
Spaniards slave: yet do I make no account of this worldly policy. Our king
builds not his hope upon either the Nobility or the communalty, but upon God
only: he is his buckler, his fortress, and his vpholder, yea he is all in all
unto him, and he believes that without him all the forces of the world are
but wind.

But let us grant all the fashions possible to the argument that we entreat
of, for to say truth, it is the highest point, and must not be weakly
handled. As the Devil the father of dissension has within these thirty years
party-colored us with religions, under these two words Catholic and Huguenot,
so are we our selves also as well in the one as in the other parti-alized. For
some take part for the states sake, others for religion only. I will therefore
stand upon the terms of Catholic, which we will here form us, and will say
that we have two kinds of Catholics, the one, catholics of estate, the
other, catholics in religion. The first are worldly catholics, and so
consequently the devils Catholics. The second are the true catholics in our
church, and so consequently the children of God. If we consider the first sort,
you are not, in my judgment, of sufficient practice in the estate to shape us
a Catholic prince by your pattern: If the second, then albeit you have
learning, yet have you not catholic religion enough in your head to make a
prince catholic by religion.

Now let us speak of the estate catholic, as of him who peradventure as at
this day bears greatest sway throughout all christendom, I mean of him that
has no consideration of the salvation of his soul in the sight of God, but of
the advancement of himself or his state, wherein I beseech those that shall
spend some hour in the reading of this my discourse, to think that I do not
in any wise allow of such catholic policies, but do utterly condemn, abhor
and detest them as abominable in the sight of God. Howbeit, in as much as now
we are to give the people to understand that there was never counsel more
pernicious, then that which the Supplication imports, also that it is a
merchandise fetched out of the leaguers back shop, who under a false show of
seeking to husband the peace of the realm, do practice a new disunion between
the king and his good subjects, I beseech you give me leave to strike upon this
tenor which has recourse unto the state, and afterward I will touch the base
that has relation to the catholic church when I come to speak of the
catholic in religion. I uphold, that if the king become a catholic without
that which you term ceremony or courtezany, and I call most holy well ordered
devotion, he loses his reputation among all men, and wythall, aduentureth the
loss both of himself and his realm. There is nothing of like importance to
the mighty as honor. That is it that may most persuade them. Our king has from
his infancy bin brought up in the doctrine that he yet follows: he has as a
man should say even sucked in with his nurses milk, his religion, together
with the express commandment that his mother the Q. of Navarre at her decease
gave and left unto him, as it were a testamentarie legacy, namely, that he
should persevere therein unto the death. He has since defended it against all
worldly endeavors, with the price of his blood and life, and has had good
success. He that being simply king of Navarre, with a handful of men has
upon this opinion braued his ennemy that was armed with the pretense of the
holy sea of Rome, with the authority of the late king and of the king of
Spain, shall now being king of France, and assisted with so many princes,
dukes, peers, marquesses, earls and barons stoop for a weak stripe with a
reed to him that does but ward his blows? This was not the opinion of Pope
Sixtus last deceased, as may witness some honorable personages, whom he charged
to tell the king, that as well in respect of his conscience toward God, as of
his reputation among men, it stood him upon to take great heed of altering
his religion, unless with such order as he had taken with his Nobility. I do
expressly allege unto you the authority of this great person, as well in
respect of his degree of dignity oner us, as for the wisdom that his age and
long experience had purchased. We other men are but ceremonies. Banish the
ceremonies of our vows in matters of greatest conscience, as religion, and ye
shall ere ye be aware banish a great part of all religions. There is nothing
that a great king ought so much to fear, as to incur an opinion of
lightness and inconstancy. The which to eschew he must use all possible means
in any alteration that he purposes in matters of consequence. If when there
arises any question or argument about the giving of the lie to a Gentleman, or
one that professes arms, when they go about agreement men use to bring all
kinds of formalities to cover the honor as well of the giver as of the taker,
will you not suffer a mighty king to use some ceremony whereby to shun the
lie which you do imagine he gives to our Church, thinking to do well? If it
stand upon his reputation (I speak now as a worldly wise man) you must tread
under foot both the profit and necessities by you alleged: for not only
princes but even mean gentlemen do account nothing profitable or necessary
that may any what impeach their honor.

But (say you) this shall be a great conquest for the K. over himself: nay
contrariwise, it shall be a brave victory that his ennemies shall have
obtained against him. So that were I in pay with them. I would also procure the
like supplication as yours. The fear nothing so much as that, say you: you say
it, but for my part I think the contrary. For were I of their counsel, God
knows what rate I would set upon the merchandise, and how much I would think
to gain by trusting it forth. The mischief is; that they be destitute of I
wot not what hired lack-lattine Preachers, whom in their pulpits they cause
to play what persons they please. My counsel is (say you) of such efficacy,
that by one sole Edict, by one skin of parchment well penned, the king shall
obtain that at his peoples hands, that fifty thousand corslets can not
obtain. If the Pope does gainsay him, a fair appeal as of abuse may do him
reason. So soon as his subjects shall see their king returned into the bosom
of the Church, they will immediately fall down at his feet, as having the fear
that held them in suspense banished away. Indeed you are a great Nostrodamus,
that do prognosticate unto us wonderful things: what pledge or surety have
you for your promise? Are you yet to learn, that between ligue and guile an
old French word that signifies deceit, there is no difference but the
transposition of a syllable? Whereupon do you ground your prediction? Are you a
Sindicque Atturny for all the rebellious towns? Are your remembrances signed,
whereby you think you shall not be disadnowed? But grant you have them, do you
take the Leaguers to be so honest men that they will not infringe their faith?
A woman that has once abandoned her honor, does afterward with time sell to
others good cheap. And I shall never think that man to have any faith, that
has so easily dispensed with his fidelity to his prince. But let us argue even
by common sense, whether there be any likelihoode to believe that the towns
will submit themselves to the kings obedience. The Judicial Astrologers that
deal with casting our natiuities, after they have erected their figures, do
stand assured of their predictions to come, in case they find they have hit
right in that which is past: and therein indeed there is some likelihoode,
albeit I be not of opinion that we should believe such fantastical
prognosticators: since therefore that you do meddle with judging of that that is
to come, it is requisite that your judgment be not fixed upon some vain
imagination, especially in matter of so great importance as this is: but you
ought to ground it upon some correspondence and couplement of things past
with such as are to come. You think that nothing but religion does continue
wars in France. When the towns armed themselves against the late king, was
it religion that invited them thereto? Was there ever prince more sted fast in
Romish religion then be? For even abandoning many times the degree of his
royalty, he framed his actions to his subjects, sometimes showing himself
openly a penitent, sometimes making himself half a Monk in cloisters, so to
exercise his devotion: neither need we any greater testimony then this, that he
had in truth bin yet alive, had he not reposed too much confidence in monks
and friars. Let us leave nothing at home that may tend to the favor of your
opinion. For in so high an argument as this I sight for the truth, not for
victory. You may reply, that the reason that raised their arms against the
other king do cease in this: for the murder committed against the two brethren
in the assembly of the states, together with the extraordinary collections and
exactions against his people cried to God for vengeance. For these be the two
common places where with they shroud themselves: but neither of these
considerations have place in the king now reigning. A solution indeed not all
amiss. But tell me: when the D. of Guise openly without all order of law went
about by the estates holden at Bloys, to cause the king of Navarre unheard to
be declared utterly unworthy and incapable of the crown of France, there was
neither vengeance to be executed, neither had the king of Navarre consented to
all the corruptions of the others reign. But contrariwise the house of Guise
had had good part therein: for they had gotten for themselves five or six
Edicts to the oppression of the people: but especially that great reformer of
tyranny, the Duke of Mayen. I know well enough that the duke of Guise shronded
his arm under the visard of religion. Yet if thou being lieutenant of France
but in parchment only, he solicited this wrong against the king of Navarre,
think you the duke of Mayenne, that so thinks himself to be indeed, were so
fond as not to prosecute his first point? Do you yet suppose that such part
of the people as in every town, by slacking the bridle to all mischief, have
enriched themselves with the spoils of good men (for to speak truth, there is
no town but has his Rossicux or Bussy le Clerc) that they, I say, that have
the strength in their own hands, will suffer the rest in the town houses to
propound the yielding into the kings obedience, or if any should be so bold
would not lodge him between four dark walls? Have they not twenty
tormentors in their consciences that accompany them in all places? Is this word
Relaps, wherewith the duke of Guise armed himself dead with him? You will tell
me that the pope shall dispense, and I tell you your preachers will not believe
it, no more then they have attended his decree and authority to sound out war
against the late king. Can not they add, that the king having set so small a
price of his conscience will prove a Catholic for a vantage, I mean of worse
condition then before, and so have no religion? May they not have a good
argument to aduow it? If they have bin so wicked as in their pulpits to
proclaim the late king to be of no religion, and to give out his abstinence
from meats and other the austerities by him used to be but mocks and
hypocrisies wherewith to abuse the peoples simplicity, what may they say of him
that so slightly may have turned his coat? You think they will not do it: if
you think so, even in common sense you are deceived. Or you imagine that
albeit they should so do, yet their Sermons would be of too small effect with
the people, to turn away this their new vow and devotion, that you assure the
king of. But I am of a contrary opinion. Thus you see us of contrary minds,
and upon this contrariety of hopes and opinions would you have the king hazard
his person and state? You may say, If I were king I would: and I will answer
for him, That if he had made the Supplication now in question, peradventure he
would do it: but being K. he must look well that he do it not. My good friend,
I understand but one Lattin word, Tanti poenitere non emam, and I think it
were good for the kings service that he should remember it in French. If the
king agreeing to your opinion by this his new belief had lost all his beleefes
of his ancient servants that have with him borne the quarrel, as taking it to
be Gods quarrel. And the princes that favored him for the communion of their
religion rather then of their callings should grow luke warm in his behalf:
And on the other side, if the rebels should persevere in their rage, into what
disorder, or rather despair should you bring his affairs? He should find
himself lurched ere he were aware, and you shall prove but a bad warrant for
your counsel. Neither your parchment nor your appeal as of abuse, to be
brief, all the petyfoggeries of France would not suffice to warrant him. His
ennemies have a new production, I say weapons, the which conjoined with I wot
not what colored title, which the strongest do never want, when the question
concerns a kingdom, they will easily by the means thereof win their
cause. For as for the consistory of Rome, which in such affairs is of some
weight in the balance, as being composed of sundry lords, who through their
long experience do ordinarily conioyne religion with the state, and never
divide humane wisdom from holiness, it will always incline to the strongest.

But is not this the part of a very Scholar in State matters, to wish that a
prince should alter his religion, upon a vain conceit thereby to win the
hearts of those whom he would conquer? If your Machiauell now lived, who
taught you that a king ought to be of like religion as his subjects, he would
tell you that a wise prince never made so vnclarkly a step, as to alter his
religion, so long as he stood upon the conquest. But having achieved all his
enterprises, he should then consult with his friends, whether it were good for
him to embrace his subjects religion, to the end the better to like them. You,
and such as be like your self do rely only upon the catholic religion of
the French kings, namely, for that king Clouis altered his Paganism into
Christianity, which in those days was dispersed over all the Galls. Let us
rest upon this example, which may be a good guide to lead us in the path that
we are to pass. Did this great king (for I account him for the greatest that
ever reigned in France without exception, either of Charlemaine, or of Philip
the conqueror) become a christian-so long as he stood upon his conquests? or
did he it without any ceremony? No verily. For when he was to receive the
sacrament of Baptism, it was performed with such dignity by his great
counselor S. Remy, that afterward the posterity converted all the ceremonies
thereat observed into miracles. Besides be abandoned not his heathen religion
to stoop to ours, until he had freed his estate from the bondage of the
Romans, subdued the Bur^uinion who occupied part of our Galls: chased the
Visigot that possessed the country of Septimany, since called Languedoc, into
Spain, and through the great battle of Tolbiac brought under his obedience al
Germany, whereby Theodorike king of Italy became a suter unto him, (...) which
performed, he received Christendom: yet can I not hereupon infer, that for
all this he became a state Christian: but thus much is certain, that he used
this discretion at his new purpose, that he turned not from his religion until
he found him self to have the upper hand.

I will use your own examples: you say that the Macedonians abated I wot not
how much of their ancient devotion to their king Alexander, because he attired
himself after the Persian manner. This story will I faithfully and at large
rehearse, as greatly serving my turn, but not yours. So long as Alexander was
busied about the conquest of Asia, he forbear to use either the habit or
customs of the kings of Persia. But having once conquered it, imagining that
he wanted no more for the accomplishement of his victories but the conquest of
the hearts of his new subjects, whose Country which he had subdued was in
extent five or six times as great as all Macedonia, he had recourse unto the
policy we speak of. He took both the attire and diadem of the kings of
Persia, and from thenceforth began to cause himself to be adored by such as
came to salute him. A matter unaccustomed among the Grecians, yet such as made
the conquered so pliable to his obedience, that he kept them in peace so long
as he lived. Hereupon a certain philosopher, or rather a Scholar named
Calisthenes, who measured a mighty kings imaginations by his own, began to
murmr among the soldiers, showing them, that it was the way to bury the
Grecian liberty in the bondage of the Persians, in the conquest whereof they
had borne a great part and portion with Alexander: and if need had so
required, had he thought upon it, he would have exhibited a like Supplication
as yours, whereby to bring Alexanders behauiors into mislike. These complaints
passing from mouth to mouth among the Macedonians was like to have stirred up a
great sedition. Whereupon the king put the schoolemaister to death, not upon
any injurious wrath, as some foolish Historiographers have written, but to the
end to stop the flux of this new commotion, and withal to make him an
example to the posterity, against such as licentiously abusing their tongues
or pens, before they have served their apprentisage in state affairs, do in
their studies meddle with controuling the actions of their king among his
people and subjects.

This example have I set you down to two ends. The first, to show you that a
sovereign prince ought never to alter his fashions, manners, or religion for
the contentation of a people before he has gotten the maistery over them. The
other to let you understand that we are not so easily or openly to control the
behauiours of our kings, especially in matters concerning the estate. For not
to penetrate into the botome of their thoughts, and yet to publish against them
such speeches or diffamatory libels as may move their subjects to revolt, is a
matter of death: and you may peradventure have deserved the same punishment as
Calisthenes: he for complaining foolishly, and out of season of Alexanders new
alteration of the ancient fashions of Greece: you for complaining of the king
for not altering his old religion for an other that shall be new unto him. For
to tell you plainly what opinion many have of you, they say that it is the
very counsel of one, who seeming to love the king, loves him not, or studying
upon his preservation, endeavors to destroy him. And at one word, that your
Supplication is the counsel of a wicked Leaguer: yet for my part, I do for
your excuse tell them, that if it includes any mischief, the same proceeds
not of any your hatred against the king, but of too much love to your self.
Had I access to the kings ear, and were I as a state man to counsel him, I
would not wish him to become a Catholic yet, but to stay until he had
overcome his affairs. Neither is there any better mean to lincke unto us a
Country that we have but lately conquered, then by purchasing favor of the
people, which may be kept by embracing their religion, unless we be so strong
as without alteration we may command the same. This is the counsel that
(speaking as a worldly wise man) I would give my king. But let us, I pray you,
return unto God, who should be our Weathercocke, and without whom we cannot
arrive in any good haven. I have suffered my self at unawares to be carried
away with the waves of this world. All this worldly wisdom is but folly
before God. Where you do wish the king to become a Catholic, without laying
his hand upon his heart, you do it to no other end, say you, but to procure
him to reign in assurance over his people, and to bring peace to his realm,
though not to his soul. What will you say if I show you both with the finger
and eye, that through even palpable and visible miracles of God, al things have
gone against the hair with such Catholics? I will not seek out of France,
neither from the quarrel that has been among us these thirty years: and the
living God I take to witness, that no passion makes me to utter that which I
do mind to speak, but even a desire to open the eyes of the blind.

It can not be denied but that the duke of Guise father to the last deceased,
also the last deceased were great warriors, bold, and as valiant as might be,
Lords that accompanied their valor with all humane wisdom, wherein both they
and the Duke of Mayenne always lodged this proposition: That they would not
use our religion any further then the commodity of their affairs did command,
for their own advancement and greatness. I will begin with the father and
his brother the Cardinal of Loraine. So soon as King Henry the second was
dead, seized upon his son the young king Frances, by a title of (...) because
he had married their niece, and withal estranged from his presence the princes
of his blood and officers of the Crown, namely, that wise Constable
Montmorencie, who was in so great favor with the former king his master: from
whom not content with that disgrace, they took the state of great Master,
which he had inioyed ever since the decease of Rene of Sauoy his father in law.
This tyranny was evident, for all the affairs of France passed through the
hands of these two brethren, who abused the kings name and youth at their
pleasures. Many good Frenchmen unable to bear that tyranny, conspired against
them. The King then soiourned sometimes at Chenonceau, sometimes at Ambois. The
whole communalty swarmed thither, insending to banish these our new Masters,
and to present a Supplication to the king for the establishing of a lawful
counsel of the Princes of the blood, and officers of the crown about his
person. I think there was I wot not what of the new religion among (for I
will not in any wise falsify this history. Their mishap was such that they
were discovered by one Desauenelles an advocate, who was of that faction, by
whom the Guises were advertised that the peoples quarrel was against them. The
enterprise thus discovered, the principalles were apprehended at the Castle of
Noise, and the common people upon the hie ways, who had their directions to
meet at Ambois. Now I beseech you understand what wisdom in man's sense
these two brethren used, to maintain themselves in their usurped authority.
Also how in the end God turned al their devises into smoke. Because this
history deserves to be known to al:so soon as these poor men were taken,
they are made to believe that they came with intent to seize upon the kings
person, and to take him prisoner. Their process is by and by made and briefly
finished by a Master of requests. Mazere, Castelnaw, Noize, and Run the
principal enterprisers are beheaded in the market place of Amboise. Renaudy
whom Pardillan slew in the fields, after his death is quartered and made an
example: and of their followers an infinite number, some drowned by heaps,
others hanged over the Castle walls. This first stone thus cast for a
foundation to their building, they considered that this enterprise must
proceed from some higher hand. Also that in such affairs after they had put
in ure the first exemplary punishment against the chiefest offenders, it was
requisite to pardon the rest of the commons, and yet in any wise not to spare
the heads of the greatest and Authors. That if any had cause to mislike the
then government, it was the princes of the blood, to whom this charge
appertained, during the minority of the king, whom a marriage could make no
wiser then his age: and therefore by a brave policy they were wise enough for
propounding their own interest: so that laying down only the honor of God and
the king, after the executions at Amboise, they publish a general pardon to
all the common people that had consented to this conspiracy, whereby no man
should afterward be molested therefore. They create a new guard of French
harquebuziers about the kings person, whose Capitains being at their devotion,
was an ordinary assurance for them to and against all men. Underhand they
gather informations against the heads of this conspiracy, not naming any. They
fortefie the high ways to Ambois and Orleance with men of arms, so to prevent
all new commotions that might spring out of Guyenne, because at that time the
late Lord prince of Conde was retired into Bearne with his brother the king of
Navarre, who were the men against whom they laid all their snares. At
Fountain-bel-eau they procure the creation of 17. new knights of the order of
saint Michael, therein violating all ancient order, for before they never
created above one or two at the most at once, and that very seldom, and with
great consideration. But these were so many bound unto them, and props for
their tyranny in time to come. Thence they lead the king to Paris, where they
do cause him to take assurance of fidelity of the provost of Merchants and
Sheriffs of the town to himself. Al these preparatiues thus made, they bring
him to Orleance, where they decree upon commandments throughout all France
for the assembly of the estates, as knowing very well that the deputies do
never yield but where force and authority commands them, albeit men be
persuaded that the same is the upholding of the peoples liberty. Withal they
dispatch many missiues in the kings name to the king of Navarre, the Prince of
Conde, the Constable, and the Admiral, to come to him to Orleance, pretending
these commandments upon his desire that they should be assistant to this
assembly. Every wise man judged that there was some notable tragedis to be
played at the costs of these poor lords, for the perpetual establishment of
the house of Guise. The Constable having some inkling, made but slow haste.
The king of Navarre, and the lord prince after many reiterated commandments
arrived at the town of Poytiers, where they had the first advertisement of the
kings discontentme^t against them, but withal at the same instant, they were
so invested by the Marshall of Lermes with two companies of men of arms, that
they could not possibly return back again. At their coming to Orleance the
lord prince was committed to safe custody, and certain Judges were expressly
sent for from Paris to frame his indictment. As for the king of Navarre, they
searched so narrowly into his actions, that there was no great difference
between Guard and Regard. The prince perceiving that it was a match set in
hand by the Lorraines for his destruction under the borrowed name of the king,
began to linger matters, craved distribution of counsel: alleged, that he
being a prince of the blood, was not to be judged by Commissioners, but by the
whole body of a Court of Parliament. But they spurred him so near, that the
defenses which he propounded were taken for an affected contumacie. In the
mean time the deputies came in apace, which was so provided, to the end, that
after the indictment had bin fully framed, this poor prince, who had erred in
nothing, but in neglecting to withstand their tyranny, might have bin condemned
to death, not only by a Parliament, that should have been brought for the
nonce, but also by the three estates of France. This once obtained, I wot not
what should have become of the king of Navarre, whom at that time all men so
forsook, that such as in heart were his humble and affectionat servants, durst
not so much as by a wink of the eye be acknowne thereof. Was there ever
enterprise guided with more worldly wisdom then this? Let us therefore see
the end. Even when they were ready to smite, and that to that effect they were
about to remove the king out of that town to Chenonceau, to the end he being
absent, the said L. prince might have no recourse to his mercy: The king booted
and spurred, and ready to take horse, began to find himself ill at ease,
and to be short, died within less then 4. days. Then, even in the twinkling
of an eye, all the purposes of these two brethren were turned to nothing. The
bondmen to the court gave them over and drew to the K. of Navarre. Him did the
estates pronounce the kings lieutenant general over all France, during the
minority of king Charles the 9. Also the L. prince, plainetife in a declaration
of innocence, by a decree of Parliament in scarlet robes, obtains his full
demand. All that the two brethren had as yet compassed were state blows, but
this was a masters blow. I speak of that master who laugheth those to
scorn, that with man's wisdom make a scorn of him. For had they not, even
with holberds fetched the king of Navarre, every man judges, that considering
his nature, he would hardly have come unto the court, or if he had come, it
would have bin with such delays, that in the mean time the others might very
easly have continued their authority about the Q. mother, a foreign princess,
who without the assistance of the princes of the blood had had no great power
to withstand them. Now will you ask me what correspondence this example has
with the state catholic whom I detest? Very great: for I aduow, and aduowing
am not deceived, that neither of these two brethren troubled his head with any
other religion, then such as they thought might serve to the advancement and
progress of the greatness of their famely. For they were the first that
counseled king Henry the second to become protector of the Dutch Nation, that
is, of the Germans religion against Charles the fifth, and forced the parliament
to verefie this brave title. This that I say is no fable hatched with my quil:
for there is none that lived in those days but knew it, neither concealed they
it, but accounted it as a matter that they thought might turn to their honor.
If these our Masters had bin so zealous to the Romish church, as since they
would have made us believe, would they have justified this journey into
Germany, which was the first ruin of our France? Would they not rather have
gainesaide it, by humble Supplications, declaring unto the king, that such a
protection was formally as they thought repugnant to the honor of God and his
Church. But they maintained the contrary as weening so both to purchase their
masters favor, and withal to benefit themselves about him, as indeed they
did. For the Duke of Guise the father never purchased so much honor as in the
Town of Metz when he withstoode the fiege against the Emperor Charles the
fifth.

This is the reason that I have noted this example against all Macheuels
scholars (I will not believe you to be any) who care not what the kings
religion be, so he may content his people. I will yet stay upon the same
example: for how long soever I make this discourse, yet will it be but too
brief to root out this wretched opinion. It is a principle of estate, that
you never suffer a Prince your neighbor to grow too mighty: but if your self
be not strong enough to withstand him, you must enter league with other
princes and commonwealths weaker then your self. A principle very familiar
with the princes of Italy, which they have bin ready enough to put in practice,
all and every time that we have passed the Mounts for the recovery of the state
of Naples or Millaine. In those days did we see the Emperor Charles the fifth
grow mighty by the overthrow of all the protestant princes, whom he had
discomfited in a pitched field, and had taken prisoners the D. of Saxony, and
the Lantgraue of Hesse. Hereupon had they recourse to our K. and put themselves
into his protection. He took their quarrel in hand, to the end to stop the
course of the Emperors purposes, albeit against all policy and worldly
reason. That he that made profession of the catholic religion, should support
heretical subjects (as they were then termed) against their sovereign Lord,
who warred upon them only in hatred of their new religion. In this voyage al
things smiled upon us: for so soon as the emperor had intelligence that the
king was in arms to pass over the Rhine, he pacified all things with his
subjects and granted them the Interim, so that the only sound of our coming
made them obtain whatsoever they demanded, and at our return from that
voyage we gave for our badge the imperial towns of Metz, Thoule, and Verdare.
But has this passed unpunished? The penance for this sin was not inflicted
during the life of Henry the second, but of his children. As also we read of
many like punishments in the history of the Kings in the old Testament. Thou
Catholic king (says this great god) have maintained the German Protestants,
to the increase of their opinions, so to keep down thy corronal, but I will
make thine offspring to feel how I am offended herewith: For I will chastise
them with the same rods, and suffer like division to take hold of thy
kingdom. I will raise up some of thy own that shall harry thee upon the same
argument, and withal call in the Protestants to their succor, in revenge of
that succor that you meant to give them, whereof shall at length ensue the
desolation of your estate. Do you not think it to be a mere punishment of God
which took root in this voyage into Germany? For my part I do not doubt it.
The ancient heathen said that the gods had feet of wool. and arms of iron,
thereby to teach us, that they were slow to vengeance, but when they began,
they recompensed that slacknesse with wonderful rigor. Now will I come to the
Duke of Guise last deceased.

Was there ever L. better beloved among the people? Even beloved, I say,
because he entitled himself Protector general of our religion against the
heretics* and withal, that there must be no reconcilement with them. A
proposition with him in such recommendation, that every man of a contrary
opinion was straight accursed, yet was he always of this advice? No: for in
the year 1572. after he had procured the death of his capital ennemy the
Admiral, his house was a sanctuary to a number of Huguenotes, even unto the
lords of Gamach, Acier, and the vicount of Borniquet principalles of the other
party: yet at that time were they all Amalekites: for proclamation by sound of
trumpet and common cry was made throughout all the quarters of Paris, not to
save or pardon any Huguenot without exception.

Let us now come to the D. of Mayenne. When the late king sent him to retire
into his obedience al Daulphine, most of whose towns the Huguenots possessed,
was he so religious as to enter no composition with them? He suffered them to
live in peace of their consciences, whereupon without blows they rendered al
their towns. Also so long as he was in Daulphine his court was fuller of
Huguenot Gentlemen then of Catholics. How comes it that in self souls
should harbor two so contrary opinions? So long forsooth as their ambition was
brideled under the kings obedience, they thought themselves most happy in
having many friends and servants of each religion. But after they had cast off
that, they imagined, that for the attaining in time to their last point, it was
requisite, not only to have weapons at hand, but even never to be diseazed of
them. Otherwise, having bin mighty in comma^ding over armies, in their opinion
they should afterward have bin brought down, when by means of peace they might
have bin returned to their own houses. And to say the truth, it is the very
counsel of Caesar, whereby in the end he became sovereign over the state of
Rome. Now let us consider, I pray you, the success of their purposes: for you
shall find, that all that they did to the confusion of the king of Navarre
(give me leave, I pray you, so to call him when I speak of those days) turned
to his advancement.

They armed themselves against him with the power of the French king, with the
king of Spaines double pis^olets, with the censures of the court of Rome, and
with the peoples favor: besides, they had all the preachers, the trumpets of
their hypocritical passions at their back. Since the years 1586. they brought
five armies into the field, to the end, quite to have cut down the king of
Navarre, three in Guyen and Poictow, and two in Auergne and Daulphine. In the
year 1587. they sent against him the D. of Ioieuse with a brave choice of
Nobility, and a great troop both of horsemen and footmen, with express
commandment to set upon him, at whatsoever price. In the year 1588. all
things wretchedly smiled upon the duke of Guise: he became Master of Paris
without any blows: causes his king to fly shamefully away: establishes what
policy he list, changes all the ancient captains of the town, to the end, to
be assured of the new: purchases abolition at the kings hand under the name of
union for all that is past: adioyneth to his estate of great Master, the
function of lieutenaunt general to the king in matters of arms. The estates
being holden at Bloys, in the face of all the world he commands the deputies,
and commanding, he seeks by all sorts of purchase to denounce the king of
Navarre incapable of the crown. Was there ever high enterprise guided with
greater sense then this? What was the Catastrophe? All these five armies
returned with shame from whence they came. The king of Navarre shieldeth the
blows, as a man should say, with a rebated sword. The greatest honor that the
D. of Mayenne got was when he took Castillon that belonged to his wife, where
he spent France 60000. crowns, and lay six weeks: a town which the Huguenots
afterward recovered with ladders that cost them not six franks. The D. of
Ioyeuse was overthrown in set battle at Coutraz. The D. of Guise upon the
king of Nauarres birth day slain in the midst of the estates without any
consent of the said king or his partakers. The death of him and of his brother
the Cardinal converted all the common malice against the late king. The Towns
rebelled against him, and chose the D. of Mayen to be their lieutenant general
over the royal estate and crown of France. In this new rage of the people he
wanted no money, and so consequently no men. The late king was forced to call
unto his aid the king of N^. who came in. Being arrived, he delivers him
together with the City of Toures, which is at this day the repair of the
sovereign courts of France. For at the only sound of his approach, the
ennemy who with a great Rhodomontade or brag had won a suburb, retired the
same night that they won it, having scarce leisure to take breath. Then is the
king slain by a Monk, which was one cheese piece of service of the holy
union: the preachers in their pulpits exclaimed that that Prince was of no
religion: Oh very God, if they thought him such a one (this I speak by the
way) why did they choose a monk to execute so wretched a purpose, unless they
were assured that under that habit, the murderer might without difficulty have
access to this poor princes closot? They then imagined that by this
unexpected death all the affairs of the realm would change countenance,
also that the king of Na. upon hatred to his religion should be abandoned of al
men: howbeit against this cursed counsel GOD otherwise provided: for the
valiant blood of the French Nobility did wholly vow it self to our natural
and lawful king. And as by the death of the D. of Guise all the leaguers gave
over their quarrel against these of the new religion, to set themselves against
their king, so upon this second murder executed on the person of our late king
all the French Nobility, forgetting their malice against the same religion,
aimed only at revenge of this death against the Leaguers: having nevertheless
first sworn the king to enter into our religion, if once he were well
instructed therein.

Thus our king by two deaths whereto he never consented, the one, of his
mortal enemy, the other, of his greatest friend, attained the Crown, and at a
time appointed came before the head city of France (which had professed
greatest hatred against him) environed with all the Princes of the blood,
officers of the crown, and as brave an army as has of late been seen in
France. Whom is he now to thank for so many blessings? First God only, next
his enemies, whom God made the principal instruments for all that is aforesaid,
as being more beholding to them then ever he was to all his servants and
friends: for, had they without wakening his weapons by anticipation of time,
suffered him to have lived close and quiet (as he did) in an out-corner of
France, at the length both his mind and weapons had been ouergrowen with
rust: but they forced him to stand upon his defense, whereby at one instant of
an apprentise they made him a persite master. He who otherwise had been
undone, had not his enemies sought his undoing: for as well his religion, as
the small knowledge that we had had of his manners, would not easily have
suffered us to favor him after the late kings decease. But he has this gift,
that so soon as we do but smell him, he makes every one to love, honor, and
regard him, yea even his very enemies. Moreover, where could he have found the
passages over the rivers open to have come to Paris? Where should he have found
such an army? To be short, he is indebted both of his crown and forces to
those who by all worldly policies sought to bring him into misery. Yea, he is
so indebted albeit he brought no more with him but a steadfast hope that he has
in his great God. I do here omit his victory at Diepe: his entry into the
suburbs of Paris which does counteruaile the best Town in France, where God,
to the end, even to lead him by the hand, dispersed a thick mist to blind
the Paristans eyes. I will also leave his Conquestes which after this he
obtained in the midst of winter in the Countries of Vendosme, Mayenne, and
almost all Normandy: his two victories that he had in one day, at Yurie and in
Auuergne: the shameful retraict of the D. of Parma: his glorious recovery of
Corbeil with the turning of a hand, where this great beater down of walls had
soiourned five weeks with eighteen canons before he could take it: and
finally, that which of late memory chanced miraculously in the town of S.
Denis: for I have not undertaken this, to trace you an history. To what then is
all this? for now it is time for me to end this argument. Peradventure to turn
the king from abandoning his religion, wherein he has received so many favors
at Gods hand? I would not wish you so think, for I have done it only to show
to al Macheuelists, that God rather assisteth princes, of whatsoever christian
profession, when in all their adversities they call upon him with their whole
hearts, and repose their whole confidence in him, then such as saining
themselves to be Catholics, have no religion in their souls, and do refer
their stay to the policy that they gather out of the visard of religion. Let
us therefore blot out of our papers that that you seek to teach the king: that
is, that so long as he was simply king of Navarre he might use the new
religion, but being king of France, he must play an other part; as if his soul
that was then king of Navarre were other then his that is now king of France.
Let us not therefore desire him to become a Catholic by groping, and march
only in darkness.

Now do I come to my catholic in religion, such a one as I wish our king to
be. Now that he may so be, I think there be three things requisite: first to
make him capable: next to pour forth our prayers to GOD for that end: and
lastly, that we be penitent. To make him capable, he must of necessity be
instructed: I say instructed, not by Ministers, as you do falsely presuppose he
will, but by a general or national counsel. I tell you again, he must, for
so have we agreed in the midst of his army, and we may not shrincke from our
consent, since it is evident that the fault is not in him that he performs not
his promise. Are you either wiser or honester then all these great princes and
lords that were of that opinion, that now you should propound an other? Yea,
admit we had not consented, yet were it his part to feel him self, and not
finding himself strong enough to embrace it without being taught, our petition
were wretched and wicked if we should entreat him to the conerary. Yet think
not that I would wish this instruction to consist only in words, our Bishops,
Abbots, and other prelates of the church must bring example. Our L. Jesus
Christ, to win the Jews hearts, began first by well doing, and afterward he
taught. The first point requisite in an advocate to persuade his Judges, is
honesty: the rest of his art is but eloquence, and the more he use it, the
more wary the judge is, specially if he mistrust the speaker. Therefore to
persuade our K. let us join the word and the effect. Why, I pray you, have we
not prepared him matter sufficient to desire to be instructed? There was never
church (with great grief I must say it) more rent then ours: I will not speak
of the abuses. A matter that almost no religion can dispense withal, the
reason, because no religion can be exercised without outward ceremonies to make
the peoples hearts intentive. And it is very difficult, yea, even impossible,
but in succession of time there will be mixed among the ceremonies I wot not
what of man, and so consequently, evil customs. I speak not therefore of
abuses, one of the quarrels of our new comers: but I speak of the impiety
that harbored in our Church, so soon as the name of League was brought in. I
will not tell you, that abandoning the gospel she would needs prevail by
arms, which I may well say by the way is an heresy. Our Lord Jesus Christ,
after whose pattern we are to frame all our actions, his Apostles and
Disciples, and after them the martyrs did never establish our Church by this
means. They planted our religion by preching and exhortations, and with their
blood sealed the christian faith in the magistrates hands: out of the fountain
whereof sprang a sea of true Christians which ouerflowed the whole earth.
Afterward, when we, taking our selves to be more wise, would needs extend our
religion by arms in our voyages over the sea, we thereby reaped no other
fruit, but that the East in the end was made the toombe both of us and our
religion. This article do I purposely pass over, as being a fault which at
this day is accounted no fault. Let us come to that which within these two
years only has passed before our faces. Shall I not call this impiety, that a
college of Sorbonne abusing the name of the holy ghost, shall advise the simple
people to arm themselves against their king? shall I not call it impiety, that
never expecting the popes decree, whereto these our Masters referred
themselves, the next day after such advise they proclaimed wars all over?
shall I not call it impiety, that wretchedlie murdered their king, and having
no other ministers of their slaughter but monks? shall I not call it impiety
that they have canonized the wretched Iacobin? shall I not call it impiety
(pardon me O good God though I presume to smite even at the head) that in the
great consistory of Rome Pope Sirtus compared that wretches entry into the
kings cabine to the coming of the Angel Gabriel, when he announced to the
virgin the future mystery of the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ? I will not
affirm that he so did, but sure I am, that such his Oration was printed in
Paris and flies all over France, importing more erroneous propositions then
this. Our king is wise, and has seen all these things: for why should not
he have seen them, since the Leaguers have ambitiously sought to make them
their trophee? After all this has he not reason to desire to be instructed in
our religion, before he come into our Church? I think him the honester man for
desiring it, and if he shall do otherwise I would say he has no soul.

Where I set down that he ought to be instructed, yet is not that enough, for
withal we are to address our prayers and supplications to God, not to the
king. When I desire to obtain some gift of the king, I deliver him my
petition: but in this case, it depends upon Gods grace, not upon his. Him
therefore we must beseech to touch our kings heart. Among so many thousand
persons as be in France, we need not past a dozen good and devout souls to
obtain our desires. S. Aug. in his youth was greatly infected with heresy.
S. Cyprian before he became a Christian doated greatly in the love of a
discreet christian lady, yea, he so doated, that to the end to seduce her he
learned tha Art Magic. S. Monique S. Augustins mother never entreated her
son to give over his heresy, for it had bin lost labor, because the same is
a leprosy of the soul which is not healed by man's hand. But she directed her
prayers to God, as did also the other lady for S. Cyprian. Their prayers were
heard with such advantage that afterward these two persons grew to be two of
the greatest doctors of our Church. Let us use the like, and I doubt not but
the K. will be on our side, considering how well he is borne. He commends
himself to the prayers of our church, as taking the prayers, as I suppose, of
all good men of either religion to be of great force with God, as already he
has in part felt the effects. For the same day that he obtained the two great
victories in two several parts of France, the one at Yurie, the other in
Auuergne, there was a general procession in Toures, wherein all the
inhabitants were present, even the little children, who in their virgin-like
devotion cried, God save the king round about the town. And while we were yet
in our prayers, the king grew to handie strokes, and his miraculous victory
wherein he was chiefly assisted by the catholic nobility continued so long as
the procession lasted. Our prayers were the prayers of Moses when the children
of Israel fought, and his victory was the victory of Aaron. Think you he
marked not this chase? Peradventure in heart he is the same that we desire. The
most catholic king that ever we had in France, and not only a founder of an
infinite number of Churches and Hospitals, but also a wonderful reformer of the
abuses in those days in our religion was S. Lewis. Think not then that after
so many reuolutions of years, God has reserved the crown of France to this
great and noble race of Burbon (the last sprig of this holy stock) but only
to the end to renew the same piety wherewith that great king was possessed.

It is therefore requisite that toward this work, we not only address our
prayers to heaven, but also that withal we bring repentance. Why? shall we be so
unwise, as to imagine that God is not displeased with our Church for so many
the impieties by me before rehearsed, whereof the priests and monks have been
the chief Ministers. And who knows whether in revenge of the same he has
sent us a king of a contrary religion to ours? Were it not a just justice of
God, and such a one as a certain French spirit durst promise to himself in
this Lattin Epigramme.

Henricus monachi manu periuit,
Qui consortia, cellulasque fratrum,
Totus ex animo suo petebat,
Et quem vel monachum putes fuisse:
O caedem miseram, impiam, nefandam!
Regno nunc lacero potitur alter
Henricus, monachis acerbus olim,
Rex purus sceleris, bonique custos,
Infandae necis acer vltor idem.
Quid mors haec tibi parturit requiris
Excors Gallia, pacis omnis expers?
Te nisi immeritam Deus iuuabit,
Poenas perfidiae lues cruentae.
Occidit monachus pium monarcham,
Occidet monachos pius monarcha.
Who ever made this hold epigram, spoke not as one that knew that the K. was
willing to entertain all monasteries and religious houses in their ancient
freedoms and liberties, as he has plainly showed in all the places where he
has passed, but as he that feared least a greater King then he, being wroth at
the horrible and abominable murder of the King, committed by a monk, would be
reue^ged upon the rest. For this is a case wherein the good do sometimes suffer
for the bad. None is hurt but by himself: God reuengeth himself by his
enemies. Why say by his enemies? Nay he will be revenged of us by our selves.
Let us therefore use the same remedy wherewith good Jeremy counseled the
children of Israel to appease the wrath of God. We may well preach unto the K.
we may instruct him in our religion, we may to that end furnish him of great
divines. All this will nothing advance our affairs. These are but plasters
laid upon the wound to supple it, but they cannot take away the cause of evil,
that proceeds of our impieties that cannot be vncommitted, albeit we thought
to bury the remembrance of them with God by public repentance of us all. I do
expressly say, of us all, because I wish him that thinks himself innocent in
this respect, may also be a party as well as he that has consented thereto.
Our church is composed both of good and bad, and when the body of a communalty
does transgres, as we have done in all that has bin done in France, every one
by the rigor of the law is punishable. The wicked have entangled the good: if
therefore we do otherwise, albeit God yields to our prayers, yet in the end
it will turn to our confusion by some mean, to us unknown. One familiar
example bred in the calamity of this time, I will set before you. There was
never king that fought with so much religion and discretion against the new
religion, as did the late king. The gate of the government of the provinces
was shut against the professors thereof: None of them was admitted to his order
of knighthoode of the holy ghost: none into the functions of judgment or
treasury: for all comfort they lived in some quiet in their own houses, which
was a very war to conquer without weapons those whom we see to be of a
contrary religion to ours. Thus by a wise discourse he chastised the Huguenot,
or pretended reformed (term him as you list) who by this means could not be
provoked to any new rebellion, and yet in his family found the contrary
effects of that he most desired: for there is nothing that the great Lords
of France so much desire, as to be near their king, neither is there any thing
that so moves the minds of the commons, as a desire to attain to offices. It
is a sickness of the mind that destroys the French man. So soon as a
merchant or citizen has gathered any reasonable stock of money, he longs
after nothing so much as to employ it in the purchase of some office of justice
or treasure for his child: so that this new religion in the judgment of the
wisest subverted it self: and peradventure such as for shame persisted in it,
because they would not seem unconstant, were no whit sorry to see their
children taught in our Schools, and so consequently in the discipline of our
religion. By these means all things grew among us from bad to good, and from
good to better. The plowman followed his oxen, the artificer his trade, the
merchant his traffike, the advocate and proctor their practice, every one in
his calling with some consent, the citizen enjoyed his renenues, the magistrate
his fees, preheminences, and honors, the catholic exercised his religion
without disturbance throughout all France, the ^uguenot lived sequestered from
among us in some corner of the realm without commotion, or at the least, so as
he made no semblant of any. All this could not the Parisian be content with: he
longed for nothing but to see the auntients wauing all over France upon a vain
conceit to overcome religion with temporal weapons only, which God always
misliked. All his desires tended but to that end: God heard his request, but to
his condemnation. Thus we see France covered with men of arms. Thus we see a
general desolation of the estate: and in lieu of rooting out heresy, we do
thus see atheism lodged in the midst of us. The Parisian longed after
nothing so much as the death of the late king, at whatsoever price. A frantike
revenge that he norished in his bowels was his only god. Upon this opinion he
procured processions in his shirt: he received (as he supposed) his creator
every Sunday: upon the festival days he remained at service from morning till
night, not to the end to appease Gods wrath, but to provoke him against the
king and his partakers, as being at that time possessed of no other religion
but passion, not passion of Jesus Christ, but his own. God yet once again
hears him: the K. is slain: a wicked monk is for the same placed in the
calendar of Martyrs, and for a testimony of their fury, these bedlems do wear
the green scarffe over their shoulders. But what fruit do they reap thereby?
This death set the crown upon this our kings head, who troubles their brains
more then the deceased, first, as being of another religion the^ theirs, next,
in that he is a prince, ready upon occasion, warlike, valiant, and one who in
four months has done more feats of arms then the late king, considering
his nature which was slow, and better disposed to discourse then to execution,
could have performed in four years. Again, they have wished that our king
might not take them, who only took care to preserve them, in taking them as
their king and a true Frenchman. They call to their succor the Spaniard, an
ancient enemy to France, who raises the siege, and in preserving them has
utterly lost them. Paris being at this day the carcass of a town governed, or
rather devoured by some score of rascalles, whose chiefest callings before were
but clarks of the rolls, notaries, commissaries, proctours in the parliament,
chatelet, and clergy courts. What? do you not think them to be gods pastimes,
who in granting them their demandes, does at this day make them bear the
sharpest and most violent punishment for their faults that ever were spoken of?
For my part, albeit I wish not the destruction of that miserable town, which
can not come to pass but that as the hail from heaven it will light upon the
good as the bad together, yet did I to my great grief steadfastly perceive,
that as the green scarffe that the Parisians put on for the death of the late
king, was a most assured testimony of their accursed folly, so the red which
since they borrowed from the Spanish Marrane is a most certain prognostication
of the bloody punishment that God keeps in store for them.

Let us therefore direct our vows and prayers to God, without dissimulation or
hypocrisy, neither let us intermeddle any worldly matters, nor let us imagine
that GOD will be charmed with words. He is not won with our mouths, but with
our hearts, wherein he has established the true seat of our devotions: the
offenses of the Ministers of our Church have attained their last period, let us
therefore earnestly and in equal balance purge them. Let us wrap our heads in
sackeloth, our bodies in hair, and our hearts in contrition, and with tears
cry unto God, that he will vouchsafe to forget all the offenses that I do
abhor to remember: let that great K. and prophet David be our guide, whom
God vouchsafed to give us for an example of one of the greatest sinners among
all the kings of Israel, as also for one of the greatest penitents, one, who
upon his repentance obtained all his petitions at Gods hands. When we shall
take the same course, God who is our true father, will embrace our prayers, and
make our king such a one as we desire.

It is therefore in thy sight that I do now humble my self: it is thou (O
Lord) who with all my heart I call upon to be our help: I know the
transgressions that against thy Majesty we have committed even from the highest
to the lowest both generally and particularly, there is none of us that can
exempt himself. If thou list to poize our cause in the balance of thy justice,
who dare appear in thy sight? Thou, I say, who by thy especial titles have
reserved vengeance to thy self: but (O Lord) I know also that thou art the GOD
of mercy. We present our selves before thy face, not to be justified, but in
our shirts bringing a pardon, which it may please thee of thy holy grace to
allow of. Thy word is true. Thou have said: If in Sodom and Gomorrha there
were but ten good men, the rest of the wicked should for their sakes have no
harm. Alas, are there not an infinite number of thy faithful servants that
never consented to all these impieties, who notwithstanding at this day do
bear the penance of other men's wickedness, driven out of their houses,
deprived of the view of their wives whom thou have commanded us to cleave unto,
banished from the presence of their parents and children, and whatsoever they
love best? Even they that have been the authors of these calamities, do they
not suffer, if not penance, yet at the least most grievous punishment for their
offenses? These deaths, these pouerties, these extraordinary sicknesses, this
famine, this general ruin of Paris, this second desolation of Jerusalem, let
them be (O Lord God, let them be accounted as penance in thy sight. Albeit
there be some among us most wickedly hardened in their fellonies, yet be there
also many in the Town, who in their souls do weep, howl, and lament for all
that is past. Grant O good God, that they may be those ten whom thou desiredst
to find in Sodom, and having now with thy rods chastized us in our bodies
and goods, suffer not our souls to be lost. We all are thy lawful and
natural children through the regeneration of the holy Sacrament of Baptism:
and we do believe, that through thy passion we be inheritours of thy Paradise.
Thou (O Lord) who of a heavy and great lump did in the beginning of the
world bring all things into good order, do exercise the same liberality over
thy Church. After this miserable Chaos that have disordered all the affairs of
thy religion, reunite us all under the banner of thy Church: suffer not the
devil the father of division to separate the head from the members, vouchsafe
to illuminate our king with the beams of thy holy spirit, so to reduce him
into thy catholic apostolic and Romish Church, to the end that to the honor
and exaltation of thy holy name, every man may acknowledge thee to be the
Father of concord and peace. O most eternal goodness, this we do most humbly
beseech thee, as taking this to be thy will, whereto we will refer al our
Prayers and Supplications.

FINIS.

