Reasons why the Bill against the Customary Tenth of Lead Oar gotten within
the County of Darby should not pass in the Honorable House of Commons.
THe maine Reasons suggested by the Minors for the passing of this Bill, is,
That the paying of this Customary Duty of the Tyth or Tenth of Lea(...) Oar,
washed and cleansed from earth and Rubbish, being allowed only one penny for
the washing of every tenth Dish or Measure, will discourage the Minors from
working, and that this Duty is but lately exacted from the poorer sort of
Minors.

Both these Suggestions are merely untrue, as by the Reasons following may
appear.
1. FIrst this is an ancient customary Duty, and has time out of mind been
paid in the high Peake and all other places where Lead Oar has been gotten
in that County to the several Ministers and Proprietors in right of their
Churches, as may appear by Deeds without Date, ancient Acc^unts and Leases, in
the several Reigns of E. 2. E. 3. R. 2. H. 6. E. 4. H. 7. H. 8. E. 6. and
since by depositions of witnesses until this time.

2. The Ministers and Proprietors of the said Customary Tithe, or Duty of Lead
Oar in that Country have paid and do pay to his Majesty first Fruits and
other Duties accordingly, for this Customary Duty of Tithe Oar, in particular,
as by their several compositions in the first Fruits Office shall appear.

3. The King has always had and has an ancient Officer over the Mine, called
a Barre-Maister, whose Office amongst other things is to see this (...)uty
paid, as appears by Record in the Duchy.

4. Of late time some Minors being encouraged by men of great power, for their
own particular interest have denied to pay this ancient Duty.

5. Upon which denial a Bill was exhibited into the Exchequer Chamber for a
Proprietor of this Duty, and a Decree thereupon obtained upon f^ll Hearing
against the said Minors, and another Bill was exhibited into the Court of Wards
in right of a Ward, Farmer to the Deane and Chapter (...) Lichfield, where the
Possession of this Duty was established likewise by Iniunction of that Court
against the Minors.

6. The Minors upon the same pretense which they now allege in this Bill in
Parliament obtained Order at the Counsel Table to retain the said Cause
there, and to stay all further proceedings at Law: And their Lordships after
several Hearings at the Council Table, referred this Cause to a Trial at the
Common Pleas Bar, which accordingly was had, and after full and long Evidence
given of both Parties, the Verdict passed against the Minors in Easter Term,
1620.

7 The Minors not yet satisfied obtained of their Lordships to have a second
Trial at the same Bar of the Court of Common Pleas, which also was had, and
after full and long evidence again given of both Parties, another Verdict
passed against the Minors for the Proprietor of the said customary Duty, in
Michaelmas Term, 1620.

8. His Majesty then being petitioned in this Cause, referred the consideration
of it to the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Right Honorable the Lord President of the Council, who after full
Examination of all former proceedings had in this Cause in July 1621. certified
his Majesty that they thought fit that the said Tithe or customary Tenth of
Lead Oar should be established according to the said (...)woe Trials at Law,
and the said Decree had in the Exchequer.

9. His Majesty again referring the whole Business concerning the Tyth or
customary Tenth of Lead Oar unto the Council Table: their Lordships upon due
consideration taken of all former proceedings in the Cause, did by their Order
of the 5. of October 1621. clearly dismiss and discharge the whole Cause
concerning the said Tithe or Tenth of Lead Oar, from the Board, and left it to
the full fruition and benefit of the Law, with this Direction, that because the
Proprietors and Owners of the said Tithe or Tenth had received loss by being
stayed at the Board upon pretense from the Minors of some point of State which
their Lordships there declared to be otherwise. Therefore their Lordships in an
Honorable respect of them the said Ministers and Proprietors, did wish that
they might have all the speed and expedition that the Law in Justice might
afford them, as by the said Order may appear.

10. Since which dismission two several Bills were exhibited into the Chancery
touching the right of the said Tithe or Tenth of Lead Ore; whereupon after
examination of Witnesses and Publication of the Depositions, and other due
proceedings, two several Decrees were made in the said Court against the
Minors, the one in Michaelmas Term, 1622. and the other in Michaelmas Term
last past.

11. During the Dependancie and continuance of all which Suites and
contentions, the Minors in the Parishes where, and when great men meddled not,
did all the time of these Suits, and still do constantly pay the said Tithe or
Tenth of Lead Ore.

12. The Lords of the Soil and their Farmours have two several Duties from
the Minors, the Cope which in some places is four pence, and in others six
pence for every Load, and the Lot which is every thirteenth Dish, for which the
Lords are to allow the Minors Wood for their Groves, or holes where they get
their Oar, as by the custom of the Mine appears, which allowance the Lords
of the Soil of late have refused to make the Minors, in recompense of which
loss they are ready to further the Suit against the Ministers and Propriators
of the Tithe or Tenth.

By all these proceedings it appears that in point of Law the Title is cleared
against the Minors in Law, by the two Verdicts: in point of equity it is
likewise clear against them, by the several Decrees in Courts of equity, one
in the Exchequer Chamber and two in the Chancery, and for matter of State, it
is also cleared by the Order and proceedings of the Council Table. Therefore
this being the Inheritance of the said Ministers and Proprietors; and having in
a manner passed all the Courts of Justice at Westminster and the Council
Board, they hope this Honorable House will not disinherite them.

All the Premises the Ministers and Proprietors of the said Tithe or Tenth of
Lead Oar do auerre to be true upon their House, and are ready prepared to
prove the same by the several Records and proofs by them alleged.


