Answers to certain Novations desired by some to be embraced by the reformed
Church: Some defend one part, others another part of these novations: In this
treatise their chief objections are turned into Questions.

Luke 9. verse 26. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him
shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his glory, etc.

printer's device of Cornelis Lodewijcksz van der Plasse HET HUYS OP EVEN
STEENROTZ GHEGRONT SCHAEDT GEEN PLASREGEN OP STARCKEN WINT


The Table.
CHAP. 1. Against usurping privy meeting and night meetings. Chap. 2. Some
forbid masters of families to interpret any Scriptures to their domestics.
Chap. 3. Some forbid all set forms of prayer. Chap. 4. Some forbid read
prayers. Chap. 5. Some interrapt Gods worship, reading lines at the singing of
psalms. Chap. 6. Some never sing the words, Glory to the Father, etc. Others
sing them at all times. Chap. 7. Some after divine service bless the people in
a legal manner. Chap. 8. Others reject presbyteriall government. Chap. 9. The
baptism of children before their years of discretion forbidden. Chap. 10. They
deny that Ministers admitted by bishops arc lawfully called. Chap. 11. Some
forbid to converse or serve God, where infidels or ignorant people are present.
Chap. 12. They forbid preachers to read the works of learned men, for
understanding Gods word. Chap. 13. Publict reading of Scriptures, without
interpretation, forbidden. Chap. 14. The office of Readers dissallowed by some.
Chap. 15. They forbid private prayers of preachers in the pulpit, before
publict service; and they forbid all private prayers of people in Churches.
Chap. 16. The principal opinions of Antinomians or Libertines.
CHAPTER 1. Against usurping privy meetings, for exercising ministerial
duties, pretending mutual edification: as also of night meetings.
Question MAY we not at all times, and in all places convocat people for
mutual edification, not seeking liberty of their Pastors, as did the
apostles and disciples?

Answ. Not only men not called to preach, but also Pastors and Preachers may
not do it. 2. The apostles and disciples might lawfully preach publicly and
privately in all places, without usurpation, for none other had the ministerial
charge but themselves. 3. Preachers law fully called by men first teaching true
doctrine, and afterward they turn apostats or heretics; thereby they loss
the right of a lawful calling, for GOD sends none to teach errors and
heresies, and men have no warrant of GOD to call them. These apostats and
heretics are become usurpers of the places whereunto they were called, and
therefore sound teachers may convocat privy meetings in these paroches without
their warrant, and without usurpation. But it is usurpation to do so in the
paroches of sound teachers. 4. Paul forbad Timothy to lay hands upon any
suddenly and that he should not be partakers of their sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. Women
may not speak publictly, 1 Cor. 14. They may teach younger women privately, Tit.
2.3. and they who admit men untryed, unqualified, and without imposition of
hands, are partakers of all their sins, he resies and abuses, which they bring
into GODS church. 5. The apostles themselves might not preach in any place
uncalled. The Lord forbad them to go to the Gentiles, and to the cities of
Samaria, and bade them go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 10.
But after his resurrection he sent them to all nations, Mat. 28. Paul ( Act.
20) bids Pastors take heed, not to other men's flocks, but over which the
holy Ghost made them overseers. The Spirit suffered not Paul and Timothy to
preach in Bithynia and Asia, but in Macedonia, Act. 16.6. Many pretend private
meetings, but they plead for publict meetings under this name.

Quest. How are they publict?

Ans. In respect of persons, place, and manner of exercise. 1. The persons are
not of one family only, nor two or three of sundry families, meeting
occasionally, but oftimes many families, and persons of diverse families towns
and parishes, etc. their number exceeding sundry parishes. 2. The place though
it be a chamber, or house ordained for private uses, yet they make them publict
houses, appointing them for ordinary publict meetings and publict exercises:
Churches are for no other respects made publict houses. 3. The exercises are
publictin their usage: for they do not every two and two, or two and three, or
three and three confer privately together, but one speaks to all the rest, and
oftimes many speak one after another: So these meetings are more publict then
ours, where only one or two speak publictly.

Quest. Can the privy meetings of two or three usurp the ministerial charge?
Ans. Two or three may usurp over the dignity and office of kings, as really as
two or three thousand, though the usupation of a greater number be more
notable. If they appoint one of their number continually, or every one their
time about to be king over the rest, prescribing and executing laws, and
receiving royal honor and obedience from the rest, not being deputed by the
lawful king to that effect, it is usurpatition. Paul, Romans 13. says, There is
no power but that which is ordained of God: yet without usurpation we may
admonish and counsel one another to do all civil duties. Such usurpation may
be in every jurisdiction of princes, rulers and magistrates, etc. So in the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, if two or three establish an ordinary custom of
preaching, and of doing ministerial duties, whether one alone, or every one
their time about do the charge; they not being deputed, nor warranted by the
ordinary pastor, it is usurpation. In a well ordered city the citizens suffer
none to encroach upon their callings, liberties, and privileges: much less
should such abuses be tollerat in a well ordered church. 2. Pastors may preach
both privately and publictly in their own parishes. If in their infirmity,
absence, or lawful distractions, they employ others in their places, it is a
lawful calling. 3. Men may teach their own families, it is warranted by GOD,
though like Abraham's family, 318. souls dwell together. 4. All other meetings
should be occasional, not hindering family worship, not ordinary publict
worship, nor the duties of servants to their masters, of children to their
parents, and wives to their husbands.

Quest. What meetings are occasional?

Answ. Such as are not of set purpose appointe^d for ordinary ministerial
exercises, but when by the providence of GOD men meet for other occasions,
either civil or ecclesiastical, as 1. when two or three together take
occasion of the publict preachings in the Sabbath, to repeat the things they
have heard: 2. They may edify one another going together unto churches. 3.
Within the churches, before the publict exercises begin, and between
preachings, and when they are ended 4. At the preaching men may stir up one
another unto attendance by example and exhortation: 5. Returning home they may
use conference. 6. Walking or sitting in the fields. 7. Meeting two or three
together at markets or publict places. 8. Eating or drinking together. 9. In
buying or selling together their speeches and purposes should savor of
holiness, and of a godly conversation, and of a good conscience. 10 Laboring
together in a calling, and in all honest exercises 11. Going to wars together,
12. In doubtsome matters enquire at their pastors, or other learned men, 13. At
publict catechizing men may learn, hearing the answers, also the preachers
should cause some rehearse conceived and set forms of prayer, that others may
learn to pray, and schoolmasters should do so to their disciples 14. And by
missive letters, as the Saints did edify one another in the primitive church.
15. And sailing together. 16. Ryding or traveling on journeyes. 17. Meeting at
burials. 18. At extraordinary feasts. 19. At family worship catechize them,
teach them to pray, interpret obscure passages of Scriptures, take an account
what they have heard at publict preachings. If any occasionally come in, he may
hear these exercises. 20. Visiting the sick, the father less, the prisoner,
the afflicted. 21. Visiting friends and acquaintance. 22. By a godly life and
conversation, good example edifieth daily.

Quest. Do not the Scriptures warrant us to meet ordinarily, for ministerial
exercises and mutual edification, as Hebr. 3.12 Exhort one another, while it
is called to day. Heb. 10.25. Let us consider one another, not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, exhorting one
another, etc Pet. 4.10. As every man has received, even so minister the same
one to another. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble
minded, support the weak. Coloss. 3.16. Let the Word of GOD dwell in you
richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another.

Answ. 1. Such places persuade mutual edification, which may sufficiently be
done at the foresaid occasions: but no scripturs do warrant the usurping
meetings: GODS word rather terrifieth from such usurpation and boldness, as is
seen in Vzza, smitten to death for touching the ark, and king Vzzia smitten
with leprosy for offering incense. The earth swallowed up Korab and his
company, which were Levits, for seeking the Priesthood, Numb. 16. The sons of
Scaeva were wounded by one possessed with a devil, for usurping the apostolic
charge: these offices were good, but the persons were not called. Moses sent of
GOD to Pharao, fearing his own weakness, desired the LORD to send another: But
now men, neither sent of GOD, nor fearing their weakness, usurp the charges of
others. 2. In Hebr. 10.25. the apostle forbidding to forsake the assembires,
speaks not of usurping meetings-but of meetings where the apostles and
preachers lawfully called were present, wherein the people exhorted one another
to observe and practice such things as were preached; and the People asked
resolutions of their doubts from the Preachers: As, What shall we do to be
saved? Are they many that shall be saved? How often shall I forgive my brother,
unto seven times? What shall be the signs of thy coming, and of the end of
the world Declare unto us this parable, etc. Math. 18. and 24. Act. 2. etc. yea
of times men did forsake the assemblies where Christ preached.

Qu. God gives not men talents to be hid up, but to be useful to others. Ergo
men should assemble for exercising their gifts.

Answ. 1. Doubtless Korab, and the foresaid usurpers had gifts which they
could make use of, but they had not a calling a. Men wanting a particular
calling, may sufficiently use all their gifts in their general calling, and
Christian conversation, at such occasions as are forementioned. 3. Because some
can govern a kingdom, shall they therefore take to themselves royal
jurisdiction and government. 4. Gifts are not hid up, if men be willing to use
them, as GOD offers occasion: if no occasion be offered, thy ready and
willing intension excuses thee: thy gifts are not idle, if thou gain thine
own soul by them.

Quest. The gifts of every member should redound to the whole mystical body
of Christ, Therefore we should convocat many to be partakers of our gifts.

Answ. A hurt finger disquieteth the whole body: if it be cured the whole
body is eased; so he that does good by one member of CHRIST, does it to all:
yea CHRIST este emeth it done to himself.

Quest. Should we not edify mutually, seeing it is said in Zachary, 8.21.
The inhabitants of one citic shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to
pray before the Lord of Hosts, and I will go also, etc.

Answ. Are these either private or usurping meetings, when they go openly to
worship in the temple, as GODS people did yearly at the three great feasts: So
do the people of sundry towns in diverse kingdoms go together into one
church. 2. Is mutual edification hindered, when thou art forbidden to do it
in an usurping way, having lawful occasion beside: you may thus say, We
hinder you to live, because we forbid you to live on roberie and thift, having
sufficient lawful means beside.

Of night Meetings.
Quest. MAY we not meet for mutual edification in the night time, seeing the
Apostles practiced it. Act. 12. When Peter came to the house of Marie, and Act.
20. Paul preached until midnight.

Answ. Usurping meetings are neither lawful day nor might. 2. In time of
persecution, and when Gods church was not in a settled estate, the Apostles and
Disciples might lawfully meet privily and publictly, both day and night,
without usurpation, for none had the charges but themselves. At that time it
was extraordinary that people heard any preaching at all; therefore they spent
both the day and the night in hearing, not knowing of the like occasion again.
Paul preached never so long at Troas before nor after, and he departed on the
morrow. The people conveened occasionally at the house of Marie, because of the
present persecution, to exhort one another unto courage and constancy, and to
pray for the deliverance of Peter, and other persecuted Saints. 3. You have
daily occasions of publict preaching, Varitas non quierit angulos, the Truth
and the Professors thereof seek not to be employed in corners and secret
places, if they can find commodious publict places, though persecution may
chasse them unto secret places: But you affect secret places, when you have
suficient publict, it bewrays that your novations agree not with the truth.

Quest. What offenses are effected by the usurping privy meetings?

Ans. They have no warrant of God, but the charge of ordinary publict and
privy meetings, for religious exercises are committed to ordinary Pastors,
and family exercise to the Masters of families, or their deputees. The Lord
said, Math. 10. That which I tell you secretly, proclaim you on thee house
tops. Many things are more lawfully done in persecution, and apostacy, and in
the beginning of a church, then afterward in time of peace and liberty. 2.
They bewray some unwarranded exercises, and though the exercises be lawful in
themselves, yet this secret usage of them in time of liberty shameth them, as
if they were works of darkness: the enemies of the truth have a fit occasion
so to judge of them, and to slander the profession. 3. The fruits of private
meetings, which they call mutual edification, are not greater knowledge of
Gods word, and more devotion, and holiness of life, then all these who are
content of the lawful ordinary meetings, but they are greater ostentation of
these things, and the contempt of such as follow not their courses; the
contempt of sundry religious exercises, allowed by God in his word as set
forms of prayer private prayer in the pulpet, and in publict places, etc. They
spread abroad erroneous novations, people forsake their own pastors, who
preach against these novations, leaving their churches almost empty, and they
follow other preachers who countenance their errors; they so disgrace the
Ministry, that their travels can do little or no good to their own flocks. 4.
Thus they disgrace the ordinary publict meetings, as if they were but ciphers,
and unprofitable for edification; thereby they cause a schism, but they are
called schismatics who refuse to be schismatics. 5. They skar pagans and
heretics from conversion, who think that they meet for some lewdness and
filthiness, which they dare not do openly. 6. Heretics at such meetings (the
Gospel having liberty) wont to spread abroad their heresies; who could censure
them? for none knew what they taught, until that so many were infected, that
their errors could be no longer kept secret, and then they professed them
openly. 7. The papists in Scotland did meet privately for idolatrous worship,
whereby they made way for the power of prelars that they began to obtrud their
traditions publictly. 8. Though the brazen serpent was a divine ordinance, yet
when they became a mean of dishonouring God, and of spiritual hurt to the
people it was destroyed: So though privy meetings were tolerable in time of
apostasy, yet when they now bring forth such bitter fruits, they should be
abolished. 9. The Patriark, themselves were priests, until that the Leviticall
order was established, but afterward king Uzzia was punished for offering
incense. Bezaleel and A holiab might touch the ark, and look into it, when they
were making the vessels of the tabernacle, but after the consecration of these
things they might not touch them, nor look into the ark no more then Uzza and
the Bethshemits. So it is usurpation to use such meetings, when a lawful
publict order is established.

Quest. If the general assembly est ablish such meetings, can they be
hurtful?

Ans. If the kings and people of Israel had established a liberty, that the
people might choose rulers and judges over the whole kingdom, whenever they
pleased, nevertheless that they had kings. If much treason and usurpation was
committed when the king only rules, much more should be committed by the
multitude of rulers: So when the publict ministry is so contemned, before the
establishing of such meetings, much more should it be after all should be in
confusion; neither civil nor spiritual rulers should keep people in order. 2.
If a Lord send for some unruly servants to do some service, they come to him
passing through their neighbors standing corn, though many plain passages be
besides: if any reprove them for treading the corn, they accuse the reprovers
as enemies to their Lord, and to his service, because they are forbidden to go
to him in an unlawful and backward way and they prove that their Lord bad them
come that way only, because he bad them come to him: So the defenders of privy
meetings accuse their brethren as enemies to mutual edification, because they
forbid them to do it in an usurping way, having sufficient lawful occasons
beside: they prove that they should do that duty in an usurping way, only
because Gods word bids them do that duty. 3. Solomon says, Thoverb. 9
Stollan waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant: So secret
meetings a stolen worship, unwarranted novations, and usurped exercises are so
sweet to some, that they confess, that when they are wearied with labors in
the day, yet they spend a long time in the night at these meetings, without
sleeping, which they can not do at the ordinary publict exercises of Gods
worship in the day time. Naturally all men are inclined to obey humane
traditions, more strictly than Gods ordinances. One preaching at the privy
meetings is sweeter then many in a lawful ordinary way, and many come
together for privy prayers, who abhor the ordinary publict prayers: So
papists keep the festival days of Saints more solemnly then the Lords
Sabboths. 4. Some make this ability of night-waking an argument to prove the
lawfulness of privy meetings, and night-meetings: But it may as well prove
the lawfulness of theft and of whoordome, which are done in the night by men
who watch for that end; And papists who watch in the Canonical hours of the
night, shall as soon prove that poprie is lawful.

Qu. Should not family worship also be rejected, because men meet privily
thereat?

Answ. Not, for 1. it is Commanded of God, Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. and Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19.
Psalm. 74. from 1. to 8. the usurping meetings have no such warrant, and
therefore can not look for such a blessing. 2. Families profess their meetings
before all men; they hinder none to come and try their exercises; but none come
to the usurping meetings, until they be tried to be of their opinion.

Quest. Does not Gods Word warrant all privy meetings, for religious
exercises, saying Be instant in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2.

Answ. 1. That warrandeth not people of civil Callings to preach, nor that
Timothy should leave his own kirk at Ephesus and encroach on other men's
charges: He must teach in season, and out of season, that is, at ordinary and
extraordinary occasions, only where he is called. 2. The apostles might not
teach in Bithynia and Asia, Act. 16.6, 7. nor among the gentiles, until they
were called after the Lords resurrection, Mat. 10.6. and 28.9

Quest. Is it not more comely thus to meet for edification, then to meet
ordinarily for excessive drinking, and idle conference, as some Preachers have
done?

Ans. 1. Both are unlawful and excessive: the one exceeds the limits both of
their Christian calling, and of their particular lawful calling over other
men's charges; the other exceeds the necessary and lawful use of Gods
benefits. 2. Thus Josephus surnamed Justus, who was not chosen with Mathias to
be an apostle, and the sons of Scaeva might say, It is more comely to be an
apostle than to betray Christ as Judas did; his offense could not warrant them
to do that charge, neither can the offense of Preachers justify such
usurpation. Because the sons of Eli abused their callings, should Uzza and king
Uzzia there fore do the office of the priests. 3. Women may not speak
publictly: but if men would preach, let their gifts first be tried, and let
themselves receive imposition of hands by the Ministry.

Quest. May not two or three meet for private prayers ordinarily?

Ans. One person alone, or one family alone may pray privately and ordinarily,
Gods word warrandeth both; and if any come into the family occasionally, he
may pray and use family exercise with them, the Christian calling warrandeth
it: But persons of sundry families may not meet ordinarily for that end; It is
usurpation, because the publict Preacher or Reader only should convocat persons
of diverse families for divine service, or in their absence they should depute
another; seeing the charge is theirs, nothing should be done of that kind
without their concurrance. When there is no publict Ministers, by reason of
apostasy and persecution, the people then without usurpation may provide for
themselves: and likewise when people dwell far distant from Churches. If a
Pastor want a Reader, he himself should do the office, or cause one do it with
advise of his people.

CHAP. II. Some forbide fathers of families to interpret any passages of GODS
word to their domestics.
Quest. SHould the fathers of families interpret any Scriptures to their
domestics? Shall not their ignorance breed error and heresies, making a false
gloss on Gods word?

Ans. They should teach them, making a true gloss, and to that effect they
should frequently hear preachings, read and confer with others, and enquire of
their Pastors the meaning of doubtsome Scriptures; but some idle pastors labor
not to understand the Scripture, and would discharge this exercise, because
they can not resolve such doubts. 2. Their sympathy with the papists brings
the same arguments, for hiding the light of Gods truth: for the papists say,
that laiks should not read the Scriptures, least their ignorance Breed error
and heresies. 3. Heresies were never bred, but by the ignorance of publict
preachers. The opinions of private men were never so much regarded that men
would follow them, to strengthen their heresies. 4. Paul speaks of a Church
in the house of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. and in the house of Aquila and priscilla,
Romans 16.5. Could these be kirks without interpretation of the word. 5. Many by
frequent catechizing and teaching their domestics, became learned publict
teachers, Qui docet indoctos, etc. 6. The neglect of such holy exercises rather
breeds heretical opinions both in private and publict persons. 7. Judge not
before the time? publict Preachers are not censurand condemned, until their
herefies be known, so should private men be used; and though some were guilty,
yet the exercise it self is lawful and profitable to such as use it well.
Should planting of vines, and publict preaching be discharged, because Noab and
Lot were drunk with wine, and Arrius turned an heretic? 8. Hirelings, like
papists, would have people ignorant, least too much knowledge make them take
notise of the ignorance, errors, and lewdness of their teachers, they are not
like Paul, who wished that Agrippa, and all that heard him, were like him in
all things, except his bonds. Act. 26. and Moses, Numb. 11. wished that all the
people were prophets. 9. By these exercises publict preachings are better
understood, which faithful Pastors should desire. 10. He that cares not for
his family in temporal things, is worse then an in fidell: if he neglect
spiritual things he is no better.

Quest. Who calls private men thus to teach their families?

Answ. GOD in his word, as Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. and Deuteronomy. 11 18, 19. they are
commanded to teach them, sitting in the house, walking in the way, lying down
and rising up. The Psalm. 78. from 1. to 8. bids men teach their children in
all ages the testimonies and works of GOD. Where are they written, if not in
his word? How can they teach them, if they show not their meaning? This command
is not ceremonial but moral. The fifth command wills both parents and
children to do their duties: Natural parents should also be spiritual
parents, in bringing up their children in nurture, and in the fear of the LORD.
How can children fear GOD, without the knowledge of his word, see Ephesians. 6.4.
2. When Paul desired aged women to teach younger women Christian duties, he
made not humane philosophy the ground of their instructions, but GODS word,
saying, That Gods word be not blasphemed Tit. 2.5. Of the duties of family
exercise see the preceding chapter, in the answers to the fourth question.

CHAP. III. They forbid all set forms of prayer.
Q. WHat is a conceived form, and what is a set form of prayer?

Answ. All set forms are first conceived, being formed according to his
conception that prays; then if any ordein them to be used again, how often so
ever, 1, 2.3. daily, etc. so far are they set forms, because they are set and
appointed for a more frequent use, 2. When Christ in garden prayed thrice,
using the same words. Matthew. 26. at the first expression it was a conceived
prayer, but afterward a set form, which he set and ordained to be said again
at two diverse times. 3. If people concur, using the words of him that
conceives, it is a set form to them, for they conceive it not, their
concurrance is a second expression of the prayer, it is first expressed by the
conceiver.

Quest. Do none pray nor wrestle with God by the Spirit, but in a conceived
form?

Answ. GOD commanded the high priests to bless the people in a set form, Numb.
6.24. Is not GODS Spirit the inditer of all GODS word? 2. When the Israelites
in the wilderness began any journey, at the taking up of the ark Moses said,
Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies bec scattered: and when the ark rested, he
said, Return O LORD, to the thousands of Israel, Numb. 10. Our LORD in the
garden said thrice a set form: and albeit the Evangelists differ in repeating
the words of his prayer, because they only pointed at the matter thereof: yet
Mark at his second, and Matthew at his third prayer, affirm that he said the
same words; and on the Cross His complaint was words of the psalm 22.1. My
God, my God, why bast thou forsaken me? and His last prayer on the Cross was
words of the psalm 31.5. Into thy hands I commit my Spirit. He had never a
greater presence of the Spirit, nor a greater wrestling with GOD against the
sense of his wrath; against Satan, death, hell, and all the power of darkness,
which he overcame by the same Spirit, who never left him in his greatest
agony. 4. Paul in the beginning of ten Epistles, said, Grace be unto you and
peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, they say he might
well do it, writing to sundry people: Thus they yield that some way he might
have the Spirit, using a set form; but he wrote two epistles to the Corinths,
and two to the Thessalonians, using this salutation, and two to Timothy, using
another salutation. 5. In psalm. 57.1. are the words, Be merciful to me, twice
repeated. In psalm. 68.1. the foresaid words of Moses are repeated. In psalm. 80.
is a set form thrice repeated, viz Turn us again, O Lord, and cause thy face
to shine, and we shallbe saved, this is insert among conceived prayers. In
psalm. 136. which was daily sung in the temple, 1 Chronicles. 16.41. is a set form of
praise 26. times repeated, viz for his mercy endures for ever. They who
reject set forms of prayer, use often this set form of praise in meeter, which
is but a paraphrase of the text, 20 the set forms of prayer are paraphrases of
the LORDS prayer. 6. Christ who best understood the Spirit of prayer, heard and
accepted the devotion of the people, crying, Hosanna, or, Save now, I beseech
thee, taken out of the psalm. 118.25. which the Hebrews affirm was yearly, said
at the feast of tabernacles: and Matthew 21. shows, that they often repeated
the words, both before they came to the temple and also within it. The
pharisees in their hypocrisy were offended thereat, but Christ defended and
commended it. 7. The last prayer in the Scripture is a set form praying for the
coming of Christ, Revel. 22.17, 20. The Spirit and the Bride say, Corns, that
is, the Spirit spe^keth in the church, viz. the regenerat, teaching her to say,
Come: And John bids them that hear this prophecy, say, Come, and John
himself prays in the full sentence, saying, Come Lord Jesus. 8. Set forms
oftimes seem to have more of the work of the Spirit then conceived forms, for
after their first conception, other godly men, moved by the same Spirit revise
them; they retain the material, and cancel the superfluous, and they alter
and supplee words needful: Though Gods Spirit enable men to pray, yet He
suffers humane frailty to be seen in their prayers, to humble them, he
gives no perfection of graces in this life, conceived prayers are not so well
tried, though some boast much of them in contempt of set forms.

Quest. Are any so infirm, that they have need of set forms, more than of
conceived forms?

Answ. Negligent pastors never try it, neither know they that many people
never understand, nor can imitate conceived forms, because themselves, and
others whom they take notise of can conceive, they think that all men can
conceive. But these following among others have more need of set forms, then
of conceived forms: 1. Some weak Christians of a honest life, and of good age,
could never remember all the Lords prayer, as their Pastors affirm, who
diligently taught them: If they cannot remember a few words often repeated,
much less variety of words never twice repeated. 2. Others learned the Lords
prayer, but cold do no further. 3 Some learned also set forms, by frequent
hearing of them, but could never conceive. 4. Some using set forms a long
time, in end became able to conceive once in the day, and they also used daily
a set form for the weaker sort. 5. Some children could pray nothing at all,
until they had used set forms, but afterward they conceived. 6. Some by a
distempered brain can not conceive when the disease rages, but at other times
they conceive; few congregations want some of these, if they have not all. 7.
It is a very eloquent and powerful prayer with God, if a humble heart groan
under the burden of sin, with faith and fervent desires of mercy and
sanctification, though they can scarslie express three words, without these
all variety of words and conceptions is but babbling. Moses at the red sea, and
Anna at the house of the Lord in Shilo, prayed in the spirit of prayer, not
uttering one word: He is a blind judge that measures inward grace by outward
eloquence. 8. If there were but one of those weak ones in a congregation, a
faithful Pastor should use set forms, to teach them to pray for their private
use: they are cruel and merciless sheepheards who neglect the weak ones in a
matter so needful for salvation. 9. And when they are helped, with a better
conscience they may conceive for the stronger sort.

Quest. When I use set forms, men esteem basely of my preaching, and account
me unlearned, if I express not variety of meditations.

Answ. But when you conceive in the prayers following, they will change their
thoughts. 2. For your estimation should you suffer the weak ones to perish, not
teaching them to be acquainted with God by prayer. 3. The disciple is nor above
his master; the Lord and his apostles used set forms, not fearing contempt,
you should do the like.

Quest. When the Lord taught his disciples to pray, he said not Use these
words, but, Pray after this manner.

Ans. The Evangelists write both to be after the Lords meaning. for Math 6.
says, Pray in this manner: Luke 11. says, When you pray, say, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. The speech of Matthew who did first write the Gospel,
can not be the interpretation of the speech of Luke, who had not as yet written
it; for the custom of the Scripture shows, and the order of nature
requires, that the interpretation should be given after the obscure words,
but not before them. 2. If the LORDS prayer contain things needful for us, we
may use the same words, to express the same things, which CHRIST the wisdom
of the Father used: If it signify not things needful, it were a fools
sacrifice to pray after the manner thereof, seeking things needless. 3.
Therefore modest Christians more wisely do conclude their own prayers with it,
acknowledging thereby it to be more perfect and significative, than any prayer
conceived by sinful man. 4. Some call it hard and obscure, Preachers should
explain obscure Scriptures, chiefly which are daily in use. If thou think it
obscure, thou can not form a prayer like it, nor imitat the thing thou
know not: nevertheless use this prayer, for the Lord unto whom nothing is
obscure, knew that it meant things needful for thee, and pray the Lord to hear
thee after his own meaning in it. 5. Some strain out a gnat, and swallow a
cable, abhorring all set forms of prayer, and yet after Divine service they say
the blessing in a set form.

Quest. It is not mentioned in Scripture, that the apostles said the Lords
prayer, Ergo we should not say it.

Answ. Charity should persuade us that they obeyed the Lords commandment in
using it, seeing no Scripture says the contrate: Many of the apostles had they
never faith and repentance, nor the love of GOD, and honored they never their
parents, because particular mention of these things are not in Scripture.

Qu. Is it not a tautologie to conclude our prayers with the Lords prayer,
seeing we have prayed for the same thing already

Ans. A tautologie is a needless repetition of the same words or matter, but
when we repeat the same things, to show the vehemency of our desires, it is
not needless. 2. A conceived prayer repeateth oftimes the same matter though it
change the words. 3 To this effect, the Lord in Math. 6. after the Lords
prayer, taught us to say the word Amen, which summarly includes in it the
whole prayer. 4. Every repetition includes in it self a new complaint, as if
you would say, I am not sufficiently sensible, nor comforted in the assurance
that my former words were accepted, therefore I pray again for the same things
No man has power and authority from GOD, to abrogate or despise any form
which GODS word approves.

Quest. If we use set forms, we should only use the Lords prayer, for no other
form is enjoined to us.

Answ. The apostles also used other set forms, and so do we: they spoke by the
Spirit in using them also.

Quest. In Numb. 6. the Lord said, Thus shall thou bless, that is, in this
manner: He said not, Use the same words. Ergo the Priests used not a set form
of blessing.

If thus import the same sense, then it is a set form of sense: why may not the
same sense have the same words? seeing the words are a manner of speaking, as
the sense is a manner of signification: no words can better express the same
sense, then the words that Gods Spirit has dited. 3. The text shows that the
priests should have used the same words: for the Lord says, Thus shall thou
bless, saying, The Lord bless thee, they are bidden say, The Lord bless
thee, this is the manner how they shall bless. 4. Albeit the priests had used
only conceived words, yet the despisers of set forms bless only in a set
form.

Quest. What call you stinted prayers? Are they lawful?

Ans. Both prayers and divine praise are stinted, when men willingly reject the
full liberty of using them which GOD has granted. GOD in his word has given
us alike warrant and liberty, to use both conceived and set forms of prayer,
he that rejects any of the two, stinteth to himself the form which he uses,
and restrains the liberty which GODS Spirit has granted in rejecting the
other form. The papists in their service book have stinted set forms: others
stint unto themselves conceived forms; though they alter the words, yet they
stint the form: but we stint neither the form nor the words, because, 1. we use
both the forms: 2. we sometimes change the forms, a set form into a conceived
form, or we use diversity of set forms in the same purpose, and so we stint
not the words of a set form. 3. At the end of a conceived prayer we sometimes
say a set form, as the LORDS prayer, or the blessing, and sometimes we conceive
words at the end of a set form. 4. Sometimes we mix words of a set form among
conceived words.

Quest. Do not many through envy complain that we abstain from set forms,
because themselves want eloquence.

Ans It is as true in some who want it, as it is true in others who have it,
that they despise such as want it. 2. But it is not true in many both private
and publict persons, who have as much eloquence as you have, and yet they use
set forms, not only to countenance the lawful practice of Christ, his
prophets and apostles, but also, because GODS Spirit works by it, and
warrandeth it in his word, as he does conceived forms.

Quest. Should not all men conceive at all times, for Gods word proves that
all men can conceive, as Joel 2.18. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,
and Zachary 12. I will pour out upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication.

Answ. Thus you prove that both private and publict persons can conceive, which
we deny not of some; but negligent pastors know not that others can never
conceive, nor yet understand men's conceptions, they know not pastoral duties,
who know not this both of young and aged persons. 2. But you make a false
glesse on these texts, as if the pouring out of the Spirit in Joel, were only a
giving of the gift of conceiving prayers. Peter Act. 2. interprets it to be the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, given unto GODS servants in a greater
measure then was usual, as diversities of tongues, prophesies, visions,
working of miracles, etc. and also the ordinary gifts, as faith hope,
charity, humilie, temperance, etc. were given more largely: and you interpret
the Spirit of grace and supplication in Zachary, to be only the gift of
conceiving prayers, as if Christ, his prophets and apostles wanted the spirit
of grace and supplication, when they used set forms.

Quest. Are not conceived forms of greater dignity, and therefore we should
not use set forms?

Answ. Does GOD abolish the Moon and Stars, because the Sun is of greater
dignity? Shall a man cut off his little finger, because the other fingers are
stronger? Shall the Sacraments be neglected, because the Word edifieth more?
2. The two forms of prayer are of equal dignity in these respects, viz. they
have one author, the holy SPIRIT, who dyted them in his Word: they are both in
one language; they both signify alike excellent and spiritual things, and
both alike able to stir up our devotion, otherwise the LORD would not have used
set forms in his greatest extremity: it is out corruption that hinders us
to make such use of them: Eloquence and variety of words are much admired by
Pagans, and natural men, like Agrippa, who was almost persuaded to be a
Christian, and yet was void of sanctification. Our corruption does still dote
too much upon the same, though we be Christians, so that we contemn the other
form which Christ and his Saints made use of. 3. All the prerogative of a
conceived form, is, that it expresses mo meditations than a set form; but it
neither makes our prayer more acceptable unto GOD, neither can it express
more excellent things. The examples foresaid of Christ and his Saints do show
that GOD accepts the one as well as the other; and if he make a difference,
it is his custom oftimes to respect more of the things which the world esteem
least of: so CHRIST in his greatest extremity choosed a set form, as was said
before, see the rest in the next chapter.

CHAP. IIII. They forbid all reading of prayers.
Qu. SHould not set forms be said from the memory, or from the heart? that is
they should be said perqueer, seeing reading of prayers is not commanded in
Scripture.

Answ. Neither repeating from the memory, nor conceiving of prayers, nor
singing of psalms on a book, nor off the book, are commanded in Scriptures,
should they therefore not be used? The duties of prayer and praise are
commanded, and these circumstances are lawful and useful, and no ways
hurtful to these exercises. 2. Whether you read them out of the invisible book
of your memorit, or from the visible book of paper, the words are alike heard
by the people, and the devotion of both reader and hearer is alike stirred up
thereby, if the corruption of our unruly hearts and itching ears hinder not.

Qu. Is it not ridicolous, if a child ask from his father bread or a fish on
paper so is it to read prayers unto God.

Answ. It is as comely thus to seek benefits from God, as to praise him on
paper for the same benefits at the singing of psalms.

Quest. The psalms are the text of Scriptures, read prayers are not so.

Answ. Our psalms in meeter are not the text of Scripture, otherwise preachers
should make sermons on them, they are but paraphrases of the text, having the
same sense. So are our read prayers paraphrases of the LORDS prayer, or of some
petitions in it, for all things needful are generally included in the LORDS
prayer, and particularly in other Scriptures.

Quest. Read prayers express not all our wants, Ergo they should be rejected.

Answ. It is no matter, if they contein things perpetually needful, the
Preacher at the end of his read prayer, or afterward in his conceived prayers
may express mo wants. 2. Neither do his conceived prayers express all his
own wants, nor yet the wants of the people, he never knows them all. 3. The
Lords prayer concluding our prayers, may supplee all the omissions of our
imperfect prayers, though we know not all our wants. 4. Thy speech reproacheth
the LORD, and his servants, who sought oftimes a supplee only of some wants.
The Lord said, Father, forgive them, they know not what they does If it be
possible take this Cup from me. Abraham prayed for Children, Jacob for food
and raiment, and safety from his enemies, the apostles for increase of faith,
Paul that the messenger of Satan might be taken from him. Many prayed that
Christ would cure their diseases, Christ never censured such prayers, but
pharisaicall holiness censureth prayers that express not all their wants,
which their own prayers could never do. 5. If by faith we seek but one thing
with inward desires, and outward expressions, this prayer is perfect in respect
of the essence, and nature of prayer; so is every petition of the Lords prayer
or the meaning thereof: but the whole sum of the petitions is perfect, in
respect of the enumeration of things needful: this enumeration needs not be
said at all times (as the foresaid example show) though we have need to seek
them daily, we may seek mo or less of them, as we are sensible of these wants.

Quest. Is it needful to read prayers publictly?

Answ. Yea, for many learned men of good understanding and conception have weak
memories, and through diseases in the head men sometimes forget words, which at
other times they remember: it is best therefore not to trust in the memory.

Quest. Romans 8.26. It is said We know not what we should pray, Ergo we should
not use set forms, for men know not what matter is in them? Ans. If we should
not pray when we know the matter, neither should we conceive if we know the
matter. 2. Much less when we know not the matter, for ignoti nulla cupido, we
can not desire the thing we know not our desires are the best part of our
prayers. 3. But the text speaks of the manner, saying, We know not what to
pray as we ought, and the Spirit helps our infirmities, and interceedeth for
us, that is, he assisteth us to pray, not with variety of words and
conceptions, but with groanings that can not be exprissed by any form of
prayer: the Spirit groaneth not, but he kindles strong desire in our hearts,
the servencie whereof causes groanings. 4. Groanings both show our earnest
desires, and prove that we know the matter before we seek it. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
says, I will pray with the Spirit, and with the understanding also

Quest. Does not the Spirit help us also, by putting new meditations and new
desires in our hearts, which were not in our minds when we began to pray, Can
this be done with set forms?

Ans. The Spirit helps us also at set forms, making us express the words
with a deeper sense of our wants, and with more fervent desires of the things
we seek, that oftimes we have not at the beginning of our prayers: both our
conceived prayers, and set forms are but lip-labor, if GODS Spirit thus help
us not. He interceedeth for us, because these and such other of his graces in
us, do enable us to pray, and GOD hears us, because he respects these
graces, and work of his Spirit in us.

Quest. What is the Spirit of prayer?

Answ. Not variety of words, and eloquent conceptions that some may have,
without the sanctifying Spirit, but it is an earnest crying unto GOD, with
faith and fervent desires and groanings, in any form of prayer. Moses and Anna,
the mother of Samuel prayed with this spirit, expressing no words at all.

Quest. Is not that prayer best, that comes from the sense of our wants?

Answ. So it is and therefore set forms should contein things perpetually
needful, and the sense of them should be perpetual as are increase of faith,
remission of sins, sanctification, and such things as are in the Lords prayer:
if any words of the prayer concern the present time only, as war, famine,
pestilence, they should be altered or removed, as the evils are changed.

Quest. Should the Church use the same means of Gods worship, both in her
infancy and perfect age?

Answ. The ceremonies are abrogat, our prayers are moral, for by them we
confess the LORD to be GOD in the first Command, we adore him in the second,
and we honor his Name in the third, using both the form of prayer. 2. If a
set form should be abrogat, because the church used it in her infancy, much
more a conceived form which was first used, for in it Abraham prayed for
children Genes. 15. and for the Sodomites, Genes. 18. Jacob used it, Genes. 32.
The first set forms in Scriptures were said by Moses, at the lifting and
resting of the ark, 3. It was the fullness of time, and a full age, when CHRIST
and the apostles used set forms. Now it is like a doting age, when set forms
which were in request with them, are become tastlesse and loathsome to many. 4.
As the church in her outward estate had an infancy, and perfect age, so has
every member thereof in all ages. Every man coming in this world, is as
ignorant of GODS word and worship, as were the Patriarks at their birth; and
some are so weak that discreet Pastors should use them like infants all their
lifetime. It is as good reason to urge people to speak all languages, because
the apostles did so, as to urge the weak, ones that have no eloquence, to
conceive prayers, because the eloquent do so: it is a tempting of GOD to
require of people above their power.

Quest. Reading is not a prayer, but a receiving into the heart information
from the words read.

Answ. You should speak so of the hearing of both the forms of prayer. 2. We
must first know before we speak, we receive information by ocular reading, or
looking on the book, and then we speak to inform others, that they may concur
with their desires, and with a still voice, and also we speak to glorify GOD
with our mouth, as we do with our heart, that he may hear us, though sometimes
true prayer may come from the heart alone.

Quest. No Apocrypha should be brought into publict assemblies, but only Gods
word, and the lively voites of his own graces, men's writings are Apocrypha.

Answ. Men's sermons, the psalms in meeter, and conceived prayers are not
Canonick more then read prayers. 2. If they be the lively voices of GODS
graces, so are read prayers, for godly men gifted with GODS graces first
conceived them, and they still signify the same things, and men having saving
grace, use them as the first conceivers did in earnest prayer, assisted by GODS
Spirit, so that they make use of them, as if themselves had conceived them.

Quest. Men's writings are not without error, they carry not such majesty as
the pen of the holy Ghost, they are not so authentic, confirmed by signs and
wonders.

Answ. Neither are men's unwritten conceptions so authentic

Quest. Do not read prayers restrain the liberty of GODS Spirit, who
inableth men to conceive?

Answ. Not, for nevertheless of them men may conceive as much as ever they
did. 2. Did Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles restrain this liberty, when
they said set forms. 3. Seeing GODS Spirit in his word indicted both the forms,
they restrain his liberty who abolish any of the forms from GODS publict
worship, seeing GODS word which allows these forms is made publict to the
world

Quest. Is it not a quenching of the Spirit, to read other men's words, when I
should pour forth mine own heart?

Answ. If you have the same wants, the words of a read prayer are yours, as
well as these who first conceived them: GOD does not appropriat words and
speeches to particular men: Thou would have people to concur with thy
conceived words, which are no more theirs then read words; if the one be a
quenching of the SPIRIT, so is the other, for both are the words of other men,
and both are set forms to the people that conceived them not. 2. It is not a
quenching, but a cherishing of the Spirit, to use reverently the gifts which he
made useful to others, it is a quenching to despise these gifts. 3. Some being
in stranger churches were much moved with set forms, thinking them to be newly
conceived because they never heard them before; but at the next hearing of
them, they become loathsome: So it is not the form, but the noveltie of the
words which pleases men's itching ears. GODS word it self often tepeated is
loathsome to our corrupt nature. Some judge GODS SPIRIT to be like themselves,
delighting only in noveltie of words, and therefore they make idols of new
conceptions, affirming that GODS SPIRIT speaks only when men use new
conceptions. The papists banish away conceived forms, others discharge set
forms: True grace should make us strive against both these extremities, in the
battle between the flesh and the SPIRIT, for GODS Spirit indicted both the
forms in his word. 4. A set form at the first hearing is esteemed a work of the
SPIRIT, but afterward unconstant people despise the same words, as a work of
Satan.

Quest. Ministers are called to preach, and not to do the office of Readers.

Answ. Then neither should they read the psalms when they sing, nor text when
they preach, as did the LORD out of Esaias 61 1: in Luke 4. 2. Prayer is not
preaching, if they be only called to preach, they should not pray in any form.
3. Thus some confess against themselves, that a set form may be used, for they
say it belongs to Readers. 4. If Ministers be called to preach, then they may
do the office of Readers, and they should do it when they want Readers, for all
GODS word are canonick preachings of GODS truth, his mercies, judgments,
power, and wisdom, and of his properties, works and wonders, etc. Ministerial
preachings serve for a further explication clearing of the sense, and
application of the canonick preachings.

Quest. Is not the reading of a prayer a neglect of conception, and a shameful
prostrating of our selves to be ruled by men, even to the shame of our heavenly
Father, who gives unto us better gifts?

Ans. There is no such neglect, seeing you may conceive before or after the
reading. 2. If you concur with a conceived prayer, the shame is as great you
are no less ruled by men, whose conceptions are no more thine then the
conceptions of read prayers. 3. It shameth not but it honors GOD, if you
reverently use the work of his SPIRIT in others, but when thou despisest that
which he approves in his word, on thy part thou procurest his shame.

Quest. To read a prayer when men may conceive, it is to bring the weak and the
lame, when they have a male in the flock. Malac. 1.14. Answ. But if I conceive
before or after the read prayer, I offer the male also. 2. If I read a prayer
with faith, with fervent desires, and humble expressions, it is a male without
blemish before GOD, through Christ: the Lord, and his apostles, and prophets
offered such males, reading set forms from the invisible book of their memory:
So we may read from the visible book of paper, which is an artificial
memory. A book is a rich treasure of conceptions, an artificial memory a
wonderful providence of God, to help such as are weak both of understanding
and memory.

Quest. Should not Christians study to perfection and grow in godly exercises?

Answ. The grouth of Christians is not in multitude and variety of words and
conceptions, for Tullius and Demosthenes might then have been Christians who
could be eloquent in any subject, even in Christian matters, if they had midled
with them, albeit they had been but hypocrites. 2. Neither consists this
grouth in forsaking the form of prayer, which Christ the fullness of all
perfection, used and approved in others: but it is a grouth in holiness of
life, heavenly knowledge, faith hope, charity, fervencie in prayer of any
form, and in other spiritual graces, and in doing good works. Our Lord in his
greatest perfection, ended his life, saying a few words, first conceived by
David in psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I commit my Spirit: and Steven said, Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit.

Quest. If any that can walk perfectly, come to his father creeping or desiring
to be born by others, will it not offend his father, and procure a refusal,
rather than the benefits which be seeks? So he that can conceive cloquently,
if be read a prayer, or say a set form, and so is born up by other men's
speeches, be offends God, and procures a refusal of his benefits.

Answ. He that concurreth with conceived prayers, is as much born up with
other men's speeches. 2. Thus the high Priests using the words of the blessing
which Aaron first said, and the Prophets and Apostles using such set forms, as
are mentioned in the preceding chapter, are here reproached as born up by
these speeches, or that they offend GOD, using set forms when they may
conceive: and CHRIST is blasphemed as an offender of GOD, and so is a sinner,
in repeating his own words again in the garden, and the words of the psalm
22.1. and psalm. 31.5. if he might conceive; or he is blasphemed, if they say he
used set forms, because he could not conceive. 3. Men walk uprightly both unto
GOD, and with GOD, by true faith, in whatsoever form they pray, though blind
zeal knows no walking, but by variety of conceptions and eloquence. 4.
Whether we read words, or say them from the memory, expressing the same wants,
the words belong to him that prays, as much as to the first conceivers: As
the light of the Sun is no more proper to them that first used it, then to such
as used it afterward, so is it with words and languages, which are the gifts
of the holy GHOST, whether men acquire them immediately, as the apostles did on
the Pentecost, or by studies and education: as all others do.

Quest. Is it not sufficient that set forms be committed to Readers, for
publict reading?

Answ. When prelates did commit baptism, and the LORDS Supper to the inferior
Clergy, and themselves did minister confirmation, it made the people despise
the LORDS ordinances, and magnify humane confirmation: So when Preachers
commit the reading of prayers only to Readers, the people despise them, because
the Preachers despise them.

Quest. I acknowledge the set forms in Scripture, for Gods Spirit did indite
them, but the set forms out of Scripture have not such authority.

Answ. Neither have the conceived forms out of Scripture such authority. 2.
But GOD to whom we speak has as great authority when we read our own set
forms, as when we read GODS word it self, then our reverence to GOD should be
no less. 3. Seeing GODS Spirit was effectual with both the forms in
Scripture, what restrains his operation from the one more than from the other
out of Scripture.

Quest. The books of Discipline show, that our first Reformers purposed not
that set forms should continue for ever in the church of Scotland, but only
until that God send sufficient able men, but who can blame giftlesse old and
failed men to plead for a stoffe, helping themselves to walk?

Answ. This reproach redoundeth to our blessed Savior, and to his servants
foresaid, as if they wanted spiritual gifts, when they used set forms. 2.
Few, or no preachers, since the first reformation were so unable, but they also
used conceived prayers. 3. Therefore it should be insert in the books of
Discipline, that set forms must continue in the church, for these causes: 1.
For people that can not conceive, that by frequent hearing of them they may
remember some words for their private use, rather then to pray nothing at all.
2. For preachers diseased in the head, whereby their conception is troubled. 3.
For other preachers, least afterward they be diseased, that then the sudden
change of the form seem not strange unto the people. 4. Both to countenance
their infirm brethren, and to countenance the LORD, his prophets and apostles,
who used set forms not through infirmity, but because the words were
sanctified, and directed by Gods Spirit, and were as acceptable to God, and as
able to express their desires, as new conceived words. They who love Christ,
should countenance himself and his members, and their religious exercises
chiefly when they are in contempt, as set forms are at this time: this is a
confession of Christ, and of his word before men. 5. For repressing the
insolency of such as are puffed up with eloquence, doting so upon it, as if Gods
Spirit were not effectual without it.

Quest. Should any pray for the space of days, months and years, until that
Gods Spirit come and assist them?

Answ. They who want faith can not pray, though they use the words of prayer:
yet no man should be hindered to pray: for none knows what is in man, but his
own Spirit: the Lord suffered babes to come to him, though they understood not
the word which works faith. 2. They who have faith may pray at all times, for
Gods Spirit never leaves his own work, though sometimes he be more or less
effectual in them.

Quest. Should not these novations be received, seeing their defenders are of a
godly life and conversation?

Answ. The danger is so much the greater, for as a godly life helps to
edify, when men preach Gods truth, so the blameless life of the pharisees,
and of heretics, did procure great respect unto their heresies and errors,
which a profain life could never do. 2. When Paul persecuted the truth, he was
blameless, touching the righteousness of the law, Phil. 3.6. 3. If they be
godly in life, and of a sound judgment, when they consider these things more
deeply, they will glorify God in forsaking them. It proceeds not from Gods
Spirit to despise the form of worship which He approved and commanded in his
word: such were the Lords prayer, the blessing of the priests, and the praying
for the coming of Christ, Revel. 22.) 4. None are more godly then Christ and
his apostles, who used both the forms.

Quest. If people concur with any prayer before the sentence be ended, take
they not Gods name in vain, not knowing what they pray for?

Answ. So they do, if they concur by assenting, or saying Amen, before they
know the full sentence: it is a mocking of God to seek the thing they know not.
2. If the preacher pray for one that was sick, and the people are informed that
he is dead, it is superstition, if they concur: So is it, if he pray that
people may show their humility, by kneeling to sacraments or idols, or that
they thankfully remember Christ's doings and sufferings, by keeping
superstitious days: but they may concur with set forms, before the sentence
be ended, if they have them in their memory, because they know the matter.

CHAP. V. Some interrupt Gods worship continually, reading the lines of the
psalm, by intermissions, in the time of singing.
Quest. HOW is it that many despise set forms of prayer, and yet they praise
God is set forms of muter: When did Gods. Spirit choose the one, and refuse
the other: both are paraphrases, and not texts of Scripture, to wit of the
Lords prayer, and of the psalms. Some use a double set form, to wit, the
miter, and the proclaiming of linese this was never practiced nor commanded in
Scripture, as were the single set forms of prayer and praise.

A. Blind zeal proclameth the lines, that such as can not read may sing: but
they neglect to repeat a set form (which is more needful) that they may learn
to pray privately, rather than to pray nothing at all. 2 The miseries of this
life, and happiness of the life to come, do show, that prayer is more requisite
now, and praising of God in the next life; we have daily motives of praise, but
much more of prayer.

Quest. What errors are committed, in repeating the lines at singing?

Answ. There is a continual abusing of Gods name in it, for men oftimes sing
divine praise, not knowing what they speak of God, as in psalm 8.1. O God, our
Lord, how wonderful? One that has not the psalm in their memory, knows not
if the works, or mercies, or fearful judgments of God, or the great power and
cruelty of the enemies be called wonderful, until that the line be sung out,
and the next line read. In psalm. 84.1. O Lord, since vengeance does to thee,
etc. three lines are sung out, and the fourth read, before they know the
sentence; and weak memories forget what they sing, before the second or third
line be read: some can not repeat the first line after the reading. They abuse
Gods name also when the last line is read, albeit they understand it; for it is
a none sense to sing only apart, viz. the last line, and not the whole sentence
with understanding: and many understand not the sentence, even at the hearing
of the last line, because they forget the former lines before the last be read:
so God is rather mocked than praised by this blind implicit faith; modest
silence has more true devotion. 2. They say that learned men themselves
understand not many words which they both read and sing. Ignorance is
tolerable, when God reveals not the matter, but not when men procure it by a
rash practice, nor yet when they will seem wise in the thing they understand
not. Will not a king be offended, if his servants speak to him as drunken men,
not knowing what they say, but more justly may God be offended at such
contempt. 3. The proclaimer of lines of times forgets the words of his book,
and he speaks other words for them. 4. Sometimes his book is wrong printed,
and he bableth, as he finds it. 5. Sometimes people distant from him hear not
his voice, because he hears his own voice, he believes that all the rest
hear it. 6. It is a great contempt of Gods worship, at every line to interrupt
and mar it, giving place to a reader. Will any interrupt the shearing of corn,
by tilling so much ground as is shorn, at the shearing of every sheaf: this
interruption is more uncomely. 7. Music orderly used stirs up men's hearts,
to praise God cheerfully: this interruption diminitheth cheerfulness, and
hinders attention unto the matter.

Quest. It is comely in the church that one part of the people shall sing, and
nes all the rest?

Ans. It is as comely as when some read the word with the Reader, and the text
with the Preacher; and as when some use ejaculations at preaching, and not all
the rest. 2. It is more comely than that all the people shall so often
interrupt Gods worship, giving place unto a Reader. 3. Gods Spirit thought it
comely, that twelve men only should sing at once in the temple and not all the
rest, Chron. 25. the rest may praise God in a vocal manner, saying with Job,
Blessed be the name of the Lord, Or, For thine is the kingdom, power and
glory: for Christ in the Lords prayer did conjoin praise with prayer. 4. The
Lord in Math. 11.25. said, I thank thee O heavenly Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, etc. this was as true praise, as when after his last supper he sung a
psalm. 5. At the Lords birth the sheepheards heard, the Angels praised God,
without reading of lines, for concurrance of the sheepheards: this angelical
praise may suffice all the world, if the musical praise be not rightly used.
6. If men have in their hearts the substantial praise of the love, reverence,
and of an high estimation of God, the matter is little though all their
lifetime they want the shadow of musical praise. 7. The ignorant may be
taught a more comely musical praise, without abusing of Gods Name.

Quest How shall it be done?

Answ. Teach them to get in their memories short and material psalms (for
they are capable of badrie songs) that once or twice every Sabbath they may
sing some of them with the people: they may also sing them in their houses; and
they may sing the conclusion, Glory to the Father, etc. It were better in the
Sabboths, after publict service to cause them learn to read, then interrupt
Gods worship with reading.

Quest. Why do sundry godly men cause proclaim the lines?

Answ. The blind zeal of some thinks it the best custom. 2 Others do it only
till they find a fitter occasion to draw unruly people to a better custom, as
the apostles did permit some I gall rites, Act. 15. which in themselves were
become dead, until the estate of the church were better satled.

Quest. May we not thus sing to gain such as cannot read, as Paul gained the
weak ones? 1 Cor. 9.

Answ. Blind zeal neglects that which is more needful, viz. by repeating
prayers to gain such as can not pray: when as men may be good Christians
without musical praise all their lifetime. 2. Paul might not be an idolater, a
drunkard, nor a blasphemer, to gain others from these vices: but he might use
or not use the legal rites, which in his days should end, and be buried
honestly without sudden violence: he gained people from superstition, you teach
them to be superstitious, making them so esteem of musical praise, as if God
could not be praised, and themselves could not be Christians without it; you
teach them to abuse Gods name and to be hypocrites, in singing words that they
understand not, so their words and mind agree not together.

Qu. We thus keep them from idle thoughts, when others are in a holy exercise.

Ans. You draw them rather both upon idle thoughts and idle words, when they
sing that which they know not. 2. Good Christians do confess, that oftimes in
their best exercises of prayer and divine praise, when they understand the
matter, they are assaulted with evil thoughts; Satan so hates Gods worship
what then can be expected of such as know not what they speak 3 When twelve
persons only did sing at once, 1 Chronicles. 29. the Lord knew that their musical
praise did stir up holy and reverend thoughts of God in the hearers, rather
then if the hearers had sung without understanding: So Elisha prophesied, not
being cheared up by his own music, but by a ministrel, 2 King 3. when David
danced and leaped before the ark, rejoising that God was present with his
people, his joy was stirred up by the music of others, as well as if it were
his own music, 1 Chronicles. 15.28, 29.

Qu. Do not these Words pertain to all Christians, to wit, that they should
speak to them selve in psalms and hymns, and make melody in their hearts to
the Lord? Ephesians. 5.22.

Ans. None can rejoice to the Lord, not knowing a reason of their joy, as they
do who sing without understa^ding: if the sound of singers stir up their mirth
and cheerfulness, they not knowing the matter, it is a melody in their hearts,
but not to the Lord, except some holy meditations of their own mind concur
with the sound. 2. If they rejoice in the assurance of Gods favor and mercy,
it is a spiritual song and melody in the heart to the Lord, though it want
outward music.

Quest. But in Coloss. 3.16. he bids admonish one another in psalms and
hymns.

Answ. When men know not what they sing, they neither admonish; nor are
admonished by such melody. 2. Paul admonishes Christians not to be like
Pagans, who at their feasts and other occasions were delighted with badry,
filthy, and protain longs, but they should use songs of heavenly consolation,
and of spiritual admonitions and instructions tending to edification. See the
end of Chapter 6.

CHAP. VI. Some never sing the words, Glory to the Father, to the Son, and to
the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world
without end. Some sing them at every passage of the psalms.
Quest. ARE these words or their meaning in the Scriptures?

Answ. In Math 28. the Disciples are bidden baptize in the name of the three
persons of the Godhead. In 2 Cor. 13.14. Paul prays to them. In Esaias 6.3. the
three persons are pointed at in the words, Holy holy, holy, etc. In Revel. 4.8.
is the meaning of the whole sentence, viz. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. In Psalm. 45.7. God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness, above thy fellows, That is, The Father has
declared the Son to be anointed with the holy Ghost, fully dwelling in Him, by
whom His manhead is replenished with gifts above all measure: And thus John, (1
John 2.27) calls the Holy Ghost, the anointing that teaches. The psalm. 136.
bids, Give glory to God, pointing at the unity of his essence, in the words
Jehovah and Adonai, and in the relative, His; and at the plurality of persons,
in the words, Elohim, Haadenim; And at His Unchangablenes and Eternity, in the
words, His mercy endures for ever. His mercy indureth not without Himself,
for it flows from Him. In Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, that is,
The Father has said to the Son: And in verse. 2. the Holy Ghost is called The
rod of thy strength He is a golden Scepter, holden out to comfort the godly,
but an Tron Rod to bruise the Wicked. Item the three persons are mentioned in
the second psalm.

Quest. Should these words be sung, concluding every passage of the psalms,
or should they never be sung at all?

Ans. It is a necessary duty of thankfulness, to make express mention of our
benefactors, so far as we know them; such are the persons of the Trinity. The
papists superstitiously said these words at the mass, and at the end of every
psalm read in proof, albeit they had read ten psalms in an hour, as if the
psalms had no religious use without these words; others reject them altogether.
The papist by the frequent use of the words make great show of holiness, that
men may take less notise of their errors and heresies. They who neglect the
words make a great show of precisenes, that their erroneous novations may seem
to be nothing else but preciseness. 2. Therefore these words, or words of the
like sense should be used, because the duty of thankfulness should distinctly
express our benefactors: and sometimes they should be omitted, to eschew
superstition, and the appearance thereof, and to show that God may be praised,
expressing only the Unity of Essence, as well as the distinction of Persons.

Quest. May we not glorify God, sometimes expressing only one or two of the
persons?

Ans. We may do it both in prayer and divine praise: for as the wife is
enriched by the riches given to her Husband, so is the Husband by the riches of
his wife: Matrimonial union makes their riches not to be divided. The soul
and the body, and all the members thereof are honored, if a crown be put on a
man's Head, a ring on his finger, a chain on his neck, because of the natural
union of the members of the body, and because of the personal union, which is
a more strict natural union of the soul and body: so if thou honor any of the
three peisons, it redoundeth to them all, not only because they all work
together in every work that God does to the creatures, and therefore all the
three merit the same glory and honor, but also because of their essential
union in one Godhead. 2. This is practiced in Philip. 4.20. Unto God our Father
be glory. Paul prayed to the Father, and to the Son, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11. and to
Christ only, 2 Thessalonians. 3.18. 2 Timothy 2.22. Peter glorisieth Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18.
Christ said, Pray, Our Father which art in heaven, Luke 11.3. If then the
Honor expressly given to one of the three persons, redound unto all of them, it
can not be prejudicial to any of the three, if the Honor be expressly given to
all the three. 4. Albeit neither the whole sentence, nor the parts thereof were
so expressly mentioned in Scriptures, as they are, yet either this, or the like
sentence, with good reason should be sung in divine praise, because not only
the whoole book of the psalms, but all the Scriptures, all Gods works, and
mercies also tend to the setting forth of the praise and glory of all the 3.
persons. 5. Christ might have commanded the Apostles to baptize in the name of
Father only, or of God any; but He commanded to express all the three persons,
to show, that as we increase in the knowledge of God, so we should express
more punctually that which we know of God. 6. As for the last verse of the 28.
psalm, containing a short prayer for Gods people, it is very pertinent to sing
it, or the like sentence, with the words of praise foresaid, because prayer and
praise agree well together: so Christ conjoined them together in the Lords
prayer, adding to the prayer the words, For thine is the kingdom, the power
and glory, etc. and also it is fit oftimes to use such short verses of prayer
and praise, as we conclude the singing of psalms, that such as can not read,
may get these lines in their memories, to sing them with the people, if they
can do no further: this may be done without abusing of Gods name, and it is
used by many in a laudable custom: Many of the psalms do conjoin praise and
prayer, we then may do the same, both at the singing of psalms, and in our
prayers.

CHAP. VII. Some after Divine Service bless the People in a legal manner.
Quest. SHould not the Preacher after Divine Service, say. The Lord bless you,
etc.

Answ. He should say, The LORD bless us, and save us, etc. not excluding
himself in a legal manner, for these reasons, 1. To acknowledge thereby his
own misery, and that he has need of blessing, as much as any of the people,
and so he casts away pharisaicall holiness. 2. To eschew Judaisme: the
priests did pray and offer sacrifice for themselves, and for the people,
acknowledging thus their own sinful condition and misery, but they spoke the
typical blessing to the people, in the second person only, not including
themselves, Numb. 6. because in it they were not to acknowledge their own
misery, but to typifie and represent CHRIST, who blesses really and
substantially, and of whose fullness every man receives blessing, but he of no
man: and therefore when CHRIST came in the flesh, the Priest of Aorons seed
being about to bless the people, was made speechless, to show that the true
high Priest who blesses really, was now coming in the flesh, Luke 1. Then he
that imitateth Aaron in blessing the people, so far he denies CHRIST'S coming
in the flesh. 3. To eschew affectation of grandour for though some honest man
say, The Lord bless you, etc. through simplicity and custom, yet others do
it in ambition, and desire of pre-eminence, thinking the words in Hebr. 7.7. do
militar for them, viz. The less is blessed of the greater, etc. But the sense
is, that GOD almighty is greater absolutely, and every manner of way than all
his creatures, because he blesses them really: and the high Priest is greater
than the people, whom he blesses typically; not every manner of way, but by
representation only: thus he represented Christ, who blesses really; but
ambitious men preach their own pride, when they should preach Christ's
humility; they bless in the second person, to show their affected vain
grandour, that they may be esteemed greater then the people, whose servants
they should be for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.) 4. To eschew conformity with
antichristians, for it is also a popish rite: the popes in the years of their
Iubilee, in their progress through Rome, they stretched forth their hands
toward the people, saying. The Lord bless you my people, etc. Their clergy
in the Letany of the service book, are said to bless such as receive orders,
including themselves, but when they demit the people from the communion, they
bless excluding themselves, to show that they are greater then the people.
When the priest ends his divine service, a bishop (if he present) says the
blessing, to show his grandour above the priests and the people. A deacon if he
say the service, if then a priest be present, he blesses for the same respect.

Quest. Are not ministers called to bless the people?

Answ. That particularly pertained to the priests, as well as the bearing of
the ark, and the burning of incense and sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 10.8. 1 Chronicles. 23.13.
Mimsters are not called to the one more then to the other. 2. CHRIST sent them
to preach the Gospel, and not to bless neither typically nor substantially;
the one is abrogate, He takes the other in his own hand: and therefore in his
first preaching, he altered the form of blessing: the Apostles used not their
form of blessing, but prayed in other words. 3. If a preacher take blessing
only for preaching, he may bless the people as he does himself, he is alike
called to both. 4. He may bless new married persons, saying. The Lord bless
you, etc because he prays for a particular blessing, viz. the prospering of
their new begun estate of marriage. 5. If any salute his neighbor, present or
absent, he may say, The Lord bless you, etc. that it may be shown unto whom
the honor is given; for salvation is a kind of honor given to our neighbor,
superior, inferior, or equal, for intertaining friendship, it is used both
among pagans and Christians, but ambitious courtasie should not conclude Gods
worship: though by way of praise people may bless GOD, Deuteronomy. 8.21. and by way
of prayer beggars may bless Princes, are they therefore greater? When
Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, he was greater in a typical grandour,
representing Christ, but when he blessed God, he glorified God as a servant,
Genesis 14.19. and unto Abraham he sought a blessing from God as a supplicant.

Qu. May I not say, Blessed are they that hear Gods word, and do the same?

An You may safely do it, for it is a preaching sentence, proclaiming salvation
to such as obey GODS word. 2. It excludes neither preacher nor people, and so
it is no note of singularity nor pride.

Quest. Some say, that the priests blessing was no prayer, but a ceremonial
blessing?

Whether it be a prayer, or a blessing, if it be ceremonial, it should not be
used. 2. Thus you may say, the moon is no planet, it is but a moon, the words
are in the imperative mood, therefore they import either praying, counselling,
or commanding. Is GOD inferior to the priests, that they should command him?
Is he weak witted, or rash in his interprises, that they should counsel him?
4. The Hebrews who best understand the words, take it for a prayer: so Maimony
discourses of it in a treatise of prayer. 5. Some say that the words are
equivalent both to a prophecy, and to the pronouncing of a blessing, so were
the words of Noah, saying, God persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Sem:
but that hindered none of their words to be prayers: the form of pronouncing of
blessings, which are also prophesies, but no prayers, are written in Deuter. 28.

CHAP. VIII. Others reject presbyteriall government.
Qu. IS it lawful, seeing Gods church is independent upon any, except Christ,
as their supreme, and absolute ruler and head?

Answ. If that independencie forbid presbyteriall government, much more should
it forbid civil government, which does less participat in spiritual things,
and therefore is less able to rule according to GODS word. CHRIST only has
supreme and absolute authority, to rule in all lawful government: In church
government men's lives and consciences are ruled by church discipline, and by
GODS word, the sword of the Spirit: In policy civil laws, and the civil
sword must rule people, but their sword and laws must also be ruled by GODS
word. 2. All creatures depend immediately upon. GOD in their bodily and
spiritual existence, and being in the secret providence whereby he overruleth
their actions and operations, and in the secret blessings which he adds to
his bodily and spiritual benefits; but in giving the outward benefits
themselves, and in keeping people inorder, they have a mediat dependence on
GOD, by using his appointed outward means: thus Solomon, Prover. 8. says, By
me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. See Romans 13.1. Cor. 6. Of church
government, Christ says, Math. 18.18. Whatsoever you shall bind or louse on
earth, shall be bound or loused in Heaven. 3. The budding of Aarons rod, and
the giving of the keys of the kingdom of heaven to the apostles, are
infallible witnesses, that GOD has ordained church government to be ministered
by certain persons, qualified to that effect: and that every member of CHRIST'S
church has not this power, see Act. 15. 1 Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 2) 4. If any
offend his brother, why should the offended person tell him thereof secretly,
next before one or two witnesses, thirdly to the church, should not the Lord
only take order thereof, because of independancie? see Matthew. 18.15, 16. 5.
Paul in 2 Timothy 5.17. speaks of three sorts of elders, viz. pastors who
labor in the word, interpreting and applying it: Doctors who only interpret
it, and ruling Elders who labor only in discipline: some make only two sorts
of elders, viz. ruling and preaching elders, for both pastors and doctors
preach Christ. Presbyteriall government is a ruling of GODS church by these
elders: if it were unlawful, Paul would not vouchsafe double honor on these
that rule well. 6 Presbyteries, synodall and general assemblies are meetings
of such elders for presbyteriall government, the pastor with his elders rules
his parochin in small matters, remitting greater to the other assemblies. 7.
Every man knows not all things, therefore matters to be agreed upon are more
cleared when manyest wits meet together, and the consent and authority is
greater, when manyest votes agree together. Though Paul was an apostle, and
Barnabas a disciple, yet the church of Antiochia sent them with other disciples
to the apostles, and elders at Jerusalem, (they being a greater number of
qualified men) for the clearing of things questioned at that time, Act 15.

Quest. Seeing a congregation is a perfect church, and has all things
perteining to a church, may they not choose to themselves a Pastor, without
consent of a presbytery?

Answ. The foresaid independancie does not warrant it, more than that a
presbytery shall appoint a pastor unto a parish, without consent of the
people. 2. Every family, and every member of Christ has the same
independencie, then every family by it self alone, and every person by
himself alone, have as good warrant to choose to themselves pastors without
the consent of a congregation 3. If a congregation has more power and
authority than a particular person, this takes away independencie, or
immediate dependencie in outward government: so the professors of independencie
do: stablish a dependencie in popular authority, whereupon particular persons
depend. 4. GODS word, the rule of men's lives, and of all outward government,
depends not upon men in the being, and secret keeping thereof, for GODS
Spirit dyted it, and his secret overruling power protecteth it, but the outward
power of keeping it, and taking care to see it obeyed, pertains to civil
rulers, who are Custodes intriusque tabulae, they should see both church and
commonwealth obey it: This is civil government, the outward power of right
dividing and applying of it, and of punishing the offenders ministerially,
pertains to church rulers, this is church government: this rule warrandeth
not people alone to choose their pastors, nor pastors alone to choose their
flocks. 5. No congregation, nor particular persons have any perfection, that
pertains to a church, without CHRIST their head, the fullness of all
perfection, by whose Spirit his servants were directed to appoint preachers, as
follows, viz. the Gentiles choosed not Paul and Barnabas, but the church of
Antiochia were commanded to send them to the Gentiles, Act. 13. And when they
ordained elders in every church, the people choosed them not by themselves
alone, Act. 14.23. The Baereans choosed not Paul and Silas, but the brethren
sent them to Berea, Act. 17.10. and Paul committed GODS flock to the elders at
Miletum, whom the holy Ghost had made their overseers, Act. 20.28. The cities
of Crete alone choosed neither Titus, nor their preaching elders, but Paul left
Titus to ordeine them; Tit. 1.5. then contemn not the ministerial authority,
for CHRIST, the fullness of all perfection, has given to them the ministerial
keys of the kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. Does not both civil and church government perteine to every member of
Christ?

Answ. Yes, in respect of the good and profit effected by them, but not in
respect of their administration: as the benefits of sight, hearing, and
speaking, perteine to the whole body, and to every member thereof, but the
offices and actions of hearing, seeing, etc. perteine only to the eyes; ears,
and mouth. So peace and prosperity, the benefits of these governments,
perteine to every Christian, but the administration of Justice and Judgment,
etc. perteine only to sufficient qualified men, chosen to be rulers. 2. They
urge impossibilities who would have all Christians to be rulers, for infants
can not speak, young children want understanding. GODS word bids women be
subject to their husbands, albeit they have the same independencie with them:
the most part of men are distracted in their callings by sea and land: men
abiding at home can not rule altogether: If all speak. Command, and give out
laws together, who can hear and obey? all shall be in confusion: therefore GOD
commands, nature inclines, and necessity forces these governments to be
exercised by a few persons fitted and chosen for that end. I have not described
the offices and government of elders, but I prove their government to be
lawful, which some denied.

CHAP. IX. Some forbid the baptism of children before their years of
discretion.
QV SHould any be baptized, before they understand the articles of their faith,
and give an account thereof in the Years of discretion?

Answ. All the apostles, except Paul, were baptized, before they knew many
articles of the Belief, as the sufferings of Christ, represented by the water,
his resurrection, ascension, sitting at the right hand of GOD, and his coming
again in judgment: neither understood they the things signified by the LORDS
Supper, though they heard them from His mouth, until afterward. 2. They that
were circumcised, knew not the mystery thereof, being but eight days old:
therefore all people should be partakers of GODS ordinances, so far as they are
capable as did the apostles, and the circumcised. Infants are capable of
outward baptism, but not of the Lords Supper, neither of the meaning of any
Sacrament.

CHAP. X. It is said, that Ministers admitted by bishops, are not lawfully
called.
Quest. ARE any lawfully called by bishops or prelates?

Answ. If any admitted by the ministry degener into^ ambitious preiats, the
ministerial power not being rightly taken from them by church discipline, they
may lawfully admit others to the ministry, but nor to ambitious prelacie, nor
to teach erroneous doctrine. 2. If bishops be lawfully deprived of their
ministerial office, their admission of others is null. 3. If any start up from
a civil person to episcopacie, not being first a minister, his admission of
others, like as of other civil persons, is of none effect: No man can give the
power which he never received. John Baptist did preach and baptize, not being
called of men, but of GOD.

CHAP. XI. Some forbide to converse, or praise GOD in the society of infidels
or ignorants.
SHould we sing psalms, or exercise divine service with infidels, ignorant, or
reprobate people?

Answ. The LORD and his apostles never debarred Judas from their divine
service. 2. Simon Magus did abide a while with Philip. The Prophets fled not
from Saul, when he prophesied amongst them. We should separate our selves from
the wicked, and come out of Babylon, in forsaking their idolatry, and known
sins, least we be guilty through practicing or countenancing them: but if their
sins be hid, their society are not guilty thereof. 3. Know thou the secrets
of the heart better then CHRIST and his apostles, who served GOD, and preached
daily among infidels for their conversion. 4. If thou be sincere, and void of
pharisaicall pride, thou will rather condemn thy self than others, as did the
Publican, and Paul called himself the greatest of all sinners. 5. Some at the
LORDS supper did abhor to take the elements from the hands of laics, as they
said, least they had been wiches, warlocks, or profain. For the same causes
also they might refuse to take them from ministers for neither can they know
their hearts, and the ministers might abhor to take back again the cup from
the people, or to give them the elements. Notable apostats should be eschewed;
apostasy it self excommunicateth them from true professors, except they
repent. 6. How shall infidels be converted, if the faithful converse not with
them, chiefly at Divine service?

CHAP. XII. Some forbid Preachers to read the books of learned men, for
understanding Gods Word.
Quest. SHould Preachers read the Commentars of godly fathers and learned men,
for inabling them to preach Gods word: for the Lord in Matthew. 10.19, says,
Take no thought how or what you shall speak, for it is not you that speak, but
the Spirit of your heavenly Father that speaks in you.

Answ. He forbids only excessive care and fear, when they are accused
before judges, for the testimony of the truth, but not when they preach,
though at preaching also they should not exceed in fear. 2. The like speech is
in Matthew 6.25. Take no thought what you eat or drink, or put on: Did they
therefore always go fasting and naked, not using the means? 3. In Matthew. 10.
verse. 7.23. he tells what they should speak. 4. He bad them hear corrupt
teachers, viz. the Scribes and Pharisees, when they sit in Moses seat: that is,
when they teach conform to his doctrine. 5. The Spirit brought to their
memories the things that CHRIST taught them, and so helped them that used the
means, John 14.26: 6. The Lord himself made use of the learning of the Doctors,
hearing them, and asking them questions, Luke 3.46. He made use of their
speeches, Matthew. 16. viz. When it is evening, you say it will be fair weather,
etc. the like is in Luke 12.5. Matthew. 23.16. In his doctrine and parables he
made use of the customs and doings of the people. 7. Some speak of moral
things with a mourning accent, calling it a preaching from the heart, and from
the Spirit, though they never interpret GODS word, which is the chief intention
of the Spirit in preaching, and the chief duty of the ministerial calling
practiced by the LORD and his apostles, Luke 4.21. and 24.27. Act. 6.4. and
8.3. and Act. 7.) GODS word it self clearly opened is the most powerful mean
to enlighten the mind, to move the heart, and to waken the conscience. 9. Why
should Timothy give himself to reading and meditation, and commit the things
he heard of Paul to such as should teach others, 1 Timothy 4.13.19. 2 Timothy 2.9.
And why desired Paul the books and parchments left at Troas. 2 Timothy 4.13. if
they were taught only immediately by the Spirit at preaching? 10. Paul makes
use of the speech of Epimenides Cretensis, a pagan. Tit. 2.12. viz. The
Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies: And of a speech of
Aratus, the Athenian poet, Act. 17.28. We are also his of spring: that is, the
offspring or creatures of GOD: and of the inscription which the Pagans wrote upon
the altar at Athens, Act. 17. To the unknown God: and of the speech of
Menander, 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil speeches corrupt good manners.

Quest. We interpret Scriptures by other Scriptures, and so we show the meaning
of the Spirit in his word.

Answ. That is good to such as know the other Scripturs already, but to others
it is like words of an unknown language. 2. The illustration of obscure
Scriptures by other scripturs is no interpretation, except the words be plainer
nor the obscure scripturs: the words that are most in themselves, cannot be
interpret by other scripture because there are no plainer words in scripturs.
Item things that are but once written in scripturs, cannot be explained by
other scripturs, as the speech of Lomech, Genes. 4.23. I would slay am in in my
wound, etc. and the decree of Augustus, taxing all the world, etc. Luke 2.

3. The LORD did interpret Scriptures by things which were not in Scriptures,
as in Luke 4.21. Matthew. 11.5, 9, 14, and 27.43.46. verses: Act. 8.33.) 4. To
repeat the same things from diverse Scriptures helps our faith in showing the
agreement of the writers, but it interprets not, except the words repeated be
plainer: therefore use also for the ignorant literal expositions and
illustrations used by learned men, and amplify them for their capacity.

Quest. Men should not read, nor preach any thing but Scriptures, for Paul
said, 1 Cor. 2. I determined not to know any thing but Christ, and Him
crucified.

Answ. That is, He would know nothing as principally belonging to his calling,
but the doctrine of our salvation, procured by CHRIST and his sufferings: all
other sciences and learning should be servants unto this, otherwise how did
Paul know the means of learning foresaid. 2. Some affirm that themselves speak
nothing but the texts of Scripture, which they never did, nor can do, except
they only do the office of readers: for neither the speeches of their method,
analysis, and division of the text, nor their doctrine, application, and uses,
nor the numbers of chapters, and verses are in the text.

Quest. In using the works of learned men, you seem to allow their errors,
who allege the church, or counsels, or fathers, or popes, to be supreme judges
of contraversies, and infallible interpreters of Gods word?

Answ. Then CHRIST and his apostles should also seem to do the same, for we
imitate their practice. 2. If a king or his deputies make people understand his
laws, by the manner of speeches and words of the people, are the people
therefore interpreters of the laws: So is it if we interpret GODS word, using
the speeches of men.

Qu. How has Christ interpret Gods word in the Scriptures?

Answ. By making some Scriptures so evident, that they need no other
interpretation from the Scriptures, if the reader understand only the language:
Such are these, Are they not twelve hours in the day? The servant is not
greater than his master, etc. This evidencie and plainness is in stead of an
interpretation. 2. By providing other plainer Scriptures, for opening up of
obscure scritures. 3. Though we find not the meaning of some Scriptures, yet
we find sufficient for our edification.

CHAP. XIII. Some forbide the Scriptures to be read without interpretation.
Quest. IS it not lip-labor, and idle words, to read the Scriptures publictly
without interpretation?

Answ. All the Scriptures can not be read without interpretation, for many
Scriptures do interpret others.

Quest. But also they must be interpret by the studies and commentaries of
learned men, otherwise he that reads them is like a woman holding out a toome
pape void of milk, that the infant can not feed thereon?

Answ. Peter calls GODS word sincere milk 1 Pet. 2.3 therefore it feeds by
it self: hence he and other Apostles wrote epistles without such
interpretation. Some milk is thin, that children may easily feed on it, some is
hard and curded, which must be made thin and rarefied by herbs: So some of
GODS word is plain, and easy to be understood, some Scriptures are hard and
obscure, but they are rarefied and made plain, that people may understand their
Preachers by prayer, meditation and reading, obtain of the LORD the
understanding, the gifts of interpretation, right applying and dividing of the
word of the old and new Testament, which are the spiritual papes of the
church: these gifts are the herbs which rarifie this milk, and make it plain
for the peoples capacity. 3. The obscure scriptures should be read, for that
which is obscure to some is plain unto others; and also GODS Spirit can help
our faith by obscure scriptures, as when CHRIST cured the blind with clay,
which otherwise makes blind. This is known, when men say in their hearts, I
know whatsoever you obscure scriptures signify, it is for my well; and if it
be needful, GOD will revale it to me. 4. Moses without interpretation did read
publictly the books of the law, Exodus 24.7. Josua did the same, Jos 8.34, and
Shaphan the scribe, 2 King. 22.10. The Eunuch read Esaias, Act. 8.28. Philip
reproved him not for it: though he understood not the particular, yet he might
be edified by some generals in it, before that Philip taught him: he saw in
the words a rare example of patience and humility, fit for his imitation, viz.
One led like a sheep to the slaughter, that opened not his mouth against his
persecutors. No chapters in the scriptures wants some plain things in
generals or particulars.

5. Prophesies and obscure Scriptures should be read and heard as reverently
and attentively as the disciples heard obscure things out of CHRIST'S own mouth,
and they learned humility, not being wiser than CHRIST, making a gloss of
their own upon his words, but patiently did attend, until the LORD after his
resurrection, and the holy Ghost after his ascension did teach them.

6. John calls them blessed that hears and reads this prophecy, though
many things in it be not understood, and therefore could not be interpret,
Revel. 1.3.7. The forbidding to read GODS word publictly, is an indirect
forbidding it to be read altogether, which increases antichristian darkness:
for if it be like a toome pape read publictly without interpretation, what milk
can it give privately: See the next chapter.

CHAP. XIIII. Some deny the office of publict Readers to be lawful.
Quest. THe charge and office of publict readers, is it allowed by Gods word?

Answ. It is as warrantable as the charge of publict preachers, 1. for Moses a
prince and a prophet was commanded, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. to read Gods word
publictly, when the people should appear before the LORD, that men, women,
children and strangers may hear and learn, and fear the Lord, and observe the
words of the Law. 2. Gods word is written, that it may be read; therefore it is
called the Scripture: Neither is publict nor private reading forbidden in
scripture, both are commanded and allowed. The Eunuch of Ethiopia read
privately, and Moses publictly: so did Josua and Shaphon. mentioned in the
former chapter. 3. The Scriptures themselves are canonick preachings of Gods
properties, his works, mercies, judgments, providence, and promises, etc.
therefore they should be read publictly, either from the visible or from the
invisible book of the memory, if they can do it: but the reading on the
visible book is more sure. 4. Paul, Act. 13.27 testifies that the Prophets
were read every Sabbath Day. This was done without interpretation. for he
says, They knew not the voices of the Prophets, therefore they could not
interpret the things they understood not; but CHRIST and his apostles did
interpret them. 5. Preachers are also readers, for they read their texts
publictly, before they give the sense, so did Nehemie chap. 8. and CHRIST Luke
4.) They who dissallow the publict reading of GODS word, contradict themselves
in practice, for they are publict readers, when they rehearse publictly the
Lords prayer, or the blessing from the book of their memory, and the text the
ground of their sermons: yea, they and all the people read publictly the
paraphrases of the psalms, when they sing them in miter with a loud voice in
the open assembly: much more should the canonick Scriptures themselves be read
publictly. 7. Necessity also forces publict reading, for poor people that can
not read, may not suste in readers to their private families, therefore they
must hear publict reading, or else they shall never hear at all: Also it is a
honoring of GOD to hear his word reverently before men. If the ministerial
preachings be called Gods word much more the canonick preachings, dyted
immediately by GODS Spirit, are his word, but who can hear it without a reader?:
then it appertains to the kingdom of darkness, and of antichrist to
disallow this charge. 8. It is objected that some readers are drunkards or
profaine, but that should not hinder reading more then preaching, for some
preachers have the same blemishes. 9. It is objected that they understand not
many things which they read: so many make sermons on texts which they
understand not, but none hinders the lawful trial of the life and gifts of
such as enter in both the callings.

CHAP. XV. Private prayer of Preachers in the pulpit, and of people in the
Church, is forbidden.
Quest. IN a publict assembly should a Minister pray privately in the pulpit
before he begin his publict exercise? Is it not idolatry or superstition, as
some affirm, or ostentation, or against decency and good order, seeing he
has prayed for the same things already in his chamber?

Answ. Christ that night that He was betrayed, prayed thrice in the garden for
the same things. 2. If within the church a Iump of a wall fall down upon the
preacher, should he neither pray to God nor man for relief, because he prayed
for Divine protection in his chamber. 3. If men ascribe divine virtue or merit
to the prayer, because it is said within the pulpit, it is idolatry: if they
think it a more religious worship done in the pulpit then elsewhere, it is
superstition. If they do it to be seen of men, rather then to glorify God, it
is ostentation: if the matter of the prayer be not holy, and the manner be not
in reverence and humility, seeing the place is ordained for a holy use, it is
undecent, and against good order: But who can know the secrets of men's hearts?
Therefore all publict religious exercises may with as good reason be
discharged, for these evils may accompany them also.

Quest. Can private prayer edify in a publ^ct assembly?

Ans. Practice and example edifieth as well as preaching. 2. Example makes
people seek a blessing for their hearing, as the pastor does for his preaching.

Quest. In a publict assembly, should not preachers and people concur in doing
the same publict actions?

Ans. They should concur in the same matter, but not always in the same manner
and actions: at publict prayer all should pray, the Preacher with a loud voice,
the people in their hearts with a still voice. At preaching all should be
exercised in the word, one in preaching, the rest in hearing it: but at divine
praise all should sing with a loud voice. In a publict house men may pray for
particular blessings to themselves, with as good reason, as in a private house
they may pray for the church militant. 2. A publict house may admit private
exercises, as duly as a publict person may have private affairs: So Christ in
the temple bad one whom He healed, Sin no more, John 5.14. So said He to the
woman taken in adultery, John 8.11. So in a church men may meditat, read
privately, and do the private actions of faith and repentance: So the Preacher
first considers every word in his mind, least he preach in publict
unadvisedly, and out of purpose. 3. At any time of the preaching men may send
up ejaculations, without concurrance of the rest, and why may not the preacher
do so before his publict exercises, whether the people be singing psalms, or
hearing the word read? But when he enters in publict, their exercises should
give place to his more publict exercises; for they may read and sing at home
when they can not have preaching. 4. At reading the word only, at singing of
psalms a paraphrase of the word only; but at preaching, both the word, and
paraphrases, with the interpretation, doctrine and application are said:
therefore other exercises should give place unto it, as unto a greater shining
of the spiritual light of the same word.

Quest. Did not the Lord forbid his Disciples, in Matthew. 6.5. to stand in the
Synagogues, and corners of the streets, at private prayers: Ergo private prayers
should not be in a publict place.

Answ. It was never forbidden in the Scriptures. 2. Because he forbids to
do after the meaning of all these words together, forbids he therefore to
do after the meaning of any part of these words separat from the rest? He
forbids not to pray, nor to pray standing in the synagogues, and corners of
the streets, nor to pray desiring to be seen of men; but that they should not
pray standing in the synagogues, and corners of the streets, desiring to be
seen of men, as the hypocrites do, for they do all things for ostentation and
human praise, as the Lord faith of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.15. so
they abused fasting and praying, and giving of alms. 3. For eschewing of
hypocrisy, and vain glory, he bad the disciples do these things secretly, as
well as openly, which hypocrites do not. 4. They should do these things before
men, not for human praise, but to provock others to do the like, and to show,
that they are not ashamed to glorify God before men: they should also do them
privately, to be exercised in the sincerity of well doing, and to be frequented
with the neglect of humane praise, and thereby to acknowledge that they are in
the presence of the Al seeing God, before whom they dare not be idle from well
doing: they should esteem it a greater honor, if God alone behold them doing
good, then if all men and angels were looking upon them. 5. The affecting to be
seen of men at private prayer, is oftimes a notable glorifying of God: So
Daniel prayed 3th the day, opning his windows of set purpose to be seen of men.
Anna the mother of Samuel prayed privately in the Temple, in the sight of men,
1 Samuel Christ prayed for himself before men, Ioh. 17.1. and he willingly heard
many praying to himself before men, as Jairus for his daughter, the thief on
the cross, the Cananitish woman, Mat. 15. Peter prayed the Lord to wash his
hands, head and feet, John 13. the Lord corrected the matter, but not the
manner of his prayer. 6. The Lord in Mat. 5.16. says, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your heavenly
Father. No good works have mo heavenly virtues seen in them then prayer; faith
is seen in it, for we believe that God hears us, and hope for we expect a
good answer; and charity, for in the Lords prayer we pray for others, as we do
for our selves; and holiness, praying not to be led into tentation;
temperance, in desiring only daily bread; patience, in suffering; and meekness,
in pardoning wrongs, in the words, As we forgive them that sin against us: the
zeal of Gods glory in the first three petitions a thankful praising of God, in
this confession, For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, etc.

Quest. May any pray privatlie in a publict place, where there is no assembly?

Answ. They may, because of the reasons foresaid, whether they be forced
thereto, because they want secret chambers, or because the church is the most
secret house they can find; or, because occasionally they are in it, when they
would pray, or men are hindered by other business; to go to their chambers,
being far distant from them; or because men appoint churches for private as
they do for publict prayers, the one is as comely as the other; but men make
decency a reason for every thing, for the which they can not find a reason.

CHAP. XVI. The principal opinion of the Antinomians or Libertines.
The first proposition containing their chief tenet.
EVery faithful Christian being united to CHRIST by faith, is one with Christ,
and Christ with him therefore as it is impossible for Christ to sin, so for the
Christian.

Answ. If the union of two diverse natures make the united parts always equal
in properties, then the body is immortal, invisible, and an understanding
substance, like the soul, for they are united in one person; and all the
members may hear and see, etc. because they are one body with the ears and
eyes; and every faithful man is almighty, infinite, and eternal God and man
in one person, for they are united to Christ, God and man. 2. If any be united
to Christ, the Just are united to him: but Solomon says, they fall seven times
a day, Prover. 24.16) 3. Before that David was made King, GOD testified of him,
as Paul says, Act. 13.21. I have found a man according to mine own heart:
This was not the decree whereby GOD ordained him to be holy, it was a divine
testimony: yet after this, though he had union with Christ, he fell in
murder and adultery, and he numbered the people. 4. Job 3.1, 2. cursed the
day of his death, through impatiencie. Lot, whose righteous soul the Sodomites
vexed, 2 Pet. 2.8. fell in incest, and drunkenness, See proposition 3. and 6.

The second proposition.
THough Christians so long as they are but children in grace should have their
hearts filled with such fear of God, as Scripture recommends, yet when they
attain unto perfect love, they should be void of all fear, Luke chap. 1.
verse 74.

Ans. That text speaks of the fear of enemies, from which Gods people being
delivered by Christ, shall serve God in safety, not fearing them any more:
this deliverance is now begun, and shall be perfited in the life to come. 2.
Solomon, Proverb. 28.14. says, Blessed is he that fears always; they can
not be blessed without this perfect love. Moses in Deuteronomy. 6.13. says, Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him. Paul. says, Philip. 2.12. Work out
thy salvation with fear and trembling: He says not, Begin the work like little
children, but work it out like men of perfect age.

The third proposition.
CHristians effectually called, seeing they want nothing of the glorified
Saints, but the separation of the soul from the body, they need not all pray
for themselves, but only for others. Therefore the Antimonians never say the
Lords prayer.

Answ. The proposition is false, and the condition also, viz. that Christians
have such perfection of glory in this life, Gods word proves it not. 2.
Solomon, 1 King. 8.46. 2 Chronicles. 6.36 says, There is no man that sins not;
and Prover. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean? I am pure from my
sin. David Psalm. 40.18. says, I delight to do thy will, etc. This is a
perfection in number, but not in degrees; for he subjoineth in verse. 12. that
his iniquities are mo than the hairs of his head; and in verse. 13. he prays
for himself. They who are not effectually called, can neither pray for
themselves, nor for others. David also in psalm. 51. and 6. and 143. and
elsewhere. Daniel greatly beloved of the Lord, Dan. 9.18, 19. Steven full of
the holy Ghost, Act. 7.55.59. Elias 1 King. 18. The apostles after they had
received the holy Ghost, Act. 4.24, etc. Paul after he was ravished to the
third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. Old Simeon, Luke 2.29, etc. all these prayed for
themselves.

The fourth proposition.
CHristians effectually called have their souls refreshed at all times with the
sense of Gods love, mentioned Romans 4. The joy flowing from it actually,
continues without interruption, and that it neither can nor should be mixed
with sorrow, upon any occasion; for seeing they enjoy the presence of God, the
ground of their joy, the children of the marriage chamber should not mourn.

Answ. All creatures have continually the essential presence of God The
Regenerat have always his gracious sanctifying presence; for Christ said, I am
with you unto the end of the world, Math. 28.20. But no Christians in this life
enjoy his intuitive presence, wherein is fullness of permanent joy, without
interruption. Paul ravished to the third heaven, had his joy iuterrupted by the
messenger of Satan buffeting him: and 1 Cor. 4.8, 9. says, We are perplexed,
but not in despair, cast down, but not destroyed Perplexity interrupteth joy.
3. In 1 Cor. 5.6. While We are at home in the body, we are absent from the
LORD his soul being in his body; he was sensible of this absence: 2 Job 3.1, 3.
Cursed the day of his birth; and chap. 17.7. he says, My eye is dim because of
sorrow.

The fifth proposition.
A Christian may get such perfection of grace in this life, which after his
effectual calling needs no more addition, according to that Philip. 3.15. As
many as are perfect, be thus minded.

Answ. That place proves the contrary: for if their perfection needed no
addition, why adds Paul, That they may be thus minded? The preceding
verses, 12, 13, 14. show, how Paul confessed himself not to have perfection of
degrees, but of numbers, for He forgets things bebinde, and reaches unto
things before, pressing toward the mark, he subjoineth, Let these who are
perfect be thus minded, that is, Let them study continually to have addition
in grace, pressing toward the mark. 2. In Ephesians. 4.14, 15. he acknowledges
that they who should afterward be no more children, yet they should grow in
all things in CHRIST their head, and in 1 Cor. 4.14. speaking of himself, and
of others, he says, Though the outward man perish, the inward man is renewed
daily. 3. Peter (2 Pet. 3.17.18.) acknowledges that the people have a
steedfastnesse in grace, and exhorts that they fall not from it, but to grow in
it. Job speaking of the righteous man, chap. 17.9. he says. He shall be
stronger and stronger, the Hebrew is, He shall add strength.

The sixth proposition.
TRue and unfeined repentance, though it be a singular grace of GOD, yet it
should have no place in the soul of a Christian effectually called by grace,
for three reasons. 1. Because the gracious pardon of GOD is not in part, but in
whole, of sins bygone, present, and to come, and therefore seeing pardon was
obtained once, upon condition of repentance, the practice of repentance is not
to be renewed: 2. Because he that is born of GOD sins not, 1 John 3.9.
partly seeing the seed of GOD remains in him, and partly by reason of his
union with Christ: 3. Where repentance is, there must be grief and sorrow, but
the joy of a Christian must not be interrupted.

Answ. 1. They say, The effectually called should not repent: We say, They who
are not effectually called can not repent, because they want faith, the tree
that brings forth such fruit: How then shall faith and true repentance be
found in the world? 2. If any be effectually called, the Just must be so
called, but they fall seven times a day, and as often they rise again: there is
no rising again but by repentance.

Answer to the first reason. Pardon of sin was also obtained upon condition of
faith, as well as repentance: If repentance must not be continued nor iterat,
no more must faith; and so Christians having once believed and repented,
thereafter they must be infidels and impenitent Persons, contrary to the
Scripture, saying The Just shall live by faith, Hebr. 10.28.) 2. Paul 1 Cor.
4.16. says, The inward man is renewed daily, see Luke 17.4.) 3. They say,
Pardon is granted also for sins to come but in the first proposition they deny
that the effectually called sin any more, because of their union with Christ,
and in the second reason of this proposition they say the same: So Satan
fights against himself, his kingdom can not stand. 4. They say, Our bygone
repentance is also for sins to come: How can we repent the sins we know not: we
may depart from this life, to day, or at this hour.

Answer to the second reason. If any be born of GOD, it is the just men, but
they fall seven times in a day. In 1 John 1.8. it is said, If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, John numbreth himself among them, he being a father
of perfect age in grace, he calls GODS people, My little children, 1 John.
2.1. Things that make sin compleet and perfect, are final impenitencie, and a
full resolution to sin, and a full desire and delectation in sinning without
reluctation: they that are born of GOD sin not in this kind, their sins come
not to a full grouth, for before they sin they study to eschew it; in the act
it self of sinning they strive and wrestle against it: when it is committed,
they cut the threat of sin by speedy repentance; the seed of GOD by repentance
choaketh this wicked grouth. 2. Our union with Christ takes not away all
inherent sin in this life, but it works in us a hatred of all sin, a sorrow
for sins committed, a thirst for righteousness, and it freeth us from the
imputation, guilt, and punishment of sin.

Answer to the third reason, That the joy of Christians is interrupted. See
the answers to the fourth proposition.

The seventh proposition.
CHristians effectually called, are oblidged to sing the psalms of praise, as a
part of their task in heaven, yet it is unlawful for them to sing the
penitential psalms, for so men make themselves liars, not being under the
sense of Gods wrath.

Answ. No Scripture shows that any did sing these psalms when they were under
the fearful fense of Gods wrath, or under a fearful judgment, but at these
times they prayed for succor and relief all singing imports mirth, though
sometimes sorrow be mixed with it: The sentence of James was evermore true,
that in trouble men should pray, and in mirth sing psalms. Jam. 5.13.) 2. When
Gods heavy hand was on David, his roaring and crying was fittest, Psalm. 32.3,
4. When he confessed his sins, and had gotten assurance of remission, he might
cheerfully sing the same words which he used in his prayer in his agony: He
made not the 51. psalm in the time of his murder and adultery, his
forewardnesse and resolution to sin would not suffer him, nor yet when his
conscience was fore troubled for sin, the extremity of his grief and sorrow
would not suffer him, but afterward he made this psalm, that in the midst of
his mirth he might glorify God, by confession of his sins, and by calling to
remembrance the fearful estate that sin brought him into. 3. As Christ after
his resurrection, and begin glorification, receined some remembrance of his
sufferings and humiliation, to wit, the marks of his wounds: so in our mirth we
should remember our sin and misery, using the same words of the penitential
psalms, which we might also have used in our prayers. 4. Thus the most
sanctified men are not liars in singing the penitential psalms, because partly
they were under such dangers; which now they remember in their mirth, or they
are now under the like dangers, which if they have any confort, they may
confess in their mirth, or they deserve the like evils, because of sin, which
daily provocketh Gods wrath; but his sparing of them is equivalent to a
deliverance from such dangers, for albeit God loves his children, he loves
not their sin, but corrects them for it, because he loves them, Prover. 3.12

Qu. May we sing psalms in time of great trouble, or sense of Gods wrath?

Ans. We may, if in the mean time we have any comfort or assurance of our
deliverance; but if all things seem bitter or fearful, we should rather pray:
So Christ that night he was betrayed, after supper, he knew what troubles were
at hand, but he was conforted in the affurance of a joyful deliverance, and
therefore he sung a psalm: but in the gardein, when his confort was abatted,
and his agony great, he only prayed: Thus Paul and Silas did sing praises to
God in the prison, Act. 16. thus the holy martyrs praised God in the mids of
the fire, and of other torments, looking that God will turn all to the best.

The eighth proposition.
CHristians effectually called, whether they pray or praise in the immediate
worship of God, they so constantly fix their minds upon GOD, and upon the
divine purposes betwixt GOD and them, that though they praise or pray, so long
as the body is able without wearying, the mind wandereth not for a minut.

Answ. 1. That is to say, the mind can not be long upon a good purpose, for
they measure the constancy of the mind with the strength of the body, saying,
So long as the body is able, etc. The Lord shows that the body is not able to
continue long upon a good purpose, without wearying, speaking to his disciples,
that could not continue with him in watching and praying, viz. The Spirit is
ready, but the flesh is weak, Mat. 26.41.) 2. Paul in Romans 7.18. says, That in
his flesh dwells no good thing, and of his mind, he says, To will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not: And in
verse. 23. I see a law in my members, warring against the law of my mind. Thus
the flesh in Christians disquieteth the Spirit, chiefly at divine service,
which the flesh abhors, and the body hates.

The conformity of these Novations with peprie.
1. Papists use always privy meetings, and night meetings in places where
true religion is professed; so do the defenders of these novations: 2. The
hindering of the interpretation of GODS word in private families, as well as in
publict assemblies, strengthens antichristian ignorance and darkness. 3. They
diminish GODS word who leave out the words of the text, as the papists left out
the second command; and they diminish it, who make the text but a cipher, and
of no effect, as if it were left out: so do the papists unto all texts that
warrant conceived prayers, when they stint the set forms of the service book
only unto the people, so do others unto all texts that warrant set forms, when
they stint conceived forms only unto the people; they use variety of words,
but they stint their prayers unto conceived forms, both do restrain the
liberty of GODS Spirit, who allowed both the forms. All men may make use of
set forms, if their itching ears hinder not; but many weak Christians are
debarred from access unto their heavenly Father by prayer, because they
understand not, and can not make use of conceived forms and set forms are taken
from them, except that some say the LORDS prayer, but no further: GODS word
allows further, in that CHRIST and his apostles used also set forms. 4. They
who hinder the reading of prayers on paper, restrain the liberty of set forms
as they do, who hinder the reading from the invisible book of the memory. 5.
The singing of the psalms at the reading of every line, is like praying in an
unknown language, as the papists do, for both take Gods name in vain speaking
without understanding. 6. The continual all use of the words: Glory to the
Father, etc. is a popish superstition, the constant neglect thereof is an
antichristianlike extremity, to hide by silence the chiefest principals of GODS
truth. which should be confessed before men. 7. Papists also bless the people
in a legal manner. 8. Popish prelates are enemies to presbyteriall government,
taking upon themselves the whole power of church government: so some pretended
reformers would have the ministration of church government to be common to all
the people, that none should rule above themselves. 9. The baptizing of
children only in the the years of discretion, is like popish confirmation,
which is a baptizing of children in the years of discretion, as if the baptism
ordained by Christ were of no effect. 10. Some deny that Ministers admitted by
bishops are lawfully called, though some bishops be actual Ministers: popish
prelates do take the power of admission from Ministers, if they be not bishops:
so both are enemies to Ministerial authority. 11. Pharisaicall professors
separat themselves at divine service, not only from pagans but also from such
weak Christians, as are not much respected among men: so papists are much
addicted to separation, men of Church office are separat from the people, in
that they are called clergy and the people laiks: And prelates, as if they were
more holy, are separafrom the inferior orders, and they separat all sound
professors from themselves by excommunication. 12. The forbidding to read the
works of learned men and sound writers, is oftentimes practiced by papists, to
the maintaining of antichristian darkness. 13. To forbid reading of Scriptures
without interpretation, is a hindering of people, as the papists do to read any
Scriptures at all, for if people be persuaded that publict reading edfieth not,
what confort can they expect of private reading? 14. To forbid the publict
office of readers, brings also private reading in contempt, and so it makes
for hiding of Gods truth. 15 To forbid private prayer in a public place before
people, it hinders the glorifying of God before men, in a worship wherein God
should be most glorified; so Antichristianlike it obscureth Gods glory. To
forbid private prayer in churches, whether people be present or not, it makes a
superstitious difference of places, as if God should not be worshipped in every
place by Christians in their general calling, papists made the like difference
between the body of the church, and the chancell or quier. 16. The Antinomians
are members of Antichrist, for they are enemies to faith and repentance the
chief doctrine of the Gospel they either contradict or pervert the Scripturs
in all their tenets. 17. All the human traditions, herisies and errors, were
brought into the church under the pretense of piety and reformation of
religion, and many embraced them through blind zeal: thus are the foresaid
novations brought in, none of them have warrant from Scripture, which is GODS
revealed will.

An addition to the foutrh Chapter.
(...) 26. the Lord says to the Apostles, that (...) ^^^ost comes, he shall
teach you all things, and bring all (...) go we should only use conceived
prayers, for the Spirit (...) conceptions, and brings them to our memories?

Answ. When Christ, his prophets, and apostles used of times words which were
said before, had Gods Spirit no meddling with these words, because they were not
new conceptions. 2. That text speaks chiefly of preaching, which was the
proper end of their particular calling. If they should not preach, using
meditation, reading, and other men's travels, as means to help them, but only
look for new conceptions from Gods Spirit, it would almost seem that prayer
should be so used, but the text proves nothing of these. 3. The words of the
text seem rather to favor set forms of prayer; for the Lord says, The Spirit
shall teach, and bring all things to your memory, whatsoever I have said unto
you: there is no mention here of new conceptions, but of things which Christ
spoke to them before; the text shows that Gods Spirit brings to men's
memories things spoken before. 4. Gods Spirit gives new conceptions, and
makes to remember old conceptions forgotten, and also to keep in memory
conceptions not forgotten; and he gives men grace in their hearts to make use
of all conceptions new and old, forgotten, and not forgotten, whether they be
read from the visible book of paper, or from the invisible book of the memory.
5. Then as the Sun and Stars are not only Gods work, when they are newly
created, but also they still remain Gods work; so the conceptions of devout
prayer are not only the work of Gods Spirit, when they are newly dyted unto
men, but they remain still his work, whether they be written or keep in
memory and as it is a gift of God, that men may make use of the Sun and Stars
newly created, or at any time afterward; so it is the gift of Gods Spirit to
use religiously any devout conceptions, when they are newly conceived, or at
any time afterward. The poesy of Homer is his as well now as at the
beginning; so are the meditations of prayer the effects of a sanctifying
Spirit, as well no was before.

FINIS.
The second answers against some Novations.
Add these to the Chap. 1. viz. Question.
SHould we not use privy meetings, for exercising our talents; lest they be
given unto us in vain?

Answ. David's brethren were stronger then himself. The soldiers which Gedeon
removed were stronger then the three hundred which he retained, but God
glorifieth himself in doing great things by the employment of the weak ones,
and by the humble patience and ready attendance of the strong ones: GOD did
accept the zealous readiness of David in preparing materials for the temple;
as well as the travels of Solomon in building it. The service done to GOD in
the heart and intension, shall be as surely rewarded as the labors of the
hand, if these things be done in faith: All the waters of a river and the
clouds of the air attend on men's service, though all be not employed; So gifts
given unto men should glorify GOD, either attending on his service, or
employed in his service.

Add these to the Chap. 3. viz.
Quest. SEeing the set forms of prayers in scripture are but short tailed
prayers, as some affirm, can they be fit for our imitation who use longer
prayers?

Answ. If short prayers should not be imitated nor used, then we should neither
use the Lords prayer, nor yet pray after that manner as the LORD commanded. 2.
Neither should we use nor imitat conceived prayers, whereof the most part in
Scriptures are short tailed, as they call them. 3 The longest prayer in
Scripture was said by Solomon at the dedication of the temple: It is twice
repeated, viz. in 1 King. 8. and 2 Chronicles. 6. Thus Gods Spirit indyted twice the
longest prayer. Repetitions are often indicted by Gods Spirit, as in the 7
epistles. Revel. 1.2. and 3. chap. In the beginning of every epistle is written
I know thy works, And in the ending, Let him that has an ear hear what the
Spirit faith unto the churches. In Matthew. 23. Christ said 7 times: Woe be unto
you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites. In the books of the Chronicles are many
histories, which were in the preceding scriptures: The 4 Evangelists oftimes
repeat the same histories.

Quest. Is it not a sufficient and substantial prayer if the weak ones say,
God help me, or be merciful to me for Christ's sake, which they may learn at a
conceived prayer?

Answ. Much more is it sufficient for the strong ones, who have no need of so
many helps; and so they need not hear conceived forms, but they may learn at
set forms to say; GOD help me, or be merciful to me. 2. If then you conceive
that the stronger sort may have more abundance of matter and words, use also
set forms, that the weak may have more matter and words, which they can not
have by conceived forms, which they can not imitat nor understand: They may
groan or mourn at them only because others do so, or because it is a custom.

Quest. It is not mentioned in scriptures that the Apostles said the Lords
prayer. Ergo we should not say it.

Answ. Neither is it mentioned that they prayed in that manner: Should we
therefore not pray in that manner? 2. Neither is any prayer in scripture so
complete and perfect in parts as the Lords prayer. 3. Charity should persuade
us that they obeyed the Lord using this prayer, seeing no scripture says the
contrary. 4. Many Apostles knew they not the ten commandments? had they not
faith and repentance? and dyed they not in the Lord? albeit they are not
particularly mentioned in scriptures.

Quest. It is more evident that they prayed in that manner, then that they said
these words.

Answ. They never used in scriptures so complete a manner: But if the matter
was included in the Lords prayer, they used also some of the words of the Lords
prayer. Christ said, Father forgive them they know not what they do. Luke 23
Not my will but thy will be done. Luke 22. Father glorify thy Name, I pray
that thou keep them from evil. Joh. 17. Here are many words of the Lords
prayer.

Add these to the Chap. 4. viz.
Quest. SHould not set forms be said from the memory or from the heart, or
said perquier, seeing reading of prayers is not commanded in scriptures.

Answ. Neither is conceiving of prayers commanded in scriptures. 2. When Paul
bids read his epistle. 1 Col. 4 16. He bids read all the prayers as well
as other things in it. Such is the set forms in Chap. 1. verse. 2. Which ten
times said in his epistles. The valediction Chap. verse. 18. See the like in 1 Thessalonians. 5 18. When John. Revel 1. verse 3. calls them blessed who read his
prophesic, and Christ requires if some had read the scriptures. Math. 12.
verse. 3.5. Luk 6. verse. 3. they did not except prayers. 2. In Romans 15.4. Paul
says, Whatsoever things are written, are for our learning: how shall we learn
them, if they be not read? And if we learn them rightly, we should use them as
the matter requires: that is, we should pray, if the words of prayer signify
things needful for us; Be they words of praise, we should glorify God; be
they words of promise, stir up our hope; be they words of his law, learn
obedience. If the words pray for such as read the epistle, both the Readers and
Hearers thereof should concur, as they do with the prayers of a Preacher, and
so these prayers are set forms.

Quest. How is Gods Spirit said to interceed for us at prayer?

Answ. In that his graces planted in our hearts enable us to pray; and God
hears us, because he respects these works of his Spirrt in us: Christ
interceedeth for us, by meriting these graces; and the Spirit interceedeth, by
working, and making them useful in us; and God hears us, for the merit of
Christ and for the work of his Spirit in us.

Quest. Is the reading of prayers on a book lawful, more then the reading of
homilies?

Answ. No Scripture proves the publict and private reading of homilies to be
unlawful, more then the expression of preaching without reading; for Christ is
preached both the ways to our hearing, and Faith that comes by hearing
excepteth none of the ways: all the Scriptures are canonick preachings of
divine verity, and are continually read: So holy ministerial preachings,
which illustrat the Scriptures, may as lawfully be expressed with reading, as
without it, chiefly when newly conceived ministerial preachings can not be
had. 2. Reading of homilies is sometimes forbidden, not as unlawful in it
self, but because it makes idle ministers neglect their studies, and hinders
them to interpret many Scripturs, when they dwell upon a few homilies, for they
are called to interpret all the Scriptures, so far as they can. 3. The frequent
repetition of the same homilies is not so needful, as of the same prayers, for
many weak ones can not at all learn to pray, except they hear the same words
often repeated. Prayer is required in some measure of all Christians; but
though every Christian should admonish one another, yet it is not requisite
that every Christian should make preachings, which is the particular calling of
the ministry, but prayer belongs to the general calling of all Christians.
4. If men forget any words of homilies, they may speak other words of the same
sense for them, without prejudice to the weak hearer, who need not the words in
their memory, if they know the sense; but if they forget words of set forms of
prayer, though ministers speak other words of the same sense for them, yet it
perturbeth the memory of the weak ones, who can not learn to pray, except they
hear the same words often repeated, and not diversity of words of the same
sense. 5. Then it is better to read set forms, for oftentimes the best memories
forget words unawars: But they who esteem it Christian perfection, to change
evermore their conceptions, they want that excellency of perfection, which
Christ and his dearest Saints had, in the submission of themselves to the
practice approven by Gods word, in praying heartily, using the words which are
read, and used by the Saints of former ages, when in their consciences they
know that these words express their wants.

Quest. If a read prayer be lawful, then you may carry your prayers in your
pocket, or buy them in a book-binders shop, etc.

Ans. If conceived prayers be lawful, men may have them for a less price, for
they may conceive at their pleasure, if the essence of prayer consisted in
words heard or seen: But the words heard or seen are only images and
expressions of prayer, as painted men and beasts are but the images of men and
beasts, though they be so named; so the naked images, and vocal expressions of
prayer are called prayers: but if faith and fervent desires concur with the
outward images and expressions, that prayer is a true prayer; and the inward
desires alone are more substantial, and true prayers, then the outward
expressions alone, though both severally be called prayers. 2. These images in
a lively way teach us how to form our prayers; but the holy Ghost inableth us
effectually to pray, whether we use the means of hearing, or seeing these
images; so the most substantial prayers can not be born in a pocket, or
gotten from men, though the expressions may be gotten from men: it is only the
expressions which men receive from ministers, as they concur, but the holy
Ghost adds true prayer to the expressions heard or seen.

Quest. Christ after his ascension gave gifts unto men to be faithfully used,
should we then by reading neglect our conceptions?

Ans. You need not neglect them, seeing you may conceive as much as ever you
did before, or after reading. 2. True grace is more known in using the basest
means, as Christ and his servants used, then to use the most glorious means
that our lofty nature affects most.

Q. The Scripture bids us pray, it bids not read the words.

Ans. Neither bids it conceive the words. 2. We are bidden drink wine in a
cup at the Lords supper, we are not bidden drink in a cup of metal or timber,
shall we therefore use only cups of gold, rejecting silver cups? saying, they
are not Gods ordinance, because they are not expressly commanded to be used at
the Sacrament; and shall we say that cups of gold are Gods ordinance, because
we esteem most of them, when as God warrandeth not the one more than the
other? So we are commanded to pray, without naming any form, yet we should
rather use both the forms then both these cups, for examples of both the forms,
but not of the matter of sacramental cups, is mentioned in Scripture: Then when
generals are commanded in Scripture we should obey in such particulars, as
wherein true obedience may be seen: So we may pray truly in any form read,
or not read, if we do otherwise, the cause is not in the form, but in our
corrupt naturs, that can not use the forms which the dearest Saints used.

Quest. Is it not idolatry in Gods worship, to direct our faces toward a
book? we should look up to heaven, where God sits in glory.

Answ. If thou can read turning thy back to the book, thy speech would seem
to have some reason: But thou can not read without looking on the words, the
book is not a religious object of adoration, but an object of necessity. 2.
The words are images of the things signified, if it be idolatry to direct thy
face toward them at prayer, so should it be at the singing of Psalms, and at
the reading of scriptures; for it is Divine Service to read GODS word for
edification. 3. Elias upon mount Carmel, and our Savior in the garden, without
idolatry prayed, with their faces toward the earth:

Quest. How many ways does Gods word warrant us to exercise spiritual duties
in particular circumstances?

Answ. Three ways. 1. When Gods word expreslie commands the duty with the
circumstances, as when the Lord forbad his disciples to fast like the
hypocrites, he bade them wash their faces, and anoint their heads. 2. When
scriptures bring exampls of the godly practicing these duties in their
circumstances, as when Steven prayed kneeling. Act: 7. 3. It warrandeth by way
of consequent, that is, it commands the general duty not showing the
particular circumstances. But none can obey except in circumstances, which
enable them to obey. Then Gods word which commands the duty expressly,
consequently commands to use the same circumstances, because without them
they can not do the duty. We have a threefold warrant of setformes of prayer
in scripture: 1. It is commanded as in Math. 6. Luke 11. He sets down the
manner and form of prayer. 2. We have examples of set forms in scripture, as
the blessing of the Priests, it was also commanded. Numb. 6. And Christ prayed
thrice in the same words in the garden. So did the Psalmest in the Psalm. 80.3.
By of consequent the scripture proves that such as can not understand nor
imitat new conceptions, must use often repeated conceptions, or else they can
not pray at all: And learned men though they can conceive, by the same
consequent they must use set forms, or else they can not teach the weak ones
to pray: neither can they be free of the contempt of the practice of Christ,
and of his servants, and of the simplicity of GODS word, except they use also
set forms. They should not seem wiser but esteem it great wisdom to imitat
them in things lawful, which are neither cerimoniall rites that are abrogat
nor miracles that can not be imitat. Then as Christ commanded to give alms to
the poor, consequently he commanded Peter to cure a creple, because he had no
other riches. He commanded to baptize with water, consequently bids that in
cold regions infants should be sprinkled, least dipping in water kill or hurt
them. So in commanding us to pray, he wills us to use forms fittest for our
ability.

Quest. Commands he such as can not make use of conceived forms,
consequently to read or hear them read?

Answ. He wills. 1. that they pray in set forms, and concur with them. 2.
And if they can not read, they should get some set forms perquier, by hearing
them often repeated, by reading without reading. 3. And for that purpose
ministers should read them: for the best memories, through cold and other
deseases will forget words unawares, and they say other words of the same sense
for them; yet it confounds weak memories, who are forced to forget the words,
in whose place they hear new words repeated. A book is an artificial memory
ordained to help the weakness of natural memories, for this end God did writ
his law on two tables, and caused his prophets write the scriptures: Gods
Spirit works holy motions in men's hearts at the hearing of his word read, and
also of read prayers, which the enemies of read prayers confess were dyted by
Gods Spirit at the first conception; and what hinders him to be still
effectual with his own work?

Quest. Is it not a shinting of prayers, if the weak ones use set forms only?

Answ. It is rather a stinting when the strong ones use conceived forms only:
they stint the form though not the words: men stint their prayers when they
use only a part, and not the full liberty which God has granted in his word,
when they are able to use the rest also, which the weak ones cannot do. God
has given them liberty only to use a set form, for he has not made them
capable of any further, so that without miracle they can not conceive. 2. They
who urge them to conceive because others can conceive, they tempt God, as if
they urged them to speak all languages because the apostles spoke them: If God
enlarge their gifts none hinders them also to conceive. 3. Neither are they
so stinred, but they have liberty to concur with conceived forms so far as
they can. 4. But thou condemnest thy self in judging others who read prayers,
when thou read either prayers or praise unto God at the singing of psalms,
Gods Spirit works at the reading of both.

Quest. Do any despise set forms altogether?

Answ. Yea, for some affirm that Gods spirit helps no man's infirmities, but
at the first conception of prayers; but they fight against themselves unawars,
admitting sundry prayers in a set form. 1. They conclude the divine service,
saying the blessing in a set form. 2. Their conceived prayers are set forms
to the people that concur with them: It is a second rehearsing of their
prayers, for the people conceive them not. 3. They stint them to say Amen at
the end of every prayer: Amen is a short sum of the prayer. 4. The preachers
conclud their conceived prayers, with a set form like to this, To the Son, with
the Father, and with the boly Spirit be glory, etc. 5. At singing of psalms,
which is a set form of praise, they say also many prayers among them.

Quest. Is it not sluggishnesse to use set forms, neglecting variety of
meditations?

Answ. We neglect them not, for we conceive also. 2. If the use of set forms be
sluggishnesse, then the contemners of se: forms are sluggish, in using these
set forms foresaid, and the people which concur are sluggish. 3. It is a
greater sluggishnes when men apply not set forms unto their hearts, when their
conscience can not deny but they signify their wants: they can not pray
without noveltie of words. Some were moved to pray with set forms, taking them
to be new conceptions, because they heard not these prayers before, but
afterward they loathed them also: They knew not the working of Gods Spirit,
whereof they brag so much: they think Gods Spirit be like themselves,
delighting only in novelty of words, and abhorring his own words, which himself
dyted unto Christians before, so that he works no more by his own words, as
they imagine; but they who grow in grace, despise not to use them also
afterward, as did Christ, and his dearest Saints.

Quest. Can book prayers be steadable at our departing from this life?

Ans. The last prayer that Christ said upon the cross was a book prayer,
written in the book of the psalms, He rehearses it from the book of his
memory, Into thy bands I commit my Spirit, Psalm. 31) 2. Oftentimes at death
God holds before men the book of his judgments, wherein all their senses may
read sufficient matter for meditation and prayer. 3. A well formed prayer for
their present condition may be read to the great confort of distressed souls,
who cannot read by themselfs

Quest. How know you if the words of set forms be dyted by Gods Spirit?

Answ. If they express things agreeable to Gods revealed will, in his word.

Quest. How know you if Gods Spirit teaches us effectually, to use them
rightly?

Answ. Every man knows best what is in himself: if Gods Spirit work in his
heart, he prays expressing the words with faith, with fervent desires and
bumilitie, intending Gods glory, his own salvation, and the good of others:
though his expression be weak, his desires may be fervent; no otherwise are
conceived prayers known to be dyted and made useful by Gods Spirit: then as
the reading of a supplication hinders it not to be a supplication unto a
King, and the reading of a psalm hinders it not to be a praise unto God, so
the reading of prayers hinders them not to be prayers, but it furthereth us
being ready to supply the defects of our memory, and it keeps our minds
from wandering when our eyes and memories are fixed upon the same matter, for
diverse objects of the sight oftimes perturbeth the memory: and if we have not
the words in our memory, a well formed prayer in the book of things
perpetually needful, will surnish unto us matter and words for our expression:
and it brings our wants to remembrance, Gods Spirit assisteth all who use the
lawful means and confide not in their own strength.

Quest. Do you match two or three read lines with Gods Spirit, as if they could
enable us to pray?

Answ. Neither can two or three new conceptions enable us to pray. 2. By what
spirit do you calumniat us as contemners of Gods Spirit, unto whom we never
matched the Canonick Scriptures, much less conceived and set forms; all which
profit nothing, if Gods Spirit work not by them 3. In the psalm fourth in
miter. O Lord grant us thy countenance, thy favor and thy grace, all such
prayers of the psalms in miter are paraphrases of the text, as the read prayers
are of some petitions of the Lords prayer: Thou by reading them at singing,
condemnest thy self in judging others who read prayers, which is more needful
then singing of psalms in this life; if at the reading the words of prayer in
the psalms, thou prayest not in thy heart, if the words express thy wants,
thou playest the hypocrite: and if thou pray, then thou read a set form of
prayer as well as of praise; for they are not new conceptions: You confess
that men speak by the Spirit in their new conceptions: our set forms at the
first expression were new conceptions: then who binds the Spirit to the set
forms of prayer in miter, more then without miter? or who binds him to a read
praise, more then to a read prayer? The Spirit inableth us to both, 1 Cor. 14.
and Ephesians. 5.18) 4. Naturally all men abhor prayer more then singing of psalms,
because of the melody in singing: if they pray without singing, they supply
the melody with novelty of words, which is admired by Pagans, as well as by
Christians: it proceeds not from Gods Spirit in christians, but from satan,
and from their natural part, to abhor any form of worship, which was in
request with Christ and his dearest saints, and was dyted by Gods Spirit in his
word: if Gods Spirit work not with him that reads, because the conceptions
are not his: so is it with him him that concurreth, for the conceptions are not
his, but if both apply the words to their hearts, the conceptions are theirs as
truly as they were unto the first expressours: neither can any now living be
the first expressour, for many have had the same conceptions before.

Quest. Reading seems more barnly, and therefore it is fitter for children
then for aged men: it seems barnly, because the words are few and often
repeated, etc.

Answ. Seeing Christ the ancient of days, and his Prophets and Apostles did
read from the book of memory, it becomes men, if they were older then
Methusalem, and wiser then Solomon, to read upon the artificial memory of
books: At Divine Service Christ did read on the book of Esaias, Luke 4. verse. 16.
The apostles did read also on visible books, for Paul had books and
parchments. 2 Timothy 4. Gods Spirit who was effectual with Christ, reading a text
of old conceptions; will also be effectual with his members, reading old
conceptions in any Divine Service. 2. The censuring of read prayers is an
indirect disallowing of reading the Scriptures, except the Lords Prayer which
expresses all our wants, and that for the same reasons which they use against
read prayers, viz. They are read: They express not all our wants, Men know
them before they read them, They are often repeated, They are not their
conceptions who read them. 3. Thus thou disallowest that aged men sing psalms,
which is more barnelie then reading of prayers, for children delight more in
music: But except we be humble like bairnes in submitting our selves to the
simplicity of Gods word, we shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. 4.
Reading and conceiving prayers, without feeling, is both bairnly and manly, for
it is natural to young and old, to pagans and Pharisaicall professors; but if
there be a sense and feeling, Gods Spirit works it above nature. 5. If few
conceptions ma^^ prayers bairnly, then our set forms are more manly then almost
all the prayers in Scripture of any form for we express mo conceptions in
them. Thus our Novators will seem to have more of the working, and presence of
Gods Spirit, then all Gods Saints in Scripture, and out of Scripture, who
follow not their errors, because they have longer prayers. God grant that they
devour not widows houses, under pretense of long prayers, and that they think
not to be heard by much speaking, as Christ speaks of the Heathen, Matthew. 6.
Shall Christ and his Saints in Scripture be esteemed less zealous, less
religious, and of less perfection, because their prayers were shorter, and
because many of their prayers did not express all their wants.

Quest. Why has Gods Spirit mixed prayers with the praising of God in the
Psalms?

Answ. That in our mirth and singing we should not be exalted out of measure,
but in the midst of our mirth we should remember our misery, in seeking
iuccour and relief. 2. Because the prayers include in themselfs a confession of
his praise: for when we seek good things, it is an acknowledging that God is
able and willing to give them: this is a great praise. 3. Christ in the Lords
prayer did join praise with prayer, to stir up our courage, in the assurance
that God will hear us, when we say, For thine is the kingdom, power, and
glory, etc. And in the psalms prayer is joined with praise, for the same end
also; thus we pray in a cheerful manner, and praise God in a modest gravitie.

Add these following to the Chap. 5. Of formal and material praise in the
psalms.
Quest. WHat is divine praise formally?

Answ. It is a serious and loving commemoration of any good thing that is in
God, or from God, which is done to the setting forth of his excellency and
worthiness: Thus if the words express directly his properties, and noble acts
to be in him, or from him, whether in a proper or figurative speech, it is a
formal divine praise. It is acted two ways; first, without melody, and in
prose, as when Job said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed
be the Name of the Lord, Job 1. and David said Let us fall into the hands of
the LORD, for his mercies are great, 2 Samuel 24. Secondly, or with melody
vocal, or isntrumental. If it was vocal only, the Hebrews called it Shir, a
song; if instruments were added to it, then it was called Mizmor, a psalm.

Quest. What is divine praise materially, when this formalitie is not
expressed?

Answ. When the good things which procure praise unto God, or prove Him to be
praise-worthie, are mentioned, not expressing any confession that they belong
unto God, as the first five verses of the first psalm prove by way of
consequent, that God is good, and bountiful, in that they are blessed, who sit
not with scorners, but meditate continually on Gods law, etc. If God were not
good and bountiful, they could not be blessed nor prosper; for as wicked
tyrants afflict the godly rather than others, so would God do, if he were
unmercifull and cruel. 2. When the wicked deeds of Doeg and Achitophell, and
others are mentioned, it commends the long suffering patience of God, in that
they lived on the earth a moment, and his justice is more manifested in
punishing them. 3. In the psalms 6.51. and 143. in their prayers, by way of
consequent God is acknowledged to be Almighty, and merciful, otherwise men
would not seek such things from him. 4. All formal praise consists in an
expressed confession and acknowledgement, that the good things are in God, or
from God. The material praise has not this confession and acknowledgement
expressed, but understood, and included in the words, and may be proven to be
procured and merited, by the things mentioned in the words. 5. The material
praise is as true and real as the formal: as true praise is included in this
prayer, Leave not my soul in hell; as when we say, Thou have not left, or do
not, or shall not leave my soul in hell, by way of confession, but the praise
included in the prayer is not so conspicuous.

Quest. Why is the book of divine praise called the book of the psalms, seeing
many prayers are also in it?

Answ. Because these prayers are also divine praises materiallie, though not
formallie, for divine praise is included in them. 2. Many works are named from
the things in them, which are of greatest moment, or manyest in number: a book
of Jeremy is called the Lamentations, for it is full of mourning speeches; yet
divine praises and prayers are also in it: the books of the Kings have also
histories of some priests and prophets; the Lords prayer has also some formal
praise in it: viz. For thine is kingdom, power and glory, etc. but mo formald
petitions and prayers are in it, praise is included in them: in the first
three, for things that concern Gods glory; in the last three, for things that
concerns man's necessity.

Quest. Can we in one sentence and in the same words, both praise God, and pray
unto him at once?

Answ. Many sentences have formal praise, which include no prayer in them, as
when we say, God is Almighty and Eternal, God dwells in heaven: Christ is
the only begotten Son of God: he is God and Man in one person, but no sincere
prayer wants divine praise included in it: the formal prayers of the psalms
have material praises included in them, and so he that sings the prayer does
also praise. 2. Two contraries in extreme degrees can not be in one subject, as
they may be in their remitted degrees; prayer and praise are diverse things,
but not contrary: then as the Sun in one beam of light may send down both heat
and illumination at once, so we may send up unto God prayer and praise in one
sentence, whether the prayer be formal and the praise material; as, O Lord
rebuke me not in thine anger, for it redoundeth to Gods praise, that his
reproof should be feared: or the praise formal, and the prayer included in it
material: as a leper said unto Christ, If thou will thou can make me clean:
Item, A broken and contrite beart, O GOD, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51. Or
whether a formal prayer, and a formal praise be together in one sentence; as,
Give ear, O sheepbeard of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, Psalm.
80.) 3. Joy and sadness are contrary, Christians may have them together in
their remitted degrees in this life; but in the next world the Elect shall have
joy, and the reprobat sadness in their extreme degrees. In this life if the
joy of Christians be greater then their sadness, they should sing formal or
material praises, or prayers: if their sadness be greater, they should not
sing at all, as James says; but rather pray without singing, though praise be
included in the prayer, they should express less mirth, when their sadness
exceeds their joy. Quest. When we sing a psalm which has prayers in it, we
sing to the praise of God, is this singing a formal, or material praise?

Answ. Both material and formal praise may be sung to the praise of God. 2.
In respect of the music our praise should be formal keeping the right manner
of the tune: and herein they transgress, who interrupt musical praise giving
place to a reader, at the end of every line, by reading the line following. The
pauses used between lines is a comely ornament unto singing, and is as necessar
to distinguish the lines, or principal parts of the tunes, as it is necessar
that shorter pauses should divide every note from another: without distinctions
and pauses all the tune should be but one note: Music without number and
division is not music: but musical praise is deformed by a non musical
interruption of reading, and Gods ordinance ordained to cheer up men for divine
praise, is deformed and rent, and so it abaiteth cheerfulness, they do evil
that good may come of it, choosing a deformed musical praise, when they may
have a rightly formed praise, They do it, that ignorant people may sing with
them. But humane will worship can not take a good effect, for Gods Spirit never
taught it; Therefore in stead of praise, they abuse Gods name, because they
sing oftimes many lines, not knowing what they say of God, even when the
sentence is ended. Their blind zeal do not read sentences of prayer, that the
ignorant may learn to pray which is more needful in this life: It were better
to sing perquier but one verse of a psalm all our lifetime, then to deforme
Gods worship, thus singing all the psalms. Some use this deformity, because
niggardnesse hinders them to buy a number of psalm books, and slugishnesse
hinders them to teach their domestics to read. 3. Where there are two, or
four, or six or mo lines in a sentence, before the last line be heard, the
ignorant know not what they have sung, and so they play the hypocrit and abuse
Gods name, seeming to praise GOD when they know not what they say of God, and
when the last line is read, many know not the sense, because they have
forgotten what was sung, and so still they abuse Gods name: And such as know
the sense also abuse Gods name, for they have but sung the last line only with
understanding: It is a none sense to sing a part and not the whole fentence
with understanding; And though some have the psalm in their memory, yet they
deforme Gods worship, interrupting it with reading. When ignorant papists pray
in Latin, not knowing what they say, it is as true Divine worship as when we
sing words of praise in our own language, not knowing what we say. If any sing
reading on a book, not taking heed what he says, it is but his own fault, and
he may amend it at other times, but when a multitude is forced by a law or
custom to do it, this is more antichristian like; the ignorant might praise God
in their hearts with a hundredth fold more true devotio^, and with understanding
if only the psalm were read to them in prose or in verse. But the pride of the
obstinat will not amend, though they know their errors. In respect of the
transcendent condition of all the psalms, the praise of every psalm may be
called formal, for every psalm has some formal praise in it, even the
penitential psalms, as Psalm. 6.8, 9. Psalm. 51.16, 17) 4. Material praise in
singing may be made formal, by adding to it, and concluding it with a sentence
of formal praise, as Glory to the Father, and to the Son etc, importing, that
not only the glory of all things, but particularly of the things mentioned in
the words presently sung; belongs to the Father, etc. If the ignorant get
these words, with the last verse of the psalm 28. viz. Thy people and thine
heritage, etc. they may sing them orderly, albeit they sing no more with the
rest at all occasions; for these words of prayer and praise are as substantial
and plain, as any words in the book of the the psalms. 5. When men sing words
which have no formal confession, they may make the praise formal in their
hearts, if they consider and acknowledge what work God has in the things
mentioned by these words. 6. When formal prayers, and other speeches are
equivolent to formal praises, they may also be called formal praises.

Quest. How are they equivalent to formal praises?

Answ. If a formal praise be added to a formal prayer, in the same sentence,
as in the third petition of the Lords prayer, Thy will be done in earth etc.
and Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy loving kindness,
etc. 2. If in the prayer Gods name be expressed, with epithites of praise, as,
Give ear O shepherd of Israel Psalm. 80) 3. If the matter and purpose of the
prayer concern the manifesting of GODS glory, in express words, as in the
first two petitions of the Lords prayer. In Psalm. 115, Not unto us O Lord, but
unto thy name give the glory: The third petition of the Lords prayer is a
formal praise, both in this respect, and in the respect forsaid. 4. Speeches
that are not formal praises by expressed confession, if they attribute unto
God honorable and divine things, by insinuation, they are formal praises by
insinuation, as in Psalm. 2. Serve the Lord with fear and rejoice in trembling,
for it is a direct formal praise that God should be served and feared.

Quest. Who are actors of Gods praises?

Answ. The elect men and angels act his formal praises, when they consider his
excellent works, and the good things in them, and the good things of God
manifested in his word, and works, And they ascribe all the honor and glory
thereof unto God, by confessing him to be the Author, Conserver and Ruler of
all, more Excellent then all, void of all imperfections, and wants that are in
all, etc. They act his material praise also, in that themselves are the
excellent works of God, a matter of great praise; and therefore they should
take notise of themselves, to be stirred up to praise God formally, as they are
always his praise materially. 2. All other creatures act only his material
praises, that is, They are a matter of his praise, in that they show forth in
themselves admirable effects of his power, wisdom, love, bountifulness,
justice and holiness, etc. which things prove and procure most great praise
and glory, And therefore in the psalm 148. all creatures are exhorted to
praise God, that is, They should show forth the excellent things that God
placed in them, that the great creator of all may be taken notise of thereby
and praised. The psalmest speaks to dumb creaturs who can not make answer,
but in that God inableth them to hold out and show to the world his excellent
gifts, it is in stead of an answer, for it is a material praising of God. And
also his speech to creatures void of understanding provokes men to take notise
of Gods gifts in the creatures, to be stirred up to praise God formallie, lest
they prove worse then the creatures.

Quest. Our Psalms in meeter, are they a translation, or a paraphrase of the
Hebrew text? You call them paraphrases, as the set forms of prayer are of the
Lords prayer.

Answ. The miter shows them to be paraphrases, for it has the meaning of the
text in mo words then a translation requires. 2. When translators add mo
words; then the just interpretation requires, it is, because the meaning of
the text can not otherwise be understood, and yet the text that has these
words added, if with these words all be considered, as parts of one sentence,
they are a short paraphrase, because more then the text is added to explicat
the text: But when all the words or sentences of the book are explicat and
illustrat by other words, there the whole work is a paraphrase. 3. The most
learned Latin Poets call their psalms turned mirer a paraphrase; Buchanan
calls his psalms Paraphrasis Poetica, because sometimes sentences, figurative
speeches, and other illustrations, and words are added to the text: sometimes
the words of the text are turned into other words, and sentences of the same
sense: these things are done in the whole work, that the Poet may have choose
of words to make the miter agree with the text: so is it with our psalms in
miter, for no Scriptures can be turned into miter by a naked translation.

Qu. If our psalms in miter be a paraphrase, then we may make paraphrases of
all the Scripturs, and so read them publictly. A. That is not needful, for many
scripturs are understood at the reading without a paraphrase. 2. If our psalms
in meeter were only the translated text, then Preachers should make sermons on
them, and readers should read them publictly, as they do other scripturs, and
the verses in miter cited to prove matters of divine verity. 3. It were not
hurtful, but profitable for the hearers, sometimes to read paraphrases of all
scriptures; but this is supplied by preaching, catechizing, and by the plainnes
of many scripturs, at the reading then these paraphrases are not so needful.

Quest, Seeing the translators of other Scripturs add some words to the text,
why may not the translations be called paraphrases?

Ans. If the whole scripturs had illustrations, and other helps forsaid, in
every sentence as the book of the psalms has, then might it be so called, but
such helps are few, and seldom found in other scripturs.

Add these following to the chap. 6. viz.
GIve some example in the book of the Psalms, where the whole sentence Gloris
to the Father, and to the Son, etc. is said in substance.

Answ. In Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, etc. that is, The Father said
to the Son, sit thou at my right hand, etc. and verse. 2. the holy Ghost is
called The rod of thy strength: He is a golden scepter, holden out to comfort
the godly, but an iron rod to bruise the wicked; thus glory is given to all the
three persons, the Father is glorified, in subduing the enemies of Christ; the
Son is glorified, in sitting at the right hand of God, and that his enemies
shall be his footstool; the holy Ghost is glorified, in that he is the
effectual rod of Gods power, ruling in the mids of Christ's enemies, and
subduing them: and in verse 4. the Eternity of the three persons is expressed,
in that the Lord made Christ a Priest for ever, without beginning, and without
ending, because He is after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. He can not be a
priest for ever, except God his Father continue for ever; for none can be a
priest, without a God unto whom he must offer sacrifice, and with whom he must
interceed for people: the holy Ghost must also continue for ever; for if the
anointing whereby Christ is effectual shall cease at any time, then Christ
could no longer remain a priest, nor do that office. So in this psalm God is
glorified according to the full sentence wherewith we conclude our psalms.

Quest. Pope Damasus caused first that sentence be sung in Gods Kirk, should we
not reject it, because papists first practiced it?

Answ. Shall no man make use of cities, tents, harps, and musical instruments,
because cursed Cain builded the first city, and his children invented the rest?
Balaam the false prophet fist said, Let me die the death of the righteous.
Palladius sent from pope Celestine, brought the gospel first into Scotland; and
one Augustine sent from pope Gregory, brought it into England, when popish
superstition was greater then in the days of Damasus, who lived in the 400
year, Palladius in the 500. and this Augustine in the 600 year of Christ. The
builders of Babel first spoke all languages, shall we therefore absteene from
all these things? 2. Therefore let us embrace the good things agreeable to Gods
word, which they made use of, but cast away the infidelity of Balaam, the vain
confidence of the builders of Babel, the superstition of papists, who used this
sentence at the mass, and at the end of every psalm read or sung. 3. Pope
Damasus said not first the substance of that sentence, neither used he it first
in musical praise; the substance of it was said in Revel. 4.8. and it was sung
when the psalm 100. was first sung; and other passages of the psames have the
sentence included in them, as the psalm 45. verse. 7. psalm 2. and salm 136.

Quest. Is it comely at one exercise of divine praise, to sing parts of diverse
psalms together, as if they were parts of one psalm or song, and that in
publict meetings?

Answ. Gods Spirit approves it by the like practice, in 1 Chronicles. 16 7. When
David gave a psalm to thank the Dord, into the hands of Asaph and his brethren:
this song or psalm was made up thus, to wit, from the verse eight of the
chapter, unto the end of the verse 23. are written fifteen verses of the
psalm 105. and from the 23 verse, unto the end of the verse 33. are written
the words of the whole psalm 96. and in the verse 34. is the first verse of
the psalm 107. all is one song. Item the first five verses of the psalm 108. are
the last five verses of the psalm 57. and the rest of the psalm. 108. are the
last eight verse. of the psalm. 60.

Quest. Is it not good to practice some of these erroneous novations, for
eschewing of shisme, and for keeping of union and conformity with some
religious persons, who in great Zeal defend them.

Zeal in defending error is not a godly but a blind zeal; it is thus known, in
that they defend these errors as carefully as they do the clearest principals
of divine verity, and they persecute such as embrace them not, as if they were
heretics. 2. Would thou keep union with them in their errors, rather than
with Christ and his apostles, who were immediately taught by Gods Spirit in
divine verity, which admits not such novations. By so doing, you eschew
not, but you entertain a most dangerous schism, dividing your selves from the
purity of the most loyal and infallible preachers of the truth. 3. If for to
make you strong with humane friendship you so despise Gods truth, that you make
errors equal unto it, professing both together, as if they were both but one
truth, then it will be a just reward, if God suffer you to fall by degrees into
palpable antichristian darkness and if God kindle unquenchable hatred and
discord, between you and your affected society, woe shall be to him that makes
flesh his arm. Jerem. 17.5.

FINIS.

