A SERMON AGAINST DRVNKENNES: Preached at Ware by DANIEL DENT Bachelour in
Divinity, and Fellow of Kings College in CAMBRIDGE.

ESAIAS, 58. 1. I Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. IN
DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

Printed by the Printers to the University, of CAMBRIDGE.

TO THE RIGHT Worsh. and highly honored Mris MARY MORE, all happiness here in
this life, and in that to come.
Right worshipful,
I Know the world will be offended with me, that I dare presume to set out a
plain Sermon against drunkenness in these times, wherein so many learned
handwritings are extant already, decked and adorned with much eloquence, enough
to strike amazement into the hearts of all Belshazzars, that shall take the
least view of them: yet if they consider the motive that induced me hereunto,
they will, if not Apologize for me, yet abate something of the rigor of their
censures. Now my maine and only inducement to be in print, was not, as men
usually plead and I might also if I would, the importunity of friends, or that
I thought in my judgment these vulgar notes of mine fit to come to the press;
but especially a vehement desire which I had to testify unto the world, how
feign I would (if I could tell how) express my thankfullnes unto you, for your
favors conferred upon me from my very cradle unto this present; which have
been so many that they cannot be specified: for you have done with me as the
young Lady did with Moses, not only saved me from the waters, the bitter
waters of penury, but also nursed me in those famous places, where both the
learning of the Egyptians and the religion of the Israelites do
superabundantly flourish. I am persuaded you take no pleasure to see your
goodness trumpeted to the world; for you know that Virtues fairest Theater is a
good Conscience: but yet thankefullnes does not love to smother benefits, but
teaches us to acknowledge from whom we have received them. Be pleased
therefore to receive these few notes, as from one whose highest pitch of
ambition is, to be thankful unto you for your many and many favors. I hope
your worship will not be offended with me, that I dare trouble you with the
reading of a plain Sermon of this subject, whose great endowments of Nature
the world knows can reach deeper speculations: But you out of your wisdom
will consider my honest intentions; in confidence whereof I cease to be further
troublesome unto you, craving pardon for my boldness, and humbly entreating the
continuance of your favor to him, who acknowledges himself

Bound to you in all dutiful observance, DANIEL DENT.

A SERMON AGAINST DRVNKENNES
JOEL 1. 5. I Awake ye drunkards, and weep and houle all ye drinkers of wine;
for the new wine shall be taken from your mouths.
IT is DAVID's assertion, Psalm. 107. 34
that God turns a fruitful land into barrenness for the sins of those that
dwell therein: the truth of this we see verified here in the land of Judah, a
fruitful land, a land that flowed with milk and honey, yet became barren for
the sins of those that inhabited the same; for so we may read in the verse
going before; That which the Palmerworme had left, the Locust had eaten, and
that which the Locust had left, the Cankerworme had consumed: So that between
them all they had destroyed the fruits of the earth, and a heavy famine was
fallen upon the whole land of Judah.

I am not ignorant that some of the Fathers would have these words to be meant
tropically, and not literally: Saint Jerome by those creatures understands the
enemies that* God did send to overthrow them: some write, that by the
Palmerworme is meant Theglaphalasar; by the Locust, Salmanazar; by the
Cankerworme, Senacherib; and by the Caterpillar, Nebuchadonazer, who last of
all took the Nation captive; but I rather, with Theodoret, take these words to
be meant literally, though in the next words of the Text, we read of a Nation
coming into the land, mighty and strong. It is usual with the holy Ghost to
style them by that name of people, or Nation. Solomon describes the Ants to be
a people not strong; Prove. 30. 25. 26.
the Conies to be feeble folk, the Locusts to have no king, and yet to go
forth by bands: and so here we see, though these creatures have no king, yet
God marshalls them all in order, to bring a famine upon Judah: one year he
sent an army of Palmerwormes; another, of Locusts; a third, of Cankerwormes; a
fourth, of Caterpillars; and these for four years together destroyed the
vines and fruits of the earth, and for so long brought an heavy dearth upon
the whole land. Now the Prophet, seeing this heavy judgment of famine to have
fallen upon the land, he labors to awaken all by true repentance; as that is
the fittest time to moove to amendment of life, when Gods judgments are upon
the earth; for then if the inhabitants thereof will not learn righteousness,
they never will. And as the Prophet awakens all to repentance, so he gives the
first on set upon Drunkards, and that not without cause; for as they had the
chiefest hand in pulling down Gods wrath and vengeance upon the whole land, so
there was good reason that they should be the forwardest in reversing that
judgment that was out against them, by speedy and unfeigned repentance. So that
these words are an Alarm to awaken Drunkards; or we may style them, an
Handwriting to hang upon the wall of every Belshazzar; the sight whereof may
strike horror and amazement into them, may trouble their thoughts and change
their countenances; for here is MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL, VPHARSIN, thou art weighed,
o Belshazzar, in the balance; thou art found too light; thy kingdom, to wit,
thy wine, in which thou do so much triumph and glory, is taken from thee, and
is divided amongst the Locusts and the Caterpillars.

In the words we have two parts; 1. An Exhortation, Awake ye drunkards, and
weep and houle all ye drinkers of wine. 2. A Reason of the same in these words,
For the new wine shall be taken from your mouths.


1. In the Exhortation two things; 1. The persons exhorted, Drunkards, and
drinkers of wine. 2. The duty unto which they are exhorted; and that is
twofold; 1. To Awake. 2. To Weep or houle.



First, of the persons that are awakened; and they are Drunkards, and drinkers
of wine. I will notstand curiously to define Drunkenness, nor to show the
diverse kinds of Drunkards; methinkes the Prophet here lets us understand whom
he means to be drunkards, when he styles them Drinkers of wine: we must first
of all then enquire who these wine-drinkers are.

Now, to drink wine is not unlawful; for every creature is good, if it be
received with thankesgiving; and wine moderately taken, says Solomon, makes
glad the heart, and therefore he would have it given to them that were of heavy
hearts; (...), It is not the use of wine, but the abuse that is forbidden, as
Chrysostom observes: for there was drunkenness before the virtue of the grape
was known to Noah; Genesis 9.
and surely, if to drink wine had been unlawful, our Savior would never have
turned water into wine at the marriage Feast; especially, he would never have
instituted it as a memorial of his Bloodshedding: So that the Prophet does
not mean to call them drunkards, or drinkers of wine, that drink either for
hilarity, or refreshment of their spirits, much less for necessity; but such
as drink intemperately: so Theodoret observes upon this place, Vinum bibere
non est malum, sed intemperanter bibere est perniciosum, To drink wine is no
evil at all, but to drink inordinately is a mortal crime.

Now this immoderate drinking is seen in three things;

First, when the affection is set too much upon the wine, Prove. 23. 31
therefore Solomon exhorts, Not to look upon the wine when it gives his color
in the glass; his meaning is, we should not lust vehemently after it: 1. Tim.
3. 3.
So Paul would not have a Bishop to be given to much wine; that is, not to set
his affection inordinately upon the same.

Secondly, they may be said to be Drinkers of wine that sit too long over their
cups, that in the Tavernes or Alehouses drink up too much of their time, Qui
pitissando totum consumunt diem, that in whisling and sipping spend whole
days: Though their brains be not intoxicated, yet are they said to be
Drinkers; Esaias 5. 11.
Woe be to those that rise early in the morning that they may follow strong
drink, that continue until night, till the wine inflame them: And who knows
not that we have as much liberty to wast our vital spirits, as our precious
time?

3. Last of all, they are drinkers of wine, Qui mensuram excedunt, that drink
measure after measure without all measure: Be not drunk with wine (says S.
Paul) wherein is excess; Ephesians. 5. 18.
his meaning is, that we should not drink excessively, more then Nature
requires, either for necessity or refreshment.

And thus we have heard briefly whom the Prophet means to be Drunkards, or
Drinkers of wine; such as are given to much wine, that waste their time or
exhaust their estate, wash away their brains and spirits by pouring in wine
and strong drink.

1. To Awake. 2. To Weep and houle.


1. They must Awake. It is the nature of drunkenness to cast men into a sleep,
(...), as Basil says, Pasil (...).
The whole life of these men is nothing else but a continual sleep. And well
may drunkenness be compared to a sleep in two respects;

First of all, As sleep is caused by multitude of vapors which ascend up into
the brain, and so stop the passage of the spirits; so drunkenness is caused
by many fumes, which coming into the brain do stupifie the same, and hinder
all the operations of the immortal soul.

2. But especially it may be compared to sleep in this regard, that like as
sleep does deprive a man of the use of sense and reason, so does this vice.

First, sleep does deprive a man of the use of sense; for as the Philosopher
defines sleep, it is nothing else but Ligatio sensuum, a binding of all the
senses to their good behavior; so drunkenness robs a man of common sense, and
makes him worse then the bruit beast, and to become like the Idols that David
speaks of, that have eyes and see not, Psalm. 115. 6. 7
that have ears and hear not, hands and feel not, feet also that are not able
to go.

Secondly, as in sleep we have no use of reason, no more have they that are
overtaken with this vice: when men are asleep (says the Philosopher) they
differ little from beasts; and the reason is, because the use of reason is
suspended: I am sure, those that by evil company have rockt themselves asleep
in this sin, are not at all to be distinguished from the sensitive creatures,
but rather to be reputed in the number of them; nay, they come short of them;
for they have (...) they have some resemblance of reason, to wit, the
excellency of common sense, which has some correspondency with humane
discourse, but these swine have not so much as a glimpse of understanding in
them; for (as Saint Basil excellently) (...), Basil (...).
as water quenches fire, so immoderate drinking extinguisheth the celestial
fire of reason, which God from heaven has kindled in us. All men pity the
forlorn estate of Nebuchadnezzar, who was deprived of his understanding, and
caused to live amongst the Oxen, and beasts of the field: And is not the case
of every Belshazzar more to be lamented, who wilfully loose their
understanding, and live amongst beasts? For excellently does Chrysostom call
Drunkenness (...), it is a voluntary madness, and a traitor to all reason,
and betrayeth the succor of the immortal soul: Sobriety makes a man able to
guard himself against his spiritual enemies, but Intemperancie does give up
the mind to be captivated by them.

Thus we have heard that Drunkenness casts men into a sleep, which takes away
all use of sense and reason: But is there no means to awaken men out of this
sleep? Yes, Gods Minister must call upon them. The Prophet methinkes here lifts
up his voice like a trumpet, and labors to rouse them; and our tongues must
cleave to the roof of our mouths before we leave calling upon them. It is
sure that this sleep is so pleasant to them, that they are loath to be hindered
of it; they cry, A little more sleep, and a little more slumber, and willingly
they would not be disturbed; as we read of the Sybarites, that they killed all
their cocks, least by their crowing they should be awakened. But the Prophet
calls upon them to awaken: And what is it to awaken? It is a metaphor taken
from the body, and translated to the soul; that look as men when they awake
out of bodily sleep, they are not the same men that they were before, having
the use of all the powers of soul and body; so these men must change their
minds and become sober. The Scripture does often call upon them to awaken; S.
Paul having to do with drunken Epicures, who cried, Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall die; 1. Cor. 15. 32
No, says he, rather awaken unto righteousness. And good reason why all
should awake and repent of this vice, if we consider either the time wherein we
live, or the danger that this vice exposes us unto.

First, if we remember the time wherein we live, and that is in the noonday
of the Gospel, wherein it is a shame to be found asleep in this vice: Romans 13.
12.
The night is past (says Saint Paul) and the day is at hand, let us not walk
in chambering and wantonness, in surfeiting and drunkenness: and so he
exhorts the Thessalonians to sobriety by this argument, 1. These. 5. 7.
They that are drunk are drunk in the night, and they that sleep sleep in the
night; but we are not of the night but of the day; let us therefore be sober
and watch, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7. It is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes
strong drink, says Solomon, Prove. 31. 4. I am sure it is not for Christians to
have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: it was enough for the
heathen, who lived in Egyptian darkness, to fall asleep in this vice; for us,
upon whom the Sun of righteousness shines most brightly, so much as to
slumber in this sin, is extreme shame.

The night of ignorance God regarded not, but now in the day of the Gospel he
looks that all should awake; therefore (as Saint Augustine excellently) Quum,
De ebrietate vitanda.
Deo propitio, dissimiles simus illis in fide, si^^ll^^ in ebrietate penitus
non debemus, When by Gods mercy we are unlike unto them in our most holy faith,
let us not be like unto them in the imitation of their manners, especially of
their beastly drunkenness.

Secondly, the danger that we are in while we sleep in this vice, may rouse
us; for all the enemies of our salvation are ready to seize upon us, especially
the Devil watches to catch us asleep in this vice; so Saint Peter tells us,
Be sober and watch, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
for your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he
may devour; and those that he finds asleep in this vice are a sure prey unto
him: so the Flesh and the World will be sure to get the victory of us, if we
awake not out of this vice. Aristotle relates of the Carthaginians, Oeconom.
that they often got the victory of their enemies; libro 1.
and he gives the reason, because they abstained from wine always when they
were to fight: I am sure, if we would get the day either of spiritual or
temporal enemies, we must not suffer the wine to rock us asleep: therefore as
Samson, Judge. 16. 9. 20.
when they told him The Philistines be upon thee, Samson, presently awoke; so
when we hear that all our enemies are ready to surprise us, we cannot but
awake. Yet for all the light of the Gospel shines so brightly upon our faces,
for all the great danger that we are in, some will not be persuaded to awake;
but they sleep securely, though sudden desolation be ready to come upon them.
We read of Jonah, that he was fast asleep in the ship, when as it was like to
be drowned: so in these times wherein the ship of the Church is like to be sunk
with the waves of persecution, yet some revell and carouse as much as ever, and
like Smiths dogs they lie fast asleep in this vice, when the sparckels of Gods
judgments are ready to fly about their ears. In the old world when men burnt
with lust, God sent a flood to quench the fire of their concupiscence; now he
sends the fire of his indignation to consume the liquor wherewith many have
drowned themselves; and yet few will be warned to escape the wrath of God. Our
Savior tells us, that as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be in the
latter days; now in Noah's time, they gave themselves to eating and drinking
till the deluge came and swept them away; Would to God we did not live to see
this verified! do not men give themselves to this sin of Sodom, and put far
from them the evil day? God has awakened the Germans by the sword that he
has sent amongst them, and he threatens to do the like to us; but let the
clear light of the Gospel moove us to repentance, then shall not God be forced
to awake us by his judgments. And the best had need to be careful to keep
themselves awake, or else this sleep will seize upon them: Noah a Preacher of
righteousness, a while slumbered in this vice; Vriah, that religious and
valiant Captain, was once at a Kings feast overcome by this; and holy Job was
afraid least his sons in their feasts and merry meetings should fall into this
dangerous sleep: yea if the very best were not sometime obnoxious to it, our
Savior would never have given a caution to his disciples to avoid this; Take
heed (says he) least at any time your hearts be overtaken with surfeiting and
drunkenness. Luke 21. 34.


Now that we may all awake out of this sleep, we must first of all labor for
Gods grace, that may dispell those lusts which cause this sleep; for till such
time we cannot awake; as we awake not out of natural sleep till the vapors
which cause the same be dispersed by the natural heat: no more can we repent
of this, till Gods grace dispell those inordinate affections which cause the
same: Therefore Saint Paul exhorts the Ephesians not to be drunk with wine
wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5. 18.
but to be filled with the Spirit; as if the Apostle had said, If ye will
abundantly thirst after the water of life, and drink your fill of the wine
that comes out of Christ's cellar, it will be a sovereign means to keep you
from excessive drinking of the fruit of the grape. It is a rule in Philosophy,
that intus existens prohibet extraneum, that which is within will be a means to
keep out that which is without; as for example; If a vessel be full of liquor,
the air cannot get in; so if our hearts be replenished with Gods grace, it
will keep out thence an inordinate desire of wine.

Secondly, If we would awake out of this vice we must take heed of all those
things that may rock us asleep therein; especially of evil company: for that
is a Dalilah to lull us asleep till our hair be cut, I mean our wits,
understanding, and memory and all be taken from us. Be not amongst the wine
bibbers, says the wiseman; it is dangerous being with them, least by their
inchauntments this sleep seize upon us. Thus through Gods grace and our care in
refraining evil company we may keep our selves awake.

This is not all that the Prophet requires of drinkers of wine; as they must
awake, so also weep and howl; not only weep, but howl also; which sets
forth unto us the greatness of the humiliation which is required of all those
that are guilty of this vice; their mourning must be like the lamentation of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, or like the mourning of parents for
their only son. But these men cannot endure to hear of any sorrow at all,
much less of so great lamentation: If the Prophet had called them to mirth and
jollity, they would willingly have hearkened; but the voice of sorrow is
always unpleasing to their cares. But yet we see the holy Ghost writes bitter
things against them, and would have them turn their laughter into mourning,
and their joy into heaviness. And good reason why these men should weep and
mourn, if they consider either the nature of the vice whereof they are guilty,
or the labyrinth of woe and misery that they plunge themselves into.

1. If they consider the uglines of the vice which they have committed; which
is so beastly, so abominable, that if a man had a fountain of tears he might
shed them all for this. This is that which raseth the image of God out of us
and transformeth us into the image of brute beasts; this is the fountain of
all vice, the fuel of lust, the mother of whoredoms, rapes, murders, and all
manner of abominations. It were easy, long to declaime against this, and to
show the cursed effects thereof out of the Scriptures, Fathers, Schoolmen, yea
out of the Heathen themselves, who by the light of Nature could learn to abhor
this vice. I might also set before your eyes sundry examples of those, that
when they have been in their drunken fits, have committed such outrages, that
the very cogitation thereof may extract tears from our eyes: only give me
leave to relate unto you one example, Ad fratres in Eremo.
which Saint Augustine makes mention of in the city of Hippo where he was
Bishop, to wit, of one Cyrillus a man of great respect and honor in the city,
who having but one son, through too much indulgence suffered him to run
into excess of riot; and it happened, that he coming home upon a time in his
drunken fit, Patrem, quem post Deum revereri debuisset, occidit; matrem, a qua
portabatur, praegnantem oppressit; sororem violare voluit; and duas sorores
vulneravit ad mortem, He slew his father, whom next to God he ought to have
reverenced; he offered most savage and unnatural violence to his mother, that
brought him into the world, he slew two of his sisters, and would have ravished
a third. I need say noe more: The strange and prodigious effects of this vice
may make us both to weep and houle for the commission of it.

But yet this is not all; there is a further cause To whom is woe? to whom is
sorrow? says Solomon. Even to them that sit long at the wine: and the Prophet
Esaias denounces woe against them; Woe (says he) to the drunkards of Ephraim:
Esaias 28 1.
Woe and misery they shall have enough in this world, and in the world to come.



1. For poverty, that shall come upon them like an armed man; Prove. 21. 17
He that loves wine, says Solomon, shall not be rich.

2. But be it, that some have an eye to the main chance (for proverbs hold but
(...), for the most part) suppose, I say, some be more politic then others,
yet shame (which always follows sin as the shadow does the body) will
overtake them in the end. Righteous Noah falling but once into this vice, and
(as many think) through ignorance, has brought an eternal blot upon himself,
who in one distemper discovered that nakedness which many hundred years had
been kept close; And how do many often expose themselves, by their reeling and
staggering, to the derision of boys and children, and are to them as owls are
to the birds!

3. Sickness, that is a concomitant of this vice; It is an excellent saying of
Chrysostom, (...) etc. Chrysostom.
water does not so dissolve the earth, Hom. 1. ad Pop. Antioch.
as pouring in wine consumes the body, breeding innumerable diseases in all
the regions of man's body in the Animalls, Vitalls, and Naturalls: hence come
Lethargies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Catarrhes, Dropsies, Fevers, Consumptions, and
many more the Harbingers of death. So that these may well weep for the misery
that shall come upon them in this world, upon their bodies, goods, and good
name.

But their greatest misery is in the world to come; It were happy for these men
that they might dye like beasts, as they live; but they must know that they
must come to judgment, and receive the fruit of their wickedness: for he that
sows to the flesh, 1. Cor. 6. 9.
shall of the flesh reap destruction. Know ye not, says Saint Paul, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor drunkards shall inherit the kingdom of God;
no, but rather must be cast out into that lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, where is weeping and howling and gnashing of teeth for ever. How
much better is it then to weep now for a moment, then to incur eternal
lamentation for the neglect thereof? Let them then that are mighty to pour in
strong drink, pour out strong lamentations for the misery that shall come
upon them, if they do not prevent the same by speedy and unfeigned repentance.
But some there are that in stead of mourning for this vice, make a sport of it,
and count it but a trick of good fellowship, and so like the Leviathan they can
laugh at the glittering sword and spear, when it is ready to pierce them
through. I know there is a time to laugh, and a time to mourn; but we can
find no time to lament this sin, which has kindled Gods wrath against his
people. Many sins cry aloud against us for vengeance, but none pierce the
heavens more then this beastly, though common sin of drunkenness; and yet it
is to be feared, that not many mourners are to be found for this vice: If the
Angel of the Lord should run to and fro, and set a mark upon all those that
mourn for this, how many of us would he pass by, who will not let fall a
tear to quench the indignation of God, which is most justly kindled against us
for this and other abominations! May not the Lord complain of us as he did of
his people the Jews, that he called them to weeping and mourning and to
girding with sackcloth; and behold joy and gladness, eating flesh and drinking
wine, and that not in Timothies cup only, but in Belshazzars bowls also? The
Prophet Amos saw to his grief, that in his time they drank wine in bowls,
and forgate the afflictions of Joseph: it were to be desired that we could not
see the same in these times, wherein the Church hangs her Harps upon the
willowes, while she sits by the waters of Babylon. But methinks I hear some
confess that indeed they are sometimes overtaken with this vice, but they are
sorry for it. If it be so, it will easily appear by their amendment of life:
For sorrow begets hatred, and hatred begets a sequestration from it; so
that I may say to such, as Saint Paul does to the Corinthians in another case,
If they have sorrowed after a godly manner for this, 1. Cor. 7. 11.
What care has it wrought in them to avoid the occasions of this vice? what
apologies to acquit themselves, when they are in danger to be drawn into this
vice? what desire to escape this in all places and at all times? what fear
least by evil company they be overcome? what zeal will they have against this
vice in the places where they live? what indignation will they have against
themselves, that they should be guilty of such a vice? yea, what revenge will
they take of themselves by fasting and humiliation for the same? Where none of
these effects are, there can hardly be any sorrow for this sin: let none
therefore daub with untempered mortar; for God is not mocked: where there is no
reformation of this vice, there is no lamentation for it; and where there is no
mourning for this, there is no awakeing out of it.

AND these men had need to awake, and weep, and howl, if they consider what
follows in the Text, The new wine shall be taken from them* If any thing
will moove them, it will be this, that otherwise they shall be bereft of that,
wherein they place their chief felicity; and that not by potent adversaries,
such as were Salmanazar, and Nebuchadonazar; but by locusts, cankerwormes, and
caterpillars; This I say (if any thing) must needs go to the heart of them, to
have their new wine rent from their mouths by such contemptible creatures. The
Prophet specifieth but one kind of wine, to wit, that which comes out of the
press; and so the word [gnasim] in the original does signify mustum, that
which is new pressed: but yet he means all kinds of wine should be snatched
away by violence; for so the word in the original intimates unto us, That
albeit they were unwilling to let go their cups, yet, will they nill they,
they should be plucked from their mouths. And here we see, if we come once to
abuse Gods creatures to luxury and intemperancy, he has many ways to deprive
us of them; not only by sending armies of men, but by sending out a few
caterpillars. But especially we may take notice how this vice of drunkenness
pulls down Gods judgments upon the whole land: Ier. 23. 10.
For oaths the land mourns, says the Prophet Jeremy: so it does for
drunkenness; for we may read in the tenth verse of this Chapter, that for this
sin the whole land of Judah mourned; because the corn was wasted, the new
wine was dried up, and the oil languished. Many and sundry are the calamities
that befall a Nation for this vice; this was that which caused the Lord to give
up his own people into the hands of their enemies: So the Prophet Esaias; Esaias
5. 11. 12.
Woe be to those that rise early in the morning that they may follow strong
drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them, and the harp and
the violl, the tabret and pipe and wine are in their feasts; but they regard
not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands:
Therefore are my people gone into Captivity. And not to go any further then
the Text, The Lord threatens to destroy the vines and all the fruits of the
earth for this sin; may not we then fear that for the abuse of wine, we
shall not only have our wines, but our wives, children, and goods taken from
us? The Spanish Caterpillars and the Jesuitical locusts have devoured the
vines of our brethren in Germany: I dare not say it was for drunkenness; but
this might be one means to kindle Gods wrath against them; And shall we
think, if we be drinkers of wine, that we shall always escape? No, the
Locusts and Caterpillars crawle as fast as they can upon us; let us then awake
and gird up the loins of our minds and be sober, and it may be we shall see
the salvation of the Lord, and that in his due time, he will send a wind that
shall scatter these locusts and drive them into the Sea of perdition.
Howsoever, Ne nos invadant somno vinoque sepultos, let them not, if they come,
finds us fast asleep in this vice; If they do, they will not only take our
wines from us, but us from our Country, and make us slaves to them, and, which
is worst of all, captivate our souls to their Romish superstition. If therefore
there be any fear of God in us, any love to the Gospel, any humanity in us,
any sparkle of religion; let us awake out of this sin, and it may be God will
awake, and stir up himself, and come forth for our salvation: which we
humbly beseech him to do, for the merits of our LORD and blessed SAVIOVR; to
whom with the FATHER and the holy SPIRIT be all honor and glory now and for
ever.

AMEN.

