THE RVINE OF ROME: OR AN EXPOSITION upon the whole Revelation.

Wherein is plainly showed and proved, that the Popish Religion, together with
all the power and authority of Rome, shall ebb and decay still more and more
throughout all the Churches of Europe, and come to an utter overthrow even in
this life before the end of the world.

Written especially for the comfort of Protestants, and the daunting of
Papists, Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and all that cursed rabble.

Published by Arthur Dent, Preacher of the word of God, at South-Shoobery in
Essex.

Apoc. 18. verse. 7.8. She says in her heart, I sit as a Queen and am no
widow, and shall see no mourning:

Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death and sorrow, and famine: and
she shall be burned with fire: for that God which condemns her is a strong
Lord.

LONDON

THE EPISTLE TO THE Christian Reader.
BEing often requested (gentle Reader) and much importuned by sundry, both
learned and godly, to publish that doctrine of the Apocalypse, which diverse of
them with lively voice heard publicly delivered: I did at last, upon my most
mature deliberation, yield unto their reasonable request; I mean the reasons
of their request. Indeed I do ingeniously confess, that I am the vnmeetest of
many, which this age (God be thanked) does afford, to deal in a matter of so
great importance, or any wise to be employed in so great and honorable a
service as this is. But if I do industriously use my small talent, and be
found faithful in a little; I hope it shall have both cheerful and
comfortable acceptance with the Church of God. For this I presume will be
granted of all, that he which has but a little strength, and yet puts it
forth to the uttermost to do good withal, is more to be commended, then he
which has thrice his strength, and uses it not to the help and benefit of
others. And true it is indeed, that sundry worthy labors of diverse excellent
men upon the Apocalypse, are already extant: so as he may seem to power water
into the Sea, or go about to mend the crows eyes, that will attempt to add
any thing to that which is already published. But know this (O Christian
Reader) that the Lords garden is so large and plentiful of all most sweet and
pleasant flowers, that where any one has gathered a Nosegay most fragrant and
delectable, another may come after, and gather another not to be contemned. For
the wisdom of God is such an vndrainable fountain and head-spring, that
where one has drawn much before, another may come happily, and draw as much
afterward: yea though thousands do succeed, yet can this fountain never be
drawn dry. Be it far from me to arrogate any thing to my self, above
others: for I am privy enough to mine own means, and do freely confess, that
in this work, I have received much light from others: and therefore do not as
a judge, give sentence upon other men's works: but as one that would furnish
the same feast, bring in my dish among them. Or as one that in the same cause
would come in as a third, or a fourth witness to testify and confirm the
same thing. And verily through the gracious assistance of Gods spirit, my
simple purpose and endeavor is to give a lift to the uttermost of my power, to
further that which is already happily begun, and to provoke others of greater
gifts, to come after with their great lights, and Lanternes in their hands, to
discry and discover whatsoever in this Prophecy is not yet fully seen into. I
am not ignorant that some would not have this book meddled withal, nor in any
wise to be expounded among the common people, because (say they) it is so dark
and hard to understand. But let all such leave their own opinions, and hearken
what the holy Ghost says. Apo. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
etc. What can be said more? or more effectually to stir us up to hear and
read, and with all gladness to embrace this book, then to tell us, that in
so doing we shall be blessed? For the things contained in this book, be no
trifles: they be not things only for a show to move wonderment, or to delight
the curious minds of men: but such as indeed do give true blessedness unto all
those that are well instructed in them. What thing is greater, then to be
blessed for evermore? If we be not exceeding dull, yea, even like stocks and
stones, it must needs move us and stir us up. For who will wittingly and
willingly loose his own blessedness, or suffer it to be taken from him when as
he may have it? If any will object that a man may be blessed well enough
without the knowledge of this book, and that there be books enough in the
Scripture, to procure our blessedness, without this: and that thousands are
now in heaven, which never knew what this book meant: I answer, that all this
does not take away the necessary use of this book: for the holy Ghost does
pronounce a blessing upon the heads of those that read and study this book,
not because a man cannot be saved without it: but because of the great comfort
which it ministers unto us of this age, and has ministered unto all the
Churches since the Apostles times. For it is the Prophecy of this age, and the
Prophecy of all the ages since Christ: wherein is fully showed what shall be
the estate and condition of the Church in the several ages thereof, unto the
end of the world. For God according to his admirable wisdom and mercy, has
never from the beginning left his church without a Prophecy, for the great
comfort thereof. For we know, that immediately after the fall of our first
parents, God himself, for the great comfort of his Church, did foretell and
foreprophesie long before of that restoration which should be made by the
Messiah his son, Genesis 3. Genesis 15.
according as it came to pass in the fullness of time. Afterward he did
foretell his people of Israel, of their great servitude, and intolerable
bondage in Egypt, and also of the end and full determination thereof, after
four hundred and thirty years. After all this he foretold by his servants
the Prophets of the captivity in Babylon, and the full expiration thereof at
the end and term of seventy years. Ier. 25.
And yet further for the comfort and consolation of his people, Dan. 7. Ezech.
38.
he foretold by Daniel and Ezechiel, of the great afflictions and troubles
which his Church should endure by the persecutions of the divided Greek
Empire: (I mean Alexanders posterity, Dan. 8.
especially the Kings of Egypt and Siria, which descended of Ptolomeus and
Seleucus, Dan. 9.
Dan. 11.
whom the scripture calls the Kings of the North and of the South) by the
space of 294 years, and of the precise determination thereof at the coming of
the Messiah. Lo then what care God has had of his Church in all ages before
the coming of his son in the flesh, so to foretell both of the affliction it
self, and also of the just period and determination thereof. And shall we not
think that God has the like care now for his church which then he had: or
has he not as great and as provident care for the good of his Church since the
promised Messiah was actually exhibited as before? Yes assuredly, and much more
too: for if his care and providence was so great for his Church being in her
ward-ship and minority: then much more now being come to her ripeness and
full age: If when it was less glorious, then much more now, being far more
glorious. Therefore now unto us he foretells by his servant John what shall
be the estate of the Church unto the end of the world: and therefore Blessed is
he that hears and reads this book: since it foretells of the Churches
afflictions in this age by the whore of Babylon, and of the full end and
determination thereof. It shows justly and precisely what the Church has
suffered since the Apostles times in several ages, and what it shall suffer:
and also how all the enemies thereof shall shortly be trodden under foot. What
can be more joyful or comfortable to all the people of God, then to know
aforehand that Babylon shall fall: Rome shall down: Antichrist the great
persecutor of the Church, shall be utterly confounded and consumed in this world;
notwithstanding all plottes and policies, crafts and devises to the contrary;
notwithstanding all forces and armies cunningly contrived and raised up against
the Church by Seminary Priests, Jesuits, Pope, Cardinal, and King of Spain?
For all these in this age do very busily bestirre them, and ransacke all
corners of their wits to repair the ruins of Rome, and to make up the
breaches which are made in the walls of Babylon their great city. But alas
all in vain, for it shall fall: It shall fall: It shall fall as Dagon before the
presence of the Arc, do what they can, spite of their hearts, maugre their
beards: it shall fall finally: it shall without all hope of recovery: for has
the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come to pass? or can any word of his ever
fall to the ground? Since therefore the Jesuits and Secular Priests do so fiske
about, and croake in every corner, as greatly fearing the fall of their
Babylon, and the drying up of their Euphrates, it stands us all in hand to be
as resolute for Christ, as they are for Antichrist; and as studious to uphold
the kingdom of God, as they are to uphold the kingdom of the devil. And for
this purpose it is very requisite and necessary, that all the Lords people
should be acquainted with this book, and armed against them with the things
reueald in this Prophecy. For this book is a most precious Jewel which God
has bestowed upon his Church in this last age: and it is great pity that all
the servants of God are not better acquainted with it, especially in these
times, for now in this age is and shall be the very heat of the war, and
brunt of the battle betwixt Papists and Protestants; betwixt God and Belial;
betwixt the armies of Christ, and the armies of Antichrist. Now this Prophecy
lays all open, and plainly tells us what shall be the issue and success in
the day of battle: which side shall have the victory, and which side shall
go down. And therefore very needful it is that it should be expounded again
and again, and all the Lords people made thoroughly aaquainted with it. For in
this age wherein we live, this Prophecy can never be enough opened and beaten
upon, that all good Protestants may be armed with it against future times,
even as it were with an armor of proof. S. John plainly tells the people of
his time, even the Churches of Asia, that they should be blessed by reading and
studying this book, because they should thereby be both forewarned, and
forearmed against many eminent troubles and future dangers. For says he, The
time is at hand: that is to say, some things were even then to be fulfilled.
For some matters foretold in this book, did begin to be fulfilled, even
presently after they were showed unto John, for the mystery of iniquity did
even then begin to work. The Church in the Apostles time had her conflicts.
The ten great persecutions began even then to be raised up. Heresies shortly
after began to spring and sprout. Afterward by degrees, the great Antichrist
did approach toward his cursed seat. And after all this, S. John foretells
how he should take possession of his abominable and most execrable seat and
sea of Rome: How he should reign and rule for a time as the Monarche of the
world: How he should prevail against the Church, and make war against the
Saints: How he should reign but a short time, and afterward come tumbling
down, as fast as ever he rose up, and decrease as fast as ever he increased.
Therefore Blessed is he (says S. John) that diligently reads and peruseth
this book, that thereby he may foresee all these things, and be armed
against them. For as the Heathen man says; Leuius laedit quicquid praeuideris
ante, Foreseeing dangers do least hurt. Now to apply all this to our times, I
say they are twice happy that are studious and painful in searching out the
true sense and meaning of this Prophecy, that thereby they may be strengthened
against all the assaults of the Papists our professed enemies, and the enemies
of Gods Church, and stick fast to the everlasting truth of God, knowing for a
certainty that these sons of Belial shall not long prevail. The date of
their reign is almost out, and the time draws on apace, wherein both they
and their king Abaddon shall be laid in the dust. But I will now proceed to a
new reason, Apoc. 9 11.
to prove that this book of the Revelations ought not to be concealed: but
openly preached and published to the whole Church of God in this age. My reason
is taken out of the 22. chapter of this book, ver. 10. in these words. Seal
not the words of the Prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand. Here is
a flat commandment from God, that this book and the doctrine of it may not be
sealed up; that is to say, kept close from the knowledge of Gods people: but it
must lie always unsealed, that all men may open it, read it, and see what is
in it: for it is a borrowed speech, taken from sealing of Letters. For we all
know, that when Letters are sealed, none may open them, or read them, but
only those whom it does concern: but if they be of purpose left unsealed,
then any man may read them without danger: So the Lord wills and
commands, that this book of the Revelations should of purpose be left
unsealed, that all the people of God might read it, study it, and know it.
If any man doubt whether the Metaphor of Sealing be thus taken in the
scripture, let him read the places quoted in the margent, Esa. 29 11. Dan.
12.9. Apoc. 4.1. Apoc. 10.4.
and in all these places he shall find it taken in this sense. Whereby it
does evidently appear, that the mind and meaning of God is, that this book
should be proclaimed and published in all the Churches. And upon this ground,
I hold that every Minister of the Gospel stands bound as much as in him
lies, to Preach the doctrine of the Apocalypse to his particular charge and
congregation: for every Minister of the Gospel must show unto his people all
the counsel of God, and keep back nothing: as Paul testifies that he did,
to the great comfort of his conscience. But the doctrine of the Revelations is
a part and parcel of the counsel and will of God: therefore it must not be
concealed or kept back from the knowledge of the people of God. And in these
days I think it not only meet and convenient that it should be so, but in
truth absolutely necessary.

But now me thinks I hear some man say: what? must this book of the
Apocalypse be preached and made known to the common people? alas, what should
they do with it? It is not for them to meddle withal: It is not for their
diet. I answer, and yet not I, but the holy Ghost: that this book must be
made known to all the servants of God. For Saint John calls it the
Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave him to show unto all his servants.
Apoc. 1.1.
It is plain therefore, that all the servants of God, both men and women, young
and old, rich and poor, must be made acquainted with this book. Moreover,
John is commanded by the God of heaven, to set down all the visions which the
Angel showed him: and to write them all in a book, and send them to the seven
Churches of Asia: that is, to people of all sorts, and conditions: Apoc. 1.11.
And therefore this book does not only concern preachers, and deep divines;
but even all the Lords people whatsoever: for it does minister great comfort
and strength of faith to all the people of God, that live in this age. But here
the Papists object that this book is full of darkness and obscurity, and
therefore not for the common people to meddle withal: nay, (say they) there
are as many mysteries, as words in it, and therefore what should men trouble
their heads about it. But no marvel though the Papists say so much, for it is
the wound of their kingdom, and the battery of their Babylon. As for others,
both learned and godly, which in this point are almost of the same mind, that
they will not meddle with this book of the Revelations: I cannot but marvel
at it. The modesty and humility of some, very rare and reverend men for
learning, and great variety of gifts (which notwithstanding scotch much at this
book) is greatly to be commended: But if I were worthy to give them advice, I
would wish them, in this behalf to change their mind, and to be of another
resolution: for I dare avouch it, that there is nothing in this Prophecy,
which study and diligence, with prayer and humility, may not overcome. True it
is indeed, that the shell is thick, and hard to break: but being broken, the
kernel is most sweet and pleasant. If any be discouraged with the darkness
and obscurity of it, let him hearken to these reasons following. First it is
called a Revelation, which is as much to say, as an uncovering of things which
did lie hid: if it be an uncovering, and revealing of things, then no doubt it
may be known and seen into. For revealed things are for us and our children.
Deuteronomy. 19.
If it be a Revelation, how say some that it cannot be understood? For, it is
contrary to the nature of a Revelation, to be so dark that none can understand
it. But shall we say that the holy Ghost which is the spirit of truth, has
given a wrong name unto it? God forbid. For if it hide matters, or so set them
forth that it cannot be understood, then it is not rightly called a Revelation.
If this book be so mystical that it cannot be understood: If the
interpretation of it be uncertain: If the common people cannot be taught to
understand it: how then should the holy Ghost say, Blessed is he that reads
the words of this Prophecy? Apoc. 1.^. Apoc. 22 7.
etc. Let any man judge that has common sense: Can any man be blessed by
hearing and reading those things which he understands not? I trow no. Then it
follows, that this book may be understood, and no doubt is understood of
many: and might be better understood of many more, if they would bend their
wits and studies unto it. The holy Ghost as I said before, Apoc. 22.10.
wills and commands that the words of this Prophecy should not be sealed
up. Whereby it is evident, that he would have them read and made known to all.
Then I reason thus: That which is open and unsealed, may be read and known:
But this book is open and unsealed: Therefore it may be read and known. If
men say the matters of this Prophecy are sealed and hid, and God say they be
unsealed and open, whether shall we believe men or God? If any shall reply and
say, we feel and find by experience, that the words of this book are hard to
be understood: I answer, that the fault is in our selves, because we are so
negligent in the search and study thereof. For if we did with that humility,
and reverend care that ought to be in us, search after the things revealed in
this book, we should find that they be not sealed up, but lie open to be
read and known. True it is indeed, that if any man light upon some piece, and
take it by it self, he shall find it very dark: But if he look upon the
whole course of matters throughout the book, and mark and observe diligently
how things be iterated, he shall find no such darkness as he fears, for
there is a notable coherence of matters, and course of times observed in this
book, even from the first chapter unto the last, as God willing shall more
fully and plainly appear in the particular opening and interpretation thereof.
One great objection against this Prophecy is, that the Fathers confess it is
full of mysteries, and that they could not understand it. If they could not
understand it say some, how, how shall we understand it? Is it not great
arrogance for us to say we understand it better then they did. I answer no.
For a man of mean learning in comparison, may now in these days more easily
understand and expound this book, then the learnedest Doctors and Fathers in
ancient time. The reason is this, we live in an age wherein the most of the
things prophesied in this book are fulfilled. Now the fulfilling of a
prophecy is the best exposition of it. But as for the Fathers, they lived in a
time wherein many of these things were not come to pass, nor fulfilled, and
therefore more hard for them to interpret and understand: for those things in
this Prophecy which are not yet fulfilled, are hardest for us of this age to
understand and resolve of. But when a Prophecy is fulfilled, it is an easy
matter to say this was the meaning of the Prophet. Some things in this book
were fulfilled before the days of the Fathers, and some things in the days
wherein they lived: and both those they did clearly understand. Some things
were fulfilled after their days, as the rising and reigning of the great
Antichrist, which they did not so clearly see into. Hereupon it comes to
pass, that many things which unto them were very obscure, are unto us most
clear and manifest: as being already fulfilled: insomuch that all which are
not wilfully blinded, may see and understand them, yea the most unlearned. Be
not therefore discouraged (gentle Reader) at the darkness and difficulty of
this book. Do not preiudicially resolve and set down with thy self, that
the natural sense of this book cannot be given, nor the true meaning found
out, but that we must be feign when we have done all that we can, to rest in
uncertain conjectures, some following one sense, and some an other, as seems
most like and probable. But no man can say confidently and precisely this is
the meaning of the holy Ghost. Oh be not of that mind good Christian brother:
for if we have not an undoubted certainty for the sense and meaning of this
Prophecy, we are never the nearer: and that is it which the Papists would
drive us unto. But know for a certainty, that the natural sense of this book,
is to be found out, as well as of other books of the Scripture. And that we
might not be left to our selves in the dark, and to our uncertain
conjectures, and doubtful interpretations; Behold the merciful goodness of
God to his Church, who himself does expound the darkest, and most mystical
things in this Prophecy, or at least so many of them, and so far, as the rest
are thereby laid open, and made manifest. The Lord himself expounds some
things in the first Chapter, which give clear light to the first vision: The
Angel expounds diverse other things. In the 17. Chapter, which is the key of
this prophecy, the Angel does of purpose, open and interpret all the greatest
doubts of this book: as who is the Whore of Babylon, who is the beast, what be
his seven heads, what be his 10. horns, what be the waters which the woman,
that is, the Whore of Rome, sits upon. Moreover, for the better
understanding of this Prophecy, we must note, that the writings of Moses and
the Prophets, unto which there be sundry allusions, and from the which sundry
things are drawn, do clear diverse things in this Revelation. The knowledge of
antiquities, ministers much aid to the understanding of this Prophecy. The
knowledge of the histories of the Church, and the particular state thereof in
diverse ages, brings great light. The observation of the phrases and manner of
speech, used by the old Prophets, does help also not a little. The serious and
deep weighing of all the circumstances of the text, and conferring one thing
with another the co^sequents with the antecedents, and the antecedents with the
conseque^ts, furthereth greatly for the bolting out of the true and natural
sense. And furthermore, as the spirit of God is the author of this prophecy,
so the same spirit is the best interpreter of it, and does open and reveal it
to all such, as using al other good means are earnest and humble suitors unto
God, for the illumination thereof: whereby they may understand both this, and
all other the mysteries of his will: which the Apostle says, God has revealed
unto us by his spirit: 1. Cor. 2.
For the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. To all this
may be added the knowledge of arts, tongues, and the learned writings, and
interpretations of sundry excellent men, which all do bring great furtherance
to the understanding of this Prophecy. Since then there be so many helps for
the opening and expounding of this Revelation: why should any be discouraged
from the reading and study thereof? But if any man demand a reason, why Saint
John writes this Revelation in such mystical and allegorical manner: I
answer, that there may be diverse reasons yielded hereof. First, that the world
being blinded, might fulfill the things herein specified. Secondly, because
John was to publish this Revelation, in such manner and form as he had received
it from Jesus Christ, which was figurative and allegorical. Thirdly, because
it was much more wisdom, to foretell the destruction of the Roman Empire,
which all that time bare the sway, almost over all the world, under covert and
figurative speeches, then in plain terms, least the Roman Princes should
rage more against the Christians, even in that respect. The like also may be
said, for Daniels dark manner of delivering his Prophecy. For if he had
uttered those things in plain terms, which he spoke darkely and
allegorically, it might have cost him his life. For the heathen enemies would
never have endured to hear that all their Empires glory and renown should
fall one after another, and one by another: and that the Jews were the only
holy people whom God did defend, and to whom in the end, God would not only
give a quiet possession of their own land and kingdom: but also a kingdom
everlasting, and that through their Messiah and great deliverer. But to grow to
a conclusion (gentle Reader) thou shall find in this poor travel: First, an
exposition of the first 13. Chapters: after thou shall find the next 6.
Chapters, unto the twentieth, reduced all to one head, which is to prove the 5.
points propounded: and last of all the 3. Chapters following briefly and
plainly expounded. If any through laziness will not, or through want of
leisure cannot read over this short travel: yet for his comfort, let him read
those things only which are written upon the 14. Chapter. And thus (Christian
Reader) hoping that thou will not neglect that which may be for thine own
good, I comme^d thee to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build further, and to give thee an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified.

Thine in the Lord, Arthur Dent.

Upon the 14. Chapter of this Book, these five points are handled.
First, that Babylon in this Book of the Revelation is Rome. Secondly, that
Rome shall fall, and how. Thirdly, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to
utter desolation in this life, before the last judgment. Fourthly, by whom,
and when it shall be overthrown. Fifthly, the causes of the utter ruin and
overthrow thereof.
Apoc. 18. verse. 4. I heard a voice from heaven say: Go out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.


THE RVINE OF Rome, or an Exposition upon the Revelation.
Wherein is plainly showed and proved, that the Popish Religion, together with
all the power and authority of Rome, shall ebb and decaie still more and
more, throughout all the Churches of Europe, and come to an utter overthrow,
even in this life.

BEfore I enter into the exposition of this Prophecy, I think it not amiss
to handle six circumstantiall points, which may give some light to the whole
matter following, and they be these.

First the instrument that writ this book. Secondly, the time when he writ it.
Thirdly, the place where he received it. Fourthly, the persons to whom he writ
it. Fifthly, the end and use of his writing this Prophecy. Lastly, the
authority of it.
As touching the first, it is agreed upon amongst the soundest Divines, that
John the Apostle or Evangelist; John the Disciple, whom Jesus loved, was the
Author and Instrument of penning this Prophecy: Apoc. 22. verse 8. Apoc. 1.
verse 19.
as he himself testifies, saying: I am John which saw these things and
heard them. And he receives a commandment from Jesus Christ which has the
keys of hell and death, that he should write the things which he had seen
and heard, Apoc. 1. verse 11.
and set them all down together in a book. Now we all know that the testimony
of John is of great weight, though he be but a man: for he is such a man as
is firmly to be believed in all that he speaks. He is an Apostle, an
Instrument of the holy Ghost, and so guided by the spirit of God, that he
speaks and utters nothing that is his own. He was well known to the
Churches to be one of Christ's Apostles, his authority among all the faithful
was thoroughly known and approved. For we must consider, that what an Apostle
did utter, he did utter it as the instrument of the spirit, which cannot err.
For the prophets and Apostles did not write the holy scriptures as they were
men only, nor yet as they were Ministers of the church only, but as they were
the immediate and certain instruments of the holy Ghost, of purpose chosen and
set apart to pen and publish the holy books of God. 2. Pet. 1. verse 21:
This S. Peter confirms saying: Prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man, but holy me^ of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. The
Apostle Paul also affirms the same touching his Gospel, which says, Gal. 1.
ver. 12.
he was not after man, neither received he it of man, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. Therefore when this our Apostle says, I am John, which saw these
things, and heard them, he gives us to understand, that he was both an eye
and an ear witness. He brings not matters which he has heard by uncertain
report: he delivers this book to the churches: they which received it at his
hands, did know him to be a most faithful servant of the Lord, even a great
Apostle, which delivers not any thing but that which he had received of the
Lord, and therefore he testifies, that he saw and heard all the things which he
has written in this book. And moreover he testifies of himself, that he was
called and authorized by Jesus Christ, to write this Prophecy, and did nothing
herein of himself, or of his own brain. For says he, I John, heard behind me
a great voice, Apoc. 1. ver. 10.11.
as it had been of a trompet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last, and that which thou see write in a book, and send it unto the
Churches. Here we see how John is called and authorized, by Alpha and Omega,
that is Jesus Christ, to write this doctrine of the Apocalypse. But may some man
say, was not John called before? was he not one of the Lambs 12. Apostles? had
he not now many years executed the office of the Apostleship right faithfully?
must he now have a new calling, and a second calling? what needs he being an
Apostle, to be called and authorized again? To this I answer, that this matter
now in hand, was a new and a special work, and therefore requires a new and
special calling. It is a strange revelation, and therefore requires a new
authority to meddle in it. For in this prophecy God deals with John, as he
did with the old prophets in like cases. For when he would foreshew unto any of
the^ special matters, he called them by glorious visions, as we may read what
a goodly vision Esaias had: Esaias 6.
what a vision full of glory Ezechiel had: and what a vision Daniel had, Ezech.
1. Dan. 10.
eue^ in majesty like unto this which John has here. Thus then it is to be
considered.

John now is as one of the old Prophets, to foreshew things to come: therefore
the Lord appears unto him in vision, and calls him, and authoriseth him
thereunto, as he appeared unto them and called them. Let this then suffice for
a reason of John's new calling to his new work and office. And thus much
touching the first circumstance.

Now follows the second circumstance, which is the time when John received
this Prophecy, which is noted to be upon a Lords day. Apoc. 1.10.
It is the day which S. 1. Cor. 6.2.
Paul to the Corinthians calls the first day of the week: in which the
Churches did meet for the holy exercises in religion: which is also evident,
because he says they came together to break bread. Now the observation of a
seventh day is of divine institution, Act. 20.7.
even from the beginning. It is natural, moral, and perpetual: for God
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it. We are therefore to think, that
although John now in his exile was absent in body from the church assemblies,
yet he was present with them in spirit, commending them most earnestly unto God
in his holy prayers, and meditations: and therefore it is said, that he was
ravished in the spirit upon the Lords day. So we read, that the like befell
unto Daniel, Dan. 7.2. Ezec. 3.12.14.
when he was prisoner in Babylon: the like also unto Ezechiel, who was taken
by the spirit in the visions of God, and carried to Jerusalem: The like to
Peter, Act. 10.10. 2. Cor. 12.2.
the like to Paul. But the special reason of John's rauishment in the spirit at
this time was, that thereby he might be made more fit and capable to receive
and understand all those great mysteries and heavenly visions, which now should
be showed unto him. And withal, let us observe, that all men are always most
capable of heavenly things, when they are most in the spirit: for God does
evermore most reveal himself to such as are most in prayer, reading, and
meditation; and to such as make greatest conscience to spend his Sabaoths
Christianly, and religiously, according to his great commandment. And let us
always be sure of this, that the more fervent and zealous we are in religious
duties, the more familiar acquaintance we shall find with God, and he will at
all times be the more open-hearted unto us, and will hide nothing from us that
may be for his glory, and our good. For such as are much in heavenly
contemplatio^, he does recke^ not amongst his servants, but amongst his dearest
friends; John 15.15.
to whom he will make known all things that he has heard of his Father. But
now let us proceed to the third circumstance.

The third circumstance is the place where John received this Prophecy, and
that is set down to be the I Will of Pathmos: which (as the Geographers write) is
a little desert Island lying in the Aegean sea, wherein it is reported that John
the Apostle was banished by the Emperor Domitian, about the year of our Lord
96. and there received, and writ this book of the Apocalypse: where note by the
way, that there is no place so obscure or vast, wherein a godly mind may not
aspire up unto heaven, and receive a great largess of supernatural things:
for Daniel in prison, Peter in a Tanners house, Paul in a broken ship
received a superabundant measure of grace, more to be esteemed then all the
gold of India. Some write, that this I Will of Pathmos is accounted amongst the
Islands called Sporades, which lie over against Asia, and the City of Ephesus,
and was in the sight both of Europe and Africa, so that it seemed to be as it
were as middle seat or holy chair, out of the which Christ preached by John
from heaven to the whole world. And indeed the counsels of God are wonderful,
and his goodness unspeakable, which reuealeth so great mysteries to his
faithful, as it were out of the Romish prison, and Babylonicall captivity.

Moreover, John declares the cause of his coming into the same Island; for he
says, he was there for the word of God, Apoc. 1.9.
and the testimony of Jesus Christ: that is, for the preaching and constant
profession of the Gospel of Christ.

Histories do report, that John was apprehended in Asia, and by soldiers
led to Rome, that he might plead his cause before the Emperor Domitian,
who most sauagely and cruelly condemned the innocent, and caused him to be put
into a cauldron of hot boiling Oil, out of the which when he by miraculous
providence escaped without harm, he was carried and conveyed into the I Will of
Pathmos.

But immediately after John's banishment, God met well enough with this
persecuting Emperor Domitian. For in the fifteenth year of his reign he was
most cruelly and shamefully murdered by his own servants. And thus much for
the third circumstance.

Now it follows to speak of the fourth circumstance, which is, the persons
to whom this prophecy is written, Apoc. 1.1.
and that is set down in the first chapter and first verse, to be all the
servants of God. As many therefore as be the servants of God, must attend unto
this book, hear it, read it, and remember it: for to all such it is
dedicated by the holy Ghost, to all such it belongs, for all such it is
written and recorded.

Some do falsely and foolishly imagine, that it was given only to John, and
that it might likewise be given to some special men, as to some great
scholars or deep divines, which could tell how to use it, and how to weld it.
But we see how grossly they err: for the holy Ghost says, it belongs to
all the servants of God. And moreover, John is willed and commanded to write
all the things which he saw in sundry visions in a book together, and to
send it to the seven Churches which are in Asia, because the Lord would have
it remain in perfect record unto the use of the whole Church, both that the
Church might have the custody of this book, and also that it might be a
faithful witness unto the end of the world, that this book was written and
penned by John the Apostle, of whose truth and sincerity the church had
sufficient experience.

True it is indeed that there are but seven churches named, but under these
seven Churches all others are comprehended. It had been an infinite matter to
reckon up all the particular Churches which were then in the world, and to have
opened their several estates: therefore under these seven Churches of Asia,
and their particular and several estates, the state of the universal Church
militant is laid open. I conclude therefore, that the whole doctrine of S. John's
Revelation, appertains to the universal Church of Christ throughout all the
world, and in all times and ages, since it was written and recorded. And that
as all scripture is written for our instruction and comfort: Rom 15.4. 2. Tim.
3.16.
and as all scripture given by divine inspiration, is profitable to teach and
convince, etc: so this book of the Apocalypse is written for the special
comfort and instruction of the Church in these last days. And so I do conclude
this fourth point.

The fifth circumstantiall point is, the end and use of this Prophecy, Mal.
3.6. Esa. 46.10. Math. 24.35.
My determination shall stand, and all my will shall come to pass. And Christ
says: Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass. It is
therefore most certain, that every particular thing contained in this
prophecy, shall be fulfilled in Gods appointed time. For God has disclosed
these things to his son Christ, not to the end he should shut them up again
in himself, but that he should show them forth to the godly, that the whole
Church might fare the better by them. It does then stand us all upon to enquire
and search into these things which must so shortly come to pass, that thereby
we may be strengthened and comforted against all future dangers. And Christ
says: Apoc. 22.7.
Behold I come shortly. Blessed is he that keeps the words of the Prophecy
of this book. But how shall we keep them except we know them? and how shall
we know them except we read them, and study them? If therefore we mean to
be partakers of this blessedness, we must not only esteem this book to
be very profitable, but absolutely necessary for all the servants of God to
be exercised in. And if ever there were any time wherein it behooved to set
forth, to urge, and to beat in this doctrine to all the people of God, then is
it chiefly necessary to be done in this our time. For this age of ours has
in the Popes kingdom, many sharp and quick wits, which commend with
marvelous praises both the Pope, and the Popish Church, and buzze into the
ears of the common people, and unlearned sort, many things clean contrary
to the doctrine of the scriptures. The Jesuits and Priests are grown
exceeding crafty and cunning. The Papists are rich, wealthy, and full of
armor and munition. Popery seems to make a head again, and the Papists
look for a day. It stands us then all upon which love Christ and his Gospel,
that we should be well appointed, and thoroughly armed against them. And for
this purpose the Revelation of S. John, is of great use and necessity.

As I said before, so I say again, that it is the Prophecy of our time,
written to this special end, that by it we might be both forewarned and
fore-armed. If we do consider the whole matter of this book, we shall
easily find out the use and end of it. For the excellent matter of it does
argue the excellent end and use of it.

Now then, as concerning the general matter of this book, here are to be
found very large and lively descriptions of the most glorious person of
Christ, Cap. 2. Cap. 3. Cap 7. Cap. 12. Cap. 7. Cap. 8. Cap. 15.
Priest, and Prophet: and also most notable descriptions of the Church, and of
the Ministers of it: and of the persecutions and afflictions, which it must of
necessity pass through in this world. Also of Gods merciful providence for
his Church, and most vigilant care over it in the midst of all extremities.
Cap. 12. Cap. 1^. Cap. 9.
Here are set before our eyes very lively descriptions of the Churches deadly
enemies; both of Satan himself, and his three great instruments, the Roman
Emperor, the Pope, and the Turk.

Cap. 18. Cap 19. Cap. 14. Cap 20.
Here are set down all their cruel persecutions of the Church, and their utter
overthrow in the end. Here are described hell, death, the resurrection, and
the last judgment. Here also the very kingdom of heaven is at large
described, with all those great rewards, Cap. 21. Cap. 22.
infinite glory, and endless felicity, which remain for all the faithful
worshippers of God.

I conclude therefore, that for as much as this Prophecy is of such excellent
contents, therefore the use and necessity of it must needs be very great.
And for this cause John is willed and commanded by Alpha and Omega, Pathmos,
where John was first called, and authorized to this work, and therefore he is
willed first of all, to record this vision which he had already seen.

By the things that are, he means the present state of the seven Churches of
Asia, which were then the most flourishing Churches in the world, as they are
described in the second and third Chapters, and in them the estate of all other
Churches.

By the things that shall be, he means all the prophesies of this book, which
were to be fulfilled in their time, and al those strange accidents, which
should come to pass in process of time, and the several ages of the Church,
even unto the end of the world. Thus we see how John receives a precise
commandment from the son of God, to write things past, present, and to come,
that they might stand in record unto all posterities, from generation to
generation. Thus much touching the fifth circumstance, which is the end and use
of this book.

Now follows to speak of the last circumstantiall point, which is the
authority of this Prophecy, which is strongly confirmed from the Author of
it, which is Jesus Christ; and therefore it is called the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave unto him. I Jesus sent mine Angel to testify these
things in the Churches. Alpha and Omega, is the Author of this book, for he
subscribes his name unto it, and sets his hand and seal unto it. Needs
therefore must the authority of it be very great, which comes from so great
a personage: for look what dignity and authority he is of, from whom the
book comes, of the same dignity and authority is the book it self.

An other strong argument to confirm the authority of this book, may be
taken from the protestation of Jesus Christ in these words: I protest unto
every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this book, if any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book. And if any shall diminish of the words of the book of
this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Here we
see how Jesus Christ makes the authority of this book equal to all other
the Oracles of God, to the which it is not lawful for any man to add or
detract under pain of condemnation. It makes much also for the authority of
this book, that S. Cap. 1.1. Cap. 1.4. Cap. 1.9. Cap. 22.8.
John does so often repeat, reiterate, and inculcate his own name; I John, I
John, I John: I John the Apostle; I John the Evangelist; I John the Divine.
Showing by all these repetitions, how needful a thing it was that the
faithful should be thoroughly instructed who he was, even one of the Lambs
twelve Apostles, and therefore to be void of all suspicion and doubt
concerning the authority of this book, and not once to imagine it to be any
invention of man, or feigned device, since it was penned by so great an Apostle.

Moreover, the authority of this Prophecy is confirmed by four reasons in
the last chapter. The first is the affirmatio^ of the Angel, who says: These
words are faithful and true. The second is the authority of the most high God
himself in these words: The Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to
show unto his servants the things which must shortly be fulfilled. The third
is the testimony of Jesus, who pronounces them blessed which keep the words
of this Prophecy. For says he, Behold I come shortly: Blessed is he that
keeps the words of his Prophecy. The fourth and last is the witness of John
in these words: I am John which heard and saw these things. Babylon, and the
whole kingdom of the great Antichrist, together with all Satan's cunning and
slight therein, and for this cause Satan has labored especially to weaken
the credit and authority of this book. He by some means in old time
prevailed thus far, that even among some Churches of true Christians, the
authority and truth of it was doubted of. The holy Ghost did well foresee this
practice of Satan, and therefore brings the more reasons for the confirmation
thereof. If the credit and authority of this book should never have been
impugned, there needed not any such special confirmation. But now (God be
thanked) there is no question or controversy concerning the authority of this
Prophecy. It is received as authentical by the common consent of all the
Churches. Almost all the ancient Fathers do acknowledge it to be Canonical.
The new writers do with one voice give their consent and approbation unto it.
The Papists themselves do acknowledge it to be the sacred and undoubted word
of God, though of al scriptures they cannot endure it should be meddled withal,
because it cutteth them so near the bone. Moreover, it may not be omitted,
that God is called the Lord God of the holy Prophets, Moses, and of the
Prophets; for all things contained in it shall as certainly be fulfilled in
their time, as theirs were. In Esaias, in Jeremy, in Ezechiel, in Daniel, and in
the rest, we find many things, which the Lord showed by the^ long before they
came to pass. Eue^ so there be many things foreshewed and fore-prophesied in
this book, which in their time shall be assuredly fulfilled. Nay, we see and
know, that many things here fore-tolde, are already fulfilled, and some things
are come to pass even in these our days. He that shall look into the times
that are past, since this Prophecy was given; shall find that all things have
fallen out agreeable to the Prophecy of this book. And surely if there were
none other thing to persuade us touching the authority thereof, this might
suffice, that every thing has fallen out just and iumpe, as this Prophecy did
foreshewe. It is our great negligence, that we do not clearly see so much. And
I do humbly entreat all the people of God to look more diligently and
narrowly into it in all time to come. And thus much concerning the
circumstances.

Now, as concerning the book it self, it may very fitly be divided into three
visions, as it were into three general parts. The first vision is contained in
the three first Chapters. The second vision is contained in the next eight
Chapters following, from the 4. to the 12. Chapter. And the last vision is
contained in all the Chapters following, from the 12. to the end.

As concerning the first vision, my purpose is not to stand much upon it,
because it is plain and easy to understand, and because it contains no
Prophesies of things to come, but only opens the present state of the Church
at that time, and also because I have already touched the sum of it in
handling the circumstantiall points, I will therefore content my self with a
very brief opening and resolution of it, beginning at the first Chapter.

CHAP. I.
The sum of the first Chapter.
THe first Chapter contains four principal things. The Title of the book.
The salutation of the Churches. The manner of John's calling to receive this
Prophecy. The description of Christ, the person that calls him.


The Title of the book is set down in these words: The Revelation of Jesus
Christ which God gave him.





Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
etc.

John to the seven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be with you, and peace,
etc. It contains a description of the Trinity, or three persons in the
Godhead. The Father is described of his eternity, namely, to be he which is,
which was, and which is to come.

John speaks here of the holy Ghost, according to the vision showed him in
the fifth chapter, where Christ is said to have seven eyes, which are the seven
spirits of God, sent into all the the world. Of the which afterward.



First, touching his kingly office, he is called the Prince of the Kings of
the earth, that is, Sion. He is a King to rule and govern his Church. He must
reign over the house of Judah for ever. He must reign over all his enemies,
and in the midst of all his enemies, even till he have trod them all under
his feet. And this benefit we have by it, that we are made Kings in him, in
this life to reign over our corrupt affections, and after this life to reign
as crowned kings forever with him, in infinite glory, and endless felicity.

Secondly, touching his Priesthood, Heb. 9.12.
which through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without fault to God, Heb.
9.14.
to purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God. So then by
virtue of his Priesthood and sacrifice, we are reconciled unto God, have free
access unto the throne of grace, and are made Priests in him to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through him. he has made us Kings and
Priests unto God, even his Father.

Thirdly, concerning his Prophetical office, he is called that faithful
witness. For he said to Pilate: John. 18 37.
For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
might bear witness unto the truth. 1. Tim. 6.13.
And the Apostle says: He witnessed under Pontius Pilate a good confession.
So then Jesus Christ is one of those three great witnesses which bear record
in heaven. 1. John. 5.
Jesus Christ is the Prince of Prophets, even that great Prophet that should
come into the world, through whom all the counsels of God are revealed unto us:
he is that only begotten son which is come down from the bosom of his Father,
and has made known unto us whatsoever he has received of his Father. He
both by his doctrine, life, and miracles, has borne witness unto the truth,
and by the virtue of his Prophetical office, the whole will of God is made
known unto us. For God has sent him as the great Prophet to instruct the
world in righteousness, and has revealed himself to us in him: Coll 1.1^.
Heb. 1.3.
and therefore he is called the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of
his glory, and the engraven form of his person. And therefore he said to
Philip: He that has seen me, has seen my Father also. John. 14.7.
And if you had known me, you should have known my Father also.

And again: No man knows the Father, Math. 15.27.
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Thus then we see
that Jesus Christ is that faithful witness, and Prince of Prophets, in whom
the will of God, and all the counsels of his Father are revealed unto us.

The manner of John's calling to receive this Prophecy, is set down in these
words: I John even your brother and companion in tribulation and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the I Will of Pathmos for the word
of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ: And I was ravished in the
spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great voice, as it had been of
a trumpet, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, that first and that last, and that
which thou see, write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which
are in Asia, etc.

Now out of these three verses five things are to be observed.

First, that John is commanded by the voice of Christ, which he heard behind
him as loud as a Trumpet, to write and record the visions which he saw, and
being so written and recorded, to commend them to all the Churches, for the
common benefit and use thereof. So that herein John does nothing of himself,
nothing of his own brain, but all things by special warrant and authority
from Jesus Christ, that Alpha and Omega, which does call him and authorize him
to this great business which now he is set about.

Secondly, John's rauishment in spirit, to the end he might be made more
capable of all these heavenly visions which were showed unto him.

Thirdly, his great humiliation, whereby also he was fitted to receive and
understand these great mysteries. Psalm. 25.
For God will guide the meek in judgment, and teach the humble his ways;
yea, his secrets are with them that fear him. Therefore although John was a
great Apostle, and had seen wonderful visions, yet he is not thereby puffed up
with pride and conceit of himself, but in the greatest humiliation of his
soul, calls himself a brother and companion of all the faithful, but
specially of such as patiently suffer for Jesus Christ and his kingdom.

Fourthly, the time when John was called, which was the Lords day.

Fifthly, and lastly, the place where he was called, which was the I Will of
Pathmos, as formerly has been showed.

The description of Christ, the person that calls John to this new office, is
set down in the next five verses following, wherein the excellent glory of
Christ's person is described.



Touching the place where Christ in a vision did appear to John, he says it
was in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes. For says he, I turned
back to see the voice that spoke with me, and when I was turned, I saw seven
golden Candlestickes, and in the midst of the seven Candlestickes one like
the son of man, etc. The 7. Psalm. 45.13. Cant. 4.1. Can. 1.9.10. Can. 6.9.
for every believer is all glorious within: every true Christian is fair and
beautiful: every regenerate man is all as gold, even as most pure gold.

It is said afterward, that Christ walks in the midst of these seven golden
Candlestickes: that is, he is always present with his Church, to feed it,
govern it, defend it, and comfort it. The Prophet says that Christ has seven
eyes which go through the whole world: Zach. 4.10. Zach. 3 9.
whereby is signified his watchful providence for his Church: for he is
always looking out for the good of it, to defend and protect it against all
adversary power whatsoever. Which thing was figured in the Rams skins, and
Badgers skins, wherewithal the Arc was covered, Exodus 2.6.
to defend it against all violence of wind and weather. Even so the merciful
protection of Christ, is as it were the continual covering of his Church.

As touching the parts and members of his royal person, he is described of
his head and hair,

As concerning his head and hair, they are said to be as white as wool, and
as snow, the most part do accompany white heads, and gray hairs.

His face shines as the Sun in his strength. Which signifies that Christ is
the same to his Church, that the Sun is to the world. For as the Sun
lighteneth the whole world with his brightness; So Christ with the
brightness of his face lighteneth his whole Church.

His eyes are like a flame of fire, that is, exceeding bright, and piercing
into all places, yea the very hearts of men: for nothing is hid from his sight,
with whom we have to do. He has Egles eyes to foresee all dangers intended and
plotted against his Church, that he may in due time prevent them.

His voice is compared to the sound of many waters, because it should sound
throughout all the world by the preaching of the Gospel. Waters is expounded
Chapter 17. verse 15. of multitudes, nations, and tongues. Christ's voice
therefore is like many waters, because his voice should go through many
countries, and kingdoms.

His feet are compared to fine brass: to signify both the perfection of all
his ways, and also his mighty power to tread down all his enemies.

He is clothed with a garment down to the ground, to signify that he walks
as King and Priest in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes. For Kings
and Priests in old time did wear long garments, specially in the execution of
their offices.

He is girded about the pappes with a golden girdle: for as Kings and Priests
did gird their garments close unto them, least otherwise they might be hindered
in the execution of their offices. So Christ girdeth himself close to his
business: for he is no idle beholder of the state of his church: but one that
continually works out the good thereof.

Concerning his provident care over his faithful Ministers, he is said to
carry them in his right hand: for he had in his right hand seven stars: that
is, the seven stars are the Angels; that is, the Ministers of the seven
churches. Ministers are compared to stars, because they should shine as
bright stars in this dark world, both by life and doctrine.

Christ is said to hold them in his right hand, because he always defends
them against the malice and fury of the world, which of all others is most
outragiously bent against them, and their favorites. But let men take heed of
over bold presuming to pull the stars out of Christ's right hand, least they
smart for it. The world is very busy this way, they think to wring them out
of his hands; but alas poor souls they are not able, he holds them too
fast, who can pull them out of his right hand? If they continue bold and busy
this way, they may hap at last take a bear by the tooth, and peradventure pull
an old house upon their heads. An other reason why Christ is said to hold the
7. stars in his right hand is, because he works by them, and their
ministry, as an Artificer with his tool in his right hand. The things which
Christ has done by these instruments are glorious and admirable. For by the
ministry of the Gospel he has converted many sinners, and saved many souls,
then the which nothing can be more honorable and wonderful: and therefore the
word of God which is the Ministers weapon, is compared to a sharp two edged
sword, which came out of Christ's mouth.

Now unto all this may be added that Christ says; he was dead, but now alive,
because he died, and rose again. And also that he says; He had the keys of
hell and death: that is, authority and power over hell and damnation. For he
has absolute power to open and shut, bind and loose; and therefore it is
written, He has the key of David, which opens, and no man shuts; and
shuts, and no man opens. All this sets forth the great power and glory
of Christ's person, and all aims at this mark and end, to commend unto us the
authority of this book, because it comes from a person of so great dignity
and excellency.

Last of all, it remains to show how John was affected with this vision,
wherein Christ did so gloriously appear unto him: When I saw him I fell at
his feet as dead. Wherein he shows how greatly he was amazed and daunted
with the sight of Christ's most glorious personage. He was stricken with such an
astonishment and fear, that there was almost no life, or spirit left in him,
and all this was to humble him even to the ground, in as much as by it, he
finds his own weakness and imperfection, not capable of such a sight, so
far as to endure it. It was no doubt profitable, or rather necessary, that
this holy servant of God, should thus be humbled and made fit to receive this
revelation with the greater reverence from his great Lord and master. And
also it makes much for our profit, as appears, in that every part of this
vision is rehearsed in the Epistles to the Churches. But to conclude, John
being thus humbled and cast down in himself, is comforted and raised up by
Christ, who laid his right hand upon him, and willed him to fear nothing. For
says he: I am the first and the last, and am alive, but I was dead, behold I
am alive for evermore. In which words he does greatly cheer up John's heart,
and tells him plainly, that this might and terror of his person is bent
only against the wicked enemies of his Church, nothing at all against the
friends thereof: but contrariwise, that all this power and glory, might and
majesty, is wholly and altogether for the good of his Church. Wherein we may
all clearly see and know to our great comfort, that the same arm of God
which casts down the wicked, raises up the godly: the same power which
wounds them, heals us: the same hand which destroieth them, saves us: the
same might and majesty which hurts them, helps us. For whatsoever is in
God, is wholly for his, and wholly against those that are none of his. And thus
much concerning the first Chapter.

CHAP. II. and III.
I Have thought good to handle these two Chapters together, and in a general
and compendious manner to set down the most special matters contained in them
both: not meaning to insist upon every particular, both because these two
chapters are plain, and easy to understand, and also because they have been
sufficiently beaten upon by many.

These two Chapters do generally contain seven Epistles, written to the seven
Churches of Asia: wherein the present estate of the Churches of Asia is very
lively described, and in them the state of all other churches then militant
upon the face of the earth.

Every one of these seven Epistles contains four things.

First, an Exordium or entrance into the matter. Secondly, a general
proposition. Thirdly, a narration. Lastly, a conclusion.
The Exordium or entrance of every Epistle contains two things; namely, the
person to whom the Epistle is written, and the person from whom the Epistle is
written.

The proposition is one and the same in all these Epistles contained in these
words: I know thy works.

The narration contains the matter of each Epistle, and consists of
commendations and discommendations; of admonitions, reprehensions, threats and
promises.

The conclusion of every Epistle, is one and the same, in these words: Let him
that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the Churches.

First, concerning the person to whom these Epistles are sent, he is named in
the beginning of every Epistle, To be the Angel of such a Church.

By this word Angel, he means not the invisible spirits which we call the
Angels of heaven; for the things attributed to these Angels, can in no wise
agree to the invisible spirits, as to be Angels of several churches: to be
neither hot nor cold, to leave their first love, to repent and amend, and
sundry such like attributes throughout all these Epistles. But by the word
Angel, he means the Minister or Pastor of every church: which therefore is
called an Angel, because he is the Minister of God, as the word signifies: As
also because every faithful Minister ought to be received and regarded as an
Angel of God, as the Apostle witnesses of the Galathians, that they received
him as an Angel of God, Gal. 4.14.
yea as Christ Jesus. And he gives many admonitions in his Epistles to this
effect: for he would have all faithful and painful Ministers to be greatly
reverenced and had in double honor: to be acknowledged, 1. Tim. 5.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. 1. Cor. 16.18. 1. Cor. 16.10. Phil. 2.29. Tit. 3 13.
and had in singular love for their works sake: to be cared for, to be made
much of, and to want nothing. For indeed a good Minister is a Jewel of price. A
good Minister is as a friend in court, which we say is better then penny in
purse. A good Minister is like a candle, which spends it self to give light
to others. A good Minister is like a cock, which by the clapping of his wings
awaketh himself, and by his crowing awaketh others. For a good Minister by his
private studies, prayers, and meditations, awaketh him self, and by his
public preaching awaketh others.

The scripture affirms a good Minister to be the very glory of Christ. And
again, 2. Cor. 8.23.
that a good Minister is a singular blessing of God. For the Lord himself
says; I will take you one of a city, Ier. 3.14.
and two of a tribe, and will bring you to Zion: and I will give you Pastors
according to my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
Now then, if a good Minister be so great a blessing of God, and so pearelesse a
pearl, how great is the sin of those which contemn them, and tread their
Ministry under foot, as vile and nothing worth. Our Lord Jesus says of all
such: Luke 10.16.
He that despises you, despises me. Let those scoffers and scorners therefore
take heed how they despise Christ, for assuredly he will not long put it up at
their hands.

If any man demand a reason why all these Epistles are specially sent and
directed to the Angels or Pastors of the Churches, seeing John before, chap. 1.
verse. 11. is commanded to write them to the Churches of Asia, I answer, that
he writing to the Pastors, excludes not the Churches, but in them, or under
them, he writes to the whole Churches, as it plainly appears in the
conclusion of every Epistle, when he says: Let him that has an ear, hear
what the spirit says to the Churches. Then that which is spoken to the Angel
of the Church, is spoken to the Church. The reason why the speech is specially
directed to the Pastor of every church, is, because the good or bad estate of
the church, for the most part, depends upon the Minister. For commonly we see
it comes to pass; Such a Pastor, such people: Such a shepherd, such sheep:
Such a builder, such building: Such a husbandman, such husbandry. Hos. 4.9.
And as the Prophet says: Like Priest, like people. For we may observe in all
these Epistles, that where the Minister is commended, the people are commended;
and where the Minister is discommended, the people are discommended also. So
that they stand and fall, sink and swim together.

As concerning the person from whom these Epistles are sent, it is Jesus
Christ, who is very gloriously described of his diverse qualities in the
entrance of every one of these Epistles. First, in the Epistle to the Church of
Ephesus, it is said: These things says he that holds the seven stars in
his right hand, and which walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlestickes. Secondly, in the Epistle to the church of Smyrna: These things
says he that is first and last; which was dead, and is alive. Thirdly, to the
church of Pergamus: Thus says he which has the sharp sword with two edges.
Fourthly, to Thyatira: These things says the son of God, who has eyes like
a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass. Fifthly, to the church of
Sardis: These things says he that has the seven spirits of God, and the seven
stars. Sixthly, to the church of Philadelphia, it is thus said of Christ:
These things says he that is holy and true, which has the key of David, which
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens. Lastly, to
Laodicea it is thus said: These things says Amen, the faithful and true
witness, the beginning of the creatures.

Now then we do plainly see how gloriously Jesus Christ is described of his
several properties in every one of these Epistles, and what honorable and
magnificent titles are given unto him: and all to this end, to move attention,
and to work in us a reverence of so great a personage, that we might more
seriously regard, and deeply ponder the things which proceed from so great a
majesty. For we see and know by common experience, that almost every man's
words are heeded and regarded according to the opinion and reverence which is
had of his person. Since then that every one of these Epistles is fronted with
this great authority; Thus says the son of God: Thus says Christ* Thus
says Alpha and Omega; therefore we ought to give diligent heed to the things
herein contained. So likewise we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that
after the holy Ghost had very notably described the person of Christ, Heb.
1.4.5.
and extolled him far above the Angels and all other creatures, he gives the
use of it in the beginning of the second chapter, Heb. 2.1.
saying: Therefore we ought to give more diligent heed to his doctrine. And
thus much concerning the Exordium or entrance of these seven Epipistles,
touching the person to whom, and the person from whom these Epistles are sent.

Now it follows to speak a word or two of the general proposition contained
in these words; I know thy works. We read in all these Epistles, how the Son
of God does praise some of the churches, and dispraise others: commend some of
the Pastors, and discommend others. Now, he that will praise or dispraise,
must specially look to this, that he be upon a good ground: and therefore
Jesus Christ before he enters into any praising or dispraising, commending or
reproving, does first protest that he knows their works, and is privy to
all their particular actions, yea, their very thoughts, and therefore cannot
err or be deceived in his censures. True it is indeed, that men may err in
their opinions and censures of others, because they know not men's hearts, and
with what affections things are carried. Men I say, may praise or dispraise too
much or too little. But Jesus Christ whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and
which searches the raines, cannot fail one jot, nor err a hair breadth, as
we say, either in comme^ding or discommending, and therefore he stops their
mouths at the first dash, so as they can have nothing to reply, when he says:
I know thy works; I know well enough what thou art, and what thou have bin; I am
not deceived in thee; I know thy sitting down and rising up, and am accustomed
to al thy ways; And this briefly of; proposition.

The narration (as is aforesaid) contains the matter of the Epistles,
consisting of praises and dispraises, admonitions, reprehensions, threats, and
promises.

Touching the first, we find that some churches are wholly commended, others
wholly discommended: others partly commended, partly discommended. As for
example, the Pastor and people of Smyrna and Philadelphia, are generally
commended for all things, and discommended for nothing; there is no fault found
with them; that is, no gross fault, as in others: for they were not without
common corruptions and infirmities. The Minister of Smyrna was a very rare and
excellent man, although a poor man to the worldward. For Christ says thus
unto him: I know thy poverty: but thou art rich; that is, rich in grace, Apoc.
2 9.
and the manifold gifts of the spirit. Thou have done great service to the
church. Thou have employed thy gifts to the good of many. Thou take great
pains in thy ministry, and art greatly blessed in thy labors: for thou have an
excellent flock, a notable good people, and therefore I cannot but greatly
commend both thee and them. The Minister of Philadelphia was also a very worthy
and notable man.

For although his gifts were not so great as some others, yet was he very
painful and faithful in a little: Apoc. 3.8.
of whom it is said, Thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and
have not denied my name: that is, thou art very constant in the profession and
practice of Christian religion. And thereupon Christ promises to bless his
labors. For says he: I will make them of the sinagogue of Satan which call
themselves Jews, and are not, but do lie: Behold I say, I will make them that
they shall come and worship before thy feet, and shall know that I have loved
thee. Here we do plainly see how Christ promises to bless this man's
ministry, for his painfulness and diligence, although he was not of the
greatest gifts. For men of greatest gifts are not always most blessed in their
labors. For God does commonly work the greatest things by weak means, that
all glory might redound unto him, and no flesh might boast in his sight. For
otherwise, if men of greatest gifts should always be most blessed in their
labors, and win most souls unto God, then we would be ready to ascribe
that to men, and their gifts, which is proper unto God, and so this praise and
glory should be somewhat eclipsed. Thus we see what excellent men the
Ministers of Smyrna and Philadelphia were, and what excellent people they had
in their charges. But on the contrary, the Pastor and the people of Sardis and
Laodicea, are discommended for all things, and commended for nothing. Indeed
the Minister of Sardis had a great name for learning and other good gifts, but
he was grown very idle and negligent, and did little good with his gifts.
Apoc. 3.1.
Of whom it is said: Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead. That
is, there was no spirit in him, no life of grace, his gifts waxed rustie for
want of use: he was fallen asleep: he was fallen away from the grace of God:
he was nothing the man which he had been. Therefore he is admonished to awake
and strengthen the things which remain, which were ready to die.

The Minister of Laodicea, and the people also, were grown lukewarm, neither
hot nor cold; Apoc. 3.16.
they were become careless and secure, not caring greatly which end went
forward in Gods matters, so they might enjoy the present profits and pleasures
of this life.

Concerning the Pastors and people of Ephesus, Pergamus, and Thyatira, they are
partly commended, and partly disco^mended. These three were reasonable good
Ministers, and had many good parts in the^, and took pains in their charges,
although there be some faults found with them. For the Minister of Ephesus is
commended for six things; for labor, for patience, for zeal, for wisdom,
for sincerity, and for courage: but disco^mended for leaving his first love;
Apoc. 2.5.
that is, for reuolting, or somewhat going back, or rather indeed, for cooling
in the love and zeal of God. The Minister of Pergamus, and people also, are
greatly commended for their constant profession of the truth in the midst of
manifold troubles, and the very heat of persecution. For the rage of the
enemies grew so fierce against the profession and professors of the Gospel,
that Antipas the Pastor of Pergamus (as some suppose) was put to death. For
Christ says thus of this church: Apoc. 2.13.
Thou dwell where Satha^s throne is, and yet thou keep my name, and have
not denied my says, even in those days when Antipas my faithful Martyr was
slain among you, where Satan dwells.

But yet notwithstanding this church is found fault withal for some few things,
that is, two gross faults: the one for suffering the doctrine of Balaam to be
broached there by the instruments of Satan: the other, that they maintained
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans. The doctrine of Balaam did uphold the
lawfulnes of eating things sacrificed to Idols, Apoc. 2.14.
and of committing fornication: for he taught Balac the King of Moab, thus to
put a stumbling block before the children of Israel. The doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes did uphold the common use of women, that is, that women might be
made common. These two most gross and absurd doctrines, were suffered and
maintained in the church of Pergamus.

Apoc. 2.19.
As concerning the church of Thyatira, they are greatly commended for the love
and service to the church, for their faith, patience, and manifold works, and
especially for their constant proceeding in religion and godliness, and that
with increase. For of this church it is said; I know thy love, and service,
and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and that they are more at the last
then at the first. But this church is discommended for suffering the wicked
woman Iezabel, (that is, a false Prophetess, which was craftily crept into
this church) to teach and seduce the people of God in that congregation,
teaching the same false doctrine that Balaa^ did at Pergamus: Apoc. 2. Verse 20.
which was, that it was lawful to commit fornication, and to eat meats
sacrificed unto Idols. Hitherto concerning the praises and dispraises of the
churches.

Now follows to speak of the admonitions.

First the Church of Ephesus having fallen from their first love, is admonished
to remember from whence they were fallen, to repent, and to do their first
works. Also the church of Smyrna is admonished and exhorted to stand fast in
the midst of those persecutions and troubles, which should be raised up against
it, by the Emperor Traianus, and continue for the space of ten years. They
are therefore exhorted and encouraged by our Lord Jesus, not to fear the
things which they should suffer: for although the devil and his instruments
should have scope to persecute and imprison them for ten days, that is ten
years, according to prophetical account; yet if they did continue faithful to
the death, they should have the crown of life. The church of Pergamus
suffering and maintaining the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitanes, is
admonished to repent and amend. The Church of Thyatira, which suffered the
false doctrine of Iezabel, is admonished to look to her self, and to hold
fast the truth of Religion. Sardis being dull and dead, is admonished to awake,
and strengthen the things which remain, that were ready to die. Philadelphia
is admonished to hold that which they had, that no man take their crown.
Laodicea being neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, is admonished to be
zealous and amend. And although they thought their state good enough, being
puffed up with conceitednes, yet are they charged to be poor, naked and blind,
and therevpo^ counseled and admonished to buy spiritual gold, that they may be
rich: and spiritual garments to hide their nakedness and spiritual
eye-salue, to anoint their eyes that they might see.

Concerning reprehensions, Ephesus is reproved for going backward. Pergamus and
Thyatira for suffering and maintaining corrupt doctrine, as formerly has been
showed. Sardis for dullness, deadness, and unsoundness in their manner of
worshipping God. Laodicea for lukewarmnesse and conceitednes.

Touching threats, Ephesus is threatened, that except they repent and do their
first works, their candlestick should be removed out of his place; that is,
the Church should be translated to some other place, but not destroyed. For
God does remove, but not destroy his Candlestickes. Pergamus is threatened, that
unless they did speedily repent, Jesus Christ would come shortly, and fight
against them with the sword of his mouth. Thyatira is threatened, that except
they repent them of their works, they should be cast into a bed of affliction,
and all their favorites should be slain with death. Sardis is threatened, that
if they did not watch and awake, Christ would come suddenly upon them as a
thief, and they should not know what hour he would come.

Concerning promises, they be very great and large for everlasting joy, and the
very fullness of glory is promised to all that fight the good fight of faith,
and overcome in the spiritual battle against the flesh, the world, and the
devil. Ephesus is promised, that if they fight it out courageously and
constantly to the end, they should eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God.

Smyrna is promised in like case, that they should not be hurt of the second
death. Pergamus likewise is promised to eat of the Manna that is hid, and to
have the white stone of victory given them. Thyatira is promised to have power
given them to rule over Nations, and to be lightened with heavenly brightness,
like the morning star. Sardis is promised to be clothed with white array;
that is, with heavenly glory, and to have their name continued in the book of
life. Philadelphia is promised to have a pillar made in the Temple of God; that
is, a firm and immovable place of eternal glory. Laodicea is promised to sup
with Christ, and to sit with him upon his throne for evermore.

Thus we see what great and precious promises are made to all Churches that
fight and overcome in this their spiritual battle and conflict.

Concerning the conclusion, it is one and the same to all these seven churches.
Wherein they are exhorted, that such as have ears to hear, should hear,
ponder, and consider all the foresaid praises and dispraises, admonitions,
reprehensions, threats, and promises. And it is therefore said, such as have
ears, because there are very few to be found that have circumcised and
sanctified ears, to hear and understand heavenly things. This is proper to
the elect, this is but, to whom it is given. And thus briefly and generally we
see what was the present state of every one of the Churches of Asia, unto
which this Prophecy was to be sent: so that by them we may see in what estate
the universal Church militant was at that time. For as some of these seven as
yet stood firm, and others had much declined, so was it with all other
churches.

Hitherto concerning the first vision, containing generally the inscription of
this book: John's salutation to the Churches: John's new calling: The
excellency of Christ which called him: And the present estate of the Church.
Now we are to proceed to the second vision, contained in the next 8. chapters
to the 12. wherein is showed, what should be the future estate of the Church in
all ages, even unto the end of the world.

CHAP. IIII.
THe principal things contained in this 4. chapter, is a description of the
person of God, the Author of this book, who is most gloriously described of
that excellent glory that is in himself, and of his royal throne which he
sits upon, and of his goodly retinue, and troops of Saints and Angels
attending about his most glorious throne. Whereunto is added the diverse
qualities, both of Angels and Saints, both in themselves and their own
natures: as also in their manner of praising and worshipping of God. This is
the general sum and sense of this chapter.

But for the better clearing and more full opening of it, I will come to the
words of the text, and open them as they lie in order.

trumpet, talking with me, saying: Come up hither, and I will show thee the
things which must be done hereafter. These words ( After this) have relation to
the first vision spoken of before, as if he should say, after I had received
the former vision, concerning the present estate of the Church, now I had an
other vision concerning the future estate thereof; and therefore he says, a
door was open in heaven, that he might come in and see al these things which
should be revealed unto him. For the opening of the door in heaven does here
signify the vnlocking of heavenly things unto John, or his entrance into them:
for so the word door is taken. 2. Cor. 3.12. Apoc. 3.8. After the opening of
the door, he is called up with a loud voice, like a trumpet, saying: Come up
hither. For although the door was opened, yet durst he not enter in till he
was called and commanded to come in. For in these cases he does not presume in
any thing as of himself, without special warrant and direction: As the
scripture says: No man takes this honor unto himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. The voice that calls him, is
like a trumpet that is loud and shrill, that he might be stirred up more
diligently to attend unto the contemplation of these great secrets which should
be revealed unto him. This voice commands him to come up hither: which
shows that John was rapt up in the spirit unto the heavens to see this
vision. This voice promises to show him things which must be done hereafter:
that is, that he should be made acquainted with the future estate of the
church, as already he was with the present estate thereof.

Upon this sudden and extraordinary calling by so heavenly and loud a voice,
John was forthwith ravished in spirit. For as the Prophet Ezechiel was by the
spirit in the Visions of God, carried from Chaldea to Jerusalem: So this holy
Apostle is carried by the spirit in the Visions of God into heaven, and by the
same spirit is made fit and capable of all these heavenly Visions which should
be showed him. So that in all this we do plainly and clearly see, that John
has as it were a further calling and admittance from heaven, to behold and
see these wonderful secrets which now are to be imparted unto him.

Behold a Throne, etc. Here begins the description of the most high and
glorious majesty of God, who is described after the manner of earthly Kings and
Judges sitting upon their Thrones and judgment seats. For he is king of Zion,
and Judge of all the world.

God for his admirable glory and beauty, is here compared to two most precious
stones. The one which is the Jasper, being of a perfect green color, as
Philosophers write: the other, which is the Sardine, being of a most bright
read color. Nothing can sufficiently resemble the glory of God, being
infinite: But these things, being of the most precious under the Sun, do after
a sort shadow it unto us.

There was a raine-bowe round about the throne, which may signify, that Gods
throne in glory and beauty does far excel all other thrones of mortal
Princes; yea, even that of Salomo^, which was of most pure Iuorie: or rather it
may signify, that although God in himself is most glorious and admirable, yet
he keeps promise and covenant with the sons of men. For the Raine-bowe was
a sign of his covenant, as appears, Genesis 9. and assuredly God will be
mindful of his covenant to a thousand generations. This Rain-bowe is said to be
like an emeraud, which is always of a fresh green color, signifying that
Gods covenant of grace and mercy toward his Church, is always fresh and
green, and his goodness toward his people perpetual and unchangeable.

Moreover, God is described of his glorious retinue, and heavenly company about
him. For it is said: Round about the Throne were 24. seats, and upon the
seats 24. Elders: Which signify the whole church, both militant and
triumphant, both of Jews and Gentiles, and are therefore called 24. because
the church of the Jews grew out of the 12. Patriarchs: and the church of the
Gentiles out of the 12. Apostles. And as the glory and pomp of mortal kings
is set out by their troops and trains of nobles, and other excellent
personages: So the glory of God (which in it self can receive no increase) is
to our capacity commended and set forth by his goodly companies of Saints and
Angels.

24. Elders are clothed in white raiment, which signifies their righteousness,
as it is expounded, chap. 9. ver. 8. not inherent, but imputative: For they
having no righteousness of their own, Christ's righteousness is imputed unto them
through faith, and through faith is made theirs: Romans 4.
For Abraham believed, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness.

These 24. Elders had on their heads crowns of gold, which signify their
victories over the world: for all the elect overcome the world through faith,
as S. John. 5.
John teaches* and not the world only, but eue^ the flesh and the devil also.
And therefore the crown and garland of victory belongs unto them as most
valiant conquerors.

out of the throne proceed lightnings, and thunderings, and voices, which
signify his terror and fearful power in the preaching of the law: for the
preaching of the law, is as it were a voice of lightning and thundering. The
powerful preaching of the law, is the very thundering of hell, and lightning
of the wrath of God upon all impenitent sinners: and therefore at the delivery
of the law, there were lightenings and thunderings, and mount Sinay it self
did tremble and shake.

there were 7. lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the 7.
spirits of God. These seven lamps which are interpreted to be the seven
spirits of God, do signify the preaching of the Gospel, and the manifold
graces and gifts of the spirit; which are given to the church by the means
thereof. For the Gospel gives a cheareful and comfortable light, being the
ministry of the spirit, 2. Cor. 3.
as the Apostle says, and therefore is resembled by seven lamps. So then from
the throne, that is, from the presence of God, proceeds both law and
Gospel, and the ministry of them both for the saving of souls. And all this
makes much for the setting forth of Gods glory and majesty, being the mark
here aimed at.

And before the throne, there was a Sea of glass, This Sea of glass is the
world, which is fitly compared to a Sea, because it is full of storms,
tempests, and waves, that are continually raised up in it. It is full of
rocks, upon which many dash, and make shipwreck. It is compared to a Sea of
glass, for the brittlenesse, chaunges, and uncertainty of all things in the
world. It is said to be before the throne like Crystal, because the
all-seeing God does as clearly behold from his throne all the thoughts,
words, and works of the sons of men, and all other particular actions of all
his creatures under the Sun, as we behold our face in a Crystal. Heb. 4
13.
For all things are naked, and as it were laid out in an anatomy unto his
eyes, with whom we have to do.

Moreover it is said, that in the midst of the throne, and round about the
throne, were four beasts, full of eyes before and behind. These four
beasts do signify the Angels of heaven, the invisible and elect Angels, as it
is expounded, Ezech. 10. verse, 20. where the Prophet in a vision sees four
beasts, as it were bearing up and drawing Gods chariot of triumph. And at the
20. verse he says expressly, that he at last understood they were the
Cherubins. The first and tenth chapter of Ezechiel being thoroughly looked into,
do make this plain. The reason why the Angels are called by the name of
beasts, is, because in the next verse they are compared to beasts, for their
qualities of certain beasts. They are named four in number, being otherwise
innumerable, because they are likened to four several beasts.

The Angels are said to have eyes before and behind, for their great vigilancie
over the Church, and every member thereof, and because they are endued with
knowledge of things past, and things to come: and last of al, because they see
and discern almost all actions under the Sun, upward and downward, backward
and forward.

Here the Angels are compared to four several beasts: to a Lion for strength
and courage: to a calfe, or an ox, for service and use: to a beast having the
face of a man, for wisdom: to an Eagle, for swiftness and readiness to
execute the will of God. And moreover, because the Eagles soar aloft, and fly
a very high pitch, we are given to understand, that the heavenly spirits are
much in celestial contemplation, and do receive the knowledge of hid secrets
and counsels, for they are much aloft about the throne of God, and many high
and deep secrets are opened unto them.

And the four beasts, had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, etc. This makes it very plain, that by these beasts are
understood the six Angels, because he ascribes unto every one of them six
wings a piece. For the Angels are described with wings, both in the first and
tenth of Ezechiel before mentioned: and also in the sixth Chapter of the
prophecy of Isaias, where the Seraphins are said to have six wings a piece:
two to cover their faces: two to cover their feet: and two to fly withal;
because they have two wings to cover their faces withal, because they are not
able to endure the inconceivable brightness and glory of God, for he dwells
in vnapproachable light. 1. Tim. 6.16.
They have two wings to cover their feet withal, because mortal men are not
able to look upon the brightness that is in them. For we read that many have
bin astonished and dazeled with the glory and brightness of Angels, so glorious
creatures are they. They have two wings to fly withal, to note the prompt
obedience and readiness to execute the commandments of God, as formerly was
showed. Moreover, the angels are said to have wings and to fly swiftly:
because God by them does speedily dispatch many purposes, actions and services
here below: and for this cause the scripture affirms, Psalm. 18.10.
that he rides upon the Cherubins: that he dwells between the Cherubins:
Psalm. 80.1.
and that he makes the clouds his chariots, Psalm. 104 2.
and walks upon the wings of the wind. For as earthly Kings are in their
progresses carried in their most sumptuous coaches, drawn by the most
excellent coach-horses, to dispatch great businesses, and many weighty
affairs within their dominions: so the visions in Ezechiel do show that the
immortal king is carried most swiftly in his chariot of triumph, drawn by the
Cherubins, as it were by beasts, to direct and ouerrule all actions under the
Sun.

Moreover, these Angels are said to be full of eyes within,

Furthermore, the Angels are here said to praise God incessantly, day and
night, saying: holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which was, which is, and
which is to come. Where we may clearly see, that the Angels praise and
worship God in a burning zeal without weariness. For they are not as men,
which through their great corruption, are full of dullness and wearines in Gods
worship; but they do always serve him with infatigable desires, and therefore
are called Seraphins, because they burn in the zeal of God, and Cherubins,
because their delight is to approach near unto him, and to be always about his
throne; yea, even in his chamber of presence. They do double and treble this
word (holy) and warble much upon it, because they know full well, that he is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works; and that all his
proceedings and judgments, are even then waighed in the balance of justice
and equity, when to man's sense, and the judgment of reason, Psalm. 36.
they seem nothing less. For his Judgments are as a great depth which man's
reason cannot found.

Further, we see that when these beasts, that is, gave glory, and honor, and
thanks to God, etc. the 24. Elders also fell down before him, and worshipped
him that lives for evermore. Where we may plainly see, that both Saints and
Angels do jointly praise and magnify God, and him alone, Even that God that
lives for evermore, even that God which was, which is, and which is to come;
that is, the eternal and everlasting God. For the scripture says: Psalm.
1.2.16. Psalm 149.5. Ps. 103.20.
Praise him o ye Saints, and praise him o ye Angels that excel in strength.
And the 24. Elders cast their crowns before the throne, saying: Thou art
worthy o Lord, to receive glory and honor, etc. Wherein we see, that all the
elect do empty themselves of all worthiness, to have any glory,
acknowledging that their crowns of glory are Gods free gift, and that the
praise thereof belongs only to him, and nothing to themselves. And this in
very deed is the right manner of worshipping God, frankely to ascribe all
glory to him, and all shame to our selves, to give all to him to whom all is
due, and nothing to our selves, which have nothing; for nothing can be given
or taken out of nothing.

Now then, to conclude and wind up this fourth chapter, we do clearly see
the sum and drift of all is, that heaven door was opened unto John, and that
he was let in, and called up into the Chamber of presence by a very loud
voice, there to take notice of the future estate of the church: and that the
person which thus called him up, was the very immortal God himself, who is so
gloriously described of his throne, his troops and trains of Saints and
Angels, as we have heard. And all this is to commend and set forth the
authority of this book, whose Author is so excellent, yea, superexcellent.

CHAP. V.
AFter this Vision containing the glory of the divine majesty was showed unto
John, that he might know from what fountain this Prophecy was derived, now
in this fifth chapter is taught and showed by what means, and by whose
mediation, the knowledge of such hidden mysteries were revealed unto the
church; namely, by the means and mediation of Jesus Christ, in whom only the
counsels and secrets of God the Father are opened, and made known unto men.
For he is the great Prophet and Doctor of the church, which is come down from
the bosom of his Father, and has made known unto us whatsoever he has
received of his Father, Ioh 15.15. Math. 3. Math. 17.5.
as he himself testifies. And the church is commanded by a voice from
heaven to hear him, and him alone.





Thirdly, a description of those most glorious praises which are given to
Christ by the Angels,

I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, By this book here
mentioned, is meant this present book of the Apocalypse, or Revelation, as it
shall plainly appear in the next chapter, when we come to the opening of the
seven seals thereof. For the things which fall out upon the opening of the
several seals, do plainly declare, that all is meant of the particular
matters contained in this present book.

This book is said to be in the right hand of him that sits upon the
throne, because all the secrets revealed in it, come from the counsel and
decree of the most high God, and are ordered by his mere direction and
providence.

It is called a written book, to show that the things contained in it, are so
firmly decreed in the counsel of God, that none of them shall fail, but come
to pass, and be fulfilled in their season. They are such as we may write of,
as we use to say: and therefore for the certainty of them, they are here said
to be written in a book.

This book is said to be written within and without, for the multitude and
variety of matters contained in it. For there were both many and great things
which should fall out in the world from the time that John received this
Prophecy, unto the end of the world.

This book is sealed with seven seals, that is to say, perfectly sealed,
because the things contained herein, are counsels and secrets, only known to
God, til it pleased him to reveal them to his church by his son. The elect
Angels knew nothing of the things written in this book, before the seals were
opened.

Here is proclamation made to all creatures, that if there were any manner of
persons in heaven or earth, among men or Angels, that would take upon them to
open and expound this book, that they should come forth and show themselves,
and be very willingly and gladly heard. But alas, the next verse does show,
none in heaven or earth was able to open the book and expound it, whereupon
John wept very much, because no man was found worthy to open and interpret this
book.

The cause of John's weeping and lamenting, was for fear the Church should be
deprived of such profitable and excellent things as he knew were contained in
this book. Such was his love to the Church: such was his zeal and care for
the people of God. An example worthy of all imitation, to mourn and weep for
the concealing of the book of God, and to rejoice in the opening of it. But
Papists and Atheists are of a contrary mind, for they rejoice in the
concealing and keeping close of the scriptures, and are much grieved with the
opening and revealing thereof; because thereby their hypocrisy and villainy is
detected and discarded.

Upon this, one of the Elders said unto John: Weep not, Judah, the root of
David, has obtained to open the book, and to lose the seals thereof. Here we
see how John is comforted and cheared up by one of the Elders, being now very
pensive and sad, and is willed to pluck up a good heart, and to be of good
cheer, for he could tell him good news; to wit, of one that could open and
expound this book, and all the secrets in it, and that is Jesus Christ, the
great reuealer of secrets, and only expounder of all riddles, and hidden
mysteries, as before has been spoken.

Jesus Christ is here said to be of the Tribe of Judah, because he is lineally
descended of that Tribe, according to the flesh, and his humane nature.

He is compared to a Lion, by allusion unto Jacobs words in his last will and
testament concerning Judah, namely, that he should couch as a Lion, Genesis 49.9.
and as a Lioness, and none should stir him. He is fitly compared to a lion,
for his great and admitable power and strength, for he reigns and must reign
over al his enemies, and in the midst of all his enemies, yea, till he has
troade all his enemies under his feet.

He is called the root of David, both here, and also in the 22. chapter of
this book, verse 16. because he sprung out of David the son of Ishai, as a
branch out of his root, Esaias. 11.1.
as the Prophet did foretell, that A rod should come forth of the stock of
Ishai, and a graft should grow out of his roots. Romans 1.3.
And the Apostle says, that Christ was made of the seed of David, according
to the flesh.

John, I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four
beasts, and of the Elders, stood a Lamb, as though he had been killed, which
had seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent into
all the world. Here John takes a view and sight of Jesus Christ, from the
very midst of the throne, and of the four beasts and the Elders. Christ
does not appear about the throne, as do the Saints and Angels, which are but
ministers and ministering spirits: but in the very midst of the throne, and
the four beasts, etc. because he is God everlasting, coequall and coeternall
with the Father, in whom (as the Apostle says) dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead, bodily or essentially. And here afterward the same worship and
honor is ascribed unto him both by the Saints and Angels, which before is
ascribed unto God the Father.

Christ is here compared to a Lamb, for his innocence; for the scripture
says: He was as a sheep, dumb before his shearer. Esa. 53.7. John. 1.29.
He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. He is the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.8.
He is compared to a Lion, for his great and incomparable strength in
co^quering hell, death, and damnation, and all infernal power. And to a lamb,
because he has dispatched all this upon the Cross, by the sacrifice of
himself once offered: for he never did more lively show forth his Lyon-like
power, then when he was as a lamb slain and sacrificed upon the Cross.

This Lamb Christ, is here said to have seven horns, which signify his
manifold power, or fullness of power, or perfect power, according as this
metaphor or borrowed speech of horn is usually so taken in all the scriptures.
This Lamb also is said to have seven eyes, which are interpreted to be the
seven spirits of God: that is, the manifold graces and gifts of the Spirit,
which he gives unto his Church. Now then to conclude this point, for as much
as the number of seven in this book is a number of perfection, and always
notes perfection, therefore by Christ's seven horns, and seven eyes, we may,
and that soundly, understand his perfect power, and his perfect sight and
knowledge in all things. For his seven eyes are so taken in the third chapter
of the Prophecy of Zachary, where it is said: Zach. 3.9.
Upon one stone shall be seven eyes. Meaning, that Jesus Christ, the corner
stone of the Church, should be full of eyes, to look out for the good of his
Church, and to give light to all others: for he is the life and light of the
world.

And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the throne. Here Jesus Christ takes the book out of his Fathers hand,
purposing both to open it, and expound it: For he is the only expounder of the
law, and the best interpreter of his Fathers will.

the four beasts, and 24. Elders fell down before the Lamb, to testify
their thankfulness and inward joy and rejoicing that the Son of God would take
upon him this office, which none other would or could perform.

Moreover, by their falling down and worshipping him, they do plainly
testify, that he is God over all, to be blessed for ever. For otherwise the
Angels of heaven, both Cherubins and Seraphins, would not thus fall down, and
worship him, ascribing unto him, both deity and divine honor. Consider then
how great he is, of whom it is said: Let all the Angels of God worship him.
Psalm. 97.7. Heb. 1.6.


Moreover, these Angels and Saints are said to have every one harpes and golden
viols, full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.

These harpes do signify the sweet concent and harmony both of men and
Angels, in sounding forth the praises of the Lamb. For herein the whole
Church, Apoc. 14.2.
both militant and triumphant do accord and tune together, as many harpers
harping with their harpes; as it is written also in an other place.

Hereby also they do plainly testify that inward peace and spiritual joy,
which all the faithful have through Christ, which is more sweet and
delightsome to the soul, then any music is unto the ears.

The viols full of odours, are expounded to be the prayers of the Saints,
which are therefore compared to odours, because they smell sweet in the
nosthrils of God, and are more fragrant then any nosegay or perfume whatsoever:
for he takes great pleasure in the prayers of his people; especially when
they come out of golden viols, that is, sanctified hearts and consciences: for
every sanctified heart is a golden heart in the sight of God; and every
regenerate conscience is a jewel of price, guilt with gold, and enameled with
pearl. For this cause the holy man David wishes earnestly that his heart
might be so renewed and cleansed inwardely, that his prayer might be directed
as incense in Gods sight, Psalm. 14 1.2.
and the listing up of his hands as a sweet smelling sacrifice.

Furthermore, these Saints and Angels do sing a new song. That is, they do
sing to the praises of the Lamb with renewed affections, and unwearied desires:
Their inward joy continues always fresh and green, as the Bay Tree: They
never wither or wax weary of the service of God: Their song is evermore new,
and therefore evermore delightsome. For the more new any thing is, the more
pleasant and delectable: for men are not affected with old, but altogether
with new things.

Now then, Jesus Christ having taken this book into his hand to open and
expound, is applauded unto by the general consent and voices of the whole
church: For say they, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof. Wherein they do all with common consent, give their voices unto
Christ, acknowledging him to be the only fit person in heaven or earth, to take
upon him this function of opening a book so closed, so clasped, so shut, so
sealed, and they do yield a reason of their proceedings, because (say they)
thou wast killed, and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every
kindred and tongue, and people, and nation. Meaning hereby, that he was put to
death to pay the price of our redemption, in whom all the believers, both of
the Jews and Gentiles, are saved. Their reason then is this: he that has
died, and risen again, and is now exalted far above all principalities and
powers, etc. is the most fit Instrument to open and interpret this book. But
thou o Christ the Lamb of God, art such a one, therefore thou of all others,
art most meet to take this matter upon thee, and to enter into this business.
Further, they amplify their reason thus: that he has made us of slaves and
servants, Kings; and of profane persons, Priests unto the most high God. And
last of all, that we shall reign upon the earth. Not meaning hereby, that we
shall reign as earthly kings, or only enjoy an earthly kingdom. For out of
all doubt, the Saints shall reign with Christ in the heavens for evermore. But
here is mention made of reigning in the earth, because after this life, Gods
children shall have the fruition and inheritance both of heaven and earth: Pet.
3.12.
that is to say, that new heaven and new earth wherein dwells righteousness:
for the heavens and the earth being redintegrated, and purged from corruption,
shall be the portion of the Saints, and the habitation of the elect, for
evermore.

After all this, John hears the voice of innumerable Angels, beside the four
beasts. That is, the Cherubins and Seraphins, or chief Angels; that is, Angels
deputed to chief offices, round about the throne, which all with a loud voice
do acknowledge the Lamb which was killed, to be worthy of all honor, glory,
and praise, etc. all other creatures both in heaven and earth: as the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, the fishes in the Sea, and the beasts in the earth, do all
in their kind sing the same song, all honor and glory, praise and power, to
belong unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for evermore.
For although the creature is as yet subject to the bondage of corruption, and
therefore groneth and trauelleth in pain, waiting when the sons of God
shall be revealed, yet it stands in assured expectation of restitution to
liberty and incorruption; and therefore here all the creatures do praise the
Lamb for that restoration which they do so longly and wishly look for. And
the four beasts said Amen. That is, they do subscribe to those praises which
the creature yields to their Creator. And not only the Angels do subscribe
and consent unto it, but the 24. Elders also, who fall down, and worship him
that lives for evermore. So that the Lamb is praised and worshipped of all
hands, both of men and Angels, and all other creatures, as God everlasting, and
blessed for evermore.

CHAP. VI.
IN the fourth chapter we have heard the description of God the Father, which
holds the sealed book in his right hand. In the fifth chapter we have had
the description of Jesus Christ, the opener and interpreter of this seven
sealed book. Now in this sixth chapter we are to understand of the matter and
contents of this book, and of the strange accidents and events which
followed upon the opening of every several seal. For in this chapter six of
the seals are opened by the Son of God, and the mysteries thereof disclosed
unto John, that he might declare the^ to the Church, for the comfort and
instruction thereof.

This chapter contains six principal things, arising from the several
opening of the six seals; and they are these: Great persecutions following
thereupon. Famine. Pestilence. Complaints of the Martyrs.


Now, after all these former matters, John did very intentiuely fix his eye
upon the Lamb, being now about to open and unclasp the first seal of the
book, and all on the sudden he was admonished and stirred up by one of the
Cherubins, that he should draw near and come up, and take knowledge of these
great and important matters, which were now to be revealed unto him. And to the
end that he might be thoroughly awaked, and stirred up to attention in so
weighty matters, it is said, that the voice of the Angel which spoke unto
him, was like the voice of a thunder: So that hereby John was thoroughly rowsed,
fitted and prepared, to receive these heavenly visions.

Therefore I beheld, and lo, there was a white horse, John keeping his eye
steadie upon the Lamb, having now opened the first seal, does in a vision see
a white horse, etc.

By this white horse, is meant the ministry of the word of God, and the
first preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, and the successors
in the Primative Church. The white horse is taken in this sense in the 19.
chapter of this Prophecy; where our Lord Jesus being upon this white horse,
beats down all his enemies before him: For who is able to resist his word,
and the ministry of it?

Zach 1.8.
In the first chapter of the Prophecy of Zachary, our Lord Jesus purposing to
build up his church, being in a very ruinous estate after the captivity, is
brought in by the Prophet on horseback, both for the reedifying of his Church,
and also for the punishment of the Babilonians, his enemies, and the enemies of
his people. In the 45. Psalm the church the spouse says thus to her beloved
husband Christ: Psalm. 45.
Gird the sword upon thy thigh, o thou mighty one, the sword of thy glory
and comely beauty, and with thy comely beauty ride on prosperously for the
business of truth, and of meek righteousness, etc.

Now in all these places of the scripture, we do plainly see, that when
Christ goes about either to broach his Gospel, or build up his Church, or to
be revenged on the enemies thereof, he is brought in on horseback. And this
does strongly confirm and warrant this exposition, seeing it is not any
imagined sense, or new device of man's brain, but such a sense as other places
of scripture will very fully bear out.

Moreover, if we do seriously consider, and deeply weigh the purpose and
intendment of the holy Ghost in all this, it will not a little help and
further this exposition. For the chief scope and drifte of all is, to describe
the state of the Church from the Apostles time to the end of the world. show
unto John the things that must shortly come to pass.

Now, we all know by blessed experience, that the first estate of the Church
did consist in the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles: and
therefore this must needs be understood of that time and estate of the church.
For Jesus Christ is he that sits upon this white horse, that is, by the
ministry of his Gospel he conquereth and subdueth the nations under him.

There may be three reasons alleged why this horse is said to be of a white
color. First, because the doctrine of the Gospel which was preached by Christ
and his Apostles, was pure and sincere, being without all spots and blots of
error and heresy. For the white color in the scripture does signify purity,
sincerity, innocence, joy, glory, and beauty.

Secondly, because the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, was full of joy and
comfort: As it is said of Samaria, after Phillip had set the Gospel abroache
there, Act. 8.8.
that there was great joy in that City.

Thirdly, because the ministry of Christ and his Apostles was very glorious
and beautiful, as it is written: Romans 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them which bring the glad tidings of peace,
etc. And again, Psalm. 45.
with thy comely beauty ride on prosperously, for the business of truth, etc.

If any man demand a reason of Christ's sitting on horseback, and riding
forth on horseback: I answer, that it does most fitly represent that
marvelous swiftness wherewith the light of the Gospel should be carried and
spread, not only throughout all Judea, Samaria, and Galile, but also throughout
all the kingdoms of the world. For is it not a wonder, to consider how
swiftly, and as it were on horseback, and also how far over the Heathen
nations, within a few years after Christ's ascension, the doctrine of the
Gospel was preached, and of multitudes embraced. He rode forth indeed
prosperously and swiftly upon this white horse, even the ministry of the
Gospel, for the business of truth, and of meek righteousness; and his right
hand wrought fearful things, as says the Psalmist.

Moreover, it is here said, that Jesus Christ has a bow in his hand. And in
the 45. Psalm, from whence it seems all these phrases and speeches are
borrowed, he is said to have sharp arrows in his hand, whereby he pierces
the heart of his enemies.

Now this bow and arrows do signify the piercing power of the Gospel,
whereby the world has been subdued unto Christ. For all the arrows of the
Gospel which Christ shoots out of this bow, which is even the tongue of his
ministers, do stick in the hearts of men; yea, they pierce into all the
secret places of the soul. For the ministry of the Gospel is lively, Heb 4.
and mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword, and enters
through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, of the
joints and the marrowe, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of
the heart.

Here is yet further mention made of a crown which was given unto Christ, and
that he went forth conquering, that he might overcome.

This crown signifies the victory which he gets over the world with his
bow and arrows. For the Psalmist says: By thy sharp arrows in the hearts
of the kings enemies, the people shall fall under them.

We read in the second of the Acts of the Apostles, that 3000. Act, 2.37.
of the Kings enemies were at once shot thorough with this bow, and these
arrows, and did fall under him. We read of many other at other times, and in
other places. For the Apostle says plainly, that the weapons of our warfare
are not carnal, but spiritual, 2. Cor. 10.
mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, and
every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Thus we see how Christ and his Apostles and all their true successors riding
upon this white horse which is the ministry of the Gospel, have gone over all
the world, conquering and ouercomming.

I am not ignorant that some do expound this otherwise: but my purpose is not
to meddle with other men's opinions, and judgments, but to set down that which
God has given me to see, and which in mine own conscience and persuasion, I
suppose to be the truth, referring all to the judgment of the church, and such
therein as are endued with the spirit of God. For the spirit of the Prophets is
subject to the Prophets. And be it known unto all men, that my chief endeavor
throughout this whole book, shall be to seek the sense that is, and not the
sense that is not: to meddle only with truth and let falsehood go.

As before at the opening of the first seal, so now again at the opening of
the second seal, John is called upon by an other Angel to give attention: and
so afterward at the opening of the third and fourth seal. Wherein we may
observe the heaviness and drowsinesse of man's nature in all heavenly things,
which is evermore ready to sink and fall asleep, except it be awaked by many
means, and stirred up by special grace.

This read horse, represents the cruel persecution, and bloody wars
which followed the preaching of the Gospel. For the red color in the
scripture, does note blood, cruelty, and wars. The rider upon this horse is
the devil himself: for who but he and his instruments delight in blood,
persecutions, and wars? he has power given him to take peace from the
earth, (for he could have no power except it were given him) and to this
purpose a great sword was given him, to murder and kill withal.

All this is to be understood of the state of the church under the ten great
persecutions, raised up against it by the persecuting Emperors, Domitian,
Traianus, Nero, Antoninus, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licinius, and other
cruel tyrants, even until the times of Constantine the great.

Stories do report, that these cruel persecutors did in most savage and
horrible manner, torture, torment, and shead the blood of innumerable
multitudes of Gods people. So that as the first estate of the Church, under the
preaching of the Gospel, was joyful and peaceable; so this second estate of
the Church, under such outrageous persecutions, was troublesome and tragical:
and yet for all that, in the midst of all these swords, blood and flames of
persecution, the Church did still prevail and increase. Tertul.
For the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Gospel. And the Church
oftentimes being sown in the blood, yet springs up, and grows in blood.
And as for the cruel and bloud-sucking Emperors, which could not endure the
light of the Gospel, but strove by tirannie to suppress it, the just God
which takes vengeance of all iniquity, and specially of the persecution of
his children, was even with them well enough: for he gave the^ over, some to be
slain in the wars, some to be tortured with horrible diseases, some to be
poisoned, some to be murdered, and some to murder themselves. Thus did God
the auenger, show himself from heaven, as the stories report, and pay home to
the full these bloud-suckers of his Church, making them examples of his wrath,
and spectacles of his vengeance to all nations.

By the black horse, famine and dearth is signified: for the black color, is
a mournful and sad color: and what makes men more pensive and sad then
famine and extreme hunger. For it is a thing intolerable: and therefore the
holy Ghost says; They be better that are killed with the sword, Lament. 4.9.
then they that die of famine. He that sits on this horse has a balance in
his hand, which signifies great penury and scarsitie of all things, but
specially of victual: in so much that men must be pittanced and stinted in
their victuals, and their bread and drink must be delivered out by weight and
measure, as it fares in straight and sore sieges of cities, when victuals
wax scarce. Leuit. 26. Ezec. 4. and 5.
This is it that God threatens in Leuiticus and Ezechiel, that he would
break the staff of bread, and that ten women should bake in one oven, and
deliver bread by measure. Now to declare the greeuousnes of this famine, a
voice comes from the throne, and from the Angels, a measure of wheat should
be for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny: the measure here
spoken of is a Chenix, which some writers say, was so much as would serve a man
for bread corn for one day. And the Roman penny under Domitian, was almost
seven pence of our money. And at that time the laboring man did work for a
penny a day, which would do little more then buy him bread corn. How then
should his wife and children do? Whereas it is said: Wine and Oil hurt thou
not, I take it that it should rather he translated, In Wine and Oil thou shall
not do unjustly: as the word will bear it. And the sense is, that in the state
of corn and vittaile, they shall deal conscionably and mercifully, not
selling at the highest, but rather at the lowest rate now in the times of
extreme scarcity.

Now, all this is to be understood of that most grievous famine which we
read to have been about the year of the Lord, 316. and sundry times
afterward. And all this for the contempt of the Gospel preached by Christ and
his Apostles upon the white horse, and the murdering of Gods Saints by him upon
the red horse, and his instruments. So grievous and fearful a thing is the
contempt of the Gospel, and the persecuting of the Saints. And God did most
justly cause the world to smart for it, and make them with sorrow enough to
feel the punishment of the Gospel rejected.

And when he had opened the fourth seal,

And I looked, and behold a pale horse,

This pale horse signifies the pestilence and other contagious diseases, which
God most justly brought upon the world for the contempt of the Gospel, and the
murdering of Christ and his Apostles, and as I noted before out of the
scriptures, that when God comes either in mercy or judgment, he is said to
come on horseback, to note his expedition, and swiftness, both in the one and
the other: so, as before Christ is upon the white horse, the devil upon the
red horse, famine upon the black horse: so here death and hell are said to be
upon the pale horse: for pestilence and death makes men look pale: but being
dead, he says hell followed. For assuredly hell does always follow the
death of the body, excepting those only whom Christ has delivered from hell
and damnation by the power of his death.

Thus then it is: the red horse with blood, the black horse with famine, the
pale horse with pestilence, have power given them over the fourth part of men,
to murder, kill and slay, as all stories do show, that for the rejecting of
Christ and his Gospel, these plagues were carried as it were on horseback,
over a great part of the world. Now as touching this famine and pestilence
which fell out upon the opening of the third and fourth seals, they are to be
referred unto those times especially, wherein the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandales,
and other barbarous nations which were the wasters of the world, did waste and
decaie the Roman Empire both far and near. Whereupon grew this famine,
scarsitie, and pestilence, and strange diseases here spoken of, about some
300. years after Christ, and somewhat more.

And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of
them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
maintained, etc. Here is discovered the state of the Martyrs after this life,
and the condition of the spirits of all just and perfect men. For whereas it
might be demanded, what became of all those heaps and multitudes of men
which were slain for the testimony of Jesus in the ten great persecutions:
it is here answered, that they were under the Altar. John in a Vision sees
them under the Altar. That is, under the merciful protection of Christ in
heaven, who for them and for us all, was made both Altar, Priest, and
Sacrifice. This Altar Christ, is afterward called the golden Altar, which is
before the throne of God. Where I am, there shall you be also. Ioh. 14 3.


And in an other place he says: If I were lift up from the earth, I will draw
all men unto me, that is, Ioh. 12 32.
all believers. Then it follows, that the souls of these just and righteous
men were in Paradise, and in Abraham's bosom, which is the very port and haven
of salvation. For although the persecuting Emperors, and other tyrants of the
earth, had power to kill their bodies, yet had they no power over their souls,
as our Lord Jesus affirms. Math. 10.


Here we see plainly, that the souls of the Martyrs do very vehemently cry
for vengeance upon these cruel tyrants which shead their blood. Moreover, they
cry for it speedily, and seem to be impatient of delay. But it is to be
observed, that they do not this in any hatred, or private desire of revenge,
in respect of any wrong or cruelty showed to them; but in a very love and
burning zeal of the Kingdom and glory of Christ, and whatsoever desire they
have, it is wholly to that end. Wherefore they are here under a figure brought
in crying for vengeance, rather to express what judgment of God tarrieth for
the cruel persecutors, then to show what mind they bear toward them. For
it is indeed their cause that cries for vengeance. And as Abels blood: so
their blood cries aloude in the ears of the Lord of Hoastes for revenge.

Moreover, we may not imagine or gather out of this loud crying of the
Martyrs in heaven, that they have any disturbance, impatience, disquietnesse,
or any coffeehouse there. But this they do in a fervent desire of that
fullness of glory which they assuredly hope for and look for in the
consummation of all things, when both their souls and bodies shall be joined
together.

And long white robes were given unto every one; These white robes do signify
that honor, glory, and dignity, whereunto not only the Martyrs, but also all
other faithful believers are advanced in the chambers of peace: for so white
robes are to be understood in sundry other places of this book. Chap. 3.18.
Chap. 7.13. Chap. 19.8.
And this does plainly prove, that the Martyrs were now in glory with Christ.

Now, as concerning the answer to their complaint and cry, it was this, that
they should be content, and have patience for a little season, (for the time
remaining, to the end of the world, was but as a day with God, and as a
moment in comparison of eternity) and the reason of the delay is yielded,
which is this, that there were numbers of others, their brethren in the
world, which should be martyred and slain for the truth, as well as they
under the great Antichrist of Rome, and the bloody Turk, at and upon the
opening of the sixth and seventh seal. And therefore in consideration that the
most wise God had decreed and fore-determined with himself in his most secret
and hid counsel, to bring multitudes of others to glory by the same way and
means that they themselves were brought, that therefore in the mean time
being so short a time, they should rest satisfied and contented. And hereby
the way, we see what staieth the coming of Christ unto judgment; namely this,
that the number of his Martyrs and Saints, and all such as he has chosen unto
life, are not yet accomplished.







Upon the opening of this sixth seal, very doleful and fearful things which
do follow: As earthquakes, the darkening of the Sun, the obscurity of the
Moon, the falling of the Stars, the rolling together of the heavens, the
removing of mountains and Isles out of their places, the howlings and horrors
of kings and captains, and other great potentates of the earth, which all are
things very terrible and fearful to behold: and all these do represent and
figure out unto us the most fearful tokens of Gods high displeasure and most
heavy indignation against the wicked world. Very grievous things fell out upon
the opening of the 2.3. and 4. seals: but they are far more grievous which
follow upon the opening of this sixth seal: for this sixth seal contains an
aggrauation and increase of all the former judgments. For now after the cry
of the Martyrs for vengeance, GOD the auenger of the blood of the righteous
does show himself from heaven, and declare his wrath in more fearful manner
then before, even to the great astonishment of all the creatures in heaven and
earth. So horrible a thing is the sheading of the blood of the Christians. For
now we see plainly, that God hears the cries of his Martyrs, and comes as
a Giant, or as an armed man, to take vengeance of all their enemies. For
Precious in the sight of the Lord, Psalm. 116.15.
is the death of his Saints: and he is much moved with the cry of their
blood, as here we see. And therefore now threatens to hold a general
Assizes, wherein he will make inquisition after blood, and arraigne and
condemn all such as are found guilty thereof: according as the persecuting
Emperors and many others, did find and feel by woeful experience. For if God
be angry but a little, who may endure it?

Now, although the Stories do report, that in those days, which was above 300.
years after Christ, there were many great and fearful Earthquakes in diverse
nations and cities of the world: yet it is apparent, that the Earthquake here
spoken of, cannot be taken literally, nor any of the rest here mentioned. For
there was never any time, neither is it mentioned in any Chronicle, that ever
the Sun was as black as sacke-cloth of hair; or the Moon turned into
blood; or the Stars fell from heaven; or the Heavens rolled together like a
scrole; or that Mountains and Islands were moved out of their places.
Therefore of necessity all this must be understood metaphorically; that is,
that God did in so strange and fearful a manner manifest his wrath from
heaven by tumults, commotions, seditions, and alteratio^s of kingdoms, as if
these things of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, had been visibly represented to
the eye. An earthquake in this book, and other books also of the scriptures,
does by a borrowed speech signify commotions of commonwealth, troubles,
tumults, vprores, and great alterations of states and kingdoms. The darkning of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and rolling together of the Heavens, do by a
metaphor in the scriptures, signify the fearful wrath and angry face of
God; which they being not able to endure, are said here to blush at, to cover
themselves, to hide themselves, to be ashamed of themselves, to remove out of
their places, no more to do their offices, etc. For as birds do hide
themselves, and thrust their heads into bushes when the Eagle comes abroad:
And as all the beasts of the forest do tremble and couch in their dens
when the Lion roareth: And as that subject does hide himself, and dare not
show his head, with whom the King is displeased: So here it is said, that the
whole earth does tremble, and all the celestial creatures are amazed and
confounded with beholding the angry face of God against the world, in so much
that they do as it were, draw a canopie over them, hide themselves under a
cloud, and surcease to do their offices.

The darkning of the Sun and Moon is taken in this sense in the second of
Joel, and also in the second chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. For there God
promising and foretelling, that in the last days he would abundantly power
forth of his spirit upon all flesh (which is to be understood of the plentiful
preaching of the Gospel in the Apostles time, and the abundance of grace that
was given with the same) adds, that for the contempt of so great grace and
mercy, he would show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth
beneath. Blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke; the Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of
the Lord come. The meaning of the Prophet is, Act. ^.
as Peter also does expound it, that God from heaven will show such apparent
signs of his wrath against the world, that men should be no less amazed,
then if the whole order of nature were inuerted. And this was performed, when
as the Jews for the contempt of Christ and his Gospel, were most miserably
destroyed by the Romans.

Even so here, under the opening of the sixth seal, God does threaten, that
for the murdering of his son Christ, and his Apostles, and innumerable
Christians, he would bring strange judgments and extraordinary calamities
upon the world, according as all stories do show, that those times were full
of bloud-sheads, commotions, famines, pestilence, and miseries of all sorts. I
am not ignorant, that the darkening of the Sun and Moon, and the falling of
the Stars from heaven, are sometimes in this book put for the obscurity and
corruption of pure doctrine, and the falling away of the Pastors of the Church
from their sincerity and zeal. But in this place the circumstances will not
bear that sense: First, because here the darkening of the Sun and Moon,
etc. is joined with an Earthquake, the rolling together of the Heavens, and
the moving of Mountains and Islands out of their places, which argues a most
horrible confusion and concussion of all things. Secondly, because afterward in
the eight chapter, he does of purpose speak of the corrupting of pure
doctrine, and the falling away of the Ministers, referring it to that chapter,
as his proper place. Thirdly, because the kings and captains of the earth here
immediately mentioned, would never have been cast into any such perplexities and
horrors upon any corruption of doctrine and the ministry, as here we read
of. For commonly men are not any whit touched or moved with that, or such like
things. Last of all, because the scope and drift of the holy Ghost, under the
opening of this sixth seal, is to describe corporal, not spiritual; visible,
not invisible judgments. For he does orderly and of purpose; handle them in
the next chapter.

Now, whereas it is said in the last three verses, that the Kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the
mightiemen, and every bondman, and every freeman, hid themselves in dens,
and amongst the rocks of the mountains, and said to the rocks and
mountains, fall on us, etc. the sense and meaning of all is this, that these
visible judgments should be so horrible and extraordinary, that all sorts of
men then living upon the face of the earth, should even wish themselves buried
quick, or that they might run into a mouse-hole or awger-hole, to hide
themselves from the wrath of the Lamb. For being both outwardly terrified with
these sensible judgments, and inwardly griped and tormented with the fury of
their own consciences, they were at no hand able to endure it.

CHAP. VII.
THis chapter does wholly appertain unto the opening of the sixth seal. It
shows generally how God in the midst of all the broiles which happened
under the opening of the sixth seal, yet did preserve his church, and
mercifully provide for his own people.

This seventh chapter may very fitly be divided into three parts.

First, it shows, that as God did most fearfully punish the world with
visible and sensible judgments, as we have heard before: so now he would set
upon them with invisible and spiritual plagues, which are of all other most
grievous and intolerable.

Secondly, it shows the state and condition of the Church militant here in
earth, as before was showed under the opening of the fifth seal the state of
the Church triumphant in the heavens;

Thirdly, it shows the blessed and happy estate of all Gods elect,

These four angels are angels of darkness, or four devils, which is proved
by this reason, that they hold the four winds from blowing on the earth:
that is, stop the course of the Gospel, which is a spiritual plague.

They are said to stand upon the four corners of the earth, because power was
given them to plague not some one or two countries, but the universal world,
both East, West, North and South.

The blowing of the winds, does very fitly represent the preaching of the
Gospel, and that heavenly inspiration and breathing of the holy Ghost which
goes with it. Wind is so taken, Ioh. 3. where our Lord Jesus says; The wind
blows where it lists, etc: Cant. 4.16.
So is every man that is borne of the spirit. And again in the 4. of the
Cantic. in these words; Arise o North, and come o South and blow on my garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out. Where it plainly appears, that the
Church craves the inspiration of the spirit, that her fruits may abound: For
what can be meant by these winds which she wishes to blow upon her garden,
but the heavenly breathings of Gods holy spirit and word. It follows then,
that if the blowing of the winds in the scriptures do signify the breathing
of Gods grace, and holy spirit, that the stopping of the winds by a reason of
the contraries does here signify the stopping of the same, and the deprivation
of all heavenly blessings. So that it is clear, that a spiritual plague is
here represented, which also is the more apparent, because here is such
special prouiso and care had for the churches safety, that it might not be
infected with this spiritual contagio^. Now all this does plainly
fore-prophesie, not only the stopping of the course of the Gospel: but even
the utter taking of it away from the world, for their great contempt thereof,
and the horrible murdering and massacring of all the true professors of it:
according as it came to pass afterward in the prevailing first of heresies,
and afterward of the Popish and Mahometish religion, as in the two next
Chapters following shall plainly appear.

And I saw another Angel come up from the East,

Hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea,

This Angel is Jesus Christ, who by the Prophet is called the Angel of the
covenant. Mal. 3.1.
That Angels do represent and sustain the person of Christ their head, is so
common and usual a thing in the scriptures, that I shall not need to stay in
it.

That this Angel is Christ, it does plainly appear by the things here
attributed unto him, which can agree to none other. First, in that he has the
seal of the living God (which is the spirit of adoption) to set upon all the
elect, for he is the only keeper of this great seal, and this privy seal.
He only has authority to set it upon whom he will.

Secondly, because he is said to come up from the East: that is, he is the
only son of righteousness which arises upon his Church every morning, and
with his bright beams expels all darkness from it. Luke 1.78.
According to that of Zacharias in his prophetical song: Through the tender
mercy of our God the day spring from an high has visited us.

Thirdly, because he holds a sovereignty and command over the devils: for
he charge them here to stay their hands from doing any hurt, till he had
provided for his elect.

power was given to these devils to hurt the earth, the sea and the trees: that
is, the number of reprobates, we may note, that the devils have no absolute
power, but only by permission: as appears in this, Job. 1. Math. 8.
that they could neither touch Job, nor enter into the heard of swine, without
leave and license.

Till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, it does
plainly show that the punishments of the wicked are deferred till provision
be made for the elect. Genesis 7.
The flood came not upon the old world till Noah and his family were
received into the Arc. Genesis 19. Exodus 12.
The Angels destroyed not Sodom till Lot was set in safety. The plaguing
Angel spared the first borne of Egypt, till the posts of the Israelites
houses were sprinkeled with the blood of the paschall Lamb. The six Angels
sent to destroy Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.
are charged to stay the execution, till the servant of God were marked in
their foreheads.

All these examples do manifestly declare what tender care the Lord in all
ages has had of his own people, that they might be delivered and set in
safety in the midst of all extremities. Even so here we see that God is very
careful, that his own children might not be infected with those damnable
heresies which now already upon the stopping of the course of the Gospel
began to be hatched, and afterward did spring and grow up in the Church both
thick and three-folde.

And I heard the number of them that were sealed, Judah were sealed twelve
thousand, etc. Now John hears the number of them that were sealed, and he
reckeneth up the whole Church militant, consisting both of the Jews, and
Gentiles. He says, that of the Church of the Jews there were sealed 144000.
Wherein he puts a certain number for an uncertain, and a definite number
for an indefinite: for his meaning is not that there were just so many, and
neither more nor less sealed: but this number does arise of twelve times
twelve, in that he says of every Tribe twelve thousand: for twelve times
twelve thousand make an hundred forty and four thousand. Neither yet may we
think, that of every Tribe there were an equal number sealed, not more nor
less of one Tribe then an other: but this number of twelve, is used as the
perfect and full number; in as much as the Church of the Jews was founded upon
the twelve Patriarchs: unto which our Savior had respect, when for to gather
the dispersed and lost sheep of the house of Israel, he chose twelve Apostles.

Now here we are to observe, that notwithstanding the horrible persecutions and
calamities which fell out upon the opening of four of the seals; yet God had
his Church even of the Jews, which in the judgment of reason, a man would
have thought long ere now, had been utterly extinct and abolished. Romans 11.
But the Apostle says: God has not cast off his people which he had chosen:
that is, utterly cast them off.

It is therefore a most sure and certain position in divinity, that God has
always his; that is, in all ages, in all times, in all places, in all
countries, even in the midst of all troubles and flames of persecution, yet
God has his hid and invisible Church even upon the face of the earth. As it
was in the days of Elias. 1 King. 19.18. Math. 27.
As was in Christ's time, when the shepherd was smit, and the sheep scattered.
And as it was in the days of the great Antichrist; as afterward we shall see.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that in the enumeration of the 12. Tribes, the
Tribe of Dan is left out, and the Tribe of Leui taken in. The cause of the
omission and skipping of the Tribe of Dan, was their continuance in Idolatry
from the time of the Judges, Iud. 18.
(at what time the first fell into it) even unto the captivity. This Tribe is
also omitted in the Catalogue of the Tribes mentioned 1. Chron. chap.
2.3.4.5.6.7. Then the reason of this omission, is first their unworthiness.
And secondly, that there might be a place and roomth for the Tribe of Leui to
be taken in: which in this Catalogue, for singular reason, and a special
mystery, might not be pretermitted. For although the Tribe of Leui had no
portion or inheritance amongst the other Tribes in the earthly Canaan, yet now
the Priesthood being transferred unto Christ, the holy Ghost does expressly
affirm, that the Tribe of Leui, as well as others, has his part and portion
in the heavenly inheritance, and the celestial Canaan.

After these things, I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could
number, of all nations, This is to be understood of the Church of the
Gentiles, and they are said to be an innumerable multitude of all countries
and nations. For although the church of God in respect of the reprobates, is
very small, and as an handful upon the face of the earth: yet in it self
simply considered, it is very great and large: for even out of Adams cursed
race, God has chose many thousands to life. And here still we are to observe
the great goodness and mercy of God, that notwithstanding; former persecutions,
and the great blindness which afterward did invade the Church in the prevailing
of errors and heresies: yet John hears and sees such an huge number sealed
up to salvation through Christ, both of the Jews and Gentiles.

The Church of the Gentiles exceeding in number the Church of the Jews, are
here said to have long whiterobes, in token of their purity and innocence;
and Palms in their hands, in sign of their victory over the world, flesh,
and the devil. For Palms in ancient time were ensigns and badges of
victory.

After this, is set down how the whole Church of the Gentiles do praise and
worship God freely, Amen to the same: as we have heard before in the 4. chapter.

Esa. 6. and also because they are expressly named and interpreted to be the
Cherubins, Ezech. 10.

If any man muse why the Angels should be called beasts, let him be resolved
with these 4. reasons. First, because they are compared to beasts before, as
the Lion, Ezech. 1.
Calfe, etc. Secondly, because Ezechiel calls them so; in as much as they
draw Gods chariot of triumph. Zach. 1.8.
Thirdly, because the Prophet Zachary compares them to red, speckled, and
white horses. Fourthly, Zach. 6.2. Zach. 6.1.
because the same Prophet calls them Gods coach-horses, and the multitudes
and societies of them, he calls Gods chariots, which came out of two
mountains of brass: that is, they went forth at his decree (which stands as
fast and immovable as a mountain of brass) to comfort and deliver his Church
out of the captivity of Babylon: Zach. 6.6. Zach. 6.8.
and also to succor and help the remnant which were left behind in Judea.
Now in the Prophets, these chariots and chariot-horses are said to carry the
Almighty most swiftly throughout all the world. And therefore in Zachary it is
said of the Angels: These are they which go through the whole world. In
Ezechiel it is said, Zach 1.10. Ezech. 1.14.
that the beasts ran, and returned like lightning. And again, they sparkled
like the appearance of bright brass: and the wheels of Gods chariots were
moved with inconceivable swiftness, even as fast as the Angels did fly. Let
these reasons and scriptures then satisfy us touching this, that the Angels
are called beasts.

After all this, one of the 24. John what they were, and from whence they came,
which were thus araied in long white robes? Which question is asked of the
Elder, not as being ignorant thereof; but to stir up John, being ignorant, to
enquire of the matter, that he might instruct him therein. And therefore when
John confessed his ignorance, desiring to be instructed therein, the Elder
tells him the whole matter; namely, that they were such as were come out of
great tribulation. For none can enter into life, but through many afflictions:
Act. 14.22.
as the Apostle says.

After this again, the militant and visible church is described and set forth,
not according to their present state, but according to that which is to come:
certainty and assurance thereof. Therefore the Apostle says, that even already
they do sit together in heavenly places. Ephesians. 26.
And here they are said to be in the presence of the throne of God, etc. to
hunger and thirst no more, etc. to have all tears wiped from their eyes, and
to be led by the Lamb unto the fountains of living waters. All which does
very plainly and plentifully express that infinite glory and endless
felicity which is prepared for all the true and faithful worshippers of God.
Many good lessons and observations might be gathered out of all this. But I do
of purpose omit them, because in this work I do chiefly and almost altogether
aim at interpretation, therein also studying brevity, soundness, and
plainness.

CHAP. VIII.
WE have heard out of the seventh Chapter how the devils and their instruments,
the Roman Emperors, did stop the course of the Gospel. Now in this chapter we
are to hear the woeful effects of the stopping thereof, which was the
springing up, and prevailing of manifold errors and heresies in the world. So
that the principal scope and drift of this chapter, is to show, that God for
the contempt of his Gospel, and great indignities offered to the true
professors thereof did give up the world to blindness, to error, to
superstition and heresy: and as the Apostle says; 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Because they received not the love of the truth, therefore God sent them
strong delusions, that they should believe lies. For, as before we have heard
how the world was most fearfully punished with external plagues and
judgments: So here we are to understand how the same was punished with
judgments spiritual and internal, as formerly has been said, upon the
stopping of the four winds. For although that spiritual plague was very
great, yet these spiritual plagues which follow upon the opening of the
seventh seal, are far greater. For now we are to hear and understand, not
only of the errors and heresies, whereby a way and passage was made by
degrees, as it were by certain stairs, for Antichrist to climb up into his
cursed chair, and to take possession thereof: but also we are to understand
of his very tyranny and kingdom it self: and also of the kingdom of the
Turk, and the last judgment. For the things contained under the opening of
the seventh seal, do reach unto the end of the world. For the book sealed
with seven seals contains all the whole matters which were to be revealed.

This chapter contains four principal things, as it were the four parts
thereof.

First, the reverent attention and silence,

Secondly, before the execution of these most execrable plagues,

Thirdly, the execution of this vengeance,

Fourthly, the vengeance it self contained in the prevailing of error and
heresy:

And when he had opened the 7. seal, there was silence in heaven about half
an hour. By heaven in this place he means not the kingdom of glory after
this life: but by heaven is meant the Church here upon earth: as it is so
taken, chap. 12. verse 1. and chap. 14. verse 2. There may be three reasons
yielded, why the church is called heaven.

First, because the birth thereof is from heaven; for it is borne of God. 1.
John. 51.


Col. 1.12.
Secondly, because the inheritance thereof is from heaven, and therefore is
called the inheritance of the Saints.

Phil. 3.20.
Thirdly, because the conversation thereof is in heaven, as the Apostle says.

To this may be added, that our Lord Jesus in his Gospel does so often call
his visible Church the Kingdom of heaven by a trope, Math. 13.
because Christ begins his reign in the faithful therein, whom afterward
he translateth actually into the very kingdom of glory.

By silence here is meant the great attention of the church, because great
things were now in hand. For now upon the opening of the 7. seal, far
greater matters are threatened then any before: and therefore the Church does
listen unto them in deep silence, and as it were in horror and trembling
through admiration: for now there appear such dreadful judgments of God to
be executed upon the earth, that all the heavenly company are astonished, and
amazed to behold it, and do as it were quake and tremble to think upon it. For
as when heavy news comes down from the Prince, to be proclaimed in open
markets, all good subjects do listen and give ear with silence and trembling:
so it fares in this case.

By half an hour, he means that short time, wherein the minds of the godly
were prepared, fitted and disposed, wisely to consider of these matters, and to
make good use of them. I know right well, that this Verse is far otherwise
interpreted of some: but I take this to be most sound, and simple, and best
agreeing to all that follows: for the next Verse is joined unto this by a
conjunction copulative, to note a coherence of the matter, and to draw the
sense together: for he says. And I saw 7. Angels, which stood before God, and
to them were given seven Trumpets.

These seven Trumpets signify, that God would proceed against the world in
fearful hostility, and come against it as an open enemy unto battle,
proclaiming open war against it, as it were with sound of Trumpet and Dromme,
setting up the flag of defiance against it. And hereupon grows this silence
and trembling in the Church, which only is moved with the signs of Gods
wrath, Chap. 1.^.
when as all others sit still in security, as the Prophet Zachary says in a
like case.

To stand in this place, signifies to administer, as it is said of the Priests
and Levites, that they stand before God, Heb. 1.1^.
and before the Altar, that is, Minister. So here the Angels do stand before
God, as ready to administer and execute these judgments. For they are
ministering spirits, and here they do sound the alarm at the commandment of
God.

These Angels are propounded as 7. in number, because it pleased not God at
once to power down his wrath upon the rebellious world, but at diverse times,
and by peecemeale.

2. Sam. 24.16. 2. Kin. 19.35.
Whether these were good or bad Angels, it is not material to dispute, seeing
God executes his judgments both by the one and the other.

Moreover, it is specially to be observed, that the blowing of these seven
trumpets, do all belong to the opening of the seventh seal, and are as it
were the seven parts thereof: for the things which fall out upon the blowing of
these seven trumpets, do reach even unto the last judgment, as the Angel
swears, chap. 10.6.7.

We heard before, that when the course of the Gospel was stopped by the devil
and his instruments, yet God was very careful for the safety and sealing up
of his own servants: so likewise we are now to hear of the like care and
providence. For now, that errors and heresies were to be sown in the world,
whereby many were corrupted: and that he himself from heaven does proclaim
open enmity against the despisers of his Gospel, by giving them up to
blindness and error: he does double his care and providence to all his
faithful worshippers. For here we do plainly see, that the Church has a
mediator, and that he which keeps Israel, neither slumbreth nor sleeps. And
therefore when the wrath of God does most of all break forth upon the world for
the contempt of his graces, yet the Church is remembered, and set in safety,
with all her children. For her prayers come up before God, and are accepted
through the same mediator. And this is the sense and drift of this third verse.

By this Angel is meant Jesus Christ, the Angel of the covenant, as we have
heard before: who is not an Angel by nature, but by office.

It is manifest, that in the old law there was a golden Altar, and a golden
Censor, in which the Priest did burn sweet incense before the Lord, which
did figure the mediation of Christ, in whom the prayers of the Saints are
accepted.

Now here the holy Ghost alludeth to that sacrificing Priesthood of the old
Testament, where incense was offered at the Altar, which now is the sweet
savor of the death of Christ, through whom both we and all our sacrifices are
seasoned and sweetened.

Who therefore is this Angel but Christ? Who is the golden Altar but Christ?
What are the sweet odours with the which the prayers of all Saints come
before God, but the most sweet mediation of the Lord Jesus? What is meant by
the smoke of the odours, which with the prayers of the Saints, went up before
God out of the Angels hand? Surely the sweet incense of Christ's mediation,
wherewith our prayers are spiced and perfumed, that they might be as sweet
smelling sacrifices in the nosthrils of God. For, as water cast into a fire,
raises a smoke: so the tears of the faithful, besprinkeled in their
prayers, make them as sweet incense, acceptable to God through Christ. The
sum of all is this, that in the midst of all these heresies, and those
hellish troubles which should be raised up by the Pope and his Clergy, the
Turk and his armies, as in the next chapter we shall see, the elect have
their prayers heard for their preservation by the merits of Christ.

Here we see how Jesus Christ takes the Censor and fills it with the fire of
the Altar; that is, the graces and gifts of the spirit: for so the fire of the
Altar is taken in Esaias. Esaias. 6.6.


Math. 3 11.
In this sense it is said, that our Lord Jesus should baptize with fire and the
holy Ghost; that is, the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost. In this sense also
the holy Ghost did rest upon the Disciples, in the likeness of cloven tongues
like fire, Act. 2.3.
whereupon they were all filled with gifts and graces.

The holy Ghost is compared to fire, because he burns out our dross,
purges the hearts of the faithful, and sets them on fire with the burning
love and zeal of Gods glory. So then it follows, that as before there was
provision had for the safety of the Church, by her Mediator: so here many
heavenly gifts and graces are bestowed upon her. For Christ casts this fire
of the Altar upon the earth; that is, upon his elect dwelling in the earth.

Hereupon it is said, that there were voices and thundrings, etc. that is, all
manner of broiles, tumults, vprores, slaughters, and divisions. For after the
Gospel was sounded forth in the Church by the power of the holy Ghost, the
devil is disturbed, and the world molested. And hence spring all these
broiles and tumults, thundering and lightning: and we must look for such
stirs after the preaching of the Gospel, whilst there is a world and a
devil.

Therefore our Lord Jesus says, he came not to bring peace into the earth,
but fire and sword, and to set a man at variance against his father, Math.
10.34.
and likewise the daughter against her mother, etc. for divisions and civil
dissentions do always follow the preaching of the Gospel; which thing yet
is not simply in the nature of the Gospel, which is a Gospel of peace, but
accidentally through the frowardness and corruption of man's nature, which will
not yield unto it, but most stubbornely rebelleth against it.

Now begins this open war to be proclaimed against the world, for their
great ungodliness and rebellion against the truth.

It were absurd to imagine that any thing in this Verse is to be taken
literally: seeing in the literal sense there was never any such matter.
Therefore of necessity it must be expounded mystically, and allegorically:
therefore by this hail and fire mingled with blood, is meant errors and
heresies. For as hail does beat down corn, and destroy the fruits of the
earth, fire does consume, and blood does corrupt and putrify: So false
doctrine and heresy does annoy, consume, and corrupt the souls of men. For it
is said, that all these being mingled together were cast upon the earth: that
is, the inhabitants of the earth, Math. 7.
and the third part of the trees, that is, Psalm. 1.
numbers of men, or a very great part of the world was corrupted. For trees
in the scripture, signify men, Esaias 40.
and all green grass was burnt: that is, the fresh fruits of grace did
wither apace and dry up: for as error and heresy did prevail, so truth and
godliness did decaie. All this has relation to the heresies of Sabellius,
Manicheus, Marcion, Fotinus, Paulus Samosatenus, Nestorius, Nouatus, Diodorus,
Appollinaris, Pelagius, and many others, which about this time, which was four
hundred years after Christ, began to spring up and grow apace.

And the second Angel blew the Trumpet, Upon the blowing of the second
Trompet by the second Angel, here appears a great mountain burning with
fire. Whereby is meant some great and notable heresies, as that of Arrius,
which troubled and wasted the Church, for the space of three hundred years,
being greatly favored of sundry Emperors, and other great Potentates in the
earth; by means whereof, it continued and ouerspread so long. Also this may be
referred to other great and notable Arch*heresies: as that of Donatus,
Macedonius, Eutiches, Valentinus, and such like: which all are here compared
to a mountain for their hugeness and greatness, and to a burning mountain,
because the Church was almost burnt up thereby. Luke 3.5.
For this word Mountain, is sometimes in the scripture put for any let or
hinderance to true Religion, as is error and heresy. Zach. 4.7. Luke 3.5.

Therefore it is said, that it was cast into the sea, that is, these great
heresies were cast upon the world in Gods wrath and heavy indignation: for
the sea is put for the world: Chapter 4. Verse 6. Chapter 13. Verse 1. Chapter
21. Verse 1. for as the sea is full of rock sands, syrts, waves, storms and
tempests: so it fares with this present evil world.

Moreover it is said, that the third part of the sea became blood: that is,
all Europe, or some great part of the world was corrupted and infected with
these great heresies. the third part of the ships were destroyed: that is, a
great number of Mariners and ship-maisters, as well as land men were infected
with these heresies, and died of them, and in them.

Stars in this book are put for the Ministers of the Gospel, as we have
heard out of the first Chapter, and the reason why. Then it follows that the
falling of this star from heaven, does most fitly signify and set forth the
declining and fall of the Pastors of the Church, and their corrupting of the
true doctrine: which is meant by the fresh rivers, and pure fountains into
which it fell. This star has his name of the effect: Wormwood; because
through the fall of it, the sweet waters into which it fell, were turned into
bitterness, and men died of them: that is, the pure doctrine was corrupted,
which turned to the destruction of many.

And the fourth Angel blewe the Trumpet, This darkning of the Sun, Moon,
and stars, does signify that great darkness which was brought upon the
Church by such teachers as did daily more and more degenerate.

Three things are generally to be observed in the blowing of these first four
trumpets.

First, that the plagues here mentioned, are specially to be understood of
spiritual plagues.

Secondly, that there is a progression from lesser to greater in these plagues.

Thirdly, that in every one there is mentioned but a third part destroyed;
which plainly shows, that although the Church was greatly annoyed and pestred
with these errors and heresies, yet it was not destroyed and brought to utter
desolation: for the full setting up of Antichrist was not yet come. All these
errors and heresies which were thus cast upon the world, and did spring and
grow apace in all places, did (as it were) make way for Antichrist, and (as it
were stirrops) hoist and help him up into his cursed chair.

By the stories of the Church, and course of times, it seems that the holy
Ghost points at those manifold heresies which sprung up in the Church after
the first three hundred years, especially after the death of Constantine the
great, who procured peace to the Church, destroyed Idolatry, and set up true
religion in his days.

Now, after his reign, and the reign of Theodosius that good Emperor,
Constantius, Iulianus, Arcadius, Honorius, and many other wicked Emperors
succeeded; by whose means all things in the Church grew worse and worse: yet
this one thing is to be observed, that all truth of religion was not utterly
extinct and put out, till the full loosing of Satan, which was a thousand
years after Christ, as we shall plainly see when we come to the 20.
chapter, concerning the binding of Satan for a thousand years. For sure it
is, that the maine principles and grounds of Religion, continued in the Church
till this full loosing of Satan; which was about the time of Pope Siluester
the second, that monster, as afterward we shall hear.

But now in the mean time, we see what heresies sprung up, what corruption
grew and increased more and more, what darkness began to ouerspread a third
part of the world: and these things grew worse and worse, even until by these
means the great Antichrist came to be possessed of his cursed seat and Sea
of Rome, which was about some 600. years after Christ.

And I beheld, and heard one Angel flying in the midst of heaven, saying
with a loud voice: Woe, woe, Because the judgments which were to be executed
hereafter, upon the blowing of the next three trumpets, were far more
dreadful and horrible then any that went before: therefore here is a special
Angel or messenger of God, sent of purpose to give warning thereof, and to
proclaim openly in the Church, three fearful woes, which should come upon the
inhabitants of the earth; that is, all earthly minded men, as worldlings,
Papists, and Atheists, at such time as the next three Angels should blow the
trumpets.

The first of these three great woes, is to be understood of the Papacy. The
second of Turcisme. The third of the last judgment. As if he should have
said: Woe unto the world, because of Popery. Woe unto the world because of
Turcisme. Woe unto the world because of the last judgment. Woe unto the world
for Popery, because thereby men should be punished in their souls. Woe unto
the world for Turcisme, because thereby thousands should be murdered in their
bodies by the Turkish armies. Woe unto the world, because of the last
judgment, for thereby all worldlings shall be plagued both in body and soul
in hell fire, for evermore.

Since then these three last plagues which were to come upon the world, are
more fearful and terrible then any of the other four, no marvel though here
is sent of purpose a special messenger to give intelligence thereof, that
every man might look to himself, seeing such great dangers were at hand. And
for this cause also it is said before, that there was silence in the Church
for the space of half an hour.

CHAP. IX.
THe principal scope and drift of this Chapter, is to paint out both the Pope
and his Clergy, and also the kingdom of the Turk, and his cruel armies. For
having already set down how a way and passage was made for the Pope to climb
up into his cursed chair by the prevailing of heresies, the falling away of
the Pastors of the Church, and the great ouerspreading of darkness and
ignorance: now he comes to describe the Pope in his full height and greatest
exaltation, being now universal Bishop, and in full possession of his seat
and sea of Rome, which was about some six hundred years after Christ, as
formerly has been showed. At what time Pope Boniface obtained of the Emperor
Phocas that murder, which slew his master Mauritius the Emperor, that the
Bishop of Rome should be called the universal Bishop, and the church of Rome,
the head of all churches.

This ninth Chapter may very fitly be divided into two parts. In the first 12.
verses.
The first is a lively description of the Pope himself, his kingdom, and his
clergy. The second, is a description of the kingdom of the Turk, and his
most savage armies: In the last 9. verses.
so that this chapter is a full opening of the first two great woes mentioned
before, concerning the Papacy, and Turcisme.

And the fifth Angel blew the trumpet, Warning was given before, that when this
5. Angel should blow the trumpet, a most fearful woe should come upon the
world, surpassing all that went before, which is the setting up of Antichrist
in his pride; that man of sin, that son of perdition.

The Pope is here compared to a star, as well as other godly Ministers in
this book, because the Bishops of Rome at the first were godly and excellent
men: for amongst the first thirty of them, there were some Martyrs. But it is
here said, that now this star was fallen from heaven unto the earth; that is,
the Bishops of Rome were greatly degenerated and fallen clean away from
heavenly things to earthly: for they declined from time to time, and grew worse
and worse, so far as to become the great Antichrist.

But some man may say, why may not this star falling from heaven unto the
earth, be understood of other Pastors falling from the truth, as well as the
Pope, as it is taken in the former chapter, and in the 12. chapter, verse 4. I
answer, that the circumstances will not here bear it. Therefore to persuade
every honest man's conscience, that this must needs be understood of the Pope in
his pride, let us give ear to those three reasons following.

First, we are to consider, that the maine drift of the holy Ghost in the
opening of the seven seals, and blowing of the seven trumpets, is to lay out
the state of the church in all ages, till the coming of Christ. Further, we
are diligently to observe, that the things contained under the opening of the
seventh seal (whereof the blowing of the seven trumpets are as it were parts,
and do all belong unto it) do stretch even unto the end of the world; so as
there is no strange accident, or any woeful condition of the Church in any
age, but it is set forth under the opening of these seals, and blowing of
these trumpets. But the Papacy was a state of the Church, and that most woeful
and lamentable, therefore it is described under the opening of these seals,
and blowing of these trumpets. But it is not described under the opening of any
other seal, or blowing of any other trumpet: therefore of necessity it must
be referred to this seventh seal, and fifth trumpet: And this is my first
reason. If any man object, that the Pope and his kingdom are most lively
described in the chapters from the 12. to the last: I answer, that all those
chapters belong to a new vision, wherein some things propounded under the
opening of the seven seals, are more fully opened and expounded. But this I
say, that in this 2. vision, the whole estate of the Church in every age is
laid open, even until the last judgment: and therefore when the 7. Angel here
does blow the 7. trumpet, immediately follows the last judgment; as
appears, cap. 10. ver. 6.7. and cap. 11. ver. 15.16.

My second reason is drawn from the course and consideration of times: for the
great prevailing of errors and heresies mentioned before, which made way for
Antichrist, was from the first 300. years, until the 600. year, and so
forward. But now, immediately upon this great increase of error and darkness,
comes the description of a special star fallen from heaven at this time,
which was about 600. years after Christ, and therefore it must needs be
understood of the Pope. And this is my second reason.

My third and last reason is drawn from the description of the Pope and his
Clergy in the first eleven verses of this chapter. For he is so lively
described and painted out in particulars, that all men that know him, or ever
heard of him, must needs say it is he. For this description here set down by
the holy Ghost, can fitly agree to none other.

The Papists themselves do confess, that this star here mentioned, must
needs be understood of some Arch-hereticke. And full wisely forsoothe they
apply it to Luther and Calvin. But we affirm, that it is to be understood of
the Pope: For was there ever any such Arch-hereticke as he? which opposes and
exalts himself against all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and against all imperial powers, as the Apostle says. But now let us proceed
to the description of him.

First, he is said to have the keie of the bottomless pit, which agrees
well to the Pope: for he has power given him to open hell gates, to let in
thousands thither: but no power to open heaven gates, to let in any thither:
for he furthereth many to hell, none to heaven. He does indeed falsely
challenge unto himself the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to let in, and
shut out at his pleasure. But here we see the holy Ghost does attribute no
such power unto him, but only tells us, that his power and jurisdiction is
in hell, and over hell, and as for heaven, he has nothing to do with it. It
were needless to show how this metaphor of keys is taken for power and
jurisdiction in the scriptures, as has been proved before, cap. 1. ver. 18.
and as needless to prove that by the bottomless pit, is here meant hell, as
appears, chap. 11.7. chap. 20.1.

Here we see how the Pope opens hell gates with his key, and a most horrible,
gross, and stinking smoke ascends up into the air presently upon it, in so
much, that both the Sun and the air were darkened with it. Which all is to
be understood of that spiritual darkness, ignorance, superstition, and
Idolatry, wherewith the whole church was ouerspread, after the great Antichrist
came to the possession of his cursed chair, and was in his pride and height,
ruling and reigning over the kings of the earth. For the^ indeed the sun was
darkened and eclipsed; that is, the light of the Gospel was almost clean put
out. For that which is spoken here of the darkning of the air and the Sun, is
to be understood of a greater and more general darkness, then that which was
mentioned in the former chapter, wherein but a third part of the world was
darkened. But now that Antichrist inuadeth the church, all is ouerspread with
gross and palpable darkness, all is as dark as pitch: no man can see where
he is, or which way he goes. For the whole air is filled with this most
odious and thick smoke, which came out of hell pit.

And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, By these Locusts, is
meant the Popes Clergy, as Abbots, Monks, Friars, Priests, Shauelings, and
such like vermin; which are therefore compared to Locusts, because they waste
and destroy the Church, even as Locusts destroy the fruits of the earth. For
both Historiographers and travelers do affirm, that whole fields of green
corn new come up, have been wasted and eaten up in one night as bare as the
earth, by swarms of Locusts in the East-countries. For in those parts of the
world, Joel. 2.
multitudes of this little vermin are to be found: even so the Popish Clergy
co^sumeth and deuoureth all green things in the Church.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that these Locusts came out of the smoke of the
pit; that is, they were bred out of it: for Monks, Friars, Priests, and such
like caterpillars, were bred of ignorance, error, heresy, superstition, and
the very smoke of hell: for from hell they came, and to hell they will. They
are descended of the black house of hell, and thither they will return.

Moreover, it is said, that power was given them to sting like scorpions. For
whom have they not stung with their most venomous stings? I mean their damnable
errors, and devilish devices. Whom have they not wounded with their corrupt
doctrine, and devilish authority? They are the sorest soule-stingers that ever
the world had, who have left their venomous stings in the souls of thousand
thousands, wherewith they have been poisoned and stung to death.

It may be demanded, what became of the church when as the whole earth was full
of these crawling and stinging Locusts. This question is now here answered; to
wit, that these Locusts are charged and commanded, that they should not hurt
any of the elect: for this woe and this plague, extends no further then to
the inhabitants of the earth, as we have heard before. Their power is limited
only to the reprobate, they have nothing to do with Gods chosen people. And
here again we see what great care God has for his in the midst of the
greatest dangers, as has been twice noted before, chap. 7. chap. 8. For now
Antichrist reigning in his full pride, yet his elect are preserved in the midst
of these scorpion Locusts, flying about their ears like swarms of Hornets,
not one of them is stung to death. Christ's little flock is always defended,
and set in safety.

And to them was commanded, that they should not hurt them, but that they
should be vexed five months, Some write, that such as are stung of a
scorpion, do not die forthwith, but have a lingering pain, wherewith they are
miserably vexed three or four days before they die of it. Now, unto this
lingering pain is this spiritual stinging compared: for these Locusts are
commanded of God, that they should not kill the very reprobates outright, and at
once, but torment the^ with a lingering death for the space of five months,
that is, 500. years: for so long did the Papacy continue in his height and
pride, full strength and virtue: and so long did the Pope and his Clergy
sting men with lingering and scorpion-like pain.

Therefore in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and
shall desire to die, and death shall fly from the^. This verse does show, that
all Papists being thus stung and tormented in their consciences with this
lingering pain of Popish doctrine, shall wish themselves out of the world, and
buried quick, that they might be rid of their spiritual stinging, and
hellish torments which they had in their conscience. For the Popish doctrine
has no sound comfort in it, it leaves men in desperation in sickness, and
upon their deathbeds.

For alas, what comfort can a poor distressed conscience have in Popes
pardons, Indulgences, Masses, Dirges, Merits, Works, Pilgrimages, Purgatory,
Crosses, Crucifixes, Agnus deis, and such like trash and trumpery? these alas
are too weak remedies for any spiritual diseases: they are not sufficient to
procure pardon at Gods hand for any sin. Alas, the poor blind Papists did
know and feel that they were vile sinners: they knew they must come to
judgment: they knew that the reward of sin was death, even the second death:
they knew all this full well, and therefore had horrible convulsions in their
consciences, and knew no way nor means how to wind out of them. For the
doctrine of free justification in the blood of Christ, was hid from them, they
knew it not: and therefore all assurance of Gods favor, all peace of
conscience, and all joy in the holy Ghost, was utterly taken from them, and
therefore many of them died in most desperate and uncomfortable manner. And for
this cause it is here said, that they sought death, and desired to be rid out
of the world one way or an other: for a tormented conscience who can bear it,
it is a kind of he^ torment.





Hitherto we have heard of the petigrew and poisoned stings of these vile
Locusts, and how they vexed the inhabitants of the earth all the time of the
great Antichrist. Now we are to understand of their form and likeness: for the
spirit of God does here paint them out in their colors, that all men may
discern them, and beware of them. First, it is said that they were like unto
horses prepared unto battle: that is, they were as strong and fierce as barred
horses, to rush and run upon all such as should but once mute or mutter against
them, or their authority. Moreover, they have crowns of gold upon their
heads, which shows and signifies, that they were the conquerors of the
earth, and Lords of the world, and who but they? for in those days no man,
nay, no Lord or King, durst quitch against a Monk, a Friar, or a pild Priest:
for if any did, they were sure to smart for it. They had also faces like the
faces of men; that is, they set fair faces upon matters, and pretended great
devotion in religion, flattering the people, and making them believe that they
could give them pardon of all their sins, and bring them to heaven; when as
in very truth, for their bellies, and for their gain, they did cunningly
smoothe with the nobles, the rich, and the mighty, setting fair faces upon al
their proceedings; and as S. Peter says, Through covetousness with fained
words, they made merchandise of men's souls, 2 Pet. 2.3.
and did closely wind themselves into the hearts of the simple people, by
their fawning insinuations, being in very deed most notable flatterers and
hypocrites. They had hair, as the hair of women; that is, they were
altogether effeminate, being given to delicacie, lust, and wantonness; they
were drowned in whoredom and al kind of beastliness, being a shoale of most
filthy villains. Their teeth were as the teeth of Lions, to catch and snatch
all that they could come by. They devoured all the fat morsels every where:
they got the church-liuings into their hands: they first made impropriations:
they incroached upon temporal men's lands: they swallowed up all every where.
If we look upon the Abbeys, Priories, and Nunneries, we may easily judge what
teeth they had. Moreover, it is said they had Habbergions, like to Habbergions
of Iro^; that is, they were so strongly armed with the defense and countenance
of the Pope, that no secular power durst once quitch against the^. Their wings
were like the sound of chariots, when many horses run unto battle: that is,
with fluttering noise, and terrible threatenings, they strove to uphold their
kingdom. Also in Churches and Pulpits, they make a roaring noise, and take on
terribly to maintain their abominable Idolatry. They had tails like unto
scorpions, and there were stings in their tails.

Abaddon, and in Greek he is named Apollyon, that is, destroying. As the
fowls have a king over them, which is the Eagle; and the beasts, the Lion;
and mortal men some chief governor, under whose protection and subjection
they live: so here these hellish Locusts are said to have a king over them,
which is the Angel of the bottomless pit; that is, the devil or the Pope,
which you will, under whose ensign they fight, and under whose defense they
live. Their kings name in Hebrew is called Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon. The
words are both of one signification, that is, destroying: for both the devil
himself, and his vicar the Pope, are destroiers and wasters of the Church of
God.

One woe is past, And behold yet two woes come after this. We have heard at
large what this first woe is, namely, the plague of the world, by the Pope and
his Clergy. Now we are to hear of the second woe, which is the most huge
and murdering army of the Turks, wherein the third part of men were slain.

Some do expound this second woe of the kingdom of Antichrist, and his armies:
but that it is not so, may appear by these reasons following.

First, the Angel denouncing woe, woe, woe, denounces three several woes, and
therefore it is said; One woe is past, and behold yet two woes come after this.
It follows then, that this is a distinct and several woe from the former, and
therefore cannot be the same.

Secondly, this woe contains specially a bodily slaughter of the third part
of the world, and of the wicked reprobates: but the first woe was specially a
plague of men's souls, as we have heard, and therefore this cannot be the same
with the first.

Thirdly, we are to understand, that this book describes all the greatest
calamities and plagues that should come upon the world in any age after Christ:
and therefore we may justly think that the kingdom of the Turks is not left
out, seeing it was one of the greatest plagues that ever came upon the world.
But the kingdom of the Turks is described in no other part of this
Revelation, and therefore must of necessity be here described.



Euphrates.

Now we are come to the description of the second woe, which follows upon the
blowing of the sixth trumpet, by the sixth Angel. And first of all he says; He
heard a voice from the four corners of the golden Altar.

golden Altar, is meant Christ, as before has been showed, with the reasons
thereof. From this Altar the voice comes to the angel which blew the sixth
trumpet, that we might know it is the voice of the mighty God, and the
commandment of our Lord Jesus.

The voice commands the sixth Angel to loose the four Angels which are bound
in the great river Euphrates. By these four Angels which are thus bound at
Euphrates, is meant many devils, or angels of darkness, as we heard before,
chap. 7. verse 1. Their binding signifies their restraint, by which they were
held back from doing that mischief which they desired to do. Their loosing,
signifies that power was given them to perform that which they wished. They
are said to be four in number, because they should raise an horrible plague
in the four corners of the earth, both East, West, North, and South. The sense
is, that the devils have yet further and greater scope given them to plague and
destroy the inhabitants of the earth. These devils had exceeding great power in
the kingdom of Antichrist, but they are insatiable in mischief, and so after
a sort lie still bound till they have their desire. The place where they lie
bound, is Euphrates, wherein is a mystery: for Euphrates literally taken, is
a great River, which ran so nigh the city Babylon in Chaldea, that it was a
mighty defense unto it, so that the city could not be taken, until they that
laid siege unto it, cut out trenches, and derived the waters an other way. Now
for the mystery, it is this: Rome in this book is called Babylon. By a
metaphor, and after the same manner, the great River Euphrates, as we shall
see afterward, chap. 16. signifies the power, wealth, and authority, which
that city Rome, even this western Babel, has to defend it self. Then it
follows, that in this power, authority, and strength of Rome, the devils lie
bound: for they waited through the power of Rome, to work yet far greater
mischief, and therefore are said to be bound, so long as they were
restrained. The mischief which they plotted, and purposed to bring to pass by
the authority and power of Rome, was the hatching and bringing forth of the
Mahometish religion, which in very deed did spring from the darkness of Rome,
as from his proper root and original cause.

The devils did foresee, that out of the superstitions and Idolatries of Rome,
defended by their great power and authority, Mahometish religion, might very
well be framed, and therefore not being content to plague the West part of the
world with Popery and Idolatry, they do greedily desire also to plague the
East part of the world with the false religion of Mahomet. They are not
satisfied with plaguing and poisoning all Europe with abominable Idolatries,
except also they plague and infect all Asia and Africa with the Turks most
execrable religion: so insatiable are the devils in working mischief. Now in
the mean time they think themselves too much straightned, bound and tied up in
Rome, and Romish religion, except they may be loosed, and proceed further to
ouerspread the whole world with all impieties, and most horrible abominations.
A man would think that when the devils had prevailed so far, as to place
Antichrist in his cursed chair, and to breed the swarms of Locusts out of
the smoke of hell, they might have been satisfied: for then, as we say, hell
seemed to be broken loose. But yet all this cannot satisfy the insatiable
devils, but they will have the religion of Mahomet established, to poison and
plague all the East parts of the world in their souls: and also they will have
the most huge, cruel, and savage armies of the Turks raised up, to murder and
massacre millio^s of men in their bodies, in the west parts of the world, as
presently we shall hear.

Now till all this be effected, they are said to lie bound at Rome. But here
we see, that this sixth Angel has a precise commandment from Jesus Christ,
to loose these devils which lay bound at the great river Euphrates, that they
might plague the whole world far and near, at their pleasure: so now all the
devils of hell are let loose, and let us hear what follows.

And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an hour, at a day,
at a month, and at a year, Now the devils being loosed and unbound by
special commandment from Christ, were in a readiness to execute their
mischief. This ascending by degrees from a short time unto longer and longer;
From an hour to a day, etc. does signify, that as the devils were pressed, and
at hand at an hours warning, as we say, to put in practice whatsoever they had
plotted: so they were as forward to continue the same, From an hour to a day,
from a day to a month, and from a month to a year, that is from time to
time, until the date of their commission was out: for their time was limited,
and their commission bounded, as afterward we shall see. And this is our
comfort, that both the Papacy is limited to five months, and the Turcisme to
hours, days, months, and years. The devils power is limited, though it
grieueth them full sore. They cannot do what they list: they cannot continue
as long as they would.

After the number of horsemen of war were twenty thousand times ten
thousand, for I heard the number of the^. Now, upon the loosing of these
devils, here follows the description of a most horrible plague which they
raised up; and it is a huge army, a murdering army, an army in number
exceeding great: for he says, They were twenty thousand times ten thousand;
that is, two hundred millions, or two hundred thousand thousands. But we may
not think that this army was ever all at one time, or in any one age, but here
are the armies of many ages reckened up, and the full plague of many years set
forth. How could Saint John number such an army, may some man say? He answers
this doubt, and says, He heard the number of them. He did not number them:
but the number was told him.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that as this army did exceed in number, so also
in terror and strength: and therefore they are said to be all horsemen. For an
army of horsemen are both more strong and more terrible, then any arm of
footmen.

Here is the description of these horsemen and horses, as they appeared to
John in a vision. First, touching the horsemen, it is said that they were very
well armed with Habbergions; that is, coats of Maile, Corselets, or Curets,
and that of a fiery color, and of the color of Iacinth; that is, of smoke,
as appears in the last clause of this verse, and also of the color of
Brimstone. For as horsemen in complete armor were wont to wear in their
breast-plates and targets certain ensigns and colors, whereby they might be
made terrible to their enemies: So these Turkish warriors and horsemen do
hold out their colors of fire, smoke, and brimstone, as it were flagges of
defiance against the whole world, threatening present death to all that should
withstand them; or as if they meant to spet fire and flame* them, or to choke
them with smoke and brimstone, and then burn them up with fire and brimstone.
All this their colors and ensigns in their breast-plates and Habbergions did
portend. Now, as concerning their horses, no doubt they were as fierce as the
horsemen. They were great Lances, they had heads like Lions; that is, they were
full of stomach and fiercenes, and out of their mouths went forth fire, and
smoke, and brimstone; that is, they had the same colors and ensigns upon
them that their riders had.

Of these three was the third part of me^ killed, that is, Here is set down
the great slaughters and massacres which these martial horsemen and Turkish
armies made throughout the most part of Europe. For he says: the third part
of men, that is, great numbers in Europe were slain by the fire, the smoke,
and the brimstone, which came out of their mouths: that is, by their bloody
cruelty, and barbarous immanitie; some being murdered in their bodies by
cruel death, and others violently drawn to the wicked religion of Mahomet.
For partly by external violence, and partly by a subtle show of religion and
devotion, they destroyed thousands both in their souls and bodies. And
therefore it is said, Their power is in their mouths, and in their tails. For
their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads wherewith they hurt. But
for the better understanding of these things, I think it not amiss a little
to open and lay forth the rising up, and increasing of the power of the Turk.

About the year of our Lord, 591. was Mahomet borne in a certain village of
Arabia, called Itrarix, for so Histories do report. This Mahomet by fraud and
cousenage, grew into great credit and fame among the seditious Arabians and
Egyptians, in so much that they made him a captain over them, to war against
the Persians.

After this, he married a rich wife, and by that means he won the hearts of
many with gifts. In the days of Heraclius the Emperor, which was in the year
of our Lord, 623. he grew to be very mighty. After this, he feigned himself
to be a Prophet, and said, that he had visions and revelations, and talked with
Angels. And so by the help of Sergius a Monk, he framed a new worship and
religion, patched partly out of the old Testament, partly from the Papists,
and partly from the Heathen. He reigned nine years, and so died.

After him, succeeded in the kingdom of the Saracens Ebubezer, who reigned two
years. Haumar, who reigned twelve years. Muhauias who reigned 24. years. All
these made great wars against the Persians, and sundry other nations, and
overcame them, and set up the religion of Mahomet amongst them, and so the
kingdom of the Saracens grew mighty: but in process of time the kingdom of
the Turks grew great, and the kingdom of the Saracens diminished. Within a
short time after this, the Tartarians, a barbarous people, waxed strong, and
made war against the Turks, and prevailed greatly for a time. But about the
year of our Lord 1300. the Empire of the Tartarians was overthrown, and the
Empire of the Turks did flourish more then ever before: For now come the
greatest monsters, and most savage and cruel tyrants of all. The first of them
was Ottomanus. The second Baiazethes. The third, Amurathes. These made bloody
wars against the Christians; I mean the Papists in Europe, and enlarged the
Turks dominions very far.

They did from time to time so cruelly murder and massacre the inhabitants of
the West, with their huge and bloody armies, that at last both the Pope, the
Emperor, the King of Hungary, the King of Polonia, the King of France, the
Duke of Burgundy, and the Duke of Venice, and almost all the Potentates in
Europe, did join together to make war against the Turks, and did levy huge
armies, but yet could not prevail: so strong were the Turks: so huge and
dreadful were their armies. Then we see that verified which here was
foretold, to wit, that the monstrous armies of the Turks, with their horses
and horsemen, should slay the third part of men: that is, the Idolaters in
Europe by heaps and infinite numbers. To set down the particular battles
betwixt the Turks and the Christians in Europe, and their horrible
bloudsheaddings, would require a volume: but this which I have briefly set
down, may serve to give some light unto it, and may suffice for the
understanding of this text. Europe, and these fearful judgments and
massacres, they repented not of their Idolatries, but waxed worse and worse:
for no judgments, no plagues can make the wicked any whit the better, as we
see in the examples of Pharaoh and Saul. the remnant of men which were not
killed by these plagues, repented not of the works of their hands, that they
should not worship devils and Idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and
of stone, and of wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor go. Also they
repented not of their murder, and of their sorcery, neither of their
fornication, nor of their theft. And thus we see how the devils which were
bound at Euphrates, being let loose upon the world, in the wrath and just
judgment of God, did fearfully plague both the Turks in their souls, and
the Papists in their bodies. The one with false religion, the other with
bloody swords: and so was the desire of the devils fully satisfied.

CHAP. X.
Having opened and expounded the two first woes which fell out upon the blowing
of the fifth and sixth trumpet, containing the two great plagues of Popery and
Turcisme, wherewith the world was punished many hundred years: now in this
chapter we are to hear of good news, and great comfort, after so much
sorrow. For here Jesus Christ comes down from heaven to relieve his poor
afflicted Church, and to be revenged of all his cruel enemies. For now, before
the 3. and last woe, containing the greatest plague of al upon the world, which
is, the last judgment; wherein the wicked shall be tormented in hell fire for
ever, both in body and soul, I say, before the blowing of the 7. trumpet, by
the seventh angel, of which we shall hear in the next chapter. Now in the mean
time is showed in this chapter, what care God had for his little flock, which
no doubt were hid in those days, and did not appear, and yet were scattered
in corners, even in the midst of the darkness of Popery, and the most
furious and hellish rage of the Turkish armies. And therefore the principal
scope and drift of this chapter, is to show how the Gospel should be
preached in many kingdoms, now after this general darkness, for the
discovering and overthrow, both of Popery and Turcisme, and to show what
should fall out in the church now in the middle time, before the 7. and last
trumpet blow: for then comes the last judgment, as the Angel swears in
this chapter, ver. 6.7.

This chapter does contain four principal parts.









This Angel of might is Christ, as appears by the description of him, and by
all the consequents following: Math. 24.
for he is said to be clothed with a cloud, which signifies his great glory
and majesty: For he shall come in the clouds of heaven to judge the world:
that is, with great pomp and glory. The Raine-bowe was upon his head, which
signifies the covenant of peace with his church, as before, chap. 4.3. His
face was as the Sun, which signifies comfort and deliverance to his church,
and the dispelling of all the smoke of the bottomless pit, as the Sun
scatters and drives away the thick mists.

His feet are as pillars of Brass; which signifies that he should tread
down all his enemies under his feet, both Pope and Turk: 1. Cor. 15.
for he must reign till he have destroyed them all. The Pope a long time
kept all the kings of Europe in awe. The Locusts were of great power. The
Turks prevailed exceedingly. But what are they all to this mighty and
glorious Angel Christ? What is their power to withstand him? What can Abaddo^
the king of the Locusts do against this mighty king of Sion? What can the
Turks most terrible horses and horsemen do against this Angel which sits
upon the white horse? Alas, alas, they are able to do nothing. They must all
be trodden down under his feet of brass.

And he had in his hand a little book open, This little book signifies the
Bible.

It is called little, in respect of the great and huge volumes of Popish
books, though in it self it be large.

It is said to be open, that all men might look into it, because it had been
shut a long time before, even during all the time of the darkening of the Sun
and the Air, by the smoke which came out of the bottomless pit. But although
it was long shut up in the time of Popery, and lay buried in a strange
tongue: yet now it is opened, and publicly preached unto all the servants of
God. And all this no doubt is to be understood of Luthers time, and all the
times ever since the Gospel was spread abroad after the great darkness. For
some hundred years ago it was hard to find an English Bible: but now God be
thanked, there are thousands to be found in the hands of Gods people. And
therefore the things here prophesied of, are fulfilled in our days: for we
live under the opening of the seventh seal, and the blowing of the sixth
trumpet, and the pouring forth of the sixth vial, as here does partly appear,
and shall God willing, be made more manifest when we come to the 16. chapter.
Now we are diligently to observe, that as the opening of this book, and the
preaching of the Gospel by Luther and his successors, has dispersed the
former darkness, and beaten down Popery: so also has it driven back the
Turk, and taken from us all fear of him, which in former ages, was the
terror of the world: for since men have looked into this book, repented of
their Idolatry, and turned unto God with all their hearts.

The Turk and his power has not been feared, especially in these parts where
the Gospel is preached. For God in his merciful providence toward his
Church, has diuerted his power an other way, and set him aworke elsewhere. So
that if men cannot be brought to believe, that God raised him up as a scourge
for Idolaters, and a plague for Idolatry and other foul sins, according to
the words in the former chapter; where it is said, They repented not of the
works of their hands, etc. yet when they see, that at the opening of the book
of God, and forsaking Idolatry, the fear of him is removed, let them believe
it. What can be more plain, then that this open book in the hand of the
Angel, has delivered us from the Pope, and from the Turk: A most happy
opening of this blessed book.

Moreover it is said, that he put his right foot upon the sea, and his left
on the earth. The setting of Christ's right foot upon the sea, signifies that
he is ruler of the sea, and stands as firmly upon the sea, as upon the land.
The setting of his left foot upon the earth, does signify, that he is Lord of
the earth, and true heir to all things in it.

And cried with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth, This crying with a loud
voice, like the roaring of a Lion, does signify the manifestation of the wrath
of Christ against all his enemies: for now he begins to roar against them,
as a Lion when he is hungry, roareth for his pray. Therefore now both the
scorpion, Locusts, and the fierce horses and horsemen are like to go to the
pot.

By the 7. thunders which uttered their voices, is meant those perfect and
exquisite judgments which now were to be infflicted both upon the kingdom of
the Pope and of the Turk. We have heard before, that 7. is a perfect number in
this book: and that thunder is put for the thundering of Gods wrath, and all
such broiles and plagues as follow therevpo^. And this is the reason of this
interpretation.

And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, It should seem these
seven thunders did so speak, as they might be understood; for John was about
to write the things which they spoke, thinking that they were uttered for that
end and purpose, that he should deliver them in writing to the churches. But
he receives a commandment to the contrary, for he is willed, not to write
them, but to conceal them until the appointed time.

But some man may say; Why were they uttered, seeing they must be concealed,
and kept close? I answer, it was not in vain: for first, though the
particulars be not expressed what the thunders spoke: yet here we are taught,
that there remain most fearful judgments against all the oppressors of the
Church, which Christ has thundered out with terror against them. And when the
time determined is come, they shall be seen and understood: but in the mean
time, they be sealed up and kept close; according to that of Job: Why should
not the times be hid of the Almighty, Job. 24.1
so as they which know him, should not perceive the times appointed of him; and
that of Daniel: Dan. 12.9.
These things are sealed up until the time determined.





God shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets.

The sum of these three verses is, that Christ gives warning of the last
judgment, that men might awake and look out in time. And because men for the
most part are careless and secure, Amos. 6.1*
putting the evil day far from them, as the Prophet speaks. Therefore here
Christ binds it with a solemn oath, and solemn gestures thereunto annexed,
as was the lifting up of the hand in ancient time, Genesis 14.22. The thing that
our Lord Jesus deposes, is, that Time shall be no more; that is, Time as it is
now, or the state of things as they be now: but he tells us flatly, that as
six Angels have already blown their trumpets, so when the 7. Angel should
blow, the mystery of God shall be finished: that is, the time of punishing
the wicked, and rewarding the godly, should come, which is therefore called a
Mystery, because the world understands it not: They think there is no such
matter.

They imagine there is no reward for the just, Mal. 3.14.1^.
or punishment for the wicked, as the Prophet says. But the holy Ghost says:
Verily there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtless there is a God which
judges the earth. And here it is said, Psalm. 58.11.
that God has declared it to his servants the Prophets.

And the voice which I heard from heaven,







The brief sense of these four verses is, that the Preachers of the Gospel
being called, allowed, and authorized by Christ unto their ministry, should
study the scriptures with great diligence, eue^ until they had eaten up the
book of God, and then they should preach and publish unto all nations and
kingdoms that truth of God, and doctrine of the Gospel, which now a long time
had lien hid in the reign of Antichrist.

It is to be observed, that John in this place represents the person of all
the ministers of the Gospel which should be raised up in these last days, for
the overthrow of Antichrist, and the restoration of true religion: for John
himself did not live to these times.

Further, it is to be noted, that all godly Students and zealous Ministers do
eat up the book of God by reading, study, prayer, and meditation, and they
find it sweet in their mouth, that is, they find and feel great joy and
comfort in the study and meditation thereof, especially when God reuealeth
thereby great and hid secrets unto them, and gives them to understand the
mysteries of the Gospel, and counsels of his will, which are locked up from
the wise and prudent of this world. This I say, is sweeter unto their mouth
then honey, and the honey comb. Concerning this phrase of eating up the book,
look Ezech. 2.9. for here the holy Ghost alludeth thereunto.

This book being so sweet in the mouth, yet being eaten and digested, is
bitter in the belly.

There may be three reasons yielded of this bitterness.

First, because it being once taken down into our soul by godly meditation,
does mortify our corrupt nature, and bring under our lusts, and therefore
seems bitter to flesh and blood.

Secondly, because afflictions and trials do always necessarily follow the
sound digestion of the Gospel.

Thirdly, because the doctrine of the Gospel being swallowed by the Ministers
thereof, must not be kept to themselves, as it were closed up in their stomachs,
but they must out with it again, as if it were some loathsome and bitter
thing, which must needs be cast up again. And for this cause it is said in the
last verse, that they must prophecy again among the people, and nations, and
tongues, and many kings. Now blessed be the name of the Lord our God, who has
given us to live in this age, wherein we do with our eyes behold and see the
fulfilling of all these things: let us therefore praise God for this great
work which we see wrought in our days, and let us still more and more
magnify this l^ttle book, which will utterly destroy Popery, and bring down
the proud Antichrist, do all that fight for him what they can.

CHAP. XI.
WE have heard that the little Book should be opened, and the Gospel preached
and published to many nations and kingdoms, after the great darkness of
Popery: and that this was done by Luther, Melancton, Calvin, Peter Viret, Peter
Martyr, Bullinger, Bucer, and all their faithful successors unto this day. Now
in this Chapter we are to understand of the effect and good success of their
preaching and publishing the Gospel, which was, that the Church should be
restored, reformed, and built up thereby, which a long time had been wasted and
oppressed by the tyranny of Antichrist: and that many should embrace the
Gospel, forsake their Idolatries, and turn to God with all their hearts: yea
whole nations and kingdoms in Europe should be converted to the faith, as we
see this day God be praised. So then the principal drift of this Chapter is,
to show those things which yet remain to be fulfilled under the blowing of
the sixth trumpet, which is the preaching and prevailing of the Gospel, even
unto the worlds end: and also the things which follow upon the blowing of
the seventh trumpet, which is the resurrection and last judgment.

This Chapter contains six principal things, as it were the six parts
thereof.

First,

Secondly, it describes the builders; that is,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, it shows that Papists, Atheists, and wicked worldlings,

Fifthly,

Lastly it shows, And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, Here
Jesus Christ gives a reed unto John like unto a rod, and thereupon he is
commanded by an Angel to go about the measuring of the temple, the altar,
etc.

By this measuring with a reed like a rod, is signified the restoring and
building up of Gods house, which now was greatly ruinated and run into decay
through the long prevailing of Popery.

Ezech. 40.5. Zach. 1.16. Zac. 2.1.2. Apoc. 21.15.
Measuring with a reed, is taken for the building up of Gods Church, after the
decayed estate thereof, both in Ezechiel, Zachary, and this Prophecy.

John in the persons of all faithful Ministers, has this measuring rod
given him, because the church was to be restored and built up by the Ministers
and Ministry of the Gospel.

The thing to be measured, is the Temple, the Altar, and them that worship
therein.

This is an allusion to the legal worship, whereby our spiritual worship is
represented. For by the material Temple, is meant the spiritual Temple, or
Church of God. By the Altar of stone, is meant the spiritual worship. By them
that worship therein with carnal sacrifices, is meant all the true members of
the Church, which worship God in spirit and truth.

Now then, both the Church, the true worship and worshippers, were all to be
measured, repaired, and built up by the ministry of the word, which all were
decayed and almost laid waste, by the Popes tyranny. But the court which is
without the temple cast out and measure it not, for it is given to the
Gentiles; and the holy city shall they tread under foot two and forty
months. John is here forbidden to measure and build up the court which is
without the temple. Whereby is meant all heretics, hypocrites, worldlings, and
all such as have a place in the Church, but are not of the Church. This phrase
of speech is taken from the old shadowish worship as the rest before. For in
the temple of Jerusalem there was an outward court which was common to all,
good and bad: the holy place which was proper to the Priests and Levites: and
the holy of holiest, or most holy place, where none might come but the high
Priest only.

Here is a reason added why the Lord God refuses all Papists and hypocrites,
and all such as belong to the outward court only, and it is this: that this
outward court is given unto the Gentiles; that is, to all false Christians and
counterfaits in Religion, which are members of the visible Church, but have
nothing to do with the invisible. These are compared to Gentiles in two
respects. First, in regard of profaneness, for they are as profane as the
Heathen. Secondly, in respect of persecuting the truth: for hypocrites and
Atheists are as forward in persecuting the people of God as the Heathen
Emperors, which persecuted the Church by the space of 300. years. All comes
to this, that when the Church should be gathered and built by the Preaching of
the Gospel, God would have all Papists, Atheists, and hypocrites shut out.

Moreover, here is the second reason yielded, why the outward court should be
cast out, and not measured: to wit, because they should tread the holy City
under foot, forty and two months: That is, they should persecute the Church
all the time of Antichrists reign. For forty two months in this verse: and
1260. days in the next verse, and three days and a half verse 9. and time;
times, and half a time, in the 12. Chapter, verse 14. and 1260 days, Chapter
12. verse 6. do signify all one thing, which is, the short reign of
Antichrist: for these months, these days, and these times, do every one of
them make three years, and a half. For who knows not that 42. months make
just three years, and an half, and that 1260. days, makes even so much
also: and by time he means a year, by times, two year, and by half a time,
half a year. Now the reason, why Antichrists reign is numbered by days,
months, and half times, and all amounting but to three years and a half,
is to note the short continuance thereof, Chap. 12.12. Chap. 17.10. Chap. 20.3.
for the comfort of the Church, as appears more fully and plainly, in sundry
places of this Prophecy, where it is set down in plain words, that
Antichrist should reign but a short time: for what is five or six hundred
years, in comparison of eternity.

But here the Papists do show themselves most sottish and ridiculous, in that
they would gather from hence, that the Pope is not Antichrist: for (say they)
Antichrist shall reign but three years and an half, but the Pope has
reigned many years: therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

Now to answer the proposition of their argument taken from this place. First,
it may be answered that this place is not to be understood literally, but
mistically: as many other things in this book.

Secondly, here is a certain number put for an uncertain, a definit number
for an indefinit, which also is usual in this book, as we heard before,

Thirdly, here is an allusion to Daniels weeks, Dan 9.
and other prophetical computatio^s, wherein sometimes a day is put for a year,
a week for 7. years, as in Daniels seauens, and a month for 30. years. So
then I conclude, that it is extreme folly to interpret this place literally.
The curious and frivolous interpretations of this place, and such like in this
book, by some writers, I do of purpose omit, as matters untrue, unsound, and
vniudiciall: for I only in this book seek the sense that is, and not the
sense which is not, as has been said before.

But I will give power unto my 2. witnesses, Having set down how Antichrist and
his company, being those Gentiles which possess ye outward court should tread
down the holy city, that is, the true churh of God for a short time: now he
comes to show, that even in the height and pride of the Popes power, and
government, yet the Church was not utterly extinct, God did never utterly
forsake it, but in all ages, and at all times, God did raise up one or other to
withstand all Popish proceedings, which is here meant by the two witnesses. For
assuredly these two witnesses do not signify Enoch, and Elias, as the Papists
and some others do dream: but they signify all the faithful Preachers and
professors of the truth, which in all ages both former and later, have opposed
themselves against the Pope, his Clergy, his doctrine, his religion, and all
his abominable proceedings.

They are called Witnesses, because they should bear witness unto the truth.

They are said to be two in number, for three reasons.

First, because they were very few in those days when Popery did so generally
prevail: for two is the smallest number.

Deuteronomy. 19.15. John 8.17. Hebr. 10.28.
Secondly, because the law of God does admit of no less number in
witnesse-bearing, as it is written; In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall
every word stand.

Hagg. 2.5.
Thirdly, it is an allusion to Zorobabel, and Iehoshua, which were the two
restorers and builders of the temple after the captivity.

Christ says here, that he will give power to his two witnesses: for no man
has any power in heavenly things, except it be given him from above: and
especially to stand fast to the truth in the heat of persecutions and troubles.

It is said, that these two witnesses shall Prophecy: that is, 1. Cor. 14.3.
Preach, declare, and speak. For so Prophecy is taken in the former Chapter,
2 Thessalonians. 5.20.
and last verse: so also in other places of the scripture.

The time of their prophesieng being 1260. days, has been expounded before.

These two witnesses are clothed in sackcloth, which signifies that they
should lead a sorrowful life here in this world. For in old time when men did
fast and mourn, they did use to put on sackcloth. It follows then that these
faithful Preachers and witnesses of the truth, did not spend their days in
mirth, iolitie and worldly pomp and bravery, as did the Popes Clergy, and
pompous prelates of Antichrist.

Now if any man will demand how this may appear that there have been always
some raised up of God, to write, preach, declare, and speak against the whore
of Babylon, even then when she was aloft and reigned as the Queen and Lady of
the world; I answer, that Histories are very plentiful in this point: which
at large do show that in all countries and kingdoms of Europe, there were
ever some stirred up to impugn and resist the whore of Babylon: As, In
England.
Robert Grosted, Bishop of Lincoln. Anno. dom. 1293. John Wickliffe, supported
by Edward 3. and diverse of the Nobility in England. An. 1400.
In Germany.
Taulerus a Preacher. An. 1354. Franciscus Petrarcha. 1356. Johannes de rupe
scissa. 1357. Conradus Hager. 1359. Cerhardus Rhidor. 1359. Petrus de Corbona.
1360. Johannes de Poliaco. John Zisca. 1420.
In Bohemia.
John Husse. An. dom. 1414. Jerome of Prage. 1416. Mathias Parisiensis. 1370.
In Spain.
Arnoldus de noua villa. An. 1250.
In Italy.
Jerome Sauonarola, a Monk. An. 1500. Siluester a Friar.
In France.
Waldus, of whom came the Waldenses, or poor men of Lions in France. An.
1160. Guilienus de sancto amore. An. 1252. Robertus Gallus. An. 1292.
Laurentius. An. 1290.
In Ireland.
Armachanus, an Archbishop. An. 1362.
In Sueuia.
Many Preachers at once. An. 1240.
In Grecia.
All the Churches of Grecia renounced the Church of Rome for their abominable
Idolatry. An. 1230.


It were too tedious to recite all which the stories do report to have
withstood both Pope and Popery, even when it did most of all bear the sway:
these may suffice for the understanding of the Text. As for those which have
been raised up since the decay and fall of Popery: I mean since Luthers time,
they are so many, and so well known, that I need say nothing.

These are two Olive trees, Here the two witnesses are compared to two Olive
trees; because that as the Olive tree does drop down his Oil and fatness:
Exodus 30.31. Psalm. 45.7. 1. John 2.20.
so the faithful Ministers do drop down upon the Church the sweet oil of
the spirit, which is all heavenly and spiritual graces: as the Metaphor of
Oil is often so taken in the scriptures.

They are also compared to two candlestickes, because that as the candlestick
bears up the candle set upon it, so the Ministers of the Gospel bear up and
hold forth the light of Gods word, even in the greatest darkness.

These candlestickes are said to stand before the God of the earth: because God
bears rule, not only in heaven, but in earth also: even then when all things
in the earth seem to be most troubled, and the church militant under greatest
persecutions as now it was.





Here is showed, that if any despise the simplicity of these two witnesses,
and offer them wrong because of their baseness, and contempt in the world,
that there is a fire comes out of their mouth, that is, the fiery and mighty
power of the word of God, vttred out of their mouths, which overthrows, and
ouerturneth their enemies: nay as fire it consumes them to ashes: for the
Ministers of the Gospel are armed with ready vengeance against all
disobedience. 2. Cor. 10.6.
Therefore they be stark mad, and know not what they do, which oppose
themselves against the true Ministers of Christ. For the sword which they fight
with, slaieth the reprobates in their souls, though not in their bodies: for
the ministry of the word, is the savor of death to all unbelievers.

That which is here spoken of shutting the heavens that it rain not, and
turning the waters into blood, is an allusion to Elias and Moses. 1. King. 17.
Exodus 4.
Whereof the one by his prayer shut the heavens, the other by his rod turned
the waters into blood. Now the faithful Ministers of the Gospel are compared
to these two, not because they should work such outward miracles as they did,
but because they should be furnished with spiritual power, which is far
greater. For most sure it is, that the invisible and spiritual power wherewith
the Ministers of the Gospel are armed, is very great and glorious, though the
world see it not, nor know it not. For the Apostle says; The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal but spiritual, 2. Cor. 10.6.
mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, and
every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, etc.

And when they have finished their testimony, Here is set down the great
cruelty and bloody tyranny which Antichrist should use against these
faithful witnesses of our Lord Jesus. For although they overcome him with the
spiritual sword, which is the fire that comes out of their mouths: yet for a
time power was given to this beast that comes out of the bottomless pit,
that is, the Pope and his adherents to murder Gods Saints with the material
sword: but yet note that Antichrist can do nothing till the two witnesses have
finished their testimony; such is Gods care and providence for all his
faithful servants.

And their corpse shall lie in the streets of the great city, Sodom, and
Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified. By the great city, here is meant
Rome, and yet not the city only of Rome, but all the Roman Empire, power and
jurisdiction, as afterward shall be made manifest. Now the corpses and dead
carcasses, which were murdered and massacred in all nations, by Antichrists
tyranny, are here said to lie in the streets of Rome, that is, to be cast
forth into the open fields, as not worthy the honor of burial in all places,
countries, and kingdoms, within the Roman Empire, or jurisdiction of Rome,
as we read to have been in England, Scotland, France, Ireland, Germany, and
Spain. And as the holy Ghost says, Psalm. 79.2.
The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat to the fowls of
the heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that Rome is here compared spiritually, or by
a trope, to Sodom and Egypt. To Sodom for filthiness; for what city ever was,
or is more filthy then Rome, the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the
earth? And to Egypt, for Idolatry, and keeping Gods people in spiritual
bondage.

Last of all, it is here said, that our Lord Jesus was crucified at Rome,
which may seem strange, since all men know, that Christ was crucified at
Jerusalem. But to answer this doubt, we are to understand, that in respect of
the place, our Lord Jesus was crucified at Jerusalem: but if we respect the
power and authority that put him to death, he was crucified at Rome: for
Christ was put to death by a Roman Judge, by Roman laws, by Roman
authority, by a kind of death proper only to the Romans; and in a place
which then was within the Roman Empire. And for this cause it is here said,
that Christ was crucified at Rome.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and Gentiles, shall see
their corpse three days and an half, Hitherto we have heard of the rage of
Antichrist against the two witnesses. Now further we are to understand of the
malice and fury of all his adherents; that is, all Papists, Atheists, and the
rest of the blind people, and seduced multitude, which all did allow the Popes
cruelty in sheading the blood of the Martyrs; and they do testify the
allowance and approbation of the Popes fact, and also their own malice and
madness against them in this, that they will not vouchsafe them the honor of
burial, but cast out their dead bodies as carrion, or as the dead bodies of
dogs or swine; thereby showing that they esteemed them no better then so.
Nay, we read, that their hellish rage and madness was so great and outrageous,
that they wracked their malice upon the dead bones and carcasses of Gods Saints
and Martyrs. For their bloody and most malicious minds could not be satisfied
except they dug up the bodies of Gods witnesses out of their graves, and
then burnt the^ to ashes. Whereas it is said, they shall see their corpse, the
meaning is, that all the blind people within the Roman Empire should be
eyewitnesses of these things; and not only so, but even great Agents also in
the slaughter of Gods people.

By 3. days and an half, which is half a week, he means all the time of
Antichrists reign, and tyrannical government, as before has been showed. For
these 3. days and a half, being in prophetical co^putation three years and
a half, signify the same thing that the 42. months, and a thousand, two
hundred and three score days before.

Here we see how the inhabitants of the earth, that is, the seduced multitude
and blind people in the time of ignorance, do greatly insult and triumph over
the death of the Lords witnesses, and they do express their joy by sending
gifts and presents one to another, as if they had received some great
benefits, or had heard the most joyful news in the world. And the reason is
added, because they vexed and tormented them; meaning thereby, that the
preaching of the truth, and the reproving of their errors, Idolatries, and
manifold impieties, was a dagger, and a corsey unto them, they could at no
hand endure it: for the preaching of the Gospel is the torment of the world,
and the Preachers the torme^ters. These few Preachers thundering against their
superstitions, and abominable service of Antichrist, did vex every vein in
their heart, and inwardly so wound and lance their consciences, that they
could have no rest til they had rid them out of the world. But now having
dispatched them, and made riddance of them, they are very cranke and iocund.

But after three days and a half, the spirit of life coming from God,
Notwithstanding the rage and savage fury of the Pope and his followers; yet
here is showed, that they could not prevail as they desired: for within three
days and a half, that is, when the date of Antichrists reign was expired,
and the time come that Popery must be disclosed by the light of the Gospel
breaking forth; there follows a great alteration. For these two Prophets or
witnesses are raised up again. For he says, the spirit of life which came from
God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand upon their feet.

This may seem somewhat strange; but it is not to be understood that they
should be raised up bodily in their persons till the last resurrection: but
that God would raise up others endued with the same spirit, which should
mightily defend both the doctrine, cause and quarrel, which their predecessors
had maintained, and sealed with their blood; in whom they should after a sort
revive and live again, even as Elias did revive, and as it were live again in
John Baptist; who is said to be endued with the power and spirit of Elias, as
it was foretold by the Prophet, and as our Savior himself does avouch. Luke
1.17. Mal 4. 5. Math. 17.12.
Now blessed be God, that we live in these days wherein we see with our eyes
all these things fulfilled. For when the Pope and his Clergy had murdered
Gerhardus, Dulcimus Nauarensis, Waldus, Nicolaus Orem, John Picus, John Zisca,
Visilus Groningensis, Armerius, Wickliffe, Husse, Jerome of Prage, and many
Preachers in Sueuia, and one hundred holy Christians in the country of
Alsatia, and many others in all countries, and of all conditions of men: yet
for all that spite of their hearts, God raised up others in their stead, as
Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Peter Viret, Melancton, Bucer,
Bullinger, and their successors; yea the thousands of excellent Ministers, and
Preachers which are dispersed over all Europe at this day: In whom all the
former witnesses do revive, and as it were stand upon their feet again. And
now a great fear is come upon the Pope and his Clergy, and all his favorites:
for they did never so much as dream of such an alteration: but this is the
Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Here the Lords witnesses whom Antichrist had murdered, are called, and taken
up into heaven, that they may be crowned with glory and immortality, having in
the earth fought so excellent a fight of faith as they had: for even as Christ
their head was taken up in a cloud into the heavens: Even so his faithful
members are here taken up in a cloud to reign with him for ever. Moreover, it
is here said, that their enemies shall see them ascending up, they shall as it
were ascend up in their sight: for from the fire and faggot, swords and spears
of their enemies, they went directly unto God, and the very consciences of
their persecutors did witness so much; nay some of them being in horrible
convulsions of conscience, did not stick to utter it; auouching the innocence
of Gods Martirs: as sometimes Pilat, Math. 2^.
and the Centurion did of Christ. But though they had not been justified by
their enemies, yet are they here justified by a greater testimony: for the
voice from heaven, the voice of God does justify them, and clear them;
accounting them worthy to be called up from the earth to heaven, and received
to eternal glory. For howsoever the Pope and his Clergy condemned them for
heretics and scismatikes; yet here they are justified and cleared by a voice
from heaven, which is more then the voices, suffrages, and approbations of all
men in the world.

And the same hour there shall be a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
city shall fall, and in the earthquake shall be slain in number seven thousand,
and the remnant were sore feared, and gave glory to the God of heaven. As he
has showed before that the world was very joyful and iocond, when they had
made dispatch of Gods witnesses; but afterward full of fear and terror, when
they saw what followed: So here in this verse is showed, that at the same
hour, that is about the same time when they have persecuted the Saints, and
see thousands of others raised up in their stead, and as it were out of their
ashes, or rather out of their blood, that there should immediately follow a
great earthquake; that is, horrible commotions, seditions, tumults and open
wars among the kingdoms and nations of the world, and amongst all people
which should live after the breaking forth of the light of the Gospel, as this
day we see with our eyes. For who now in these days does not see and feel
this Earthquake? who knows not what stirs there have been and are every
where about Religion? Who is ignorant that all the wars, seditions,
treacheries, treasons, and rebellions that are this day in Europe betwixt one
kingdom and an other, are specially concerning the matter of religigion? But
mark what follows. Behold the effect of this Earthquake. It is said, that
the tenth part of the city shall fall. By the city here, he means the great
city Rome, mentioned before verse. 8. which is therefore called the great
city, because it was the chief city of the Roman Empire, and the very
seat of Antichrist. Now then the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost is, that
when there once begins to be an earthquake, that is, broiles, contentions,
alterations, questions and disputations, about religion: and that the popish
doctrine which had so long prevailed in the world, should be called in
question, yea openly preached against, convicted and condemned, that then Rome
should begin to fall, and Romish religion to suffer a great eclipse, yea the
tenth part; that is, some part of the city of Rome: I mean the doctrine and
authority of Rome should be overthrown. Now this falling of the tenth part of
Rome, was fulfilled within some few years after the broaching of the Gospel
by Luther, and his immediate successors; but since it is gone back many
degrees, and hereafter it shall still ebb and consume away by degrees, even
till it come to nothing: as God willing shall be plainly proved hereafter.

Moreover, here is set down another effect of this earthquake: which is, that
thereby shall be slain in number seven thousand, that is, many thousands; for
the number of seven is a perfect and universal number, as formerly has been
declared. But the sense of this clause is, that all such as will not yield to
the Gospel after matters once come in question, and the light thereof breaks
forth, but continue still in their blindness and hardness, standing out
sturdily against the truth, shall feel the heavy judgments of God upon them,
and come to miserable and wretched ends, as did here in England Stephen
Gardener, bloody Bonner, and many other such open persecutors in other nations
and countries, as the book of Martyrs does plentifully witness.

Last of all it is said, that the rest were terrified, and gave glory to the
God of heaven: that is, the elect of God seeing these horrible judgments upon
the persecutors of the Gospel, and having their eyes opened through these
contentions and broiles about religion, should repent of their former
Idolatries, blindness, and ignorance, should yield to the truth, and give
glory to the God of heaven, as at this day we see thousands do, God be
thanked. more and more in all the kingdoms of Europe, even until the end of
the world. For here we see it foretold and prophesied, that in this very last
age of the world, and even as it were, a little before the blowing of the
seventh trumpet, which presently hereupon is sounded, as in the next verses
appears, many should repent, and give glory to God.





Now comes the third, the last, and the greatest woe, which is the woe of
eternal death upon all the ungodly, both in their souls and bodies for ever
in the last judgment. The first woe was the Papacy. The second woe was
Turcisme. And this third woe is the last judgment. For it now follows, that
the seventh Angel blows the last trumpet: as our Lord Jesus swear before,
that when the seventh Angel should blow the trumpet,

Now at the blowing of this seventh trumpet, there were great voices in heaven,
saying; the kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his Christ's, and he
shall reign for evermore.

These voices in heaven are the triumphing voices of Gods elect, who do
exceedingly rejoice and triumph, that the kingdom of Satan and Antchrist is
overthrown, and that the kingdom of God and of Christ is set up, and shall
stand for evermore. For now all adversary power being overthrown, Christ does
deliver up a peaceable kingdom to his father, as it is written; Then shall be
the end, when he has delivered up his peaceable kingdom to God the Father:
1^ Cor. 15.24.
For he must reign over the Church militant, till he have troade down all
his enemies under his feet, and when the Son of God has subdued all things
to himself, then shall he be subject to his Father, as he is the mediator of
the Church, and yet reign with his Church triumphant for evermore.

Then the 24.

Saying: We give thee thanks o Lord God almighty,

These 24. Elders do signify all the elect, and glory unto him, because now
he had received the kingdom, the power and the glory, both Pope, and Turk,
and Emperor, and all his enemies, being subdued under his feet.

Now he mentions the wrath and vengeance which is to be powered forth upon
all the wicked at the last day, and also the reward of the godly. For whereas
he says, The Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead, that they should be judged, the sense and meaning is, that all the
profane enemies of the Church, which have had their time in which they were
angry with Gods people, and in their wrath did afflict and vex them very
sore, should now be judged and condemned in Gods wrath: for now the day of his
wrath and vengeance is come, wherein he will destroy them that destroyed the
earth, and seemed to carry all before them; and where also he will give a
full recompense of reward to all his faithful worshippers, both small and
great, both Preachers and professors of his Gospel.

Then the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in the Temple
the arc of his covenant, and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and earthquakes, and much hail.

This is a further amplification of that which is set down in the former
verse. For now he says, that the temple of God should be opened in heaven:
That is, an open door and passage should be made through Christ, for all the
elect to enter into Gods everlasting kingdom, and reign with him, and his
Angels for evermore.

By the arc of the covenant, is meant Christ, who is said here to be seen
in the Temple or kingdom of glory, because through his mediation only (in whom
the covenant of peace is established with his church) the 24 Elders are made
partakers of their Crowns, and enter in with him, and his Angels into the
everlasting Temple made without hands, and eternal in the heavens. But on the
contrary here is said, that there were lightnings, thundrings, etc. That is,
most horrible vegeance and wrath poured down upon al reprobates in hel-fire
for evermore. For when it shall be said to all the faithful: Come ye blessed,
etc. then also shall it be said to al unbelievers: Go ye cursed into hell fire,
etc.

Now for warrant of this exposition of the last verse, that the Temple in
heaven is to be understood of the kingdom of glory, look Chap. 15. ver.
5.6.8. Chap. Apoc. 15.5.6.8 Apoc. 16.1.
16. ver. 1. The reason hereof is, that as the doors of the Temple of
Jerusalem being set open, Gods people entered in and worshipped: so the
everlasting gates of the new Jerusalem, and celestial Temple being set open by
Christ all the elect do enter in, and worship God without weariness, even as
the Angels for evermore.

2. Sam. 6.2 Psalm. 78.61
That the arc of the covenant is taken for Christ, see 2. Sam. 6.2. Psalm. 78.
ver. 61.62. This arc of the covenant, that is, Christ, is here seen in the
Temple, because Christ has already taken possession of heaven as mediator and
head of the Church, and now does set open the kingdom of heaven to al
believers, that through him they may have free access thereunto, as it is
written, Ephesians. 2.18
that thorough him only we have an entrance unto the Father.

That by thundrings, lightnings, earthquake, hail, is meant that horrible
vengeance and wrath, which is powered forth upon all the ungodly, Psalm. 11 verse.
6.
see Psalm. 11. verse 6. Let this briefly suffice to satisfy the conscience of
the reader. And thus much concerning the second vision contained in these eight
chapters going before, wherein we have heard al things expounded that do
belong unto the opening of the seven seals, and the blowing of the seven
trumpets, that is, al notable things which were to fall out from the Apostles
times, unto the end of the world.

CHAP. XII.
NOw having finished the second vision, we are come unto the third, contained
in all the chapters following, even unto the end of this book. Wherein diverse
things, which were obscurely and darkely set down in the former vision, are
more plainly and fully opened and expounded: So that this third vision is as it
were a commentary or more clear exposition of sundry things contained in the
second vision.

The principal drift of this 12 Chapter, is to set forth the nature of the true
visible, and militant Church here in earth, whose head is Christ Jesus. And
also the false malignant church, whose head is the devil, together with the
continual enmity and war, which is always betwixt them.

This Chapter may very fitly be divided into five parts.

The first is a description of the true Church.

The second is a description of the devil the Churches enemy.

The third contains the Churches battle with the devil, and her victory.

The fourth shows the joy and triumphs of the godly, in the churches victory
over Satan.

The fifth and last shows the fury, Satan, who, although he was foiled in
battle by the Church, yet would not give over, but continued persecuting the
church in her members, and making war against the remnant of her seed.

Text.
And there appeared a great wonder in heaven: A woman clothed with the sun,
and the moon was under her feet, and upon her head a crown of 12 stars.

First the Holy Ghost calls the matters of this chapter a great wonder, to
stir us up to attention. For men are much moved with wonders; and a wonder
indeed it is in the literal sense to see a woman clothed with the sun, etc.
but a far greater wonder in the spiritual sense, as we shall hear; and the
greatest wonder of al, that a poor weak woman should encounter with a great
red dragon, and overcome him.

It is said to be a wonder in heaven, because the church here in vision
appears not upon the earth, but in heaven, in as much as her birth is from
heaven, her inheritance in heaven, and her conversation in heaven.

The Church is here compared to a woman, as in the 45 Psalm, and the whole
book of the Canticles, and that for three reasons.

First, as a woman is weak and feeble, and in law can do nothing of herself
without her husband: so we of our selves are weak and feeble, and in matters
of Gods law and worship can do nothing without our husband Christ, as he
says: without me ye can do nothing. John. 15


Secondly, as a woman thorough the company of her husband is fruitful, and
brings forth children: so the Church by her conjunction with Christ, and his
word, does bring forth many children unto God.

Thirdly, as the love and affection of a woman is to her husband, as Genesis 2.16.
so the love and affection of the Church is altogether to Christ, and Christ to
her.

This woman is clothed with the Sun: that is, Mal. 4.2.
the Church is clothed with Christ the Sun of righteousness, as the Prophet
speaks.

The Moon was under her feet. Whereby is meant, that the church treads
under her feet al worldly things, which are compared to the moon for their
often changes, waxings, wanings, increasings decresings, and continual
mutations, and uncertainties.

The church treads al transitory things under her feet: that is, she makes
light account of them; she regards them not in comparison of heavenly things.
For he that is clothed with the sun, cares little for the light of the moon.

She has upon her head a crown of 12 stars: which signifies that the
church is adorned, and beautified with the doctrine of the twelve Apostles,
that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, as it were with a crown of gold, of
pearl, and precious stones. For the doctrine of the Gospel is the crown of
the church.

And she was with child, and cried travailing in birth, and was pained ready
to be delivered.

The church is said to be with child after she has conceived the immortal
seed of the word, by the ministry of the Gospel, as the Apostle says. In
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. 1. Cor. 4.15.
And to the Galatians: O ye little children of whom I travail in birth again,
till Christ be formed in you.

Galat. 4.19
It is not only said that this woman was with child, but also, that she was
very near her time ready to bring forth, and to be delivered, and that she
cries in travail. Now the child which she brings forth, is Christ Jesus, as
appears verse 5. for there it is said of him, that he should rule all nations
with a rod of iron.

Now although Christ was borne but of one member of the church, which is the
Virgin Marie: yet may it be said that the whole church, which was before his
coming, did even travail with pain to bring him forth, because they had
through faith in the promises a longing, and fervent desire and expectation of
his coming. For from the first promise made to Adam, and afterward renewed to
Abraham and his posterity; the church stood in a continual expectation of the
promised Messiah, looking wishely every day when he should be actually
exhibited to the world. For which cause here she is said to cry travailing in
birth. And not vnsauerly also may ye church be said to cry travailing in birth,
when through many persecutions, and afflictions she brings forth children
unto God by the ministry of the word. For the church brings forth no
children at ease, but with hard travail, and much ado, having so few friends
to help her, and so many enemies against her, as anon we shall hear.

And there appeared another wonder in heaven. For behold a great red dragon,
having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.

And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to
the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be
delivered.

Now we are come to the description of the Churches great and capital enemy,
which is the devil: who because he studieth and labors continually to
impeach the good estate of the Church in heavenly things, to deiect her from
her dignity, and dispossess her of her inheritance, therefore here in vision
he is said to appear in heaven. For he medleth with the Church, in and about
heavenly things, practicing to pull her out of heaven, from whence she came,
and whither she must return, even to cast her into hell, and condemnation with
himself, if it were possible.

The devil is compared to a dragon for his fury and felnesse; to a great
dragon for his power and might; and a red dragon, for his bloody cruelty,
malice, and madness against Christ, and all his mmbers.

His seven heads signify his manifold sleights, and subtilties, wherein he is
a crafts-maister.

His ten horns signify his dreadful power. For who knows not that he is
stronger then any other creature, having not lost his strength by his fall,
but remains as strong as an Angel of light.

His seven crowns upon his heads, do signify his manifold victories over the
world. For he has from time to time, and from age to age, got so many
conquests of the world, through his sleights and power, that now he is the god
of the world, as the Apostle says, and reigns as king over them.

This dragon has a monstrous tail both for length and strength. For it is so
long, that it reaches up to heaven, and so strong that it brusheth down the
stars from thence. That is, the devil through ambition and covetousness, and
other fleshly lusts, does pull down many Ministers, which shined in doctrine
and life, as the stars of heaven, even unto the earth, where they have lost
their brightness and glory, and shine as much as the Moon in a mist.

the dragon stood before the woman in travail, to devour her child as soon
as it was borne. Wherein we are to observe the malice and fury of Satan, in
that he watches so narrowly to devour the blessed seed, even the Savior of
the world, so soon as he was borne. And for this cause he stirred up Herod the
king, Matthew. 2.
subtly to seek him out by the wise men, that he might kill him: and
afterward most cruelly practiced the same, by murdering so many innocents.
But this is always a general truth, that Satan seeks to smother not only
Christ, but every member of his in the cradle; yea to blast them in the bud,
before ever they come to fruit or flower.

So she brought forth a man child, which should rule all nations with a rod of
iron, and that her child was taken up unto God, and his throne.

Notwithstanding the malice and watchfulness of Satan, yet the Church
brings forth Christ, which should rule and overrule all nations with a rod
of iron: that is, the scepter of his word, as it is in the second Psalm, Isa
11.4.
and with the rod of his mouth, as the Prophet speaks.

Moreover it is said, that this child was taken up unto God and his throne.
That is, Christ by his resurrection did take possession of his chair of
estate, in despite of Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Priests, the Pharisees, and
all other his enemies, which sought to keep him down: and now he being
ascended into heaven, does draw all his members unto him, in despite of the
devil and all his imps.

And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore
days.

Now after the woman's child was set in safety, here is showed what became of
the woman her self: To wit, that she was so sore pursued by the Scribes and
Pharisees, and by the Priests and Elders, that she was feign to fly into the
wilderness. The natural sense and plain meaning of this place is, that when
the church began to grow, after Christ's ascensio^, and the number of the
Disciples to increase exceedingly, as we read in the 2. of the Acts; Satan
did so greatly malign it, and began to be in such a rage, that he would have
eaten them up all at a bit, and rooted them out at once, that so the woman
might have no more being in the earth. And therefore we read, Act. 8. that
after the stoning of Steven, there was such a persecution raised up against the
Church by the high Priests, the Princes of the Jews, the Pharisees, and all
that cursed crew, that all the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were scattered,
and dispersed here and there in the Heathen countries, and among the heathen
people, which here are called the wilderness, that is to say, a ground
untilled, desolate, and barren of all fruits of godliness.

But now may some man say, how shall the Church do in the wilderness? how shall
she live? how shall she be sustained? There is no tilling, no sowing, no
planting, there grows no corn, there is nothing to be had either for food or
raiment. Here it is answered, that God prepared a place for her, where she
should be fed. God took up an Inn for her. She wanted neither food nor
raiment in her persecutions and troubles. Which teaches that God does always
provide for his own, even in greatest miseries, scarsities, famines,
banishments, and persecutions. As sometimes he did for Elias in the time of
dearth, 1. King. 17. Numb. 11. Numb. 14.
and for the children of Israel in the wilderness.

The time, wherein the Church was fed in the wilderness, was a thousand two
hundred and threescore days: that is, during the time of her persecutions, as
before has been showed,

And there was a battle in heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought.

But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven.

Now we are come to the third part of this chapter, which is the battle
betwixt Christ and the devil. For whereas the dragon could not smother Christ
in the cradle, as he endeavored, and so deprive the Church of all her
happiness for ever: now he proclaims open war, both against Christ, and
all his members, plotting and purposing to oppugn the very salvation of the
church, though it be founded in Christ. Wherein he shows both his impudency
and furious madness.

Dan. 10.13. Iud. 9.
Michael here signifies Christ, as Dan. 10.13. Jude v. 9. This name is given
to Christ in Daniel, because he is the first of the chief Princes: that is, he
is the head of the Angels, Col. 1.16.
who are chief Princes, as the Apostle affirms.

That Christ has his Angels joined with him, is not to note any weakness or
want of strength in Christ, alone to overcome his enemies, but to show, that as
Christ does effect great wonders in the world; so for the most part he does it
by instruments, and means: as sometimes Angels, sometimes men. But here he
specially means the Apostles and their successors, yea and at this day all
christian kings, princes and potentates of the earth; and all others, which
take part with Christ against the devil, and his instruments.

Well, here we see that these two Generals, and grand captains Michael and
the Dragon, do muster both their armies, join battle, and fight a pitched
field, the event and success whereof is this, that the Dragon and his Angels
go down. Oh blessed success, may we say! For if the devil had prevailed, it
had been woe to us; since this battle was about, and concerning the very
salvation of mankind by christ's death and resurrection. We know how the devil
set upon Christ alone to tempt him unto sin, that so he might overthrow the
work of our redemption, supposing in this combat or Monomachie to have got
the day: but he prevailed not. Afterward how strongly did he oppugn him by his
Angels? I mean the Scribes and Pharise^^* the high Priests and Elders of the
people, yea all the devils in hell, and his whole infernal army, not only in
murdering and crucifying his natural body, but also in using all forcible and
cunning means to keep him down, that he might never rise up again; as the
great stone upon his tomb, the sealing of it, the watch set to keep it. for
the devil knew right well, that if Christ rose again, he should lose the field.
For the resurrection of Christ is our actual justification, Romans 4.25. Romans
1.3.
And Christ was mightily declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection
from the dead. Well, do the dragon and his Angels what they can, yet Christ is
risen again, and has spoiled principalities and powers; yea all the infernal
army, and has made a show of them openly, and has led them all in triumph
upon his cross: So that we see in this first and greatest battle, the devil
has the foil. And it is further said, that the devil and all his Angels were
cast out of heaven, and their place was no more found: which is not to be
understood of their first casting out of heaven, immediately after their
creation. For at that time they were no devils, nor enemies to the church, but
Angels of light: but now since their fall, and since they were devils; they
are said to be cast out of heaven, not because they ever came in heaven since
they were devils, but because they can no longer impeach the church touching
her blessed estate in heaven. They are without all hope to dispossess her of
her inheritance: for that is ratified, and made sure unto her in the death and
resurrection of Christ. And for this cause it is said, that the devil has no
more to do in heaven: that is, he cannot for his heart overthrow the salvation
of Gods children. For who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is
God that justifies, Romans 8.33.
who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen
again, etc. True it is indeed that this battle is said to be in heaven, that
is, about heavenly things, yea about the highest points of heaven, which is
salvation or damnation: for the devil upon this very point, and these very
terms, has from the beginning mightily wrestled and strugled with ye church,
and does even until this day: but blessed be God, that he cannot, nor shall not
prevail against any one of gods elect. For our lord Jesus says, I give unto
the^ eternal life, and they shall never perish, Ioh. 10.28.
neither shall any take them out of my hand: my father which gave the^ me is
greater then all. Neither shall any pluck the^ out of my hand. And again. Ioh.
6.37. Ioh. 6.40.
All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me. And this is the fathers will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day.

Now further we are to observe, that as Christ in his own person has once
prevailed in the maine battle against the devil: so his church militant shall
likewise always prevail through him. For it is written, Matt. 16.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

And the great Dragon, that old serpent, called the devil and Satan, was cast
out, which deceives all the world: He was even cast into the earth, and his
Angels were cast out with him.

Now because the devil cannot overthrow the salvation of Gods elect, he is
said to be cast out of heaven into the earth: that is, amongst earthly and
carnal men, that he may exercise his tyranny, and wrecke his malice upon them.
For he has power given him to tyrannise over them at his pleasure, Ephesians. 2.2.
2. Tim. 2.21.
and the Apostle says, he works in the children of disobedience, and takes
them captive to do his will.

Then I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying: now is salvation, and strength,
and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night.

Here is the triumphant song of victory, which all the Saints and Angels do
sing unto God, praising and magnifying his power, and the power of his Son
Christ, for ouercomming the dragon, and giving the victory to the church
through Christ. For now with great joy and loud voices they sing and say, that
the churches salvation is sealed, and made sure unto her for ever. It can never
be shaken. The devil is foiled and cast down into the earth.

These songs of joy after great victories, are of great antiquity in the
church: as we read of the children of Israel, Exodus 15 Judge. 5. 1. Sam. 18
after the overthrow of Pharaoh and his army in the red sea: of Deborah, after
the great victory over Sisara: of the women, that sung after the victory of
Goliath by David.

The devil is called the accuser of the brethren for two causes. First because
he accuses Gods elect of much sin, and calls for justice against them day
and night at Gods hands, that they might be condemned upon such articles, as he
is able to prove against them: for he knowing right well that the judge of all the world is a just God, and must needs deal uprightly, does daily urge him to
do justice unto sinners, being willingly ignorant that al Gods People, though
sinners, are cleared and discharged in Christ.

Another reason is, because of the calumniations, reproaches and slanders,
which in all ages, at al times, and in all places and countries, he has always
unjustly raised up against the true worshippers of God.

But they over came him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.

Here is showed that the churches victory over Satan and hell, is not thorough
any power or might of her own, but by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of
their testimony, that is, the word of God, which they witness, profess,
love, and stick unto even unto death.

Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabitants
of the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you, which has
great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.

Here again the saints, and Angels, and all the blessed company of heaven, are
called upon, and exhorted to rejoice, because the devil and his Angels are cast
out, and the elect have the victory over him thorough the blood of the Lamb,
and because the salvation of the church is sealed up, and God only reigns
through Christ. Which al are matters of so great moment, that not only the
church militant is stirred up to rejoice herein, but even the church triumphant
also, that is, the spirits of just, and perfect men. But on the contrary, here
is fearful woe denounced against the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea:
that is, all Papists, Atheists, worldlings, and reprobates. For since he cannot
have his will of the church, yet he will have his will and wite his malice upon
them, by hardening their hearts, and blinding their eyes, and making them his
slaves and vassals, to fight for his kingdom against Christ, against his
church, against all goodness, and all good men. The reason is added, why the
devil is in such a rage with the world, and comes upon them in so great wrath
and fury, to wit, because he has but a short time: that is, because his
kingdom draws toward an end, therefore he does so bestir him.

And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which had brought forth the man child.

Now the devil seeing himself cast out of heaven, so as he cannot impeach the
salvation of the church, he raises up horrible persecutions against her by his
instruments here in ye earth, laboring to root her out if it were possible:
for being overcome of the head, he does now with might and maine, set upon the
body; and what horrible storms and tempests he has in all ages, specially in
these last days raised up, and daily does raise up against the church, both
the scriptures and al church stories do abundantly declare.

But to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the presence of the serpent.

These two wings do signify all the ways and means of evasion, which God gave
unto his church, when he delivered her from the hands of her pursuers and
persecutors: and also her swift flight from them, and al their malicious
practices. For although the church cannot absolutely fly from the presence of
the devil, with her Eagles wings, being so unspeakably swift as he is: yet
after a sort she is said to fly from him, and his presence, when the power of
the tyrants and persecutors which he raises up, cannot overtake her to murder,
and kill her. But as touching her flight into the wilderness, and her lodging
and nourishment there, by Gods providence, in the midst of al penury and
extremity, we have sufficiently heard before ver 6. and therefore here I
surcease to speak any further of it. As concerning the space and continuance
of her nourishment in the wilderness, which is here set down to be a time,
and times, and half a time, it is the same that the thousand two hundred and
threescore days, mentioned in the sixth verse; and the 42 months, mentioned
Chap. 11. verse 2. and the three days and a half, mentioned Chap. 11. ver. 9.
as before has bin showed.

And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

Now the church being secretly hid and nourished by Gods providence in the
wilderness, so as the devil and his instruments cannot find her out, nor come
at her, he takes another course, and casts about another way to annoy her;
and that is by casting a flood of water after her to drown her withal. Whereby
is meant, the innumerable lies, reproaches, and slanders, which he raised up by
sundry heretics against her in all ages; as the Arrians, Donatists, Papists,
and such like, and al to bring her into the hatred of Princes; Potentates, and
all that were in love with her; that since otherwise he could not prevail
against her, yet at least he might utterly sink her in this gulf of reproaches.

But the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
up the flood, which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth.

The same God which first delivered the church from the violence and fury of
Satan, and afterward cast him out of heaven, and gave her the victory over
him; and after that again miraculously hid her and preserved her in the
wilderness, does not now at a dead lift forsake her, nor suffer her to be
drowned in this flood of reproaches, and unjust calumniations, which the dragon
cast up after her. But causes the earth to help her, and to swallow up the
flood: That is, he uses al creatures in the earth to help his church: and not
only so, but also he stirs up many earthly and carnal men to befrend the
church, and to take part with her against her enemies. As sometimes he did
Cyrus, Ebedmelech, Nebuzaradan, Gamaliel, and sundry others, whose power and
policy he used for the good of his church, and for the drying up of that flood
of reproaches, which Satan has in all ages cast up against her. And God be
thanked, we see at this day that this flood of slanders and calumnies, which
papists and atheists cast out against the church, and her particular members,
do dry up daily, and shall dry up more and more, being drunk in by the earth.
And the church does still stand immovable, and shall stand and continue even
unto the end of the world.

Then the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.

Here we see there is no end of the devils malice. He is infatigable in
mischief: though he have never so many foiles, yet he will not give over, but
begin again. For whereas he could not prevail against the woman, to cast her
out of heaven, by impeaching her election and salvation in Christ, nor yet root
her out the earth by persecutions, being hid in the wilderness, and locked up in
the privy chambers of Gods providence, as sometimes young Ioash was locked up in
the priests chamber from the fury of Athaliah: King. 11.2
now he goes another way to work, and sets upon her in her seed and
posterity, which remain in the earth unto this day. So that now since he cannot
do what mischief he would against the church; yet will he do what he can:
seeing he cannot wound her in her head, yet will he bite, and pinch at her
heel: as it is written, that he should bruise her heel. Genesis 3.15.
And as is the malice of Satan against the church; so is the rage and fury of
al his members, even all the wicked and ungodly, against the true worshippers of
God. They are restles in malice and in mischief: if they cannot vex them one
way, they will try another: if they cannot touch them in their lives, yet will
they molest them in their goods and good name: if they cannot do what they
would, yet will they do what they can: they will never give over: if they can
spite them in the least thing that is, they shall be sure of it. For they are as
full of venime as a toad, and as full of malice to Christ, as an eg is full of
meat.

And I stood on the sea sand.

Now John affirms that he stood upon the sea sand, to behold the beast which
rises out of the sea in the next Chapter; or else because the greek word may
be of the third person, which is, he stood, that is, (...).
the dragon stood, it may bear this sense, that the devil stood upon the sea
sand, as it were working and framing out of the sea his chief^ instrument,
which is the beast now following to be spoken of.

CHAP. XIII.
We have heard in the former chapter the description of the church, and of her
archenemie the devil, and of the battle betwixt them, with the success
thereof. Now in this chapter we are to hear of the dragons two great
instruments, whereby he fights against the woman: that is, the Roman empire,
and the Papacy. For by these two, as it were his two hands, he has in all
ages, from the Apostles time to this day, most cruelly assailed, and afflicted
the church. Therefore the maine drift of this chapter is, to describe at large
these two beasts, together with all their beastly proceedings. So that this
chapter may fitly be divided into two principal parts.

The first is a description of the Roman monarchy, when it was at the highest
pitch, until the 11. verse.

The second, is a description of the Papacy, when it was in his pride, and
exaltation; in all the verses following unto the end of this chapter.

In the first of these two maine branches, the Roman Empire is diversely
described.

First, of the petigree thereof.

Secondly, of her seven several governments.



Fourthly, of her victories.

Fifthly, of her blasphemies.



After this is set down the wound, which was made in the Empire, with the
curing of the same.

a great part of the world, and had many nations subject unto it, especially,
when the Popes were the heads thereof.

In the second maine part is the Papacy very lively described.

First, from the petigree thereof, which is of the earth.

Secondly, from the civil and Ecclesiastical power thereof, which is pretended
to come from Christ, although in truth it is of the devil.

After this is set down that the Papacy should be as mighty,

Then is showed, that as the Papacy did in substance of matter set up and
restore again the old Roman tyranny, to be worshipped, and wondered at;

Last of all,

Text.
And I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads, and ten horns,
and upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of
blasphemy.

First, we are to understand that a beast in the Scripture does signify a
kingdom, or monarchy; and that not in respect of the civil power thereof,
which is of God, Romans 13.
as it is written, There is no power but of God: but in respect of the
tyranny, cruelty, ambition, pride, and other such like beastly qualities
thereof, which are of the devil: and therefore this beast is said to ascend
out of the bottomless pit, chap. 17.8.

This word beast is thus taken in the seventh of Daniel, Dan. 7.4.5.6.
where the three great Monarchies of the Babylonians, Medes and Persians, and
of the Grecians, are compared for their pride, rapine and cruelty, to a Lion, a
Bear, and a Leopard. The Angel in that chapter says expressly, Dan. 7.17.
that these beasts were kings, that is, kingly governments or Dominions.

By the beast in this place is meant the Roman Monarchy, not in regard of the
civil power thereof, but especially in respect of the tyranny of it, in
oppressing the Church.

By the sea here is meant the troublesome state of the nations: as it is taken
chap. 4. verse. 6. and chap. 21. verse. 1. For from the boiling, and broyling
estate of the former kingdoms and heathen nations, which were as a raging sea,
did the Roman Empire spring up, as all stories do witness. And the Prophet
Daniel does flatly teach that through the division of the Greek Empire, Dan.
10.
which fell out in the posterity of Alexander the Great, Dan. 11.
especially betwixt his two sons Ptolemeus and Seleucus, this Roman
monarchy by degrees made a head, till at last it came to this pitch, which now
we shall hear of.

By the seven heads of this beast, are meant the seven several governments of
the Roman Empire. First, by Kings. Secondly, by Consuls. Thirdly, by Decemuiri.
Fourthly, by Dictators. Fifthly, by Triumuiri.

By the ten horns of this beast, is meant the great power and large dominion
of the Roman Empire, or as the Angel himself does expound it,

Now then we see that the Roman Emperors both in homes and heads, were like
their Father the devil or the dragon.

By the ten crowns upon his ten horns, are meant his great and manifold
victories over other countries and kingdoms.

The horns of this beast are said to be crowned, and not his heads, because
the Roman Empire has always more prevailed by power then by policy, by
strength then by subtilty. But the Dragon has his heads crowned, and not his
homes, because he has always done more hurt by policy, then power; by
subtlety, then strength. One thing in all this is greatly to be heeded, that
the holy Ghost in this chapter does specially speak of the Roman monarchy, as
the Popes were heads thereof; or as it was under the dominion of the Popes in
their pride, when as the Emperors were almost trodden under foot: and not
simply and soly, as the Emperors were heads thereof.

Moreover it is said, that upon the seven heads of this beast was written the
name of blasphemy. For besides the blasphemies of Caligula, Nero, Domitian,
Dioclesian, Iulianus, and the other old heathenish, and persecuting Emperors,
which have arrogated unto themselves divine honor, we shall anon hear of the
surpassing blasphemies of the Popes against God,

And the Beast which I saw was like a Leopard, and his feet like a Bears, and
his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his power, and his
throne, and great authority.

Here the Roman Empire is described of the likelihood of qualities, which it
had with the other three Empires going before it. For first, it is compared to
a Leopard, for swiftness to pray upon others; and also for fircenesse, and
subtlety, as did the Greek monarchy. Secondly, it is compared to a Bear for
rapine and ravening, as the monarchy of the Medes and Persians. Thirdly, it is
compared to a Lion for pride and insolency, as the monarchy of the
Chaldaeans. So then by this description it is very clear, that this beast
signifies the Roman monarchy, because it contains in it the whole power of
the other three Empires: and is here described as a compound of diverse beasts,
yea as a very monster of monsters, having the body of a Leopard, the feet of
a Bear, and the mouth of a Lion.

Moreover it is said, that the Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and
great authority. Which plainly shows, that the power and authority of the
Roman Empire is of the devil, in respect of the evil quality thereof, that
is, fraud, rapine, For the powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.2.
as says the Apostle.

And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded unto death: but his deadly
wound was healed, and all the world wondered, and followed the beast.

Here John in a vision sees one of the seven heads of the beast, almost
wounded unto death. There be diverse and differing opinions of the learned
touching this wound of the Empire, both when it should be, and how, and by
whom. Some understand it of the death of Julius Caesar: some of Nero: some of
the oppression of the Goths and Vandales: some of the great prevailing of John
Husse, and Jerome of Prage in the greatest part of Bohemia. But to let all
these pass, if we do wisely consider and weigh with our selves, that by a
beast in this place, is not meant any lawful administration of government:
but a tyrannical power in persecuting the Church, we shall find that a head
of the beast was then wounded, when Constantine the Great slew Maxentius and
Licinius, the two last persecuting Emperors, set up true religion, and brought
peace to the Churches. For hereby the Roman Empire was greatly wounded, as
touching the tyranny of it. The holy Ghost does not set down which of the
seven heads were thus wounded, but in general says, one of them. Now it is
very probable, that he means the sixth head: For we do not read of any
such wound in the former five which were past. Neither can it be understood of
the seventh head, which was the Papacy, because it received no such wound as
yet. It follows then, that the wound was in the sixth head, that is, in the
Empire. But we read of no Emperor that did so wound the beast, as did
Constantine the Great. And therefore it is very probable, nay, an hundred to
one, that the holy Ghost here points at him.

But it follows, that his deadly wound was healed, to wit, by these wicked
Emperors which succeeded Constantine, as Constantius, Iulianus, Valentius, and
others, which afresh did set up Idolatry, and persecuted the Church. Now
upon the healing of this wound, it is said, that all the world wondered, and
followed the beast: that is, many nations, or the greatest part of the world
did submit themselves to the Roman tyranny. For sure it is, some kingdoms
were never subject to the Empire of Rome, as some part of Asia, and some part
of Africa.

And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying: Who is like unto the beast, who is able to war
with him!

Now is showed how all the subjects of the Roman Empire, did worship the
Dragon: that is, they maintained that worship, which he liked and loved, that
is, the worship of idols, which the Apostle calls the worship of devils. And
it is said also, 1. Cor. 10.20.21.
they worshipped the beast: that is, they did all with one accord submit
themselves both to the religion, and authority of the beast: that is, to the
Popes, as they were the seventh head of the Empire. For, as I said before, so I
say again, the holy Ghost here speaks of the Empire, when it was in the
greatest glory and exaltation; yea when all the world wondered and followed
the beast; yea, when all admired the great and large dominion of the Roman
empire; and said within themselves, who is like unto the beast? who is able to
war with him? Now, the Empire of Rome was never so great and powerful, as
when the Popes were heads thereof, I mean when they executed the whole civil
jurisdiction of the empire, besides their Ecclesiastical power, which now did
both meet in one. For now the Papacy was aloft, and the Roman Empire joined
with it: so that the eyes of the world were dazeled with the pomp and
magnificence thereof, and they said, What is like unto it? or who is comparable
to the Pope, the seventh head thereof? For then the blind world thought that
the power of the Popes, was not only above all things in this world, but also
did reach even unto heaven and hell. For they imagined that the Pope might
carry to heaven whom he would; and whom he would, he might cast down to hell:
and therefore who could war with the beast? And thus we see the reason of
their wonderment, and of their speech. All stories and experience it self do
show, that there was never any power in the world so wondered at, as the
usurped power and majesty of the Pope, after he came to be the head of the
Roman monarchy. For then the world supposed that he had power, even as God:
and that he might depose, and set up kings and Emperors at his pleasure. Then
it is clear, that under the dominion of the Popes, Rome has been in her
highest exaltation and glory. For the Papacy was the seventh head of the
beast, whereby the whore of Babylon was supported in her most magnificall
pomp and pride.

42. months.



Here are set down the proud and blasphemous speeches both of the old, and new
Roman Empire; and of the old, and new Roman Emperors. For this beast (as I
said before) comprehends all the Roman Empire, both under the Heathen
Emperors, and the Popes. Touching the great things, and blasphemies, which the
old persecuting Emperors have belched out against the God of heaven, it would
require a volume to set them down in particulars. I will therefore only mention
two or three for exampels sake: As first that of Caius Caligula, which would
have his image set up in temples to be worshipped as God, and that the people
should swear by his name. Nero also did openly blaspheme the name of Christ,
and required divine honor to be given unto him. Domitian commanded that he
should be called God and Lord. Many others required the like things: and so all the world woondred and worshipped this blasphemous beast. Now as the sixth head,
which was the old empire of Rome, was full of the names of blasphemy; so the
seventh head, which is the new Empire under the dominion of the Popes, which he
here chiefly speaks of, did most of al blaspheme. For the Pope did challenge
unto himself al power both in heaven and earth: he would be worshipped as God:
he usurped authority over the word of God: he did take upon him to forgive
sins. He did most blasphemously incroach upon all the offices of Christ, as
king, priest, and prophet. He has commanded the Angels. He has erected
blasphemous images, and caused pictures to be made of the Godhead. He boasts
and craketh great things of his Papal power, of Peter's keys, of Peter's chair,
of Peter's succession, of his miracles, of his two swords, and of his manifold
praerogatiues roial. One of the Popes poisoned his God: another cast his God
into the fire: another would eat his peacocke in despite of God. Some of the^
counted the religion of Christ a tale or a fable: some drank to the devil: some
said, they could do as much as God. It were infinite to set down al their
blasphemies: for it is said of the whore of Babylon, that she was full of the
names of blasphemy. Let this suffice for the understanding of this text, that
as the old heathenish Emperors did blaspheme, so the Popes being heads of
the Empire, did most of al blaspheme. And as it is here said, they did not only
blaspheme the name of God, but also did open their black and blasphemous
mouths against his tabernacle, that is, his church, calling it a company of
heretics, schismatickes, apostataes and such like; and also against them that
dwell in heaven, that is, the spirits of just and perfect men, which are in
heaven, as Luther, Calvin, Melancthon and such like.

Moreover it is to be noted, that this mouth was given unto this monstrous
beast, thus to blaspheme and speak great things. But this is to be understood,
that it was given in the wrath and just judgment of God upon the world, to
plague them withal, because they regarded not the knowledge of the truth. But it
is added, that this power of the beast thus to work his actions, was limited
unto 42. months; so that although he rule and rage for a time, yet shall he
not long continue.

And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to over come them;
and power was given unto him over every kindred, and tongue and nation.

Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life of the Lamb, which was slain from the
beginning of the world.

These two verses do set forth the great power which was given unto this beast,
both in fighting against Gods people, and also ouercomming of them, and
murdering of them by heaps. As we read of thousands murdered in the first ten
great persecutions, and ten thousands by the Popes, since they came to exercise
the civil authority and jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, and that in all
countries and kingdoms of Europe; as it is here said, that power was given
unto him over every kindred* and tongue and nation. And it is added, that all
that dwell upon the earth, that is, all the subjects of the Roman monarchy, shall
worship the beast, and make a God of him; as we read they have don. And the
chief motive thereof, was his blasphemous mouth, boasting and threatening great
things if any did withstand him: and also his mighty power and authority,
whereby he bare down al before him. For if any did but mute against him, he
was sure to smart for it. And thus through his tyrannical power he subdued al
nations under him, and made them stoop and fall down and worship him. But it
follows, that for all this, none of Gods elect did worship him, or submit
themselves to his religion, and authority, but only those that dwell upon the
earth, that is, earthly men: as papists, atheists, and reprobates, and al such,
whose names are not written in the book of life.

Christ is called the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, because the
saving power of his death was from the beginning to all believers, although he
was not actually exhibited until the fullness of time.

If any man have an ear, let him hear.

If any lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity: if any kill with a
sword, he must be killed by a sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the
Saints.

Here is showed, that the things spoken of this great beast, are very secret
and mystical, and can be understood of none but those only, whose ears and
eyes God opens to hear, and see, and understand, that is, the very elect of
God: as for all papists and worldlings, their ears and eyes are sealed and shut
up, they cannot understand them, but do still worship the beast, ascribing unto
him divine power and honor.

In the 10. verse the judgment and vengeance of God is denounced against the
Roman monarchy, both former and latter; which, as it has long oppressed the
church with cruel bondage, and drawn thousands into perpetual captivity; so it
self also should be cast down, with all the adherents thereof, both in this
life and that which is to come. For as the Roman Empire did tyrannise over the
world, and led millions into spiritual captivity and bondage: so here it is
avouched, that according to the just law of quittance, it self should be
brought to the same lore. And as this beast had murdered many by the sword; so
he him self must be murdered by the sword also: As the Apostle says, 2. These.
1.6
God is just, and therefore will recompense tribulation to them that trouble
his Church. Now all this seems unto me, to be a clear prophecy of the fall and
final destruction of the Roman Empire, which indeed considering the pitch
that it was at, may seem a thing strange and incredible: and therefore the
Holy Ghost stirs us up to attention in the ninth verse, as to a thing of
great woonderment, and admiration: for if the Roman monarchy fall, the Papacy
must of necessity fall with it. For the Roman Empire is that beast, where we
shall (God willing) plainly, and at large hear of the joint destruction of
them both together.

It is added: Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. That is, here is
required great patience of al Gods children, to wait, and carry til the
performance and accomplishment of those things; and also faith and full
assurance to believe, that they shall in Gods appointed time come to pass. For
few do believe these things, and therefore wait not with patience for the
accomplishment thereof.

And I beheld another beast coming out of the earth, which had two horns like
the Lamb, but he spoke like the dragon.

Having described the first beast which is the Roman Empire: now the Holy Ghost
comes to describe the second beast, which is the Papacy, or the kingdom of
the great Antichrist: for although he be described before in regard of his
monarchy, that is, the civil jurisdiction, which he exercised as he was the
seventh head of the beast, and head of the Empire; yet here he is described
after another sort, that is, according to his ecclesiastical authority: and
therefore he is called another beast, or a beast differing from the former, in
that he exercises an other power, besides the power of the heathen Emperors
of Rome, which is his spiritual jurisdiction, Chap. 16 Ver. 13. Chap. 19. Ver.
20.
in which respect he is called the false prophet.

This second beast rises out of the earth, as the former rose out of the sea:
then it appears that Antichrist is, by his breed, a son of the earth;
obscurely borne, and by little and little creeping up out of his abject estate;
as did the Turk. It is here most truly said, that the kingdom of Antichrist
arises out of the earth, and is the very breed of the earth: for assuredly it
never came from heaven. It was first hatched out of couetuousnesse, ambition,
pride, murders, treasons, poisonings, sorceries, enchantments, and such like.
For all stories do show, that from these roots the Papacy grew to his exceeding
height and altitude.

This second beast has two horns, like the Lamb: Whereby is meant his civil
and ecclesiastical power, or his kingdom, and Priesthood; which he falsely
pretends to come from the Lamb: and therefore he gives in his arms two
keys, and has two swords carried before him. So Boniface the eight showed
himself one day in apparel as a Pope, and the next day in armor as the
Emperor; and the two horns in the Popes miter are signs hereof. But the
Holy Ghost here tells us, that these two horns are not the horns of the
Lamb, but only like the horns of the Lamb: for he received not his power from
the Lamb Christ; but from the devil, that is, the dragon with ten horns. Then
thus it is, the Papacy is the seventh head of the first beast, that is, the
Empire; and yet a beast by it self, with two horns like the Lamb, in respect
of his joint power and authority, both ecclesiastical and civil, in which
respect he is called even the eight: and one of the seven, Chap. 17. ver. 11.

Although this second beast have two horns like the Lamb, yet he spoke like
the dragon, that is, al his words and works, practices and proceedings, laws
and decrees, are for the dragon, of whom he has his power and throne, and
great authority. So that whatsoever he pretends in religion, and matters of
Gods worship, as though he would be like the Lamb; yet assuredly he is
altogether for the dragon and the devil: he is assured unto them, as al
experience does manifestly witness.

And he did all that the first beast could do before him: and he caused the
earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed.

Here is showed, that this second beast was as mighty and strong as the first
beast, and could do as much as he, even in his presence. Whereby is noted the
great power, and authority of the Papacy, in performing as much in the service
of the dragon against God and his church, as ever the Empire of the heathen,
and those wicked Emperors could do: yea he did much more against Christ and
his religion, then ever the persecuting Emperors could do, even then when they
were at their highest pitch. And all this he did in his presence, that is, in
the sight and open view of the whole Empire, or whole world.

And he caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, that is, al Papists, and
worldlings, to worship the first beast, that is, to receive the worship and
religion of the old Roman tyranny, which set up and maintained Idolatry. So
then, although the power in the Papacy came under the name of Christ, yet in
truth it was the same that the power of the persecuting Empire: for the heathen
emperors condemned the true worship of God, and set up false worship, even the
worship of devils, which is Idolatry, and so do the Popes also. So then we see,
that this second beast is al for the first beast, that is, he leuieth al his
power and authority, to set up the worship and religion of the old Roman
tyrants; and to force al men by cruel laws and decrees, to receive and embrace
the same. So this second beast is nothing better the^ the first; nay in truth a
great deal worse.

And he did great woonders, so that he made fire to come down from heaven on
the earth, in the sight of men.

And deceived them that dwell on the earth, by the signs which were permitted
him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth,
that they should make the Image of the beast, which had the wound of a sword,
and did live.

These two verses do contain two special things: The one is, the false and
fained miracles of Antichrist. The other is, the cursed effect thereof.

Touching the first, which is the woonders and miracles which Antichrist should
work, it is here said that he should make fire come down from heaven, as
Elias did. The meaning whereof is not, that the Popes could indeed cause fire
to come down from heaven, as Elias did: but in the opinion of the blind world,
they seemed to have as great power as ever had Elias. For partly by counterfeit
miracles, and partly by some strange things done by the power of Satan, the
seduced world has verily believed, that the Pope and his clergy had as great
power to work miracles, as ever had Elias.

Touching the second thing, which is the effect of these woonders: It is here
said that the inhabitants of the earth, that is, Papists and Worldlings, were
grossly deceived and deluded by them, even by those lying woonders, which
were permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, that is, in the face and
open view of the Empire: According as the Apostle foretold, that the coming
of Antichrist should be by the effectual working of Satan, 2. These. 2.
with all power and signs, and lying woonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish, etc. But concerning the Popish
counterfeit signs and woonders, it is needelesse to write, being so well
known to al men, as they are, and so common and notorious in all stories.

Now Antichrist having gotten the world under him, by his counterfeit miracles,
does lay his commandment upon the^, to make the Image of the beast. Now what
is here meant by the image of the beast, is somewhat hard to discuss: some
think, that by the image of the beast, which had the wound of a sword, and did
live, is meant the repairing, and the restoring of the decayed estate of the
empire, by the Popes, to his full strength and virtue. We do read that the
state of the empire under Nero, Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, was weak and
feeble, in comparison of that which it was before, under Augustus, Tiberius,
and Claudius. We do read also that the Goths and Vandales made horrible
rents and dissipations in the Roman empire. We do further read, that the
empire was divided and rent in pieces; so that there was the emperor of the
East, and the emperor of ye West; yea at last, the empire of the West fell
quite down: so that for the space of three hundred years and more, there was
no Emperor of the West, until the Bishop of Rome Leo the third made Charles
the Great, the king of France, Emperor: Then was the empire of the West again
erected, and in time grew to as great an height under the dominion of the
Popes, as ever before; yea and far greater. Now I say, some do take this
restoring of the decayed estate of the Empire, by the Popes, to his former
strength and power, to be the making of the image of the beast, which had the
wound of a sword, and did live. But for mine own part I cannot be of that
opinion; and my reason is, that the restoring of the decayed estate of the
empire to his former condition, was the setting up of the beast himself: for
the empire is the beast, and not the Image of the beast: for we must needs
grant, that the beast, and the image of the beast, are two several things. But
the Popes in recovering the empire to his pristinate estate, set up the beast
again: and therefore not the image of the beast. Therefore the image of the
beast, cannot be understood of the restoration of the decayed estate of the
empire. Besides this, it is here said, that the inhabitants of the earth had a
great hand in making of this image. But the inahbitants of the earth bare small
sway in the recovering and erectio^ of the empire. (For therein the Popes were
al in all, after it came into their hands) Therefore this cannot be understood of
ye Empire, but of some other thing: let us then diligently search out what may
be the true meaning of this place. It must needs be granted, that by the
beast, which had the wound of a sword, and did live, is meant the recovered
estate of the empire, as before verse. 12. and by the image thereof, I
understand the form of government: for an image does signify a likeness, a
similitude, a figure or form of a thing. And as in all civil and
ecclesiastical regiments, there is both a substance and a form; a matter and
a manner: so here, and that he has renewed the persecuting Empire, not only
in substance of matter, but also in form of government: and therefore I
conclude, that the Popish Church-policie, and external regiment, is the very
Image of the beast.

Here the inhabitants of the earth are said to make the Image of the beast,
because they gave their consent to the making of it: for indeed the Popes
themselves were the chief agents and doers in it.

Here is showed, that this image of the beast was not a dead image, but a
living image: for Antichrist put a spirit into it; that is, life and power, and
great authority; insomuch that this Image could speak; and not only speak,
but speak with great authority and terror: so as whosoever would not worship
this Image, that is, submit himself to the Popish Hierarchy, should be put
to death. But may some man say, How did this image speak? I answer, by the
Popes Clergy. For the Romish rabble of Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, Priests,
Friars, and all that cursed corporation, were the very breath, life, and
spirit of this image: I mean, that the lifebloud of their external regiment,
did lie in the execution thereof by the Clergy, as it were in certain
arteries and veins. For what was their outward form of government, without
this cruel execution of their stinging Clergy men, but as a dead Image
without life? But when Antichrist had once consecrated and erected his Romish
priesthood, then did he put life into his Image, which before he had caused to
be made and erected. Then we do plainly see, that the popish Hierarchy is
not a bare resemblance of the old Roman policy, to stand as a picture on a
wall, but has a spirit put into it by the false Prophet, and speaks with
such power and terror in all kingdoms, that it causes all to be put to
death that will not submit themselves unto it, and fall down and worship the
beast. Who knows not this, that as many in all countries, as would not
embrace popery, and the old Roman tyranny; the Popish Clergy, their
inquisitors, and other Officers, did condemn them in their Courts, as
heretics, schismatikes, and delivered them over, being condemned, to the
secular power to be put to death.

And he made all both small and great,

And that no man might buy or sell,

Antichrist is not content to murder and massacre all in all countries, which
will not worship the Image of the beast; that is, stoop to his government and
authority: but he will go yet a step further, and will have all sorts of
people brought in bondage unto him, as his marked servants. For as men use to
set a brand upon their sheep and other cattle, and to eare-marke them, that
it may openly and manifestly appear to whom they appertain: so does
Antichrist this Romish beast, cause all men in all kingdoms to carry in open
view his mark or brand, whereby all may see that they do appertain unto him.

It is here said, that all the vassals of Antichrist, of what degree, estate,
or condition soever, must receive his mark in their right hand, or in their
forehead: that is, they must openly profess and practice the worship and
religion of the beast. For the forehead is put for the profession; and the
right hand, for the action: so that in one of them at the least, every man must
openly declare, that he acknowledges the Pope of Rome to be Lord of his faith.

Moreover it is added, That no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name: the meaning is,
that no man might traffic in the world, or have any doings amongst men; nay,
he might not be suffered to live, except he had the mark of the beast in his
forehead, or in his right hand; that is, unless he did profess and practice
the worship, the religion, the laws, and decrees of the Pope. For the mark of
the beast is put for his worship, religion, laws, decrees, regiments, and
policy.

Moreover the Popes vassals have not only his mark upon them, whereby they
may be known, but also the name of the beast; for they must be named after
him, even as children bear the name of their Fathers, and must be called of
the Pope, or Papa, Papists. And not only so, but also they have another privy
mark upon them, and that is the number of his name, which is Latinos, or
professors of the Latin religion, Latin kingdom, and Italian Church, as
shall by and by appear.

Now then to grow to a conclusion, and to make a brief recapitulation of all
things here spoken concerning the second beast, which is Antichrist: Let us
consider what increasings and proceedings he has made, as it were by degrees.

First, although he have two horns like the Lamb, that is, civil and
ecclesiastical power; yet he speaks like the Dragon, that is, he bends all
his power and authority, words and works for the devil.

Secondly, he does as much as the first beast could do in the service of the
Dragon.

Thirdly, he causes the first beast to be worshipped, that is, establishes
the substance of his religion.

Fourthly, he makes the image of the beast, that is, adds a form to the
substance.

Fifthly, he puts life into his Image by his Clergy.

Sixthly, he will have this Image worshipped, and yielded unto, on pain of
death.

Lastly, he will have all men of all conditions to wear his liuerie, and to
receive his mark, as it were his hired and covenant servants.

Here is wisdom: Let him that has wit, count the the number of the beast:
for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred theescore and
six. Now last of all the holy Ghost tells us that it is a very high point
of wisdom and understanding, to count the number of the beast, and requires
a sharp and pregnant wit; and withal tells us, that it is the number of a
man; that is, such as a man endued with Gods Spirit may find out. Then we
are encouraged to search into it, since it is within the compass of man's reach.
It is no impossible thing. If therefore we could find out his name, we would
desire no more; then the field were won: for his name would discover him, and
descrie him to all the world, and quite stop the mouths of the Papists, so
as they should never have any thing more to say. For if Saint John had said
expressly and in plain terms, that the Popes of Rome are this second beast,
and the very Antichrist himself, then the Papists had been put to perpetual
silence, all matters quasht, and all controversies ended betwixt them and us
for ever. But here the holy Ghost does not tell us his name plainly, but
mystically, as many other things in this book, that the worldlings which
should fulfill them might be blinded, whilst the eyes of Gods elect are opened
to see into the truth of all these matters. Well, to come to the point: Saint
John does only here set down the numeratiue letters of the beasts name. He
wrote in Greek, and he only sets down three Greek letters or characters,
which in Greek numeration make six hundred sixty six. (...)
Now further we are to note, that the numeratiue letters of the Greek word
(...) do make just this number. And yet further we are to observe as a very
special thing, that Irenaeus, Iren. lib. 5. contra haeres.
an ancient Father of the Church, who lived very near unto the Apostles
times, mentions this word Lateinos, as the name of the beast. And moreover
affirms, that it was a common received opinion in his time, and before, that
the Beast should be so called. Now then let us consider how this fitteth.
First, we know that the numeratiue letters of Lateinos do justly fit Saint
John's Greek numeratiue letters. Secondly, we know that Antichrist is the head
of the Latin Church, or Latin Empire: and therefore this very Lateinos. For
here we do not enquire after the name of any particular man, but about the
name of a kingdom; for the beast is a kingdom, and a succession of men. Now
Italy in old time was called Latinum, and the Italians Latini: which notes of
what country the beast should come. Moreover, the beasts name, or name of the
Roman Empire is Lateinos, because the Empire both under the heathen tyrants,
and the Popes especially, had all their religion, service, prayers, laws,
decrees, writings, and translations in Latin: all was in Latin, Latin. The
Pope preferred his Latin translation of the Bible, before the Hebrew and
Greek originals.

Thus then it is. Saint John tells us flatly, that the number of the beast is
six hundred sixty six: Irenaeus says, that Lateinos is his name, which
contains just that number. Therefore here we have his name, here he is
found. For if his name be Lateinos, we need search no further, we know who
it is, we know who is meant: for is not the Pope Lateinos? are not the
succession of them Latini? are they not the heads of the Latin Church, and
Latin Empire? Have they not all their worship and service in Latin? Are they
not Latins? for what is the name of the Roman Empire but Lateinos? And what
is the name of the Popish Hierarchy but Lateinos? True it is indeed which the
papists say, that many names may be invented, whose letters make this number:
but the Spirit of God speaks not of fained names, for thereof can come
nothing but uncertainty: but he wills us to count the number of his name,
which then the beast had, that is, Lateinos. I do thus then conclude. The
beast is a kingdom, and the Papacy is the kingdom of the Latins: Therefore
the Papacy is the beast. The papacy is Lateinos, and contains the number of
the beast. For what other monarchy can be showed since this Revelation was
given, whose numeratiue letters contain this foresaid number? Assuredly none.
And therefore out of all doubt Saint John points at the Roman Empire, and
monarchy of the Popes. For Lateinos does both contain the number of the
beast, according to Saint John's computation, and also his name, which is the
Latin Empire, or Roman Empire. And thus have we heard the description of
these two huge and monstrous beasts, the sea beast, and the land beast; which
both from the Apostles times hitherto have indeed played the beasts against
Christ and his Church, and still do play the beasts, and will never cease
playing the beasts, till their horns, and hoofes, heads, and bodies be clean
cut off, which will be shortly, as we shall hear anon.

CHAP. XIIII.
WE have heard in the former chapter the description of the two great and
dreadful beasts. We have also heard how mightily they have prevailed now many
years, and reigned as monarchs of the earth. Now in this chapter we are to
hear of the fall and ruin of them both. So that the maine drift and scope of
this chapter, and all the chapters following, until the twentieth chapter, is
to show, that both the Roman Empire, and the Papacy shall ebb as fast as ever
they did flow, shall wane as fast as ever they did wax, shall decrease as fast
as ever they did increase, and fall down as fast as ever they did rise up,
even until they come to utter ruin and desolation.

This Chapter contains seven principal things.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,







Text.
Then I looked, and behold a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand, having the Fathers name written in their foreheads.

Now at last the holy Ghost brings in Jesus Christ upon the Theater of the
world, as it were to play his part in this tragedy, and to help the poor
weak woman, which we heard of before, against the Dragon, and the two
monstrous beasts, which would have torn her in pieces, and utterly devoured
her, if this Lamb Jesus Christ had not stepped in and rescued her. Well, now
comes in our Lord Jesus, and begins to stir in these matters, and to
take upon him the protection and defense of the poor helpless woman, against
both the dragon, and the dragons two great instruments. But may some man say,
What is a poor Lamb to encounter with a dragon, with a Lion, with a Leopard,
and a Bear? I answer, that although Christ be a lamb to his church, eue^ the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, and the Lamb that was a
slain sacrifice from the beginning, for the redemption of his elect: Yet to
all his enemies he is a most strong and terrible Lion, even the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, as he is called before. John in a vision sees a Lamb stand
upon mount Sion; that is, Christ present with his Church. For mount Sion was an
ancient figure of the Church; as it is written: Mount Sion lying Northward is
fair in situation: Psalm. 48.2.
it is the joy of the whole earth, and the city of the great king. And again,
The law shall go forth of Sion, Mich. 4.2.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Moreover, Saint John sees here with the Lamb an hundred forty and four
thousand: that is, the particular members of the Church, putting a certain
number for an uncertain, and specially alluding to the sealing of the twelve
tribes of Israel, as before has been showed. For it might be demanded,
where the Church was, John answers, that even then in the midst of the
heat of persecutions God had his hid and invisible church, whom Jesus Christ
did protect and preserve even in the very flames of persecutions, being
always present with them, and amongst them, as he said to his Disciples a
little before his bodily departure from them. Lo, I am with you even unto the
end of the world. And here he is said to stand upon mount Sion with his
hundred forty and four thousand. And it is added, that this number of Gods
faithful elect children had the Fathers name written in their foreheads: That
is, they did profess, and practice the doctrine and religion of God their
Father only, utterly renouncing and abhorring the worship and religion of the
Beast. For the Fathers name in this place is set opposite to the mark of the
Beast; to signify, that as the worshippers of Antichrist received his mark:
so the true worshippers of God received his brand, which is his Spirit, and the
fruits thereof, whereby they were perfectly discerned from those which had the
beasts mark. So then it clearly appears from this place, that God preserved
many thousands of his true worshippers, even in the days of the great
Antichrist, when there seemed to be very few or none remaining upon the
earth, as it was in the days of Elias. In vain therefore do the Papists ask
us, where our Church was before Luthers time, since the holy Apostle here
stops their mouth, and tells us plainly, that Christ had his little
flock in the wilderness, even then, when it was in greatest streightes, and
as we say, driven to the walls. And therefore visibilitie is no sound note of
the Church, as the Papists do most ignorantly dispute. For it is a fond and
absurd kind of reasoning, to say there is no Church at all, because it does not
visibly appear: as if a man should reason that there is no Moon in the
heavens, because sometimes there is none seen, as in the change.

And I heard a voice from heaven, Here is set forth how this company of true
worshippers do magnify and praise God, for his great mercies toward them.
First, John hears a voice from heaven, that is, an heavenly voice, or the
voice of the Church praising and glorifying God. For we have heard before, the
earth, and the reasons thereof: Whersoeuer therefore the Church is assembled to
hear the word, and to pray, and give thanks; there is a voice from heaven, or
an heavenly voice. Now this voice is compared to three things: first, to the
sound of many waters. Secondly, to the sound of a great thunder. Thirdly, to
ye voice of harpers, harping with their harps. It is likened to many waters,
because it proceeds from sundry sorts of people, of sundry nations,
countries, and kingdoms, as the word Waters is taken afterward in this
Prophecy. Chap. 17.1. Chap. 17.15.
It is compared to Thunder, because the prayers and inuocations of the true
Church are as loud in the ears of God as any thundercracke. It is compared to
Harpers harping with their harpes, both because their spiritual worship and
service is as sweet unto God, as any music unto men: as also because all
Gods faithful people do tune together among themselves, and in their worship,
as the strings of a well tuned instrument of music, or as many musicians
playing together, which make a sweet harmony, and most melodious dittie.

Now is showed how this holy society of the faithful do continue their
praising and glorifying of God. They are not weary of well doing, but hold on
constantly in the course of Gods worship, having new songs of thanksgiving in
their mouths, and serving God daily with renewed affections, as men inflamed
with the zeal of Gods glory: and all this they do perform before the throne,
before the four beasts, and the Elders; that is, in the presence of God, and
his Angels, and his holy congregation. And no man could learn that song, but
the hundred forty and four thousand, that is, none of the reprobates and
ungodly worldlings could inwardly feel and understand this spiritual worship,
but only the elect, to whom it is given to understand the secrets of God, and
the mysteries of his sons kingdom.

These are they,

And in their mouths was found no guile:

This holy company are not defiled with women, that is, with gross and diverse
sins, or rather with idolatrous pollutions. For they are virgins, that is,
chaste worshippers of God, which are not polluted with the defileme^ts of
Antichrist. These follow the Lamb Christ whersoeuer he goes. They hear his
voice, they profess his worship, and obey his doctrine; they abhor
Antichrist, they follow not the beast, nor receive his mark. They are bought
from men, and bought from the earth, as it is said before, that is, they are
redeemed and bought with a price from the corrupt lump of mankind, and cursed
race of Adam, that they might be the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb,
that is, wholly consecrated to his worship, and to serve him in righteousness
and true holiness all the days of their life. In their mouths was found no
guile: That is, they do declare their innocence and uprightness both in
their words, and works, as those which Christ has chosen out of this world,
and bought with a price thorough his blood, in whom they are without spot or
speck before God.





Hitherto the holy Ghost has taught us how the Church was preserved under the
tyranny of Antichrist, and greatest waves of persecutions; and that even then
they did purely and faithfully worship the true God. Now he proceeds to
foreshew the ruin and downfall of Antichrist, and plainly to prophecy the
utter decay of the kingdom of Babell. This doctrine therefore we are to
hearken unto with great attention and cheerfulness, because it does so much
concern our good, and the good of the whole church, also because we live in
the days, wherein we see it is in part fulfilled.

First therefore we are to understand, what is meant by this Angel here
mentioned, to wit, not any celestial Angel, or invisible spirit, as it is
sundry times taken before: but by this Angel, and the two Angels following,
are meant all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, which should be raised
up in these last days, for the overthrow of Rome, and the delivering of the
Church from under the captivity of Antichrist: which may plaine^y appear by
this, that it is said, this Angel preaches the everlasting Gospel unto them
that dwell on the earth, which cannot properly agree to the celestial spirits.
We have heard out of the tenth chapter, that Jesus Christ did open the little
book, which is the Bible, and did give authority to his faithful Ministers
to go preach and publish the doctrine thereof to many nations, countries, and
kingdoms: John sees an Angel come down from heaven, having great power, so
that the earth was lightened with his glory. By which Angel is meant all the
Preachers of this age. And the Angel is said to have great power: For what is
more powerful then the ministry of the word. And moreover it is said, that
the earth was lightened with his glory, that is, with the brightness of the
preaching of the Gospel, whereby the darkness of Popery was dispersed and
driven away, and Babylon falls upon it, as there you may read, and as here
we shall see the like effect by and by.

Moreover it is here said, that this Angel flies in the midst of heaven:
that is, very swiftly carries this everlasting Gospel thorough all the
Churches. For when Gods appointed time was come, wherein he would go about the
overthrow of Popery, he caused his everlasting Gospel to be set abroach, and
to spread over many kingdoms and nations, as we see this day. Now because
these kingdoms, where God would have the knowledge of his Gospel diuulged,
were many and great, therefore here is expedition required: and this Angel
does carry it, not standing but flying. And all this we see perfectly fulfilled
with our eyes, when God raised up Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Peter Viret,
Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, and all their worthy successors unto
this day, which have spread the everlasting Gospel very far, and carried it
very swiftly over England, Scotland, Germany, Denmark, Polonia, Sweuia,
Russia, and many parts of France and Flaunders. Another reason why this Angel
is said to fly in the midst of heaven, is because no power of man shall ever
be able to stay the course of this everlasting Gospel which this Angel carries
abroad, no more then men are able to stop the course of the Sun in the
heavens, or a cloud in the sky. For this Angel flies in the midst of heaven,
far above the reach of the beast, and al Kings and Potentates that stand for
the kingdom of the beast: Therefore let them do al what they can, they shall
never be able to stop the course of the Gospel. For it is called the arm of
God, and his very arm holds it forth to the world, and who is able to bend
it in, or to turn it backward?

There be three reasons, why the Gospel is called everlasting.

First, because it is in his own nature everlasting, 1. Pet. 1.25.
as it is written, the word of the Lord indureth for ever.

Secondly, because it puts us in possession of everlasting things. As it is
written; Thy word, O Lord, Psalm. 119.
endures for ever in heaven.

Thirdly and principally, because as it was long before Antichrist was hatched:
so it shall continue, when he and his kingdom is dead and rotten.

Saying with a loud voice; Fear God, and give glory unto him, etc.

Here is set down the doctrine, which this Angel preaches with a loud voice,
that is, with great zeal. The sum whereof is this, Fear God, and give glory
unto him, and worship him that made heaven and earth, etc. The sense is, that
the true and everliving God should only be feared, and worshipped, and all
glory should be given to him alone through Christ, and none to Antichrist, none
to Cardinals, and Legates; none to Angels, none to Saints, none to images,
roods, crosses, and crucifixes. Here then is set down an abridgement of the
doctrine of this everlasting Gospel, namely that men should only fear God
and worship him, and give all glory to him alone, and not to any creatures. And
the reason is yielded, because the hour of his judgment is come, Deuteronomy. 33 10
Isay 42.4 Zeph. 2 3. Psalm. 119.13
that is, the time of the manifestation of the Gospel, or laws of the most
high God: for so the word judgment is often taken in the scriptures.

Here we are to observe one special thing, to wit, that the Gospel, which this
Angel flies withal, contains the brief sum of all the doctrine which
Luther, Calvin, Peter Martyr and the rest have taught out of Gods word, and
agrees in all points with it. For what other thing did they al preach, teach
and write, but that men should turn from idols to the living God? from
fearing, glorifying, and worshipping creatures, to fear, worship, and glorify
God alone which has made al things? What other thing do all the Preachers of
this age publish and proclaim in all their sermons, but this; Fear God and
give glory only to him? Is not this the Epirome and short sum of the
doctrine of all the Preachers of England, Scotland, Germany, France, Denmark,
and all the rest? and therefore I conclude, that this Angel must needs be
understood of the preachers of this last age, which now these fourscore years
have founded the Trumpet of the Gospel against all the inventions of Popery.
And blessed be God, we see these things fall out in our days, and are
eyewitnesses of the fulfilling of them.

And there followed another Angel, saying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon
that great City: for she gave to all nations to drink the wine of the wrath of
her fornication.

Here is set down the blessed effect of the preaching of this everlasting
Gospel, which is the downfall of Babylon. For as when the clear sun arises
upon the earth, the thick mists and clouds are dispersed: even so when the
bright beams of the Gospel do shine forth unto the world, Babylon that dark
kingdom vanishes away incontinently. And as it is written in the eighteenth
Chapter: So soon as the earth was lightened with the glory of this everlasting
Gospel, Babylon immediately falls. Therefore now before I go any further,
my purpose through the assistance of God, is to prove these five points out of
this verse, and that which follweth unto the twentieth Chapter, to wit:

First, that Babylon here signifies Rome. Five maine points.


Secondly, that Rome shall fall, and how.

Thirdly, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter desolation in this life.

Fourthly, by whom, and when it shall be overthrown.

Lastly, the causes of the utter ruin and overthrow thereof.

But before I go about to prove that Babylon here is Rome, I would have it
carefully observed, How Rome is to be taken.
what is meant by Rome, viz. not the topographie of Rome, that is, so much
ground only as is compassed within the walls of that City, but the regiment,
government, and prerogative that is claimed by virtue of that monarchy, whereof
Rome is the head. By Rome is meant the power and authority of Rome: or to
speak plainly, by Rome is meant the Roman monarchy. Further, we are here to
observe the reason why the Holy Ghost calls Rome Babylon: for Rome literally
and properly taken, is not Babylon, in as much as they were two diverse Cities,
one in Italy, the other in Chaldaea: But Rome is called Babylon mystically,
figuratively, and, as the Holy Ghost speaks, spiritually, and by a kind of
allusion. Chap. 11 Verse. 8. A reason why Rome is called Babylon.
For as the old Eastern Babylon did a long time oppress the church of the
Jews: so Rome this Western Babylon, has long oppressed the church of the
Christians. As the Eastern Babylon did many years hold down the people of
God, in miserable bondage and servitude: so the Western Babylon did a long
time keep the Christian Church, in spiritual thraldom and misery. In which
respects Rome is spiritually compared to Sodom and Egypt: Metonymie, or
changing of names, when that is given to one thing, which is proper to another,
for the likeness of quality that it has with it, or adioined unto it.

Now having showed the reason why Rome is called Babylon, and what is meant by
Rome; we are to proceed to the first point, which is, to prove that Babylon in
this place signifies Rome, which although it be granted of all sound divines,
and avouched in the writings of the best learned both new and old, so as it
shall need no great proof: yet I will ad three or four reasons out of this
book, to make it more plain and apparent. First therefore, I do thus reason
out of the seventeenth Chapter and last verse: Babylon is that great City
which reigns over the Kings of the earth: but there was no other City which
did reign over the Kings of the earth, when John writ this book, but only
Rome: Therefore Rome is Babylon. For as for Jerusalem, it was at that time made
an heap of stones. The first proposition is avouched by the Angel of God,
expounding unto John what is meant by the great whore, The woman which thou
saw, says the Angel to Saint John, is the great City, which reigns over
the Kings of the earth, That is to say, Rome, or the Romish synagogue, and
malignant Church. For the Angel could not speak more plainly, except he
should have named Rome, then to say thus, The woman the great whore of Babylon
is the great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth. For if one
should say, the great City of England, every man knows that thereby is meant
London; if one should say, the great City of France, every one knows that
thereby is meant Paris: so when the Angel says, the great city which reigns
over the Kings of the earth; all that lived in those times knew that, Babylon
is Rome.
thereby was meant Rome. For Rome was the chief City of the monarchy, and is
put in this book for the whole monarchy, and the religion thereof, as has
been said before.

My second reason is this. Babylon is the mother of whoredoms, and
abominations of the earth. Babylon is that great whore, with whom have
committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and the inhabitants of the earth
made drunk with the wind of her fornication.

But Rome, and none but Rome is such a one. Therefore Rome is Babylon.

My third argument is this. Babylon is that City which has had seven several
gouerments. But only Rome has had seven several kind of gouerme^ts: therefore
Rome is Babylon.

The proposition is proved from the words of the Angel, expounding unto John
what is meant by the seven heads of the scarlet colored beast, whereupon the
woman sat. The seven heads (says he) are seven Kings, that is, seven orders,
or states of kingly government: for seven Kings in this place are not put for
seven several men, which were Kings, as some do take it: Dan 7.17.
but for seven several gouerments, as it is taken in Daniel. The four great
beasts, says the Angel there, are four Kings, that is, four kingdoms,
gouerments, or monarchies, as al men know. So here by seven Kings is meant the
seven several regiments of Rome: That is to say, by Kings, Consuls, Decemuiri,
Dictators, Triumuiri, Emperors, and Popes, whereof the first five were then
fallen when John wrote, one was, and one was to come, that is, the Papacy.

My last argument is this. Babylon is that City which is situate upon seven
hills: but only Rome of all Cities in the world is situated upon seven
hills: therefore Rome is Babylon.

The proposition is avouched by the Angel, which says in the seventeenth
chapter, that the seven heads of the scarlet colored beast, are seven
mountains, whereon the woman sits, that is, seven hills whereon the City
of Rome is situated, whose names are these: Capitolinus, Palatinus, Auentinus,
Exquilinus, Celius, Viminalis, and Quirinalis, as al Poets, and
Historiographers do testify. One says thus of Rome. Septem quae vna sibi
muro circundedit arces. Virg. Georg.
another thus. Septem vrbs alta iugis toto quae praesidet orb. Propert.
Another calls Rome (...), the City with seven heads, that is, seven hills.
It is clear then by these reasons, that Babylon in this place signifies Rome.
As for the exposition of the Papists, which affirm that Babylon here
signifies the universal society of the wicked, it is fond and ridiculous: for
the Holy ghost says, Chap. 17. Chap. 18.
Babylon is that City which reigns over the Kings of the earth. But to say
that the universal society of the wicked reigns over the Kings of the
earth, is absurd and ridiculous. Therefore to say that Babylon is the
universal society of the wicked, is absurd and ridiculous. The distinction of
the Jesuits here is also as frivolous as their exposition: for they say, if
Babylon be Rome, then it must be understood of Rome under the heathen
Emperors: but not under the Popes. But the Angel says, the woman, that is,
the whore of Babylon, or Antichrist sits upon seven mountains: ergo she
sits at Rome, and Rome is the seat of Antichrist; and consequently Rome
under the Popes is Babylon. Moreover, we may reason thus against the Popish
distinction: That which was Babylon under the heathen Emperors, is the same
which is here prophesied to be the chief City and seat of Antichrist. But
Rome was then Babylon: ergo Rome is now Babylon: for Rome is that City which
the Angel says should be the seat of Antichrist: And this book does show,
that the great Antichrist should reign in the same City, where the heathen
Emperors had reigned: and therefore it stands firm, that Rome under the
Popes is Babylon.

This then being granted, that Babylon here is Rome; it follows that Rome
shall fall: for the Holy Ghost says, Babylon is fallen, speaking in the
present tense, as the manner of ye scripture is in prophesying of things to
come. For whatsoever God has determined to come to pass, is, as it were,
already don, because of the certainty of it: Rome shall fall.
and for this cause also the word is doubled: It is fallen, It is fallen. We
see then most clearly, that almost 1500. years before Rome began to fall, the
certain fall thereof was foretold. This place of it self, is clear enough to
prove my second point, which is, that Rome shall fall. But my purpose is to
reduce and gather all the five Chapters following to certain heads, to prove
the maine points which I have propounded: first then I reason thus to prove the
second point, that Rome shall fall. That City and kingdom which has the seven
vialles of Gods wrath emptied and powered down upon it, cannot stand, but must
needs fall. But Rome is that City, which has the seven vialles of Gods wrath
powered down upon it: Therefore Rome cannot stand long, but must needs fall.
The proposition is manifest, and not to be denied. The assumption is proved
throughout all the sixteen Chapter, and especially in the tenth and the twelfth
verses, the vials of Gods wrath are expresslie said to be powered down upon
the throne of the beast: and in the second verse of that Chapter it is
avouched, the second vial was powered down upon the men which had the mark of
the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image: How then can the throne
of the beast hold out? or how can they which have received the beasts mark
stand up long? For there is a great Emphasis or vehemence in the manner of
speech. For he does not simply say, the wrath of God,

My second reason is this. The beast that was, and is not, and yet is, shall go
into perdition. Julius Caesar, Augustus, Claudius, Tiberius; and therefore it
is said, that it was. But in the reign of Nero, Otho, Galba, and Vitellius, it
was greatly decayed: and therefore it is said, it is not; meaning so great as
it had been: and yet in some sort it was: and therefore it is said, and yet
is. Now this beast shall go into perdition. Therefore the Roman monarchy
shall be destroyed; and consequently, the Papacy. For the Roman Empire
holds up the Papacy, as it is written, that the woman or whore of Babylon
sits upon the Scarlet* colored beast, which had seven heads and ten
horns: that is, the Roman monarchy, which bears up the whore, and bears
up the Papacy: but the Holy Ghost says, this beast, that is, the Roman
Empire, shall go into perdition.

My third argument is this.

The beast that was and is not, being even the eight, and one of the seventh,
shall go into destruction. But Rome is the beast that was and is not, being the
eight, and one of the seventh: they shall both together go into destruction,
that is, both the Empire and the Papacy. For as the dominion of the Popes goes
down, so also their worship and religion, goes down with it, and for this
cause it is expressly set down in the nineteenth Chapter, the beast and the
false Prophet, that is, the Roman Empire, and the Papacy, were both destroyed
together.

Since then the Holy Ghost has spoken it twice for failing, that Rome shall go
into perdition, and shall go into destruction; I take it to be a very sound
consequence, that Rome shall fall, and shall be destroyed. But how shall it
fall, may some man say? or wherein shall it fall? I answer, that it shall fall
in the credit and estimation of her doctrine: It shall fall in wealth and
riches: How Rome shall fall.
It shall fall in power and authority. And in all these it shall fall by
degrees, as it did rise up by degrees: It shall not fall at once, as it did not
rise up at once.

This is set down in the sixteenth chapter, Cyrus and Darius the kings of the
Medes and Persians, laying siege against it, could not take it till by policy
they dug great trenches, and derived the waters another way, and so dried
them up, that the Holy Ghost says, The way was prepared for them to pass
over. Now, as this Euphrates was the strength and fortification of old Babylon:
so the honor, wealth, riches, power, and authority of Rome, is the very
fortification of it. by degrees unto the end of the world. For the utter
destruction of Rome is not yet come, but it is greatly decayed from that it was
fourscore years ago: And if it continue decaying fourscore years mo, as
assuredly it shall, then will it be brought to a low ebb. Since Luthers time
we know how the Popes Euphrates has dried up; but there is yet much water
left, and it is yet too deep for the kings of the earth to pass over and take
it. But it shall ebb so low, that the kings of Europe shall easily pass
over, and take it, as we shall hear anon. But in the mean time we see that
it falls, and that it is in falling, and the work of God goes forward
every day. For now in this age, God be thanked, many kings and princes, with
great multitudes of their subjects, have their eyes opened to behold, that the
Romish religion is abominable; The kings of the earth in this age renounce the
Pope.
and that the Papacy is the very kingdom of the great Antichrist. And
whereas before they worshipped the beast, now they hold up their hands only
to the God of heaven, and glorify him in his son Jesus Christ. Now we see
that many laws are made in sundry kingdoms and provinces to abolish that
usurped power of the Bishop of Rome: Many acts, edicts, and injunctions are
set forth in sundry nations and kingdoms of Europe to destroy, root out, and
deface all monuments of Idolatry and superstition, which Antichrist had
erected in all kingdoms.

Now the Popes which were honored as Gods in the earth, are accounted, and
adjudged as the most vile and abominable creatures that live upon the earth.
Does not all this experimentally show that Babylon is fallen, and that Babylon
does fall by degrees? It is very palpable: we need no further proof for this
second point. But here we are further to observe, that the Jesuits perceiving
the great decay of Rome, The Jesuits bestir them, and why.
and the continual drying of their Euphrates, do bestirre them to stop the
leake, that it might not dry up altogether. Even as when men let out the
waters of great fish ponds, so as the water waxes low, we see the fishes
skip and plunge, and take on wonderfully: So the Jesuits perceiving the waters
of their Romish Euphrates to empty and dry up daily, do mightily take on,
digging and searching every day to open the springs, and to find out some
fresh fountains to maintain their great fishpond, and to keep the waters
deep enough, that there may be no safe passage over, for the kings of the
earth to come and take their great Babylon. All this does appear out of the
sixteenth Chapter of this Prophecy: where Saint John in vision sees three
unclean spirits like Frogs, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out
of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. By which
frogs the holy Ghost means the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, The Jesuits
compared to frogs, and why.
which are compared to frogs for three reasons. First, that as frogs
delight in filthy lakes, and puddles; so the Jesuits delight in the filthy
puddles of idolatry and superstition. Secondly, as frogs make a great
croaking in their marish grounds; so the Jesuits make a great croaking in kings
courts, in Noblemens houses, and Gentlemen's houses, and almost every where,
where they can get any entertainment, croaking and craking of the Popes
supremacy, the popes holiness, the Popes blessing, the popes keys, the popes
power, Peter's chair, Peter's successor, Christ's Vicar, and many good morowes,
I know not what. Thirdly, as frogs are all of one nature and quality,
delighting in croaking, and living in puddle: so the Jesuits are al of one mind
and disposition in evil, croaking every where to maintain their Euphrates,
and living daily in whoredom, Sodomitrie, and al kind of outrageous
beastliness. But that I may more fully persuade the conscience of the reader,
that by these frogs are meant the Jesuits and seminary priests: let us
seriously weigh that which goes before, and that which follows after in this
text, and we shall discern it to be very clear and apparent. First, it is
said, verse. 10. that when the fifth Angel poured out his vial of Gods wrath
upon the throne of the beast, by and by his kingdom waxed dark: that is, the
majesty, power, pomp, credit, and estimation of Antichrist began to be
diminished, obscured, and to suffer a great Eclipse: which thing was fulfilled
shortly after Luthers preaching. And presently it follows, that they gnawed
their tongues for sorrow: that is, they were full of fury and rage, by
excommunications, wherewith in former times they had even as it were with
lightening and thunder caused kings and nations to tremble; neither by force of
wars and bloody slaughters; neither by any skill in learning; nor by
treacheries, they could any thing prevail, but that the Gospel did still more
and more lay open their filthiness and shame: then did they become, and so do
they continue til this day, even as mad men in sorrow and rage, which the holy
Ghost expresses, in saying, they gnawed their tongues for sorrow, and
blasphemed the God of heaven, etc. Whereby it is evident that the beast, and all
that have received his mark are full of fiery hatred and malice, and cannot
tell which way to be revenged. For the more they strive, the more they lose
daily. Feign would they have Popery restored to his ancient credit and
dignity: and they devise what they can to bring it about; but it will not be.
For their kingdom waxes darker and darker, weaker and weaker: and that is a
dagger unto them, and a grief of all griefs, which makes them gnaw their
tongues, and gnash their teeth for sorrow. But yet for all this, they repented
not of their works, says Saint John, and therefore God is more incensed
against them, and causes the sixth Angel to pour out another vial upon the
great river Euphrates, and the water thereof dried up: as we have heard. Now
then observe carefully, and note it diligently, that the frogs come forth
upon the darkening of the kingdom of the beast, Note this.
and the drying up of their Euphrates. For who knows not that the pope and
his co^plices perceiving ye weakening and diminishing of their kingdom, have
sent out these Jesuits and Seminary Priests into all parts of Europe, to
repair the ruins of Rome, if it were possible. And this is one
circumstantiall reason to prove these three frogs be understood of the
Jesuits. But let us proceed to open the whole description of the holy Ghost,
that it may yet more plainly appear. First, these frogs are called unclean
spirits, spirits, because they come out of the mouth of the Dragon, ^he beast,
and the false Prophet. Thirdly, they are called three in number, being in the
truth nearer unto three thousand, because they proceed out of three several
mouths the Dragon, the beast, and the false Prophet: that is, the devil, the
Roman Empire, and the Papacy. Three horrible monsters, three terrible
bugbeares, which with one consent conspire together against the Gospel, to
uphold their Babylon, and to stop the leake of their Euphrates. Now these
three Frogs are said to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, the beast, and
the false Prophet, because they come with the very mind and message of the
Pope, and the Roman Empire, and so consequently with the very mind and spirit
of the Dragon. For they are the very breath of the Pope, and the spirits of
the devil, as like him, as if they had been spitte out of his mouth. They are
sent on the devils errand, and the Popes embassage into all countries and
kingdoms, and are taught their lesson what they shall say, and instructed what
they shall do, and what courses they shall take with all sorts of men, both
Kings, Nobles, and the meaner sort: and for this cause the holy Ghost says,
they came out of the very mouth, the very heart, and the very bowels of the
Pope, and of the devil. And although these Jesuits and seminary priests are
called of their fauorits, Catholic doctors, The holy ghost calls the Jesuits
the spirits of devils Chap. 16.14.
holy fathers, etc. yet the holy Ghost says flatly, they are the spirits of
devils, working false and fained miracles, and with great efficacy of error,
deluding and deceiving the simple and blind multitude. We see then, that the
holy Ghost in all this description, does plainly note out the Jesuits and
seminary priests. For to whom can these things here spoken of agree, but only
to the^? And do not we which live in these days, sensibly see and discern the
fulfilling of al these things? Surely we can not but see and feel the^, unless
we be wilfully blind, and do of purpose blindfold and hoodwink our selves. But
the holy ghost goes yet futher, and does more fully, and as it were
demonstratiuely point them out unto us, describing the^ by their office, which
is, to go unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world; to gather the^
to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Who is ignorant that the
Jesuits and seminary priests are sent out to al kings and Nobles of the whole
world, that favor the^ and their proceedings? Are they not croking in corners
thick and threefold in all parts of this land? Are they not practicing of
treacheries and tresons against our most gracious Queen and the whole state?
are they not plotting the destruction and subversion of this Church and common
wealth? Nay, as the holy Ghost says, the chief end of their coming abroad,
is to solicit and gather ye kings of the earth unto battle against God,
against Christ, and against all true professors of religion. The bettell
betwixt them is here called, The battle of the great day of God Almighty:
that is, that Battle, wherein the Almighty God will have the day, and go
away with the victory. For it follows, that the Jesuits and seminary
Priests did prevail with the seduced kings of the earth so far, as to gather
them together to place, The Jesuits by their crafty persuasions shall bring
the popish kings, and their armies to a place where they shall be destroyed.
Numb. 11.
which in Herbrue is called Armageddon: that is to say, a place where they
shall be destroyed, and that with such horrible slaughter, that the place shall
take a name thereof. For it was an usual thing among the Hebrews, to call the
place where any famous thing fell out, by a name which did report ye same unto
all posterity, as Kibroth Hataanah, the graves of Concupiscence; Hamon Gog,
the multitude of Gog; and diverse such like. And so here Armageddon, Ezech. 39.
the destruction of an army, because the kings of the earth, and their armies
which shall fight against the Church, at the instigation of the Jesuits, shall
come to a place, where they shall have a notable overthrow. This word
Armageddon may fitly be derived of two Hebrew words, that is to say, Cherem,
which signifies destruction, and Gedudh, which signifies an army; that is,
the destruction of an army; or as some say, and that very iudicially, it may
come of Gnarmah Gidnon, which signifies the subtlety of destruction; because
the blind kings and Nobles of the earth shall by the subtlety and crafty
persuasions of the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, be entised to fight against
the Protestants, in a place where they shall have a famous foil. Some derive
Armageddon of Har, which in Hebrew signifies a mountain, and Megiddo, which
is the place where the godly king Josias was slain: and so this place should
be called Armageddon, the mountain of Megiddo, for the slaughter of kings that
shall be there. Zach. 12.11^
To the which the Prophet Zachary alludeth, saying: In that day there shall be
a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of
Megiddo. Well, we do see that all these significations and deriuations of
Armageddon come to one thing in effect; which is, that the great armies which
assemble themselves in battle against the Lord, shall be destroyed: and
therefore it is not much material to dispute, which is the more likely
signification of the Word. But this let us observe for our comfort, that
whenever we shall see the kings and Captains, Nobles and Potentates of the
earth, being solicited by the Jesuits, priests, and the false Prophet, to leuy
great armies, and make great powers to fight against the Gospel, and the true
professors thereof, for the maintenance of great Babylon, they shall not
prevail, but be utterly overthrown and destroyed. As in part we see
fulfilled in the year of our Lord 1588. when the great and invincible Armado
of the Spaniards, as they thought, which was long in preparing against us, and
at last, by the instigation of the Jesuits, brought upon us, came to
Armageddon, as we know, God be praised. And in all time to come, in the like
case, let them look for the like success. Well, now to grow to some conclusion
of this point; we do plainly see that Rome falls, their kingdom waxes
dark, their Euphrates dries up, they epsy it. The Dragon, the beast, and the
false Prophet send out their frogs into all countries and kingdoms, hoping to
prevent it by the help of the kings of the earth, and especially the king of
Spain: but alas all in vain! for they must come to Armageddon, when they have
done all that they can. For God fights from heaven against them, God brings
them down, and no power of man is able to uphold them.

But now let us proceed to prove the third maine point; which is, that Rome
shall fall finally, and come to utter desolation. For all sound Divines are
persuaded of the fall of Babylon, and do grant that it falls, and is in
falling: but all are not so thoroughly persuaded of the final fall thereof in
this life. Therefore now I will prove by manifest Scripture, that Rome shall
fall for a do. Rome shall fall finally.
First, if the things be deeply considered and narrowly looked into, which
Saint John says shall fall out upon the pouring forth of the seventh vial of
Gods wrath, by the seventh Angel, they do fully portend a deadly downfall, and
utter overthrow of Rome. For the seventh vial is not poured upon the earth, or
sea, or fountains of waters, or on the Sun, as the first four vials were,
which signified some particular judgments; but it was poured forth into the
very air, text says, that upon the pouring forth of this vial, there was a
loud voice heard out of the temple of heaven from the throne: that is, It is
done. It is dispatched. The utter overthrow of Rome is fully concluded of, and
all things finished which belong to the pouring forth of the seven vials, which
contain the seven last plagues, wherein the whole wrath of God is fulfilled,
as appears chap. 15. as before it is said, Babylon is fallen, It is done,
because it shall certainly be done. For whatsoever God has determined to be
done, is as it were already done, because it shall most certainly be
effected. Since then the Lord has pronounced this of Rome, there remains
nothing but a daily accomplishment of it: and let all the papists know for a
certainty, that they must go to their gear, they must come to their payment,
there is no way of evasion. For has the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come
to pass? Now upon this that God says, It is done, follows presently, that
there were voices, and thunderings, and lightenings, and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, even so mighty an
earthquake. What is meant by thundrings, lightenings, and earthquakes in this
Book, I have before showed: to wit, of them shall escape. For this seventh
vial of Gods wrath upon the kingdom of the beast, is compared to a most
horrible and blustering tempest, raised up in the whole air, that is, in all
places of Antichrists dominions. And it is specially to be noted, as a thing of
great moment, that the holy Ghost says, There was never such an earthquake as
this, since the world began, and since men were upon the earth. For
assuredly, so soon as the seventh Angel pours forth his vial, the kingdom
of Popery shall go down a maine, which shall not belong before the end of the
world, as all circumstances here do show. After all this, Saint John tells
us the effect of this thundering, lightning, and extraordinary earthquake;
which is, that the great city was divided into three parts; that is, there
shall be a most horrible rent and division in the city of Rome, and
throughout all the Popes dominions. What this rent and division is, and how it
shall be, I cannot determine, being a thing to come, as all the rest
comprehended under the pouring forth of the seventh vial. But this I am sure
of, that Rome shall go down; and there shall be such tumults, vprores, rents,
divisions, dissipations, and concussions in Rome, and throughout all the Romish
jurisdiction, as never was heard of, nor read of, since the world began. For
Saint John adds, that Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath: That is, God does now
at length call to mind all the wrongs done to his people, and all the righteous
blood shed, for the space of seven or eight hundred years, by the whore of
Babylon, that he may be fully revenged, and execute the fierceness of his
wrath both upon her, and her whole kingdom: yea, and that in such terrible and
wrathful manner, that there shall be no place of refuge, no place to fly unto
for succor. Every I Will fled away, and the mountains were not found: Meaning,
that the Papists in that day shall have neither moutaine, nor Island to fly
unto. And last of all, the holy Ghost says, that there fell a great hail like
talents out of heaven upon the Idolaters: insomuch, that they blasphemed God,
because of the plague of the hail. For the plague thereof was exceeding great.
A tale^t was about the weight of threescore pound, as some write. Then it
follows, that this hail of Gods wrath upon the Papists, shall be most
terrible and fearful, and beat them all down to the ground, as it were an
hail of milstones, or plough-irons. Now, when this hail of talents comes,
as assuredly come it shall, then shall the kingdom of Popery be beaten to
dust and powder: and therefore no marvel though the idolaters, seeing all this,
be in a most horrible rage, and blaspheme God, as Saint John says,

Now let us proceed to further proof. In the eighteenth chapter of this
book, the whore of Babylon says in her heart: Isa. 47.
I sit, being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore
shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine: and she
shall be burnt with fire. For that God which condemns her, is a strong Lord.

First, here Rome is described, as she was in the height and top of her
pride and security, when she held the dominion of the kings of the earth, and
boasted that she was the head of the Catholic Church, carrying her self very
insolently above all kings and Emperors, treading upon their necks, and
making them attend at her gates barefoote in the midst of winter, as the
stories report. Yea, and that she was no widow; that is, no solitary or
desolate person, but one that had many lovers, which were strong to defend
her, so as she should feel no want, nor see any sorrow. But the time will
come, and draws on apace, wherein she shall be thoroughly punished for her
haughtiness, and intolerable pride and security. For the holy Ghost says, her
plagues shall come at one day, that is, suddenly, shortly and speedily, even
death, sorrow and famine, and she shall (...) burnt with fire. For that God
which condemns her, ^^ a strong Lord.

If this be not plain enough to prove an utter overthrow of Rome, I know not
what can be plain enough. For if death, famine, and fire will not pull her
down, I know not what shall pull her down. But Saint John says flatly, that
God himself who is a strong Lord, will oppose himself against Rome, and
condemn her. If this strong God take against her, who can uphold her? Can the
king of Spain? can the Cardinals? can the Emperor? can all the Dukes of
Italy, and all the potentates of the earth, that take part with her? No, no,
Job. 23.
they are al too weak. For if God take against a man, who can reclaim him,
says the Holy Ghost? For he does whatsoever he will. And again, God is wise
in heart, Job. 9.
and mighty in strength, who ever hardened his heart against him and prospered?
If God call not back his anger, the most proud helps are bowed under him. And
God says by the Prophet: Can thy hands be strong, Ezech. 22.
or can thy heart endure in the day that I shall have to do with thee? Then it
follows, that though Babylon sit as a Queen, and al her lovers take part
with her, yet because the strong Lord is against her, therefore she shall come
to utter destruction. Some of good judgment in the truth, have gathered from
this place, that the very City of Rome shall be burnt with fire; Amos. 1. ver.
4.7.10.14. Amos 2. ver. 2.5.
which assuredly may well be. But this I am sure of, that the phrase of burning
with fire, does in the Prophets always signify an utter destruction and
desolation of a City, or a kingdom, and therefore it follows that Rome shall
be utterly destroyed.

But behold yet stronger, and plainer proof. Saint John says, a mighty Angel
took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, with
such violence shall that great City Babylon be cast down, and shall be found no
more. Al men know, that old Babylon in Chaldaea was destroyed by the Medes, and
Persians, long before Saint John writ this book: and therefore that is not
here meant, but the new Babylon which is Rome, as before has bin proved. The
Phrases of speech, and the signs which the Prophets used to declare the
destruction and desolation of old Babylon, are here alluded unto in the
destruction of Rome. For we read in the prophecy of Jeremy, that the Prophet
having written in a book all the evil that should come upon Babel, for holding
Gods people so long in most miserable captivity, said to Seraiah, When thou
come unto Babel, Ier. 51. ver. 61 62.63.64.
thou shall read all these words, and when thou have made an end of reading
this book, thou shall bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of
Euphrates, and shall say: Thus shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise up
from the evil that I will bring upon her, although they weary themselves. Now
let us consider how this agrees with the same which is here set down, and
we shall find, that all things are here set down, with greater force, to
express, as it were, a deeper vengeance, and a more heavy (and unrecoverable
destruction). First, there is a man, here is a mighty Angel: there the man
takes up a stone, here the Angel takes up a great stone, like a millstone:
there the stone is cast into the river, here into the deep sea. Al these
circumstances being applied to Rome, do greatly aggrauate the matter, Rome
shall fall without all hope of recovery.
and very plainly show, that it shall fall, Without al hope of recovery. For
the Lord declares by this forcible sign, of casting a millstone into the sea,
that the City and kingdom of Antichrist shall be cast deep down into
perdition, and shall lie overwhelmed, and drowned in the same for ever. For if
old Babylon was utterly destroyed, and came to a final desolation in this
life; much more shall Rome, as the Holy Ghost disputes. But old Babylon came
to utter ruin and desolatition in this life, as both Isay and Jeremy do
witness: Therefore new Babylon; that is, Rome, shall come to utter
destruction: and as the Holy Ghost here says, shall be found no more, or shall
fall without all hope of recovery. Stories do report that Rome has been
sundry times destroyed by the Goths and Vandales, and others, yea once fired
and quite burnt up, but afterward built and raised up again by the Emperors:
But here the Holy Ghost says expreslie, that it shall have a final fall, and an
unrecoverable destruction. For can a millstone, cast into the bottom of the
sea, ever be got up again? no, no, it is impossible. Therefore, let the
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, do what they can, they shall never set up Rome
again; they shall never restore her to her former state and dignity; they shall
never repair her credit again. Let he Pope, and Cardinals, and the King of
Spain, and all the world, and all the devils in hell, join together, they shall
never get up this millstone out of the bottom of the sea. For the Angel has
cast it in with such a violence, that no power of man shall ever fetch it out
again. True it is indeed, that the Jesuits bestir them, and the Seminary
Priests, and Papists do work apace in all lands, and adventure themselves in
most desperate manner, to recover again the credit of Popery, and to set up
again the dignity and the power of the Pope, and the glory of their Church and
City, and their bold enterprises, do make many even to doubt that they will
again one day prevail. But assuredly we are to make full reckoning, that
although here and there they may support for a time, some ruinous parts of
their rotten frame: yet do what they can, it shall in the end down upon their
heads, and come to utter desolation. Indeed, Rome stands yet, and Popery is
not quite fallen down. But they are disclosed, their credit is cracked, their
power decaieth: and so this thing is begun, and the time draws on when it
shall be fully accomplished. He that had beheld the Power, the Pomp, the
riches and estimation of the Church of Rome about some fourescoure years
paste, and looks upon it now, shall see a wonderful alteration. It seemed
then to be without al danger of shaking: for the Emperor and the Kings of
the earth stood forth with all their force and might, power and policy, to
uphold it: but God be thanked, we see how it is already come down, and shall
come down every day more and more, whosoever says nay to it.

But behold yet more, and more plain proof for the utter desolation of Rome.
For Saint John describes the eternal desolation thereof, by denial of those
things which are in Cities inhabited: First he says, there shall be no more
any voice of harpers, Musicians, Pipers, and Trumpeters, heard in Rome, that
is, al music shall surcease, which argues an utter desolation. For what
inhabited cities are without music?

Secondly, he says there shall be no crafts man of what trade soever found
in Rome; Rome shall come to utter desolation.
which argues an utter desolation. For what flourishing City is without
artificers?

Thirdly, he says, no light of a candle shall any more shine in Rome, which
argues an utter desolation. For what inhabited City is without candles?

Fourthly, he says, no sound of a millstone shall be heard in Rome, which
argues an utter desolation. For what City is without milles to grind their
corn?

Lastly, he says, the voice of the Bridegroom and of the bride shall be
heard no more in Rome, which argues an utter desolation: for what City is
without bride and bridegroom? and without marriage for procreation sake? Then I
conclude from all this, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter
destruction.

But behold yet more plain and pregnant proof drawn from the pitiful
mournings, and most woeful lamentations of the Kings of the earth, the
Merchantes, and the Mariners, who al do jointly lament and mourn, for the
destruction and desolation of Rome, crying, alas, alas, that great City
Babylon, that mighty City: for in one hour is thy judgment come: In one hour
so great riches are come to desolation In one hour she is made desolate. What
can be more plainly, and fully spoken, to prove an utter desolation of Rome?
What can be more required, then to have it set down in express terms? as
here we see. For now the Holy Ghost uses no figure, no hardness, no
circumlocution, no obscurity: but tells us plainly, and thrice for failing,
that Babylon, that is, Rome, is made desolate, is come to desolation. the
Kings, Merchants and Mariners, shall stand a far off for fear of her torment,
and they shall weep and wail, when they shall see the smoke of that her
burning, signifying that the torment, and plague of Rome shall be so great, that
Kings for all their might shall not dare to come nigh to rescueher: no not the
King of Spain with all his great might and power, he shall be feign to stand
a far off, or rather utterly to forsake her, weeping and wailing as well as
others, for her most fearful, and unrecoverable destruction.

But we are to observe in all this, that the holy Ghost uses a figure or kind
of speech, which they call a Prosopopoeta or fayning of a person, whereby the
Popish Kings being dead and rotten are brought, in lamenting, and bewailing
the fall of Babylon, as if they were alive again: or else it may be understood
of the Cardinals, and Legates, which are even as Kings upon the earth. But
it cannot be understood of christian Kings, for they shall be the instruments
of God to pull down great Babylon, as we shall hear anon. Furthermore, let us
consider the causes of this great lamentation, for the deadly downefal of
Babylon, by the Popish Kings, Merchants, and Mariners. First the Kings, they
mourn and lament, says Saint John, because they had committed fornication
with the great whore of Babylon, and lived in pleasure with her. That is, they
had lived long with her in abominable idolatry, and pleased her that way: and
therefore she gave them dispensations to live in wantonness and al carnal
pleasures, and even to do what they list, spending their days in sensuality
and al kind of fleshly delights.

Secondly, the Merchants do weep and wail, alas, alas, that great City that
was clothed in fine linen and purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, for in one hour so great riches are come to
desolation. Mark then that the ruin of their great City, with all the pomp,
pleasure and riches thereof, is that which yet sticks in their stomachs.

Thirdly, the Mariners do greatly mourn and lament, Alas, alas, that great
City, wherein were made rich all that had ships on the sea by her costlines.
For in one hour she is made desolate. Thus we see how the Kings and Merchants
and Mariners shall bewail the utter ruin and great desolation of Rome, for the
loss of their pleasure, their gain, and their profit.

Moreover we are to observe, that that which is spoken by the old Prophets
Isay and Jeremiah, touching the utter desolation of old Babel, is applied by
Saint John to new Babel, which is Rome. Touching the old Eastern Babylon,
the Prophet says thus: Isay. 13.19
Babel the glory of kingdoms, the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, shall be
as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall not be inhabited for
ever, neither shall the Arabian pitch his tent there, neither shall the
sheppeheardes make their foldes there. But Ziim shall lodge there, and their
houses shall be full of Ohim: Ostriches shall dwell there, and the Satyrs shall
dance there, that is, Fairies, Hobgoblins, Night-spirits, and such like,
whereby is signified the utter desolation of old Babylon. John applies all this to Rome saying, Babylon that great City is become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of al foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird. Noting hereby both the filthiness of Rome, and also her utter
desolation.

But now let us proceed to our last and greatest argument, to prove the
final fall, and utter destruction of Rome, and all Romish power and
authority. In the nineteenth chapter of this Prophecy our Lord Jesus is
described, sitting upon his white horse, John gives him goodly names and
titles, calling him the word of God, the King of kings, and Lord of lords: the
beast, and the false Prophet, and all their forces, and at last he sees them
join battle. I saw (says Saint John) the Beast and the kings if the earth,
and their armies gathered together to make battle against him that sat upon
the white horse, and against his army. Now all this is to be understood of
the battles betwixt the Papists and the Protestants in these last days. But,
may some man say, who shall have the victory? what is the success? what was
the issue? Let us hear of that. The holy Ghost answers, that the Beast and
the false Prophet were taken, foiled and overcome: The Protestants shall have
the day.
using a warlike phrase, because in the wars they use to take the greatest
Captains and Commanders alive, and to put them to their raunsoms. The like
unto this we have in the seventeenth Chapter, where Saint John tells us,
that when the Popish kings and Potentates shall make war against Christ and
his Gospel, they shall have the like success unto this. For, says he, These
have one mind, and shall give their power and authority unto the beast, they
shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord
of Lords, and king of kings.

But, may some man say, when the Leaders and commanders of the Popish armies
shall be taken captive and set at their ransomes, what shall become of the
inferior Captains and soldiers? The holy Ghost answers, that the remnant
were slain with the sword of him that sits upon the horse: That is, they
were put to the sword, says, that he saw an Angel stand in the Sun,

Now to make this plain. We know, that they which proclaim any matter,
seek some market cross, or high place to stand in, where they may best be
heard: So this Angel, which proclaims the victory against Antichrist,
before any stroke be stricken, because of the certainty of it, stands in
the Sun, as it were in the Theater and midst of the world, as in a place
most fit for his purpose, that he may be heard throughout all the earth. Now
this proclamation is directed to all the fowls of the air, to bid them to a
supper, which is here called the supper of the great God. But it may be
demanded, what cheer shall they have? The holy Ghost answers, that they
shall eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of great Captains, and the flesh of
mighty men,

This we know, that when men are slain in great numbers in the wars, their
bodies lie scattered, as meat for the fowls of the air. And therefore here
all fowls are invited and bidden to a great supper, made them by the great
God, whose hand is in all this; their cheer, and their dainties are reckoned
up to be the flesh of kings and Captains, etc. Now out of all this may be
strongly concluded, that hereafter in all time to come, when the armies of the
Pope, which is the beast, the armies of the king of Spain, who has given his
power and authority unto the beast, and is his great vpholder; when the Armies
of the Cardinal his great confederate; when the armies of the Leaguers, his
great adherents; yea when al these, and all other Popish armies shall join and
band themselves together against the christian kings and defenders of the
Gospel: they shall have a notable overthrow, insomuch that their dead
carkesses shall even cover the earth, and the fowls of the air shall come to
their great supper, which the Lord of hosts will make ready for them. For
assuredly, and out of al doubt, they that live shall see the fulfilling of all
this, The popish armies shall go down by heaps
and shall see the popish armies go down by heaps in all countries and
kinstdomes, and be made meat for the fowls of the air. For the holy Ghost
says, They shall come to Armageddon, that is, the place where their Armies
shall be destroyed. And again, If any lead into captivity, he shall go
into captivity. If any kill with a sword, he must be killed with a sword: For
as the Popish forces have in former time taken captive the people of God, and
cruelly murdered them: so now the time draws on apace wherein they
themselves shall be taken and put to the sword. And therefore now at last I
conclude, that Rome shall fall finally, and come to utter destruction in this
life. For as Rome did rise up by degrees in this life, so Rome shall fall by
degrees in this life: As Rome grew up to her full height and highest pitch in
this life; so it shall come to her lowest ebb and greatest declination in this
life: I mean before the coming of Christ unto judgment. For the falling
down of hail like talents upon the kingdom of the beast, shall be in this
life: The extraordinary earthquake upon the dominions of Antichrist, shall be
in this life: The coming of the Popish Armies to Armageddon, shall be in this
life: Rome shall be utterly destroyed in this life.
The mourning of the kings, merchants and mariners, for the overthrow of
Babylon, shall be in this life: The great battle betwixt the beast and him
that sits upon the white horse, shall be in this life, before the day of
judgment: The pouring forth of all the seven vials of Gods wrath upon the
kingdom of the beast, shall be even in this life. For it were an absurd
thing to say, any of these things shall be after this life; or to say that
these things shall not be til the very coming of Christ; for they are all
things to be effected here in this earth: and the holy Ghost does describe
them as things to be done upon the face of the earth: for otherwise we could
have small comfort in any of these things, if they should not be done here
in earth, or if they should all be deferred till the very coming of Christ,
and in the mean time Antichrist shall still prevail. 2 Thessalonians. 2. An objection
answered.
But it will be objected, that Saint Paul says, The Lord shall consume
Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth, and abolish him with the brightness
of his coming: Therefore before his coming he shall not be utterly abolished.
True it is indeed, he shall not utterly be cut off in all his members, til
the very coming of Christ. For there will be some Papists remaining in all
countries, even unto the end: there be some, nay, many, that will carry the
beasts mark even til the last day. But the holy Ghost in this Prophecy
speaks of the reuolting and falling away of kingdoms, and countries from the
sea of Rome; whereby it shall come to pass, that it shall be exceedingly
weakened, and brought so low, that the kings of the earth shall easily take
it; or as the holy Ghost speaks, shall easily pass over their Euphrates, The
Pope shall be brought very low. 2. Sam. 3.
a naked Pope, a desolate pope, a Pope whose flesh shall be torn, whose flesh
shall wither, as we shall hear anon. He shall be such a Pope, as Ishbosheth was
a king, when Abner and all Israel fell away from him. He shall be such a Pope,
as the king of Portugal is a king.

But it will be objected, How know you this? are you a Prophet? can you
foretell of things to come? I answer, Saint John was a Prophet, and endued with
a prophetical Spirit in this matter of his visions and revelations; and I
speak no more then Saint John has set down. And therefore I hope I speak
within compass: for I do but relate Saint John's words, and explain them in
such measure as I am able. This Prophecy does plainly declare, that Babylon
shall fall; Rome shall come down, the Pope shall never be esteemed again. And
I do believe it to be so; I believe God; I believe his word; I believe all
that is spoken in the Scriptures: and I do endeavor to persuade others also.
For since the holy Ghost has so plainly, and so fully foretold it, why should
we not believe it? Why are we so slow to believe all that is written in the
Scriptures? Has God spoken it, and shall it not come to pass? Shall any jot
of his word fail? Shall we think he iesteth with us, when he does so often
and so seriously tell us of the downfall of Rome? Surely, surely, the cause
why men are not fully persuaded of the final fall of Rome, is, because they
do not diligently peruse this book of the Apocalypse. But let men be
studious and diligent in this book, and they shall be out of al doubt, that
Rome is the great whore of Babylon; that the Pope is Antichrist, and the
Papacy the beast.

But now me thinks I hear some man say, how is it like that Popery shall
fall down more and more here amongst us, since it has so many friends,
backers, and vpholders, and seems to gather strength, and make an head
again? I answer, that al is but a lightening before death. I answer, that al
is but the stopping of a water-brooke, or making a damme overthwart it, which
will cause it to swel more, and break over with greater violence. I answer,
that all is no more then is foretold, that 2the Jesuits shall come forth like
frogs out of their puddles, and marish grounds, and keep a croaking for a
time, til they have croaked their own destruction, and many others. For they
shall never set up Popery here in England, to stand and continue, do what they
can. I must needs confess, that our sins, being so horrible and
outrageous, as they are, and being grown to such an height, and ripeness, do
deserve some fearful vengeance, and that God has a just controversy against
us, as sometimes he had against Israel, because there was no mercy, nor
truth, Hos. 4.
nor knowledge of God in the land: but swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and
whooring, and blood touches blood, and therefore says God, the land shall
mourn, etc. But yet I hope for his covenant sake, for his great mercies sake,
for his names sake, for his glory sake, and for his Church sake, he will be
gracious and favorable unto us, and not bring upon us that vengeance which our
sins have deserved: or at leastwise though he correct us, as indeed he has
just cause, and we may justly fear it; yet he will do it in mercy, for our
amendment, and not in wrath to our destruction, as he says by his Prophet:
Ier. 30.11. Ier. 46.28. Ier. 10.24.
I will not utterly destroy thee, but I will correct thee by judgment, and
not utterly cut thee off. But howsoever it shall please the most wise God to
deal with us; yet this I say, and am persuaded of, that Popery shall never
be established again in this kingdom; my reason is, because the everlasting
Gospel carried abroad by the Angel that flies in the midst of heaven, shall
spread still more and more throughout all the kingdoms of Europe, Romans 11.24.
as appears Chap. 14. ver.6. for otherwise how shall Rome fall? how shall the
Jews ever be converted? how shall fire come down from heaven, and devour both
Gog and Magog, John tells us plainly, that in these last days the Gospel
shall be preached to many people, Apoc. 10. ver.11 Apoc. 11. ver. 13
and nations, and tongues, and to many kings. And further he says, that in
this age wherein we live, many shall renounce Idolatry, repent and give glory
to the God of heaven. But some man may say, how prove you that this kingdom is
one of them which S. John speaks of, and which he means, wherein the
gospel shall be preached unto the end of the world? I answer, Apoc. 17 ver.
12.13.16.
that it is proved out of the 17. chapter of this prophecy, where the holy
ghost tells us flatly, that those ten kingdoms of Europe which had a long
time ben the ten horns and strength of the beast, and being of one mind, had
given their power and authority unto the beast, should now in these last days
rise up against the whore of Babylon, make war against her, hate her and make
her desolate. But this kingdom is one of those ten horns, England and other
kingdoms which have forsaken the beast, shall so continue unto the end of the
world.
and other kingdoms which now hate the whore, do not continue, how shall she
be made desolate and naked etc? Then it should seem, the beast shall revive
and recover himself again, and so S. John shall be found a false prophet. But
God is true, and all men are liers, and Saint John shall be found a true
prophet: and therefore these kingdoms of Europe which have begun to hate the
whore, shall continue, and never give her over, till (as the holy ghost says)
they have eaten her flesh, and burnt her with fire: that is, till they have
utterly devoured her. But here it will be objected, that in the latter days
iniquity shall have the upper hand. I answer first, that I find no such
place of scripture. But this I find, that our Lord Jesus foretells his
disciples, that very shortly after his death and resurrection, many seducers
and false teachers should arise, which should deceive many, and draw them away
from the love of the gospel: and says he, because iniquity shall be
increased, Math. 24.12.
the love of many shall be cold. But this speech of our savior, does not
properly concern our times. But yet it must needs be granted, that the wicked
shall wax worse and worse, and the world shall not amend, but still be worse
and worse,

But now me thinks I hear some man say, what likelihood is there of all this
which you write touching the overthrow of Rome? Do we not see, that Rome is
yet strong? Does not Italy, Spain, the greatest part of France, and
Netherland, and Germany, stand for her defense? Has not the whore still many
and great bearers, and vpholders, what likelihood is there the^, that ever she
shall be brought so low as you speak of? I answer, We may not say, what
likelihood is there of this?
that in this case we must not ask this question what likelihood. We must not
consult with flesh and blood. We must not take counsel of humane reason. For
God is marvelous in his devises, and when he has once decreed and determined
of any future event, he will compass it by means far surpassing all humane
reach and capacity: yea by such plots and devises, as man's wit could never
have once dreamed of. For he has all means in heaven and earth in his hands,
and is admirable in all his proceedings, and therefore we may not ask this
question, what likelihood, or how can it be, or how can it possibly come to
pass? What likelihood was there an hundred years past, when Rome was in her
height, and all the kingdoms of Europe stood for her, that ever she should
have been forsaken of so many of her old friends, as at this day she is? What
likelihood was there, that when the Pope could command the Emperor, and all
the kings of Europe, and their kingdoms, that ever he should have been
brought so low as at this day he is, God be thanked? What likelihood was
there that ever poor Martin Luther should stand out with the everlasting
gospel in his mouth against the Pope, Emperor, and as it were the whole
world, and yet dye in his bed in a good old age? What likelihood was there that
Henry the eight, of famous memory, should renounce Rome, oppose himself
against the Pope, and suppress the Abbeys, Priories, and Monasteries in this
kingdom, and take their lands and livings into his own hands? Therefore I
conclude, that when God has decreed the utter overthrow of Rome, we must not
ask this question, how can it be? or which way shall it be brought about? For
the scriptures do teach that God in all ages, has done the greatest exploits,
either by himself alone without means, or else by weak means, or contrary
to all means.

2. Chro. 20.
By himself without means he overthrew the Moabits, Ammonites, and them of
mount Seir, which made war against good king Iehosaphat.

Exodus 14.
By himself he destroyed Pharaoh, and his army in the red Sea.

Ios. 6. 2. King. 19.
By himself he overthrew Jericho, that great city.

By himself he slew the huge army of the Assyrians, that made war against
Ezechias.

2. Chro. 14.
By himself he smote the great and dreadful army of the Ethiopians before
Asa, and before Judah.

2. King. 6.
By himself he smote the Syrians, which besieged Dothan the city where the
prophet Elisha was.

Iud. 7.
By weak means he overthrew the innumerable army of the Midianites, even by
Gedeons three hundred.

1. Sam. 14.
By weak means he slew a garrison of the Philistines, even by Jonathan and
his armor-bearer.

Genesis 14.
By weak means he overthrew the kings of Sodom and thereabouts, even by
Abraham, and his family.

He overthrew Goliath by David: Sisera by Iael: 1 Samuel 17^ Iud 4. Iud. 9. Dan. 3.
Abimilech by a woman.

Contrary to means, he saved the three children from burning, being in the
fire.

Contrary to means, he saved Jonas from drowning, Ion. 2.
being cast into the sea.

Contrary to means, Dan. 6.
he preserved Daniel from devouring, being cast into the Lions den.

Contrary to means, he kept the Israelites from drowning, being in the
bottom of the sea. Exodus 14.


Contrary to means, Ios. 10.
and to all expectation he caused the Sun to stand still at noone day,
whilst he overthrew the five kings of Canaan by Iosuah.

Therefore I conclude, that forasmuch as God in all ages has effected the most
strange and admirable things, either by himself without means, or by very
weak means, or contrary to all means, therefore it is in vain to ask this
question, The utter overthrow of Rome concluded of.
how or by what means shall Rome be destroyed? for it is enough for us to
know that it shall be destroyed, and come to utter desolation. And in my
judgment the holy ghost has so often, and so plainly affirmed this, that no
man should any more make any doubt of it, Apoc, 14.8. Apoc. 16 2. Apoc 17.8.
Apoc. 17.11. Apoc. 18.21. Apoc. 18.8. Apoc. 17 16. Apoc. 18 22. Apoc. 18.9.
or once call it into question. For what can be more plain, then to say, Rome
is fallen: Rome shall fall. Great hailestones like talants shall fall upon it.
It shall go to perdition: It shall fall to destruction: It shall be cast
down like a great milslone into the bottom of the sea. It shall be burnt with
fire: It shall be made desolate and naked: It shall be without inhabitants.
All the popish sort both high and low, shall with great mourning and
lamentation bewail the desolatio^ thereof. Apoc. 16.16. Apoc. 19.20.
Their armies shall come to Armageddon. The beast and the false prophet shall
be taken, and their captains and soldiers slain by infinite heaps, and
their carkases made meat for the fowls of the air. If all this be not plain
enough, I cannot tell what can be plain enough. True it is indeed, the holy
Ghost does not name Rome, but it is apparent by the circumstances, that all
these places must needs be understood of Rome, of Romish power, and of the
Romish armies. For there can be no other sound sense given of them, as all
divine writers, and interpreters do affirm, both new and old. And therefore
I conclude, that S. John in this prophecy could not speak more plainly,
except he should have named Rome. For he names Babylon. He names the great
city, which then reigned over the kings of the earth. He names the city
situate upon seven hills. He names the city which had seven several
governments. And therefore out of all doubt he means Rome.

Well then, since it is so that Rome and all Romish power and authority shall
fall flat down, and come to utter destruction and desolation in this life, let
all men take heed how they join with Rome: how they join with the Romish
Church, and how they receive the beasts mark, for assuredly they shall al be
destroyed together, both in this life, and in that which is to come, as we
shall hear by and by.

Let all wise men therefore, and all such as have any care of their salvation,
follow the wholesome counsel and advise of the holy ghost, which says, Go
out of her my people, Apoc. 81.4.5.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues: for her sins are come up to Heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities. Our only wisdom then will be to separate our selves from the whore
of Babylon, that is, from the Church of Rome, and to join our selves with all
speed to the true Church of God, that is, the Church of the Protestants, for
this shall stand and flourish: the other shall fall down and perish.

But what then, Gods people are to rejoice in the ouerthr^w of Rome. Apoc.
18.20.
shall we be sorry for the fall of Babylon and the ruin of Rome? No no. The
holy Ghost counsels us greatly to rejoice in her destruction and overthrow,
saying, O Heavens rejoice over her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, because
God has given your judgment on her. We are therefore to be so far from
mourning and lamenting for the desolation of Rome, as the kings, merchants,
mariners and other her friends, as that it ought to be the very joy and
reioicing of our hearts. For S. John says, that not only the holy Angels,
Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs shall rejoice at the destruction of Rome: but
also all the Saints, and the whole body of the Church. And therefore he says,
that after the utter overthrow of Rome, He heard a great voice of a great
multitude in Heaven, saying, Hallelu-iah, that is, praise ye the Lord, Apoc.
19.1.2.
for he has condemned the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants shed by her hand. And
again says S. John, they said, Hallelu-jah, Hallelu-jah, Hallelu-jah, thrice
together, thereby expressing the great joy, and tha^ksgiueing, for the
destruction and overthrow of the great whore: and even so ought all that love
God, that love the Church, and that love the truth, greatly to rejoice in the
destruction of Rome: because this monster shall no longer oppress the Israel
of God. And sure it is, that the more zealous and godly that a man is, the more
he will rejoice at the destruction of Popery: for a man cannot love God and his
church, that does not laugh in the destruction of that Antichristian and bloody
kingdom. Let no man here say, this is cruelty: this is want of charity: and
want of pity, to laugh in the destruction of any, or to rejoice at other men's
harms. Apoc. 8.6.
But the most wise God says, Reward her, even as she has rewarded you, and
give her double, according to her works, and in the cup that she has filled
to you, fill her the double. In as much as she glorified her self, and lived
in pleasure, so much give ye to her torment and sorrow. And therefore I
affirm, that no man ought to be moved with any compassion or pity, Psalm 137.
for the overthrow of Rome. But herein that saying of the Prophet is true:
Blessed is he that takes and dasheth her children against the stones: and
again bend thy bow, Ier. 50.14.
shoot at her, spare no arrows. For she has sinned against the Lord. Moreover
we are to observe, that forasmuch as the Lord wills and commands all men
to reward Rome, as she has rewarded us, and to give her double according to
her works, therefore we ought every one of us, as much as in him lies, and as
his calling will bear, to do his uttermost to pull down Rome, the Magistrate
by the sword, the Minister by the word, and the people by their prayers. For
even Christian kings and princes, and all the nobles of the earth, must not be
negligent to fight against Rome. For herein that saying is true: Ier. 48.10.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed is he
that keeps back his sword from blood. For this cause, I do upon my knees
night and day, most humbly and instantly entreat the God of heaven, that as
he has put into the heart of our most gracious and excellent Queen, to hate
the whore of Babylon, and to be his greatest instrument in the whole world, for
the weakening and ouerturning of Rome, and defense of his most glorious gospel
(which is her crown and glory in all the Chuches, and her great renown in all
Christian kingdoms) so she may constantly continue, and never cease drawing
out the sword of Justice, till she have utterly rooted out of her dominions,
all the cursed crew of popish Iebusits, and all such as have received the
beasts mark, and especially the Jesuits and seminary priests which are the
devils brokers, the popes agents, and the king of Spaines factors in all
kingdoms. Here also I do most humbly even upon my knees, with dropping eyes,
yea if it were possible with tears of blood, beseech and entreat the learned
and reverend fathers of our Church, that they would bend all their power and
authority, with might and maine against the Romish strumpet, and the rather
because in these days she seems to make a head again, having so many and
great favorers, that she and her accomplices dare perke with their nebbs, and
very boldly and confidently prate of a tolleration. Here also I do most
humbly and earnestly entreat, all my learned and godly brethren, the ministers
and preachers of this Church of England, that in all their public teachings,
and private proceedings, they would make strong opposition against Rome, and
Romish religion. And I beseech the God of Gods, that we may all join
together, with united forces, to march on valiantly against the armies of
Antichrist, and to spread the everlasting Gospel far and near, to the utter
ouerturning and beating down of this western Babylon, and that howsoever we
may amongst our selves differ in judgment in some things, yet that there may
be no breach of love, or alienation of affections amongst us, but that we may
all go together hand in hand, and arm in arm, to preach Gods everlasting
truth, and to set our selves against the common adversaries. For if we will
not set our selves against them, yet they will be sure to set themselves
against us. And thus much concerning the third maine point, which is the final
fall of Rome, even in this world.

Now it follows to speak of the fourth maine point, which is, by whom, and
when Rome shall be overthrown. But for the better understanding of this point
concerning the persons that shall overthrow Rome, we are to observe that S.
John describes the whore of Babylon, Apoc 17.4.
sitting upon a scarlet colored beast, having seven heads, and ten horns,
whereby is meant the Roman monarchy, as has been showed before. After this
the Angel expounds unto John, what the heads, and horns of the beast mean,
and says, that the ten horns are ten kings, or ten kingdoms, which yet have
not received a kingdom, but shall receive power as kings, at one hour, with
the beast. The sense is, that these ten kingdoms, had not received such
power and authority, under the Emperors, as they should under the Popes, for
there was great difference in these kingdoms under the Popes, from that which
they had been under the Emperors. For they received far greater power, and
they carried an other mind toward the papacy, then the nations did before
toward the empire, for they did submit themselves to the papacy for conscience,
and love, even as to the holy Church, which they never did to the Empire. And
this is the reason, why the holy ghost says, they had not received a kingdom,
but should receive power as kings, at one hour with the beast. Which is not to
be understood simply, but after a sort, for they had received kingdoms, under
the Emperors, but not in such sort as afterward they did under the Popes. For
the Roman monarchy under the dominion of the Popes, was in his greatest
height, and altitude, and the kings of Europe grew up together with the papacy
in power, might and dominion. And S. Cap. 17. ve. 13.
John adds, that these ten kings or kingdoms were all of one mind, and did
give their power and authority unto the beast, that is, they did with might
and maine, labor to uphold the Babylonicall strumpet. But the Angel tells
John flatly, that the ten horns, that is, the ten kingdoms of the empire,
which before had given their names, their power, and authority to the beast,
to uphold her and defend her, should now in these last days all change their
minds, and turn against her. For says the Angel to John: The ten horns
which thou saw upon the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and make
her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.
Here then it does plainly appear, who they be that shall overthrow Rome,
and by whom it shall be destroyed. To wit, by the ten kings of Europe, or
kingdoms of Europe, which some very learned do reckon up to be these,
England, Scotland, Germany, France, Spain, Denmark, Sweueland, Poland,
Russia, and Hungary. If the holy ghost by the ten horns, do not mean a
defi^^t number, that is just ten: yet assuredly he means all the kingdoms of
Europe, and whatsoever else did once uphold the beast.
S. John words are plain, that these kingdoms which took part with the
beast, shall take against her, and pull her down. But we know, that all the
kingdoms of Europe did take part with her, therefore it follows that all
the kingdoms of Europe shall take against her. And therefore it is very
probable, that in time France, Spain, and Italy, It is probable that France,
Spain, and Italy shall f^rsake the whore
shall turn against the beast. We know that the rest of the kingdoms are
already turned against the beast, and the beast has lost seven of his horns:
the eight, which is France, begins to be somewhat loose, and to shake a
little, which if it fall off, the rest will follow after a pace. The reason why
the kingdoms, which were subject to the Roman empire, are compared to horns,
is, because that as horns are the strength and defense of a beast, wherewith
also he pusheth down other creatures: so the strength and defense of the
Roman empire, and the papacy, was in the kingdoms which were subject unto
them, and took part with them, whereby also they did mightily push at other
nations and kingdoms. Moreover we are to observe, that whereas S. John says,
the same horns which did uphold and defend the whore, shall pull her down, it
is not to be understood of the same men, but of their successors in the same
kingdoms. For the kings of England, Scotland, Denmark, Polonia, and other
countries, which gave their power and authority unto the beast, are dead and
gone. If we respect the persons of the men, and those which succeed them now
in these kingdoms, and pull down the whore, are other persons: but because
they succeed and govern in these kingdoms, they are said to be those ten
horns of the beast. Then thus it is: these ten kings which now hate the
harlot, are called the ten horns of the beast, not because they be any
defense and strength unto him, but because they sit upon the same thrones of
their ancestors, which did uphold and maintain him But this one thing is very
clear and apparent out of the interpretation of the Angel, that the same
kingdoms which have maintained Popery, shall put it down, as we see already
fulfilled in England, Scotland, Denmark, and the rest which have embraced the
Gospel. And it is very likely that the other kingdoms which as yet have not
embraced the Gospel, shall Gods good time embrace it. For this seems unto
me, to be a very good argument taken from the words of the interpreting
Angel. Those ten kingdoms which have vpheld Rome, shall pull down Rome: but
France, Spain, and Italy, have vpheld and do uphold Rome: Therefore France,
Spain, and Italy, shall pull down Rome. To this may be added for
confirmation: that the everlasting Gospel shall be preached in these last days,
Apoc. 14.6.
to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. Which I understand of
all the nations of Europe, which were subject to the Roman Empire, and the
Papacy. And further that the holy ghost says, that the preachers of the
Gospel from Luthers time, shall publish Gods truth among people and nations,
and tongues, Apoc. 10.11
and many kings: which I understand as before.

I am not ignorant that some good divines make it doubtful, whether Rome
shall be overthrown by the Kings of Europe only, or by the Turk also, and the
kings of the East. For mine own part, I dare not resolutely determine of it,
being a thing to come, but the event shall declare, and they that live shall
one day see it. It may be the Turk, and the Eastern princes may have some
hand in this business. For the Roman Monarchy did stretch far that way, when
it was in his highest elevation. But that which is alleged of the drying up of
the waters of Euphrates, Apoc. 16 12.
that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared: Proves nothing,
because it is an allusion to Darius and Cyrus, which were kings of the East;
and took old Babylon by drying up the waters of Euphrates, and leading over
their armies, as we have heard before. I do thus then resolve and conclude,
that the Turk and the Eastern Kings may happily have some stroke in this
work. But it seems most probable unto me, The kings of Europe shall
overthrow Rome.
that the kings of Europe shall be the greatest agents in this action. For the
words are plain, that the Kings of the earth which sometimes were subject to
that monstrous beast, should now at last shake of the yoke of her servitude,
and withdraw the obedience of their subjects from her, And should hate and
abhor the harlot of Rome, and should make her desolate. By vvithdrawing their
subjects from her obedience, and naked, by spoiling her of her treasures, and
shall eat her flesh, and tear her in pieces for pure hatred, and burn her
with fire: that is, bring her to utter destruction.

So that she which before at her pleasure might command all Princes to
beegin war, to cease from war: to defend her quarrels, and to annoy her
enemies, now is glad to flatter a few seduced Princes to take her part, that
she be not utterly forsaken of all men. Or else to practice by treason, and
treachery, subborning the Jesuits, those rogues and vagabonds, to stir up
tumults among the people, and to trouble godly estates, and commonwealthes,
that despise her dominion, but assuredly without all hope, ever to recover her
ancient tyranny. But here it may be objected, that the preaching of the
gospel, is the greatest and strongest means to overthrow Babylon. And
therefore how can it be done by the Christian princes. I answer that it is
true indeed, that of all other means, the gospel is the strongest, but the
thing is this. First the gospel being set abroach, shall detect and discover
the whore of Rome, and all her abominable doctrine, and filthiness, which
the Christian princes espying, shall renounce her, make war upon her, and slay
in the field thousand thousands of her soldiers, as we have heard before.
And hitherto concerning the persons, that shall overthrow Rome.

Now it follows to speak of the time when it shall be destroyed. Which of
all the rest is a thing most hard to be decided. For the holy ghost faith,
Job. 24.1.
why should not the times he hid of the Almighty: So as they which know him,
should not forsee the times appointed of him. Dan. 12.9.
And again, the words are closed and sealed up, Act. 1.7.
until the time determined. And again, it is not for you to know the times or
the seasons, which the father has put in his own power. Yet even in this
point, I will by Gods asistance, set down so much as is revealed, and so much
as God has given me to see. First I do confess that God in his word, has
set down the just period, and precise determination of all the greatest
afflictions and persecutions, that ever came to his Church, before the coming
of his Son in the flesh, for the comfort thereof, as that of Egypt, after the
expiration of four hundred and thirty years: that of Babylon, after the date
of seventy years: that of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 8.
after the determination of an hundred and thirty years: that of Alexanders
state after six years: Dan. 11.
that of Magog and Egypt, after 294 years. So likewise that of Christ's death
and resurrection, after seauentie seauens, or seauentie weeks, which make 490
years, as the Angel Gabriell foretold, unto the prophet Daniell. Dan. 9 42.
But concerning the just period and precise determination, of the persecutions
of the Church, since Christ by the Roman Empire, and the papacy, we find not
the like set down: and here of there may be two reasons yielded. First
because the Church of the Jews were not under so clear, and precious promises
as we are, therefore it was needful, for the better strengthening of their hope
and comfort in afflictions, that they should know the very time determined: but
because the Church of the christians lives under most clear and comfortable
promises of deliverance, therefore God according to his deep wisdom would
have our faith exercised in an assured expectation of the acco^plishment
thereof, though the precise time be concealed. An other reason may be this: the
utter overthrow of Rome, falls out to be, but a little before the coming of
Christ to judgment, as appears in this prophecy. Now then, if we knew the
day or year certainly, when Rome should fall finally, it would give us too
much light, unto the knowledge of the last day, which God in great wisdom,
has of purpose hid from the knowledge of all men: yea, and of Angels. I know
right well, that a certain learned writer, does precisely determine the utter
destruction of Rome to fall out, in the year of our Lord 1639. Napier in Apo.
14. page. 183.
But by the favor of so excellent a man be it spoken, I see no sufficient
ground thereof. But touching this matter, of the time of Romes final fall, I
will deliver mine opinion, and my reasons, submitting my self to the judgment
of the learned, for I would be loath, in this or any other thing, to go beyond
my compass, or to pass the bounds of modesty, and humility, and therefore
do refer all to be tried by the sicle of the sanctuary. I do therefore thus
judge, that the utter overthrow of Rome, shall be in this age, I mean within
the age of a man: my reason is this. We of this age, live under the opening of
the seventh seal, the blowing of the sixth trumpet, and the pouring forth of
the sixth vial. For the first it is manifest, because the opening of the
seventh seal, contains all things, that shall fall out to the end of the
world: as has been showed and proved before. Apoc. 8.1.
For the blowing of the sixth trumpet, that also is plain, because under the
blowing thereof, the little book was opened, and the gospel preached, as we
see in this age. Apoc 10.2. ver. 10.11.
For the pouring down of the sixth vial of Gods wrath, that also is most
clear, because thereupon the great river Euphrates dries up, and the Jesuits
are sent out, to solicit the kings of the earth to battle against the
Church, as we see fulfilled in these our days. Then I reason thus, Rome must
fall down finally, Apoc. 14. voc. 6.8.
in that age wherein the little book is opened, and the everlasting gospel
preached: but in this age, the little book is opened, and the everlasting
gospel preached, therefore in this age, Rome must fall down finally. And
again I reason thus: Rome must fall down finally, in that age, wherein the
river Euphrates, that is, Apoc. 16.16.
the fortification of Rome dries up, and the Jesuits are sent forth, to stop
the leake thereof: but all this falls out in this age, as we see with our
eyes. Therefore in this age Rome shall fall down finally. It is very probable
that Rome shall fall finally in this age. Apoc. 10.6.7.
The reason of the proposition is, because in this age the popish armies shall
come to Armageddon.

Moreover this I say, and not I, but the Lord, when the seventh Angel blows
the seventh trumpet, then comes the end of the world: But the sixth Angel,
has sounded the sixth trumpet long ago, as appears by the effects: Therefore
it cannot be long ere the seventh Angel blow. But Rome must fall down
finally, before the seventh Angel blow, as has been showed before.
Therefore the utter fall of Rome cannot be long deferred. I do not determine
either of day, month, or year, because it is not revealed. But I guess at an
age, because the holy ghost points us unto an agent.

If any man see further I will easily yield unto him, and thank God for his
light.
But all these things I set down for the comfort of Gods Church, not desiring
to understand above that which is meet to understand: but to understand
according to sobriety.

Now it rests to speak of the last maine point which is the causes of Romes
utter ruin, and overthrow: she made all nations drunk with the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. They which outwardly make others drunk, or commit
fornication with others, are vvorthie to be severely punished.

How much sorer punishment are they vvorthie of, which do the same
spiritually: and therefore vvoe be to Rome.

An other cause of the destruction of Rome is, for that she has shed the blood
of all the Prophets, Martyrs, In thee was found the blood of the Prophets, and
of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth. The causes of Romes
utter downfall.
What is he vvorthie to have, that is a most cruel bloudsucker: nay what is
he vvorthie to have, that shall murder a kings children: yea, that shall
murder his eldest son and heir apparent to the crown.

But Rome has murdered thousands of the king of Heavens children. Yea, Rome
has murdered the great heir of Heaven and earth, I mean the very son of
God. For Christ was put to death by the Roman power and authority, and by a
Roman Judge, men judge what Rome is vvorthie to have.

Moreover, S. John tells us, that Rome with her enchantments has deceived
all-nations.

Besides all this, the holy ghost says, Rome is the habitation of devils, and
the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean, and hateful bird.
What think you is like to come of an habitation of devils, What trow ye vvil
be the end of a shoule of foul feends, and a company of most ugly and
monstrous helcats. What is like to become of a cage of Howles, Ravens, and
Vultures. Yea, a nest of Vipers, Toades, Snakes, Adders, Cocatrices, and all
the most stinging serpents and venomous vermin in the world. What will be the end
of pild Priests, filthy Friars, maungy Monks, roguing Jesuits. Are not these a
cage of unclean birds. What do they study, what do they plot, what do they
practice every day, but seditions, periuries, murders, co^spiracies,
treacheries, treasons, and all manner of villainies. If I had no other reason to
persuad me that Rome shall fall, and come to a miserable end, yet this only
would make me so to think, that these villainous Jesuits do teach and conclud in
their cursed conue^ticles, yt it is not only lawful but also meritorious, to
murder any christian prince yt is not of their catholic religion: oh
monstrous villains: o most hideous helhou^ds: have not these monsters suborned
diverse desperate caitiffes, to embrue their hands in the blood of christian
princes. How many have been their plots? now desperate have been their
practices, to murder and poison our gracious and noble Queen, the French
king, the king of Scots, and other Christian princes. But can such proceedings
prosper? can such courses be blessed? can a man be established by iniquity?
No no, let them know for a certainty, that God will cross and curse all such
devilish proceedings, as hitherto he has done, his most holy name be
praised. But if any man list to know more of the proceedings, and practices of
Jesuits, let him read master Doctor Sutclieffe his answer, to Parsons
wardword, a book worthy to be read and known of all men. But now to grow to
a conclusion of this point, and to wind up together, all the reasons and
causes of Romes ruin, thus I do determine, that forasmuch as Rome is the
great whore, with whom have committed fornication all the kings of the earth:
forasmuch as Rome has made all nations drunk, with the wine of her
fornication: forasmuch as Rome has deceived all nations, with her
enchantments: forasmuch as Rome is a den of devils, and a cage of all
unclean birds: forasmuch as Rome has shed the blood of Apostles, Martyrs, and
Saints: forasmuch as Rome has murdered the son of God. Therefore it shall at
last, come to most miserable destruction, Nomb. 24. ver. 24.
being that Chittim, which in the end must needs perish: for what punishment,
what pain, what torture, what torment can be enough for this damnable whore,
which has committed such execrable and most outrageous villainies?

Be it therefore known unto all men by these presents, that Rome for all her
most monstrous and prodigious sins, shall fall still more and more, and come
to a fearful destruction, even in this life. But some man may say, what shall
become of Rome, and of all her friends after this life. S. John answers,
Apoc. 14. ver. 9
that if any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, 10.
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and he shall be
tormented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment shall ascend, and they shall have no rest, day
nor night, 11.
which worship the beast, etc. Here is sentence of eternal damnation, passed
upon all the friends of Rome. Oh that all papists would consider this in time,
and think with themselves, what a woeful thing it is to be a papist, for they
and their kingdom must go down in this life, and in the life to come, they
must be tormented in hell fire for ever. For Saint John says flatly, that all
papists shall be cast into the great wine press of the wrath of God, where
they shall be strained and tread, Apoc. 14. ve. 20
till blood come out of the wine press, unto the horse bridles, by the space
of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. And again he says, that the beast
and the false prophet were taken alive, and cast into a lake of fire, burning
with brimstone. Let all men therefore take heed, how they join with the
papists, for we see what shall be their end, both in this life, and the life
to come. Therefore let all Gods people, come out of Babylon, and hasten out of
Sodom, least they be wound up in their judgments. Let all wise men practice
the policy of the Gibeonits, who when they saw that Iosuah did so mightily
prevail against the Cananits, Ios. ^.
and bear down all before him, did very pollitikely provide for their own
safety, and by subtle means enter into league with Iosuah, and the Israel of
God. So let all that have any care of their own salvation, speedely forsake
Babylon, which otherwise will fall upon their heads, and fly to Zion, which
shall stand fast for evermore. And thus having reduced all the five Chapters
following, to prove these foresaid points, I will proceed unto the twentieth
Chapter: for there is almost nothing of any moment or difficulty in the
15.16.17.18. and 19. Chapters, but it has been already opened and expounded.

Chap. 20.
SAint John having in the former chapters, plainly and plentifully set down
the utter overthrow both of the beast and the false prophet, that is, the
Roman empire, and the papacy, does now in this chapter set forth the
condemnation of the dragon, their graund captain, which set them all on work.
For there has as yet, been no motion of him, which has been the beginner
and raiser up of the rest, and the great worker of all mischief, therefore now
comes his judgment and condemnation, now because he has been a more
general worker, and his mischief has extended larger then the kingdom of
Antichrist, therefore in this 20. chapter there is an history of him, set
forth by it self. First how he seduced the nations before the coming of
Christ: afterward how Christ at his coming binds him, by the light of his
Gospel, from seducing the nations, and so holds him shut up, for the space
of a thousand years, in which the Church did flourish greatly, and many were
raised up, unto the spiritual life. But when the thousand years were expired.
Satan was let loose and went forth again to seduce, and by the great
Antichrist, and the Turk, gathered innumerable multitudes into his armies, to
fight against the Church, which armies are called Gog and Magog.

But they are all overcome and destroyed, and that old serpent himself is
caught, and together with his instruments the beast, and the false prophet is
cast into hell fire, to be tormented for ever. And this is the sum and
principal drift of this Chapter.

It contains five principal things, as it were the five parts thereof.

The first is, the binding, Satan, by our Lord Jesus, for the space of a
thousand years.

The second is, the flourishing of the Church, Satan's captivity.

The third is, thousand years expired, and the woeful effects thereof.





The text.
AND I saw an Angel come down from heaven, haueing the key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand.

And he took the dragon that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and
bound him a thousand years.

And cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut him up, and sealed the
door upon him, that he should deceive the people no more, till the thousand
years were fulfilled: so after that he must be loosed for a little season.

This Angel here spoken of, is our Lord Jesus, who is therefore said to have
the key of the bottomless pit, because he has power and authority over hell
and death, as we have heard before.



The time when Satan was thus taken and bound, was, when Christ first preached
the Gospel, and his Apostles after him, to all nations.

The cause why he was now bound and chained up, was, for that he had a long
time seduced all nations, and reigned as King and Lord over the Gentiles, and
greatly seduced the Jews also.

The time of his imprisonment is set down, to be a thousand years, that is,
all the time from the preaching of Christ, and his Apostles, until Gregory the
seventh, and other monstrous Popes, which did let Satan loose again. Which
space of time is guessed by the learned, to be a thousand years or
thereabouts. But here it is to be observed, that this binding of Satan, is
not to be taken simply, and absolutely, as though Satan was so bound and
chained up, for this thousand year, that he could not seduce at all, or do
no mischief at all, after the preaching of the Gospel by Christ, and his
Apostles: I say this is not to be taken simply, but afrer a sort, that is,
that he could not so generally and universally seduce all nations, as he had
in former time, before the coming of Christ. For otherwise it is well known,
that even after Christ's time, he did greatly persecute the Church, bring in
many errors and heresies, and harden and blind many men's hearts: but yet all
this was nothing, in comparison of that which he had wrought in former ages,
when he was even as it were the god of the world, and the Gentiles worshipped
him as God, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 10.
that all the worship of the heathen nations, was the worship of devils. And
again, that God in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own
ways. Act. 14.16.
And then was Satan a great prince indeed. Luke. 10.18.
But now comes a chain for him: For Christ preaches the Gospel, and
sends forth his disciples with power, and thereupon says, I saw Satan
fall down like lightning: For the preaching of the Gospel, beats down the
kingdom of Satan and sin.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that notwithstanding all Satan's power and might,
craft and subteltie, yet this Angel which has the key of the bottomless
pit, does apprehend him and shut him up, and seal the door upon him: so that
he cannot get abroad to seduce so generally, as in former time.

But S. John says, that after a thousand years, he must be loosed for a
little season: that is, the time wherein the great Antichrist should bear the
sway: which was some 4. or 5. hundred years. For the Gospel did prevail in
some measure, in the world, a thousand years after Christ, and the principles
and grounds of true religion continued in the church, until the full loosing of
Satan, though with many blotts, corruptions, and abuses. For after the first
six hundred years, the clear sincerity of the truth was much dimmed with
errors and heresies: but yet the maine grounds did remain till the full
expiration of the thousand years. Now we know that the Gospel has been
preached in these last days, above three score years. Therefore it follows,
that the strength of Popery continued not much above 500. years: Which here
the holy Ghost for our comfort, calls a little season: therefore I do here
omit it.

And I saw seats, and them that sat upon them, and judgment was given unto
them. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship the beast, neither
his Image, neither had taken his mark upon their foreheads, or on their hands,
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand year.

But the rest of the dead men shall not live again, until the thousand years
be finished: this is the first resurrection.

Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection. For on such
the second death has no power. But they shall be the Priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand year.

Here now is set forth the state of the Church millitant, for the space of
the thousand year, wherein Satan was chained up. For it is said here, that
the Church did grow and flourish: yea, and greatly exercise her power and
authority, during that time. And therefore Saint John says, that he saw
seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. Whereby he
means, that the Apostles and their successors, had their chaires, seats, and
consistories, wherein they did both preach the word, and execute the Church
censures: as the Scribes and Phariseies before had sit in the chair of
Moises, and I take it, the latter part of the fourth verse, is to be referred
to the first clause, to wit, that the Church did live and reign with Christ,
a thousand years. Which is not to be understood of the Church triumphant, as
some do take it, and all the rest of this fourth verse, but of the flourishing
estate of the Church militant, during the time of Satan's captivity: for all
the faithful do after a sort live, and reign with Christ, even here in the
earth, when they overcome the world by faith, and subdue Satan and sin, by
the power of grace.

Now where it is said that John saw the souls of them that were beheaded, for
the witness of Jesus, etc. It is to be understood of those, which in the time
of the persecuting empire, and growing of the papacy, were slain for the
truth. For the second beast, which is the dominion of Popes, reigned not in
those thousand year, in the which Satan was bound, but yet did grow by
degrees toward their height, and used great tyranny against the servants of
God, before Satan's full loosing.

The Chiliasts or Millenaries, do fondly gather from this scripture, that
after the overthrow of Antichrist, the Lord Jesus would come and reign with
the faithful, here a thousand years upon the earth, and that in this time,
that Christ should so reign, as a great and glorious king upon the earth, his
subjects should enjoy all manner of earthly pleasures, and delights. This
foolish error is confuted by the words that follovv in the text; as we shall
see afterward.

Whereas he says, the rest of the dead shall not live again. It is to be
understood, of such as were spiritually dead, that is, such as did despise the
Gospel, which was preached those thousand years, and were not thereby
revived and quickened unto eternal life, but did still remain, as men dead in
sins, and trespasses.

Therefore the meaning of S. John is, that as in the thousand years, many that
heard Christ and his Apostles, and their successors, were raised up from the
death of sin, to the life of righteousness, so many others were not
quickened by their doctrine, but still dwelt in their sins, whom he calls
the rest of the dead: and he says, these shall not live again, meaning the
life of God, or the life of grace, and whereas he adds until the thousand
years be finished, he means never, or not at all, for so the word until, is
often taken in the scriptures: and it is sure, that after the expiration of the
thousand years, they did not live the life of God, and the life of the spirit.
For then the devil was let loose upon the world, to work his pleasure, and to
seduce with all efficacy of error and iniquity.

Whereas it is said, this is the first resurrection, he means the rising from
sin, to the life of righteousness, which was in the thousand years, of the
gospells preaching, and therefore he adds, that he is blessed that has part
in the first resurrection, etc. and says, that all such shall reign with
Christ a thousand years. Which is meant of the reign of the faithful, even
upon earth, for the space of that thousand years, in which Satan was bound:
but yet excludes not their eternal glory in the heavens.

And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison.

And shall go out to deceive the people, which are in the four corners of the
earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is
as the sand of the sea.

And they went up unto the plain of the earth, and they compassed the tents of
the Saints about, and the beloved city: But fire came down from God out of
heaven, and devoured them.

Now S. John tells us, that after the determination of the thousand years,
Satan shall be let loose upon the world, for their unthankfulness, and
contempt of the Gospel, to seduce and deceive, even as much as ever he did.
No marvel therefore, that the two great and monstrous heresies of Popery and
Mahometrie, did now begin mightily to grow and increase in the world. For
what other thing can be looked for, after this letting loose of Satan.

But we are to observe, that as Satan was bound by degrees, through the
ministry of Christ, and his Apostles, and their immediate successors: so also
he was loosed by degrees, by the prevailing of heresies, till the great
Antichrist was hatched, and brought into the possession of his cursed chair.
For Satan was not fully loosed, till the year of our Lord 998. At what time
Siluester the second, came to be Pope, who was in league with the Devil.
Stories do report, that at his death he called for the Cardinals, and
confessed that he had familiarity with the Devil, and how he had given
himself unto him body and soul, so that he might come to the papal dignity.

After him succeeded sundry other Popes, which were notorious monsters, some of
them murderers, some poisoners, some sorcerers, some coniurers. By whom the
devil was fully loosed, all light of the gospel, and true religion being in a
manner clean put out, and most abominable Idolatry, and all manner of
villainy spreading over the face of the earth, and therefore S. John says, that
Satan being thus fully loosed, he went forth to deceive the people, which
were in the four corners of the earth, even Gog and Magog, etc. This seducing
by Satan, here spoken of, is the same with that which is spoken Chapter 13.
only this excepted, that this of Gog and Magog is more general. We read
there how all nations, kindreds, and tongues, were made to worship the image of
the beast, and to receive his mark: but that is to be extended no further,
then to those kingdoms which were subject to the papacy. But here by these
armies of Gog and Magog, are understood all the chief enemies of the Church,
in these last days, since the loosing of Satan, both open and secret, both
Turk and Pope: for the Turk is an open enemy: the Pope a more close enemy.
Gog signifies covered, Magog uncovered, whereby is noted the Pope and the Turk.
For the Pope comes covered under the name of Christ, and Christ's vicar,
Peter's successor etc. But the Turk comes uncovered, for he openly denies,
and impugneth Christ.

Moreover the names of Gog and Magog, are here set down to note of what
countries these chief enemies should spring: to wit, out of Scithia, Siria,
Arabia, Italy, and Spain. For Magog was the son of Iapheth, Genesis 10. ver. 2.
of whom came the Sythians. Gog was the name of a great Captain in the lesser
Asia, which built a city, and named it after his own name Gogkartah, that is,
the city of Gog. And it is put in the prophecy of Ezechiel, Ezechiel. 38.
for the whole region of the lesser Asia, and Siria. Whereby the prophet did
foretell, that the great enemies of the Church should arise out of those
coasts. As in very truth they did, for out of Egypt, Scithia, Siria, and the
lesser Asia, did spring up Ptolomeus, Silencus, Antigonus, Cassander, and the
rest of Alexanders posterity, which vexed and oppressed the Jews, by the
space of 294. years, even until the coming of the Messiah, at what time the
divided Greek empire was overthrown, and translated to the Romans.

Furthermore it is to be noted, that the prophet Ezechiell says, that Gog is
the chief prince of Mesech, and Tuball. Genesis 10.2.
By Mesech he means Arabia, and by Tuball Italy and Spain: noting thereby
the countries and kingdoms from whence the great persecutors of the Church,
from the return out of the captivity of Babylon, until the coming of the
Messiah should arise. For assuredly those enemies, were collected of diverse
nations, but served chiefly under the princes of Asia the lesser, of Siria,
and of Scithia. Now then to conclude: Gog and Magog in Ezechiell, are put for
the princes of those countries, which were the chief Captains in gathering
great and mighty armies unto battle, against the children of Israel, after
they were come out of the captivity of Babylon. And the prophet there in one
sum under the armies of Gog and Magog, comprehends all the enemies that
fought against them, from time to time, after the captivity, unto the coming
of Christ. And now for the application of this, unto the enemies of the Church,
under the Gospel, we must first note, that through this book, the figures
and phrases of speech are taken out of the law and the prophets. Now therefore,
when the Lord would set forth in one sum all the enemies of the Church,
which Satan mustereth, after the time of his loosing out of prison, before the
coming of Christ to judgment: there is no one place more fit, to set forth
all these armies, then those armies of Gog and Magog, and therefore the names,
even Gog and Magog are here brought in, to set forth these huge ar^ies of the
Turk, and of the Pope, and of all the enemies of the Church, in these last
days, which should gather themselves to battle, being in number as the sand
of the sea: as S. John says, yea, did cover the whole face of the earth with
their multitudes, and compass the tents of the Saints about, and the beloved
city, that is, did make war against the Church and people of God, which in
comparison of them, were but as a few tents, or some little city. But mark
what follows, and consider the issue of the battle. The holy ghost says
expressly, that fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them.
Which does plainly show that the armies of Gog and Magog, though never so
huge, shall be destroyed by the fire of Gods wrath.

Now from this I gather, that as the armies of the Pope shall go down still
more and more, as formerly has been showed, and as experience in the last
years good success both in Ireland, Netherland, and against Spain also, has
partly proved, (Gods most holy name be praised) so also the armies of the Turk
shall be overthrown, so far forth as they fight against the true Church, or
at least be so kept back, that they shall not be able to compass the tents of
the Saints, as we see and feel this day, God be thanked.

And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone,
where that beast, and that false prophet are and shall be tormented, even day and
night, for evermore.

Here is set down the Devils doom: to wit, that he shall be cast down into
the infernal pit, as well worthy both for his seducing all nations, and
stirring up the armies of Gog and Magog, against the Church, even to root it
up, if it were possible. Therefore Saint John tells us, that forasmuch as he
is the author of all mischief, and he that has set all the rest a work,
therefore both he and his instrumens the beast, and the false prophet, Gog and
Magog, shall all drinck of the same cup of Gods eternal wrath, and be all
thrown down together into one close prison, which is that gasping gulf and
infernal lake, that burns with fire and brimstone, for ever.

Lo then, what shall be the end of the devil, the Pope, the Turk, the
Emperor, the King of Spain, the Cardinal, and all other the devils
instruments, which here in earth have persecuted the Church, and compassed
the tents of the Saints, and the beloved City.

Now after all this in the five last verses, Saint John enters into a lively
and clear description of the last judgment. First noting the terror and
majesty of the Judge himself, in this, from his face both Heaven and earth
fled away: that is, no creature shall be able to endure his angry countenance, in
that day: and yet vvithall setting down the purity and uprightness of his
judgment and judgment seat, calling it a white Throne. death and hell, sea
and grave, did deliver up their dead. And all without exception, came to
judgment. And the books of their consciences were opened, (for every man's
work is engraven upon his conscience, as it were in letters of brass, or
with the point of a Diamond: Ier. 17.2. Ver. 13.
as the Prophet speaks.) And they were judged of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works, and according to the
testimony of their own consciences: And death and hell, yea, whosoever were
not found written in the book of life, were cast into the lake of fire, Turk,
with their overthrow, and also the preaching and prevailing of the Gospel in
these last days: he comes to describe the last judgment In the 14. Chapter
having set down, that the everlasting gospel should be ple^tifully preached
in this last age, and the overthrow of Babylon, immediately following,
forthwith he proceeds to the description of the last day. In this Chapter
having before concluded of the utter overthrow of Rome, of the beast, and the
false prophet, of Gog and Magog, and all adversary power, at length he
proceeds to this description of Christ's second coming, which we have heard
of. And out of all this, I do gather, that the utter overthrow of the Pope, and
all his adherents, shall be in this life, a little before the coming of Christ
unto judgment.

Chap. 21.
AS we have heard before of the utter overthrow of the beast, and the false
prophet, and all their adherents, and also of the everlasting condemnation of
the dragon, that old serpent, which set them all a work. So now in this
Chapter, we are to hear of that most happy and blessed estate, which the
faithful shall dwell in for evermore: so that the maine drift of this Chapter
is, most fully to describe that infinite glory and endless felicity, to the
which all the 144000, that is, all the elect of God, shall be advanced, when both
the beast, and all that have received his mark, shall be cast down into the
infernal lake.

This Chapter may very fitly be divided into four parts.

The first is, a description of the renouation of the world, and the
restoration of the creature.

The second is,

The third is, a protestation of God himself,

The fourth is, holy Jerusalem. Which city is here most gloriously described
of his walls, gates, foundations, streets, height, length, breadth,
brightness, matter, form, persons, and inhabitants.

The text.
AND I saw a new heaven, and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first
earth were passed away, and there was no more sea.

And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.

And I heard a great voice of heaven, saying, behold the tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be their God.

And God shall wipe all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain.
For the first things are passed.

By a new heaven and a new earth, is meant the renewed estate of heaven and
earth, after this life in their quality, not in their substance. For we do
believe according to the scripture, that this visible heaven, and this visible
earth shall continue for ever, as touching their matter and substance. But
shall be greatly altered and changed in condition, and quality. 2. Pet. 3.
For S. Peter says, we look for new heavens, and a new earth, according to
his promise, wherein dwells righteousness, that is, such heavens, and such a
earth, as is free from all corruption and sin. Which thing also the Apostle
S. Paul does plainly teach, saying, that the creature does fervently expect,
Romans 8 19.
when the sons of God shall be revealed, that is, when Gods children shall be
made known to be as they are, the very heirs of infinite glory, which in this
life does not appear. And he yields two reasons of this desire of the
creature: one is, because in the mean time it is subject to vanity and
corruption: the other is, that then it shall be free from both. And for this
cause the Apostle says, that the creature groneth with us, Romans 8.
and earnestly desires, and longs after that day, wherein it shall be set
free from the bondage of corruption, and redintigrated and restored to that
pristinate estate, wherein it was before the fall. But whether this is to be
understood of heaven and earth only, or of heaven and earth with their
adjuncts and particular creatures, I will not here go about to discuss:
howbeit I do greatly incline to their opinion, which hold, that heaven and
earth, with all their furniture being redintigrated and restored to their first
estate, shall remain for ever, to set forth the glory of the creator, and
for that use of glorified men, which now the Angels have of them.

Now whereas Saint John adds, that there shall be no more Sea. He means
that there shall be no more any troublesome and confused estate of this world,
no more broiles, waves, tempests, Chap. 4.6. Chap. 8.8. Chap. 13.^.
and storms, as it falls out in this life. For the word Sea is so taken
twice or thrice before.

By the holy city new Jerusalem, he means the Church triumphant, which
therefore is said to come down from God out of heaven, because it has all his
newness and holiness from God, and from heaven, whereby it is now prepared
and made ready to be married unto Christ, even as a bride tricked and trimmed
up for her husband. And for this cause S. John hears a voice from heaven,
saying, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and he will be their God. Meaning thereby that
Jesus Christ will keep house with his glorified spouse, and be at bed and
bourd with her for ever in the heavens, at what time she shall be freed from
all tears woe and misery, that the first things are passed, that is, the
state wherein the world is now, being subject to many afflictions, temptations,
vanities, and corruptions.

And he that sat upon the throne said. Behold I make all things new, and he
said unto me. Write: for these words are faithful and true.

And he said unto me, it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end. I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life
freely.

He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and
he shall be my son.

But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liers, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is the second
death.

Here the omnipotent God, which sits upon his most glorious throne, does
protest, that he will make all things new, that is, restore the world to that
execellent estate wherein it was before Adams fall, and his elect to a state
and condition far more excellent in heaven, and for the greater certainly
and assurance of it, wills and commands John to write it, and record it as
a thing most certain and infallible, and to set it down as a thing already
done. For things to come which are decreed in the counsel of God, are as
certain, as if they were past: for God cannot err, alter, nor change, and
therefore he says, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the
unchangeable, and immutable God. And adds, that he will give freely to every
one that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life, that is, without all
regard of our deserts, he will give to every one, that earnestly seeks after
heaven and heavenly things, his full fill thereof. And moreover, that whosoever
overcomes, in the spiritual battle, shall have the full fruition of all
good things, both in this life, and the life to come, as having special right
and interest therein through Christ, God being his father, and he his son
and heir. that all reprobates, all Atheists, worldlings, and all unbelievers
shall have their part an portion, in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone for ever.

And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials,
full of the seven plagues, and talked with me, saying, I will show thee the
bride the Lambs wife.

And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and an high mountain, and
showed me that great City, that holy Jerusalem, discending out of Heaven
from God.

Having the glory of God, and her shining was like unto a stone most precious
as a Jasper stone, clear as Christ all.

Here one of the Angels mentioned in the 16. Chapter, which had a Vial full
of Gods wrath: Talks with John, and tells him that he will show him the
bride the Lambs wife: that is, the triumphant Church, or the Church in her
glorified estate, being united, and married unto Christ, in the kingdom of
glory. And therefore Saint John says, that this Angel carried him away in the
spirit, to a great and high mountain, and showed him that great City holy
Jerusalem. etc.

when this Angel showed John the great whore of Babylon, he carried him away
into the wilderness in the spirit: because the whore of Babylon should make
the Church barren and desolate, as a wilderness. But now that he is to show
him the spouse of Christ in her glory, and to describe the everlasting
Jerusalem, he carries him in the spirit, unto a very high mountain, that he
might take a sight of it, as Moises was carried up to the top of mount Nebo,
that from thence he might take a view of the holy Land. Which teaches, that
none can take a right view of Heaven and heavenly things, but only such as fly
an high pitch, and mount far above this earth in holy affections, and heavenly
contemplation.

Moreover, Saint John tells us, that as soon as he took a sight of this new
Jerusalem, far passing all Sinai sights: forthwith he espied in it the very
glory of God. If he had said, he had espied the glory of a King, it had been
much. If he had said, he espied the glory of an Angel, it had been more. But
that he espieth the very glory of God, it is most of all. For who can conceive
or express, what the glory of God is, being infinite. The Apostle says, that
God dwells in inaccessible light, 1. Tim 6.
or such light as none can approach unto.

Then this is one word for all, touching the beauty and superexcellencie of
the new Jerusalem, that it comprehends in it, the very glory of God: but yet
for amplifications sake, it is compared to a Jasper stone, for never fading
greenness: and to a Crystal stone, for bright shining and glittering for
ever.

And had a great wall and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve
Angels, and the names written which are the twelve tribes of the children of
Israel.

On the East part, there were three gates: and on the Northside three gates: on
the Southside three gates: and on the West side three gates.

And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
Lambs twelve Apostles.

Now Saint John proceeds to the description of the wall and gates of this
great city. This we all know, that a strong wall serves for the safety and
defense of a city, and for the security of such as dwell in it. For if it be
so high that none can it scale, and so thick that none can batter it, then is
it indeed impregnable, and the Citizens in great security. But the wall of
heaven is so high, as none can scale it, as is set down in this twelfe verse,
and so thick, that no double Cannon can pierce it, as appears verse 17.
therefore all the inhabitants of this new Jerusalem are out of all fear of
dangers.

Moreover this city has twelve gates, to signify an hard access for enemies
to break in: and an easy passage, for the Citizens themselves to go in and
out. And at those twelve gates twelve Angels, at every gate an Angel, as it
were a porter, to see that none be let in, but the true Citizens, and free
denisons, and such as have to do there, which are here named to be the
twelve tribes of Israel, that is, all the elect of God, both of the jews and
gentiles.

Moreover it is said, that there were three gates on every side the city, both
East, West, North, and South, to note that out of all quarters of the earth,
the redeemed should be gathered, and as our savior says, many shall come
from the East, and the West, the North, and the South, Math. 8.
and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of God. So that
it is not material, what country or nation a man is of, whether English,
Scottish, French, or Spanish, so he be a believer, for then he shall be sure
to be let in, at one gate, or another, either at the Eastgate, or the Westgate,
the Northgate, or the Southgate. Moreover the wall of this city, has twelve
foundations, that is to say, it is surely founded. And in every gate, the name
of an Apostle, so that all the gates had the names of the Lambs twelve
Apostles, to signify, that the groundsell and foundation of this city, is
laid upon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephe. 2.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

And he that talked with me, had a golden reed, to measure the city withal,
and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

And the city lay four square, and the length is as large as the breadth of
it, and he measured the city, with the reed twelve thousand furlongs, and the
length and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred forty and four cubits, by the
measure of man, that is of the Angel.

Now S. John tells us, that the Angel which talked with him, had a golden
reed to measure both the city, and the gates and walls thereof. Measuring with
reeds was a thing of great use in ancient times, as we read in the prophecy
of Ezechiell and Zachary, Ezechiel. 40. Zachary. 2.
and as we heard before in the eleauenth Chapter. But because all things
belonging to this celestial Jerusalem, are super excellent and glorious,
therefore the very measuring rod and reed, is of pure gold. This great and
glorious city is said to lie four square, to note unto us, that it stands
fast, and immovable, for round things are easily rolled, and moved this way
or that way, hither and thither. But square things are not apt to roll or
move. This everlasting Jerusalem therefore lies four square, because it can
never be moved, but stands fast for ever. As the Apostle says: Seeing we
receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. ve. 28
let us have grace whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him with
reverence and fear.

The Angel with his golden measuring rod, measures the square sides of the
city, both the length, breadth, height and depth of it, and finds each of
them to be 12000 furlongs, which after eight furlongs to the mile, makes in
our account 1500 miles, and so the whole square of this great city, comes to
six thousand miles, which is a goodly compass, and notes unto us the great
largeness of gods kingdom, and that there is romth enough for all the
inhabitants thereof. Yea, most pleasant and commodious rooms, as our Lord
Jesus says: in my fathers house are many dwelling places. John. 1.4.
If it were not so I would have told you: for I go to prepare a place for you.

After this, he measures the thickness of the wall, and finds it to be an
hundred forty and four cubits, which after our common account of two cubits to
a yard, amount to seauentie and two yardes, which is a jolly thickness, even
so thick as no Cannon can pierce, and therefore altogether in expugnable, as
has been said before.

And the building of the wall of it, was of Jasper, and the city was pure
gold, like unto clear glass.

And the foundations of the wall of the city was garnished with all manner of
precious stones. The first foundation was Jasper, the second of Sapphire, the
third of a Chalcedonie, the fourth of an Emeraud, the fit of a Sardonix, the
sixth of a Sardius, the seventh of a Chrysolite, the eight of a Beryll, the
ninth of a Topaze, the tenth of a Chrysoprasus, the eleauenth of a Iacinth, the
twelft of an Ametheist.

And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, and every gate is of one pearl, and
the street of the city is pure gold, as shining glass.

As we have heard of the form of this goodly city: so now we are to hear of
the matter of it, that is to say, of what stuff it is made. First, S. John
tells us, that the whole City is of most pure and glittering gold, like unto
glass: and that the wall was of Jasper most green and flourishing, and also
that the very foundation of the wall was beautified and adorned with twelve
sundry kinds of precious stones, which he reckons up. We count it a great
matter here below, to compass and close in our houses with a wall of brick,
and none can do it but men of place: but alas, what is that to his wall? what
is brick to precious stones: and pibbles, to pearl. But S. John adds that
the gates were of pearl, and the street of the city of pure gold! Oh how
brave, how beautiful, how glorious, how glittering, how gorgeous, how
admirable, a city is this: for if the gates be of pearl, and the streets of
gold, then what are the inner rooms, what are the dining chambers, and what
are the lodging rooms. But here we may not grossly imagine, that the
kingdom of God is of such metal and matter inded, as is here described. But
the holy ghost would give us some taste of it, and after a sort shadow out unto
us under these things which are in most precious account amongst men, what
the glory and excellency of the immortal kingdom is. For otherwise there is
no comparison betwixt gold, pearl, and precious stones, and those heavenly,
invisible, and immortal things which we look for, and hope for thorough
Christ: which in very deed are so great, so glorious, and so inconceivable,
that gold, pearl, and precious stones, are scant so much as any show, shadow,
or resembla^ce thereof.

And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God almighty, and the Lamb, are the
Temple of it.

And this City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it.

And the people which are, saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the kings
of the earth shall bring their honor and glory unto it.

And the gates of it shall not be shut by day, for there shall be no night there.

And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.

And there shall into it no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies: But they which are written in the Lambs book of life.

In this new Jerusalem there is no Temple, as was in the old Jerusalem: For
there shall be no need of any, no need of doctrine, of Sacraments, of prayer,
as in the old Temple, wherein the law was taught, sacraments administered,
sacrifices offered, and many other rites and ceremonies observed.

But Saint John says, that now God and Christ shall be all in all. They shall be
the Temple of this most holy City. And all they elect shall fully know them,
and dwell with them for ever.

And as this City has no need of any Temple, so has it no need of any
light either of Sun or Moon. For the glory of God and the brightness of the
Lamb do light it for ever: whose incomprehensible brightness does as far
excel the brightness of the Sun and Moon, as they do excel a little
candle at noone day. But it may be demanded who shall dwell in this so
glorious a City, and in this so great a light. Saint John answers, that the
people that are saved shall walk in it: that is, all the Israel of God, all
true believers, which are happy that ever they were borne, that they may come
to the possession of such a kingdom, as is here described. For Saint John
says, that the resplendent brightness of this City is so great, that even
the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it. And also,
that the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.

Oh how unspeakable is the glory of this city, that Kings shall throw down
their Crowns and Scepters before it: counting all their pomp and glory but as
dust, in respect of it. And the magnificence and pomp of all the potentates of
the earth shall here be laid down. And albeit none of the kings, and nobles
of the gentiles, might be admitted into the old Jerusalem, yet all of the
gentiles that believe, shall be admitted into this new Jerusalem, and made free
denisons thereof for ever. And although the gates of this city always stand
open both night and day, as not fearing any danger of enemies: yet no unclean
thing shall enter into it, but only they which are written in the Lambs book
of life. Thus we see how gloriously the holy ghost has described unto us,
this city of the Saints, and habitation of the just, for evermore. He must
needs be a very block, that is not moved with the consideration of this
endless felicity. For this city is described unto us, in so glorious and
admirable a manner, to bring us into love with it, and to work in us an
unquenchable thirst and desire after it. Oh therefore let us spend many
thoughts upon it: let us enter into deep meditations, of the inestimable glory
of it: let us long till we come to the fingering and possession of it, even as
the heir longs till he come to the possession of his lands. Let us think
every day ten, and every year twenty, till we be in possession: let us
with the Apostle sigh and groan, desiring to be clothed with our house, 2. Cor.
52
which is from heaven: let us in the mean time, cast away all things, that may
hinder us in our christian course: let us shake off every burden, and run with
patience, the race that is set before us: let us as they which prove masteries
abstain from all lets and hindrances. And since we strive so exceedingly for
a corruptible crown: how much more ought we for an incorruptible. For what
pains, what cost, what labor, can be enough for a kingdom: let us therefore
strive and strain, to get into this golden city, where streets, walls, and
gates, and all is gold, all is pearl: yea, where pearl is but as mire and
dirt, and nothing worth. Oh what fools are they, which deprive themselves
willingly of this endless glory, for a few stinking lusts Oh what mad men are
they which bereave themselves of a room in this city of pearl, for a few
carnal pleasures and delights. Oh what bedlames and straught beasts are they,
which shut themselves out of these everlasting habitations, for a little
transitory pelf. Oh what intolerable sots and fops are all such, as will
willingly be barred out of this palace of infinite pleasure, for the short
fruition of worldly lucre and trash. Let us therefore in all time to come, make
more reckoning of heaven, and less reckoning of the earth. Let us mind
heavenly things, and despise earthly things, let us prease hard, unto the
things that are before, and forget the things that are behind. Let us strive
hard for the price of the high calling of God, and contemn even the glory of
this world.

Chap. 22.
IN this Chapter S. John proceeds yet more largely, to describe the blessed
estate of all Gods Saints in the kingdom of glory, and the principal scope
and drift of this Chapter is yet more to enlarge the joys of Gods people,
after this life, and to ratify the authority of this prophecy.

This chapter contains four principal parts.

^er. 1.2.3.4.5.
The first, is an amplification of the joys of Gods kingdom.

^er. 6.7.8.9.16.19.
The second, is a confirmation of the authority of this book.

Christ unto judgment.

Christ.

The text.
AND he showed me a pure river of the water of life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb.

In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was the
tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month,
and the leaves of the tree, serve to heal the nations with.

And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the Lamb,
shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him.

And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of
the Sun: For the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for
evermore.

The Angel does yet further show unto John a pure river of the water of life.
Whereby is signified the ouerflowing abundance of all good things, which the
righteous shall enjoy, in the kingdom of glory.

This river is said to proceed out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb,
because God in Christ is the original of all this life and happiness.

Further it is added, that in the midst of the golden street of this new
Jerusalem, and of both sides the river, there was a tree of life. Which
represents Christ, now in this heavenly paradise: as in former time, it
represented Christ in the earthly paradise: and also that eternal and blessed
life, which our first parents should enjoy, if they did continue in the
obedience of God.

This tree stands not in an out corner of the city, but in the very midst
of the street, and of both sides the river, that all the Citizens of the new
Jerusalem, might have free access unto it, and taste of the most dainty fruits
thereof, in great variety: for it bears twelve manner of fruits, that is, in
Christ all variety of pleasure and endless delight, is to be found.

This tree bears fruit every month, as well in winter as in summer: for
here every month is Autumn. The sense is, that in Christ the new and fresh
fruits of immortal joy, without any satiety or loathing, are for ever to be
found.

The leaves of this tree are very medicinable and sauatiue. For they serve to
heal the nations with, that is, to preserve them from all diseases, and
griefs: which argues a most blessed life, not subject to sickness, or any
other infirmity. For Christ is our never failing physician, which in this life
heals all our spiritual diseases, and infirmities. And after this life, will
preserve us in perpetual health and happiness.

There shall be no more curse, that is, in the heavenly paradise, we shall no
more be subject to any curse, as Adam was in the earthly paradise. Which also
argues the perfection of happiness after this life, and yet for further
amplification of this most glorious estate: it is said, that the throne of God,
and of Christ shall be erected in the midst of this golden street, and all
his chosen people shall there accompany him, dwell with him, be always about
him, yea and serve him without wearines for ever. Yea, all his faithful
worshippers, shall come so near his throne, that they shall see his very face,
and be ravished with his glory, having his image, his name, his wisdom, and
mercy imprinted in their foreheads: yea, his inconceivable light and glory,
shall be so resplendent, that there shall be neither night, nor need of
candle: but in his glittering and most glorious chamber of presence, shall all
his elect reign, and triumph with him, for evermore, in infinite felicity: and
the very fruition of eternal delectation, where shall be mirth without
measure, and solace without sorrow: as the Prophet says: Psalm. 16.
in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there is
pleasure for evermore.

And he said unto me, these words are faithful and true, and the Lord God
of the holy Prophets, sent his Angel to show unto his servants, the things
which must shortly be fulfilled.

Behold I come shortly. Blessed is he that keeps the words of the prophecy
of this book.

And I am John, which saw and heard these things, and when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, which showed me
these things.

But he said unto me, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and
of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the words of this book:
worship God.

In these four verses, are four special reasons brought, to confirm and
ratify the authority of this book.

The first of them is, the affirmation of the Angel.

The second, the authority of the most high God.

The third, the testimony of Jesus, pronouncing them blessed, which keep this
prophecy.

The fourth, the testimony of John, who heard and saw these things. But
because in the epistle to the Reader, I have more at large handled this
argument, and these same verses: therefore here I do of purpose relinquish
them. And that also of John's adoration, and the Angels refusal, being things
most manifest and easy to understand.

And he said unto me, seal not the words of the prophecy of this book, for
the time is at hand.

He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy let him
be filthy still, and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still, and
he that is holy, let him be holy still.

And behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man,
according as his work shall be.

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

Blessed are they that do his commandments, that their right may be in the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.

^er. 15.
For without shall be dogs, and enchanters, and whooremongers, and
murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies.

Here is first an exhortation, to publish and proclaim the knowledge of this
book to all people, and in no wise to conceal it, or keep it close, as
formerly has been showed in the epistle.

Here is a further admonition, that they which are unrighteous should be
unrighteous still, etc. Which is no allowance or encouragement granted unto
wicked men, to continue in their evil ways, but is rather a terrible threat,
if we take all the words together, in this and the next verse, as if he
should say, if men will needs continue in their filthiness, yet certainly
Christ will come shortly and reward them according to their works.

Or else it may be a phrase of speech, which they call an ironicall
concession: as in another place the holy ghost says to the young man. Eccles.
11.
Walk in the ways of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but
know that for all these things, 1 King. 22.15. Math. ^6.45.
God will bring thee unto judgment: So likewise in other places.

After this, here is blessedness pronounced upon all such as keep the
commandments of God, and it is said, that there right is in the tree of life,
not meaning thereby, that their keeping of the commandments is the cause of
their right in Christ: but only an effect or consequence. For our good works
do not go before, as causes of our justification: but follow after, as
declarations of the same. For by doing we are not made just, in the sight of
God, but only declared to be just, in the sight of men.

And as for the keeping of the commandments, we do it not in such perfection
as Gods justice requires, but in such measure, as his mercy accepts through
Christ. And here the holy ghost says, that all they which have a right in
Christ, which is the tree of life, and endeavor to keep the commandments,
shall enter in through the gates, into the new Jerusalem: but on the contrary,
all the rout of reprobates, whom he calls dogs, enchanters, whooremongers,
etc. shall be utterly shut out, as having nothing to do, in this everlasting
city, their portion, being allotted in the infernal lake.

I Jesus have sent mine Angel, to testify unto you these things. I am the
root, and the generation of David, and the bright morning star.

And the spirit and the bride say Come. And let him that hears, say Come: and
let him that is a thrift come: and let whosoever will, take of the water of
life freely.

For I protest, unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him, the
plagues that are written in this book.

And if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of this prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy
city, and from those things, which are written in this book.

He which testifies these things says, surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so
come Lord Jesus.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all. Amen.

The authority of this book is here again ratified from the person of him
who is the author of it, that is, Jesus Christ, who is here called the root
and generation of David: both because he is descended of the house of David,
according to the flesh: and also because the eternal kingdom which all the
prophets did foretell, should spring out of the house of David, was indeed and
in truth established in Christ, who is our true David, and our righteous
branch, and as it is here said, the bright morning star, which has most
gloriously risen upon the world, to dispell all darkness, and to bring the
great and everlasting light.

Moreover, here is great protestation made in the eightene and ninteene
verses, of great plagues to be inflicted upon all such as shall add any thing
unto this book, or take away any thing from it. Which also makes greatly for
the confirmation of the authority of this book, for that to the which nothing
may be added, and from the which nothing may be taken away, must needs be
absolute and perfect. But this book is such a one: therefore this book is
absolute and perfect, being a part of Gods everlasting truth.

Last of all, here is set down the fervent desire of the bride, after the
bridgrome, for she being inflamed with the spirit, desires him to come, and
make up the match betwixt them, that she may be joined to him in marriage,
celebrate the solemnization, and live together with him in the eternal
triumph. Which is the sense of these words, the spirit, and the bride say come,
and let him that hears, say come. For it is proper and peculiar only to the
brid, to hear, wait, and long for the coming of Christ. And let him that is
a thirst, come. That is, all such as thirst after righteousness, may truly
say, come sweet Jesus. For they are allowed freely, to drink of the water of
life. The plain menaing of all this is, that the Church being directed by the
holy ghost, most vehemently prays and longs for the coming of Christ, that
she may have her topfull happiness, and full fruition of all those super
excellent things, which are provided and purchased for her through him. And
therefore to satisfy her desire, Jesus Christ the heavenly bridegroom says,
I come shortly. To the which the bride says, Amen, Amen. Even so be it. Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, and make an end of these sinful and conflicting
days, that all thy deer ones may have and enjoy, their long ^^ked for
happiness, and felicity in the heavens, for ever and ever.

FINIS.

