A Sermon preached before the Queen's Majesty, By Master Edward Dering,
the.25. day of February.

Anno.1569.



Imprinted at London by John Awdely.

A Sermon preached before the Queens Majesty, by Master Edward Deryng. 1569.
O Lord open thou my lyps, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
PSALM 78. 70. He chose David his servant also, and took him from the
shepefoldes, even from behind the Ewes great with young took he him: to feed
his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. So he fed the^ according to
the simplicity of his heart, and guided them by discretion of his hands.


THe Prophet declares in this Psalm how God of his justice, for the great
syn of Ephraim, took from that Tribe both the Tahernacle and the Scepter, and
gave them to the tribe of Judah: whom then according to his mercy he had
purposed to bless with all pefect happynes. In which we learn not to abuse
Gods mercies, least they be taken away from us, as from the tribe of Ephraim
they were. And then what helps it us that in times past we have been happy?
And least this should happen also unto the tribe of Judah, to fall from Gods
mercies, into his displeasure: the prophet in this place stirs them up to
thankfulness, that they might be found worthy to have continued toward the^ so
great blessings. And this he does by example of David, in showing both how
mercifully God had dealt with him, and how obediently David walked before the
Lord.

And herein he uses as it were three reasons Three reasons.
to move them withal. The first is of Gods great mercy whence he had called
David. The second is of Gods intent and purpose whereunto he called him. The
third of David's own person how faithfully and how truly he did execute that
whereunto he was called. The first argument or reason he comprehends in these
words: He chose David his servant, and took him from the Shepefolds. The
second in these words: He chose him to feed his people in Jacob, and his
inheritance in Israel. The third in these words: So he fed them according to
the simplicity of his heart, and guided them with the discretion of his hands.
These arguments will I speak of as God shall give me vtteraunce. And if they
shall be now more effectual to move us, then they were then to move the people of
Israel: then be we profitable and happy hearers. If not, it is good right and
reason, that as we have been in the fellowship of the same sin and iniquity,
so we should be partakers of the same reward and punishment: that if God shall
so deal with us, that we loose again both the Tabernacle and the Scepter, as
they have done before us, we can say no other but the Lord is righteous, and
behold we have eaten the fruit of our own labors. Let us therefore consider of
these arguments, and stir up as we may the gift of God that is in us, that
at length we may learn by them more holy obedience.

The first argument is the good consideration of Gods mercies whence he called
David. I
Which argument alone is so effectual and strong to styr us up to the
obedience of our calling, that it is able enough to raise us again, though we
were never so deep soonken in rebellion. A sure proof of the efficacy of it
may be unto us the often and continual use of it in the sacred scriptures. For
seeing that Gods spirit in his holy word does so often aply it, both as a help to
confirm the godly, and as a present remedy to turn again the most obdurat and
wylfull sinner from his obstinate purpose: surely, except all the dewes of gods
mercies be marueilously dried up in our barren hearts, the same argument if we
can well think of it, will be effectual in us to work our regeneration in
the newnes of life. (...) God would have Abraham to forget his coun try and his
fathers house, to go that long and weary journey into the land of promise, where
he and his posterity should dwell after him, h^ con^med him with this saying: I
am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of (...). xv.
V^ of the Chaldeans. By this rem^brance of his former benefits he persuaded
Abraham to adventure all that he presently enjoyed, vp^ hope of a better
promise, which yet he had no^ seen, but which should be fulfilled.

When God would move the children of Abraham, that is the children of Israel to
turn again from their great iniquites, that they has so long practiced in the
hardness of their heart, he uses but this argument, to tell them of all the
miseries that they were borne in: their country to be a cursed country, their
fathers idolaters, themselves given over to al voluptuousnes and pleasure, not
regarding Io^. 24. Ge^e. xi. Exodus iij.
God, nor seking his religion. In which woeful estate when the Lord God did
behold them, he pitied their misery, and said even then unto the^: You shall
live. By which promise their former Exodus x^.
woe vanished away, and instead of nakedness they were clothed with broidred
work, they were covered with sieve silk, de^ked with any ornaments, and had a
crown of beuty upon their heads. Now therefore that they should (...). 23.
not walk in their own ways, or commit Idolatry as other Gentiles did, nor
tread such Es^. xli^. E^. xvi.
benefits under their feet: this argument as a strong medecin the Prophet
repeated often, and with many words.

Thus God dealt often with the Kings of Israel (...). S^m. x^. (...). (...).
(...). x^. xv^. (...). (...). ^ij. (...). Regum (...). (...). (...).
and of Judah, when they began to fall away, and walk as others nations walked
that were round about them. He called them back by putting the^ often in mind,
how his mercy had been with them, and from what low estate he had raised them
up. Thus the Prophets of God dealt often with the people. Joshua, when Iosu. ij.
he had brought them into the la^d of Chanaan, to the end they might fear God,
and so make their dwelling sure, he made unto them a long repetition of Gods
benefits, that by remembrance of them their dull spirits might be styrred up
the more obedientlye to follow God. Samuel, when, he was afraid of Gods (...).
S^m. (...).
heavy displeasure toward the people of Israel, because they had asked a king
for them: to th^nd they might turn a way Gods anger from them by their speedy
repentance, he told them what God had before done for them, as a ready way to
make them beware afterward, how they did willyngly^ ^end so loving a father.
Steven, when he would (...). v^
have persuaded those, whose iniquitye was now grown to so full measure, that
they ha^ crucified Christ, as though in this alone were the greatest hope of
amendment, he chose no other way to convert them but this, to show in long
exhortation what God had done for the^, and for their fathers. And this, as in
the beginning it was given by the holy Ghost to man, as a soueraygne medecin
to keep him far from unthankfulness: so it has been continu ed by the same
spirit from time to time to styr us up not to forget the Lord. Our Savior
Christ to make his Disciples sure, and that they should never shrincke for
adversity, he told them often this, that they had not chosen him, but he had
chosen them. Saint Paul, John. xv.
when he would move the Corinthians for to avoid the false Apostels, and to
follow Christ, he persuaded them thus, that in times past 1. Cor. xij
they were Gentiles, and were willingly lead away to dum Idols. And again to
the Ephesians: You were in times past dead in Ephesi ij
trespasses and sins, you walked after the Prince that rules in the air,
after the spirit, that now works in the children of disobedience: but God who
is rich in mercies, thorough the great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead, has quickened us in his son Christ.

This argument, dearly beloved, seeing it is so strong, let us apply it unto
our selue^ for our disease cleaves fast unto our bones with long continuance,
and we have need of sharp medicine to heal if again. Let us therefore use it
(I beseech you) and if Gods spirit have not forsaken us, that we be
incurable, no doubt we shall recover and grow to amendment. Let us see our own
estate, and what God has done for us, what cloudy^ days have gone over our
heads, and in how fair sunshine we be set again, and no doubt wh^ ^e
hereafter shall alure us as before, it will make us afraid of his deceitful
bait, and we will never be brought with the beuty of the golden cup, to drink
of the spiritual whoredoms that are within. We were in times past Gentiles,
and uncircumcised people, Ephe^. (...)
now Christ has pulled down the waule of separation, and made us all one,
even his children of adoption. We were aliantes from the common wealth of
Israel, now we are received as Citizens, in the company of his faithful. We
were strangers from the covenant and promise, now Christ has delivered a new
Testament, in which we also are written heirs of mercy. We lived som^e in
ignorance, and had no hope, now we have received knowledge, and are comforted.
We were without God in the world, and could no where lay down the terrors of
our sins, but now we have received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry
Abba, Father. And what should I say more? We were subject unto sin, hell, death
and condemnation, now Christ has spoiled the principalites and Romans viij
powers, delivered us out of y^ power of darkness, translated us into a kingdom
of immort^ie Col. ij. ^xv
and grace. Except we have set our hearts as an Adama^t stone, or as the Prophet
says Col. i. xi^
made our hearts and facee like the Flint, it is impossible but that this
cogitation should ^ze. iij. ix
move us. Or if it do not so, surely, surely, though the Lord had not spoken
it thus often unto us, or if the Scripture were not written for our
instruction, yet the law of Nature would condemn us for most unthankful men.
Day and night we should bear a witness in our own conscience, how fearful judge
meant God has reserved for so great iniquity. Who amongst us could bear it,
to be rewarded with unthankfulness, where we have well deserved? To be contemned
of those, whom we raised up to honor? To be spoiled of those, who^ before we
had clothed? To be betrayed of those, whom we have especially trusted? And how
then are we blind and understand nothing? How shall the Lord bear it at our
hands, if we be unthankful unto him, if we contemn him, rob him of his
honor, who alone has made us glorious, when we were covered with our own
shame and confusion? The Lord grant us his holy spirit, that we deceive not
our selves.

There is nothing more effectual to move a son to obedience, then to know he
has a loving father. Nothing makes so trusty the ^ondseruant, as to remember
he has a gentle Master. Nothing makes the Subject more faithful unto his
Prince, then to feel by good experience his Princes elementy. Nothing joins
man faster in the bond of friendship, then to consider well what his friend
has done for him. And let nothing bind our obedience more carefully to the
word and will of God, then that he has so long continued mer ciful unto us. As
sure as the Lord does live, this is his holy truth, he y^ cannot be moved with
this, he has not Gods holy spirit. Poo^e or rich, bond or free, hye or low,
Noble or of low degree, Prince or subject al is one. The remembrance of Gods
mercy must make us al thankful, were we never so mighty. This cogitation must
vanish far from us the pride of a kingdom, to think how God has raised us
from the sh^s. Whoso^er can say thus: I have been bond, but I (...) free: I
have been in danger, I am in safety. I have been fearful and trembling, I am
careless: I have been full of sorrow, now my soul is at rest: I have been in
misery, I am in dignity: I have been a prisoner, I am a Princes. Believe me,
believe me, if the great and goodly Cities, which he builded not: if the houses
full of al manner of gold, which he filled not: if the vineyardes and Olive
trees, which he planted not, did not make him to forget the Lord, which brought
him out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: If prosperitys have
not made him dronken, so that he has banished far from him al sense and
understanding, the remembrance of this thing will make him thankful unto him
that has been the worker.

Yea, even you that are now a Princes of Majesty, if you have felt any such
alteration, take heed, flee far away from al unthankfulness. If you have seen
the days, in which you have said: O Lord, I have no friend but the alone, now
that prosperity has brought unto you a great many of fair countenaunces,
forget not that God, who was your only Friend in trouble. If in times past
you have prayed that you might not build upon the sand, to have your house
shaken with every Mat. vij.
blast of wind: now that you have choice of your (...) ground, take ^de. I
beseech you, where you lay your foundation. Now that the Stern and Helm is
in your own band, guide your Ship so that the waves do not over run it. If you
have prayed in times past unto God to molify your enemies hearts, and to bring
their cruel practices to nothing, now that you your self are in safety, be not
cruel unto Gods anointed, and do his Prophets no P^l. ^v.
harm. I need not seek far for offenses, whereat Gods people are grieved,
even round about this Chapel I see a great many, and God in his good tune
shall root them out. If you have said sometime of your self: Tanquam Ps^.
xlii^
ouis, as a Sheep appointed to be slain, take heed you hear not now of the
prophet: (...). xxx^
Tanquam indomita Iuuenca, as an v^tamed and unruly Heiffer. I will not with
many words admonish your Majesty, that are wise enough: only I will say this,
return into your own heart, and search your raynes. And here I set before you
the tribunal seat of Christ: If you know these things to be true, discharge
the faith you owe, green not your quiet conscience, least it begin to accuse
you, and the burden of it be greater then you shall be able to bear. If God
have defended you mightily, as ever he did David the Prophet, discharge your
faith with the Prophet David and cry in spirit: Quid retribuam Domino (...).
(...)
pro omnibus quae retribuunt mihi? What shall I give unto the Lord for all those
benefits that he bestowed upon me?

And thus much as God has given me utterance, I have noted unto you out of the
first part of this scripture, how that God did choose David from the shepefold.
The Lord give you grace to confess his goodness, and she we your selves more
thankful for all his benefits. One other thing we may note here, that all that we have of God, it is of his free mercy, it is not of our deserving, even
as he gave both the Tabernacle and the Scepter unto the tribe of Judah, because
he loved it. So God gave unto his people a land that flowed with milk and
hoony, but he gave it not for Joshua. v.
their righteousness, for they were a frowaroe, people, but because he loved
them. So God dealt favorably with Sion, that is, with the children of Israel,
not because of their obedience, Deuteronomy. 1. 8
for they were a rebellious nation: but because he remembered his oath which
her swear unto their forefathers. So God fulfilled the prophecy of Jacob, and
he blessed Judah, (...). xlix.
but he fulfilled it in David, whom he took from the shepefoldes. So Christ
made his 1. Corin. j. (...)
kingdom everlasting in the house of Jacob, but he laid first the foundation
of it. And now he has builded it up neither by the wisdom of the wise, nor by
the understanding of the p^udent, but to testifye unto us his free grace and
mercy. He has chosen the foolish things This her does to bear dow ne (...)
pride.
of this world, to confound the wise, and the weak things of this world, to
confound the mighty: and vile things of the world which are despised, to bring
to naught the things that are esteemed and had in reputation, for this cause
alone (as the scripture witnesses) that no flesh should rejoice in his
presence.

But what need we so far to seek for examples? Let us behold our selves how
ple^tifully at this day are Gods mercies and benefits poured out upon us, both
upon our Queen, and upon her people. How myghtely does he defend us in so many
dangers? How sit we in safety, when all the world is on an uproar? And is this
(think you) of our deserving, or rather of Gods mercy? Now surely, surely, we
were very blind, if we would not al confess with the Prophet Jeremy, that it is
Gods Lai^ ix.
mercy that we be not consumed. So much disobedience both in Prince and
Subject, so little care of duty, so deep forgetfulness of God what does it else
deserve, but heavy judgment? What can it testify else, but that all these
blessings are of mercy? Well, well, the wisest w^y is to take heed in time. Let
not Esaias. (...).
our syus separate between God and us. If therebe no where examples that we can
look upon, yet let us beware by the tribe of Ephra im, that we abuse not Gods
mercies for fear we lose them. Because we are now out of danger, and there is
no peril that is present, let ve not therefore say as proud Babylon: I sit like
a Queen, and shall see no evil, I shall be a Reu. xvi^
Lady for ever, and shall see no loss of Children. He that thinks he stands
(says Paul) 1. Cor. x.
let him take heed he fall not. It is no good argument that our state is sure,
because God has delivered us out of a great many of trou bles. Nay, let us
rather fear, and be the more circumspect. Gods arm that has been ^ret ched
out for our safeguard in times past, is not now drawn in that he cannot again
grieve us. God delivered the people of Israel out of ij. Regu^. x^ij. x^ij
the hands of many and greeous enemies: but yet when the people of Israel
would in no wise amend. God could raise up Salmanasar to lead them away to
perpetual captivity. ij. Regum ^ij. ix.
Nay, we have a great many more fearful examples then this. We have fearful
example before our eyes, to take heed of Gods judgments, when we abuse his
graces. God defended Senacherib in the conquest of a Esaias. 37. xxxv^j.
great many of countries, in all which he escaped harmles: yet when he knew not
himself, but blasphemed the God of Israel, even before the waules of Jerusalem,
God could find him out at home in his own country, and in the temple of his
Idols his own sons slew him. Agamemnon. x. years together in mortal
Agame^non.
and bloody wars, could never be hurt: yet after, at home in his own house
by his own wife he was killed. Bibulus a noble Bibulus.
Roman, gat many victories, and still escaped peril: yet afterward in the
city of Rome, when he should have had the glory of all his valiant acts, and
rode through the strats in the pride of his triumph, a tyle falling from the
house, stroke so deep into his head, that it killed him presently. Julius
Caisar, Julius Caesar.
in wynnyng the west part of the world, in. 51. set battayles never received
dangerous stroke: yet after all his dangers so happily escaped, at home in
the Senate house, in the myddest of his Nobilitye, and in his Parliament robes
he received. 24. wounds, and all of them deadly. Many such examples are before
our eyes to make us beware and take heed of security, when any danger is pa^
and to take heed of forgetfulness, when we have received mercy. The Lord enrich
us with the graces of his spirit, that when we often behold from whence we have
been delivered, we may seek diligently, and be always careful how to be
found thankful.

The second argument which I said the The second argument.
Prophet used, to make the people thankful, was taken of Gods intent and
purpose, to what end he chose David, and that he shows in these words: To
feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. These The office and
duti of Princes and magistrates.
words are very plain, and contain so expressly what is the duty of any
Prince or Magistrate, that none can be ignorant, but he that will not know.
For this purpose they are chosen, to feed Gods people in Jacob, and his
inheritance in Israel. Whether he be Prince or Emperor, Duke, Earl, Lord,
Counselor, Magistrate whatsoever, for this purpose he is called, discharge it
as well as he will: He must feed Gods people in Jacob, and his inheritance in
Israel. O if God had called them for some other purpose, how gladly would they
have executed it? If God had called them to dicing and carding, to swearing and
lying, to pride and vanity, the mighty men of our days, how busely had they
done their duty? But alas, this is not to feed gods people in Jacob, nor his
inheritance in Israel. This is to feed our selves, even as the Ore is fed to
the slaughter house, so we do feed our selves to everlasting confusion. They
that have ears to hear, let them hear. God Math. xj.
had chosen his Rulers, To feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in
Israel. These are the plain and express words of Gods spirit: And then what
outrageous spirit is y^, or what Fury rather, that cries thus w^an impudent
face, that the Prince has not to (...) with Jacob, and may not meddle with
Israel? But these are the steps that the man of s^e should tread, to speak
against the Lord, and yet say that he cannot err. There are the lively marks
of Antichrist, thus to fight against Christ, and yet say he is his ^hear. Such
is all the religion of ^stry, examine it if you will, even from point to point,
where God says one thing, it says still contrary, and yet cries with shame
enough, there is no error in it. God says, It is the doctrine of devils i.
Tim. ii^
to forbid marriages, and the lawful use of meats: The Pope presumpt^y
forbids both, and yet says still that he has the holy Ghost. Paul the
Apostle says: If you Gala. ii^.
observe days and times, I am afraid that the Gospel is preached unto you in
vain: The Pope says, you shall observe both, I can dispense with the Apostle,
and yet he says he is Apostolical. Saint Peter says: Be you subject i. Peter.
i^
to the Prince, as to the chiefest: The Pope says, the King is not highest,
but he is above does King and Keasar, and yet he says still he is the
Successor of Peter. And what should I say more? It greueth me to reckon up all that Monsters abominations. It would make a Christian heart to bleed, to see how
he has deceived the simple. With his paper waules and painted fires he made
them so afraid, that they believed what so ever he had Apo. xxij.
spoken. But he is filthy, and let him be filthy still: We will return to our
purpose, and learn of a princely Prophet what is a Princes duty. He must feed
Jacob and Israel, that Esaias. xlix
is, Kings must be Nurce fathers, and Queen's must be Nurces unto the Church
of God. And to this end they must use their authority, that Gods children may
learn virtue and knowledge. For to seek only worldly peace and security, or
to make us live at ease here in this wayfaring city, that is rather to feed
flesh and blood, then to feed Jacob: rather to Heb. xiij.
make happy this worldly fellowship, then to instruct Israel. The true
Israelite is strong against the Lord, and comes with violence to claim the
kingdom of heaven. What helps it in this respect to be rich or honorable?
If I had all the riches in the world, yet Psa. xlix.
could I not pay the price of my bothers soul. Or if I had never so much rule
and authority, I am not therefore the nearer to make intercession unto God.
They are other weapons that must prevail against Satan, and Ephe. vj.
it is an other attire that will be accepted for the marriage garment. If we will
feed Jacob Mat. xxij.
and Israel, let us lead them to the house of wisdom, and train them up in
the fear of God. The Lord open the Queens Majesty's eyes, that she may look
to this charge: Otherwise if we lived never so peaceably under her, yet when
the Lord shall come to ask account of her stewardship, how she has fed Luke.
xj.
her fellow servants with the meat appointed them, then she will be found
eating and drinking with sinners.

But because we are so dull of hearing, that a little teaching of our duty is
not sufficient for us, I will show out of the scriptures somewhat more plainly,
if ought may be playner, what is the duty of a Prince. The Prophet Esaias very
effectually sets it out in the person of our Savior Christ, saying:
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and Esaias. xi.
faithfulness the buckle of his raines. It is true that the Prince must defend
the fatherles and widow, relieve the oppressed, and have no respect of persons
in judgment, sake peace unto his people, and gird him self with righteousness:
But this is also his duty, and his greatest duty, to be careful for religion,
to maintain the Gospel, to teach the people knowledge, and build his whole
governance with faithfulness. For this cause king Solomon, both the mightiest
and the wisest king that ever was, called him salfe a Preacher. And king David
to testify how he acknowledged his duty, spoke openly to his people: I will
instruct thee, and teach thee in the way that thou shall go, and I will guide
thee with Psa. xxxij
mine eye. This general rule king Solomon gave unto other: Be diligent to know
theestate of thy flock, and take heed unto thy ^ron. 27
heardes. For riches remain not always, neither the crown from generation
to generation: Expres^y showing, that to increase riches, or to set forth the
glory of a kingdom, that is not the greatest d^uty of a Magistrate. Thus the
Prophet Hoseas, crying out against the people of Israel, he reckeneth up this
as their greatest disorder, that lying and ^e. iiij.
swearing, and ignorance of God was not punished amongst them.

And alas (dearly beloved) if this be the saying of the Prophet, let us look
unto it. I dare not but speak the truth, seeing God has called me hither. He
has raised me up so hye, when I was cast down, that I cannot forget his
benefits. If this will not serve, I will surely speak it more plainly, when
the Lord shall open my mouth again Surely if this be the saying of the Prophet
(as it is in deed) that lying, that swearing, that blind and wylfull
ignorance shall be punished, let not the Princess deceive her self, the
spirit of God does not posses her heart, if she hear daily, lying and
blasphemous swearing, and see the peoples ignorance, and yet leave all
unpunished. Look unto these things better, if you will look well unto your
self: you cannot pretend ignorance, this is plain enough, if any thing be
enough. And yet least you should seek to buselye to be deceued, I will
rehearse the plain law of the Lord. That this doctrine may be warranted with
the surer witnesses, God says of a King in the, 17. of Deuteronomy: When he
shall sit Deu. iv^ xviij. xi^. xxix. etc.
upon the throne of his kingdom, then shall he write him this law repeated in
a book, by the Priests of the Levites. And it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life: That he may learn to fear the
Lord his God, and keep all the words of his Law, and these couenauntes, for
to do them. That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren. That he turn
not aside from these commandments, neither to the right hand, nor to the
leaft. But that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his Sons in
the midst of Israel.

This law I know not how your Majesty shall interpreate, because I know not
your spirit: but of this I am sure, it made David that he would not suffer a
wicked man in his Psa. x. vij
house, It made Asa drive away the Sodomites out of Israel, put down the
Idols, depose j. Reg. xv.
his own mother from her dignity. It made Ieosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, even in
the j. Regum xxij. xli. ij. Reg. 8.
beginning of their reign, to make godly and zealous reformations in religion,
and never consulted farther with the high Priests. Nay it made Solomon to put
down Abiathar that i. Reg xix
was the hye Priest, and to place Sadoe a better in his room. This made many
godly Emperors in the primitive Church, to call general counsels, to reform
many misorders crept into the church, to depose many ambitious and proud
Popes, and plate better in their room. And he that denies this, denies the
Sun to shine at noone days. And as this law has thus wrought heretofore:
so when it lights in a good spirit, I am sure it will do the like hereafter.
It will move a godly Magistrate to have his chiefest care to maintain
Religion, and to suppress superstition. And such is Gods righteous judgment,
that whosoever shall do the contrary, I am sure his own conscience will
condemn him self. It is the law of Nature, and it makes the most wickedest
Magistrate to sigh^ and say in his heart, in remembrance of hy^ sin: Sure
this doing will not last always, God has appointed me for some other purpose.
This was the greatest fault that proud Agamemnon could find in all the glory of
his Agam^non.
kingdom, (...), i. When Gods cause goes not upright, it lays the glory of
my kingdom in the dust, it turns vpsidowne al my life and happiness. Thus it
happens with the wicked, who so ever they are: they condemn their own doing,
when they seek not to set out the glory of God. The law of God has thus
commanded it, the godly kings of Judah and Jerusalem have evermore practiced
it, the faithful Emperors in the primitive Church made it their chiefest study,
the law of Nature has engraven it in the heart of man. And what godly Prince
can now sleep in security, if he have no care unto it? Especially seeing God
is the God of all Magistrates, and they are his creatures. This is their
greatest study, to show obedience unto him, to feed his people, and set forth
his Religion.

But here I think some will easily say: If this be so as you teach it, then
the case is clear, the Prince is a spiritual Magistrate, it belongs unto
him to reform religion, he is the highest Judge in the Church of God to
establish that by law, which the law of God has appointed. How then that the
Pope sees not this? Why do not others see it, that read and know the
scriptures? The Emperors them selves, why have not they s^ne it? How grew the
Pope up to such vn^ridled authority? How the Pope should come to so great
authority, I know no cause but this, that it was the will of God, and such was
the depth of his secret judgments: The purple whore would make all the
Princes of Apo. xvij
the earth to drink of the cups of her fornications. But for the Popes seeing,
or not seeing of his own abominations, I know not his eye sight, I cannot tell
whether he does see them, or see them not, but I think he sees them. For I
see in all ages, how God has raised up some that have enuayed bitterly against
his intolerable pride. If he sieth it not, his eyes are very sick, and him
self a verier beast then ever was Nabuchodonosor. Dani. iiij.
And the Lord be praised, that has hardened his proud heart, and revealed
better knowledge Math. xj.
unto little ones. Why other should not see it that read the scriptures as well
as we, and are as well learned as we, I can assign no other cause, but say
with the Prophet, Gods judgments are like to a great depth. They are as they
are, and what they are it skilleth nothing unto us. I came not hither to
compare with learning, who be Hebrews, (...) C^or. xj.
and who be none. I am sure, if they did seek him in the simplicity of their
heart, and call after Ps. xxxvi
him in the truth, not in their own inventions, that then they should find
him. Now they seek the living springes in vain, because Iere. ij.
they seek them in the puddels that they have dug them selves. And they
seek for the Gospel of salvation in vain, because they follow the doctrine
that is but precepts of Mar. xv.
men. But what if many learned see it not? Is it not therefore truth, that is
so plain in the Scriptures?

Let me ask again I beseth you, this question: Why did not Pharao see, that
Moses and Aaron were sent of God? They turned Exodus vij
all his waters into blood: they brought upon Exo. viij.
him Frogs that covered all his land: they plauged him with great swarms of
Lyce a Exodus ix.
Flies: they feared him with thunders and Exodus X.
lightnyng, and with great tempests: they made darkness thick and sensible
upon the Exodus xij.
face of the earth: they slew the first borne of all that was in the land. Why
knew not Exo. xiiij.
Pharao that they were sent of God? They divided the read sea, and went through
on dry land: What madness made him venture to go so desperately after? Why would
he not be taught, till the water covered him and all his host? Should the age
that came after him reason thus against Israel: If your God be the Lord of
heaven and earth, why did not our fathers know him? Why did not the Scribes and
Pharisees know Christ to be the Messiah? John. j.
They heard John Baptist give him plain testimony: why did they not believe
him? The same Christ fulfilled all that was spoken by the Prophets: why could
they not see that he was the Savior of the world? He made Math. xi.
the himde to see, the deaf to hear, the dum to speak, the lame to go. He
made the sick and Math. ix.
diseased whole: he raised up the dead, he told unto them even their thoughts
and cogitations: John. xi.
How were they so dull of understanding, that yet they could not know him? If
this may be sufficient to reprove a truth (why do not other see it) then the
Pharisees reason well against Christ, when they said unto the people: Why do
none of the Princes and Rulers believe in him? John. vij


But see I beseech you, how great is our madness that thus reason of other men,
why they see, or see not. Why have we our selves so great beams in our eyes,
that we can not see Mat. vij.
our own estate and condition? Why do we not see the shortness of our life, but
thus live ^eb. xiij.
in the world, as though we should live ever? Seeing we have a righteous God,
that will be a revenger of his own cause, and punish o^ Romans ^ii. Roma. ^ij.
transgression, why do we syn yet daily more and more? Seeing our life is but a
vapor, Iam. iiij. Esaias. iiij.
and all our glory is but as the flower in the field, why be we so bewitched
with love of so great vanity? Seeing our estate shall be before John. v.
God everlasting, and these accounted days come so fast to an end, that we
shall be Ioh. viij.
speedely called: why be we still so careless in what sort we shall appear?
Seeing Gods threatninges are so near unto us, and the dangers that hang over
our heads are so many. Seeing Gods judgments are so fearful, and his wrath
burning for ever: why ar we so careless? And why is it true that was spoken so
long a gone:

Heu v^unt homines, tanquam mors nulla sequatur:
Aut velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Why do we live, as though we should dye never:
Or as hell fire were an old wives fable ever.
Believe me, believe me, this is intolerable blyndnesse, seeing we be so bleare
eyed our selves, that we cannot see before us neither heaven nor hell, yet that
we will reason against Gods truth, by any man's eye sight, whether he see, or
see not. If we list to meruell at the duines of man's eyes, we cannot well marvel
at any thing so much, as at o^ own foolishnes, that cannot see our selves. L^
us look at the last to our own estate, and a^ for other men let us leave the^
unto the Lord he does know most assuredlye who be his John. x.
They are not the wise and prudent of this world that he has chosen. There are
not many ij. Tim. ij (...). Corin. j.
Princes and Noble men in the face of h^ Church. If Princes and Magistrates will
b^ still rebellious, what is that to us? If the Pope and his hirelinges will be
blind still yet the Scripture is the Scripture.

The unfaithful Steward never lyue^ more riotously, then when his Lord is
ever Luke xvj.
at hand to call him to his accomptes. The foo lishe Uirgins are never faster a
sleep, the^ Mat, xxv
when the Bridegroom is ready to enter into his wedding chamber. The children
of this world are never buselier occupied, then the Luke. xij.
night before their souls shall be taken from them. The fonne of perdition
shall never be ij. These. ij
more lofty, then in these latter days when he shall be revealed. But for
these that are so blind, let them be blind still: let us approach Mebr. iiij.
unto the throne of grace with faith, that the secrets of the Lord may be
revealed unto us. As for Kings and Emperors if you will yet ask, why could
they not see it, but commit them selves unto so great slavery: alas poor
creatures, how could they see in the midst ^f so great darkness; How could
they read, when the book was fast sealed? How could Apoc. xv.
they discern the voice, when they heard no ^und but of ti^kling Cymbals? But
this Apoca. (...).
was the great subtlety and craft of Satan. He knows how willingly we be
carried to worldly studies, and whether we did incline ^ether he thrust us
headlong. He knows what corruption he has sown in our nature, and how
unwillingly we meddle with the things of God: And therefore it was an easy
practice for the Pope his Minister to pull away heavenly cares from all Princes
gouernmentes. They are grievous unto flesh and blood, and such as Kings love
not to meddle with all. This was one mean why Princes did not their duty. An
other was as great as this: they heard the Pope so mag uisied, that they
thought him half a God. When they were once persuaded the Popes pardons should
be no small discharge, who would not willingly submit him self with al
humility to receive it? If we may live all our life in riot, and yet after
through the Popes blessing rest in the peace of the Church: who would refuse any
popish subjection? Make ^en once drunk with this opinion, and they are at
your commandment to do what you will. Baresoote and bareleg they will wait at
your gate, set your foot if you will on the Emperors neck, he will refuse no
villainy.

Well, now that God has delivered us out of that kingdom of darkness, now we
know the Pope to be Antichrist, his prayers to be evil, his Pardons to be
worsse then the sin of Witchcraft: let us look at the last to our own duty,
and trust no more to such a broke staff. If God has made us Princes or
Magistrates, let us fee ^e his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel.
This is our duty, let us harken unto it: and that we may do it the better,
let us enquire how it may best be discharged. And I beseech your Majesty The
safegarde of a Prince is true obedience to God.
to harken, I will speak nothing according to man, which may easelye be
contemned: but that which I will speak, shall be out of the mouth of the Lord.
In obeying of which shall consist your safeguard, and the health of your kingdom.

Especially and above althinges look unto your Ministry. There is no
commandment given oftener in the old Testament: none given oftener in the new.
When God would specially bless the people of Israel, he scattered the Leuits
among the other tribes, Number. iij.
that the law might be taught in all the costs of Iewry. When Christ would
bring into the world the light of the Gospel, he sent forth his Apostels to
preach unto every creature. In the old law God signified by many outward
tokens, how necessary the Priesthood was for the instruction of his people,
and what Priests he required. The slaves were always Exo. xxv.
in the rings of the Arc, the Lamp ever burning, to show that the Priests
should always declare the will of God unto his people, and offer up the sweet
incense of continual prayer. On the neat her end of the robe of the Ephod, were
bells always soundyng, to Exodus 28
teach that the Priest should be ever heard, where so ever he did go, and
show him self a Messenger of the Lord of hosts. In the breast plate he had
Vrim and Thumim, two lively Ex. xxviij
presentations of Gods presence, to be witnesses unto the Priest of his
knowledge and righteousness. In the plate of gold upon his forehead Ex. xxviij
was engraven in great golden letters, Holiness unto the Lord, to testify his
upright life and conversation God forbad any stranger to enter in among them,
except he were circumcised in heart. And of the children or Aaron, if any had
faulted in his ministerye, he should by no repentance be received again to the
Priesthood. This was the care that God had then of his Priesthood, that he
might keep in holiness all the children of Israel.

This is the care that we must have of our Ministry, if we will have the
gospel of Christ to grow. This care was greatest unto the godly Rulers and
Princes of Israel, to the end they might keep the sanctuary undefiled. This
care must be greatest in those that be Christian Magistrates, if they love Gods
glory, and increase of his Gospel. Thus did king Solomon in the beginning of
his reign, i. Reg. ij.
when he put down Abiathar, and made Sadoc hie Priest. Thus did Ieosaphat,
when to ij. Cro. 18
reform religion he sent forth Leuits into the coasts of Israel. Thus did
Ezechias at the 2. Reg. 18
entrance of his kingdom, when this was his first care, how the Levites might
be provided ij. Cro. 29
for. But of al other Moses, who had received the commandment of God him
self, as appears, did especially see what was the necessity of the
Minister. In the. 33 of Deuteronomie, a little before his death, thus he makes
his prayer: Let thy Vrim and De. xxxiij
Thumim be with thy holy one, whom thou did prove in Masah, and did cause
him to serve at the waters of Meribah, who said unto his father and to his
mother: I have not seen them, neither knows he his brethren, nor yet his own
children, but they observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach
Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law. They shall put insense before thy
face, and burnt offering upon thine altar. Bless O Lord his substance, and
accept the work of his hands. Smite through the loins of them that rise up
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not up again.

Mark I besethe you, both his great care how the Levites might prosper, and
his notable describing of them what man^r of men they shall be. First he prays
that true knowledge and understanding be never removed from them: that their
affection toward Gods Sanctuary may be such, that neither father nor mother,
wife nor children do keep them back from obedience to the law and covenant.
O that our Ministers were such as Moses prayed for, then no doubt God would
bless them according to their request, and confound their adversaries that
rise up against them. And here also mark his great zeal for their
prosperity: He was the pacientest man, and had the miledest nature of all the
people of Israel, yet could he not suppres his good and great affection, but
brake out into these words: Smite through the loins of them that rise up
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not up again. O Lord,
if Moses had lived in our days, and seue this adulterous generation that so
spoileth the Levites, how would his zeal have been inflamed against them? He
would have cried out as good Nehemias cried: Plage them Nehe. vj. and. xiij.
O Lord, that defile thy Priesthood. And good were it for these synful men,
that God would send his plagues upon them, while yet they have time to repent.
Now we want a Moises to pray for their punishment, for they sleep in their
sins, and God (I fear) has reserved them to a greater punishment. The Lord
grant us grace to remember the latter end, and now look while it is yet time,
to the good order of the Ministry.

When God ^sed to establish his mercies with his Church, he promised thus, as
the greatest token of his love: I will give you Pastors according to my heart,
that shall feed Iere. iij.
you with knowledge and understanding. When he would have them have sure hope
that he was their God, and they were his people, he said he would give them
Levites, that should teach his people the di^erence between the holy and the
profane, between the unclean and the clean: he promised them this as a
perpetual covenant: The lyps of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and they
shall seek the Law from his mouth: For he Ma^a. ij.
is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts. And this was the charge that God gave
straightly unto the Priesthood: That they should tell his people of their
sins, and the house of Esa. ^viij.
Jacob their offenses. A miserable common wealth mu^t needs be, and far
separated from God and his mercies, that has blind leaders, who cannot lead
them selves. Who so fears the Lord, will surely look unto it, that he
mayntaine no such ^es within his kingdom, nor nourish any such sores in the
body of his country.

If a man be once called to the Ministerye, i. Pet. v.
let him attend upon his sl^ke, and feed them as his duty binds him. with
the ^de of life, or let him be removed. Christ said: Pa^ce, John. xx^
pasce, pasce, Feed, feed, feed: This charge he has given, even as we love
him, so to see it executed. Say what we will say, and the more we say it, the
more impudently we shall lie, if we say we love him, while we keep not his
commandments. Would to God we were wise to understand it. Christ said, they
Math. v.
are the salt of the earth, and what shall be done with them, if they can
season nothing? Christ said, they are the light of the world, and what heap of
miseries shall they bring with them, if they them selves be dark? Christ said,
they be the watchmen, and what case shall the City be in, if they do nothing but
sleep, and delight in sleeping? Who sees not these in^e sicknesses, that can
see any thing? They a^ the Pastors, and how hungry must the floc^ be, when
they have no food to give them They are the teachers, and how great is their
ignorance, where they them selves know^ nothing? They are the Evangelists or
Messengers of glad ridings, how little hope ha^ they, and what slender faith,
whose Messengers cannot tell what the Lord says?

The Lord enlarge within your Majesty, the bowels of mercy, that you may once
hau^ pity upon your poor Subjects. This cogitation made Paul say to
Timothy, a paynful Father unto a careful Child: I charge thee before God, and
before the Lord Jesus (...). Timo. j.
Christ, that shall judge the quick and dead at his appearance, and in his
kingdom: preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort. etc. Of al miseries wherewith the Church is grieved, nohe is
greater then this, that her Ministers be ignorant, and can say nothing. What
could Jeroboam do more then this, to strengthen al j. Reg. xiij
his Idolatry, then to make him Priests of the lowest of the people? What
could have made Asa (being otherwise religious) so soon ij. Cro. xv
to have turned away from the service of God, saving only he suffered his
people to be without a Priest which could teach the^ the word of God? What
plage did God threaten grea^er against a rebellious people, then that he would
take from them their true Prophets? Esa. xxxij
When were the peoples syns so ripe to pro^ure vengeance, as when their
Preachers were dum Dogs, and could not barcke? And Esaias. lvj.
what I beseech you, is our condition the better? Or what be many Ministers
of our time and country other then dumme Dogs? Surely, as Ahijah said of the
people of Israel, so we may say of our Ministers: Have we not made us Priests
like the people of our i. Cro. xiij
country? Who so ever comes to consecrate with a young Bullock, and seven
Rams, the same may be a Priest for them that are no Gods. And so surely if
we served Baal, a great number of our Priests at this day were tolerable, but
if we serve the Lord, what do they with that function they cannot skyll of? Let
them return again to their old occupation. And yet this is but one evil, and
if it were reformed, yet much still were amysse. If I would declare unto your
Majesty all the great abuses that are in our Ministry, I should lead you
along in the spirit, as God did the Prophet Ezechiel, and after many
intolerable Ezec. viij
evils, yet I shall still say unto you, behold you shall see mo abominatio^s the^
those.

I would first lead you to your Benefices, and behold some are defiled with
Impropriations, some with Sequestrations, some laden with Pensions, some robbed
of their commodities: and yet bet behold more abominations then these. Look
after this upon your Patrons, and les some are selling their Benefices, some
farming them, some keep them for their Children, some give them to Boys, some
to Serving men, a very few seek after learned Pastors: and yet you shall see
more abominations then these. Look upon your Ministry, and there are some of
one occupation; some of another: some shake bucklers, some Ruffians, some
Hawkers and Hunters, some Dicers and Carders, some blind guides and cannot see,
some dum Dogs and will not barcke: and yet a thousand more iniquities have now
covered the Priesthood. And yet you in the mean while that al these whoredoms
are committed, you at whose hands God will require it, you sit still, and are
careless, and let men do as they list. It touches not belike your common
wealth, and therefore you are so well contented to let all alone. The Lord
increase the gifts of his holy spirit in you, that from faith to faith you
may grow continually, till that you be zealous as good king David to work
his will. If you know not how to reform this, or have so little counsel (as man's
heart is blinded) that you can devise no way, ask counsel at the mouth of the
Lord, and his holy will shall be revealed unto you.

To reform evil Patrones, your Majesty must strengthen your laws, that they
may rule as well hye as low. As Esdras said once, so may I say now: The hands
of the Princes and Rulers are chief in this trespass. If Esdra. ix.
you will have it amended, you must provide so that the highest may be afraid
to offend. To keep back the ignorant from the Ministry, whom God has not
called to such a function, take away your authority from the Bishops, let
them not thus at their pleasure make Ministers in their Closset, whom so ever
it pleases them. To stop the inconveniences that grow in the Ministry by
other, who say they are learned and can preach, and yet do not, that are as I
said, dum Dogs, and will not barcke, bridle at the least their greedy appetites,
pull out of their mouths these poisoned bones that they so greedely gnaw vp^.
Take away Dispensations, Pluralities, Totquots, Nonresidences, and such other
sins. Pull down the court of Faculties, the Mother and Nurce of all such
abominations. I tell you this before God, that quickneth all things, and
before our Lord Jesus Christ, that shall judge the quick and the dead in his
appearaunce, and in his kingdom: amend these horrible abuses, and the Lord is
on your right hand, you shall not be removed for ever. Let these things alone,
and God is a righteous God he will one day call you to your reckoning. The God
of al glory open your eyes to see his high kingdom, and inflame your heart to
desire it.

The third thing sha^ I said in this place was to be noted, was of David him
self how faithfully he executed that whereunto he was called. The Prophet
says: He fed them in the sincerity of his heart, and guided them with the
discretion of his hands. An excellent virtue, and meet for king David, that
was a man according to the heart of God. He knew that obedience was better then
sacrifice, and that Gods people were never better ruled, then when their
Princes brought into captivity their own understanding, and in simplicity of
ha^ were obedient only to the wisdom of God. He had to good experience of his
own wisdom, and had tried it often how it made him to rebel: therefore to
please God effectually, he walked in his simplicity. O that our Christian
Princes had so great measure of Gods holy spirit, how many and grievous (...)
^ens (...) then be taken from us, that now Christian eyes and ears can hardly
behold and hear. How many sins should (...) extinct and buried, that now
vain polecy^ does maintain and strengthen? The time is past, and I will say
no more.

The God of all mercy, and Father of all consolation, enspire our hearts with
wisdom, that we may walk before God in our own simplicity. That what his
holy word has spoken, we may humblye hear, and reason not against it,
because of our common wealth. Then shall we end these short and evil days with
gladness: And when Christ shall appear in glory and Majesty to judge the quick
and dead, we shall stand on the right hand, in the number of his Elect, and
hear that la^ and happiest sentence that never shall be called back again:
Come yeblessed of my Eather, and possess the kingdom which is prepared for
you from the beginning of the world. The which time the Lord bring hastily upon
us, even for his sons sake Jesus Christ our Savior: to whom with the holy
Ghost, three persons and one God be all honor and glory both now and ever.

Amen.

