A brief and necessary Instruction, Uerye needful to be known of all
Householders, Whereby they may the better teach and instruct their Families in
such points of Christian Religion as is most meet.

Not only of them thoroughly to be understood, but also requisite to be learned
by heart of all such as shall be admitted unto the Lords Supper.

1572.

To the Christian Reader.
IT shall not be necessary for me (most loving brethren) to show any causes
for mine own excuse why I have attempted the setting forth of this little
Catechism, as though I had rashly adventured above that was meet, to set
forth any thing to be so common by my private advise: Or as though I had
presumed above mine abilitye to become so general a teacher, having my self so
mean understanding. For in these days in which there is so great
licentiousnes of printyng books, as in deed it makes us all the worse, who
can blame it that has any taste or sauer of goodness, be it never so simple, if
it had no other fruit, yet this is great and plentyfull, that in reading it we
should keep our eyes from much godles and childish vanity, that has now
blotted so many papers. We see it all, and we mourn for grief, so many as in
spirit and truth do love the Lord. What multitude of books, full of all sin
and abomination, have now filled the world? No thing so childish, nothing so
vain, nothing so wanton, nothing so idle, which is not both boldly printed,
and plausibly taken. So that herein we have fulfilled the wickedness of our
forefathers, and overtaken them in their syns. They had their spiritual
enchauntmentes, in which they were bewytched, Beuis of Hampton, Guy of Warwike,
Arthur of the round table, Huon of Bordeaux, Oliver of the Castle, the four
sons of Amond, and a great many other of such childish follye. And yet more
vanity then these, the witles devices of Gargantua, Howleglas, Esop, Robyn
Hoode, Adam Bell, Friar Rushe, the Fools of Gotham, and a thousand such other.
And yet of all the residue the most dronken imaginations, with which they so
defiled their Festiual and high holydaies, their Legendawry, their Saints
lives, their tales of Robyn Goodfellow, and of many other Spirits, which
Satan had made, Hell had printed, and were warranted unto sale under the Popes
privilege, to kindle in men's hearts the sparks of superstition, that at last
it might flame out into the fire of Purgatory. These were in the former days
the subtle sleightes of Satan to occupye Christian wyts in Heathen fancies.
And we as men that can not learn wisdom by any examples to keep our selves
from harm, but as though the wickedness of our forefathers were not yet full,
we will make up their measure, and set up Shrines to the word of God, and the
wrytinges of all his Saints, which our forefathers had cast out of all honor,
that their own dreams and illusions might be had in price. To this purpose I
trow we have multiplied for our selves so many new delights that we might
iustefy the idolatrous superstition of the elder world. To this purpose we have
printed us many bawdy songs (I am loathe to use such a loathsome word, save
that it is not fyt enough for so vile endeavors,) to this purpose we have
gotten our Songs and Sonets, our Palaces of pleasure, our unchaste Fables and
Tragedies, and such like Sorceries, more then any man may reckon. Yea some have been so impudent, as newborn Moabites, which wallow in their own vomit, and
have not been ashamed to entitle their books, The Court of Venus, The Castle
of Love, and many such other as shameless as these. O that there were among
us some zealous Ephesians, that Act. 19. 29.
books of so great vanity might be burned up. The spirit of God wrought in
them so mightily, that they contemned the price of so great iniquity, in one
City, and at one fire they brought together the books valued to two thousand
marks, and burnt them al at once. O happy light and clear as the Sun beams,
if we might see the like in London, that the chief street might be sanctified
with so holy sacrifice. The place it self does crave it, and holds up a
gorgeous Idol, a fyt stake for so good a fire. O Lord thou art able to work
what thou wylt, let us see this day that Jacob may rejoice, and Israel may be
glad. So recompense thine enemies, as they have recompensed thee. Of old they
Iere. 36. 23
burnt the wrytings of thy Prophets, and in their ages following they departed
not from the sins of their fathers, but gave the An. dom. 290. sub
Dioclesianus, et anno. 1559 sub Paulo. 4.
holy labors of thy Saints unto ashes, now let us see the just recompense of
anger, and make our good Rulers the instruments to execute thy judgments. We
have now long enough played with our own fancies, Lord raise up again thy word
into honor, that our eyes may be occupied in holy readinges.

And you dear Brethren that are yet in battle to fight against Satan, pray
and cease not, that God alone may be exalted in our days, that Satan may be
trodden under foot, and that the word of God, the strong weapen of our strife,
may be given into the hands of all, that their life may be in safety. And be
persuaded of this, that there is no one thing more enemy to the word of God,
then these vain and sinful imaginations of our own unbridled wits, which
have now filled so many volumes. And therefore I trust I can deserve no blame
to adventure the setting out of this short enstruction, sith my desire is only
to advance Gods glory, and edefie his poor Church, that is yet so covered in
dark ignorance: when so many have found leave to spread abroad their labors,
that have no other pleasure then offyn and wyckednes.

Now for that that I have taken upon me to set forth unto many this
enstruction, bear with me, I beseech you, and pray unto God that we may all
together hold the humblenes of mind that was in Christ Jesus, that we be not
wise in our own conceits, nor think of our selves above ye which is
convenient, but acknowledging the blindness of our heart, and the ignorance in
which we are borne, we may say with the most happy Apostle, we have nothing
that we have not received. And of many other I do willyngly profess it, I am
the least, but by the grace of God I am that I am, and I trust his grace is not
in vain in me. But this that I here present unto the Church of God, I have not
done it alone: but another faithful labourer in the work of the Lord, and a
good brother in Christ Jesus, whom God has endued with great knowledge, and
blessed with much understanding, he has taken the greatest pain, and the
greatest fruit must grow of his labors. So that I have not adventured of my
self, but have only been an helper of an other man's labor. And the cause yt
has moved us both is such, as has made the Children of God even to faint in
their mourning, until they shall see the great mercies of God to take away the
cause of their grief. We see the great ignorance in which the people are every
where covered, the clouds of darkness, more then the darkness of Egypt, have so
over shadowed them, that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ, who
is the Image of God, it does hardlye or not at all shine in their unbelieving
hearts.

Scarce one of a great many can give an account of their faith, yet S. Peter
requires it of 3. Pet. 4. 13
every Christian. A very few have tasted the beginninges of the Gospel of
Christ, and yet S. Paul bids that the word dwell plentifulfully Col. 3. 16.
in each one of our hearts. The Apostle blames the ignorance of the people,
who have learned yet no further, then repentance from dead works, and the
first enstructions of the faith toward God: But O Lord, how Heb. 6. 1.
many thousands of us, of faith and of true repentance can say nothing? The
Prophet speaks of the kingdom of Christ, that in those days the earth
should be full of the know Esa. 11. 19
ledge of the Lord, as the waters that do cover the sea: where is now that
blessed spirit of understanding to be poored upon us? And where is this riches
of the knowledge of God? Are not rather the multitude of our brethren clothed
with darkness, so that they grope in their ways as at midnight, and know
nothing of the way of life? We pray daily according as we are taught, Let thy
kingdom come, if we speak not like the Parets, in words without
understanding, then this is our meaning: let thy spirit bear rule in our
hearts, and the knowledge of thy word lighten the eyes of our mind. And what
do we then else but dally with the Lord, if we pray still for knowledge, and yet
sleep still in ignorance^ Then this is (loving Brethren) a good excuse for our
boldness, if in so great necessitye, according to our talentes, we seek to be
profitable unto many.

If any think that there are already sufficiently set forth many Catechismes,
I do easily grant it, but they are not sufficiently learned, neither yet can
be. For it was necessary in the best and most godly of these labors, whilst
the Christian faith is plainly taught, to edifiyng of the simple, and
conuincing of the adversary, that the faithful teacher should use more words,
then can be carried in mind of the ignorant man. And therefore I thought itgood
as briefly as I could, to comprehend the effect of all, that the begynninges
being made plain, and easily printed in memory, we might enter into reasoning
and disputation with our selves, enstructing one another, and helping one an
other, that we might have the more fruit in the longer labors of others, but
most of all that we might be encouraged to the most holy and lively word of
God, to drink with continual desire of the fruitful spring, even until the
water of life do flow up in our hearts unto everlasting gladness, and the day
star do arise in our hearts, which may lighten our minds in to the knowledge
of the God of glory.

There is nothing remaining more why this labor should be misliked, except
any man would think, that every Congregation had a sufficient Pastor to
instruct those that were ignorant, so that they should not need any strange
Teacher: God grant that in time to come this may be found true. But yet we
are far from it, even as light from darkness, or death from life, or as
knowledge and understanding is from insensible blyndnes. O that we had eyes to
see so great misery: For sure it may not well be justified, that in so clear
light of the word, as God has made now to shine upon us, that there was ever
nation which had so ignorant Ministers We may here in compare with the man of
sin him self. I do not know that in the midst of all his abominations there
was a more loathsome sight of that idolatrous priesthood, then we have set up
among our selves, to be fellow laborers among us in the Gospel. For what
though they exceeded in loosnes of life? Yet their dark and barbarous religion
was so thick a cloud spread over their manners, that the fulness of their
lynnes was not easily seue: But we have the light that has made althinges
manifest, and the Sun has shined that has disclosed iniquity, so that
there has not been among us any popish Priest so dronken, nor any alehouse
Chaplen at such a perpetual truce with his drinking pots, that has possibly
purchased so much discredit to his belly God, and kitchen faith, as our dum
Dogs and guides, do daily multiply against the God of Israel, and the faith of
his anointed our only God and Savior. It greeneth me to remember, and lotheth
me much more to rehearse the estate of the ministration into which we are
fallen. We have good time now to complain with the Prophet, like people, like
Priest. Even Esa. 44. 2
the same coueringes of Israel that shadowed then their glory, they have spread
the^ selves again as the heavens, and are come over our head in so great a
tempest of blindness and ignorance, that they have shaken the foundations of all
our comfort.

We saw in deed Halcionios dies, the glad and pleasant days in which our hope
shined, when first our happy government turned away our sorrows, brake the
yoke of Antitichrist, delivered us from the power of darkness, and carried us
among the Saints of God into the kingdom of light. But our hope has since
suffered a great Eclipse, from the fulness of her beutie, (such has been the
malice of Satan.) He attempted against us even at the first his most pestilent
practice, and has brought accordinglye his purpose to effect. When God had
turned the will of the Magistrate, Deuteronomy. 1. 15
and inclined his ear to understanding: when he had given unto him courage to
scatter Exo. 18. 21
the enemies of his truth, and planted true fear in his heart to establish his
Gospel: then the subtle Serpent which had turned all his devices hither, he
bent his violence, and this counsel pleased him best: To corrupt the
Priesthood, who should instruct the Prince Nu. 27. 21
by Vrim and Thumim, that if thus he might darken the light of the people, it
might be the more easy to lead them out of the way.

Then he entered again, and with more success into his first assaults,
wherewyth he tempted once our savior Christ: He robbed the Minister of his
blessed hope in the providence of God, and made him seek the ways full of vile
shame, to get his bread. He hanged before his eyes an other veale of pomp and
vanity, that he could not with open countenance see Christ, but followed the
present plea sures that better liked him. And so first wou^ding the head, the
infection has grown since into the other parts of the body, that now al most
there is nothing but wounds and swelling, and sores full of corruption. Look
where we will among the people of the Lord, and how hardly shall we funde the
dwelling place of the godly Pastor.

If Jeremy were now alive, he would take Iere. 9. 1.
up again his old complaints: O that mine head werefull of water, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of
the daughter of my people. For look what agreement has righteousness with
unrighteousness, and what fellowship has light with darkness, what concord
Christ with Belial, or what part the beleuer with the Infidel: the same
society is between a great number of our English Parsons and Uicars, with the
true Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel. Your selves good Christian Readers
make the comparison, and be your own Judges, what cause we have to complain.
The true Minister is the salt of the earth, to dry up corrupt and noisome
humors, Mat. 5. 13.
and to preserve the substance pure, that the world may be offered up a sweet
sacrifice unto God: But our Uicars and Curates, we have some of them yet of the
old morowmas Priests, whose salt is unsavory with much popish leaven, that
there is no taste in them of the Gospel of Christ. Most certain it is, that
the popish Priesthood is no calling for a Minister of the Gospel: And
therefore they that have not openly forsaken that, and have given a new promise
unto Christ, they may well have the living, but they cannot be the persons whom
God has called, nor yet the salt to season his elect and chosen.

The true Minister is the light of the world, Mat. 5. 14
which holds forth the Gospel of Christ in his hand as a lantern to
lighten the steps of a great number, how to walk unto Christ: but what
daylight I beseech you, shines in the Ministers of our making? They are better
seen in their several occupations, then in the knowledge of the word, which
they should dispense unto others. The true Minister is a fisher of men, by whom
the parish is stirred up to all love, to God first, and then mutually one to
another: but the Parsons now have either nets so broken, or their baytes so
ill, that we see the effect is, no gatheryng together, but a woeful dispersion
both of Priest and people. How many examples do we see of a continual
dissipation in suits and controversies? the Parson against the Uicar, the Uicar
against the Parson, the Parish against both, and one against another, and al
for the belly. Among who^ neither people, Parson, Curate, Uicar, one nor other
has any care for the Gospel of Christ. As the Lord does live, this is no
other fishing, but to suffer that roaryng Lion to catch al by his
enchauntmentes, that he may have large pasture in the Church of God. The true
Minister is the eye of the body: Mat. 6. 22 Mat. 9. 38 Mat. 22. 3 Ma. 23. 34.
the woorkeman in the harvest: the Messenger that calls unto the Marriage: the
Prophet that tells the will of the Lord: the wise man that teaches to
discern between good and evil: the Scribe that does expound Ma. 25. 16 Lu.
24. 48 1. Cor. 4. 1
the law: the Servant that occupies his Masters talentes unto gain: the
Wytnes that bears testimony of Christ to all people: the Matthew. 24. 45. To.
15. 16.
dispensers of the mysteries of God: the Stew ard that gives meat in due
time, unto the residue of the household: the Sacrificer of the Gospel of God, to
make the oblation of his flock acceptable: the Minister by whom the 1. Cor. 3.
5
people do believe: the Laborers of God to till his husbandrye, and make up
his buylding: 1. Cor. 3. 9
the Shepherd to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
blood. Ac. 20. 28
But alas and woe for us, if we can see our sorrow, what one of these excellent
virtues shines in our Pastors? I speak the truth, and God in his good time
will give us eyes to see his judgments. Scarce one Parish of an hundred has
found such a Minister, or scarce two and three in a Sheere whom God has so
blessed. If S. Paul say true, or if the voice of God be fearful in our ears,
that we cannot believe except we hear, and we cannot To. 10. 14
hear without a Preacher: where is our glory that we are the people of the
Lord? Or where is our rejoicing that the Gospel is amongst us? Were it not
that the works of the Lord preached daily unto us, and their voice had come
into our ears, as fully as to Psalm. 19. 5.
our forefathers, even in the strongest of our people, it would make their
faith to waver.

For about us in our Country, where dwells that Minister, or where is his
name, that shall strengthen the weak hearted, and raise them up in hope? He
must faith S. Paul, he must be apt to teach that is made Minister: but we
have made the old saying true, Oportet ^ Tim. 32
non habet locum, they are we may say, they are more meet for the plow, that
dwell in the personage. Say the Apostle what he say will, he must or ^e must
not, he shall be made Minister now that pleases the maker.

Even thus it is, both high and low, as many as God has sealed with a god
spirit, they complain of it. They say all with Jeremy: Iere. 2. 8.
The Priests say not, where is the Lord? and they that should minister the
law, they know nothing. The men among us that would be our leaders, they may
say as of old time, I will prophecy unto thee of wine, and of strong Mich. 2.
^^
drink, but of the law and the testimonies they can no skill. So heavy is the
hand of our God over our sins, until we be amended. He has broken his two
staves of happy feeding, Zech. ii. 13
both bewty and bands, and given in steed of them the instruments of a
foolyshe Shepherd, and has raised us up Pastors which look not for the
things that are lost, nor seek the tender Lambs, nor heal that that is
hurt, nor feed that that stands up. 2. Chroni. 15. 3.
And therefore we may boldly say, God himself being our warrant, that the Israel
of the Lord is without his Pastor.

But some perhaps will think this complaint to be grievous, God has not dealt
thus with us, but rather has multiplied a great many of learned and godly
Ministers unto us, even now in great abundance, as in any age before us: Most
certainly true it is, that God has raised up in our days men of singular
hope, full of excellent gifts, whose virtues in young years has shined far
above the gray hears of their forefathers. Would God we were half thankful
enough for so manyfolde blessings. The joy of the whole earth, and the gladness
of all the world, that is the blessed hope of the Gospel, it shines not a
little, even in their countenances The Lord increase them a thousand thousand
fold, and give them double his spirit, that they may be greater then all their
enemies, and abide faithful even unto death: that through them the Prince may
rejoice, the Magistrate may be glad, their fellows may be encouraged, yt peo
ple may be taught, al may have hope, syn may be abolished, Idolatrye rooted
out, Antichrist overthrown, Satan trodden down, Hell may be confounded, the
Gospel may increase, righteousness may shine, and God may have the glory. This
desire is the fruit of our lyse, and there is not in the world a better
portion: this we have chosen, and in this we will dwell, until the fulness of
time, that we shall say in our course: Lord now let thou thy servant depart
in peace.

But we have here not a little fear, and we see the stumbling blocks, that
have made our ways dangerous. True it is many men ar greatly to be beloved,
but this is as true: there is none so good but Satan will seek to fifth him.
Noe, Lot, Aaron, Miriam Samson, David, Martha, Mary, men and women of most
excellent virtue, and such as the world was not worthy of: and yet not one of
these whom Satan wounded not, yea almost unto death. The most glorious of all
men subject unto sin, was Adam him self, and yet he was thrown down into
great confusion. So that the Saints of God (for so I trust I may call them,
because of their great (...)) the Saints I say, that God has sent unto us,
they have great cause to fear, ^ to say with Paul, Who seems to stand, let
him take heed he fall not. Sure they are ^f continual assaults, and even at
this present one above other shakes all their faith.

Satan has so rent a sunder the glory of our Ministry, that flesh and
blood is not half willing to bear the shame of the world that goes after it.
He has spoiled it of the due reward: of al authority: of al obedience: love,
reverence and honor that man should gene unto it. He has laid upon it much
contempt, many reproaches, great poverty, intolerable bondage, so that though
the calling be in deed the most precious inheritance under the sun, yet the
glory is so darkened unto mortal eyes, that al Nobility is quite fled from it,
the Gentlemen afraid to come unto it, the rich man rather chooses any other
kind of life, the men nest estate so hardly contented with it, that S. Paul
him self can find but a few folowers, that will cast away from them the
clokes of ^. Cor. 4. 2
shame, and not degenerate from the dignitye of their office. But God shall
once give again unto his Ministry beuty, in steed of ashes, and rich
apparel in steed of sackcloth, when he shall turn again the captivity of
Syon, and build up the walls of the promised Jerusalem. In the mean season we
will live in hope, and give thanks unto our God that has brought us hitherto.
One other assault of Satan hurts as much as this: yea and so much the more,
because it is covered with the cloak of benefit, and shows us a saluing
medicine against the former wound. For where as the Ministers living in most
Churches is but small, he has found this remedy, that one man should have many
benefices: and whereas the reproach is not little, but even the name is full of
disdain, as to be called master Parson, Master Uicar, Sir John, a parish
Priest. etc. Against this evil he has found a remedy worse, and given
liberty to all that will, to be Non residentes, to forsake their charge, to go
where they will like masterles hounds, to fyl the common wealth with worse then
any idle or vagabond persons. Lo this is the vessel of poison that Satan has
set a broch, and the cup of whoordome which the Pope has begun of unto all the
world. This is the head and fountain of all spiritual darkness: the root from
which the glory of Antichrist did first arise: the filthy spring of al
abominations, which by pestilent increase has ouerslowed kingdoms with most
shameful slavery: brought Princes into contempt: and set a vile person in the
Monarchy of the world. And yet at this day it does so dull the spirits of
many excellent me^, that their hearts are full of surfeting, and yet they fool
not their disease, they wallow (as I said) in their own vomit, and yet they see
not their shame. The hainousnes of this syune it is so displeasant in the sight
of God, that he has revenged it with one of his greatest plages in hardening the
offenders hearts, that they should have eyes to see, and not see, and ears to
hear, and not hear, and hearts to understand, and yet not understand. For
where as in many things they hear the voice of God, and follow humbly his
calling, yet here they be deaf even as the Serpent that stops his ears,
that he may not hear ye Charmer, charm he never so wisely. It is plain y^
the spirit speaks: Be dilligent to know the state of thy flock, Pro. 27. 23
and take heed to thy herds, for riches remain not always, nor the crown from
generation to generation. But yet the love of riches, and gorgeous show of
honor has so deceived many, that in many years they see not their flock, nor
care not at all in what pastures they be fed. So much in vain it is that the
Apostle speaks unto them: He that has an office, let him attend on his
office. The charge that To. 12. 7.
S. Paul gives to the Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, is as plain as may
be spoken, yet they cannot understand it: Take heed (says he) Ac. 20. 28
unto your selves, and to all the flock, of which the holy Ghost has made you
ouersears, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased which his own
blood. Oh that this precept were written in our hearts with an iron pen, or a
claw of Adamant, that we could never forget it. The often remembrance that we
have bound our faith unto the spirit of God, that he has called us for the
instruction of his people, and that they are the price of the blood of Christ,
would make us at the last so to love our duty, that the Sun and Moon should
be ashamed at the sound of a Nonresident, and the name of that parson should be
odious unto us, y^ would take upon him a charge and look not after it. The
Prophet says, that Ezec. 3. 18 and. 33. 8.
if the Minister declare not the judgments of God against him that synneth,
the wicked man shall dye in his syn, but his blood shall be required at the
hands of the negligent watchman. And the Apostle to the Hebrews, speaking of
the faithful Minister, says that they Heb. 13. 17
watch over the souls of those that are committed unto them, as they that
shall give account if any of them perish. If these two be sufficient witness,
that according to the law the truth should be esteemed, by their word most
certain it is that our negligent Pastors, who have covered them selves as
Solomon says, with thick clay, and multiplied their benefices, till they be
many in number, they must needs think they have an heavy account against the
day of Christ. Neither gold nor silver, nor the pride of honor shall be
acceptable in steed of the souls of their brethren. But so it is they are
shut up in blindness, and God has covered them with a spirit of slomber, and
they are set down in the counsels of the mockers and despisers, which say in
much securitye, where is the promise of his coming? O curssed law of liberty
that has so dulled their spirit: And O bottomless pit and hell of whooredomes,
out of which such a stinking savor continually breaths of Pluralities,
Totquots and al manner faculties, and dronken dregs of popish abominations.

O Lord God we beseech thee multiply thy spirit yet more upon thine anointed
and chosen servants. Lead them into the mydst of thy Sanctuary, that they may
drink full of thy loving kindness. And enrich them so far with all thy
blessings, that they may see with thy Saints what is the height, the breadth,
the length, the deapth, and how unsearchable is the riches of thy glory, that
have alone immortality, and dwell in light, which shall shine for ever:
That thy manyfolde mercies which thou have multiplied unto them, may be made
perfect in that fulness of spirit, until they shall say unto themselves, even
with the zeal of that noble Prophet and King: I will not enter into the
tabernacle of my house, nor get up into my bed, I will not suffer mine eyes
Psalm. 132. 2
to sleep, nor mine eyelyds to slumber, until I have caused this land which
thou have blessed to spue out the surfetings of this deadly poison. O Lord God
thou that art able, bring this good thing to pass, let not our sins separate
between us and thy goodness, but open thine ears unto our prayers, and pour
out thy compassions upon us, that we and our Rulers may all rejoice and sing
together with thy Saints in the Apocalips, Allelu-iah, salvation, Apo. 19. 2
and glory, and power be to thee O Lord our God, for true and righteous are thy
judgments, and thou have condemned the great whore which did corrupt the
earth with her fornication. And therefore make us say continuallye Allelu-iah,
and her smoke let it rise up for evermore. Amen.

Farewell good Christian Reader, and forget not thy deutie to bless them with
thy prayer, who have blessed thee with liberty, and help them to the glorious
triumph of the Gospel of Christ, who have broken from thy neck the yoke of
Antichrist, that they may long rule with righteousness, with peace, and with joy
in the holy Ghost, whose government has made thee free from the bondage of
Egypt, from the spiritual Baby lou, from Pope and papacy, which shame has
shadowed, and shall at the last close it up for ever.

From my Chamber. the. 22. of April. 1572. Thine in the Lord.vE. D.

Roma. 8. 22. Every creature groneth together and traueleth in pain until
this present. and not only the creature, but we also which have the first
fruits of the spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption,
even the redemption of our bodies.
A short instruction very necessary for all such as shall be received to the
Lords Supper.
Question.

What is ^^e chiefest duty of a Christian ^an (...) this life?

Answer.

^he chiefest duty of man, and not ^^^^an only, Pro. 16. 4. Esaias. 6. 3.
but of all the creatu^es in the world in their nature, is to set forth the
glory of God.

Question.

How shall we perform this duty?

Answer.

To perform this duty, it is necessary to know unto Romans 3. 7.
what death we by our selves ar subject. Romans 3. 7.
What great salvation God of his free mercy has given unto us through faith.
And what To. 20. 4.
thankfulness we owe unto him for our deliverance.

Question.

Tell me these things in order: First what is syn? and what does it deserve?

Answer.

John. 3. 4.
Sin is the breach of the law of God, contained in the ten commandments:
Romans 6. 23
and the reward of this sin is eternal death.

Question.

Rehearse the ten Commandments.

Answer

God spoke these words and said. I am the Lord thy GOD which Exodus 20. 1
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, thou shall
have none other Gods but me. etc.

Question.

What means this commandment, thou shall have none other Gods but me?

Answer.

The meaning of it is, yt I should acknowledge but Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
one only God, that I should Deuteronomy. 6. 13
honor and fear him, that I should Deu. 10. 20
clean unto him: that I should not do Deuteronomy. 8. 19
after ye abominations of any idolatrous people to worship stocks or stones:
that I should not Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
harken to any false Prophets, that teach their own fantasies, and not the
word of God: That I should not Deu 18. ^5.
seek to any Sorcerers, Co^iurers, Witches, Soothsayers, Charmers, or any
such: Deu. 12. 32
But that I should harken unto Christ alone, and add no thing to the word
which he has spoken, but put all my trust in God alone, call upon him alone,
fear him alone, and love him above all. All this is contained in this first
commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Question.

What means the second commandment, that we shall not make any granen
Image?

Answer.

The meaning of this is, that we should not think God to be like either Deuteronomy.
4. 15. Act. 17. 29.
man or woman, or gold or silver, or any manner creature, that we should not
woorshyp him under the similitude of Leui. 26. 1.
Sun, Moon, or any other thing what soever it be, to how down before it.
But only in Ioh. 4. 23.
spirit and truth we must woorship God alone, and beside him no other: no
Saint, no Angel, no creature. And that the worshipping of God alone, be not
according to our fancies, Deu. 12. 32
but only as him self has commanded in his word. If in any of these
points we be faulty, we have broken this second commandment.

Question.

What means the third commandment, that we should not take the name of God
in vain?

Answer.

The meaning of it is, that we should not swear Leui. 19. 12
falselye, nor Eccles. 5, 1.
rashly, nor in light matters, but with Deu 28. 58
fear and reverence make mention of the name of the Lord our God in Iere. 4.
2.
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, to the glory of God, or maintenance
of brotherlye love, in which causes we must swear by the name of God Deuteronomy. 6.
13.
alone, neither by heaven, nor earth, neither by book, Saint, nor Angel,
Ierem. 5. 7
nor any creature. As for Mass, Cross, Roode, or such other, we ought so to
detest such manner Idols, that they should not once be Exo. 23. 13 Psalm. 16.
4.
named among us. But we should have only precious in our eyes the Deu. 28. 58
glorious and fearful name of the Lord our God. This is to obey this third
commandment.

Question.

What means the fourth commandment, Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath day?

Answer.

To keep holy the sabbath day, is to come together, and with fear and
reverence to hear Act. 20. 7.
the word of God preached unto us: to receive his Sacraments with faith and
with repentance: 1. Cori. 14. 18.
to pray together with one heart and voice: to show in outward doing our
inward sabbath, Number. 29. 7
that we rest from sin and wickedness: that the spirit of God dwells in us,
and worcester keth in this life the beginning of our everlasting rest. This is the
fourth commandment.

Question.

What means the fifth commandment. Honor thy father and thy mother?

Answer.

To honor our Parents, is to Leuit. 19. 3
fear, love, obey, and relief them, or any other that are unto us in their
steed. As our Exo. 22. 28
Princes, and Rulers, our 1. The. 5. 12
Pastors and Ministers, our Masters and Teachers, the Leui. 19. 32
aged and graye headed men: And also all manner of Superiors, that they may be
honorable, they must put on a fatherly affection toward their Inferiors.

Question.

The sixth commandment: Thou shall do no murder, what means this?

Answer.

The Lord here forbyddeth all kyllyng, fightyng, quarrelling, and John. 3. 15.
inward hatred, all Leui. 15. 17.
desire of revenge, all reproaches, and mockes of the dumme, the deaf, the
lame, or any other impotent: All Deuteronomy. 21. 1.
hurt toward our brother, and that we should do good unto all, Mat. 5. 44.
yea even to our enemies, and love one another as our selves.

Question.

What means the seventh commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery?

Answer.

In this commandment the Lord forbyddeth all fornication, adultery,
uncleanness, wanto^nes, al Leui. 18. 22
unnatural lusts, vnpure thoughts unchaste behavior, filthye talk, Deuteronomy. 22.
12
wanton apparel, idle pastimes, glottony, dronkennes, Deuteronomy. 22. 21
houses of open whoredom, and whatsoever else may allure to vncleaues.

Question.

What means the eight commandment, Thou shall not steal?

Answer.

The Lord here forbyddeth all stealyng, both in deed and thought, all 1. The.
4. 6
deceit, all Leui. 19. 11.
lying and oppression, all Deu. 24. 14
withholding of the laborers hire, all Exo. 22. 21.
vncourteousnes to the stranger, widow, and fatherles: all Deu. 10. 17
gifts to pervert judgment: all Leui. 19. 35.
false measures, and covetousness, and charge us to be Pro. 27. 27.
content with our calling, and to live of our own. To observe these things is
not to steal.

Question.

What means the ninth commandment, Thou shall bear no false wytnes against
thy neighbor?

Answer

We are here forbidden to bear witness in any untruth, by oath or by word: we
are forbidden al Leui. 19. 16
flattery and dissemblyng: all flaunderous and ill reports, either our selves
to speak them, or to hear them of others: nor in private offenses we may not
speak the truth to the hurt of our brothers good name, if by Mat. 18. 25.
private admonitions he may be won, but carefully and bold ly we must testefy
al truth what so Leuit. 5. 1.
ever we know, to the furtherance of justice.

Question.

What means the tenth commandment, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
house. etc?

Answer.

Here in plain words God forbids all inward desire, what so ever is
unlawful to be done, which desire is not only synful when we consent unto it,
but To. 7. 7.
the very motion is enemy unto God, and banished from his presence. For it is
un possible those bodies should see God, which can nourish evil concupiscence
in them, even as it is un possible that corruption should 1. Cor. 15. 50.
inherit incorruption, or that To. 8. 6.
flesh and blood in this similitude of old Adam should inherit the kingdom
of God. So that by this commandment most clearly we may see the image of
that man that plea seth God, even such a one in whom is nothing impure, neither
in will nor nature.

Question.

Sith these are Gods commandments, I see now most assuredly how there is no
man that synneth not, tell me then what punishment is due unto our sin.

Answer.

The To. 6. 23.
reward of sin is death, not only the present and transitory change which
we shall all taste of, but ^ Apo. 20. 6. and. 21. 8.
second death, an other everlasting death, the curse of God, and his heavy
wrath which has no end, everlasting condemnation, and the Mat 25. 41 Mark. 9.
44.
pains of hell which abide for ever, not only in soul, whose worm dies
not, but in body also, whose fire shall never be quenched.

Question.

How say we then that God is merciful, if his anger be such as shall never be
pacified?

Answer.

God is in deed a 2. Cor. 1. 3
God of all mercies, and father of all consolations, whose loving kyndnesse
has no end, and in the great riches of his compassions he has Ephesians. 3. 10. 1.
Ioh. 3. 2
appointed to make known the glory of his majesty unto his children. But God
is also just and Romans 2. 2
judges righteously, and therefore to such as through infidelity despise the
riches of his goodness, and disobey the word of his glorious power, he has
appointed a just recompense of eternal death.

Question.

Now I know what is sin, even the breach of the law of GOD. And because of
the excellency of Gods majesty which by sin is offended, I see the greatness
of sin, and how it deserves eternal death, of which without exception by
nature we are all gyltie. But tell me now, is there no punishment in this life
by which we may recompense our sin?

Answer.

There is no sufficient recompense in the world: Ap. 18. 12.
no goods nor multitude of riches: Luc. 17. 10
no liberality to the poor: no whipping nor scourging, Col. 2. 23.
nor hurt of thine own body: nothing that thou can devise Psa. 49. 8
so precious is the redemption of thy soul, and the continuance for ever.

Question.

Now I know what sin is, and to what death it has condemned us without all
remedy in our selves, tell me now how we may be delivered from the anger of
God, and the pains everlasting?

Answer.

Mark and I will tell thee, pray unto God to give thee understanding, and low
in humility of spirit, I will declare the salvation of the Lord, when we had
sinned, and by sin had Romans 3. ^5
provoked God to anger, and so were Ac. 26. 18
subject to Satan, hell, and condemnation, that the righteousness of God might
stand, it was necessary that these things should be borne, and suffered, the
anger of God, the tyranny of Satan, and the pains of hell, which all followed
sin, and therefore he that shall be a savior for our sins, Gal. 3. 13. 2. Co.
5. 21
he must take this upon him, and in his own righteousness, he must be delivered
again from them.

Question.

Tell me then where shall we find such a Savior?

Answer.

The Lord lighten our eyes, that we may understand the riches of Col. 1. 29
his glorious mystery: the Lord reveal his secret unto us: ye Lord make us
see with all his Saints Ephesians. 3. 18
what is the height, the breadthe, the length, the depth, that we may sing unto
him the praises of al his mercies. This Savior whom we seek for, who for our
sins must Heb. 2. 9
taste of death, and yet in the power of his Romans 1. 4
own ryghteousnes must rise from death to life, he cannot be found Psa. 49. 7
Psa, 59. 1^ Ps. 107. 13
among the children of men. All the righteousness of Ez. 14. 14
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it cannot recompense the least of all my sins.
Adam and Eve while they were yet in integrity, they could not Genesis 36.
bear the sin of the eating of one apple which was forbidden them. Yea the
Jude. 6.
Angels of heaven when they kept not the first estate, but Ioh. 8. 44
fell away from the truth in which they were created, they could not bear up
their syn, but it 2. Pet. 2. 4
weyed them down to hell, and bound them for ever in the chains of darkness,
so that in men and Angels there is no hope. But God that is Ephe. 2. 4
ritche in mercies, and whose compassions have no end: He sent his own son
in the Romans 8. 3.
similitude of sinful flesh, to be a redeemer, and to condemn sin in the
flesh. So that this is the Savior sent into the world, even Jesus Christ the
righ teous, in Colo. 2. 9.
whom the fulness of the Godhead does dwell bodily, that when there was no
salvation in all creatures, GOD might Cor. 5. 19
be in Christ, and reconcile the world un to him self.

Question.

If Christ through the power and virtue of his Godhead, did fulfill all
righteousness, and satisfy for our sin, why then was he also made man like
unto us?

Answer.

As it was necessary that Christ should be God, Job. 4. 18* and. 25. 5.
or else he could not have been so perfect righteous, as the law of God
required, nor yet have borne the heavy burden of syn: So it was also necessary
that he should be man, or else he had been ryghteous only to him self, and
Heb. 2. ^^
we through him had not ben sauc tified. For it could not be that we should
have been partakers of his grace, if he had not ben partaker of our nature, nor
we could not have been free from the wrath of God, and rigor of his law,
except our Heb. 2. 14 Gal. 3. 13
nature in him had felt his fathers anger, and he perfect man for us had been
accursed: for Eze. 18. 4
God had so appointed that the soul that had sinned, it should die, and he is
not like 1. Sam. 1^ 29.
unto man that he should repent, but the word that he had spoken he would
surely accomplish. And therefore that God might be righteous in his judgment,
Christ was man like unto us, and so in our flesh Heb 9. 14
offered him self unto death, as if he should have said unto his father:
Execute O God thy judgments against man, and lo behold me a perfect man, I
will bear the^. And thus was our savior Christ perfect God, that he might be
stronger then Satan, and take sin away, and perfect man, that we might have
part of his redemption Heb. 4. 15
who in all things was like unto us, sin only excepted.

Question.

Sith Christ God and man has thus paid the punishment of our sins, are we
now all discharged before God?

Answer.

No, not every one shall be saved by Christ, but they alone that do believe,
and in a true faith take hold of his mercies.

Question.

Rehearse the Articles of this faith.

Answer. I believe in God the father. etc.

Question. Why make thou mention of God the Father, God the Son, and God
the holy Ghost, seeing there is but one God?

Answer. As the scripture teaches us most plainly that there is but Deuteronomy. 4.
32 Ephe. 4. 6.
one God, so likewise it teaches me that the sa^^ divine substance is
distinguished into three persons, into Mat. 28. 19 1. John. 5. 7.
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Which three persons are one God
Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Act. 17. 25.
eternal, infinite, and most perfect in it self. And when God shall give us
such eyes as shall be able to see the glorious Majesty of his Godhead, then we
shall have also such heavenly wisdom, as shall easily perceive the
distinction of the persons. In the mean while we will believe the truth of his
eternal word, and hate and detest all contrary heresies.

Question. God grant unto us all this sobriety, but tell me now what is the
effect of the Articles of thy faith.

Answer.

First I believe that God the Father, the maker of all things, Ephe. 3. 15.
for his son Christ's sake, is my Father, and therefore 1. Ioh. 4. 9.
loves me. Secondly, that God the Son was made 1. Tim. 2. 5.
man for me, and has wrought for me what so ever was needful to salvation.
Thirdlye I believe, that God the holy Ghost Gala. 4. 6.
dwells in my heart, as the 2. Cor. 1. 22 Ephe. 1. 14,
seal of mine election, and persuades me that Christ's benefits are all
mine, and works in me, Collo. 2. 11.
that I dye unto sin, and live unto righteousness.

Question.

What is it that thou call the Catholic Church?

Answer.

The catholic Church is the whole company of the Heb. 11. 39.
faithful, which have been here to fore, or are now, or shall be to the latter
end, even the whole fellowshyp of the elect of God, I believe ye God know eth
them all, that he has and will take them all into his glory.

Question.

What call thou the communion of saints?

Answer.

The communion of Saints is the society that we have all with 1. John. 1. 3.
God through Christ Jesus, and the employing of all Gods benefits, both
spiritual and temporal, to the mutual help and comfort one of an other,
according to the measure offaith that we have received. Thus I believe the
Saints of God will do, Psalm* 132. ^
and while they are in this life, live one to another.

Question.

What is it to believe ye forgeuenes of syn?

Answer.

To believe that the punishment of our sins is fully paid by Jesus Christ, and
therefore freely forgeuen unto all that believe in him.

Question.

What beleuest thou of the resurrection of the body?

Answer.

I do believe that after this life ended, Eccle. 12. 7.
my soul shall go to God yt gave it, and that my body shall rest in the grave,
till the appointed time, and then I shall Job. 19. 25.
see God in my flesh, I my self shall see him, and mine own eyes shall look
upon him, even in this body made glorious, and with out al Phil. 3. 21.
corruption, like unto the body of Christ.

Question.

What is it thou say of life everlasting?

Answer.

I believe yt when God shall raise again this body, and join again in one my
body and soul, that then my body shall be without al corruption, no more
subject to any change, but that Death it self our last enemy shall be taken
away, Cor 15. 54
and swallowed up in victory, and I shall live, so that I shall never dye. God
strengthen us by his spirit in the inner man, yt we may be able to comprehe^d
with all his Saints, Ephesians. 3. 17
what is the length, the breadth, the height, the depth yt we may know the love
of Christ, and be filled with all fulness of God.

Question.

The Lord increase this faith in us: But tell me, have we this faith in our
own power, to believe if our selves will?

Answer.

No, but Ephe. 2. 8.
faith is the gift of God, even as our salvation likewise is, and of our selves
there is not one of us that 1. Cor. 12. 3
ca^ so much as name the Lord Jesus, but John 6. 6^.
it is wrought in us by the holy Ghost, through the Galat. 3. 2. Romans 8. 7.
preaching of the word, confirmed and Romans 4. 11.
made strong by the same Spirit, through the use of the word and Sacraments.

Question.

How many Sacraments are there?

Answer.

Two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Question.

What strength of faith have we through our Baptism?

Answer.

Baptism is a seal and token by which God will have me assured that Act. 22.
17.
my syns are forgeuen me, and that my life is acceptable in his sight: That
like as the water washes away the filthiness of our bodies, i. Pet. 3. 21.
so our souls through the blood of Christ are made clean from the corruption
of syn: And as after our outward washing the body is more comely, so after our
Baptism the Romans 6. 4.
spirit of God woorketh in us, that syn is dead in our mortal bodies, and we
be risen up into newnes of life. And in whom so ever Baptism has not this
work, he may well have the name, but in deed he is no Christian.

Question.

What strengthening of our faith do we find in the use of the Lords Supper?

Answer.

The Supper of the Lord does strengthen my faith, that I should not doubt, but
as surely as I receive the bread and wine into my body, to become of perfect
substance with my flesh, 1. Co. 10. 16
so Christ has given him self wholly to become mine, and nourishes my soul
to everlasting life, Romans 4. 25
his death and passion is my delyuerance from syn, 2. Cor. 5. 21
his ryghteousnes is my justification, even so surely confirmed unto me, as if
I my self had performed in mine own body that most holy obedience unto his
father, which he alone fulfilled. Thus I receive the Sacraments as signs and
seals of the righteousness that is by faith.

Question.

Sith that this is then the doctrine of salvation, that when we were dead
through syn, God of his great mercy sent his son to be made man, and dye for
our syns, and to fulfill all righteousness, that he might bring again life into
the world, and so give that life unto every one, whosoever should receive the
holy Ghost to believe, that so we might be saved by faith, who before were
condemned by our works: Whereto then now serves our well doing, or what
avails it to do good works*

Answer.

True it is, our good works deserve nothing at Gods hand, for in his sight
our good works are not good, but all our ryghteousnes is like a defiled Esaias.
64. 6.
cloth. And were they never so many, yet by them Job. 35. 7.
God receives nothing at our hands, Psalm ^6. 2.
and all our well doing extends not unto him, and therefore if we will ask
any thing by works, we must ask of them of who^ we have deserved it, at the
hands of God we can ask nothing. And therefore as touching merit we will let
our works alone. But we have greater causes of well doing, and which ought
more to enforce us, then either life or death. We must do well first, to show
our Collo. 3. 15.
thankful hearts to our Savior Christ, and to 1 John. 5. 2.
testefie our love toward him, with keeping of his commandments. Again,
we ought to do well, that our 1. Pet. 2. 12.
example may call out brethren unto righteousness, that they also may become
with us of the household of faith. But the greatest cause of all other is, that
in our well doing Mat. 5. 16.
we set forth the glory of God, and his holy name is praised in our good
works. This ought to be so precious in our eyes, that ten thousand hels and
heavens should not so much move us. This is the excellency of virtue, that
God in it is gloryfied, and this is the great horror and confusion of sin,
that God in it is dishonored.

Question.

Because that prayer is the especial means which God will have us use to
increase in faith, tell me what belongs to true prayer?

Answer.

It is requisite in true prayer first that we pray Psa. 50. 13.
only to God: Iaco. 4. 3.
Secondly, that we be inwardlye touched with the need of the thing we ask: 2.
Cori. 1. 20.
Thirdlye, that we ground our prayer upon Gods promise. Luke 18. 2.
Fourthly, yt we continue, though straight we obtain not: Lastly, that we ask
not what we will, but such things as we are sure God has commanded us to
ask, like as we have example in the Lords prayer.

Question.

Rehearse the Lords prayer.

Answer.

Our father which art in heaven. etc

Question.

What desire thou in this prayer?

Answer.

I desire of my heavenly Father, that his holy name may be glorified among us,
both in his excellent works, and in our lives: That he only may be had in
honor, and all other set aside. Secondly, I desire that his kingdom may
flourish, that is, that his holy spirit may bear rule within us, to all
heavenly delights, and that his word may have the preeminence, to be our only
law of righteousness, which we may all obey. Thirdly, that we may willing ly
resign our selves to him, without all murmuring whatsoever he shall do.
Fourthly, that he will minister of his great riches, althings necessary for
our vocation. Fifthly, that our consciences may be quiet, and we have hope,
that our sins ar pardoned and blotted out of memory, even as we pardon all
whosoever have offended us. Lastly, that God would strengthen us with his
holy spirit, and increase our faith, that we may overcome the world, and
quench the firye darts of Satan, and so at the last be partakers of his glory.

Question.

Tell me now briefly the effect of all that thou have confessed.

Answer.

By the ten commandments I see my sin, and how I have deserved the wrath
of God, and everlasting damnation. From which because I could not be delivered
by mine own strength, the holy Ghost by the preaching of the Gospel has
wrought in me faith, in Christ my Redeemer, by which I am assured that he has
borne the punishment of my syns, and made me heir with him of everlasting
life. And of this that I should never doubt, he has given me two Sacraments,
as outward signs and tokens to be seen and felt of me, that as surely as I
see my self made partaker of them outwardlye, so the holy Ghost inwardlye
enstructing me, I should not doubt, but inwardly to be partaker of Christ him
self with all his benefits, that in him and through him I shall have life
everlasting. And thus being regenerate into this lively hope by ye holy Ghost,
my ways should be directed by ye same spirit, to walk in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

FINIS.

