THE APOLOGY, OR DEFENSE OF A VERITY HERETOFORE PVBLISHED CONCERNING A
MEDICINE CALLED AVRVM POTABILE, that is, the pure substance of Gold, prepared,
and made Potable and Medicinable without corrosiues, helpefully given for the
health of Man in most Diseases, but especially available for the strenghning
and comforting of the Heart and vital Spirits the performers of health: AS AN
UNIVERSAL MEDICINE. Together with the plain, and true Reasons, manifold and
irrefragable Testimonies of fact, confirming the Universality thereof. And
lastly, the manner and order of administration or use of this Medicine in
sundry Infirmities. BY FRANCIS ANTHONY of London, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON Printed by John Legatt, 1616.

THE PREFACE TO THE INDIFFERENT and Judicious Reader.
ALexander the Great, King of Macedon, amongst all other blazons of his honor,
has this not the least: That in hearing of causes, both his ears were open to
both parties, Plaintiff, and Defendant: That being rightly informed, his
decision of the controversy might be upright, not partial. As this is the
duty of every learned and judicial Reader: so in this question of mine, I
cannot entertain other thought, then expectance of all integrity: Not only to
have ears, and all other senses auersed from the tongues and quills of
idly-learned slanderers, but also reserved unto a generous equanimitie toward
the necessary and equable reply of the Defendant. Not doubting therefore
(gentle Reader) of this your disposition, I have written, and dedicated to your
hands and hearts, to take, read, digest and cherish this Apology of my
Preparation, and administration of my Essence and Liquor of Gold, commonly
called Aurum Potabile or Potable Gold: with assurance of censure on my side,
though distasting the A-B-C-darie and Comicall Rayler. If therefore my
malicioners have heretofore seduced you into sinister constructions of this
cause, it was not your fault, but their posting malice, anticipating and
forestalling that better and true Information, which this Apology freely now
offers, and earnestly entreats to be so accepted. Many good men have justly
complained against the Pasquelling liberty of traducing slanderers. If a
sufficient conclusion should rest therein, yea, or a moving Inducement: then
you with me must needs confess, that no virtue shall have his due regard, no
man of whatsoever desert, shall be secure of his good name. My contentment and
satisfaction preservative: my shield and defense against the tainted darts of
such adversaries, shall be security against foul challenge, Impossibility
of attaint, the warrant of truth: which in her naked simplicity shall
maintain me, in the uprightness of a good conscience against all their
attempts, and by Gods grace, powerfully deliver me. Unto you therefore
(indifferent and sincere Readers) I consecrate the protection both of this
Treatise, and of the Medicine it self therein handled. Because, as no man is
created solely for his own particular, but for the profit and good of others;
(for nature has made, and charity commanded a vicinitie and neighborhood
betwixt all men) so this being materially a kind of universal Medicine: it
ought not to be restrained from the public tender of profit to all men.
Socrates being demanded what Countriman he was, answered, not only an Athenian
but a Cosmopolitane, a Citizen of that great Commonwealth, the whole world. So
ought every good Physician in the public profession of his faculty, not to
bury his talent in the soil of one Country, but to remember, that the very
Character of his calling does challenge the fruits of his function for all the
world, so far as possible capacity extends; specially of this nearest
community in Christendom. Let it not therefore seem strange unto you,
(worthy Readers) that without exception of Country or nation, I do
indefinitely appeal unto all, and in such generality consigne these fruitions,
which long study, labor and chargeable experience have confirmed unto me, in my
profession and Practice of Physic. Arist. says morally (but the sentence is
divine) Bonu^ quo co^munius, eo melius. The more common a good thing is, the
better it is. Of which follows one reason of this my present act: Omne Donu^
quo melius, eo comunicabilius. The better any gift is, the more co^municable
also ought it to be. And as it is so in nature it self, so ought it to be in
the dispe^sation of the possessour. I do not herein so propose, and magnify
mine own endeavors, and the perfection of this Medicine by my self made, with
a solitary conceit, and ambitious prejudice, as though no person else where
were seized of the like (and peradventure in a higher degree of exaltation) but
acknowledging Gods blessings and gifts, to my self amongst many others, I may
not hide my talent in the earth: But beside the present uses hereof in most
urgent causes of health, do also wish the provoking, and virtuous emulation in
others, to incite their industries in the search and labor of excellent
necessity for a common good. Also that so general a Medicine may as generally
be known to be had, to the intent to be used in all places. The opinion of
every excellent, both ancient, and modern Physicians, concerning the virtue,
power, efficacy and use of Potable gold, is conuested in their own writings:
who do hold firm, that no Physician can well save the performing honor of his
profession, without Potable gold, howsoever otherwise he be furnished with
herball Medicines. In which kind also, God has stored so many particular
adiuments, for the relief of man's miserable maladies, that none ought to
neglect the indagation of their virtues, the preparation of their parts, and
administration of their Remedies. Which as

I gladly and happily use in fit time and place, so I also commend the like use
to others, even with this Potable Gold, as is commonly used in sundry other
Polychresticke, or Panchresticke Medicines: according to every present
requisition of occasions and circumstances, by the advice of any rational and
experienced Physician. With which profession I offer and submit the respect and
acceptance of my Inventions, desiring you all, with like regard and favor, to
receive and embrace this my will and desire of doing good, and to be profitable
to many.

THE DIVISION OF THIS TREATISE.
ABout five years past I published a short discourse for the Assertion of
Chymicall Physic, and of true Potable gold, containing these heads or
Chapters. 1. Whether gold may be so dissolved, that it become truly potable. 2.
That the highest and most powerful excellency of Medicines is in Metals. 3.
That amongst all Metals gold has the prerogative, concerning the Physical
use of Medicine. 4. Of what manner is the Art, and mystery to dissolve gold,
and distill it up: which commonly is called, Drawing over the helm. 5. That it
were requisite by public question to examine and try this truth of this
Magisterie, that so the mouth of all gainsayers might be stopped. 6. That
Potable gold deserves the name of a General or universal Medicine: and of
the manifold use, and efficacy of mine own Potable gold.

This Treatise of mine, containing a simple, naked and plain delivery of a
simple and naked truth, and therefore as simply and plainly in words and style
set forth, though it really satisfied both here and in foreign parts many
learned men, Judicial lovers of truth, yet it wanted not the common lot of all
virtues, to find maleuolent eyes and detracting encomberers: such as may seem
either with blind zeal, or ignorant opinion of omniscience, rather to repine
at a fee lost, then desire the true knowledge of that, which they never
intending to labor for, yet ambitiously desire an imputation of critical
knowledge therein. The sand of this descent was chiefly, if not only in
London. The Issue, none have greater cause to mourn for, then the Printers for
want of utterance, or rather they which bare the charge of printing: for unto
Judicial Readers, those labors of theirs, though they were tedious and
nauseous, yet some recreation followed in laughing at so much obstetrication of
such mountains in the parturition of such ridiculous mice. I hope none will
expect a cryquit answer of me to their most powerful arguments, being, in the
most modest term, a shamble of impotent and effrenat scolding: but rather
truth and matter against falsehood and words, leaving their tongs and
goose-quils, to the judgment and censure of their own reformed and better
advised hearts: of which my charity persuades me not wholly to despair:
knowing some learned gentlemen of the same company, not the same mind, ready
to blush at such a publication, which all the learned men of Christendom do
laugh: And who can fancy such barking Rhetoric, wherein not only good words,
are made the measures of madness, but precious hours are consumed in frothy
rablings? If they be still of the same spirits, I wish them thereof full
contentment therein: And that therefore they would in some hollow craggy place
stretch out their own strains, that 1000. exchange of interest might
bountifully return them their delightful terms and Syllogismes in this their
new Barbara. But this my Apology shall with much tranquillity, I hope, answer
them, defend mine own reputation and integrity, vindicate this verity
questioned; give estimation to potable gold, and make the use thereof more
common. According to which intentions I have divided this Treatise in three
parts. In the first shall be proved and maintained that which in my first
printed book was delivered concerning gold, that it may be made potable and
medicinable, and be esteemed for a kind of general Medicine, or near
thereto. In the second I will satisfy and sufficiently prove by irrefragable
testimonies, and examples, that this my Medicine so much canuased, both is made
and does consist of gold, and also performs the true effects, mentioned to be
incident unto potable gold. In the third part I will show and teach the way how
to use this Medicine in every particular disease. That all pacified and
indifferent persons, favorers of truth, and embracers of Gods blessings, may
enjoy the fruition thereof. Some circumstances also I have hereunto annexed,
such as are pertinent to this our intent.

It is a controuersed question: Whether there be or may be made a general or
universal Medicine, good for all Diseases. Many hold the negative. If they
speak precisely of all Diseases without distinction, I say as they do, and
consent. For there be many fatal, mortal and Incurable Diseases, against
which all consultation and counsel of Physic is bootlesse. Therefore that my
assertion of a general Medicine be rightly understood, I desire my meaning to
be truly and distinctly taken. For I know that some diseases be native and
hereditarie: some caused by some outward and superuenient chance or accident:
some proceeding of simple distemper: some of humors joined therewith. Those
which are native and hereditarie, are generally thought, and for the most part
be all incurable, though they may in some kind receive alleuiation and ease:
And some of them also in the title of those which happen by superuenient
accident: As luxations, lamenesse, Impotencies, want or superfluity of some
joint, blindness, deafness, Ambiguitie of sex, etc. And these so far as
they be restaurable and capable of Cure, are chiefly under that part of this
faculty which is called Surgerie, and requires the hand, though not always
and in all cases. But those Infirmities and Diseases of the other kind,
proceeding of inward causes within the body, such as, for the most part, be all
Maladies whereupon all Rational Physicians are exercised, if by administration
of one Medicine they all (I mean, so long as they are accounted curable by
Rational Physicians) may be eased, mitigated and perhaps perfectly cured,
surely such Medicine, ought and may be accounted respectively a general
Medicine. For as that Physician is to be accounted perfect, and a general
Master of his Art which knows according to his title, faculty and
profession, how to cure all diseases, though he leave and give over some as
incurable; not for wnat of fit means and skill in all cases of possibility,
but through ineptitude and indisposition of the subject being incapable of
redintegration: So also that shall be accounted a Medicine universal, which
cures most and the greatest diseases, though not all: not through defect of
efficacy in the Medicine it self, but respectively for the inhabilitie of the
subject.

This also may be proved by reason derived from 1 The first reason.
those Medicines of Rational Physicians, which for the multiplicitie of their
operative extent to many intentions, and curing of many diseases, are called
Polychresta, that is, of many uses. For if there be among them such as be
helpful not to one only singular affection, but to many different diseases, why
is it not likewise consequent and reasonable that by help of Art, a Medicine
may be made much more comprehensiue of efficacy upon diseases? And as it may
be made to exceed in one degree, so in 2. 3. 4. 100. and from Polychreston,
of many uses, be Catholicon, universal, of all uses. The reason is all one to
reasonable men.

If objection be made, that such Polychrest is artificially made by composition
of many things, wherein are diversity of natures. And this universal of one
only, which implies an impossibility of different and contrary operative
faculties: to this I answer, that Polychrests are made out of Simples without
commixtion: As from Rheubarbe, Vinegar, Lead, Niter, Vitriall, Opium, Camphire,
and many other, whereof some do both loose and knit, some do heat and cool,
some have other contrary effects, which appear in their operations, and are
testified by Writers. These things being thus in impure mixtures and imperfect
bodies, what doubt can there be made of the high prerogative and supreme
excellency of Gold, which all the learned and experienced antiquity, and the
continued deriuation from thence unto this day have acknowledged and magnified
for the chief, if not only Treasury, and rich Cabinet of universality and
Panchresticke Medicine: In which all the dowers of all other Medicines,
whatsoever are written and experimentally found, be united and naturally
enclosed.

Secondly, whereas the original of most diseases 2 The second reason.
springs from that, which the Physicians call Intemperies, that is, a
distemperature, being especially in the first qualities, hot, cold, moist or
dry; there is no reason to the contrary, but that one Medicine, being without
excess or defect, in equal harmony of all qualities most temperate, and also
powerful in operation, may be sufficient for the collection, qualifying, and
rectifying of all and every such distemper. Such a like body is gold: which
notwithstanding it be compounded of the four Elements, yet is this in
prerogative above all other natural bodies, endowed with an exact temperament
and equality of the compounding Elements, and Elementall qualities. Every one
to the other three, and all four to and among themselves by exact natural
equality and perfect mixture, are so compounded to the perfection of this
body, that it constantly persisteth in the fire without diminution. From this
proportional mixture of Elements resulteth a temperament of supreme
mediocritie: whereupon that our learned and famous countryman Roger Bacon,
calls Gold the mean between the four first qualities. Seeing therefore by
Gods gift in the creation it consists of so true an adequation and subtle
temperament, this must needs appear and show it self operatiuely in
consequent effects upon those first qualities, and be powerful against all
distemperatures, whether hot or cold, moist or dry, or any their combinations:
First allaying and bridling any excess therein, and so by degrees and
succession ouercomming the whole discord, and restoring mediocritie of
temperament between all. So that the general Axiom or Rule of great
Hippocrates is here magnified: That Diseases are cured by Medicines contrary
to themselves. For the mean betwixt two extremes is no less contrary to both
and either of them, then one extreme to an other: and more powerful in
reduction, by how much it is more habitual and fixed in the unspotted
mediocritie and equality. Let this be understood of gold dissolved and made
potable, otherwise it is not operative upon those distempered qualities in one
kind or other

The third Reason concerns the temper of the body to be cured. Death (says
Galen) does always 3 The third reason.
follow the unmeasurable or excessive distemperatures of the Heart. So likewise
do Diseases. For all parts of the body languish with the Heart. Let us
therefore consider a little the Emperie of the Heart in man's body, how by his
own heat and vital spirit, it reigns over, and in all parts of the body.
Let us also take into consideration the distemperature of other parts making
impression upon the Heart, and so are causes of languishment and death. Which
being on either side certain, then it must also be true, that if gold
administered do restore integrity of temperament to the Heart, the other parts
and members of the body shall also receive comfort, strength, restoration,
and finally life to the whole body. Wherefore the first office of every good
Physician is, to have special regard, to maintain and uphold the spiritual
functions of his diseased patient, which all have their original from the
heart. For if he suffer them to quail, and over much to be dejected, all
Cordialls will then come unseasonably. That admonition is just and necessary
First strengthen and comfort the Heart, then apply for the Disease, if need
be: for often times, the Heart being well corroborated, the Disease imminent
vanishes. But some will ask, how gold, so hard, solid and compact, and
therefore indigestable by any strength of man's stomach, can pass from thence
to the heart, and strengthen, comfort, rectify and restore it; conconsidering
that these and such like faculties come to it by the plenty of pure, clear,
and subtle spirits of the blood, which cannot be made of any thing not
digested both in the Stomach and Liver, and therefore not of gold. In answer
whereof I say, that long and daily observation has confirmed, that many things
naturally are effected by the hidden and specificall properties of some things,
whereof no understanding of man can give a certain and vndisputable manifest
cause or reason. We see the affinity of natures between Iron and the
Lode-stone, and the pointing of this to the North Pole. Of which kind there be
infinite exemplarie instances. Neither do the most learned Physicians and best
Philosophers so well agree upon the reasons of those Purging Medicines which
they call Elective, as appropriate specially to one humor: and diverse others
to some special part of the body, yea and to some special diseases: but that
a great part of them do fly to these hidden and specificall properties, some
in the same, some in other terms. In which rank if we marshall gold, what
Lieuetenant will chide? He certainly must be some ouerweening man, that will
question these noble virtues of gold, that has read so many notable and famous
Authors for that affirmative assertion, part whereof I have cited in my other
book, being but one Rank of a whole Army. Here I will only trouble the Reader
with a few lines out of that famous Physician and excellent Philosopher Arnald.
Gold alters the evil condition of man's body, cleanses and renews it. The
virtue of many things may come near the particulars of the operation hereof,
but no one perform it all. But potable gold alone is it which works these
miraculous effects: this is not subject to corruption, but is agreeable to the
Complexion and temperament of man. It does neither heat, nor cool, nor
moysten, nor dry: but is temperate in all temperature, and exceeds all things
in durabilitie: It helps a cold stomach, and gives courage to Cowards and
fearful hearts: It helps the passions of the Heart: It is good against
Melancholy: It comfort natural heat and tempereth the same, neither may
any thing be compared to it or supply the stead thereof. The virtue thereof is
manifest in the substance of it. It cleanses and clarifieth by reason of the
natural heat it has. It gives high and supreme temperament above all other
things, by reason of the great temperament of it self: and being it self
most durable, it causes continuance and durabilitie, according to natural
possibility in other things, and preserves man's body. And because it is like
to the Complexion of men's body, therefore if it be prepared as it ought, it
will join and incorporate thereunto. But all the secret is in the preparation
of it, which the wise Philosophers have concealed. It confirms and keeps
sound the substance of the Heart, and preserves it, and clarifieth the
substance of the spirits, and sends good blood to the skin, and with a light
and easy abstersion preserves beauty as in youth. Thus he writes, as also in
other places of this Author you may read many admirable effects and virtues of
gold both solid and potable. How gold is so powerful a Cordial and so
general a Medicine, is held a very difficult question to find the cause and
reason thereof. Let every man's opinion be free to himself. I will without
prejudice to any other briefly show you my opinion. I take it for granted that
gold of all mixed bodies is most equal and temperate in the Elements and
elementall qualities, so that moisture with heat as agent, dryness with
coldness as patient and subject to action, are inseparably with natural
concordance perfectly joined. Wherefore gold is respectively a body not only
incorruptible in water, fire, air, and earth, and as it were an earthly image
of eternity, but also most convenient, agreeable, and as it were allied to and
with the heart of man, which of his hot moisture does work the vital spirits,
and maintain the arteriall beatings of the pulse in all parts of the body.
And this temperament of gold must be considered two ways. First (as Scholars
call it) Arithmetically: hence comes the equality and equabilitie of
qualities elementarie in the compact and solid body thereof, not resolved into
the permanent form of potable liquor. In this consideration it were very hard
for learned Physicians that build so much upon and press authority, to deny
that gold has and actiuely does show many great effectiue virtues, seeing the
Catalogue is so great of many notable and famous Physicians which extol the
effects thereof, and at this day do use it so much; as of gold quenched in
wine, boiled in broth, given in limell or foil in Conserues and Electuaries.
The hope and end thereof in all their intentions, is to Corroborate and comfort
the heart. And this temperature in and of gold is habituate and coessentiall
with the whole substance, matter and form, in all the Elements both active and
passive. And because not the material but the formal Essence is most operative
and professor of the noble Elements, fire and air, from whence resulteth in an
indissoluble bond, heat and moisture so friendly agreeable to man's nature.
Therefore gold in his natural coagulation and soliditie, cannot so fully
according to the inward power of his natural efficacy and virtue, show and
perform the effects thereof, as being resolved, opened, and made potable, that
the Elements and elementall qualities may more freely both work and be wrought
upon, and be brought from their potentiality to actiuitie in application to the
body of man. For then the agent and formal virtues, fire and air be
predominant in their exaltation. Whose property, being communicated and
applied to and with the spirits of our body, is to refresh, comfort and
strengthen the heart: renew, restore, and increase the spirits, by that
wonderful faculty, and near equality as it were brotherhood which it has
to them. And this in the second consideration of the temperament of Gold
Geometrical in that different respect, as the other is called Arithmeticall.
In which that proportionate quality friendly and concordant to the heart and
temperament of man, and that complexioned moist heat or hot moisture, is
preualent or predominant. And one chief reason why Arnald before cited and
very many others of unreprovable authority, do so much commend, and with a
reserved secrecy admire the excellent dowers of gold, is, that being made
potable, it restores, augmenteth and preserves that our humidum radicale, and
calidum innatum, Natural heat and moisture, (understand them complexioned not
distinct) and so with respective possibility, prolongeth life, and keeps
back old age, I mean the sense of the defects and infirmities thereof.

If it be objected that this exact temperature and equality Objection.
of mixture in gold being supposed, it cannot actiuely operate or work any
thing in man's body, because, as every action comes from or by means of some
predominant quality, so equality without disparagement keeps all in an
vndefeazeable bond of an irresoluble compound. I answer thus. In cases where
the intemperature or distemper of the disease (or the degree thereof in some
cases) is not yet known, the doctrine positive and counsel of Physicians is,
to use and administer temperate Medicines, which shall not be offensive
manifestly to any quality, but indifferent and allowable to all. If this be
done with good advise and reason: in such like case, it must needs be far more
consonant to reason, and behoouefull to the patient, to give such a Medicine as
is not only temperate by qualification, but so prerogatiuely excellent therein,
that it cannot lose that temperature and the consequent efficacy thereof, by
the force of any thing consonant or dissonant. Which is far otherwise in all
vegetables reputed equal in temperament, because they are apt in some cases to
cause dangerous distemperature in man's body. Examples are plentiful. But for
instance take Manna it self reputed a very temperate laxatiue, yet very easily
it self turning into a hot Choleric humor, and increasing the same, and the
distemperatures and diseases consequent thereupon according to the disposition
and inclination of the body receiving it. Of which there is no fear in the use
of gold, for the reasons aforesaid. Therefore whether the Tenure be: That
Contraries be cured by Contraries, having respect to the disease and the cause
thereof, the quality of the Medicine is remedy: Or that like are conserved by
their like, with regard to the strength of the patient and comfort of the
heart, according to the doctrine of Hippocrates: Gold (as has been proved)
must needs be in both intentions the fittest and most convenient Medicine and
remedy for diseases of what temper or distemper soever, being advisedly given:
specially being Philosophically opened, resolved and made potable:

That there may be a general or universal Medicine 4 The fourth reason.
is also proved, by consideration taken from the nature of the person
diseased, with reference to the disease. For if the disease be strong, like a
heavy burden pressing the patient, and the poor patient weak not able to
bear out the Critical day of happy judgment of issue of the malady; I ask
in this case what ought to be done. Certainly, rather enable the body to the
end of the Combat, by comforting and strengthening the heart, then vainly
attempt to remove the log, and suffer him to sink under the burden. For, not
the Medicine, but nature alone is the true physician, curing all infirmities,
if she be not oppressed, or that she be so relieved, that strength in her be
maintained. It is not unlike by comparison unto the charge of sumpter Mules or
Pack-horses, which often times use to be fed traveling that they may endure to
carry their burdens to the Inn, not discharged untimely of their packes. And
by this means they need not be unloaded at every bayte; but prouendred under
their loads for the quicker dispatch. So no disease is cured, the strength not
maintained: but contrarily by perfect Method the strength and power of the
body is by degrees to be restored and comforted, that the disease may be both
resolved, and life maintained. To this purpose did Arnaldus write in these
words. The only intention of ancient Physicians was, to give vigor and strength
unto nature: Who being strengthened, performs whatsoever is expedient. And by
this means they never did overthrow any man. Therefore never cease to work
with Cordialls in administration of Physic. This is the counsel of Arnald.

Moreover, many diseases proceed from obstructions The fifth reason.
of some viscous, slymie and mucilaginous matter, not separated in the vessels
of concoction, by their imbecility, either natural, or accidental. Therefore,
if this obstruent matter be subtiliated, the obstruction shall thereby be taken
away, and consequently both the disease and accidents of the disease cured. Of
such kinds of Obstructions, besides other diseases, many kinds of fevers do
arise, burning, rotten, hectic, pestilent, etc. Also many and dangerous
sicknesses both hot and cold. Against which though Medicine made of vegetables
do often very much prevail: yet because for the most part they be too weak,
and leave no solid and lasting impression: or contrariwise work so violently,
and seldom without some offense, scarce ever with such temper, gentleness and
sincerity as is requisite. Therefore that Medicine which being most temperate
and equally graduated to the Elementall harmony of man's body, ought justly to
be preferred both before them and all of that kind. For such one cannot by his
coldness offend the complexioned parts, nor by his heat the hot: but by
opening and so promotiuely taking away the Obstruction, be equally and
certainly profitable to all. Galen teaches that the cause is to be taken away,
by finding out, and applying the true contrary of every alterable nature. As to
cure any disease coming of and depending on Obstruction, is the dissoluing of
matter obstruent, and opening the Obstruction. This counsel we ought to follow
in all such cases, in opening that which is forcibly shut. And then gentle and
quiet restitution comes of temperament to all distempered parts. For, whether
the excess were in heat or cold, the spirits which were shut up in prison,
now set at liberty, are refreshed, recover their former vigor, and health to
the whole body. If the blood (says Hippocrat.) be stopped in his course, and
the spirit with it, it causes chylnesse, numnesse, giddines, loss or
hinderance of speech, heaviness and pain of the head and convulsions, after
which follow many kinds of the falling sickness which be accounted cold
diseases. In brief, it is most evident, that only Obstructions be the cause of
many and sundry diseases, not only different, but directly contrary each to
other. Therefore as one cause brought them in, so may one Medicine expel them.

But pause a while. It may be demanded how humors Objection.
so exorbita^t and abounding as they do in the bodies of many men, shall be
emptied from thence by the force of any medicine, whose faculty is not to expel
or purge by the common passage, and whose intent is to be only strengthening and
comforting the heart.

To which I answer: It is true, that in many diseases Solution.
the abundance of humors are such causes, that except they be purged away in
due and convenient time and order, it is scarce possible to hope for a sound
recovery: in which case if some gentle Purgation, together with the
administration of this universal Medicine be used, both the strength shall be
better maintained, sooner recovered, and the disease overcome Yet though no
purgation be given, but only this universal Medicine at times administered,
such is the virtue thereof, that Nature it self being strengthened and
comforted above the malice of the offending humors and the disease, will expel
the burden of those humors by the most convenient passages which that case may
require, whether it be by siege, vomit, urine, sweat, or other exitures. For
the Physician attending, is not directer and Master, but minister and servant
in fit administration unto nature: which being comforted and strengthened, will
help her self beyond all hope and conceit of man, as has bin often found to
the admiration of the greatest Doctors which hitherto have written, and
happens daily in our own experience. In all diseases the Physicians part is,
to promote the endeavor of nature to expel the offending humors by those
passages, which herself shows and directs; with discretion between
critical and symptomaticall euacuations, and of the conueniencie of a few
circumstances following the particularities of the disease: Of this I could
easily and plentifully bring many irrefragable and demonstratiue reasons: but
they may partly be understood by that which is already said, and partly are
written by diverse others grave and learned Authors. Therefore I will follow
brevity, and only set down a few lines out of that profound and singular
Philosopher Raymund Lully: who in the 32. Chapter of the Theorie of his
Testament writes thus. Blessed be our glorious and omnipotent God who has
given mankind knowledge and understanding to join and integrate the confused
particularitie of all Medicines with one real universality, by which all
things be and continue rectified. Therefore Son I warn thee, if thou
desire to be a perfect Physician, set not thy Practice on the particularities
of Medicine, or the particular intentions of Physic, because they be
confused, and at this day not sound, nor perfect. For nature cannot endure
them, by reason of their too much confusion, but is best pleased or satisfied
with and in one only Medicine. Because there is but one Medicine truly curing
all Infirmities, and comforting the spiritual virtues and powers of life, etc.
And a litttle after in the same. He that knows how to reduce most
particularities or virtues (for the intention of Curing diseases) unto one
universality (of subject) shall be the most excellent amongst Physicians. In
particular Medicines virtues be confused: but in an universal, they be
real, united, and active, as the whole course of nature shows. And this is
Medicina, Medicinarum, superlatiuely by excellency and prerogative the
Medicine of Medicines. And he that has such a Medicine, has a precious gift
of God. For it is an incomparable treasure. Thus far Raymund: who though he
there speak of that great and high Philosophical secret, yet he plainly
witnesses that there is in nature a universal Medicine: which whether it be
made of gold, or gold made of it, It mattereth not much, for either way it
sufficiently proves, the excellent properties of gold most agreeable to man's
nature; which having thus far proved, I will here end this first part of
this Treatise.

Having thus, unto moderate and well tempered Judgments (for my intent and
purpose in this treatise) proved, that there has bin, and therefore may be a
Panchresticall Medicine, for which very many learned are either searchers
themselves, or witnesses of other men's happiness in attaining the same: yet
because the peruicacie of some is such, that against experiment and sense it
self, they will (peradventure consciously) pretend the Impossibility and
maintain the negative: and some again, though yielding a possibility and
maintaining the affirmative, will fight in the shadow of one instance:
contending, that though they granted it may be; yet this subject of mine, this
my potable gold has not either the true, or near preparation of that so
renowned and famously mentioned Medicine, powerful and available in all
diseases that may happen to men: I will apply my self to their satisfaction.
My answer shall be brief, and of two sorts. First by Reason: secondly, by
manifest and clear demonstration of effects, of manifold experiments and
witnesses beyond exception: which be the maine pillars and only necessary
substructions of all knowledge in matter controuertible amongst men.

Concerning the proofs of reason, I have sufficiently satisfied that point in
my other book in the fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters. Yet further I pray
consider here with me, that there be many paths leading to the same Town,
and many ways to one and the same end. Some in their endeauours and pursuit
for the attaining of a universal Medicine labor in Minerals and those Metals
which respectively be called, and are imperfect: Some in Salts: some in
vegetables, some in the Animal kind: every one dittying the sound of the bell
answerable to his own tune. Let each of them therefore follow the Issue of his
own labors. I force not against them. But freely profess that in the
persuasion of those reasons which have lead me, I resolutely set down my rest
for this scrutinie in natural gold, and therein have employed my Industry:
with what success and happy Issue, I appeal to the most certain, true and
uncontrollable Judge and Doctresse, which is experience. The centonary
Fropperies of Alphabetarias, of Aurum non Aurum, shall nothing abate the
vindicting of this constant truth, that by my preparation, Aurum non Aurum,
gold has been so altered in and from the compacture and soliditie of his
primitive body; and in that respect it may be called, and truly is, non Aurum,
not gold, but destroyed, concerning the gross body, and altered into a
subtle, penetrant and volatile nature, and so exalted into the full actiuitie
of a most precious Medicine, with all the powerful explications of healthful
and helpful mysteries which nature has sealed in that body, and left to the
industrious labor of man to unfold. For gold is the Emblem of a magnificent
and most princely Palace, drawing the beholders of his natural luster, to
search what excellent Jewels be contained within that outward wall of so rich
promises. Which though they be many and admirable, yet few attain to the
fruition thereof, because by externe apparences, they aim at the latent and
hidden virtues: neither do they know the right key to unlock that rich
Cabinet. And although I cannot sufficiently declare, nor prize, all the
faculties (which be respectively innumerable) of this bountiful treasury: yet
I may and do confidently acknowledge and profess, that I have found in use
and practice very many of great worth; which as in themselves, for the use of
men they be of great worth, and estimation, so for them, man is reciprocally
bound both to ackwowledg and thankfully embrace, as Gods large blessing; who
commands us to knock at these gates of Nature, that they may be opened unto
us, that so we may find and enjoy the treasures locked therein. What man
amongst thousand has found out and perfected the like magisteriall secret? Who
is he among many, that has not tired his teeth in the hard shell, never
enabled by cracking it, to come to the sweet kernel, in which dwells this
mellite and gentle liquor of gold? But I will leave this digression, and
return to the intended end.

There is no question but that a Medicine made of 1. Reason.
natural gold, dissolved without things corrosiue, and brought into a
substance in form like honey, and Medicinable, potable, and disperseable into
any liquor, is both excellent, and justly to be reputed potable gold. But this
Medicine of mine, made and consisting in it self of gold, is such (as I have
before proved and shall further hereafter prove) therefore it is, and ought to
be acknowledged for true potable gold. The proposition needs none other
proof, then the consent of all famous writers of and upon potable gold: The
Assumption, whereupon the Inference and Conclusion depends, is proved in my
first published book, as also out of manifest demonstration, not private, to
my self, but public in the sight of many, not only once done, but sundry
times iterated: in which proceedings, the demonstratiue tokens mentioned in
Art, are apparent: the Isntrumental water which was in the form of common
water before it was put upon the gold, in few days becomes tincted, with a
deep and ruddy color, also when the Isntrumental water so tincted, shall be
distilled away, the solution of gold remains in form of honey as by
Philosophers is specified. In the whole magisterie, Art or process I have not
kept any thing secret, saving the Isntrumental water as Raymund testifies.
But some will say, If this be that true Potable gold, why do you make it common
to others? Good Sirs, forsooth I answer because it is such, therefore I make it
common, concerning the use: Which being profitable to all, challenges the
right and law of nature and charity, to be communicated to al. But that other
great secret of the Philosopher, not communicable to others, is only
profitable to the Author himself. And therefore let not this be the less
precious in it self, because innumerable men receive health and comfort
thereby? The sun gives visible light to the whole world. Is it therefore an
inferior Planet unto Mercury which seldom appears in the sight of men?

Again. That Medicine which really performs 2. Reason.
the true and proper unquestioned effects of Aurum potabile, being essentially
made of the said subject, ought and needs must be accounted true potable gold.
But this Medicine of mine, has produced the notable effects, only proper to
potable gold. Therefore it must needs be the same. An affirmative argument from
the effect to the cause is good and strong: as likewise from the cause to the
effect. In the holy Scriptures, a Prophet shall be judged great, by his great
works. As Elias, Elisa, and the Apostles raised the dead, as our Savior
Christ did. (It being proper only to the power of God) whose doctrine they as
forerunners; these as succeeders preached, in one verity, and the same divine
gift. The Analogy and proportional deduction of Inference, is a like true in
Arts and Sciences, and in all works both of Nature and Art, whether singular
or conjoined. So our Potable gold, brought from the potentialitie of natures
lock, unto the actiuitie, which artificial opening exciteth and manifests,
is known by his own proper and inseparable efficacies and effects, largely
affirmed in my other book. The Assumption of this Argument, drawing the
conclusion, I will further hereafter, by examples confirm.

The third Reason may be taken from the extraordinary 3. Reason.
and wonderful manner of working in the nature and resolution of gold, whereby
it is brought from fixation, to volatility, and so made potable. Therefore I
say thus. Whosoever can so dissolve the body of gold, that it shall not by any
Art be reduced again into fixed solid gold, but so persist; doubtless has
made potable gold, medicinable and profitable for the health of man. But by
Gods blessings in my endeauours, I have often times done this, and still can do
it: therefore doubtless I have often times made, and still can make potable
gold, medicinable and profitable for man's health. The dependence and connection
of this proposition stands in this: That gold in his primitive, natural,
hard, compact body, cannot communicate his internal virtues in man's body; and
therefore is not medicinable. For then the formalitie of gold is not loosened
from the bridle, or freed from the bodily prison, and bonds of coagulation; and
therefore not easily work upon the subject whereunto it is applied. But
contrariwise, being vltimatly and irreducibly solute, it is then apt for
action. So that if the substance of gold be exalted in his exuberate color, it
is a true token that it is made subtle, attenuate, and therefore Medicinable;
and that the aerie and fiery parts, or Elementalitie thereof, are predominant
over the earthy and watery. And in this manner preserving the natural unity
of the whole compound, do draw them (not altering the composition, but
subtiliating the substance) in the exalted symbolisme of the same Elements. The
Assumption has the same proof and confirmation which the other before: that
is, my very often and almost daily experience, whereof, if need be I, can
produce many eyewitnesses of eminent rank, and amongst them some learned
Physicians, against whom no one dare mutter an exception. But as Auicen in his
book de Anima makes three kinds of proof. 1. Sophistical. 2. Logical, and
3. Sensible by sight: of which it is to be understood, that by Sophistical
there he means not false or counterfeit cauillings. But leaving that apart, I
will content my self with the other twain. The Logical part of which we have
hitherto discoursed by inference of reason: And now, will we proceeede to the
third, being of sensible and eye-witnessed experiments.

EXPERIMENTS AND OCVLARE TESTIMONIES, A FEVV DRAWN OVT OF A GREAT NVMBER, BY
WHICH the Wonderful virtues of this my Potable gold in the Curing of Diseases
are fully showed, perhibited and avouched, by oculare and sensible testimonies,
free from all future challenge and question.
A PROTESTATION OF THE Author, to the writers of these Epistles or Letters
following.
HOnorable, Worshipful and Worthy persons, I entreat your courtesies, and
considerate humanities, not to take in ill part or make sinister constructio^,
that I have without your special allowances and warrants, published these your
letters written unto me, concerning the effects and successes in the
administration of my Potable gold. Protesting hereby, that I entertain not the
least thought of wronging any of you; but being compulsarily enforced to the
necessary defense of my Integrity and good name, intentiously scandalized in
the oppugning of this Medicine, which is the subject of this Discourse. I pray
you all willingly to consent to this auerrment of your own consciences, and
testifying both the Innocence of me, and useful necessity of a Medicine
proved by your selves in so many cases of dangers, left and forsaken after all
other known Remedies rankly attempted: and prognostically reputed desperate.
Which your consents, I doubt not shall record an honorable memory of you, in
the maintenance of so necessary, and healing truth. I shall never fail by any
my habilities, to be ready in any kind of services of good offices toward you.

TRANSMARINE TESTIMONIES. THE USE OF THE POTABLE GOLD BROVGHT OVT OF ENGLAND,
AND PRESENTED TO HIS SACRED IMPERIAL Majesty I do approve, by the happy
success in two cases of mine experience.
FIrst, I gave one ounce weight thereof to a young man naturally strong, but
then far spent with a malignant fever, being febris inclusa, with Idleness
of his Brain. After taking thereof he slept, and in his sleep, avoided
through his mouth, four long and round worms, living and quick. So was he
quit and free both from the fever, congelation, and distemper of the Brain.
Notwithstanding many Remedies had been before proved upon him, and he had
lain in this case four weeks extremely sick, in great danger of death.

AN other also recovered by this potable gold; Who being possessed of a
Quartane fever, (which took him in the Autumn or fall of the leaf, and held
him all winter) and was thereby so weakened, that his strength seemed utterly
decayed, and ready to fall into a Dropsy. This man after many Purgations,
took of me an ounce of this Potable gold, in the distilled water of Carduus
Benedictus: whereby he fell into so strange and unaccustomed sweat, as I
cannot remember ever to have read, or heard of the like. For beside that it was
natural, with out other impulsion, and so abundant that two persons had their
hands full in drying him, yet it so continued 3. days and 3. nights. But the
most wonderful thing of all was, that in this extraordinary sweat, and
abstinence from meat the time of three days and nights, he was so far from
fainting, for so much as any person could observe, that with this natural and
spontaneall euacuation, he did every hour wax stronger, lustier, and more
cheerful: And at the end of these days, he was thoroughly recovered and in
perfect health.

I do witness this JOHN ATHMESTETT IN Pubemheimb and Weyer, Dr. in Physic,
and Physician to the Sacred Imperial Majesty.

Right worshipful Sir.
Having read your true Assertion of that high Medicine the Aurum Potabile, and
heard relation made of the strange and wonderful effects of the same, by my
Lord Rosse his Majesty's Ambassador, Sir N. Drury. and Mr. Stafford, with
diverse others noble and gentlemen of England that were at this Election and
Coronation in Frankforth, I could and would not omit to visit you with these
few lines, humly entreating you, that for my pay, I might be partaker of this
so great a gift of God. And having understood by the letters of Sir Henery
Carry, that 4. ounces of this high medicine are sold for twenty shillings, I
have entreated this gentleman to lay out four pounds sterling, that I might
have 16. ounces of it. The which, if I may attain at your hands, as also the
dose, the manner and time of exhibiting it (for unwilling would I err contrary
to your experience) I shall ever hold my self bound and behoulding unto you.
Thus humbly beseeching you that for common studies sake, you would not let me
fail of my Entreaty, I rest

Your though unknown yet ever loving friend JAMES MOSAN, Physician to his
Highness.
CASSELL IN HESSEN THIS 11. Iuli. 1612.
RIght Worshipful Sir, I thank you most highly for your Aurum Potabile which
you sent me: which indeed I do never use, but in necessity, when other
Medicines will show no help at al. I have tried the virtue thereof in extreme
vomitings: In the passion of the heart: In malicious and contagious Dysenteries
or bloody fluxes: In the rising or suffocation of the mother, and the falling
sickness by reason thereof: In the Colike. In all which diseases after all
other helps inward and outward have failed, one dose of this Medicine did
effect so much, that all these patients after they had taken it, as it were in
few hours recovered their health. I have also tried it, in that disease which
is called Melancholia hypocondriaca (in English some call it the Melancholy of
the gutts) but have not found that effect as in the former. Yet it has
comforted the party maruellously.

From Sleusingen 24. of Febr. 1612. Your ever good friend JAMES MOSAN.

Worshipful Dr. Anthony, you may think me either forgetful, or unthankful
for your manifold courtesies toward me. But the truth is, I can find no
convenient means as I would, how to show my thankfulness; and therefore
constrained to die your debtor.

Your Aurum Potabile is an admirable Medicine in most Diseases. I have given it
in the beginning of a Podagricall fit: Whereupon the patient fell into a sweat,
and therewithal his pain ceased, and the patient walked again in short
space. Also in the bloody flux I have used it, In the falling sickness: In the
superfluous Menstruall flux of women: In the worms of young children; In the
Measels and small Pocks: Almost in all the Diseases of the Matrice, it is a
most excellent Remedy. Let all them that have written against it, talk idely
and nothing to the purpose. This grant them, that they have read much, and
write learnedly, but nothing to disprooue your Medicine: That little experience
that I have made of it, and others have found, is sufficient to show their
vanity. So I desire to be commended to you, etc.

From Cassell this 16. of August. 1614. Your most loving friend James Mosanus.

But that I may the better advertise, declare and satisfy this relation by
letters sent unto me from this said worthy, truly learned, and virtuously
adorned gentleman James Mosan Doctor of Physic, and primate Physician in
ordinary to the Landsgraue of Hess. I think it not amiss here to insert that
which came from an English gentleman named Alexander Oldfield, then being in
Germany; who in the year 1613. the 22. of July, in certain letters sent to
Sir Richard Norton Knight, and by him showed unto me, amongst other matters
writes thus.

One thing I had almost forgotten, which I entreat your Worship to certify to
my Lords, the Lord Biship of Winchester; that being at Hall the 28. of May, I
met with the Landsgraue of Hessen his Doctor of Physic, which speaks English
very well (for he proceeded his degrees in Oxford.) And talking with him about
Physic, he asked whether I knew Doctor Anthony. I told him that I had heard
of him. He told me, that his Aurum Potabile was excellent Physic: and the
first experience that he had made of it, was on a maid of 21. years of age,
which was fore troubled with the falling sickness, and since that time she was
never troubled with it, being now above a year past. He gave her one ounce
thereof at a time, and that self same day she fell into the passions of that
Disease eleven times, and (as I said before) she never fell since into them. He
gave it also to a child not above four months old, which was grievously
troubled with that disease, and it helped the child presently.

Also he gave it to one that was troubled with the bloody flux, and was brought
so low with it, that no man thought he could have recovered: he gave him one
ounce at a time, and that but once only, and instantly he recouerd, and is very
well.

He gave it also to a woman which was in childe-bed, and was exceeding weak
with the scouring, and nothing could stay it but that Aurum Potabile. For as
soon as she took that, she recovered. This himself reports, and wishes
that he dwelt near unto D. Anthony, that he might have I nough thereof as
need required.

ALEX. OLDFIELD.

SIr. I am persuaded that you admire my long silence, which proceeds from no
other then sundry great businesses, etc. I had occasion to recommend some of
your Aurum Potabile which I had for my proper use, to a principal gentleman
here in the Emperors Court. By whose means I have bin of late much sent unto
by sundry principal persons, some dangerously sick, to impart it unto them;
namely the Baron of Cressy, who had two sons sick of the small Pox: the
Eldest of about 19. and the other of 17. years of age. The Eldest died without
taking any of the Aurum Potabile, because they about him thought it was in
vain, and that they were both too far spent. The other, being as
dangerously sick, took it, and is thereupon recovered. The father himself
not being well, has likewise used it, and does find himself much comforted,
and well again by it. Many more in like manner. I have been so liberal of my
store, that it is almost spent. Many do wish I had such quantity by me that
they might have a good part of it for their money. Wherefore send me I pray you
a good quantity of the three sorts, with the price thereof. Send it either by
some of our Merchants that are to come to this next Mart at Frankfurth, or else
by some frind of trust in the company of the Count Palatine, or the Lady
Elizabeth, etc.

VIENNA THIS THIRD OF Feb. 1612. Style Brit. Your very assured and loving
friend Sr. Steph. Leseiur Knight, Ambassador to the Emperor.

Worthy and learned friend, I write to you later then I intended, because I
thought it not fit to deliver my opinion before manifold experience made, in a
matter of such worth and consequence. Experimentu^ fallax, as our great master
Hippocrates teaches. But now I will breefely show you the virtue and
excellency of your medicine. The first trial that I made of it, was on mine
own daughter about 16. years old: which for two continual days, was much
troubled with vomitings, keeping nothing that she eat or drank. Also by reason
of intolerable inward torments she could not sleep one wink for the space of
two days and nights. In which her extremities, having used all other
convenient and commended medicines to no purpose, but altogether without any
ease or mitigation of her pains, I betook my self lastly to your medicine,
as to a holy Anchor, and last hope. She took the same and kept it, and then
slept a little. But after 2. hours she cast again in great abundance, and
since she has continued perfectly well.

The second trial I made thereof, was upon a very worshipful gentleman, Sir
William Samuel Knight. He had a burning fever, with great violence of
continual heat, so that he utterly lost all sleep: he had withal a
weakness in his kidneis, and could not make water. Sundry glisters were
administered unto him, Purgations, vomits, and he was also let blood: All which
(in my observation) were so far from giving him any ease, that the disease did
still grow stronger, and all the symptoms or accidents every day worse and
worse, and more grievous. I persuaded the giving of your medicine. But at the
first I could not obtain, that he should take a new and unknown thing. At
last by the Importunity of his friends, and the necessity of his disease still
increasing, he yielded and took it. In an instant almost, he felt a gentle
remission of his heat, and a mild cooling; his spirits comforted; his kidneis
strengthened, so that he made water in a reasonable good quantity. Since which
time, he never ceased to extol this Medicine, though in troth, having been
long afflicted with a most violent disease, he has not as yet fully recovered
his strength.

The third trial I made, was upon a maid of noble family, which being taken
with dreadful convulsions, after some glisters taken, had also this medicine,
and was thereby perfectly cured.

Lastly, I was desired to send all the store I had of this medicine, to a grave
Matrone, a gentlewoman already spent with old age, and much sickness, being
then left to Gods mercy as at her last gasp. She presently after the taking of
this medicine, found much ease and comfortable strength in her spirits, though
I think there be no possible recovering her, so spent as is aforesaid:
farewell. etc.

GAYTON the 10. of Sept. 1611. Your loving friend Ioh. Marks.

MAster Doctor Anthony, though I have no acquaintance with you at all, yet
being an eye witness of your general charity extended to the whole world, in
bringing to the use of men the most excellent quintessence for the rectifying
of nature, that the world (as I think) yet ever had, I am thereby imboldned to
presume of your favor for some sew grains of the same, which (for the
several operations that I have seen thereof, in two special friends of mine,
both at the point of death) shall in my esteem for ever be held in most
precious account. For you shall understand that about a tweluemoneth since, I
came to a brother in laws house of mine, one Sir William Samuel knight, of
Vpton in Northamptonshire, whom I found in great extremity of sickness, and
thereby so weakened with the continual torment he was in, that all which were
about him feared him greatly: he had three Doctors of Physic, yet could none
of them minister any thing to him to give him any ease of his torments, but
rather tormented him more, until at last, himself remembered that one Mr.
Marks had commended this memorable medicine of yours. Which being brought, he
took, and it wrought so miraculous an effect within the compass of two
hours, as neither he nor I ever saw before. For it instantly delivered him of
his pain, which seemed before intolerable: It gave him rest, which for many
days and nights before he had bin barred of: It drew on an appetite by little
and little, all meat before being loathsome unto him: And (which is most
marvelous) whereas formerly, by his medicines excoriating those passages, he
seemed to endure great torture upon every provocation to the stool: he had now
in the day and night five stools, and every provocation was now as delightful
unto him, as the other were tormenting. Then did one of his Physicians advise,
that now he should take some Cordial, to assist the faculties of nature being
very weak. But when this was propounded unto my brother by his wife, he
utterly refused it. Nevertheless, it was so far forth urged, as that he
took it, the Physician bearing him in hand, that it was nothing else but
Unicorns horn, Bezoar stone and such like. But after taking thereof, my
brother fell again into his former tortures, and more vehement then before.
Whereby he was enforced the self same night to send again unto Mr. Marks; who
relieved him as formerly he had done: since which time (by Gods blessing) he
has continued well. After this manner an obstructed body was cured. It has
wrought a great effect in Sir John Hunt Knight, of Leichestershire, who lately
was very low brought with a flux, together with a Burning fever: and being
near unto death, and void of all other help, he was relieved by the self
same Medicine only, and perfectly restored. Mr. Doctor Ashworth, who partly had
seen, and partly heard these miraculous effects of this your Medicine, lying
dangerously sick at Oxford this last Summer, sent his Son in very great have to
Master Marks for some portion of this your Medicine: his said son feared
that at his return, he should not find him living But thanks be to God, he
lives, and is well: which is to be attributed unto your Medicine, although
peradventure he will not acknowledge the same, etc.

KNIGHTHORP IN LEICESTERShire, January 20. 1612. Your Ready and assured friend,
Henry Skipwith.

MACTE VIR PROBITATE, et Scientia singulari.
MY wifes brother Mr. Henry Skipwith, lately told me how friendly mention of me
you made to him; He might very well have reciprocated, and said, how often
mention he has heard me make of you. Yet howsoever, I must ever acknowledge my
self obliged to you in double bands. For in my last grievous and long
languishing sickness, when my then Physician Dr. C. staggered in his Judgment
of my Disease, and in the hope of my recovery he seemed to quail: yea when my
self, and all my beholders did despair of my life; then by Gods providence, a
friend (telling the rare virtues of your Aurum Potabile) caused two grains of
the same, to be dissolved in five spoonfuls of distilled Endive Water, and so
to be ministered unto me. After receiving thereof, within one hours space, it
is incredible to be spoken, what alleuiation I found of my languishings, and
what corroboration of all my vital parts. In the morning I took it, and
until night I felt a most happy operation thereof. It procured stools all
that day, so pleasingly as my soul could desire: until such time as that my
Physician (after he had taken his leave of me for that night, I that I had now
composed my self to rest) came again unto me, having upon the point of a knife
somewhat which he did put into my mouth, being then almost asleep. But about
midnight when I did awake, I found my self relapsed as before. Then, utterly
despairing of my life, I called (as I thought my last call) unto my wife,
entreating her to send again to my foresaid friend, to entreat him to
consider, whether in his Judgment two grains were not too small a proportion
to overcome the malignitie of so dangerous a Disease. He therefore gave me this
second time three grains, which speedily as before, and wonderfully did
refresh my spirits, and thereby my body was very soluble for the space of 7.
days after. And notwithstanding sundry euacuations every day, my strength
daily increased. Then was that Dr. exceedingly angry that I did entertain his
counsel no longer: since which time he has wrote an English book,
uncharitably defaming me, and cauilling against that famous Medicine, which by
the providence of God restored unto me both life and health. Now concerning the
chief intention of these my letters, I pray you send me 12. grains of your
potable gold in such form as my brother Mr. Henry Skipwith lately received
from you. This bearer my friend shall give you satisfaction for the same, etc.
The Author of health is God, who perpetually preserve you, unto whom he has
vouchsafed such favor as to attain unto so great a restorer of health, and
prolonger of life, as this Aurum Potabile appears to be. Farewell. Reu. Dr.

Vpton, 15. Feb. 1612. Your most loving friend William Samuel.

Worthy Sir. I am advised by that Reverend Doctor, Master Doctor Hunton, in
these parts highly accounted, to require in behalf of our worthy friend, a
knight, your help and advice, in a deplored estate, wherein he now stands.
We desire also some quantity of your Aurum Potabile, with direction for the due
administration thereof. This gentleman diseased is near 80 years of age, of
Choleric constitution. The first original of his Infirmity (as we
conjecture) was by company of his wife being young. Not long after in a Journey
which he took, when he was yet scarce six miles from his house, he was
constrained often times for to alight from his horse. Then did he make water, and
in his water either blood, or some substance like unto blood, peradventure
spermaticall, which has continued now many days. Also even to this time he is
unable to retain his urine, by the Imbecillitie of his bladder as we suppose.
A Gonorrhe likewise he was subject unto. He is not as yet free from any of
these Infirmities. We expect some help from you. For your charges and
counsel, this gentleman will give you full content. My self also will be with
you this next Term, and will not be unthankful.

Trent the 11. of Sept. 1611. Your most loving friend, N. W. Physician.

MAster Doctor Anthony you may call to mind, This letter came from the Knight
himself.
if you please, that about September last past, you wrote certain letters unto
me. At which time I also received from you five ounces of your Aurum Potabile,
to the praise of God, your commendation, and my great good. My Diseases were
mentioned in the former letters. Besides which I had also a great swelling from
my hucchlebone unto the soles of my feet. But it is without pain:
peradventure it came of cold, or with lying long time upon my right side. I
understand by Master Doctor Hunton, that besides this Aurum Potabile which you
sent me, you have also the substance of gold in form like honey, I pray you
send me thereof, and the manner how to use the same. I do feel (I praise God)
a mitigation of all my pains and Infirmities throughout all my body: the
swelling which I mentioned does daily decrease: My urine also I am able to
retain. This book of yours Master Doctor Hunton requested of me. Send me an
other I pray you, your studies and endeauours God always bless: farewell.

BLYBROVVGH October. 10. 1611. Your friend. H. A.

THis gentleman, of whom I shall now next write, and whose letters sent unto me
are extant, being Secretary to the right honouable the Earl of Southampton,
in his own words had been long sick of a Quartane fever: for Cure whereof he
entertained a most learned Physician, who ministered unto him a long time such
Medicines as were appropriate: Neither yet had he ouermastered the fever; nor
restored any strength unto the patient. Then did this Physician persuade this
gentleman his patient to use my Aurum Potabile; which he did, and with good
success. Whereupon, he wrote afterward unto me for more thereof, as
follows.

Sir, I have found so much good use of your Aurum potabile, as makes me desire
more. For I must truly say, I have gotten much strength since I took it, and
recovered my spirits exceedingly decayed by extremity of sickness: my store
is not so spent, but that I have some left in the Country, but my slay has bin
longer here then I expected; and therefore may be supplied from you with more
ease then from thence. Which I desire may be sent by this bearer of the best:
So shall I rest,

Your very loving friend, Thomas Kisley.
SOUTHAMPTON HOUSE THIS 26. of Nouemb. 1611.
MAster Doctor Anthony, I pray you make me so much beholding unto you as to
bestow me this twenty shillings in that sovereign quintessence which I had of
you at my being with you. For (as I told you) I was to have but one of those
glasses my self: which, one of my especial friends has had of me; so that
now, I have scarcely one grain left. Sir Brian Cave Knight, was taken with a
violent burning fever: but after taking of this Medicine, he had only one fit,
and then was perfectly well recovered. Also a servant of mine, had in like
manner so dangerous a Fever, that at my coming home I found him at point of
death. The only taking of this Medicine has so purged him by an extraordinary
Sweat, (that thanks be to God) he is at this time in a Journey abroad with me,
and finds his body in so good temper as it was not of a Twelve month before,
etc.

Your assured friend to use Henry Skipwith.

SIr. Some few hours after your departure, Master Doct. Lewknar came hither to
my Lord Bishop of Winchester. And at supper, after my Lord had made some
relation of the proceedings and benefit he found of your Aurum Potabile,
Doctor Lewknar replied in the comendation thereof, saying; That on Saturday last
past, he being at Cowdry, came to a gentlewoman who was dead to the world,
being both speechless and knowing no body; he gave her one spoonful of your
Aurum Potabile, in that case as she then was. And at the first taking thereof,
she fell into strange convulsions, wherein she continued two hours: and after
he gave her as much more, and then she fell into a great sweat: and 2 hours
after, he gave her a spoonful more, and she fell into a fine sleep, and
waking she said, Give me more of that: which was done; and she took good rest
after. And the next day, he went to see how she did, and found her eating of a
Chicken. This he told before my Lord Bishop, his brother, Doctor Steward of the
Arches, Sir Thomas Bilson my Lords son, and my self.

WALTHAM THIS 15. of August 1611. Your loving friend Tho. Webbes.

THis Doctor Lewknar, of whom mention is made in these former letters, did
afterward write unto me, desiring to have more of my Potable gold. For this
learned Gentleman, had before found and seen the effects thereof in the Cure
of his daughter in law by marriage with his Son, being strongly taken with
the falling sickness. The case whereof set down in a part of his letter to
me, which I have showed in the end of my first book. Whereupon the adversaries
both to my self and the truth, have greatly accused (I was about to say
slandered him) as may appear by an other letter of his sent unto me beginning
thus.

Good Doctor Anthony, I have been bitterly taxed, for giving testimony of the
good success of your Aurum potabile: which does nothing at all daunt me. For I
assure my self, that Aurum potabile being rightly made (which few have
attained unto) is a singular medicine howsoever, I think yours (as I have
experienced) to be good. And therefore I pray you send me two ounces by this my
kinsman, and write unto me, what effect it works in women's monthly courses,
and. And after it follows.

I do assuredly promise you, that as I shall find the effect thereof good, all
the Society of the College shall not auert me. So likewise, shall not any
private regard of friendship, flattery or gain, induce me at any time, to give
approbation to any dangerous or uncertain medicine, etc.

Your loving friend George Lewknar.

I Doubt not (my good Cosen) but you much desire to hear what effects your
Auru^ Potabile has performed in these parts. A certain near neighbor of
mine, the wife of To. Downing, lay even at point of death, after a long
languishing sickness (for she was prayed for in the Church.) Whereupon, my
Son Barners and I, went in the after noone to see her. Shortly after our
coming, she took a potion of a Physician there present, which suddenly she
cast up: at which I mused. Then did her husband affirm, that for the space of
a month before, she had not taken down a spoonful of any thing, but she did
likewise cast it up. My Son did the^ importune me, to give her a spoonful of
your Aurum potabile; which I was very loath to do, seeing she seemed but a
dead woman: and, it might be some discredit to the medicine, and to me. Yet at
the last I did yield, she being desirous thereof: I gave her therefore a
spoonful, which stayed with her contrary to all our expectations. And within a
short time, whereas before she was so cold, that they were forced to lay more
clothes on her, she came to a kind natural heat. The^ we gave her some
mace-ale with Aurum potabile, which she digested, and afterward mace-ale
alone, which also stayed with her. The 3. day after, we sent to visit her, who
sent us word that the same day she had eaten the best part of a Chicke^, and
did hope to come to us shortly, etc. You shall also know that Mr. Boswell a
Minister and Preacher of Saffron Walden, did greatly importune me for one ounce
of Aurum potabile for his wife, being accounted past Cure in a languishing
disease. And she by that only ounce received so much comfort, that he sent up
to Land. to you for more, etc

COVVLING, 21. die Maij. 1611 Your assured loving Cosen Tho. Wolridge, Justice
of peace in Essex.

A Letter sent to Master Edward Smith of the Temple, Counselor at the common
laws, from Master George Wethery, Secretary to the right honorable the Lord
Sheffield, Lord President of his Majesty's Council established for the North
parts.

Good Master Smith, my Lord would have you send presently to Doctor Anthony,
and desire him to send his Lordship (with all possible speed) the like quantity
of his Aurum Potabile, as he sent the last time; for that my Lord has made
many trials of it, and will report much good thereof; which will turn greatly
to Master Doctors advantage, and the credit of his Medicine.

York this 30. of September. 1613. Always yours George Wethery.

A True Relation made by me Elias Holmes, of the manifold virtues of Master
Doctor Anthonies Aurum Potabile, tried by the command of the right honorable,
Edmund Lord Sheffield, Lord President of York.
THe wife of John Goulsbrough servant to my Lord, lay very sick sundry days
before my Lord had knowledge thereof. Then was I sent unto her, whom I found
languishing and in great extremity. She was greatly sweld in her body, and
had also a looseness, so that it past from her almost unknowing to her. And
further she was greatly distempered in heat. She had taken no manner sustenance
for 4. or 5. days before, whereby she was grown so weak, that she could
not move her body but as she was helped by others. Also her eyes were greatly
swelled: her speech could not be heard the length of the bed: she desired
nothing but drink, taking no rest, neither night nor day.

The first spoonful that I gave her, did show small effect whilst I was with
her, which was some hour: but they which attended her, said, that some two
hours after, it made her rist, and to void a little water of her Stomach. At
evening I gave her one other spoonful, and before I could seal up the glass,
she was in a little slumber, but it continued not long. Nevertheless, she
felt so much ease at her Stomach, that she said, What is this that my good Lord
has sent me: for I give God thanks I feel much ease toward that I did: with
that she prayed heartily for my Lord And both her speech and countenance seemed
better then before: Then about one of the clock at midnyght, she fell asleep,
and slept two hours. The next morning, I gave her the third spoonful; and
after that she cast a little, and in her casting she took cold, which caused
her to cough, and made her so ill and weak, that I thought my labor was all
lost. Her loosenes also held her still. But it pleased God to give such a
blessing unto this Medicine, that after the taking of 4. or 5. spoonful more,
her flux was staide, her strength also recovered in such sort, that she was
able to sit upright in her bed, and to receive sustenance. Also, after three
spoonful more, she could endure to have her clothes put on, and with a little
help, to walk up and down the Chamber. She took in all 13. spoonfuls. Then
did she acknowledge that she was perfectly well, giving God thanks therefore:
And to me she said, Now Master Holmes I pray you spare your further labor,
etc.

THomas Tailor, one of my Lords household servants, about the same time in the
former year had an extraordinary Malign fever and of long A quotidian malign
fever.
continuance. He was a very able and strong man: Nevertheless, it had so
weakened him, that he was seantly able to go upright: He could endure to take
no sustenance for a long time. Often times also as a mad man, he would arise
out of his bed in the night season, and lie down on the floor, and there lie,
until some body came by chance to help him.

This year he likewise fell into the same Infirmity by all signs and tokens.
His first fit continued six hours, with such violent pain at his heart, that
he was enforced to cry out. My Lord was not willing that I should give him any
thing this first fit. The next day after, when the former passions began to
assault him, my Lord sent me unto him, and I gave him one spoonful of this
Medicine. After which, he did sundry times cast up by vomit, a very filthy and
evil substance. When he had done casting, I gave him another spoonful, and so
he rested quietly, having an easy fit which continued the space of three
hours. His third fit came also unto him, then I gave him one other spoonful,
and within a quarter of an hour, he had a vomit. I gave him one other
spoonful, and he had one other vomit. I gave him then an other, that is, three
times one after an other, and three times he vomited: and then he was provoked
to the stool. Whilst he was there, he had again a very great vomit, being of
diverse colors, and a mucilage or slymie substance. After this vomit, I gave him
one other spoonful, and then he slept quietly, and had no more fits afterward.

HEnry Kickinson one of my Lords servants, it A continual malign fever.
pleased God to visit with an extraordinary Quotidian fever, having a sensible
pain in his bones, which made him so sore that he could not abide one to touch
him: and with the extremity thereof, became even mad and senseless, not
knowing any man. Also so weak, that every one of his friends expected death.
He continued in this extreamitie a fortnight, before I was sent to him: In
which time, he had taken little sustenance. His body also was extremely hot,
and he took no rest.

After the first spoonful that I gave him, within half an hour he fell
asleep, and slept the space of one hour, and when he awoke did cast a little.
At night I gave him one other spoonful after which he slept two hours, and
then spoke these words. Will not Master Holmes come again unto me? and other
such like speeches manifestly approouing that he had found comfort by that
which I had given him. Then did he give thanks unto God. All that I gave him
was eleven spoonfuls. So by little and little he amended, and became perfectly
recovered.

MAny others I could here set down, which have received in these parts present
relief by this Medicine. Among the rest, my Lords Children both sons and
Daughters, who sundry times and in sundry cases being affected, have always
been cured with this only Remedy. Also my Lord himself by use thereof, does
prevent many sits of the Stone which heretofore he has been subject unto, and
preserves his health thereby; So likewise does my Lady.

LAstly for my self, being subject unto an extreme migrim in my head, as
Physicians call it, but my disease is in this manner. Many times in the year,
being in perfect health, I shall have my sight suddenly taken away; so shall I
continue half an hour: then shall I have a most violent aching in my head,
also a sleepiness; then a kind of stupor first in my lips and tongue, and so
it goes down to my hands; I stretch them out like unto the Palsy, and A dead
Palsy
thus it holds me a good while: Then it will go down into my legs. All this
while I shall have a great desire to cast, but cannot, until I have been in
this fit some 6. hours: and then with much ado I shall cast, and after once
or twice casting I shall have some better ease. As long as I am in that former
extremity, I shall sometime sarcely be able to fetch my breath, neither to
speak, nor understand, nor hear what is spoken. But at the last I fall
asleep, and then I begin to be well, and yet not very well, nor in perfect good
health for the space of one whole week after. Now it pleased God, that being
at Land. in December. last, 1613. being in presence of my Lord, suddenly I felt
that my sight failed me, my head aked, and that my fit approached near.
Whereupon I craved pardon of my Lord, being not able to go forward with his
business that I had then in hand. My Lord therefore commanded me presently to
take some Aurum Potabile; for it was then in my custody. But I made the
mixture somewhat more effectual of the gold, then I was accustomed to do at
other times. And within one quarter of an hour after taking thereof, my
spirits and senses were comforted: the cold, which at the first possessed me,
became temperate. Also I brake wind both upward and downward. Likewise I had a
desire to vomit, and an inclination to sleep: But my Lord would not permit me,
causing me to be kept walking up and down. Whereby after the space of one
hour I felt my self very well: only my head did ache a little. But (praised be
God) I did not fall into my usual fits. Furthermore, by taking that Aurum
Potabile, I became loose bodied, whereas usually I am accustomed to be bound.
All these things (if need require) I will be ready upon mine oath to avouch.
Thus I do end.

EVER SINCE I TOOK THIS Medicine I have continued in good health, praised be
God.

Feb. 4. 1614. Your loving friend Elias Holmes, attending my foresaid Lord in
his Chamber.

I May not forget here to remember the right Reverend father in God, whose
learning, piety and virtue be sufficiently known, the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, my Honorable good Patron: against whose testimony there can be no
exception. His Lordship is a most autenticke witness of this my Potable gold,
and testifies the virtues thereof to all persons: and can (if need require)
maintain the same to the greatest persons of this Realm: how not only
himself in the recovery and maintenance of his own bodily health, much
weakened with continual studies, and the late great pains in conference of
many copies, for the true translation of the holy Scriptures out of Hebrew into
English: but also very many others, receiving Aurum Potabile from his pious
charity, have been from many and diverse diseases recovered, and restored to
their former health by use thereof. But because the vocal and lively
attestation of his Lordship, can more satisfy any that require satisfaction,
then any delivery by his letters sent me, I will be sparing in that point: and
trouble the Reader only with a few of many, showing how, and to whom, his
Lordship in greatest necessities, and dangerous diseases, did liberally bestow
this Potable gold, and commanded the effects thereof to be briefly set down,
as follows.

SIr, being appointed by my Lord and Mr. to confer with diverse of this country,
who have bin cured of sundry diseases with Aurum potabile, given unto them by
his Lordship: I have accordingly taken the report of those few that were near
this place, and with whom I might conveniently speak. Many more there are,
that received good by it, which dwell remote from this place, with whom I shall
speak as occasion shall be offered, and leisure permit to do it. So hoping to
be better furnished with these things against your coming into Hampshire,
which is shortly expected, I take leave, resting,

Your assured friend to my power, Antho. Langford Secretary to my Lord Bishop
of Winchester.
BISHOPS WATHAM THE last of November, 1612.
GOod Sir, although it be unusual with me to offer exchange of words to
strangers, yet since the heavenly providence has designed a part of noble
skill, wherein I understand you are singular, to be some means of healthful
use unto me, I should hold it a just forfeit of my recovered estate, if I
should silence any thing that appertains to the effecting it. I therefore
cannot choose but tell you how much I am bound to my Honorable good Lord of
Winchester, who first of his good favor vouchsafed me of your Aurum potabile,
so well agreeing with my diseased body, as that I shall become a Customer unto
you for more of it. I find it very mild above all other Physic in operation,
causing a temperate sweat, and much allaying the violence of the offending
humors. How highly I do prize it, this my letter shall be hostage: desiring
him from whose unsearchable power the virtue comes, to bless you for it, to
whose further grace I leave you; and rest

Your assured friend Lucy Ieruice, wife unto Sir Tho. Ieruice knight.

I Was sick of an ague some seven night or there abouts, A malignant burning
fever.
and the^ I had two such fits, as I and all that did see me, thought I could
not have escaped death. Then I drank a spoonful of Aurum potabile in the
middle of mine extreme burning, and within a quarter of one hour after, the
extreme pain in my stomach ceased, and I felt my self very well. Only the
heat remained with me about one hour, which pain of the stomach was wont to
hold me 3. or 4. hours in the former fits. The next day that my Ague should
come, it came not all the day, until supper time. And sitting at supper, it
came very terribly upon me, so that I was driven to go to bed. I was extremely
sick. Then I called for a spoonful of Aurum potabile and it wrought with me as
it did before. I did also sweat some three hours, and so I thank God, he
took his farewell.

SIr, the Disease of my Son was in this manner: A long continuing quotidian
with a vomiting.
It took him once in 24. hours, with a cold shiuering in the likeness of an
Ague. Which cold held him but a short time. Afterward, he fell into an
extreme heat, with a vomiting which continued about 3. or 4. hours. In this
manner he was daily perplexed the space of a Month or five weeks, before he
took the Aurum Potabile. Which at the first taking, being at the beginning of
his cold, stayed his vomiting, and his fit was not so extreme as it had been
before. And in this manner he took it 3. or 4. fits immediately one after
another, about the quantity of a spoonful or somewhat less: and still his
fits did lesson and decay, and lastly left him altogether.

Durlay January 10. 1612. Francis Fortescue.

A BRIEF COLLECTION AND RELATION OF THOSE FEW AMONGST MANY, THAT HAVE TAKEN
AVRVM POTABILE, IN THIS COUNTY of SOUTHAMPTON, truly related concerning the
effect thereof, delivered from their own mouths unto me Anthony Langford.
THomas Wheeler of Waltham husbandman, aged 67. years, continued sick the
space of one month of a new disease very common at that time, whereof many
died. This man likewise was in so great peril of death An aged man at point of
death.
that the bell tolled for him, and he was prayed for in the Church. In this his
desperate case, a spoonful of Aurum Potabile was given unto him, by which he
felt some present relief, and fell into a gentle Sweat for an hour or twain:
Then taking one other spoonful, he slept quietly the space of an hour: After
that a third spoonful, by which he had a vomit of a great quantity of slymie
humors. And by sensible degrees he recovered health, praised be God, and is yet
living being of great years.

EDmund Laurence of Bishops Waltham gentleman, A continual burning fever
aged 36. years, was perplexed with a burning fever continuing two days, and
two nights without intermission; he only took one spoonful or rather less in
quantity of the Aurum Potabile, and by degrees he soon returned into his
former temper and health again.

GIles Ethericke Yeoman of the same place, 40. A continual and sharp burning
fever.
years of age, had a continual and sharp burning fever eight days and
nights. In all which time he could take no rest: he took two spoonfuls of
Aurum Potabile, and slept quietly the space of two hours the same night. The
next day toward evening, taking the like quantity, he slept the whole night
quietly, and recovered perfect health.

William Hills of Waltham aforesaid, Yeoman, A quotidian.
aged 55. years, having had five fits of a quotidian, and being entered into
the sixth, he took a spoonful of Aurum Potabile, which put him out of his
cold fit, and made him sweat; and then taking as much more, it gave him a good
vomit and 2. or 3. stools: and thereupon shortly after he slept quietly and
recovered his stomach, which both had failed him the former 5. days, and
since he has been well.

John Walter of the same, 40. years of age, having A tertian fever.
had 4. fits of a Tertian, and the fifth fit being upon him, he took a good
spoonful of Aurum Potabile. Whereupon within one hour after, his fit left
him, and never troubled him since.

The said John Walter, having 2. spoonfuls of Aurum Potabile left, after he
himself was cured, he gave the same unto a maid in Hambleton of 14. years,
who A tertian.
had languished of a tertian fever a quarter of a year before, and thereby was
cured and had no more fits.

HEnry Hindle of Waltham, 47. years aged, for A continual fever with vomiting.
the space of five days continually had a fever without intermission. He could
not retain any thing in all that time, that he did either eat or drink.
After the fifth day, he took a spoonful of the Aurum Potabile, which he did
not cast up as his other nutriments: but digested it, and it put him into a
sweat that continued about 4. hours: Then again he took as much more, and
did sweat 3. hours more: After that he arose, and being up, he did vomit a
pint of thick viscous phlegm. Then after the space of two hours, he did eat
of a piece of veale, which he retained and digested. And the next day went
abroad, and in short time recovered his former health which he inioyeth now.

John Cole of Waltham Mercer, 43. years aged, A Passion of the heart.
was grieved with an extreme pain at his heart, so that for the space of
three days he could neither take food nor rest, and was grown so weak, that
every man doubted his life. A spoonful of Aurum Potabile was given him by
those about him, he not knowing what they gave him. And after one hour, an
other spoonful; and a while after the third spoonful. By this means, he
continued long in a sweat, and within two days after was restored to health.

THese also whose names are under written, have all in their extremity of
sickness, received Aurum Potabile, from my Lord Bishop, and are well
recovered: But hitherto I have had no conference with them. Howbeit it is most
certain, that by means thereof, they were recovered from sundry dangerous
Infirmities.

Robert Moore Master of Arts, of this new fever. Reuben Hamme gent. the like.
The wife of Mr. Armwood in the forest, of the like. The wife of Mr. Cotton of
Roche Court. The wife of John Hawkesworth, cured of a strange disease, whereof
she had long before languished. Richard Peckham. Tho. Beale, about one hundred
years of age, and recovered of this new ague, and is yet living. Edward Searle
of Northampton gent. having long languished of this new ague. Nicholas Prior.
Anthony Langford.

I Doubt not but that these Testimonies so warranted, being but a few
exemplarie proofs of very many, will satisfy any understanding and honest
reader. I intend not with a whole Calender or endless Catalogue, and with
tedious reading of the same thing often done, to weary the reader. Else I could
easily enlarge this Roll: It being certain, that there is scarce any one
Shire or Lordship in England, from whence I have not bin sent unto, for my
potable gold, with which, Noblemen, gentlemen, and persons of other ranks have
bin diversely cured and relieved, in their necessities of their healths:
Apparent it is, that it never hurt any, profited all, though all have not
recovered. We must herein ever acknowledge the unrevealed ordinance of God, not
to be controlled by any Art or Industry of humane Remedies. I desire
therefore the patient Indifferency of all Readers, to consider and favorably
to Interpret these my proceedings. For I acknowledge and confess, that in
ordinary Cures performed, no Rational Physician ought to print the Calender of
his successes, except in some cure and peculiar case, which seldom happening,
may be a light and Instruction to others (though many have sought fame thereby)
which was far from my intent and purpose. But the necessity of vindicating
my integrity, and the well known truth of the effects of my potable gold,
have made that necessarily voluntary, which before I never entertained in
private consultation. For good wine needs no Bush or Sign. And these be the
motives why I offer this small assay (I hope not wearisome to be read and
observed) being a short mention of some persons and Diseases, which have
received present help by the use of this so maligned Medicine: (my potable
gold) I say, a short mention, not of all, nor the greater part, nor in any
near proportion of number to the total. For some will not consent to be
named: and some specialties may not be diuulged. And in some respect I am not
very forward of mine own nature to enlarge the malice of my traducers, by
publishing some Cures which cannot please them to hear of. Thus far forth
concerning other men's testimonies: I will proceed to mine own practice.

AS the brighter the Sun is, the more apparent be the shadows caused by
solid and thick duskish bodies: so, the more excellent and famous the glory
is, that is achieved by things well and faithfully performed; the more it is
spurgald with the kicking heels of Envy. As this is true in all actions and
commercements of this life, so it has notoriously and lauishly bin practiced
against me in my proceedings. At the very first, this corroding spite, sparing
no man, this malicious detraction, enemy of truth, set up their whole rest in
such fashion as they could, to demolish my fair building. But truth, that
precious daughter of time, has now undertaken the quarrel, that will say,
nill they, she must and will prevail against their fury, and maintain her
quiet navigations, notwithstanding any gustes or storms, from their dry, and
waterlesse Clouds. And to the intent that every impartial, vnpreiudiced, and
Intelligent reader, may the better understand the cause of these Impressions,
and the state and first force of this controversy, which has now enforced the
public attestation of the virtues of this Medicine: I will as briefly and
sparingly as may be, by one or two Instances, declare the first original cause.

SIr Adolfe Carry a worthy knight, nobly descended, being not well, sent for a
Physician of great name and fame: who gave him such Medicines as he thought
fit, one being a Purgation, which did not only cleanse the first veins, but
wrought somewhat forceably. Within short time after, the disease was discovered
to be the small Pocks. But by the unseasonable revulsion and indraught of that
so strong Purgation (as I think) and peradventure by some other neglect,
nature failed in the sufficient expulsion of the pustules. Also those exitures
which appeared, shortly after sunk again, or, as we commonly say, went in.
Hereupon, the Patient fell into that extremity, that the eminent peril of his
life could not be hid, so that all they that were about him despaired utterly
of his recovery. Wherefore they sent to his brother, to call hastily for the
Doctors best accquainted with the state of his body, which were two: Who
missing them both, neither knowing where to seek either of them, and being
very sensible and heavy for his brothers desperate case, by chance met with me
in the way, entreats me to accompany him to his brother, then lying dangerously
sick. But I hearing the names of those Doctors, was unwilling to go, being
loath to give offense: also that gentleman was at that time utterly unknown
unto me, whereby the rather I excused my self. He replied, that I was
sufficiently known to him by a friend of his whom I had cured, and therefore
instantly persisted, that in so honest and necessary and just a cause I would
not refuse him. I consented, went with him; and being then evening I visited
the sick gentleman his brother, and found him in a most deplorable state,
without sleep or any other rest, raging and rauing. He took a spoonful of my
Aurum potabile, with which he presently became quiet, of a more cheerful
countenance, and fell into a gentle sleep. After one hour I gave him an other
spoonful, after which he spoke advisedly, and said he was much comforted, and
so sleept again, and sweat naturally al his body over. And (which was the best
sign) the Pocks or Pustuls did again come out plentifully. I attended him all
that night, and at fit and seasonable times gave him my medicine, sometime pure
of it self, sometimes mixed with broth or other convenient liquor. The next
morning, one of his first Doctors coming and finding me there with his
patient, took that for his occasion to rail on me in unseeming terms. To
whom it was answered, that I was unwillingly and almost compulsiuely brought
thither, by the nearest of blood to the sick gentleman, and with no less
entreaty then others. But these Physicians were so far from conferring with me
concerning the further health of this patient, whom they then found in very
good case, that they both joined, and would not be quiet, before they had rid
me thence; contrary to the will of the patient, and of those that were present.
In what case and state I both found and left this gentleman, you have hard.
After my departure, what cooling, or astringent, or otherwise qualified
Syrupes, or Electuaries, or other form of medicine they gave him all that day
I know not. But this I know, that the next night he relapsed into the same
cruel and desperate accidents, in which I formerly had found him, and from
which I had restored him: peradventure, he fell into this relaps for want of
that my medicine, so powrefull in strengthening the heart, and expelling poison
from it. For doubtless, the exitures being stopped, and the poison returning
from the outward parts of the body, whither nature had expelled it, to the
heart, the same accidents must needs return. Such relapses are most
dangerous, because both the infection is stronger, and the body weaker. And so
it appeared in this noble gentleman, by this his untimely death. Then did these
Physicians under whose hands he died, bethink themselves of some stratageme,
to avoid the imputation imminent. One of them therefore hastneth to the Court,
where he publishes excuse of himself, and accusation of me. And further
causes me to be cited to the College of London Physicians, and with the
eloquence of Tertullus very stoutly accuses me, as culpable of the death of
this gentleman. Where I acquitted my self, and maintained my innocence by four
lawful witnesses, servants and attendants of their late Master the deceased
knight: Who with one consent and contestation dilated: That I came to their
said Master lying in his last and extreme pangs, rauing after the exitures of
the small pocks were stricken in: That after I had with careful and diligent
attendance all that night administered my potable Gold unto him, as aforesaid,
the extremities of his passions, and grieuousnesse of accidents were much eased
and abated, he more quiet and in better sense, and that the Pustules of his
diseafe did again plentifully break out, by which means he was respectively
in good temper: And that the next day when the said Physicians had excluded me,
and given him their mixtures, all things turned to their old course, he to his
former extremities, and so died. His Majesty also had commanded 4. honorable
persons to be present at the College in the hearing and debating of these
actions now in question: that is, the right honorable the Lord Kneuet, Sir
Henry and Sir Philip Carry knights, brethren of Sir Adolph deceased, and Sir
William Godolphin knight; who finding it fully proved, how I found him (in the
agony of death) how I left him (in good temper) how the other Doctors received
him (in very good case for that disease) how they left him (dead,) truly
reported the whole matter to the Kings Majesty as indeed it was. What his
Majesty's censure then was herein, and on whom he would lay this imputation of
his death, may easily be coniectured out of the manifestations of the cause.
Also those two worthy brethren, mere strangers to me at that time, living in
honorable account and place, so generously and virtuously, that none dare
entertain any sinister thought against their sincerity; nor opinion that they
will for any respect whatsoever be induced to report any untruth for me nor any
other: are always ready to give further satisfaction, if any as yet be not
sufficiently persuaded of these proceedings. Reason it self, in one maine
ground of Physical indications does teach us, that, a iuvantibus et
nocentibus, from such things as help, and such things as hurt, a most
invincible argument is drawn, and concluded. Is it not a general rule with
all Physicians, to continue the use of those things which have manifestly
relieved and profited the patient (if there be no necessary exception) and to
fly and for bear the use of those which have hurt, or done no good? Nature
teaches brute beasts, to seek shadowed and cool places, in the heat of
summer, because their sense finds ease and refreshing by the shadow, and hurt
and annoyance by the parching sun. Apparent it is, that my Potable gold did
even miraculously refresh, help, profit and comfort this diseased gentleman,
of whom this question first grew. For his understanding was thereby recovered:
quietness, rest, and sleep procured: natural and healthful sweating caused:
and the poison of his disease driven from the center and heart, whereby the
pustules and exitures did again appear and come forth. All arguments and
signs of good estate and temper in that disease did appear as portending a
perfect recovery. On the other side, whatsoever the Medicines administered by
these two other Doctors were, before or after my coming, I know not. But, most
certain it is, that whatsoever they gave, or howsoever they handled the
matter, much hurt succeeded, even the greatest mischief that may happen to a
languishing patient. For all the concourse of his former grievous, direful,
and mortal symptomaticall accidents returns with double strength, when his
heart and vital spirits were not able to resist. The striking in again of the
exitures, rauing, wrestling, and (which only remained to conclude the tragedy)
Death it self, the last of all lines that man can draw: and a true line to
draw and direct understanding men to the true cause of his death. These
circumstances compulsarily wrung from me, be sufficient for the evidence of
this verity to all men, that will not maliciously spurn against apparent
truth. But my traducers do still spiderlike suck poison in stead of honey, and
force themselves to an unnatural vomit of these humors against this medicine,
truly of gold, and truly potable. In which bitterness if they did not still
persist, against their own science, conscience, regard of virtue and verity,
wounding many honest hearts, with false suggestions against my good name, and
the innocuous worthiness of this Medicine, and defrauding many poor
languishing souls of the use and benefit thereof, I would, and surely gladly
would, for their sakes, have forborne the narration and report of this true
story: Which I am by them compelled to publish for my Apology.

MIstres Cicely Boulstred, a worthy gentlewoman, Extreme vomiting.
and virgin, attending in near service our gracious Queen, in good favor
and account, fell sick, and had greiuous passions. Unto whom diverse of the
most famous Physicians of the College were called. Who with great care, and
their utmost skill, sparing no cost (as was fitting in such a place)
administered all kinds of conducing Medicines, both Cordials, and other
respectively to the cause of her disease, and passions: both such as be ready
in the shoppes, as others by some singularity of Art prepared. Her passions
still continued, if not increased. Continual vomiting, and reiection of
whatsoever she took, meat, drink, medicines: with swoundings, torture,
torments of every part of her body. A miserable and pitiful spectacle, much
lamented of many very honorable persons. She could not rest nor sleep night
nor day. So that sinking under the burden of this affliction, with the violence
and continuance thereof, her strength utterly failed. She could not retain so
much as one drop of any broth or other nourishment. Her Stomach by conjecture
of all Physicians, was drawn together and shut up, without any power or
faculty to perform the offices of nature. In this miserable estate, this
distressed gentlewoman languished two whole months, without any ease or
relief by the use of any the Medicines given her by the advice of the said
Physicians: all things tending to a more desperate and Immedicable estate.
Whereupon the mother of this gentlewoman demanded of these said Doctors,
whether they had any hope to give help, or at least wise ease to her daughter;
else she said she would send for Doctor Anthony. Those Doctors hereupon limited
themselves to a certain time, which they spent in their uttermost habilities
to perform, to the intent I should not be called. To which purpose they
commanded an Apothecary to attend in the Chamber of the patient all the next
day and night, and every third hour to give her a Cordial. Then voluntarily
they said to the mother, Send for Doct. Anthony if you will, and God send him
good success with your daughter. Then was I sent for, and finding this
gentlewoman in so desperate a case, left and given over by all the Doctors of
the College as not to be recovered, (for besides the advice of these Six,
there had been public consultations in the College, as is requisite in such
like cases which sildome come in use) I desired God to bless my endeauours,
and to continue his blessings in the administration of this my happy medicine.
After a small time, upon due and mature consideration of all things, I gave her
at the first, not a whole spoonful of my Aurum potabile, as in other cases,
but much less, scarce a quarter so much; which she cast up again with a
vehement force and torture of her body. A little while after I gave her as much
more, which she cast up in the same manner as she did the first. Again I gave
it the third time, some part of which she also cast up, but kept some, with a
kind of strife or conflict between the medicine and the malady. Then I
advised, that she should not further be troubled for a season, but to try if
she could now take a little rest or sleep: So she disposed her self
thereunto, and slept soundly a whole hour; which diverse of great account then
present can witness. For she snored that we all heard: Which seemed strange to
all: considering for a long time before she had taken no rest. When she waked,
she said that she found her self somewhat better at ease. Then (which was the
fourth time) I gave her half a spoonful, which she kept without any contending
or trouble to her body. This gave me, and many worthy gentlewomen there
present, great hope of a good recovery. Wherein (God be praised) we were not
deceived. For in all the other administering of this Medicine, orderly, as she
was able to bear, increasing the quantity, her spirits were relieved, she
daily recovered strength, all the passions, symptoms and accidents of her
diseases ceased, her sickness fully left her, and she recovered perfect
health. Thus with the use of this happy Medicine, this gentlewoman was
recovered, and cured of that dangerous disease, wherein those other Doctors had
wearied themselves, and forsaken her; at which her friends wondered, mine
rejoiced, and other malicious adversaries fretted: for which God be praised. If
they will call these the effects of Iugling, and of a corrosiue Medicine, they
will hardly find any Cordial amongst all their Dispensatories and Magistrall
prescriptions. The cause and effect are Essential Relatiues.

THe Lady and wife of Sir Francis Leake Knight, Continual vomiting and
destillation of Reume continuing many months.
being now conceived of her first child, was fallen into many infirmities.
She had a continual and abundant slux at her mouth, caused by collection of
phlegmatic and pituitous humors: Also a continual vomiting and casting, ever
after any food taken. Her flux ceased not neither day nor night. She was
brought to that weakness and leanness in her body, that al her friends thought
she was in a consumption. During the time of this sickness (which was five
months) she used many medicines in hope of remedy, but found none. And
therefore justly feared either miscarying her travel, or the loss of her own
life. Whereupon, by the persuasion of some friends, which knew right well the
efficacy of my Potable gold, she took thereof the third month before the time
of her delivery, and at several times continued the use of it. By which
means, her vomiting, and flux of spitting ceased, she recovered strength and
good habit: and all the rest of the time of her child bearing, continued in
very good health and disposition. And in due time was delivered of a fair and
strong Son, which is yet living.

THe Lady and wife of Sir Edward Barret knight, Peril in childbirth.
and sister to the forenamed Lady, being in travel of childbirth, in such
hazard and extremities of hard labor, that both her Midwiues and all other
there present despaired both of safety and life of mother and child; by
counsel of a great Lady then in my chamber took of my Potable gold, and
beyond the expectation of them all, was presently delivered of a child in good
liking But the after burden stayed, which in that weakness made them fear
the like danger. Therefore they gave her the same Medicine again, by which the
after burden followed, she recovered, and did well.

THis Medicine has likewise bin happy and succesfull to very many others,
Weomen in like cases, even after the child has been dead in their bodies,
and they given over in their last extremities. So that it is scarce possible to
find any Medicine to match this in such cases, whereof I will set down a few
examples.

THe wife of Joseph Pemberton Haberdasher of Ipswich Childbirth.
in the County of Suffolk, was delivered by means of this Potable gold,
being in great extremity and danger, by reason of her hard labor.

THe wife of Master Oration Paluasino, was recovered Childbirth.
by the same Medicine, being in great danger through hard labor in
childe-birth.

IN like manner was the wife of Thomas Blackeborne Childbirth.
Citizen of London, when she had been two days in labor, safely delivered by
this help.

THe wife of Nicholas Colman in Great Saint Bartholmewes, Childbirth.
was even at the point of Death, and upon the taking of this Aurum Potabile,
was presently delivered, and her life preserved.

MAster Foxton in Red Cross street, had his wife Dead birth.
in the like case, and in greater danger, by reason of the child in her body
being dead.

THe like Foetus mortuus, or dead birth, the wife of Dead birth.
Master Castle, of Hatfield Peuerell in Essex, had carried in her body three
days, neither could she be delivered by any help, until she took the Aurum
Potabile.

THe wife of Master Hard dwelling upon Saint Peter's Hill in London, was
delivered of a dead Dead birth.
child, yet nevertheless she was still full of intolerable pains. Whereupon
the wife of M. Fitzgarret Esquire near dwelling, gave unto her of my Aurum
Potabile, the next day after her delivery of that child, at 9. of the clock
in the morning. And the same day at 2. of the clock in the after noone, she
was delivered of an other dead child, and then presently recovered.

THe wife of Mast. John Bingle of the Exchequer was Peril of Childbirth.
in her travel in great peril of death, unto whom a grave gentlewoman there
present at her labor, gave of my Aurum Potabile; with which help, both she
and the child were saved.

THe Lady and wife of Sir John Pretiman knight, Burning fever in Childbirth.
being in childe-bed, fell into a burning fever: also she could take no rest
nor sleep: And other very violent passions she endured. She was not willing to
take any manner of Medicine. Only Aurum Potabile she took, and was quickly
restored to health.

THe wife of Mast. Edmund Kingstone, of Gloucester Burning fever and bloody flux
in Childbed.
shire, being in childe-bed had a burning fever, and with it a bloody flux. She
was thoroughly cured by the same means which the Lady Pretiman used.

AN other gentlewoman of the same County, Fever and scouring in Childbed.
the wife of Christopher Blackewell, was by the same means cured of a fever,
with an excessive scouring, lying in childbed.

THe wife of Master John Sherington of London Preservation of Aborte.
Merchant, being with child, had many passions and evident causes, to make her
fear abortion or miscarrying. Being therefore advised thereunto, she took of
my Aurum Potabile, daily a proportionable quantity, and went out her full
time, received Gods blessing in the safe delivery of a fair child.

Whereby it appears that this Medicine has diverse virtues and faculties: As
in case, both to promote the birth where it is stayed, be the birth alive or
dead: as also to stay and prevent abortion of miscarrying, unto the full time
and periode of the natural birth, which in the power of the Medicine is but
one: That is, the only comforting, strenghtning, and enabling of nature, to
promote and perform her own actions, which way soever is most fit for the
safety and health of the body, as in other cases before has been observed.
And not only profitable to each mother in all those former causes, but to the
infant also, as shall appear by one Relation, which here follows.

THe wife of Master Richard Brown Esquire, Peril in Childbirth.
dwelling in the Black friars, was long in labor of childbirth, and in great
danger, notwithstanding she had two midwiues with her. A certain gentlewoman
and neighbor being then present, persuaded to send for some of my Aurum
Potabile, and to give it her. One Midwife said, she had better means to give
her. But when all means failed, and small hope of life remained, then was my
Aurum Potabile sent for. And after it was twice administered unto her, she was
safe delivered of a living and well liking child, God be praised. The next day
following, The newborn Infant in danger.
the same gentlewoman and neighbor, came to visit the mother and child,
finding the child in the Midwiues lap, not well, but languishing and ill. The
Midwife desired of this gentlewoman some of the Aurum Potabile for to give the
child. It was then asked, whether she, who had denied it unto the mother the
former day, would now give it unto so young an infant? The Midwife answered,
that having seen the admirable effect thereof the day before, she doubted not
of success in the child. She gave it therefore unto the child, mixed with
breastmilke, and the child presently amended.

If therefore such young infants, which skantly have seen the light of the Sun,
and have brought from the mothers womb their infirmities, and not taken them
by misdiet or misorder, do find relief by this Medicine; as also women in
their conception, and in time of their delivery, and afterward lying in
childbed, as is evidently set down in particularitie: Even in this only case,
it meriteth that account, that no Lady or gentlewoman of account, should at any
time be unfurnished thereof, for the benefit of themselves, and their infants,
in case of necessity: seeing that no Medicine is more powerful, more secure,
more pleasing to take.

SIr Lewis Lewknar knight, in the year of our Lord 1611, fell dangerously
sick with a continual burni^g The Plague or Pestilence.
fever, and vehement passions. He sent for two famous Physicians of the City
of London; which followed and plied him six days with all the conducible
remedies they could devise, but without any success. For they neither eased
his passions, nor abated the burning heat and fury of the fever: So that the
patie^t every day waxed worse and worse: at the last, an Aposteme appeared in
his groyne, a true token in such a disease, of a pestilent and contagious
infection: which at that time, though not since, was very hot in London.
Thereupon these Doctors excused themselves, in that they were tied to the
attendance of diverse noble persons, whom they were loath to infect. And
therefore, were compelled to bid him farewell. And accordingly left this worthy
gentleman, to wrestle with this disease, for the cure of which they were waged,
and by conscience thereunto tied; and his trust in them was reposed. They
having thus taken their leaves, I was sent for, not knowing the disease, which
could not long hide it self, having such manifest tokens. Yet I thought it,
against both charity and honesty, now being with him, to forsake him. And
therefore resolved (by the grace of God) with some powerful and strong
Antidote, to expel the poison from his heart, and afterward to proceed for
his further recovery, as occasion should be ministered. To which purpose, I
first gave him six grains of my Essence of gold, mixed appropriatly. After
which, in a small time, he began to sweat, which continued all that night, and
a great part of the next day. The next night, and so every day for 4. days
more, I gave again the same Medicine, in the same quantity, which caused
abundant sweating, whereby both the malignitie of the fever and the unnatural
heat was exceedingly abated: the Aposteme, which was risen very great, did
daily decrease, and at last quite vanished, only with a certain sticticke
plaster outwardly applied. Thus he was cured of this mortal and contagious
disease, before it was known abroad of what he was sick: which I would not
now have published, but that the Knight himself, has not been sparing
amongst his friends to report both what his sickness was, and the story of his
Physicians and recovery.

THe year before, I had likewise cured of the same The Plague or Pestilence.
disease, with an Aposteme also appearing, the Lady and wife of the same worthy
knight.

THe Lady Edmonds widow, about the age of 78. Dropsy and Iaundise in extreme
old age.
years, a Lady well known in Court: (so likewise are those that formerly are
named) about three years past was fallen into a dropsy, with all the
symptoms thereunto belonging. Her belly, face, legs, hands, greatly swelled:
blood wasted and spent: not free from the Iaundise, nor far from a Consumption.
How dangerous her case was, is sufficiently known. She was perfectly restored
(praised be God) in short time, nothing being ministered unto her, but only the
Aurum potabile and Essence of Gold. This Lady, spared not either for cost, or
due observation to preserve life and health, after that she had once found
comfort thereby; for during the space of 12. days at the first, she took
every morning 3. grains of the Essence, dissolved in a spoonful of Aurum
potabile: and the like proportion was taken at night when she went to rest.
Also before dinner and supper, at each time one spoonful of the Aurum potabile
alone. After 12. days were spent, and that her stomach was amended, natural
rest returned, her strength increased, the disease abated, and all the state of
her body bettered, then the Lady took of the Essence but once a day. And so by
degrees all things in lesser proportion. Needful it was, that this Lady should
take these helps in greater proportion, then usual, partly in regard of the
Infirmity, being a capital disease: partly also in regard of her years, in
which nature was not so powerful to overcome the malady, as in youth.

SIr Thomas Parrey knight, Chancellor of the Duchy, and of his Majesty's privy
Council, being Extreme cough in age and want of sleep.
of the age of 77. years, this last winter was much dejected in ability and
strength of body every ways. His appetite abated, his sleep diminished,
tormented with an extreme cough day and night, not able in many weeks
together, to go forth of his house for execution of his place. He had used
good helps of learned Physicians, from time to time all the winter long. In
February last I was brought unto this honorable person; and finding that the
best Medicines ordinarily, in use had nothing auailed, I persuaded him to take
of my Aurum Potabile, whereunto he willingly condescended. I gave him thereof
in the morning in bed fasting, as also one hour before Dinner and Supper, at
each time a spoonful. Also whereas usually his sleep was but two hours every
night, which was after he was first laid in bed, and then afterward being once
awaked, he slept no more all that night, but continually did lie coughing,
until he arose in the morning: my counsel was, that after his first sleep,
his Honor should take two grains of the Essence of gold, dissolved in one
spoonful of the Aurum Potabile: which doing, he always within half an hour,
was at good and quiet rest, his Cough ceased, and he slept quietly until six
of the clock in the morning. This course it pleased him to continue until the
12. of April, in which time he daily gathered strength and ability of body
to undergo any service of his Majesty. And thus he continues still to the
praise of God.

A Certain young gentleman, only Son and Debilitie of retention of sperme.
heir unto his Father being of great possessions, complained unto me that his
sperme passed from him vnsensibly both day and night, whereby his body was much
enfeebled, his complexion altered, and a Consumption imminent. A marriage was
tendered unto this young gentleman, being an heir also. Conditions agreed upon
by Parents on both sides, both for Dowre and Ioynter. The father of this
gentleman being in fear of his sons life, was loath to make any perfect
Contract, until he had found Remedy for his son. He used the best help
that the Country could afforde, wherein he lived. But finding none, he brought
up his son to London, used my counsel; and with the help of Aurum Potabile,
the Essence of Gold, and a Solution of Pearl which in such case I do use, he
has recovered perfect state of body, is married, and has Issue. This
Gentleman about twelve Months since being in London, came to visit me, whom
when I beheld I knew not until he had manifested himself unto me; so greatly
was his body altered even into a full vigor and perfect constitution.

THe wife of Master Robert Dixon, Secretary unto Sir Henry Montague Knight,
Recorder of the Speech and sense lost in Childbed.
City of London, being delivered in childbed; was possessed with a most
violent burning fever. She had three Physicians of great worth, who ministered
unto her such helps, as Art could affoard in that case. Not prevailing, they
left her being senseless. Then did the Lady Tanfield send unto me for some of
my Auru^ Potabile, which her Ladish. caused to be given unto this gentlewoman.
In short time after sheefell into a sweat, not long after she slept; and when
she did awake, she had recovered both sense and speech, her burning fever was
assuaged, and in few days after by Judgment of al her friends, she seemed
past all peril and danger of life. But shortly after, rising up out of her
bed, and sitting up over long, she took cold, so that all the parts of her
body became cold and were utterly benumbed, and without sense, her speech
failed, and her strength and spirits much abated. The former worthy Lady being
informed thereof, did send again of my Aurum Potabile unto her, which instantly
put her into a sweat, after she was in bed, and by degrees restored her unto
perfect health. The same gentlewoman being lately delivered of two daughters,
fell into the like passions both of heat and cold, and in each of these
extremities was relieved with the Essence of Gold, as formerly she had been,
with Aurum Potabile.

MAster William Rowden the Kings Majesty's servant Speech and sense lost.
and Marshall of his Hall, 70. years of age, or thereabout, with a continual
Ardent fever which held him long, he was at the last brought to that debilitie
and weakness, that he altogether kept his bed, took no rest day nor night,
but for the most part lay senseless, not knowing what was said or done unto
him. In this extremity I was brought, and it pleased God that by these former
helps, he was recovered, and remains still in perfect health.

MAster William Gore now Alderman and Sheriff Aquartane Ague.
of the city of London, threescore years of age or thereabout, dwelling in
Bow lane, for the space of many Months languished of a quartaine fever. In
which time, by prescript of learned Physicians, he had taken so many Medicines,
that he utterly abhorred all usual Physic. When he was informed by some of
his well wishing friends, that my Aurum Potabile, was very Cordial, effectual
in operation, and not loathsome or unpleasing to take, he was resolved to make
use thereof, although he had resolved never to use any more Physic. But being
dissuaded by some of his Physicians, my professed adversaries, he refrained the
space of some weeks, until mere necessity (by reason of his still
continuing quartane, and his strength daily abating) enforced him to send for
me. I ministered unto him at return of his next fit, a small quantity of my
Aurum Potabile with 2. grains of the Essence of gold; which gave him such
contentment during the time of his fit, that his fever was much more tolerable
then formerly it had been, and himself in far better vigor after his fit.
The^ did he much admire what reason his Physicians could allege, for the
disabling of that Medicine. To conclude, in very few fittes, this Medicine
cleared him of his fever, it brought him to quiet rest, restored him to
appetite, and brought him to good ability and strength of body. And until
this time, it is and has been a continual relief unto him, whenever he
finds himself inclining to any manner of debilitie or sickness.

AS in this case, so have they dealt with diverse of the Nobility of this land
and honorable personages, who in extremity of their sickness, having first
used (and that fruitlesly) all the course of Physic which their Physicians in
Art could advise them) have desired the help of my Aurum Potabile. But have
been diuerted by malicious cauillations of those, who rather desire their own
lucre and gain, then the life of their patients. Nevertheless some of the
right Honorable, not being daunted by their terrifyings (more fit for
children and babes, then for men and women of understanding) have made happy
use thereof both in Court and City; although for causes convenient, it is not
publicly diuulged, and yet peradventure not utterly silenced. But time, in his
due time, will bring the truth to light.

MAster Matthew Dale, Justice of Peace and Judge in Gilde Hall, 76. years of
age, has sundry times been troubled with an infirmity incident to age: that
is, want of Retention of his urine. Whereby sometimes in the night season, he
has bin enforced more then twenty times to make water: whereby his natural
rest (which should have sustained nature) was taken from him: and consequently
his stomach failed, and his strength abated. Upon the use of Aurum Potabile,
these extremities were abated, and he continued until the end of his days, in
good state of body, answerable unto his years.

THe wife of Master Matthew Dale, 70. years of Consumption of the Lungs.
age, having an infirmity of the Lungs, altogether incurable, was
nevertheless preserved in good state of body, many years with help of this
Aurum Potabile.

SIr William Hericke Knight, had by his Lady two Falling ^^^^nesse.
daughters, the one after the other. Each of them being 20. weeks of age, was
taken with the Epilepsie or falling sickness, and died of that disease. After
them, he had by his said wife a third daughter; then did they change their
Nurse, suspecting that some defect might be in the Nurses milk. When this
daughter came to the age of 16. weeks, the Epileptical fits began to possess
this infant, and daily the fits increased, until the disease came to the
height. Then was the Nurse and child sent for hither to London; having heard
that I had cured some in the like infirmity. The father used my help in this
case. It pleased God that with the help of my Aurum potabile and Essence of
gold (with some helps given to the nurse) I perfectly cured that Child of this
dangerous infirmity. This was done in the spring time. Then I advised the
Lady, that the like should be done at next fall of the leaf: But that being
neglected, the child upon the feast day of All Saints next following, fell into
the same disease again; which I likewise cured the second time. Since this
time, being now four years past, this child never had fit, praised be God.

IN like manner, and of the same infirmity, a Son Falling sickness.
of Sir George Wright Knight, being a year old was cured by me, and many
others, whereof some shall be mentioned in this treatise hereafter.

John Vnet, belonging to the right honorable Sir Speech and sense lost
Henry Hubbard Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 40. years of
age or thereabout, after long sickness, was at the last brought to that
debilitie and weakness, that he lay deprived of speech and sense. The bell
tolled for him: The servants of the house had taken their leave of him: no hope
of life remained. Being in this manner at point of death, some of my Aurum
potabile was put into his mouth: by which he was brought again to speech, to
sense, and lastly restored to perfect health, being formerly by judgment of
all, ordained for death. Of this case, Raymund Lully in his book of the
Quintessence writes in this manner. We term them dead men, not those which
absolutely are dead, but those of whom by the opinion of Physicians there is
utter despair, so that they are forsaken by all Physicians, and the actions of
life have relinquished them, and be deprived of sense. If such like men (says
he) reputed thus dead men, shall recover life and health by a Quintessence,
then may they justly be said to be revived from death.

IN like manner was there an other, whose name is Speech and sense lost
Robert Brodbottome, a Citizen, 60. years of age, neighbor unto Sir Lewis
Lewknar then dwelling in Aldersgate street; being likewise at deaths door,
the bell having tolled for him the space of three hours. The said Knight, when
he understood that it tolled for his neighbor whom he well loved, sent him of
my Aurum potabile, willing the wife of the said patient by any possible means,
to put the same into his mouth. Which being done, he shortly after fell into a
sleep, sweating in his sleep, and after his awaking, his sense and speech
returned, and himself recovered health, and yet is living.

THe daughter and heir of Sir Walter Coape knight, now Lady and wife of Sir
Henry Rich knight, being then dangerously sick of the small Pocks (whereof
Small pox
many worthy Knights, Ladies, and gentlewomen have miscarried of late) was
presently relieved by use of my Aurum potabile, and the small Pocks expulsed
plentifully.

IN the small Pocks also, and likewise in the measels, diverse have been
recovered, whose only names I record, and none have miscarried to my knowledge
which in due time have embraced the benefit of this medicine.

The Lady and wife of Sir Richard Ogle knight. A gentle woman belonging to the
Lady and wife of Sir Edward Barret knight. Sir Henry Caries Page. Sir Henry
Caries daughter, of the measels. The Son and heir of Sir Henry Carry, of the
small pox. A young daughter of Sir Richard Norton knight, of the Measels, which
were stricken in and recoiled by cold taking whereby the child was in great
danger. A Kinswoman of Mistress Brown of Essex, widow. A Servant of Master
Marsh Esquire, then dwelling in Colman-streete. A Maid servant, belonging to
To. Dixon before mentioned. An other maid servant of Master John Morris
Merchant, dwelling near unto leaden hall. An Infant of Mr. Price the Kings
servant.
DAily experience also has taught us of late, that very many both young and
old have miscarried of the Small Pox, even under the hands of the best practiced
Physicians, although the cure of them be accounted no difficult matter: unto
whom, if this approved Medicine, so secure from danger: so powerful in
corroborating the Heart, and expelling the venomous malignitie of that Disease,
had been at hand, and had been administered in due time and form, no doubt
but (the virtue expulsive being fortified in the patient, and the material
venenositie subtiliated) if not all, yet some of them, might by this only
Medicine have been recovered. As the use hereof has prevented death in many,
so likewise very many wanting the benefit thereof, in the flower of their age
perished; which have used purgative Medicines, whose property is to draw
malignant humors from the external parts, unto the center of the body, and to
the very Heart it self. I leave this matter to be considered of, by those
whom in like case it may concern hereafter.

THe Honorable Lady and widow Doretie Skot, Vomiting of sustenance in old age.
sometime the wife of Sir Thomas Skot Knight of the age of 78. years, for the
space of many days could retain no manner of sustenance, but instantly cast
up by vomit whatsoever she received. Neither could this be stayed by any
Medicine ministered unto her. All means failing, my Aurum Potabile stayed this
extremity. And after taking thereof, she likewise took any manner of other
sustenance, and retained the same. Hereby it may appear, that this one and the
same Medicine, does sometime procure vomit, when nature would be unburdened,
and at other times it suppresseth vomit, when nature is so infeebled, that it
would feign retain nutriment for sustentation, but cannot.

MAster Napper Esquire, dwelling in Oxford, 60. years of age, was long time
perplexed with a Vomiting and scooring.
very strange infirmity. He was diverse times taken with an extreme vomiting,
with a scooring likewise, which both continued the space of 2. or 3. days
commonly every hour without intermission until his body was utterly
exhausted. The^ he became so feeble and weak, that he was enforced to keep
his bed many days, until by degrees he recovered some strength again. But
when his body began to be repleate, then did he fall into his former passions.
In this manner he continued one whole year more. He used for Remedy, the
counsel and advise of Physicians both at Oxford and London. When all their
means auailed not, then did he send unto me for my Aurum Potabile, which by
the help of God prevailed in this case, to the great admiration of many.

THe wife of Master William Wiseman Counselor at the Law, after her safe
delivery in Childbirth, was possessed both with a fever, as also with an
extraordinary and a dangerous flux, tam per Menstrua quam per seeds. Her sleep
also was thereby utterly taken from her. By means whereof she was brought
unto great Imbecillitie and despair of life. In this dangerous case, after the
fruitless help of other Physicians she was recovered and perfectly restored,
with the Essence of my gold in few days.

SIr Edward Barret Knight, having his abode Essex Ague.
sometime in Essex near unto the Marshes (a Country much subject to Agues)
was two several times possessed with that kind of fever. And each time he was
freed from that fever, by the only help of my Aurum Potabile. Many also of
his servants, more then ten at one several time, have been taken with that
Country fever. One especially amongst the rest, a woman, having chief
government over the family, was so grievously afflicted therewith, that her
senses were taken from her, and other such like accidents so oppressed her,
that there remained small hope of life. Yet it pleased God, that both she and
the rest, in short time were recovered (although the Agues of those parts do
commonly continue long:) as also in one part of Kent, where many have been
relieved by my Aurum Potabile, after that all other means have failed.

MAster Doctor Savage, Doctor of the Civil Laws, Essex Ague.
56. years of age, lying sick in Essex of the like fever, sent for me to come
down unto him. Being now with him, and before I administered any thing unto
him, he was strangely taken with convulsions and Crampes, in his hands, feet,
legs, face and in all the exterior parts of his body, with extreme tortures,
lamentable to behold. I appeased all these symptoms within the space of one
half hour, with the Essence of my gold, which in short time brought him into
a Sweat, and his Convulsions and Crampes ceased, (...) fever also was cured in
very short time.

THe same Doctor Savage now lately within these two months, was taken with a
malignant fever, a Disease now common in sundry places. He was perfectly cured
thereof, only with the Essence of gold. I gave him thereof three grains,
before the beginning of his fit, dissolved in five spoonfuls of Endive water
with a little sugar: and the like quantity in the midst of his hot fit. This
I did reiterate every fit until the fourth fit. In which time he was free from
his ague. But afterward he fell into the like fever again, as also into those
former Convulsions, which could not by any help of Medicine be assuaged,
until he was enforced to send unto me, 17. miles for the Essence of gold:
which being taken gave him present relief, admirable unto them who were eye
witnesses of the effect thereof.

MAster Thomas Drywood of Northokenden in Long languishing sickness upon
obstructions.
the County of Essex, 30. years of age, by reason of obstructions and other
inward causes, languished a long time, became very lean, and so into a
consumption. Being therewith almost spent, my Aurum potabile was present remedy
to him, and he lives now in good health.

THe wife of the said Thomas Drywood, by the same Weakness after childbirth.
medicine recovered from a great weakness and decayed estate, caused by hard
labor in childbirth, and sickness afterward.

A Daughter of theirs being about 4. years old, Obstruct.
having pined, and decayed long time of an unknown disease, upon the taking of
my Potable Gold, vomited up a great quantity of viscous tough matter, and then
recovered presently.

A Young daughter of John Fan Citizen, dwelling Obstruct.
in Aldersgate street, being five years old, by reason of obstructions in her
liver, spleen, and breast, which had long continued, and was thereby much
hindered in her breathing, took one ounce only of my potable gold, after which
she cast up much slimy stuff, tough, like molten glass, that one could
scarcely cut with a knife, and presently she amended, and shortly after became
perfectly well.

MAster William Snelling Fishmonger, dwelling in Falling sickness.
Thamestreete, had a young infant of a year old, who was grievously perplexed
with the falling sickness. His fits were frequent and often, sometimes 20. in one
day. So that the parents besought God, to take him to his mercy. out of that so
great misery: When diverse medicines had been tried in vain, he was at the
last recovered by my Essence of gold, and never since was troubled with any
fit, being more then 3. years past.

A Maid servant of the Lady and wife of Sir Thomas Convulsions.
Smith knight, being 22. years old, was afflicted with most violent
convulsions, and fits like unto the falling sickness incessantly day and night
for a long season: not finding any ease by glisters, and many other medicines
given her by other Physicians. At last she was by me cured of that fearful
disease by this my Medicine, and never felt it since; three years being past.

AN Infant of a year and half old, daughter unto Inward torments and gripings
of an infant.
Sir Edward Barret knight, was long grieved with some inward torments and
gripings in her belly. The Lady Paget, Baroness, her grandmother, gave her of
my Potable Gold, with which she presently cast up some raw fleagmaticke matter
or humor, and was well for the space of 2. hours: after which time she
complained as before, and peradventure worse. The Lady her grandmother gave her
an other spoonful, after which she cast again much viscous matter diversely
colored, and then slept a whole hour. But waking suddenly, she seemed as one
ready to diepresently, having many dangerous signs as sowundings, and falling
of her jaws etc. So that the good Lady, holding this Infant all that while in
her lap, was feign forcibly to open her mouth, and poured in an other spoonful
mixed with beer or ale. After which she cast again a blackish and ill
sauoured slimy thick stuff. Then she was well and recovered.

MAster Thomas Allin Esquire, more then 60. Extreme debility.
years of age, being lodged in Broad street, having then languished a long
time: at last being near spent, he sent for me: and with my Potable Gold
especially, some other dietary means being also prescribed, he was perfectly
restored in few days.

MAster Small, gentleman, an Attorney at the A quartane ague.
law, and student of Furniualls Inn, 32. years old, had lien sick of a
quartane fever many months, and had also the iaundise. He finding no help in
other medicines, was in short time perfectly cured by my Aurum potabile.

MAster Thomas Tutteshame gentleman, aged 20. A quartane ague.
years, son of Master Anthony Tutteshame, both of Staple Inn, was likewise
cured of a quartane ague, by my potable gold.

A Young son of Sir Io. Talesburrough knight, about Essex ague.
4. years old, lay dangerously sick in Essex, of the popular and vniuersarie
disease, ordinary in those marish countries, and could not endure to take any
medicines. He took my Essence of gold, with the aurum potabile at several
times, and was thereby perfectly cured.

THe daughter of Sir Anthony Capell knight, about A Consumption.
14. years old, after a long sickness fell into a Consumption, with extreme
weakness. Her father sent unto me for some of my potable gold, whereiwth she
was in reasonable time perfectly recovered, and restored to her former health.

FRancis Wonnam of Darkin in the County of Surrey, Palsy of all the body.
Yeoman, was taken with a dead Palsy in all parts of his body. To whom Master
William Radcliffe Esquire of the same Town, gave some of my potable gold
which he had in store for his own use, being often times troubled with the
Stone; by which means the said Wonnam recovered, and had perfect use both of
legs and hands.

A Young gentleman Io. Studolph, 17. years old, being Speech lost, and vomiting,
then with his mother (a widow) dwelling near the foresaid Darkin, was taken
with a Palsy in his tongue; his speech was taken from him, and whatsoever he
did either eat or drink, he cast it up. I was sent for, and stayed there some
three days. In which time, by intermissiue administering of my Aurum potabile,
and Essence of gold, his vomiting was stayed, his speech recovered, and he
perfectly cured. But I heard afterward by some of his friends, that about a
year after he fell again into the same Disease, and died thereof before he
could conveniently send for any help.

MAster John Coals, called Captain Coals, about 44. years old, had long time
been troubled Consumption of the Lungs.
with a dangerous Disease of the Lungs, shortness of breath, coughing and with
it, spitting of rotten matter, and seemed to be in full Consumption. He was
perfectly cured with the continued use of my Potable gold.

HEnry Smith servant to Sir Edward Barret Palsy.
Knight, lost his speech by a Palsy, and so some time. Afterward he perfectly
recovered his speech again, by help of my Aurum Potabile.

A Servant of Sir Thomas Smith Knight, having been long troubled with a
quartane Ague, Quartane.
finding no help by other Medicines which had been given unto him, was cured
with my Potable gold.

A Daughter of Master Fitzgarret Esquire, dwelling upon Saint Peter's Hill, was
infected with Plague.
the Plague or Pestilence, and cured by the only use of my Essence of gold,
dissolved in my Aurum Potabile with Carduus Water.

ELizabeth Elward, being allied unto Edward Rugham retainer to the Lord Kneuet,
was likewise infected with the Plague, and because the same Plague.
Edward Rugham was continually attendant in White Hall under the Lord Kneuet,
the said Lord therefore persuaded him to use my Aurum Potabile for his
kinswoman, being then in Edward Rughams house; which he did, and by it
recovered his kinswoman.

Diverse other were also cured of the Plague at the same time.

A maid servant belonging to Master John Morris, merchant, dwelling near unto
Leaden Hall.

A servant of Sir Edward Conway Knight.

Mast. Carre Counselor at the Law, dwelling in Great Saint Bartholmewes.

A man servant and a maid servant in the house of Mistress Randall widow,
dwelling on Saint Peter's Hill.

Three servants in the house of Sir William Hericke Knight.

Master Arthur Luson, Citizen in Paternoster Row.

THe wife of Master Seabright of London, Esquire, Convulsions with loss of
sense.
being about 60. years old, was often taken with diverse and sundry passions,
as Convulsions, and paralyticall stupefactions of her sense of feeling; And had
been sundry times relieved by my Potable gold. But to overcome, and utterly to
suppress the great abundance of those humors or matter, which caused these
fits so often to return, without being perfectly cured, I advised her to take
sometimes of my Essence of gold. Which when she had taken, she cast up a
great quantity of Melancholicke black stuff. Since which time, she has
never been troubled with any of those passions.

MAster John Sherington of London, Merchant, had a son about three years
old, long time Obstructions in a child.
dejected and weak, and had received many Medicines against the worms and
other causes which were suspected, but to no purpose (for he daily grew worse
and worse.) At last therefore, having taken my Potable gold a few days, he
cast up a great quantity of tough, thick, and viscous humors. After which (the
matter of Obstructions being taken away) he presently recovered perfect health.

ALso a young daughter then borne to this Master A newborn Infant.
Sherington, being six months old, fell dangerously sick, and with the same
Medicine was restored.

THe wife of Mast. Coals dwelling in Colmanstreete Plague.
(after the death of her said husband, who died of the Plague) she being then
with child, was also infected. And fearing in that case all strong Medicines,
used only my Potable gold and the Essence, with use whereof by Gods grace she
recovered, and her child saved, of which she was after safely delivered. The
husband which took other Medicines, not this, died. The wife which refused all
other Medicines, and took only this, recovered; Notwithstanding the increase
of danger by her childbearing. Let the due consideration of this one case, stop
the mouth of malice it self, and inform the envious to glorify God, for his
great and good gifts bestowed upon men.

EDmund Nusum dwelling near Charing-Crosse, fell into a dangerous sickness
and long time continued therein. In this his distress he sent for a learned
Physician of London, well known: who used his best skill and endeauours, for
recovery of this patient. But failing in his expectation, he told the patients
wife, that she must shortly be a widow, A worthy gentleman, their neighbor,
pitying this case, sent his man to me in this sick man's behalf. I came, and
found the Apothecarie at the patients door, newly come from him, which saluted
me with these, or the like words: You come tooo late, there is no good to be
done. To whom I answered, that though I could do no good, yet I would do no
hurt. So when I came to the patient, and could not find any likely signs, nor
hopes of life, I undertook nothing concerning his recovery; neither promised
so much as hope. Yet for a trial, I gave him some of my potable gold, and
continued that administration all that night, once in three hours. It pleased
God that he recovered, to the great admiration of all men.

NOt long after, the only son of the aforesaid Apothecarie, (whose name was
Nathan Darbey) 17. years of age, was likewise taken with a violent burning
fever. He had the advice and counsel not only of the said Physician before
specified, but also of many other of the College. But the patient grew worse
and worse, and at length became speechless, and was as it were upon the
threshold, to take death by the hand. The father then, though in despair of
his son, yet having seen the former effect, came hastily unto me, in the
Sermon time (being then the Sabbath day) imploring my aid for his sons
recovery, if yet it were possible. His complaints prevailed. I gave his son
of these materials, iterated by degrees as the case required. God blessed the
means, and he recovered.

MAster William Parkinton gentleman, likewise, dwelling near unto
Charing-Crosse, and sufficiently well known, lay dangerously sick, using the
advice and help of the said before mentioned Physician. He neglected no means
of ordinary course prescribed by Physic. Nevertheless the patient found
small relief. For the Physician himself accounted him a dead man. So likewise
did his wife, and other his friends, In this forlorn estate, I was called unto
him. I only gave him of the Essence of gold, and the Aurum Potabile. And that
God, who does wound and heal: who brings us to the brinke of the grave, and
raises us up again, by this means, as his revealed ordinance, restored him
again unto perfect health.

BY these three last instances, all dwelling near unto one place, and almost
at one time, one Physician being called unto them all, and they all forsaken by
him, as deplored: yet nevertheless, they all being recovered, by the only
help of this Aurum Potabile: we must of force acknowledge the same to be an
extraordinary blessing sent from God, for relief of those, who have enjoyed
the benefit thereof. And let no man deprave this Medicine, in that it is
administered so diversely. It ought rather to be had in greater price. The nearer
unto simplicity, the nearer to verity. Also, in vain are many things used,
when one thing prevails. As in all the course of our life this is true, so
likewise in administering of Physic. Therefore Damascen says: It were a wicked
fact to use a compound Medicine, where a simple profits.

CONCLUSION OF THE SECOND PART.
BY these evidences, and manifold experience sincerely delivered, partly taken
and faithfully translated out of Latin letters, sent from several parts
beyond the seas; partly in English verbally set down, as they came to me; any
reasonable man, not seduced by vain oppositions, nor wilfully preiudicate,
nor peruersly malicious, may easily judge, that this medicine, my Potable gold,
is the most wholesome, safe, and operative medicine, which at this day is
known to be had in use: both for the cure of desperate and hopeless
sicknesses, when all help of man is accounted vain: And for the wonderful
restoring of the decayed strength, and languishing powers of the body, with a
singular comforting of the heart: As also, for a Prophylacticke, and preserver
of health. Which so being, the greater is their sin, which contrary to Gods
commandment, Christian charity, the love of truth, their duty toward their
neighbor, and peradventure their inward testimony of their own conscience,
have so virulently and despitefully inueighed against the true and
uncontrollable virtues and effects thereof: And in their wast papers of
impression, have attempted to show the power of malicious Rhetoric, thereby
to wrong that good, which they themselves cannot attain unto. Whereby so far
as their ability and credibilitie could stretch, they have notoriously
injured, not me only, but all sorts, ranks, and degrees of people, subject to
the vnrespectiue tyranny of sickness, which makes no difference between the
Cottage and Palace, the King and the Peasant. The wrong to me, is, that for my
love and truth, works of charity, good intentions toward all, and good
deserts of as many as have made, or hereafter shall make use of the fruits of
these my labors: they have rewarded me, with that which is under my backbiters
tongues, railing, for reverence, reproach, for my good deeds, and slander, for a
recompense. But the wrong done to others, has many branches, and searches to
the seat of greatest honor. For (though I dare not say that it should have
been otherwise, by the administering hereof (the length and number of all days
being in Gods hand) yet to show their warm charity against all things, not in
their own Apothekes, they would not suffer our late young Prince, worthy of
immortal memory, to use this so famously and above all exceptions approved
medicine; notwithstanding in the use of all other, they found not so much as
any hope. In a desperate case, and a prognosticated life, all rules both of
learning and charity allow, yea and require the attempt of any means, not
noted of ill suspicion: Much more so publicly and manifoldly testified, for
the admirable good effects which it had wrought in diverse persons. But that
Rubricke ( Propter dignitatem personae etc.) Give ordinary medicines to great
persos, to preserve the honor of the Physician, that he has done no hurt,
scilicet, though he did no good, is neither Prophylacticke nor Therapeuticke.
We say in English: As good never a whit as never the better. And such is their
pious affection toward all others whom it may concern, that whatsoever
happen, none of them will make use of this my potable gold, (which though not
properly, yet emphatically may be called a divine Medicine: and certainly with
more merit, then their Gratia Dei, Manus Christi, Benedicta Medicamenta,
Diuinum Medicamentum) though it would save a thousand lives. Esteeming (as it
seems) that good which is so done without the Seplasiasticke preparations, to
be their dishonor, and delinement. Let all be soberly used, but where greatest
need is, the best and most powerful chosen. But the searcher and judge of all
hearts will recompense according to merit, to them, as to enemies of truth. And
to the sincere lovers thereof, acknowledging Gods mercies showed in the
administration of his own gifts, their guerdon, which is the testimony of a
good conscience. If we look back, unto the actions of certain Physicians of
old time even before the age of Galen, and the admirable medicines of some of
them: we shall find not impertinent to our purpose, that of great Alexander
King of Macedon. He (as Quintus Curtius in his third book reports) in the
extremity of a most dangerous and violent disease, desiring either present
help or death, that he might hold his appointed day of battle with Darius
King of Persia; for that purpose, consulted with his friends and counselors,
what remedy might be found in this desperate case. The King disliked al
ordinary medicines, as too weak for his purpose. The Physicians would allow
none such as they called unknown. One Physician among the rest, named Philip,
being borne in the country Acarnania a part of Greece, offered Alexander to
make him a medicine very safe to be taken, which should speedily restore him to
health, though the other Physicians knew not what it was. Parmenio a great
Counselor and favorite of Alexanders, dissuaded his King from this medicine,
(for he was unwilling the King should recover as the sequel showed) and
labored to persuade him, that this Philip the Physician was hired by Darius
for 1000. talents to poison him. Yet Alexander took that Physic, and finding
the effect answerable to his promise, after his health so suddenly and beyond
expectation recovered, did afterward among other accusations, lay this for one
against Parmenio, as not wishing him well; which altogether made up that
Judgment which brought him to his end. And very honorably, both rewarded and
regarded Philip, to whom next under God, be attributed and acknowledged the
preservation of his life. The working of that medicine, in the same place is
described, not unlike to this of mine. In this manner, Vt vero Medicamentum,
etc. So soon as the Medicine diffused or spread it self into the veins, there
might leisurely, by little and little recovery and healthfulnesse be perceived
in all the body. First the spirits and heart recovered their vigor, and after
the body also, sooner then could be believed. For Alexander after he had been
in this case three days, showed himself to his Army: which did not more
ardently or affectionatly fix their eyes upon Alexander, then upon Philip who
had so unexpectedly restored him to them: Every one striving who should first
give him their right hand, embrace and thank him. Thus much Curtius.

Semblably it is sufficiently proved and famously manifest, that very many
great, Noble and Honorable personages, both men and women, sick either as
Alexander was, or taken with other more dangerous and violent diseases,
forsaken by all other Physicians, as incurable, have been by the use of this
Medicine, through Gods grace, in very short time recovered, and restored to
their perfect health. Therefore unto you worthy and Honorable gentlemen, who
as you are the Inheritors of Nobility, so are you of gentle and noble
dispositions: to you I say, I turn my self, resting assured, that you esteem
these calumniating bablers, to have said nothing real, material, and
veritable against me, howsoever they have moved their tongues and quills. They
intend not in this case, your health, but my damage: and would rather you were
offered a silent sacrifice in eternal sleep, then strike one sail, or unlace
one bonet blown with the wind of their malicious breath, or leese the price
of a popular Recipe, for a Benedict Medicament, although it do no good, shall
do no harm, Propter honestatem Medici, that is, for the reputation of the
Doctor: though every day almost do give miserable experience, that by want of
doing good, the mischief increases; and so with the reputation of the Doctor,
the poor patient is lodged in his grauesend, which is harm enough, and the
worst of a maledict Medicine. Therefore as I desire, so I justly hope, that you
will discern between a black and a white: falsehood, and truth: light and
darkness. That you will patronise, defend and keep from oppression, both me
and the truth. If there be any doubt concerning the auouchment of the cures and
good effects of this my potable gold, here spoken of, you have the reports, the
particular names and places, and many of their own hand writings I keep ready
at all times, to be showed for your further contentments. And I am verily
persuaded, that all honest persons which have been recovered from their
diseases and infirmities by the good use of this my potable gold, will be so
thankful to God for that benefit, as to acknowledge the means of their
recovery, and not imitate those silent 9. Pharisees cleansed from their Leprosy
by our Savior: which is little less (if not equivalent) then against their
own knowledge and conscience to deny. Of them you may know and be satisfied,
that it has done good to all, hurt to none: That it is a safe, powerful and
pleasing Medicine: even a Prince amongst all, analogising with principality in
this. That doing much good, yet of malicious and vnshamefull persons it is ill
spoken of as Princes often times are. Let these worldling slanderers, disprooue
that I say, or prove the contrary, if they can. If not, then it is time they
would be entreated, if not for conscience sake, yet at least for shame (if they
fear any) to be silent hereafter: though it were more for their honest
account, to recant in print. These great cures performed, realities, things of
fact, often times, in sundry and distant places, and sundry and diverse
persons, in sundry and different diseases, done and performed to the great good
of many, and applaused by common attestation, in all parts of the Realm, and
many parts beyond the seas: This (I say) cannot be pocketted as not done, nor
so easily vilified by a fine phrase, a little good Latin: Substance or sense
there is none in his writing, it is mere froth, and the deceitful inside of a
rotten Egg, or worm-eaten nut: good for nothing but to befogge the clear
light of a known truth, and maintain the inured practice of learned scolds.
Surely, this is not, White, in any tongue, Latin or Welsh, howsoever
versified. These testimonies for me (which will daily increase) shall lie and
remain to all posterities, as honorable Trophies, fixed in the hearts of
understanding and honest men; when these stagie chartlets of theirs, shall not
be vouchsafed an honest eye or ear: but cast by for wast paper, to stop
mustard pots, or other base offices. They are not able, to produce one
Instance, of harm received by this Medicine. Whereas contrary, the chiefest,
most polychresticall, and greatest magnified compositions (whereof (to speak
truth) at this day the right Ingredients be not known: and against which some
learned Doctors have learnedly written) have their Imputatio^s, wherein the
charge must be either upon the Medicine it self, or upon the Physicians.
Whose errors, if themselves will not mend, I will not excuse. If objection be
made, that all have not recovered, which have taken this Medicine of mine, but
some have died: I confess that is true. But what then? Old Age is irreuocable.
Many diseases also are either essentially incurable, or prevent all power of
Medicines, either by the vehemency or malignitie Morbi acutissimi, or by the
negligence of timely help. Many also being easily to be cured at the first,
are made desperate and incurable, by errors, either of Medicines directly
hurtful, or at the least not helpful, to the intolerable weakening of the
poor patient, and triumph of the disease. Also Hippocrates tells us, that
all diseases be not curable. For the fatal and predestinate hour is
inevitable. There rests an unknown cause, which is the unsearchable counsel
of God, which will not that all diseases shall be cured in all men. Thus much
concerning the second part, we will now proceed to the third.

THE THIRD PART SHOWING THE USE OF THIS POTABLE GOLD.
THat which Philip of Macedon, father of Alexander the great said of gold: That
with it all Cities, Citadells, Castles, Forts, Fortresses and Bulwarks,
howsoever by nature, Art and munition thought impregnable, might be assaulted,
laid open and conquered: I may as truly, but to better use, affirm of Aurum
potabile, that is, of Gold made into medicine and reduced to the form of a
potable liquor, that it does assail and oppugn all infirmities and inward
diseases of man's body (respectively curable, as aforesaid.) That it also does
restore, establish, and confirm, the vigor and strength of man's body, with the
natural and vital faculties thereof: If it be duly and considerately
administered, with such care, caution and judgment as becomes the dignity of
a rational Physician. For as the Captain of an Army, having any peculiar
exploite in hand, neglects no means, either by Military Discipline, or
Engines of war, to accomplish his intended purpose; so is the Physician
likewise bound to do. And as the clandestine enemy which lies in Ambush, and
appears not in sight, is much more dangerous, then he that comes in open
face; so likewise, many of our internal diseases, whose malignitie lurkes in
the inward parts, are more difficultly cured, then those which manisest the
uttermost of their malice. And as in this age, both Armor and other Artillery
for the service of war, are far different from those of former times, so
that it were ridiculous now, either in offensive war or defensive, to
relinquish our Ordnance of all sorts, because (in comparison) they are but late
inventions, and to trust to the ancient military instruments serviceable among
the Romans in those days: Even so, the capital diseases of this age, being
for the most part Complicati Morbi, whereas olim they were simplices, will
hardly be extirpate, if we ouercuriously do persist in the prescript rules and
method of antiquity, and tie our selves only to their Medicines: seeing that
daily experience does teach us, that they perform not the effects promised,
and therefore, are for the most part administered fruitlesly. Seeing therefore
the endeavors of this age (being enforced thereunto by defect of those
medicines) have likewise added unto Art, and have enriched the same with other
materials medicinable, not formerly retained in common use; or the same, by
more artificial preparation, have exalted into a higher virtue: Were it not
madness (the validity of the same being sufficiently experienced) to
relinquish those of a higher nature, and to use triuiall and fruitless
medicines? Let the Soldier make convenient use of the Sword, Dagger, Helmet,
Target, Pike, and such like (for they have been of long antiquity) but
withal, let not Musket, Saker, Mineon, Cannon, be neglected, because they are
new inventions, in comparison of the other. And let us likewise approve, and
retain in use, Electuaries, Syrups, Pills, Powders, and whatsoever else by
long approbation is pertinent to the expulsing of malignant humors the causes
of maladies: yet, let not the virtues acknowledged by all antiquity to be
insident in gold, be least regarded, which virtues do actually appear in
potable gold. Every graduated Physician is tied by solemn oath, as also by
integrity of conscience, not to neglect any thing, tending to the recovery of
his patient; But to use all manner of effectual medicines, either new or old,
whether of their own inventions, or of other men's labors, being approved to
be secure and not nauseous: not rejecting the same upon any private
consideration, either of prejudice or malice. But leaving this digression, to
the intent that every body whom it shall concern, may make the best use, reap
the full fruition of all benefits which they can expect by this so profitable
and extraordinary gift of God, (although they cannot at all times have the
assistance and directing advice of a learned Physician, to prescribe and order
the administration thereof, which were to be wished) I will here in this last
part of this Treatise, endeavor to help that defect: and teach the method,
manner, and rules, how, and in what diseases and passions, it may most
profitable be administered. Which though by many the letters sent me, before in
this discourse set down as also by the histories of many cures by my self and
others therewith performed, it be reasonable plain, yet I will draw it into a
more distinct and orderly delivery, according to the good will and meaning I
have: That by a general helping medicine, a most general and universal
benefit may be reaped.

Therefore be it known, that the use of this medicine is generally twofold,
answerable to the two general ends of Practicke Physic. One, to preserve the
present health. The other, to recover it, being broken or lost: by curing the
Diseases, and rooting out the causes thereof.

THE USE OF POTABLE GOLD in preservation of health.
ALL the Physicians and learned men, both before in my first printed book, and
here in this alleged, as also almost innumerable others, whose names I omit to
avouch, for brevity, agree in this: That Aurum Potabile is the best Medicine,
and most profitable Instrument for the conservation of health, in all kind of
complexionable temperaments; That it partly suppresseth and suffers not
luxuriously to bud, shoot out, and bring their fruit unto ripeness, any
seeds, or latent roots of sicknesses, lurking in man's body, whereunto any
pronenesse or aptitude hereditarie, or otherwise accidental, make them
obnoxious: That it reduces to mediocritie, inordinate distemperatures, either
in excess or defect: That it refreshes, vigorateth, and strengthens the
heart; restores, and increases the vital spirits: aduanceth the force and
and generation of good blood, multiplieth geniture seed, and ability of
prolification in both sexes; banishing sterility, preventing abortions, and
providing quick, easy, and safe deliueries in childbed, suppresseth the
infirmities of age: preserves the vigor of youth. It were unnecessary to heap
arguments in confirmation hereof, being in it self so authentically warranted
by famous authors, and manifestly witnessed by many experiences. Particularly,
it is a preservative against the Falling sickness,, the Apoplexy, Leprosy,
Plague, Dropsy, Cancer, Gout, Stone, and all manner of fevers in all ages and
sexes. And in some, it expels (or rather enableth the body to expel) by
convenient and most natural passages, the antecedent matter or humors, from
and by which any diseases depending upon such material causes might spring,
and so by prevention, preserves health.

But it is to be known and observed, that this Medicine The first form.
of gold, though made of one body, yet is reserved and used in three forms and
consistences; which not being known, there may be much mistaking and error in
the use and administration thereof.

First, when the gold is dissolved in the proper menstruall or isntrumental
water, this water is distilled away from the dissolved gold, until it be in
the bottom in the form or consistence of a liquid gum or honey, deeply
colored (as Raymund Lully calls it) and most unctuous. To which, the spirit of
wine is then put, and by solution thereof, tincted very red and deep colored.
That tincted spirit of wine is gently decanted, or powered off, and so reserved
by it self in a glass. And is called the Physical Tincture of gold. And may
so, in small room, and with no burden be carried whither any man please. And
this we call the first form.

Take one ounce of this tincted spirit, mix it with The second form.
16. ounces of generous wine (or if you please, of any other liquor.) And this
being so mixed is called that Potable gold, of which so often mention has
been hitherto made. One, or two spoonfuls of this at one time, and sometimes a
whole ounce, I accustom to give, in such cases and Diseases as aforesaid.

The third form is this, and thus made. That tincted The third form.
red spirit of wine, in which the dissolved gold is taken up from the white
feces, or residence, is put into a fit glass body with a head. And with a
gentle heat of a Balneum, the spirit is drawn off, until the substance in
the bottom of the glass be dry. Then do I put on fresh spirit of wine,
setting it in digestion certain days. In which time it will cast off an other
residence. This process is reiterated, and at every such solution and
distillation, the feculent residence must be separated from the pure, until it
leave no residence at all. Then is it called the Quintessence or Essence of
God, which I do use to administer in the quantity of 2. or 3. or more grains,
and do dissolve it in some appropriate liquor or other mixture conducent.

So that any, that is desirous to make use of this my Medicine, may have either
the Potable gold, or the Tincture of gold, or the Essence of gold, or all; and
apply them in all manner of needful uses, as occasion shall require.

They therefore that shall take it for preservation, may use it in the simplest
and least curious order and fashion. That is, to take of the Auru^ Potabile one
or two spoonfuls, together fasting, and in bed, if they may, else in the
morning after they be up; the oftener, the better. Use gives instruction, from
that common Indication aforesaid, A Iuuantibus et nocentibus, etc, From things
that help and hurt, every one is directed. Therefore whosoever after twice or
thrice taking, has found benefit thereby, he may proportion himself, in
moderate increasing or diminishing the dose or quantity, according to his own
hability and constitution. For, in increasing the quantity of this, there is
no danger, so it be within any bounds of mediocritie, not exorbitantly
exuberate: which is far otherwise in all or most part of other simples and
compositions, whether merely Medicaments, or Midicamentall nutriments, as are
Oximel, Saffron, Methridate, Treacle, all Cordiales and Purges whatsoever.

Also a convenient time to take it (especially in those that have weak
stomachs) will be one hour or two before dinner or supper, or after supper, at
bed time (for it does both help digestion, and procure sleep) according as
the circumstances shall require or suffer.

In precaution of Lunarie Diseases, such as have their exacerbations and fits
according to the quarters, changings, and full of the Moon, as Epilepsies,
Defluxions, inordinate Menstruals and such like: The rule is, for this last, to
take it near the time of course: In the other, 3. 4. or 5. days before the
new and full Moon.

If it be desired for the more particular appropriating of this Medicine to any
particular cause, to take it not so simply of it self, but mixed: Then let
such, either by their own knowledge, or the appointment of some experienced
Physician, mix it with some specificall water, decoction, extraction, or
otherwise formed Medicine, according to the necessity of every particular
cause and occasion: Or with some compound water, approved for that Disease, or
Polychrestall to the same, and others, in neighborhood and link of causes to
it.

THE USE OF AVRVM POTABILE IN SUNDRY INFIRMITIES.
THe diseased person that shall use this Medicine, may take it in the same
proportion or dose, as formerly is set down, or somewhat greater or less,
according to the condition of the party, and state of his Disease. Commonly
one spoonful of the Aurum Potabile is given at one time: or six The dose.
or eight drops of the Tincture of gold, mixed in some appropriate liquor:
and of the Essence of Gold, two or three grains. Where necessity shall
require, these doses may be doubled, or more; as of the Aurum Potabile, two or
three spoonful unto a full ounce: of the Essence four grains or six: Of the
Tincture in like respect. Also in some persons greatly debilitated, and not
able well to retain, a small quantity is first to be attempted, and then by
degrees increased, as by former examples may plainly appear. Also this Essence
of gold is very fitting and convenient for very young infants but newly borne,
in any Disease whatsoever, being ordered in this manner. Take one grain of the
Essence, dissolve it in one or two spoonful of brestmilke or in some distilled
water as shall be fitting: give the child part of that mixture at the first:
after a while give it more. This is securely given, the third or fourth day
after the birth; so is likewise the Aurum Potabile in a small quantity, and
mixed with some other liquor, not with milk: neither must the child suck
within two hours after, lest the wine in the potable gold, should curdle the
milk.

These administrations are to be given intermissiuely, How often.
sometime every second, third, or fourth hour, as the present case shall
require: until of the operation appear with good signs, the abating of the
passions, diminishing of the Disease, and recovery of strength.

It may be given at al times, most commonly in the When to be given.
morning fasting, or an hour before repast. Likewise after meat to prevent a
surfeit. For it helps digestion, and preuenteth sicknesses following such
repletions. To procure sleep it is given at bedtime; or if necessity urge,
in any other hour of the night or day: being effectually a true Anodine, of
contemperation without stupefaction, not narcoticke.

The Effects of this Medicine: corroboration of Effects.
the heart: restoration of the vital spirits decayed and enfeebled: which
apparently is manfest, by quiet and sweet sleep most commonly following; as
also by mitigation of pain, and appeasing of violent passions: sometime by a
mild and gentle sweat ensuing, sometimes by vomit, and reiection of malignant
viscous humors: also by plentiful euacation of urine, as also by restraint
thereof, where the retention is weak. And though sildom, yet sometimes by a
looseness of the belly: but very often, by staying inordinate fluxes. And every
of these functions, though contrary some one to other, are directed and
performed by the mere motion of Nature it self, being strengthened, vigorated,
and enabled, by the virtue of this Medicine.

Let thus much suffice, for the simple, or very simply mixed use of this
Medicine. But although in this form taken and used, it gives great
furtherance toward the curing of any malady, as by many particular experiments
has been related, in which sildome times any addition of peculiar effect has
been administered: yet because of the great variety, difference and diversity
of dispositions, natures, places, diseases, times, and countries; and because
prescription ought not to preiudicate the skill and judgment of all men;
Therefore to supply these differences, I do leave free to the judgment and
discretion of every rational experienced Physician, to administer this
medicine, with any kind of Waters, Liquors, Syrups, Conserues, Electuaries, or
other medicines simple or compound, such as they shall upon good grounds and
experience, know or judge most appropriate, specificall, convenient, and
agreeing to the present circumstances of the disease, nature, and quality of
the patient, and necessity of his state. We give no prescript of Method, or
limitatio^ of proceedings unto Physicians; they being present, know what is
needful, what requisite, in order, time and place: what in each respect is to
be done, what to be left undone. But where a competent Physician is not at
hand, as in Country villages, or such like places, there some admonition or
direction is expedient.

It is well known among learned men, what effect, efficacy, and force, is
attributed to that Medicine which is called Universal, in that high degree
whereof writers make mention, that it performs great and admirable effect,
not only upon man's body, but also upon Metals, as appears by these words of
Raymund Lully: The quintessence of gold, after distilling away of the
isntrumental water, will remain in the bottom of the glass, very pure, and
separated from all impurity, thick in the consistence of honey, or of gum,
deeply colored and very unctuous, greatly available, both for Medicine of
many body, as also of Metals. But this Medicine of ours, has his preparation
only pertinent to the use of man. Nevertheless seeing that, both that Medicine
of Raymund Lully, and this of mine, have all the virtue incident unto them
derived from gold, and from the form thereof, as from one fountain and
foundation; therefore it will not be impertinent, to prescribe the same use and
manner of administering of this medicine of mine, which Raymund does unto his.
For if the agent cause be one in them both, the manner of use may also be the
same. He prescribes a special use in these words. Mix this Essence of gold
in a quantity of white wine, when you will give it to a Phlegmatic
constitution, especially in the Winter season. If to a Choleric, give it in
fair water: to a Melancholic, in broth, wherein mutton is decocted: If he be
of a Sanguine complexion, in clear white wine: And this shall be a prevention
against infirmities, and their bodies shall be rectified against the distemper
of the season. If you give this medicine to those that are sick, let the
mixture be more effectual of the Medicine. Neither be thou greatly troubled
(says he) to know the perfect state of the disease. For nature it self is
wise and provident by her own instinct, and has invested to this stone being
dissolved, sufficient virtues, to rectify that which is amiss in nature. My
son, this medicine is powerful, both against hot diseases, and cold,
natural, and accidentiall, etc. These words and other hereunto tending Raymund
sets down, which we out of our experience have found to be answerable to
this our intent. Nevertheless we acknowledge, that sometimes extraordinary
symptoms do occur, which threaten present danger of death, if they be not
speedily prevented: As is, extreme heat, extremity of cold, great thirst,
lack of sleep, inordinate fluxes, and such like. All which by the good
pleasure of God, are mitigated and assuaged by this only Medicine of mine. And
yet many things may be appropriately added hereunto, and pertine^t for the
expulsing of every Disease. Therefore, if the patie^t have a repleate body, that
necessity require some euacuation to be made; gentle, and not violent purges,
fitting the humor offending, are to be administered. Sometime the body has
need by urine or sweat to be relieved: which both, although this Aurum
Potabile do in sort perform yet in some cases it is to be helped. If a flux
be caused in the nether ventricle, unto which a Medicine received at the mouth
cannot speedily penetrate, then a clensing, and astringent Glister will be
expedient. If sleep be wanting, that necessarily must be regarded. And
although this Medicine does for the most part by a secret propriety therein
procure sleep, yet if need be, let other helps be adjoined. Blood letting in
convenient time must not be neglected. Other things pertinent, I refer to the
discretion of them, whom it shall concern.

THE CONCLUSION OF THIS TREATISE.
Having thus, ingenuously, plainly, and fully (as I hope) satisfied all
indifferent and vnpartiable Readers, of the cause of this discourse, concerning
the general and extraordinary effects of this Medicine: and of the three
kinds thereof: of my use in administration thereof, in all Diseases, sexes,
ages and circumstances: together with the liberty and cautions in further
extent, and mixture with other Medicines: I now return in the Conclusion, unto
such Readers, to whom I have and ever shall, deuote, consecrate and dedicate
all my studies, labors and industry, commending unto you the right
construction, and generous acceptance, without any sinister detortion, of my
good and unspotted intendements, not retorted against my traducers, with any
malicious virulence, but extorted by mere compulsion, for the necessary
challenge, and defense of my good name, oppugned by two Doctors, though never
expugnable by them, nor the laudatorie versifiers, chaunting pro forma absque
materia. Let them enjoy the glory of their Eloquence, or rather loquence, with
ill applied Phrases. I desire none other contentment in this question, then the
public testimony of a constant truth. Truth will surely live, prevail,
flourish. It is like the gentle and sweet Marierome, manifoldly excellent for
many virtues. Which but rubbed in the hand, yields an excellent sent,
comfortable to all senses. Of which herb it is written, that if swine be
enforced, with full sent of open nostrels to take the smell, it is mortal to
them, and causes them to die. Surely this is a secret in Nature, that a thing
so good in it self, and so agreeably helpefull to good men, should by the
malice, or brutishness of a Swinish nature be accounted poison. This is a true
Emblem of my Medicine, which being helpful to all, hurtful to none, yet
there are found such, as profess hatred to the very name thereof: and so turn
that general preservative, to their private poison of rancor. But herein that
common rule of Philosophy, is not unfitly analogised upon them: Nutriens
conuertitur in naturam nutriti, et non contra. The nourishment is converted
into the nature of the body nourished, but not contrarily. So likewise the
envious man, whatsoever he beholds with his malicious Eye, though
extraordinary good of it self, yet he conuerteth it to his own perverse
disposition, which is evil. As may well appear in the Be, and the Spyder,
this sucking poison, and the other honey out of the self same flower. Let all
these things be considered, by the indifferent and Judicious Reader, and with
equal balance let him peise truth with falsehood, sincerity with deceit, not
inclining either to hatred or adulation, but with free mind and integrity of
conscience, let sentence be pronounced. Among good men there ought to be good
dealing. It may peradventure be that some doubts may be moved, or cauilling
allegations against the tract of this Treatise in some point or other, but
surely such as will be utterly unprofitable to the sick patient, who is to be
relieved by healthful Medicine, and not by subtilitie of Argument. Wherefore
if I should endeavor to answer every frivolous and idle objection, I should
both abuse the Reader, and think mine own time evil spent. Some few things I
desire to admonish the Reader: First, favorably to construe and interpet the
intent of these my proceedings, and not rashly, upon any man's words or
writings, to condemn the verity of this matter now in question. Also, if any
thing in this Treatise be contained, which seems not answerable unto every
man's capacity or judgment, that such person would be pleased, first, to
admonish me thereof by private letters, or otherwise, that I may in those
doubts yield him satisfaction, before he do publicly oppugn the truth.
Furthermore, if these things to some, seem of small moment, I humbly entreat
them, to produce better in place for the use of the languishing patient
(provided always that it be no less approved by time and experience) and in
the mean time, whilst we live in expectation thereof, let the Commonwealth
receive benefit by this, without their let or prejudice.

AN APPENDIX RESERVED FOR THE JUDICIOUS READER.
IT is generally well known, that Matthew Gwinne, in the Preface of that his
Invectiue book against me, did, in most instant manner, solicit the Kings
Majesty, for the suppression of this Medicine my Potable gold. His
Inducements, and motives were in these words. Tolluntur vna Medici, etc. The
Physicians of this City, the Chyrurgians, and the Apothecaries will all decay,
and in manner be subverted; if this one universal Medicine of Anthony do
prevail. He enforces the same as yet further: Let your Majesty establish
this, least the Archytectonicall order of the Physicians, (for I do produce
his own words) the Polychrest all order of the Chyrurgians: the honest,
learned, and wealthy order of the London Apothecaries, be either confused, or
utterly confounded, by the Intrusion of those who prepare Medicines Chymically.
How unjust this petition is, and how prejudicial unto verity it self, and
unto true Art (whereof the Apothecaries have but a shadow) who sees not? If
God has granted unto this our age, an extraordinary blessing, more serviceable
for the health of man, and much more available then all other Medicaments
hitherto retained in common use, ought it to be exploded by the practitioners
in Physic, or to be rejected of the patient in his utter distress, because
the like lucre and gain does not to them aforesaid redound, as by other
drugges ordinarily prescribed? Was that elect Vessel (mentioned in holy writ)
justly scourged and utterly silenced, because by his words and admonition, the
handicraftsmen, employed about that idol of Diana, were likely to lose some
part of their usual lucre and gain? (I hope it is not unlawful in this case,
to compare profane with sacred actions.) Nay rather contrariwise. If this
universal Medicine, shall approve it self by daily experience to be
universally effectual, then being retained in use, both Physicians,
Chyrurgions, and Apothecaries, will the rather be accepted of, and the more
reverenced: Neither will that threefold order, be either confused, or
confounded herewith but rather confirmed, and better settled in general
account. For if these three, when they shall be called to the sick patient,
would at their entrance (as the ancient Ethnic Senators used to do, when they
entered the Senate house for consultations of the Weal public) shake off
aemulation, Envy, and overmuch desire of filthy lucre: then the Physician
should find in this Medicine, such help in desperate Diseases, as both he and
his languishing patient should rejoice at the fruits thereof. The Chyrurgians
likewise, in some case of theirs, as in Faintings, Swoundings, Convulsions,
Crampes, and where sleep and rest are wanting, whereby great feebleness and
deiection of Spirits do ensue should then make perfect experience and trial,
of what validity this Medicine is. Then also the Apothecarie should lose no
part of his honesty, of his learning, nor of his substance and riches, having
by him this Medicine, as a last refuge for the relief of his forlorn patient.
The Apothecarie is careful, to have in every corner of his shop, diverse and
sundry contemptible drugges, loathsome to most men, now in this age of ours.
My desire is not to detract any thing from them in their gain or skill, but
rather to add thereunto, and the behalf of the Common wealth, unto whom I do
here dedicate, consecrate and offer, all these my labors; and whatsoever else
is in my power.

FINIS.

