THE PLAIN MAN'S Pathway to Heaven: Wherein every man may clearly see,
whether he shall be saved or damned.

Set forth Dialogue-wise, for the better understanding of the simple: By ARTHVR
DENT, Preacher of the word of God at South-Shoobery in Essex.

The ninth Impression.

Corrected and amended: with a Table of all the principal matters; and three
Prayers necessary to be used in private families hereunto added.

ZEPH. 3. 5. Every morning the Lord brings his judgment to light, he fails
not: but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed.

LONDON Printed for EDW. BISHOP, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1607.

THE CONTENTS of this Dialogue.
FIrst, it shows man's misery in nature, with the means of recovery.
Secondly, it sharply inueigheth against the iniquity of the time, and common
corruption of the world. Thirdly, it shows the marks of the children of God,
and of the Reprobates, with the apparent signs of salvation and damnation.
Fourthly, it declares how hard a thing it is to enter into life: and how few
shall enter. Fifthly, it lays open the ignorance of the world, with the
objections of the same. Last of all, it publishes and proclaims the sweet
promises of the Gospel, with the abundant mercies of God, to all that repent,
believe and truly turn unto him.
To the right Worshipful Sir JULIUS CAESAR Knight, one of the Masters of the
Requests to the Kings Majesty, Judge of the high Court of Admiraltie, and
Master of S. Catherines: A. D. wishes all good things in Christ Jesus.
Having finished (Right worshipful) and made ready for the Press this little
Dialogue: I bethought me (since the common manner of all, that write any books
in this age, is to dedicat the same to one or to other of great place) to whom
I might dedicate these my poor labors. At last I did resolve with my self,
none to be more fit then your worship: both in regard of some affinity in the
flesh, as also because of those manifold good parts, wherewith the Almighty
has endued you. Having therefore none other thing to present your worship
withal (in token of a thankful heart for your courtesies showed toward me)
behold, I do here send unto you this third fruit of my labors now
published. Most humbly beseeching you to take it in good worth: not weighing
the value of the thing, which is of no value, but the simple and good mind and
meaning of the giver. This work does sharply reprove and euict the world of
sin, and therefore is like to find many deadly enemies, which with cruel
hatred will most eagerly pursue it unto death. Zoilus also and his fellows, I
know, will bitterly carpe at it. Therefore it flies unto your Worship for
protection, and humbly desires to take Sanctuary under your wings. Wherefore I
humbly entreat you to take upon you the patronage and defense of it: that by
your means it may be delivered both from the calumnious obloquies of evil
disposed persons, and also from the worlds malignity; so as it may take no
injury. And concerning this little volume, the sum of the matter of it, you
shall find in the Epistle to the Reader. As concerning the manner, here is no
great matter in learning, wit, art, eloquence, or ingenious invention: (for I
have herein specially respected the ignorant and vulgar sort, whose
edification I do chiefly aim at) yet somewhat there is, which may concern
the learned, and give them some contentment. Whatsoever it be, I leave it with
your Worship, beseeching you to give it entertainment. And so I do most
humbly take my leave: commending both your self, your good wife, and your
whole family to the merciful protection of the everliving God. From
South-Shoobery in Essex. April. 10. Anno Dom. 1601.

Your Worships to command in the Lord, ARTHVR DENT.

THE EPISTLE TO the Reader.
GEntle Reader, seeing my little Sermon of Repentance, some few years since
published, has been so well accepted of: I have, for thy further good
published this Dialogue, being the third fruit of my labor: wishing to it the
like success, that God thereby may have the glory, and thou who art the Reader
comfort. I have, in one part of this Dialogue, produced some of the ancient
writers, and some of the wise Heathen also, to testify upon their oath in
their own language, and to bear witness of the ugliness of some vices,
which we in this age make light of: which I wish may not be offensive to any.
In other parts of this work, I do in a manner relinquish them. But in this
case I have in my weak judgment, thought them to be of some good use, to show
forth thus much: that if we do not in time repent, forsake our sins, and
seek after God, both the ancient Christian fathers (whose eyes saw not that
we see, nor their ears heard that we hear) yea the very Heathen also shall
rise up in judgment against us. Let none therefore stumble at it. But if any
do, let them remember I am in a Dialogue, not in a Sermon. I write to all of
all sorts: I speak not to some few of one sort. But that which is done herein,
is not much more then that of the Apostle ( As some of your own Poets have
said, Act. 17.) which is warrantable. One thing, dear Christian, I pray thee
let me beg of thee; to wit, that thou would not read two or three leaves of
this Book, and so cast it from thee: but that thou would read it
throughout even to the end. For I do assure thee, if there be any thing in it
worth the reading, it is bestowed in the latter part thereof, and most of all
toward the conclusion. Be not discouraged therefore at the harshnesse of the
beginning: but look for smoother matter in the midst, and most smooth in the
perclose and wind-vp of all. For this Dialogue has in it, not the nature of a
Tragedy, which is begun with joy, and ended with sorrow: but of a Comedy,
which is begun with sorrow, and ended with joy. This book medleth not at all
with any controuerfies in the Church, or any thing in the state
Ecclesiastical, but only enters into a controversy with Satan and sin.
It is contrived into six principal heads. First, it shows man's misery in
nature, with the means of recovery. Secondly, it sharply inueigheth against
the iniquity of the time, and common corruptions of the world. Thirdly, it
shows the marks of the children of God, and of the Reprobates; together with
the apparent signs of salvation and damnation. Fourthly, it declares how hard
a thing it is to enter into life: and how few shall enter. Fifthly, it lays
open the ignorance of the world, with the objections of the same. Last of all,
it publishes and proclaims the sweet promises of the Gospel, with the
abundant mercy of God, to all that repent, believe, and truly turn unto him.
The Author of all blessing give a blessing unto it. The God of peace, which
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great sheepeheard of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make us perfect in all
good works, sanctify us throughout, amend all our imperfections, and keep us
blameless until the day of his most glorious appearing, Amen.

Thine in the Lord, A. D.

The plain man's pathway to Heaven.
Interlocutors:
Theologus, a Divine. Philagathus, an honest man. Asunetus, an ignorant man.
Antilegon, a cauiller.
Philagathus. WEll met, good Master Theologus.


Theol. What mine old friend, Philagathus! I am glad to see you in good health.


Phila. Are you walking, Sir, here all alone in this pleasant meadow?


Theol. Yea: for I take some pleasure at this time of the year to walk abroad
in the fields for my recreation, both to take the fresh air, and to hear the
sweet singing of birds.


Phila. Indeed, Sir, it is very comfortable, especially now in this pleasant
month of May: and thanks be to God, hitherto we have had a very forward
spring, and as kindly a season as came this seven years.


Theo. God does abound toward us in mercies: oh that we could abound toward
him in thanksgiving.


Phil. I pray you sir, what a clock hold you it?


Theol. I take it to be a little past one: for I came but even now from dinner.


Phila. But behold, yonder comes two men toward us: What be they I pray you?


Theolog. They be a couple of neighbors of the next Parish: the one of them is
called Asunetus, who in very deed is a very ignorant man in Gods matters: and
the other is called Antilegon, a notable Atheist, and cauiller against all
goodness.


Phila. If they be such, it were good for us to take some occasion to speak of
matters of religion; it may be we shall do them some good.


Theol. You have made a good motion: I like it well. If therefore you will
minister some matter, and move some questions, I will be ready to answer in
the best sort I can.


Phi. But stay sir, lo here they come upon us.


Theol. Welcome neighbors, welcome. How do you Asunetus, and you Antilegon?


Asune. Well, God be thanked; and we are glad to see your mastership in good
health.


Theol. What make both of you here at this time of the day? There is some
occasion I am sure draws you this way.


Asune. Indeed sir, we have some little business; for we came to talk with one
of your parish, about a Cow we should buy of him.


Theol. Has my neighbor a Cow to sell?


Antilegon. We are told he has a very good one to sell; but I am afraid at
this time of the year, we shall find dear ware of her.


Theol. How dear? What do you think a very good Cow may be worth?


Antile. A good Cow indeed, at this time of the year, is worth very nere four
pound, which is a great price.


Theol. It is a very great price indeed.


Phila. I pray you M. Theologus, leave off this talking of kine, and worldly
matters; and let us enter into some speech of matters of religion, whereby we
may do good, and take good one of another.


Theol. You say well: but it may be these men's business requires haste, so as
they can not stay.


Asune. No sir, we are in no great haste, we can stay two or three hours, for
the days are long; if we dispatch our business by night it will serve our
turn well enough.


Theol. Then if it will please you to walk to yonder Oak tree, there is a
goodly Arbor, and handsome seats, where we may all sit in the shadow, and
confer of heavenly matters.


Asune. With a good will Sir.


Phila. Come then let us go.


Asune. This is a goodly Arbor indeed, and here be handsome seats.


Theol. Sit you all down, I pray you. Now friend Philagathus, if you have any
questions to move of matters of Religion, we are all ready to hear you.


Phila. It may be these men are somewhat ignorant of the very principles of
Religion; and therefore I think it not amiss to begin there, and so to make
way for further metters.


Theol. I pray you do so then.


Phila. First, then I demand of you, in what state all men are borne by nature?


Theol. In the state of condemnation, as appears, Ephe. 2. 3. We are by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. And again it is written:
Behold I was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 52. 5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me.


Phila. Is it every man's case? Are not Dukes and Nobles, Lords and Ladies, and
the great Potentates of the earth exempted from it?


Theol. No surely, it is the common case of all, both high and low, rich and
poor, as it is written: What is man that he should be Job 15. 14*
clean, and he that is borne of a woman, that he should be just?


Philaga. From whence comes it, that all men are borne in so woeful a case?


Theol. From the fall of Adam, who thereby has not only wrapped himself, but
all his posterity, in extreme and unspeakable misery; as the Apostle says:
By one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: and by the offense of one,
the fault came on all men to condemnation.


Phi. What reason is there that we all should thus be punished for an other
man's offense?


Theol. Because we were then all in him, and are now all of him: that is, we
are so descended out of his loins, that of him we have not only received our
natural and corrupt bodies, but also by propagation have inherited his foul
corruptions, as it were by hereditary right.


Phila. But forasmuch as some have dreamed that Adam by his fall hurt himself
only, and not his posterity; and that we have his corruption derived unto us by
imitation, and not by propagation: therefore I pray you show this more plainly.


Theol. Even as great personages, by committing of treason, do not only hurt
themselves, but also stain their blood, and disgrace their posterity: for the
children of such Nobles are disinherited, whose blood is attainted; till they
be restored again by act of Parliament. Even so our blood being attainted by
Adams transgression, we can inherit nothing of right, till we be restored by
Christ.


Philaga. Does this hereditarie infection, and contagion, ouer-spread our
whole nature?


Theol. Yes truly, it is universal, extending Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 1. 21. Col.
2. 13.
it self thorowout the whole man, both soul, and body, both reason,
understanding, will and affections: for the Scriptures avouch, that we are
dead in sins and trespasses.


Phila. How understand you that?


Theol. Not of the deadness of the body, or the natural faculties of the
soul, but of the spiritual faculties.


Phila. Did Adam then lose his nature and destroy it by his fall? or is our
nature taken away by his fall?


Theol. Not so. Our nature was corrupted thereby, but not destroyed: for still
there remains in our nature, reason, understanding, will, and affections, and
we are not as a block, or a stock; but by Adams disobedience we are
blemished, maimed, and spoiled of all ability to understand aright, or to will
and do aright. As it is written: We are not sufficient of our selves, to
think any thing as of our 2. Cor. 3. 5.
selves: but our sufficiency is of God. And again: It is God which works in
you both Phil. 2. 13.
the will and the deed; even of his good pleasure. And as concerning the other
point, S. James says: That all men are made after the Iam. 3. 9.
similitude of God; meaning thereby that there remain some relics and parts
of Gods Image, even in the most wicked men: as reason, understanding, etc. so
that our nature was not wholly destroyed.


Phila. Then you think there be some sparks and remnants left in us still of
that excellent Image of God, which was in our first creation.


Theol. I think so indeed: and it may plainly appear unto us in the wise
speeches and writings of Heathen Poets and Philosophers: in all which we may,
as by certain ruins, perceive what was the excellent frame and building of
man's creation.


Phil. Can a man please God in any thing which he does, so long as he
continues in the state of nature?


Theol. No, not in any thing: for till we be in the state of grace, even our
best actions are sinful: as preaching, prayer, alms deeds, etc. As it is
written: Who can bring a clean thing Job 14. 4.
out of that which is unclean. Job. 14. 4. The Apostle also says: They which
are in the flesh Romans 8. 8
cannot please God: that is, such as are still in their natural corruption.
And our Lord Jesus himself says: Do men gather Grapes of Mat. 7. 16.
thorns, or Figs of thistles? Meaning thereby, that mere natural men can
bring forth no fruits acceptable to God.


Phila. This is a very harsh and hard saying; I pray you for my further
instruction, make it more plain.


Theol. Men in the state of nature may do those things which of themselves are
good, but they do utterly fail in the manner of doing them: they do them not
as they should be done: that is, in faith, love, zeal, conscience of
obedience, etc. neither yet with any cheerfulness, delight or feeling, but
even as it were, forcing themselves to do the outward actions. Thus did Cain
sacrifice; the Pharisees pray; Ananias and Sapphira give alms; and the Jews
offer up their oblations and burnt offerings.


Phila. Have men any true sight, or lively and sound feeling of this misery and
woeful estate, so long as they be merely natural?


Theol. No surely, but are altogether blinded and hardened in it, being nothing
desirous to come out of it, but do greatly please themselves in it, and can
hardly be persuaded that they are in any such woeful case; as appears
plainly in the example of that ruler, who being commanded or rather required
of our Savior Christ to keep the commandments, answered: All these have I
kept from my youth. And again, Luke. 18. 21.
although the Church of Laodicea was wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and
naked; yet she thought her self rich, increased with goods, and wanting
nothing. It follows then, that so long as men are in the state of nature,
they have no true sight and feeling of their misery.


Phila. Do you not think that all men being merely natural, are under the
curse of the Law?


Theol. Yea certainly: and not only so, but also under the very tyranny and
dominion of Satan, though they know it not, see it not, feel it not, or
perceive it not: for all that are not in Christ, are under the curse of the
law, and the power of darkness and the devil, as appears, Ephesians. 2. 2. where
the devil is called the prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience. In another 2. Cor. 4. 4. 2. Tim.
2. 26.
place, he is called the god of this world, who blinds the eyes of all
unbelievers. And again, it is said; that all men naturally are in his snare
being taken captive of him at his will.


Phila. Few will be persuaded of that; they will say, they defy the devil,
and thank God they were never troubled with him.


Theol. Their hot words do nothing amend the matter: for the devil is no more
driven away with words, then with holy water; but he sits in the tongues and
mouths: nay possesses the very hearts and intrals of thousands which say they
defy him, and are not troubled with him, as appears manifestly by their
particular acttions, and the whole course of their life.


Phila. Me thinks, if the devil do so inwardly possesle the hearts and
consciences of men, they should have some sight and feeling of it.


Theol. The working of the Devil in men's souls (being an invisible spirit) is
with such inconceivable slight and crafty conueiance, that men in the estate
of nature cannot possibly feel it, or perceive it: for how can a blind man
see, or a dead man feel?


Phila. Show this more plainly.


Theol. Even as a crafty Juggler does so prestigiate and blind men's outward
senses by the delusions of Satan, that they think they see that which they
see not, and feel that which they feel not: Even so the devil does so delude
and bewitch our inward senses, and the natural faculties of our souls, that
we having a mist cast before our eyes, think we are that which we are not,
see that which we see not, and feel that which we feel not. For the deep
cunning of Satan lies in this; that he can give us our deaths wound, and we
shall never know who hurt us.


Phila. Few will believe this to be true.


Theol. True indeed: for few will believe the Scriptures: few will believe
this, because few feel it: where it is not felt, it can hardly be believed:
only the elect do feel it, and therefore only the elect do believe it. As for
all others, they are the very prentises and bond-slaues of the devil, which is
a thousand times worse then to be a galley-slaue.


Phil. How long do men continue in this woeful state of nature, being under the
curse of the law, and the very slavery of Satan and sin?


Theol. Till they be regenerate and borne again, and so brought into the state
of grace: as our Lord Jesus says: Except a man be borne John 3 3.
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.


Phila. Do not many die and depart this life, before they be borne again, and
consequently before they be brought into the state of grace?


Theol. Yes no doubt, thousands: for many live forty or threescore years in
this world, and in the end die, and go out of this life, before they know
wherefore they came into it: as it is written: My people perish for want of
knowledge.


Phila. What may we think of such?


Theol. I quake to speak what I think: for surely I do not see how such can
be saved. I speak not now of infants and children, whereof some no doubt are
saved by virtue of the promise and covenant, through the election of grace.


Phil. It seems then that you think none can be saved, but those only which
are borne again.


Theol. I think so indeed.


Phil. I pray you tell me what that same regeneration and new birth is, whereof
you speak.


Theol. It is a renewing and repairing of the corrupted and decayed estate of
our souls. As Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 13.
it is written: Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind. And again: Be
renewed in the spirit of your mind.


Phila. Explain this more fully.


Theol. Even as the wild Olive retains his old nature, till it be grafted
into the sweet Olive, but afterward is partaker of a new nature: so we til we
be grafted into Christ, retain our old nature, but afterward are turned into a
new nature, as it is written: If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. 2.
Cor. 5. 17.



Phila. I understand not what you say.


Theol. You must know this, that as there is a natural birth of the whole man;
so there is also a spiritual birth of the whole man.


Phila. How is that?


Theol. When as the natural faculties of the soul, as reason, understanding,
will and affections, and the members of the body also, are so sanctified,
purged and rectified by grace, that we understand, will, and desire that which
is good.


Phila. Can not a man will and desire that which is good, before he be borne
again?


Theol. No more then a dead man can desire the good things of this life. For
man's will is not free to consent unto good, till it be enlarged by grace: and
an unregenerate man does sin necessarily, though not by constraint. For man's
will is free from constraint (for it sins of it self) but not from
thrasdome unto sin.


Phila. You speak, as if a man could do no other thing but sin, till the new
work be wrought in him.


Theol. That is mine opinion indeed: for a man and his flesh are all one, til
he be regenerate; they agree together like man and wife, they join together in
all evil, they live and die together: for when the flesh perishes, the man
perishes.


Phila. Is not this regeneration a changing or rather a destroying of humane
nature?


Theol. Nothing less: It is neither an abolishing, nor changing of the
substance of body or soul, or any of the faculties thereof: but only a
rectifying and repairing of them by remoouing the corruption.


Phila. Is then our natural corruption so purged and quite removed by the
power of grace, as that it remains not at all in us, but that we are wholly
freed of it?


Theol. Not so. For the relics and remnants of our old nature, which the
Scripture calls the old man, do hang about us, and dwell in us, even until
our dying day: as it is plainly proved in the ten last verses of the seventh
to the Romans.


Phila. Then you affirm that this new man or new work of grace and
regeneration, is imperfect in this life.


Theol. Yea. For the new creature, or new work of grace, can never be fully
fashioned in this life: but is always in fashioning. And as our faith and
knowledge in this life are imperfect: so is our regeneration, and
sanctification.


Phila. You said before that the regeneration or new birth is of the whole man;
which speech seems to imply, that the new work of grace is entire and
perfect.


Theol. You mistake the matter. For although the new birth is universal, and
of the whole man, yet it is not entire, perfect, pure and without mixture of
corruption. For it is written: The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
Gal. 5. 17.
spirit against the flesh. The Apostle also prays, that the Thessalonians may
be sanctified thorowout, in spirit, soul, and body.


Phila. This seems very obscure, I pray you make it more plain.


Theol. You must note this, that the new work and the old, flesh and spirit,
grace and corruption, are so intermingledly joined together in all the
faculties of the soul and body, as that the one does ever fight against the
other.


Phila. But tell me, I pray you, how you understand this intermingling of grace
and corruption in the soul? Do you mean that grace is placed in one part of
the soul, and corruption in another, so as they be sundred in place?


Theol. No, that is not my meaning: but this, that they be joined and mingled
together (as I said) in and thorowout the whole man. For the mind, or
understanding part, is not one part flesh, and another part spirit: but the
whole mind is flesh, and the whole mind is spirit, partly one, and partly
another. The same is to be said of the will and affection.


Phila. I pray you express it more plainly.


Theol. Even as the air in the dawning of the day, is not wholly light, or
wholly dark, as at midnight, or at noone day; neither is it in one part
light, in another part dark: but the whole air is partly light, and partly
dark thorowout: and as in a vessel of lukewarm water, the water it self is
not only hot, nor only cold, but heat and cold are mixed together in every
part of the water: so is the flesh and the spirit mingled together in the soul
of man. And this is the cause why these two contrary qualities fight together.


Phila. Out of doubt this doctrine of regeneration is a very great mystery.


Theol. Yes certainly: it is a secret of secrets, which the wise of this world
cannot comprehend.


Phila. Some think that courtesy, kindness, good nurture, good nature, and
good education, are regeneration, and that courteous and good natured men must
needs be saved.


Theol. They are greatly deceived; for these things do not necessarily
accompany salvation, but are to be found in such as are altogether profane
and irreligious: yet we are to love such good outward qualities, and the men
in whom we find them.


Phila. What say you then to learning, wit, and policy; are not these things
of the essence of religion, and prove a regeneration?


Theol. No, no: for they be external gifts, which may be in the most wicked
men, as in Papists, Heathen Poets, and Philosophers: yet we are greatly to
reverence learned and wise men, although the new and inward work be not as yet
wrought: for that is only of God, that is from above.


Phila. The common people do attribute much to learning and policy: for they
will say, such a man is learned and wise, and knows the Scripture as well as
any of them all, and yet he does not thus and thus.


Theol. It is one thing to know the History and Letter of the Scriptures, and
another thing to believe and feel the power thereof in the heart, which is
only from the sanctifying spirit, which none of the wise of this world can
have.


Phila. It is a common opinion, that if a man hold the truth in judgment, be
no Papist, or heretic, but leads an honest civil life, then he must of
necessity be saved.


Theol. That follows not: for many come so far, which yet notwithstanding
have not the inward touch.


Phila. That seems strange. For many will say, As long as they be neither
whore nor thief, nor spotted with such like gross sins, they trust in God
they shall be saved.


Theol. They err not knowing the scriptures. For many thousands are in great
danger of losing their souls for ever, which are free from such notorious and
horrible vices may many which in the world are counted good honest men, good
true dealers, good neighbors, and good Townes-men.


Asune. I pray you Sir, give me leave a little. I have heard all your speech
hitherto, and I like reasonably well of it: but now I can forbear no longer,
my conscience urges me to speak. For me thinks you go too far, you go
beyond your learning in this, that you condemn good neighbors, and good
townsmen. You say, many such men are in danger of losing their souls: but I
will never believe it while I live. For if such men be not saved, I cannot tell
who shall.


Theol. But you must learn to know out of the Scriptures that all outward
honesty and righteousness, without the true knowledge and inward feeling of God,
avails not to eternal life. As our Savior Christ says: Except your Math. 5.
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. It is also written that Acts 17. 12.
when Paul preached at Berea, many honest men and honest women did believe: that
is, such as were outwardly honest, or honest to the world only; for they could
not be truly and inwardly honest, before they did believe. Therefore you see
that this outward honesty and ciuility, without the inward regeneration of the
spirit, avails not to eternal life; and then consequently, all your honest
worldly men are in great danger of losing their souls for ever.


Asune. What sound reason can you yield, why such honest men should be
condemned?


Theol. Because many such are utterly void of all true knowledge of God, and of
his word. Nay which is more: many of them despise the word of God, and hate all
the zealous professors of it. They esteem preachers but as pratlers; and
Sermons as good tales; they esteem a Preacher, no more than a shoemaker: they
regard the Scriptures, no more then their old shoes. What hope is there then,
I pray you, that such men should be saved? Does not the holy Ghost say: How
shall we escape if we Heb. 2. 3.
neglect so great salvation?


Asune. You go too far, you judge too hardly of them.


Theol. Not a whit. For all experience shows, that they mind, dream, and
dote of nothing else day and night, but this world, this world, lands and
leases, grounds and livings, kine, and sheep, and how to way rich. All their
thoughts, words, and works, are of these and such like things. All their
actions do most manifestly declare, that they are of the earth, and speak of
the earth: and that there is nothing in the^, but earth, earth. As for sermons,
they care not how few they hear. And for the scriptures they regard them not,
they read them not, they esteem them not worth the while: there is nothing
more irksome unto them; they had rather pill strawes, or do any thing, then
hear, read, or confer of the Scriptures. And as the Prophet says; The word
of the Lord is as a reproach Ier. 6. 10.
unto them, that have no delight in it.


Phila. I marvel much, that such men should live so honestly to the world-ward.


Theol. No marvel at all; for many bad men whose hearts are worm-eaten within,
yet for some outward and carnal respects, do abstain from the gross act of
sin; as some for credit, some for shame, some for fear of Law, some for
fear of punishment; but none for love of God, for zeal, or conscience of
obedience. For it is a sure thing, that the wicked may have that spirit which
does repress; but not that which does renew.


Phil. It seems then by your speeches, that some which are not regenerate, do
in some things excel the children of God.


Theol. Most certain it is, that some of them in outward gifts, and the
outward carriage of themselves, do go beyond some of the elect.


Phil. Show me I pray you in what gifts.


Theol. In learning, discretion, justice, temperance, prudence, patience,
liberality, affability, kindness, courtesy, good nature, and such like.


Phila. Me thinks it should not be possible.


Theol. Yes truly. For some of Gods dear children, in whom no doubt the
inward work is truly and soundly wrought; yet are so troubled and encombred
with a crabbed and crooked nature, and so clogged with some master sin; as some
with anger, some with pride, some with covetousness, some with lusts, some one
way, and some another: all which breaking out in them, do so blemish them and
their profession, that they cannot so shine forth unto men, as otherwise no
doubt they would; and this is their wound, their grief, and their hart-smart,
and that which costeth them many a teere, and many a prayer: and yet can they
not get the full victory over them, but still they are left in them, as the
prick in the flesh to humble them.


Phila. Yet love should cover a multitude of such infirmities in Gods children.


Theol. It should do so indeed: but there is great want of love, even in the
best: and the worser sort espying these infirmities in the godly, run upon
them with open mouth and take upon them to condemn them utterly, and to judge
their hearts, saying; they be hypocrites, dissemblers, and there is none worse
then they.


Phila. But do you not think that there be some counterfeits, even amongst
the greatest professors?


Theol. Yes, no doubt, there be, and always have been some very hypocrites in
the Church: but we must take heed of judging and condemning all, for some. For
it were very much to condemn Christ and his eleven Disciples, because of one
Judas; or the whole Primitive Church, for Ananias and Sapphira.


Phila. But I hope you are of this mind, that some regenerate men even in
outward gifts, and their outward carriage, are comparable with any others.


Theol. Questionless, very many. For they being guided by Gods spirit, and
vpheld by his grace, do walk very uprightly and unblameably toward men.


Phil. Yet there rests one scruple: for it seems very strange unto me,
that men of so discreet carriage as you speak of, and of so many good parts,
should not be saved. It is great pity such men should be damned.


Theol. It seems so unto us indeed: but God is only wise, and you must note,
that as there be some infirmities in Gods children, which he corrects with
temporal chastisements; and yet rewards their faith, love, and inward
service and obedience, with eternal life: so there be some good things in the
wicked, and them that are without Christ, which God rewards with temporal
blessings; and yet punishes them eternally for their unbelief and hardness
of heart.


Phila. Now you have reasonably well satisfied me touching the doctrine of
regeneration, and the manifold errors and deceits that are in it, and of it. I
pray you let us now proceed: and first of all tell me, by what means the new
birth is wrought.


Theol. By the preaching of the word, as the 1. Pet. 1. 23. Ioh. 15. 3. Act.
10. 44. Ephesians. 4. 3.
outward means; and the secret work of the spirit, as the inward means.


Phila. Many hear the word preached, and are nothing the better, but rather
the worse: what I pray you is the cause of that?


Theol. Men's own incredulity, and hardness of heart: because God in his wrath
leaves them to themselves and depriueth them of his spirit, without the which,
all preaching is in vain. For except the spirit do follow the Act. 16. 14.
word into our hearts, we can find no joy, taste, nor comfort therein.


Phila. Cannot a man attain unto regeneration and the new birth without the
word and the spirit?


Theol. No verily: for they are the instruments and means, whereby God does
work it.


Asune. Why may not a man have as good a faith to Godward, that hears no
Sermons, as he that hears all the Sermons in the world?


Theol. Why may not he, which eats no meat, be as fat and as well liking, as
he that eats all the meat in the world? For is not the preaching of the word,
the food of our souls?


Asune. I like not so much hearing of Sermons, and reading of the Scriptures,
except men could keep them better.


Theol. Faithful and honest hearers do therefore hear, that they may be more
able to observe and do. For a man cannot do the will of God before he know it:
and he cannot know it without hearing and reading.


Antile. I marvel what good men do get by gadding to Sermons, and poring so
much in the scriptures; or what are they better then others? there are none
more full of envy, and malice then they. They will do their neighbor a shrewd
turn as soon as any body; and therefore in mine opinion, they be but a
company of hypocrites, and precise fools.


Theol. You judge uncharitably. Full little do you know what they feel, or
what good Gods people get by hearing of his word. For the work of the Spirit
in the hearts of the elect is very secret, and altogether hid from the world,
as it is written: The wind blows John. 3. 8.
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell
whither it goes, or whence it comes; So is every man that is borne of the
spirit. And again: The things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God.


Asune. Tush, tush; what needs all this a do? If a man say his Lords prayer,
his Ten Commandments, and his Belief, and keep them, and say no body no
harm, nor do no body no harm, and do as he would be done to, have a good
faith to Godward, and be a man of Gods belief, no doubt he shall be saved,
without all this running to Sermons, and prattling of the Scripture.


Theol. Now you power it out indeed. you think you have spoken wisely. But
alas, you have bewraied your great ignorance. For you imagine, a man may be
saved, without the word: which is a gross error.


Asune. It is no matter: say you what you will, and all the Preachers in the
world besides: as long as Iserue God, and say my prayers duly, and truly,
morning and evening, and have a good faith in God, and put my whole trust in
him, and do my true intent, and have a good mind to Godward, and a good
meaning; although I am not learned, yet I hope it will serve the turn for my
souls health. For that God, which made me, must save me: It is not you that
can save me, for all your learning, and all your Scriptures.


Theol. You may very fitly be compared to a sick man, who having his brain
distempered with heat, raueth, and speaks idly, he cannot tell what. For
the holy Ghost says: He Pro. 28. 9.
that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. And again: he that despises the word, he shall be destroyed.
Pro. 13: 13
So long therefore as you despise Gods word, and turn away your ear from
hearing his Gospel preached, all your prayers, your fantastical soruing God,
your good meanings, and your good intents, are to no purpose; but most
loathsome and odious in the sight of God: as it is written: My soul hates
your new moons, and your appointed feasts, they are a burden unto me, I am
weary to bear them. When you stretch out your hands, I will hide Esa. 1. 14.
mine eyes from you: and though you make many prayers, I will not hear. For
your hands are full of blood. And again the Lord says by the same Prophet: He
that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a Isa.
66. 3.
sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he
offered swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol.
Where you see, the Lord tells you his mind touching these matters: to wit,
that all your prayers, services, good meanings, etc. are abominable unto him,
so long as you walk in ignorance, prophanenes, disobedience, and contempt of
the Gospel. For he says in the words immediately going before: To him will I
look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
words.


Asune. I grant indeed for them that are idle and have little to do, it is not
amisle now and then to hear a Sermon, and read the Scriptures: but we have no
leisure, we must follow our business, we cannot live by the scriptures: they
are not for plain folk, they are too high for us, we will not meddle with
them. They belong to Preachers and Ministers.


Theol. CHRIST says: My sheep hear my John 10.
voice, and I give unto them eternal life. If therefore you refuse to hear the
voice of Christ, you are none of his sheep, neither can you have eternal
life. And in another place, our Lord Jesus says: He that is of God, hears
Gods word. Ioh. 8. 47.
Ye therefore hear it not, because ye are not of God. S. Paul writing to all
sorts of men, both rich and poor, high and low, men and women, young and old,
exhorts, that the word of Christ may dwell plenteously in them all, in all
wisdom. Col. 3. 16.
You see therefore that the Apostle would have al sorts of people, that have
souls to save, to be well acquainted with the scriptures. Therefore you may as
well say, you will not meddle with God, with Christ, nor with everlasting life,
as to say, you will not meddle with the scriptures.


Asune. Well, I cannot read, and therefore I cannot tell, what Christ, or what
S. Paul may say: but this I am sure of, that God is a good man (worshipped
might he be) he is merciful, and that we must be saved by our good prayers,
and good serving of God.


Theol. You speak foolishly and ignorantly in all that you say: having no
ground for any thing you speak but your own fancy, and your own conceit: and
yet you will believe your own fancy against all Preachers, and against all
that can be spoken out of the Word. But I pray you give me leave a little. If
a man dream that he shall be a king, and in the morning when he is awake
persuades himself it shall be so, may he not be justly laughed at, as having
no ground for it? even so may all they which believe their own dreams and
fantasies touching salvation: But it is true which Solomon says: A fool
believes every thing: that Pro. 14. 15.
copper is gold, and a counter an angel. And assuredly great reason there is,
that he which will not believe God, should be given over to believe the devil,
his dream, and his fancy.


Asune. I pray you instruct me better then.


Theol. You had need indeed to be better instructed: for the devil has slily
deluded your soul, and cast a mist before your eyes, making you believe the
Crow is white, and that your estate is good before God, whereas indeed it is
most woeful and miserable.


Asune. Nay I defy the devil, with all my heart. But I pray you tell me how
it comes to pass that I am thus deceived.


Theol. This it is that deceives you, and many others: that you measure your
selves by your selves and by others: which is a false metwand. For you seem to
lie straight, so long as you are measured by your selves, and by others: but
lay the rule of Gods word unto you, and then you lie altogether crooked.


Asune. What other thing is there that deceives me?


Theol. An other thing that deceives you, is your own heart: for you know not
your own heart, but are altogether deceived therein. For Ier. 17. 9.
the heart is deceivable above all things. He is a wise man and greatly
enlightened that knows his own heart. But you are blind, and know not what is
within you: but dimly imagine you shall be saved, and hope you know not what of
eternal life. And because blindness makes you bold, you will seem to be
resolute in words, and say: it is pity he should live, which does any whit
doubt of his salvation. And assuredly you speak as you think, and as you know.
For ought that you know to the contrary, it seems so: though indeed, and in
truth, it is not so: for you are deluded with a false light. And sometimes, no
doubt, you have pricks, gripes, terrors, and inward accusations of conscience,
for all your bold and resolute speeches.


Asune. Truly I never heard so much before.


Theol. That is, because you shut your eyes, and stop your ears against God,
and all goodness. You are like the deaf Adder, which hears Psa. 58. 45.
not the voice of the Charmer, though he be most expert in charming.


Asune. Well then, if it be so, I would be glad now to learn, if you would
teach me. And as you have showed me the means whereby the new birth is
wrought: so now show me the certain signs and tokens thereof: whereby all
men may certainly know that they are sanctified, regenerate, and shall be saved.


Theol. There be eight infallible notes and Eight infallible signs of
salvation. John 3. 3. John 2. 5. ^s. 119. 114 ^s: 145. 18. To. 12. 11. Apo: 3.
19 Mat. 16. 24 Job 1. 28. Ephesians. 4. 21. Phil. 4. 8.
tokens of a regenerate mind, which may well be termed the eight signs of
salvation: and they are these: A love to the children of God. A delight in his
word. Often and fervent prayer. Zeal of Gods glory. Denial of our selves.
Patient bearing of the cross, with profit, and comfort. Faithfulness in our
calling. Honest, just, and conscionable dealing in all our actions amongst men.



Phila. Now that you have showed us the evident signs of man's salvation: show
us also the signs of condemnation.


Theol. The contraries unto these are manifest Eight signs of condemnation.
signs of damnation: No love to the childen of God. No delight in his word.
Seldom and cold prayers. Coldness in Gods matters. Trusting to our selves.
Impatience under the Cross. Unfaithfulness in our calling. Dishonest and
unconscionable dealing.



Phila. No doubt, if a man be infected with these, they be shrewd signs that a
man is extremely soule-sick, and in a very dangerous case. But are there not
yet more evident and apparent signs of condemnation then these?


Theol. Yes verily. There be nine very clear Nine manifest signs of damnation.
and manifest signs of a man's condemnation.


Phila. I pray you, let me hear what they be.


Theol. Pride. Whoredom. Covetousness. Contempt of the Gospel. Swearing.
Lying. Drunkenness. Idleness. Oppression.



Phila. These be gross things indeed.


Theol. They may not unfitly be termed the nine Beelzebubs of the world: and he
that has these signs upon him, is in a most woeful case.


Phila. What if a man be infected with some two or three of these?


Theol. Whosoever is infected with three of them, is in great danger of losing
his soul. For all these be deadly venom, and rank poison to the soul: and
either the three first, or the three last, or the middle three, are enough to
poison the soul, and sting it to death. Nay, to say the truth, a man were as
good gripe a toad, and handle a snake, as meddle with any one of these.


Phila. Is every one of them so dangerous?


Theol. Questionless. For they be the very Plague-sores of the soul. If any
man have a Plague Sore upon his body, we use to say Gods tokens are upon him,
Lord have mercy on him. So we may truly say, if any man be thoroughly and totally
infected at the heart with any one of these, Gods tokens are upon his soul,
Lord have mercy on him.


Phila. Many do not think these to be such dangerous matters as you make them,
and many there be which make light of them.


Theol. True indeed: For the most part of men are altogether shut up in
blindness, and hardness of heart, having neither sight nor feeling of their
sins; and therefore make light of them, thinking there is no such danger.


Phila. It is most certain, that men are given to lessen and extenuate their
sins; or else, to hide them, and dawbe them over with many cunning shifts, and
vain excuses. For men are ever ready to take covert, and will writhe and
wreath (like snakes) to hide their sins: yea, if it were possible, to make
sin no sin, to make virtue vice, and vice virtue. Therefore I pray you lay
open unto me out of the scriptures, the grieuousnesse, and ugliness of their
sins.


Theol. The stinking filthiness of these sins is so great and horrible, that no
tongue or pen of man is sufficient fully to manifest and lay open the same,
according to the proper nature and being thereof: yet notwithstanding, I will do
my endeavor to lay them open in some measure, that all men may the more loath
them.


Phila. I pray you then, first of all begin with Pride.


Theol. You say well: For that indeed may well stand in the forefront, since it
is a masterdiuell, and the master pocke of the soul.


Phila. Show me out of the Scriptures, that pride is so grievous and loathsome.


Theol. SOLOMON says: Every one that is Pro. 16. 5.
proud in heart, is abomination to the Lord. Which plainly shows, that God
does detest and abhor proud men. And is it not a fearful thing, think you,
to be abhorred of God? And in the same Chapter, verse. 18. he says: Pride goes
before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. Wherein he shows that
pride is the forerunner of some deadly downfall, either by disgracing or
displacing. For it is an old and true Proverb: Pride will have a fall. And
oftentimes when men are most lifted up, then are they nearest unto it: as the
examples of Haman, Nabuchadnezzar, and Herod, do plainly declare. When the
Milt swells, the rest of the body pineth away: Even so, when the heart is
puffed up with pride, the whole man is in danger of destruction. Moreover the
holy ghost says: The Lord will destroy the house of the proud. Pro. 15. 24 Job
11. 5 and 15. Job 20. 26.
Job says of such kind of men: The spark of his fire shall not shine: fear
shall dwell in his house, and Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
And in another place, he says; The fire, which is not blown, shall devour him.
Job 23. 13
Me thinks therefore if there were any spark of grace in us, these terrible
speeches of the holy ghost might serve to humble us, and pull down our pride;
especially since the Scriptures do affirm that God resists the proud, and
sets himself, exprofesso, against them; and therefore woe unto them: for if
God take against a man, who can reclaim him? for he does whatsoever he will.


Phil. But tell me, I pray you, when you speak against pride, what pride it is
that you mean?


Theol. I mean all pride, both that which is inward in the heart, and that
also which breaks out in men's forheads; I mean that which apparently shows
it self in men's words and works.


Phila. Do you mean also pride of men's gifts?


Theo. Yes surely; for there is no pride worse or more dangerous then that.
Beware, says one, of spiritual pride; as to be proud of our lerning, wit,
knowledge, reading, writings, sermons, prayers, godliness, policy, valor,
strength, riches, honor, birth, beauty, authority. For God has not given such
gifts unto men, to the end they should make sale-ware of them, and set them a
sunshining, to behold; seking only themselves with their gifts, the vain
praise of the multitude, and applause of the people: so robbing God of his
honor, and proudly arrogating to themselves, that which is due unto God; which
is the praise of his gifts. But he has given his gifts to an other end:
namely, that we should use them to his glory, and the good of others (either in
church or commonwealth) especially of those which do most concern us.


Phila. Yet we see commonly, men of greatest gifts are most proud.


Theol. True indeed: For the finest cloth is soonest stained. And as worms
engender sooner in soft and tender wood, than in that which is more hard and
knotty: and as moths do breed sooner in fine wool, then in course flocks: Even
so pride, and vainglory, do sooner assault an excellent and rare man in all
kind of knowledge and virtue, then an other of meaner gifts. And therefore
pride is said to spring out of the ashes of all virtues. For men will be proud,
because they are wise, learned, godly, patient, humble, etc. Pride therefore
may very fitly be compared to the crab-stock speins, which grow out of the root
of the very best apple tree. Therefore to say the truth, this is one of the
last engines and weapons, which the devil uses for the overthrowing of Gods
own children: even to blow them up with pride, as it were with gunpowder. For
as we see it come to pass in the siedge of strong holds, when no battery or
force of shot will prevail, the last remedy and policy is to undermine it, and
blow it up with trains of gunpowder: so when Satan can no way prevail,
against some excellent servants of God, his last device is, to blow them up
with pride, as it were with gunpowder.


Phila. I see it is a special grace of God, for men of great gifts, to be
humble minded; and he is an old man of a thousand, which excelling in gifts,
does excel in humility; and the more gifts he has, the more humbly he walks:
not contemning others; but esteeming them better then himself. For commonly we
are the worse for Gods gifts; because we have not the right use of them; and
again, because they engender so much proud flesh in us, that we had need daily
to be corzied. Therefore God shows great favor and mercy to that man, whom
he humbles and takes down by any afflictions, or infirmities whatsoever. For
otherwise, it is sure, proud flesh would altogether ouergrow us.


Theol. You have spoken the truth: for the Apostle 2. Cor. 11.
himself confesses, that he was tempted and troubled this way, and had like
to have been puffed up out of measure, with the abundance of his revelations;
but that God, in great mercy, sent him a cooler, and a rebater; to wit, a
prick in the flesh (which he calls the messenger of satan) whereby the Lord
cured him of his pride. And even so does he cure many of us, of our pride, by
throwing us to satan, leaving us to our selves, and giving us over, to commit
some gross evil, even to fall down and break our necks; and all, to the end
he may humble us, tame us, and pull down our pride, which he sees we are
heart-sicke of. It is good for us therefore to be humble in the abundance of
graces, that we be not proud of that which we have, or that which we have done.
For humility in sin, is better then pride in well doing.


Phila. Herein surely appears the great wisdom and mercy of God: that he so
graciously wringeth good out of evil, and turns our afflictious,
infirmities, falls and downe-fals, to his glory, and our good.


Theo. It is most true. For even as of the flesh of a Uiper, is made a
sovereign medicine, to cure those which are stung of a Uiper; and as
Physicians expel poison with poison; so God, according to his marvelous
wisdom, does of the infirmities which remain in us after regeneration cure
other more dangerous diseases; as pride, vainglory, and presumption. Oh,
blessed therefore be his name for ever, which thus mercifully causes all
things to work together for the good of his own people; of whom these things
are specially to be understood!


Phila. Is there no cause, why men of great gifts should glory in their gifts?


Theo. No surely, none at all. For the Apostle says; Who separateth thee? And
what have 1 Cor. 4.
thou, that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why boastest
thou, as though thou had not received it? Where the Apostle plainly
shows, that no man is to be proud of his gifts; because they are none of his
own: he has but received them to use. We count him worthy to be laughed at as
a fool, who having borrowed brave apparel of others (as a silk gown, a
satin doublet, a chain of gold, velvet breeches, etc.) should proudly iet in
the streets in them, as if they were his own: Even so they are worthy to be
Chronicled for fools, which are proud of good gifts, which are none of their
own. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy says: Thus says the Lord; Let not the wise
Ier. 9. 23.
man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, neither the
rich man in his riches: but let him that glories glory in this, that he
understands and knows me. To this point also well says the Heathen Poet: No
man Theocritus.
can escape the punishment of pride; therefore in greatest prosperity be not
pussed up.


Phil. Yet it is a world to see, how proud, surly, haughty, stately, insolent,
and thrasonicall some be, because of their gifts: they think they touch the
clouds with their heads, and that the earth does not bear them; they take
themselves to be petty Angels, or some wonderful wights. They contemn and
disdame all others which have not the like gifts. They do contemptuously
ouerlooke them, as a lion should ouerlooke a mouse, a king a beggar; or, as we
say in a proverb, As the devil ouer-looked Lincoln.


Theol. Oh proud dust! Oh haughty worms meat! If they would bring their hearts
before God, and their consciences, thoughts, and affections to be judged by
this Law, it would soon cool them, and take them down well enough: they
should see their wants and imperfections to be so great, that they indeed
should have no more cause to boast of their gifts, then the black-more has of
his whiteness, because his teeth are white. The holy Ghost cuts al our combs,
and pulls down all pride of flesh, when he says: How small a thing does man
Mat. 16. 14.
understand of God!


Phila. I pray you, let us proceed to speak of the outward and gross pride of
the World: and first of all, tell me what you think of pride in apparel.


Theol. I think it to be a vanity of all vanities, and a folly of all
follies. For to be proud of apparel, is, as if a thief should be proud of
his halter, a beggar of his clouts, a child of his gay, or a fool of his babble.


Phila. Yet we see how proud many (especially women) be of such bables. For
when they have spent a good part of the day in tricking and trimming, pricking
and pinning, pranking and pouncing, girding and lacing, and brauing up
themselves in most exquisite manner, then out they come into the streets, with
their Pedlers shop upon their back, and carry their crests very high, taking
themselves to be little Angels: or at least somewhat more then other women.
Whereupon they do so exceedingly swell with pride, that it is to be feared
they will burst with it, as they walk in the streets. And truly we may
think, the very stones in the street, and the beams in the houses do quake,
and wonder at their monstrous, intolerable, and excessive pride. For it
seems, that they are altogether a lump of pride, a mass of pride, even
altogether made of pride, and nothing else but pride, pride.


The. You seem to be very hot in the matter.


Asune. Marry, Sir, I like him the better: for the world was never so full of
pride as it is now adays.


Theol. Alas, alas: indeed, who can hold his peace, at the pride of this age!
What a thing is it, that flesh and blood, wormes-meat, dust and ashes, dirt and
dung, should so brave it out with their trim clouts, and that in the sight of
God, angels, and men? For the time will come, when both they, and al their gay
clouts shall be buried in a grave: yea, as Job says, The grave Job. 17. 14.
shall be their house, and they shall make their bed in the dark. And then
shall they say to corruption; Thou art my Father: and to the worm: Thou art my
Mother and my sister. What then shall it avail the^, thus to have ruffled it
out in all their bravery, when as suddenly they shall go down to destruction?
What did it profit the rich man, to be sumptuously clothed, and fare
deliciously every day, when his body was buried in the dust and his soul in
hell fire?


Asune. I pray you, Sir, what say you to these great ruffes, which are borne up
with supporters, and rebatoes, as it were with post and rail?


Theol. What should I say? but God be merciful unto us. For such things do
draw down the wrath and vengeance of God upon us al: and as the Apostle says:
For such things sake, the wrath Col. 3. 6.
of God comes upon the children of disobedience. And truly, truly, we may well
fear that God will plague us for our abominable pride.


Asune. What say you then to these doubled and redoubled ruffes, which are now
in common use, strouting fardingales, long locks, foretufts, shag-haire and al
these new fashions which are devised and taken up every day?


Theol. I say, they are far from that plainness, simplicity, and modesty,
which has been in former ages, our forefathers knew no such things. It is
recorded of William Rufus, sometime Graftons Chron.
King of this Land, that when his Chamberlain on a time brought him a new
pair of hose, he demanded of him what they cost: who answered, three
shillings. Whereat the King being somewhat moved, commanded him to prepare
him a pair of a mark. If Kings were then thought to exceed, that bestowed a
Mark upon a pair of hose, what is it to be thought of many mean men in these
our days, (yea such as have no living, and are searse of any good calling)
which bestow as much upon one pair, as the King did upon two, when he was
thought most of all to exceed? But alas, alas, we have passed all bounds of
modesty and measure: there is no hoe with us. Our land is too heavy of this
sin. For the pride of all Nations, and the follies of all Countries are upon
us; how shall we bear them? And as for these new fashions, the more new they
be, the more foolish and ridiculous are they. For with our new fashions, we are
grown clean out of fashion. If we had as many fashions of our bodies, as we
have of our attire, we should have as many fashions as fingers and toes. But
vain men and women, do apparently show their vain minds, by following so
greedily such vain toies and fashions.


Asune. It was never good world, since starching and steeling, buskes, and
whale-bones, supporters, and rebatoes, full moons, and hobby-horses, painting
and dying, with selling of favor and complexion, came to be in use. For since
these came in, covetousness, oppression and deceit have increased. For how
else should pride be maintained? And sure it is, within these thirty years,
these things were not known, nor heard of. And what say you then to painting
of faces, laying open of naked breasts, dying of hair, wearing of periwigs,
and other hair coronets and top-gallants? And what say you to our artificial
women, which will be better then God has made them? They like not his handy
work, they will mend it, and have other complexion, other faces, other hair,
other bones, other breasts, and other bellies, then God made them.


Theol. This I say: that you and I, and all the Lords people, have great and
just cause of mourning, weeping, and lamentation, because such abomination is
committed in Israel. David's Ps. 11. 9.
eyes gushed out with rivers of teeres, because men kept not Gods laws: and an
horrible fear came upon him, because men forsook Iere. 9. 1.
the law of God. Jeremy did sigh in secret, wishing that his head were full of
water, and his eyes a fountain of teeres, because of the sins of the Neh. 13.
people. Nehemiah mourned for the transgressio^ of Gods people. Lots just soul
was vexed with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites: and shall we mourn
nothing at all for these things? shall we be no whit grieved for the pride of
our land? shall we shed no teeres for such horrible and intolerable
abomination? They are odious in the sight of God and men: the air stinketh of
them. It is Gods marvelous patience, that the devil does not carry them away
quick, and rid the earth of them: or that fire and brimstone does not come
down from heaven and consume them.


Antil. You are too hot in these matters of attire: you make more of them, then
there is cause.


Asune. I conne him thank; Gods blessing on his heart; I shall love him the
better, while I know him: because he is so earnest against such shameful and
detestable pride. Is it not a shame, that women, professing true Religion,
should make themselves such pictures, puppets, and peacockes, as they do? And
yet I hear few preachers in the pulpit speak against it.


Antil. I marvel you should be so earnest in matters of apparel. You know
well enough, that apparel is an indifferent thing: and that Religion, and the
kingdom of God does not consist in these things.


Theol. I know right well, that apparel in it own nature is a thing
indifferent: but lewd, wanton, immodest, and offensive apparel is not
indifferent. For all such abuse takes away the indifferency of them, and
makes them sinful and evil, by circumstance. For otherwise, why should the
Lord threaten by his Prophet, that he would visit the Princes, and the Kings
children and all such as were clothed with strange apparel, that is, the
fashions of other countries: Zeph. chap. 1. 8. Again; why should the Lord so
plague the proud dames, and minsing minions of Jerusalem, for their pride and
vanity in attire, if there were no evil in such kind of abuse? the Lord says
thus, in the third of Esaias, against those brave and gallant dames; Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-out necks and with
wandering eyes, walking and minsing as they go, and make a tinkling with their
feet: therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the daughters of Zion bald,
and the Lord shall discover their secret parts. In that day shall the Lord take
away the ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and the round tires, the
sweet bals, and the bracelets, and the bonnets, the tiers of the head, and the
stops, the head-bands, and the tablets, the earrings, the rings, and the
mufflers, the costly apparel, and the vailes, and the wimples, and the
crisping pinnes, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the
lawnes. And in stead of sweet savor, there shall be stink; and in stead of a
girdle, a rent: and in stead of dressing of the hair, baldness: and in stead
of a Stomacher, a girding of Sacke-cloth, and burning in stead of beauty.
Then shall her gates mourn and lament: and she being desolate, shall sit upon
the ground.

Thus we see how terrible the Lord threatens the gallant dames of Jerusalem
for their excessive and abominable pride. And this may well be a Mirror for
the proud minions of our age, which assuredly may well fear, the Lord will
bring some such judgment upon them, as he did upon the daughters of
Jerusalem. For their sin is as great in this kind, as was the daughters of
Zion: and God is the same God now that he was then, to punish it.


Antile. Tush: never speak so much of these matters of apparel. For we must
do as others do, and follow the fashion: or else we shall not be esteemed.


Theol. If you follow them not, you shall be more esteemed of God, of his
Angels, Saints, and all good men. As for all others, if you esteem them more
then these, you show what you are.


Antil. Well, for all that, say you what you will, pride is in the heart, and
not in the apparel. For one may be proud of plain apparel, as well as of
costly. And some are as proud of their falling bands, and little sets, as
others are of their great ruffes.


Theol. You speak foolishly. For how know you that? can you judge men's hearts
and inward affections? Can you say, when men's and women's apparel is sober,
modest and Christian-like, that they have proud hearts, and are proud of that
attire? You go very far indeed, to judge the heart. You ought to judge
charitably of such as go soberly and modestly attired: even that their heart
is according to their attire. As for you, we may rather think your heart is
vain, light, and foolish: because your attire does strongly argue it: And as
the Prophet says: The trial of your countenance testifies Esaias 3. 9.
against you: you declare your sins as SODOM, and hide them not.


Antile. I pray you then set down some rules for apparel out of the Scripture.


Theol. I may well set down what I will: but surely most men and women will do
what they list. For verily it may be thought that many of this age have
forsworn God, and his word, and al goodness. For they are come to this point,
let God say what he will, they will do what they list. For as the Prophet
says; They have made a covenant with Hell, and with death, and are grown to
an agreement: Esaias 28. 15. And I do verily think, if God himself should come
down from Heaven in his own person, and dissuade men and women from this
vanity of apparel, yet would they still use it, as it were in despite of God,
and as it were to anger him the more. For they are so extraordinarily
enamoured, and so immoderately delighted with it, and do so continually, and
altogether dote on it, and are so wood mad of it, that they will have it,
though men and angels, and all the world say nay: nay, which is more, though
they should go to the devil quick with it. And therefore it is but lost labor
to speak against it, preach against it, or write against it. It is but even to
plough the sea, or knock at a deaf man's door: for there is no hope of any
reformation. Only this we gain, that the world is reproved and convicted of
sin: and these things shall stand in record against them, in the last day: so
that they may say, they had a fair warning, and that there was a Prophet
amongst them.


Philaga. Yet for all this I pray you set us down some directions and rules,
out of Gods holy book, concerning attire. For albeit some be very bad and
outrageous in these things, yet there be some others which are well disposed,
and will (no doubt) make some conscience to frame themselves according to the
rules of Gods word.


Theol. Well then, for their sakes which are well disposed, I will set down
some few directions. Saint Paul in 1. Tim. 2. 9. wills that women should
array themselves in comely apparel, with shame fastness and modesty, as
tecommeth women that profess the fear of God: and not with broydered hair,
or gold, or pearls or costly apparel. The Apostle Saint Peter gives like
rules also: for he says, speaking 1. Pet. 3. 3.
of Christian matrones, and professors of holy Religion, that their apparel
must not be outward, that is, not consist so much in outward bravery (as
broydered hair, gold put about, etc.) as it must be inward; that the hid man
of the heart may be clothed with a meek and quiet spirit: which is a thing
before God much set by. For after this manner, says he, in times past, the
holy women, which trusted in God, did attire themselves: as Sara, Rebecca,
Rachel; and such like ancient and grave matrones.


Phila. Wherein does this inward clothing specially consist?


Theol. In four things, which are set down in the forenamed places: to wit,
shamefastnes, modesty, a quiet spirit, and a meek spirit.


Phila. These be fine suites of apparel, indeed. I would all women would put
them on, and never put them off, but wear them continually. For they are the
better for wearing, though all other apparel be the worse.


Theol. If women would deck themselves inwardly with these foresaid virtues,
they would be unto them as ornaments of gold, and jewels of pearl. For the
woman that fears Pro. 30. 1.
the Lord shall be praised.


Phila. But now I pray you sir, set down your judgment for outward attire.


Theol. This is all that I can say, touching that point, that it must be as the
Apostle says; Comely, decent, handsome, neat and seemly; not light, nor
wanton, not lascivious, not immodest, not offensive.


Phila. But who shall judge what is comely, sober, handsome modest, etc: For
every man and woman will say, their apparel is but decent and cleanly, how
gallant, brave, and flaunting so ever they be.


Theol. Herein the examples of the most godly, wise, grave, and modest men and
women are to be followed: for who can better judge what is comely, sober and
modest, then they?


Phila. But we see some; even of the better sort, in this matter are a little
infected, run out, and go beyond their bounds.


Theol. The more is the pity. But alas, we see the sway of the time and the
rage of the stream is so violent, that it carries before it whatsoever is not
settled, and very deep rooted. And some godly and well disposed persons, whose
hearts are not with these things but with God, are notwithstanding perforce
earied away with the violence of the wind, and tide: whose case, though it
cannot well be defended, or excused; yet it is much to be pitied and lamented.


Phil. Have you any further directions, touching this point*


Theol. There is one thing yet more to be added: to wit, that attire be
according to men's places, callings and degrees. For that is not seemly for
one, that is seemly for another: that becomes not one man's place, that
becomes another: For that is not meet for poor men, which is meet for rich
men: nor that meet for mean men, which is meet for men of note and great place.


Phila. Then you think it lawful for kings, princes, and great personages, to
wear peerle, gold, silver, velvet, etc.


Theol. Questionless, it is lawful for such in sober manner and easure, to
wear the most costly and precious things which the earth can afford: and
that, to set out the magnificence, pomp, and glory of their places. And
therefore such things are in them most comely and decent.


Phils. But now adays, few will keep within compass, few will know their
places: but the most part run beyond their bounds, and leap quite out of their
sockets.


Theol. True indeed. For now adays, mean gentlewomen, yea some gentlewomen of
their own making, will ruffle it, and brave it out, in their attire, like
Countesses and Ladies of honor. Plain folk also, in the Country, will
flaunt it like Courtiers, and like good gentlemen, and gentlewomen: and they
see me to say in their hearts, Fie of this plainness, we will no more of it,
we will not take it as we have done. So that now the old prouorbe is
verified: Every Jack will be a gentleman, and Ione is as good as my Lady. For
now we cannot, by their apparel, discern the maid, from the Mistres: nor the
waiting gentlewoman, from her Lady. And thus we see, in this matter of
apparel, how all is out of joint.


Phila. Is there any more to be said, in this ease?


Theol. There is yet another thing to be respected, in this matter of attire.


Phila. What is that?


Theol. That it be according to men's abilities. For it is lamentable to
consider, how poor men and women, poor hired servants, milkemaides, and such
like, go quite beyond their ability. And more lamentable, to see what
wretched* and ill-fauoured shifts they make, to compass these things: so
sharp and so eagerly, are they set upon them.


Phila. Well Sir, now you have sufficiently rolled the stone, and at large
satisfied us touching the matter of pride; which is the first sign of
condemnation. Now proceed to the second, which is who redome; and unfold unto
us out of the Scriptures, the dangers thereof.


Theol. Solomon in his Proverbs, says: That Pro 22. 14
the mouth of a strange woman, or an harlot, is as a deep pit: he, that is a
derestation to the Lord, shall fall therein. Wherein he plainly shows, that
those whom God detesteth, and is exceeding angry with, are given over to this
vice. And, in another place, he says: An whore Pro. 23. 17
is as a deep dit oh, and as a narrow pit. Noting thereby, that if a man be
once fallen in with an harlot, he shall as hardly get out again, as a man that
is plunged into a very deep and narrow pit, where he can scant stir himself.
The same Solomon, in the book of Ecclesiastes, yields Eccl. 7. 28.
us the reason heerof: namely, because she is as nets, snares and bands:
wherein if a man be once taken he is fast enough for getting out. I find,
says he, more bitter than death, the woman, whose heart is as nets and snares,
and her hands as bands. He that is good before God shall be Eccl. 7. 28.
delivered from her: but the sinner shall be taken by her. We do therefore
plainly see, in what a labyrinth and dangerous case they be, that are left o^
God, and given over to whoredom and harlots. And therefore it is said: Desire
not her beauty in thine heart* neither let her eie-lids catch Pro. 26. 5.
thee. For, by a whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of brend: and the
adulteress hunteth for life, which is precious. Again, he says: Albeit the
lips of an harlot drop as an honiecombe, Pro. 5. 3. 4.
and the roof of her mouth is fofter then oil; yet her latter end is bitter
as wormwood, and as sharp as a two edged sword. All these prudent speeches of
the holy Ghost, do most evidently show unto us, what a fearful thing it is to
commit whoredom, and so to fall into the hands of whores and harlots.
Therefore Job Job 36. 14.
says of the wicked: Their soul dies in youth, and their life among the
whore-mongers.


Phila. You have very well showed, out of Gods book, the great danger of
whoredom and adultery. And it is greatly to be lamented, that men in this age,
make so light of it as they do, and that it is so common a vice: nay, that
some (alas, with grief I speak it) do profess it, live by it, and
prostitute themselves wholly unto it.


Theol. Such men and women may justly fear the plaguing hand of God: for the
Lord says, by his Prophet: Though I fed them to Ier. 5. 8.
the full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in
harlots houses. They rose up in the morning like fed horses: every man neigheth
after his neighbors wife. Shall I not visit for these things (says the Lord*)
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?


Phila. Me thinks, if men were not altogether hardened in this sin, and even
past feeling, and past grace, this threatening and thundering of God himself
from heaven, should terrify them.


Theol. A man would think so indeed: but now we may take up the old complaint
of the Prophet: I hearkened and heard, and lo no Ier. 28. 6.
man spoke aright: no man repented him of his evil, saying: What have I done?
Every one turned to their race, as the horse rusheth into the battle.


Antile. Tush, whoredom is but a trick of youth, and we see all men have
their imperfections.


Theol. You speak profanely, and wickedly: 1. Cor. 10. 8.
For, shall we count that but a trick of youth, for the which the Lord smote
three and twenty thousand of his own people in one day? Shall we count that
but a trick of youth, for the which 2. Sam. 12. 10.
the Lord threatened David, his own servant, that the sword should never depart
from his house? Shall we count that but a trick of youth, Genes. 24. 25.
for the which Hamor and Shechem, the father and the son, and many other,
both men, women and children, were cruelly murdered by Simeon and Leui, the
sons of Jacob? Shall we count that but a trieke of youth, for the which 1.
Sam. 2. 22.
the Lord slew Hophni and Phineas, the two sons of Eli the Priest, in the
battle of the 1. Sam. 4. 11.
Philistines? Shall we thus set all at six and seven, and make light of such
horrible villainies? Does not the severity of the punishments show the
greatness of the sin? Does not the Apostle say: These things came upon them
for our 1. Cor. 10. 11.
ensamples, upon whom the ends of the world are come: and yet you pass it over
with a tush, and a trick of youth: as if God were to be dallied with. No, no,
be not deceived; God is not mocked. They which will not be moved now in
hearing, shall one day be crushed in pieces in feeling. And they which now call
whordome a trick of youth, shall one day howl and cry, yell and yelpe, for
such tricks, with woe and alas that ever they were borne.


Antil. Oh sir you must bear with youth, youth you know is frail; and youth
will be youthful, when you have said all that you can.


Theol. Yes, but God does allow no more liberty unto youth, then unto age: but
binds all, upon pain of death, to the obedience of his commandments. The
Apostle says: Let Tit. 2. 6.
young men be sober minded. David says: Psalm. 119. 9.
Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? In taking heed thereto according
to thy word. The wise man says: Remember thy Eccl. 12. 1.
Creator, in the days of thy youth. And further adds: that if they will
needs follow their lusts, their pleasures, and their own swinge: yet in the
end he will bring them to judgment, arraigne them, condemn them, and tame
them in hell fire well enough.


Phila. Yet we see, men are so violently carried after their lust, and so
desperately bent, that they will have the present sweet and pleasure of sin,
come of it what will. Come sickness, come death, come hell, come damnation,
they are at a point: they will pay the highest price for their lusts. They
will purchase their pleasures with the loss of their souls. Oh woeful
purchase: O damnable pleasures.


Theol. Sweet meat will have sower sauce, and a dram of pleasure, a pound of
a sorrow. Such cursed catifes shall at last pay a dear shot for their
pleasures. Such desperate wretches shall one day know (to their everlasting
woe) what it is to provoke God, and to sin with so high an hand against him.
They shall well know in spite of their hearts, that vengeance is prepared for
the wicked, and that there is a God that judges the earth. Let al men therefore
take heed in time. For whoremongers and Adulterers Heb. 13. 4.
God will judge. And the Apostle says flatly, That whoremongers and Adulterers
shall not 1. Cor. 6. 9. Heb. 12.
inherit the kingdom of God. Let therefore no fornicator, or unclean person,
be found amongst us, as was Esau. But let us abstain from 1. Pet. 2.
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul: And let every one know how to
possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and nor in the lust of
concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.

Herein let us consider the wise speech of an ancient Father: Sin, while it
is in doing, Chrysostom. Math.
ministers some pleasure; but when it is committed, the short pleasure thereof
vanishes away, and long sorrow comes in stead of it. Neither let us here
reject the saying of a wise Heathen: Shun pleasure, for fear of Isocrates ad
Deem.
smart. Sour things follow sweet, and joy heaviness.


Antile. Yet for all this, you shall not make me believe, that whoredom is so
heinous a mattter. You make more of it then it is.


Theol. True indeed. For you, and such as you are, will believe nothing against
your lusts, and fleshly delights: and that is the cause why you are deaf on
this ear. I will therefore add a word or two more (out of the oracles of God)
to that which has vin spoken. The wise king says: He that commits
Adultery with Pro. 6. 32.
women, destroieth his own soul: and so is accessarie to his own death,
which is no small matter. For we use to say, if a man hang himself, drown
himself, or any manner of way make away himself: that he was cursed of God,
that Gods hand was heavy against him, that the devil ought him a shame, and
now he has paid it him. And all the country rings of such a strange accident,
when, and where it falls out: and the Crowner of the Country does sit upon
it. How much more may all the world wonder at this, that a man should destroy
his own soul, and wittingly and willingly cast away himself for ever! Now
the holy Ghost says: the Adulterer does such an act, gives such a venture,
and willingly murthereth himself. Oh, therefore woe unto him, that ever he was
borne. For sure it is that great Crowner of heaven, that crowns whom he will
crown, shall one day sit upon it, and give judgment. Moreover, as the
Adulterer sins against his soul: so also he sins against his body after
a special manner, as witnesses the 1. Cor. 6. 18.
Apostle. Also he sins against his goods and outward estate: as the holy man
Job testifies, saying: Adultery is a fire, that deuoureth to Job 31. 12.
destruction, and it will root out all our increase. Furthermore he sins
against his name. For the Adulterer shall find a wound Pro. 6. 33.
and dishonor: and his reproach shall never be put away.

Item, he sins against his wife: who is his companion and the wife of his
covenant. And God says, in the same place: Let none trespass against the wife
of his youth: keep your selves in your spirit, and transgress not. Last of
all he sins against his children and posterity: as the Lord said to David:
Because 2. Sam. 12. 10.
thou have despised me, and done this, therefore the sword shall never depart
from thy house. Behold I will raise up evil against thee, out of thine own
house. Now therefore, to conclude this point, we may see how many deadly wounds
men make in themselves, by committing of adultery. They wound themselves in
their souls. They wound themselves in their bodies. They wound themselves in
their goods. They wound themselves in their names. They wound themselves in
their wives, and in their children. What man, except he were stark mad, would
thrust in himself, in so many places, at once? The adulterer, with his own
sin of adultery, makes all these deadly wounds in himself. And it is a
hundred to one he will never get them cured, but will die, and bleed to death
of them. Lo, thus you see the dangerous quality and condition of this sin.
Shall we now therefore make light of it? Shall we say it is but a trick of
youth? Shall we smooth over the matter with sweet words, when the holy Ghost
makes it so heinous and capital? Shall we make nothing of that, which draws
down Gods wrath upon the soul, body, goods, name, wife and children? That
were an intolerable blindness, and most extreme hardness of heart. An
ancient writer has long ago passed sentence upon us, who make so light of
this sin: for, (says he) Adultery Basil in Epist. Gregor.
is the very hook of the devil; whereby he draws us to destruction. And
another godly Father says: that Adultery is like a furnace, whose mouth is
gluttony, the flame pride, the sparkles filthy words, the smoke an evil name,
the ashes poverty, and the end shame. And so we plainly see, that howsoever
we regard not this sin, but flatter our selves in it, yet those, whose eyes
the Lord has opened, have in all ages condemned it as most flagitious and
horrible: yea the very Heathen will rise up in judgment against us; who have
spoken and written many things against this filthy and beastly vice.


Phila. Now indeed you have sufficiently branded the vice of adultery; and
laid out the ugliness thereof, that all men may behold it stark naked and
abhor it. If any man (notwithstanding all this) will venture upon it, he may
be said to be a most desperate monster. For what does he else, but (as it
were) put his finger into the Lions mouth, and (as it were) take the bear by
the tooth? and they may well know what will follow, and what they may look
for. Let all men therefore in time take heed to themselves, and to their own
souls, as they will answer it at their uttermost peril, at the dreadful day
of judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. But now one
thing rests; to wit, that you should show us the special roots and causes of
adultery.


Theol. There be five special causes of it. The first is our natural
corruption: for the very spawne and seed of all sin is in our corrupt
nature: and this, of all other, is a most inherent sin, as witnesses the
Apostle James, saying: When lust has conceived, it brings Iam. 1. 15.
forth sin; and sin, when it is perfected, brings forth death.

The second is gluttony and fullness of Bread: for when men have filled their
bellies, and crammed their paunches, as full of good cheer, wine, and strong
drink, as their skins can hold, what are they meet for, or what mind they
else, but adultery and uncleanness? And therefore well says one: Great
nourishment, and gross feed, it is the shop of lust. The Heathen Est officina
Terence.
Poet could skill to say, Sine, Cicere and Baccho friget Venus. Without meat
and drink, lust waxes cold. And to this effect the wise king says, that
their eyes shall behold strange women, Pro. 23. verse. 3. and verse. 33.
whose hearts are set upon wine and bellycheare. And therefore he advises all
men, not to look upon the wine when it appears red, when it shows his
color in the cup, or stirs very kindly: and that for fear of this
after-clap. An ancient writer says to the sam purpose: He that delicately
pampereth his Gregorius Nazianz.
belly, and yet would overcome the spirit of fornication, is like him that will
quench a flame of fire with Oil.

Therefore, to close up this point, sure it is, though men pray, hear, and
read much, and be otherwise well disposed: yet except they be absteinous in
diet, they will be much troubled with lust.

The third cause of adultery, is Idleness: For when men are lazy, luskish,
and idle, having nothing to do, they lie wide open to adultery; and lust
creeps into them. Some Historiographers write, the Crab-fish is very desirous
to eat Oysters: but because she cannot perforee open them, she watches her
time when they open themselves unto the sun after the tide, and then she
puts in her claw, and pulls out the Oyster. Even so satan watches his
opportunity against us, that he may infect and breath into us all filthy lusts,
and adulterous desires, when we lie open unto him by idleness. Wisely
therefore to this point said the Greek Poet: Much rest nourishes lust. And
Hesiodus.
another Poet says: Quaritur agistus quare sit factus adulter? In promtu causa
est: desidiosus erat.

Slothful laziness is the cause of Adultery, And therefore another says:
Eschew idleness, Otia si tollas, periere cupidinis ar cus.
and cut the sinews of lust.

The fourth cause of adultery, is wanton apparel: which is a ministrelsie,
that pipes up a dance unto whoredom. But of this enough before.

The fifth and last part of adultery, is the hope of impunitie, or escaping of
punishment. For many being blinded and hardened by Satan, think they shall
never be called to an account for it: And because they can bleare the eyes of
men, and carry this sin so closely under a cloud, that it shall never come to
light, they think all is safe, and that God sees them not. And therefore Job
says: The eye of the adulterer waits Job 24. 15.
for the twilight, and says; None eye shall see me. And in another place; How
shall God Job 23. 13*
know? can he judge through the dark cloud? But verily, verily, though the
adulterer do never so closely and cunningly convey his sin under a canopie,
yet the time will come when it shall be disclosed, to his eternal shame. For
Eccl. 12. 24.
God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thought; whether it
be good or evil. For he has set our most secret sins in the Psalm. 91. 8.
light of his countenance. And he will lighten 1. Cor. 4. 5.
the things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart
manifest. For this cause Job says; When I sin, thou watchest Job 10.
me, and wilt not purge me from my sin.


Phila. Now you have showed us the causes of adultery, I pray you show us the
remedies.


Theol. There be six remedies for adultery: which no doubt will greatly
prevail, if they be well practiced.


Phila. Which be they?


Theol. Labor. Six remedies of adultery.
Abstinence. Temperance. Prayer. Restraint of senses. Shunning of women's
company, and all occasions whatsoever.



Phila. Well sir; now you have waded deep enough in the second sign of
damnation, I pray you let us proceed to the third, which is covetousness. And
as you have laid naked the two former, so I pray you, strip this stark naked
also, that all men may see what an ugly monster it is, and therefore hate it,
and abhor it.


Theol. I would willingly satisfy your mind: but in this point I shall never
do it sufficiently. For no heart can conceive, or tongue sufficiently utter the
loathsomeness of this vice. For, Covetousness is the foulest fiend, and
blackest devil of all the rest. It is even great Beelzebub himself. Therefore
I shall never be able fully to describe it unto you: but yet I will do what I
can to strip it, and whip it stark naked. And howsoever that men of this
earth, and blind worldlings, take it to be most sweet, beautiful and amiable,
and therefore do embrace it, entertain it, and welcome it, as though there
were some happiness in it; yet I hope, when I have showed them the face
thereof in a glass (even the true glass of Gods word) they will be no more in
such love, but quite out of conceit with it. I will therefore hold out this
glass to them.

Saint Paul to Timothy brandeth this sin in the forehead, and boareth it in
the ears, that all men may know it, and avoid it; when he says:
Covetousness is the root of all evil. 1. Tim. 6. 10. Luke 12. 15.
Our Lord Jesus also gives us a watchword to take heed of it* saying: Take
heed, and beware of covetousness. As if he should say; touch it not, come not
near it, it is the very breath of the devil: it is present death and the very
ratsbane of the soul. The Apostle lays out the great danger of this sin,
and does exceedingly grime the face of it, when he says: that the end of all
such as mind earthly things, is damnation. Phil. 3. 19.
Let all carnal worldlings, and muckish minded men lay this to heart, and
consider well of it, lest they say one day: had I wist.


Phila. Good sir, lay open unto us the true nature of Covetousness, and what
it is, that we may more perfectly discern it.


Theol. Covetousness is an immoderate desire of having.


Phila. I hope you do not think frugality, thriftinesse, and good husbandry
to be covetousness.


Theol. Nothing less. For they be things commanded; being done in the fear of
God, and with a good conscience.


Phila. Do you not think it lawful also for men to do their wordly
business, and to use faithfulness and diligence in their callings, that they
may provide for themselves and their families?


Theol. Yes no doubt. And the rather, if they do these things with calling
upon God for a blessing, upon the works of their hands; and use prayer and
thanksgiving before and after their labor, taking heed all the day long of the
common corruptions of the world: as swearing, cursing, lying, dissembling,
deceiving, greedy getting, etc.


Phila. Wherein I pray you does covetousness especially consist?


Theol. In the greedy desire of the mind. For we may lawfully do the works of
our calling, and play the good husbands and good huswiues; but we must take
heed that distrustfulnes, and inward greediness of the world do not catch our
hearts. For then are we set on fire, and utterly undone.


Phila. Since covetousness is especially of the heart, how may we know
certainly, when the heart is infected?


Theol. There be four special signs of the hearts infection.


Phil. Which be they?


Theo. The first is an eager and sharp set desire of getting. Therefore the
holy Ghost says: Pro. 28. Pro. 20. 21.
He that hastes to be rich, shall not be unpunished. And again: An heritage
is hastily gotten at the beginning; but the end thereof shall not be blessed.
The Heathen man also says: No Demosthenesin Olinth 3.
man can be both justly, and hastily rich.

The second is a pinching and niggardly keeping of our own, that is, when men
(being able to give) will hardly part with any thing, though it be to never so
holy and good use. And when at last with much ado, for shame they give
something, it comes heavily from them (God wot) and scantly.

The third is, the neglect of holy duties: that is, when men's minds are so
taken up with the love of earthly things, that they begin to slack and cool
in matters of Gods worship.

The fourth and last is, a trusting in riches, and staying upon them, as though
our lives were maintained by them, or did consist only in them: which thing
our Lord Jesus flatly denies, saying: Though a man have abundance, yet his
life consists not in the things that he has. Luke. 12. 15.

These then are four evident signs and tokens, whereby we may certainly
discern, that meus hearts and intrailes are infected with covetousness.


Phila. You have very well satisfied us in this point. Now let us understand
the original causes Two causes of Covetousness.
of Covetousness.


Theol. There be two special causes of Covetousness. The one is the ignorance
and distrust of Gods providence.

The other is the want of tasting and feeling of heavenly things: For till men
taste better things, they will make much of these: till they feel heaven, they
will love earth: til they be religious, they will be covetous.

Therefore the cause is soon espied, why men are so sharp set upon these
outward things, and do so admire riches, worldly pomp, pleasures, and
treasures: Because they know no better, they never had taste or feeling of
those things which are eternal.


Phila. Now as you have showed us the causes of Covetousness, so let us also
hear of the effects.


Theol. If I once enter into this, I shall be entar gled and wound up in a
maze, where I know not how to get out again. For, the evil effects of this
vice are so many, and so great, that I know not almost where to begin, or where
to end. Notwithstanding, I will enter into it; get out how I can.


Phila. If you do but give us some taste of them it shall suffice.


Theol. Then will I briefly dispatch things in order. And first of all, I
reason from the words of the Apostle before alleged, that if covetousness,
and the love of meny be the root of all evil, then it is the root of idelatry,
the root of murder, the root of theft, the root of lying, the root of
swearing, the root of symony, the root of bribery, the root of usury, the root
of lawing, the root of all contentions in the Church, and the root of all
brabling and brawling in the Common weaith. Moreover, it spreads far and
near, it dwells in every house, in every town, in every city; it prieth
into every corner, it creeps into every heart; it anoieth our Physicians, it
infecteth our Divines, it choaketh our Lawyers, it wounds our Farmers, it
baneth our Gentlemen, it murthereth our tradesmen, it be witcheth our
Merchants, it stingeth our mariners. Oh covetousness, covetousness, it is the
poison of al things, the wound of Christianity, the bane of all goodness! For
covetousness marres all: it marreth all, every where, in all places, in all
degrees, amongst all persons. It marreth marriages: for it coupleth young to
old, and old to young. It marreth hospitality, it marreth all good
housekeeping, it marreth alms deeds, it marreth Religion, it marreth
Professors, it marreth Ministers, it marreth magistrates, it marreth all things.
And therefore what sin so grievous, what evil so odious, what vice so
enormous as this? For this cause it was pretily said of one: that all other
vices are but Factors to Covetousness, and serve for Porters to fetch and bring
in her living. She makes symonie her drudge, bribery her drudge, usury her
drudge, deceit her drudge, swearing her drudge, lying her drudge. O what a
devil incarnate is this, that sets so many vices a work, and has so many
Factors and underlings to serve her turn! Are they not in a pretty case, think
you, that are infected with this sin? Oh, they are in a most miserable case. It
had been good they had never been borne. For being alive they are dead: dead
I mean in their souls. For Covetousness is souls poison, and souls bane.
Covetousness is the strongest poison to the soul that is. It is a confection of
all the Spiders. Toades, Snakes, Adders, Scorpions, Basiliskes, and all other
the most venomous vermin of the whole world? If the devil can get us to take
down but one pennyweight of it, it is enough, he desires no more. For
presently we fall down stark dead. Therefore the Apostle says: They that will
be rich (he means in all haste, by hook or by crook) fall into temptations,
and snares, and into many 1. Tim. 2.
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For,
as Covetousness is rank poison to the soul: so the Apostle compares it to
the deep gulf, wherein thousands are drowned. And therefore he adds in the
same place: But thou O man of God fly these things. In which words he does
most gravely advise all the Ministers of the word of God, to take heed of it.
For as it is dangerous to all men; so it is most dangerous and offensive in the
preachers of the Gospel.


Phila. Indeed it must needs be granted, that Covetousness is a very
grievous sin: yea even a monster with seven heads. Yet for all that, we see
in this our iron age, how many of all sorts are infected with it: and how few
will give any thing to any holy use. Most men now adays have nothing to spare
for Christ, nothing for his Gospel, nothing for his Church, nothing for the
poor children of God, and needy members of Christ. Christ is a little beholden
unto them: for they will do nothing for him, no not so much as speak a good
word in his cause, or the cause of his poor Saints. Every little thing with
them, is too much for God, and good men. For when they come to giving unto holy
and necessary uses, then they will stick at a penny, and scotch at a great,
and every thing is too much. But to bestow upon themselves, nothing is too
much. Nothing is too much for lust, for pleasure, for back, belly, and
building; for cards and dice, for whores and harlots, for rioting and
reuelling, for Tauernes and brothel-houses. Hundreds and thousands are little
enough, and too little, for their expenses this way. It is lamentable to
consider, what masses of money are spent and bestowed upon these things. But,
alas, alas, how heavy an account are they to make in the day of the Lord,
which so spend their lands, livings, and revenues! I quake to think what shall
become of them at last. It were well for them, if they might be in no worse
case then a Crocodile, or a curre dog.


Theol. It is most certain that you say: and we all have great cause to lament
it, and to take up the old complaint of the Prophet Jeremy, saying: From the
least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given unto
Covetousness: Ier. 6. 16.
and from the Prophet even unto the Priest they all deal falsely. And another
Prophet says: they build up Zion with blood, Mic. 3. 10.
and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof judge for rewards, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money: yet
will they lean upon the Lord and say: Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can
come unto us. But these holy Prophets, and men of God, do fully describe unto
us the state of our time: wherein, though all be corrupted, yet we bear our
selves stoutly upon God, we presume of his favor, because of our outward
profession, and say in our hearts: No evil can come unto us.


Asune. You say very true, Sir. The world was never so set upon covetousness,
and men were never so greedily given to the world, as now adays. And yet (in
truth) there is no cause why men should be so sharp set upon this world. For
this world is but vanity: and all is but pelf and trash. Fie on this mucke.


Phila. Many such men as you are, can skill to give good words, and say: Fie on
this world: al is but vanity: and yet for all that in your daily practice, you
are nevertheless set upon the world, nor never the more seek after God. You
hear the word of God no whit the more, you read no whit the more, you pray
never the more; which evidently shows, that all your fair speeches, and
protestations, are naught else but hypocrisy and leazing. Your heart is not
with God, for all this. All is but words, there is no such feeling in the
heart. And therefore I may justly say to you, as God himself said to his
people: This people have Deuteronomy. 5. 28.
said well, all that they have said. Oh, that there were an heart in them to
fear me, and keep my commandments!


Theol. His words indeed are good; if his heart were according. For all things
considered, there is no cause why men should be so given to this world: For
they must leave it, when they have done all that they can. As we say: To day a
man, to morrow none. And as the Apostle 1. Tim. 6.
says: We brought nothing into this world: and (it is certain) we shall carry
nothing out. We must all die, we know not how soon: why therefore should men
set their hearts upon such uncertain and deceiuable things? for all things in
this world are more light then a feather, more brittle then glass, more
fleeting then a shadow, more vanishing then smoke, more unconstant then the
wind. Doubtless says the Prophet David: Man walks in a shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them: Psalm. 39. 6. I wonder therefore that these Moules and Muck-wormes
of this earth, should so mind these shadowish things, and so dote on them as
they do. If they were not altogether hardened and blinded by the devil, they
would not be so nearly knit to the clod and the penny as they are: thinking,
and always imagining, that there is no happiness but in these things, which
are but dung and dross: and at last they will give us the slip, when we think
our selves most sure of them.

The wise king, who had the greatest experience of these things, that ever man
had (for he enjoyed whatsoever this world could afford, upward and downward,
backward and forward) yet could find nothing in them, but vanity and vexation
of spirit. Moreover, he flatly avouches, that all these things, riches,
wealth, honor, pleasures, and treasures, will most notably deceive us in the
end, give us the slip and be gone. For he compares riches, and all the glory
of this world, to an Eagle or Hawke, which a man holds upon his fist,
stroketh her, makes of her, takes great delight and pleasure in her, and
says he will not take ten pounds for her: yet al on the sudden she takes her
flight, and flies up into the air, and he never sees her more, nor she him.
The words of the holy Ghost are these: Will thou cause thine eyes to Pro. 23.
5.
fly after them? (meaning riches) Thou may: but they will not be found. For
they will make themselves wings like to the Eagle, which flies up to Heaven.
From thence we may learn, that though we set our hearts never so much on any
thing here below: yet at the last it shall be taken from us, or we from it.

Therefore all worldly men do but weaue the Spiders web, and may fitly be
compared to the silly Spider, who toileth her self, and labors all the
week long to finish up her web; that she may lodge her self in it, as in
her own house and free*hold. But alas, at the weeks end, a Maid in a moment
with one brush of a broom, dispessesseth her of her in heritance which she had
purchased with great labor and much ado. Even so, when the men of this world
have, with much care and travel, purchased great lands and revenues, and
gathered all that they can: yet on the sudden, death (with one stroke of his
direful dart) will make them give up the ghost: and then where are they? It
was pretily therefore said of a man in the light of nature: No man has ever
lived Herodotus Polym.
so happily in this life, but in his lifetime many things have befallen him,
for the which he has wished rather to die then to live. And assuredly I think
there was never any man lived any one day upon the fare of this earth, but some
grief or other either did, or justly might invade his mind ere night; either
in the temptations of the world, the flesh, or the devil* or in regard of
soul, body, goods, or name: in regard of wife, children, friends, or
neighbors: in regard of dangers to Prince, Estate, church, or Common wealth:
in regard of casualties and losses by water by fire, by Sea or by land. What a
life therefore is this, that has not one good day in it? Who would desire to
dwell long in it? For it lies open every day to manifold miseries, dangers,
losses, casualties, reproaches, shame, infamy, poverty, sickness, diseases,
collickes, agues, toothache, headache, backe-ache, bone-ache, and a thousand
calamities.


Phila. You have very well described unto us the vanity of this life, and that
no day is free from one sorrow or other, one grief or other. Which thing our
Lord Jesus ratifieth, in the reason which he brings, why men should not
distrustfully care for to morrow. For, says he, Sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof. Or, as Mat. 6.
some read it. The day has enough with his own grief. Where in he does
plainly show, that every day has his sorrow, his evil, his grief, and his
thwart. But I pray you proceed further in this point.


Theol. This I say further: that when men have swinked and sweat, carked and
cared, moiled and turmoiled, drudged and droiled by night and by day, by sea
and by land, with much care and sorrow, much labor and grief, to rake
together the things of this life; yet at last, all will away again, and we must
end where we began. For, as Job said; Naked we came into the world: and naked
we must go out. Job 1. For even as a windmill beats it self, makes a
great noise, whisleth and whisketh about from day to day, all the year long;
yet at the years end stands still where it begun, being not moved one foot
backward or forward: so when men have blustered and blown all that they can,
and have even run themselves out of breath, to scrape up the commodities of the
earth, yet at last they must (spite of their beards) end where they began: end
with nothing, as they began with nothing: end with a winding sheet, as they
began with swaddling clouts. For what is become of the greatest Monarchs, Kings,
Princes, Potentates, and Magnificoes, that ever the world had? Where is Cyrus,
Darius, Xerxes, Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, Scipio and Hanniball? Where are the
valiant Henry's, and noble Edwards of England? Are they not all gone down to
the house of oblivion? Are they not all returned to their dust, and all their
thoughts perish? Though they were as Gods, yet have they died as a man, are
fallen like others.

Who now cares for them? who talks of them? who fears them? who regards
them? do not beggars tread upon them? Yet while they lived, they were the Lords
of the world: they were as terrible as Lions: fearful to all men: full of
pomp and glory, dignity and majesty. They plowed up all things, they bare
all before them, and who but they? But now they have given up the ghost, and
are (as Job says) Job 30. 23.
gone down to the house appointed for all the living. Their pomp is descended
with them, and all their glory is buried in the ashes. They are now covered
under a cled, cast out into a vault, made companions to toades, and the worms
do eat them: and what is become of their souls, is most of all to be feared.

Thus we see, how all flesh does but make a vain show for a while upon this
Theater of misery, fetches a compass about, and is presently gone. For as the
Poet says: Serius aut citius sedem properamus ad vnam: First, or last, we must
all to the grave.


Asune. You have made a very good speech. It does me good to hear it. I
wonder, all these things considered, that men should be so wholly given to this
world, as they are. I think the devil has bewitched them. For they shall
carry nothing with them when they die, but their good deeds and their ill.


Theol. The drudges and snudges of this world, may very fitly be compared to a
Kings lumpter-horse, which goes laden all the day long, with as much gold and
treasure, as he can bear; but at night his treasure is taken from him, he is
turned into a sorry durtie stable, and has nothing left him, but his galled
back. Even so the rich cormorants and caterpillars of the earth, which here
have treasured and hoorded up great heaps of gold and silver (with the which
they travel laden through this world) shall in the end be stripped out of all,
let down into their grave, and have nothing left them but their galled
consciences, with the which they shall be tumbled down into the dungeon of
eternal darkness.


Phila. Wherein does the sting and strength of the world especially consist?


Theol. Even as the great strength of Sampson lay in his hair; so the great
strength of the world lies in her two breasts: the one of pleasure, the other
of profit. For she, like a notable strumpet, by laying out these her breasts,
does bewitch the sons of men, and allureth thousands to her lust. For if she
cannot win them with the one breast, yet she gameth them with the other: if
not with pleasure, then with profit: if not with profit, then with pleasure.
He is an odd man of a thousand, that sucketh not of the one breast or the
other. But sure it is, which soever he sucketh, he shall be poisoned. For she
gives none other milk, but rank poysen. The world therefore is like to an
alluring Iael, which sits at her door, to entise us to come in, and eat of
the milk of her pleasures: but when she has once got us in, she is ready
(even Iud. 4. 21.
while we are eating) with her hammer and her nail, to pearce through our
brains.


Phila. I see plainly, this world is a very strumpet, a strong bait, and a
snarling net, wherein thousands are taken. It is very birdlime, which does so
belime our affections, that they cannot ascend upward. It is like the waights
of a clock, hanged upon our souls, which draws them down to the earth: it
naileth us fast down to the ground. It mortifieth us into clay: it makes us
abominable unto God. For I remember God made a law, that whatsoever goes with
his breast upon the ground, Leuit. 11.
should be abominable unto us. How much more these carnal world-lings, which
are fast sodered to the earth!


Theol. The Apostle S. James seeing into the deep wickedness of this world,
and knowing right well how odious it makes us in the sight of God, cries out
against it, terming it adultery, and all worldlings adulterers; because they
for sake Christ their true husband, and whorishly give their hearts to this
world. O ye adulterers Iam. 4.
and adulteresses, says he, know ye not that the amity of this world, is the
enmity of God?

Whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world, makes himself the enemy
of God. And who dare stand forth and say, I will be the enemy of God? Who
therefore dare be a worldling? For every worldling is the enemy of God. What
then will become of you, O ye wicked worldlings?


Phila. It appears then plainly by the Scriptures, that the excessive love
of this world, and insatiable desire of having, is a most dangerous thing; and
men do they know not what, in seeking so greedily after it.


Theol. The heathen man will rise up in Sophocles.
judgment against us: for he says; Insatiableness is the foulest evil
amongst mortal men. But many of our sea-gulfs and whirle-pooles make no
conscience of it. They think it is no sin: they devour and swallow up all;
and yet are never satisfied. They will have all, and more then all, and the
devil and al. The whole world cannot satisfy their mind: but God must create
new worlds, to content them. These men are sick of the Golden dropsy: the
more they have, the more they desire. The love of money increases, as money if
self increases. But the Scripture says: He that loves silver, shall not
Eccl. 5. 9
be satisfied with filuer. Oh therefore, that we would strive earnestly to get
out of this gulf of hell, and tread the moon, that is, all worldly things,
under our feet: as it is spoken of the Apo. 12 1.
Church: and that we would set our affections on the things that are above, and
not on the things that are beneath: that we would fly an high pitch, and so
are aloft as the Eagles, looking down at this world, and all things in it, as
at our feet, contemning it, and treading the very glory of it under our feet,
that it may never have more power over us!


Phila. Oh happy, and twice happy are they that can do so! And I beseech the
Almighty God, give us his holy spirit, whereby we may be carried above this
world, into the mountains of Myrrh, and the mountains of Spices. For Can. 6.
4.
how happy a thing is it, to have our conversation in heaven, that is, to have
an inward conversation with God, by much prayer, reading, meditation, and
heavenly affections! This indeed is, to clime up above the world, and to
converse in the chambers of peace. Oh therefore, that we could seriously and
thoroughly conceive and consider of this world as it is, that we would well weigh
the vanity of it, and the excellency of that which is to come, that we might
loath the one, and love the other: despise the one, and embrace the other: love
God more than ever we did, and this world less. For what is this world but
vanity of vanities?


Antil. You do exceedingly abase that, which some make their god. You speak
contemptuously of that, which most men have in greatest price and admiration.
You disgrace that which multitudes would grace. You make light of that, which
numbers make greatest account of. Let us therefore hear your reasons: show us
more fully what it is; describe it unto us.


Theol. The world is a sea of glass, a pageant of fond delights, a Theater of
vanity, a labyrinth of error, a gulf of grief, a stie of filthiness, a vale
of misery, a spectacle of woe, a river of teeres, a stage of deceit, a cage
full of Owls, a den of Scorpions, a wilderness of Wolves, a cabben of
Bears, a whirlwind of passions, a fained Comedy, a delectable frenzy;
where is false delight, assured grief, certain sorrow, uncertain pleasure,
lasting woe, fickle wealth, long heaviness, short joy.


Phila. Now you have indeed described it to the full, and laid it out (as it
were) in orient colors. And a man would think, he were bewitched, or stark
mad, which hereafter should set his mind on it. But yet I am desirous to
hear a little more of that, which I asked you before; where in the strength
and poison of the world does specially consist.


Theol. In this lies a great strength of the world, that it draws down the
stars of heaven and makes them fall to the earth, as it is said of the Dragons
tail. Apoc: 12. which is, ambition, conetousnes, and the love of this world.
For we may wonder and lament, to see how the love of these things has wounded
and ouerborne many excellent servants of God, both Preachers and professors of
the Gospel: which thing does plainly argue the strength of it. For it is the
strongest and the very last engine, that satan uses to impugn us withal,
when none other will preaaile. For when no temptation could fasten upon Christ,
he brings forth this last weapon which never fails: All these things
Matthew. 4.
will I give thee: showing him the glory of the whole world. So then he (having
experience of this, that it never fails) thought to have overcome Christ
himself with it. Here therefore, lies the very sting and strength of the
world and the devil. For whom has he not taken, with All these things will I
give thee? whom has he not wounded? whom has he not deceived? whom has he
not overthrown? with this he enticed Baalam: with this he beguiled Achan:
with this he overthrew Judas: with this he be witched Demas; with this in these
our days, he deceived many of excellent gifts. For assuredly, he is a Phoenix
amongst men, which is not overcome with this. He is a wonderment in the world,
that is not moved with money.


Phila. I am now fully satisfied for this matter. But one thing comes often
into my mind; to wit, that these miserable worldlings can have no sound
comfort in their pleasures and profits: because they have no comfort in God,
nor peace in their own consciences.


Theol. You say very true. It is impossible, that men, loving this world,
should have any sound comfort in God. For no man can serve two masters, both
God and riches. Their case therefore is very dangerous and fearful, though
they never see it, nor feel it: as I will show you by a plain example. Put
case, one of these great rich worldlings should be clothed in velvet and cloth
of gold, in most stately manner; and also should be set at his table, furnished
with all the dainties of the world; should be attended and waited upon by many,
in most Lordly and pompous manner; should sit in his goodly dining-chamber, all
glittering like gold; should have his first, second, and third service served
in, with minstrels and instruments of music, in most royal sort; he sits
in his chair, like a King in his throne: yet for all this, if a dagger should
be held to his heart all this while, ready to stab him* what pleasure, what
joy, what comfort can he have in all the rest? Even so, whatsoever pomp or
pleasures wicked worldlings have here below, yet their guilty and hellish
conscience is, as it were, a dagger, held always hard to their heart; so as
they can have no sound comfort in any thing. Or let me give it you thus: Put
case a man has committed high treason, and were therefore apprehended,
arraigned, and condemned to be hanged, drawn and quartered: what then can
comfort him in such a case? can mirth, can music, can gold, can silver, can
lands, can livings? No, no: none of all these can help him, or give him any
comfort. For the continual thoughts of death do so gripe him at the heart,
that none of all these can do him any good or any whit mitigate his grief.
What then is the thing that may comfort him in this case? Only a pardon, sealed
with the Kings broad seal, and subscribed with his own hand. For as soon as
he has got this, his heavy heart reuiueth, and leapes for joy. This then
assuredly is the very cause of all profane Atheists and worldlings, who are
not asiured of the King of heaven his pardon for their sin: and then, what
joy can they have either in their meat, drink, goods, cattle, wives,
children, lands, revenues, or any thing whatsoever? For the dreadful thoughts
of hell do eftsoons cross them inwardly, and quite dampe and dash all their
mirth. Their own consciences will not be stilled: but in most terrible manner,
rise up and give evidence against them, telling them flatly, they shall be
damned, how merry and iocund soever they seem to be in this world; setting a
good face on the matter. For sure it is, that inwardly they have many a cold
pull, and many heart gripes. And all their mirth and iollity, is but a gigling
from the teeth outward: they can have no sound comfort within. And therefore
the wise King Pro. 14 13.
says; Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful: and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. Likewise says the holy man Job; Terrors of conscience come upon
the wicked man like waters: in Job. 27. 20.
the night a whirle-winde carries him away secretly. Eliphas the Temanite,
avouched the same point, saying: The wicked man is continually as one that
trauaileth of child: a sound Job. 15. 20.
of fear is in his ears, etc. Thus then we see, that howsoever many carnal
Atheists, and ungodly persons, seem outwardly to float aloft in all mirth and
iollity, bearing it out (as w^e say) at the breast: yet inwardly they are
pi^ched with terrors, and most horrible conuultions of conscience.


Antile. You have spoken many things very sharply against covetousness: but
in my mind, so long as a man couets nothing but his own, he cannot be said to
be covetous.


Theol. Yes, that he may. For not only is he covetous, which greedily desires
other men's goods; but even he also which over niggardly and pinchingly holds
fast his own, and is such a miser, that he will part with nothing. We see the
world is full of such pinch-pennies, that will let nothing go; except it be
wrung from them perforce, as a key out of Hercules hand.

These gripple muck-rakers had as leeue part with their blood, as their goods.
They will pinch their own backs and bellies, to get their god into their
chests. And when they have once got him in there, will they easily part with
him trow ye? No, no: a man will not part with his god, for no man's pleasure.
He will eat peasebread, and drink small drink, rather then he will diminish
his god. Therefore the scripture says: Eat not the meat of him that has an
evil eye: Pro. 13. 6.
and desire not his dainty dishes. For as he grudgeth his own soul; so he
will say unto thee: Eat and drink, when his heart is not with thee. Thou shall
vomit thy morsels, which thou have eaten, and lose thy pleasant speeches. The
old saying is, The coueteus man wants as well that which he has, as that
which he has not: because he has no use of that which he has. So then you
see, there is a great strength of covetousness, in the niggardly keeping of
our own.


Antil. Yet, for all this, men must follow their worldly business, and lay to
live. For it is an hard world, and goods are not easy to come by. Therefore
men must plie their business, or else they may go beg or starve.


Theol. I deny not, but that you may follow the works of your calling
diligently: so it be in the fear of God, and with a good conscience, as I told
you before: but this greediness and gripplenesse God does condemn, and also
this excessive love of money.


Phila. Believe me I know no body that hates it, I cannot see, but that all
men love gold and silver.


Theol. It is one thing to use these things: and another thing to love them and
set our hearts upon them. For the Scripture says: If riches increase, set not
your heart upon them: Psa. 62. S. John also says: Love not this world, nor the
1. Ioh. 2.
things that are in this world. He says not, use not this world, but love not
this world. For use it we may: love it we may not. Therefore the Apostle says:
that they which use this world, 1. Cor. 7.
should be as though they used it not. Where he allows a sober and moderate
use of the things of this life, in the fear of God. We must use this world for
necessities sake, as we use meat and drink. For, no more of this world then
needs must: for fear of surfeiting. The holy Ghost says: Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with things present. Heb.
13. 5.
Happy is that man therefore, that is well content with his present estate
whatsoever, and carries himself moderately and comfortably therein. For the
spirit says: There is no profit to a man under the Sun: but that he eat and
drink, and delight his soul with Ec. 2. 24.
the profit of his labors. I saw also this, that this is of the hand of God.
In which words, the prudent King says thus much, in effect: that this is all
the good we can attain unto in this world, even to take a sober and
comfortable use of the things of this life, which God bestows upon us. And
further he avouches, That thus to use them aright, and with sound comfort, is
a very rare gift of God. For as one says: He is a wise man, that is not
grieved for Gregorius Nazi.
the things which he has not: but does rejoice in the things that he has:
using them to Gods glory, and his own comfort. So then I conclude this point,
and return you an answer thus: That we may in sober and godly manner, use
gold, silver, and the things of this life: but at no hand to ouer-loue them, or
give our hearts unto them.


Antile. Well: yet for all this, I cannot see, but that these preachers and
professors, these learned men, and precise fellows, are even as eager of the
world, and as covetous as any other.


Theol. Now you show your venomous spirit, against better men then your self.
And I have a fourfold answer for you. First I answer, that although godly men
may be somewhat overtaken this way, and ouer-spirt a little, yet they break
not out so grosiv as others. Secondly, if God leave them sometimes to be
overcome of the world: yet he, in his great wisdom and mercy, turns it to
their good. For thereby he first humbles them, and afterward raises them Romans
8.
up again. And so all things work together for good, to them that love God.
Thirdly, I answer, that we live by rules, and not by examples. For even the
best of Gods people have had their wa^ts and weakness. Therefore we may not
frame rules to live by, out of the infirmities of the most excellent servants
of God. Wicked therefore and impious is their allegation, which allege David's
adultery, Lots drunkenness, Peter's fall, Abraham's slips, Salomons weakness,
etc. for a shelter and defense of themseines in the like sins. Lastly, I
answer, that you do greatly wound your self, in your own speech: so far off
are you from mending your market any whit thereby. For if Preachers and other
godly men (after many prayers and teeres, and much means used) cannot escape
scot-free, but sometimes are wounded, and almost overthrown, by the world and
the Devil; what then shall become of you, which use no means at all, nor any
gain striving, but willingly give place to the Devil? If the Devil did
ouer-master David, Lot, Sampson, Solomon, and other such excellent Worthies:
alas, what shall become of mere worldlings and Atheists? If the most valiant
men, and thief Captains in a battle go down, what shall become of the
faint-hearted soldiers? and as Saint Peter says; If the righteous scarce 1.
Pet. 4. 18.
be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear? So then I take you at
the rebound, and return your own weapon upon your self, that since godly men
cannot escape through this world, without blows, what shall become of them
which know not what godliness means?


Antile. Yet, I say once again, that men must live, men must lay for this
world: we cannot live by the Scriptures. And as for that which you call
covetousness, it is but good husbandry.


Theol. I thought, we should have it at last. Now you have paid it home: you
are come to the old bias, and as an Hare to her old form, and her old covert.
For this is the very covert and thicket of the world, wherein they would hide
covetousness: but I will do what I can to hunt you out of it, by the
Scriptures.

First, Solomon says: He that spares more Pro. 11. 24.
then is right, shall surely come to poverty. So then you see, that
covetousness brings poverty. Thus therefore I reason: that which brings
poverty is no good husbandry: but covetousness, and too much sparing, brings
poverty: therefore it is no good husbandry. The same Solomon says; He that is
given to gain, troubles his own house. That is, the covetous man is an
occasion of many evils, in his estate and family. From this Scripture I do thus
reason; That which troubles a man's house, is no good husbandry: but
covetousness troubles a man's house: therefore it is no good husbandry. Last
of all, the old proverb says: Covetousness brings nothing home. And
therefore it is no good husbandry. For oftentimes we do see, that men, for
covetousness of more, lose that which otherwise they might have had. One of
the wise Heathen says: Evil gain is as bad as Hesiodus.
loss. But the covetous man does seek after wicked gain, and therefore
seeks loss: and consequently, is no good husband. Another says: Unjust
gain, brings both loss and misery. Phocillides.
And therefore it is far enough off from virtue, and all good husbandry. Thus
then, I hope, you are so hunted both by God and men, that this covert cannot
hide you. And therefore you must out of it, and seek some other shelter: for
this will not serve your turn.


Phila. Now, I must needs say, you have fully stopped his mouth, and thoroughly
ferrited him out of his deep burrow. And it is most certain, that you say:
that the wise heathen have condemned covetousness and all unjust gains, which
we both practice and defend: and therefore will rise up in judgment against
us. But now let us leave this cauiller, and proceed in our matters. There is
one thing yet remaining, wherein I desire to be satisfied.


Theol. What is that?


Phila. I would gladly know which be the special remedies against
covetousness.


Theol. There be two special remedies against covetousness: to wit,
Contentation, and the meditation of Gods providence.


Phila. Let us hear somewhat of Contentation, out of the Scriptures.


Theol. The Apostle says: Having food and 1. Tim. 6. 7.
raiment, we must therewith be content. For we brought nothing into this
world: and it is certain we shall carry nothing out. The Spirit also says:
Let your conversation be Heb. 12. 5.
without covetousness, and be content with your present estate. Again, the
Apostle says: He had learned in what estate soever he Phil. 4.
was, therewith to be content. Note that he says, he had learned: for he had it
not of himself. For Contentation is the singular gift of God: as it is
written: The righteous eats to the Contentation of his soul: but the belly
of the Cyril. in Joan. 4.
wicked shall want. Pro. 13. 25. An ancient Father says: We ought to accustom
our selves to live of a little, and to be content; that we may do no wicked or
filthy, thing for lucres sake. Chrysostom. homil. 51.
Another says: He is not poor that has nothing: but he that desires much.
Neither is he rich that has much, but he that wants nothing; for
contentation never wants. There is no grief in lacking, but where there is
immoderate desire in having. If we will live after nature, we shall never be
poor; if after our own appetite, we shall never be rich. Well therefore said
the Poet: Wax not rich unjustly, but justly; Euripedes.
Be content with thine own things; abstain from other men's. Thus then we see,
that both God himself (the fountain of all wisdom) and men also, both in
the state of nature and grace, do all jointly advise us to strive for
Contentation: and then shall we have a sovereign remedy against Covetousness.


Phila. Let us hear somewhat of the second remedies against Covetousness.


Theol. An earnest thinking upon the providence of God, is a present remedy
against the most foolish and pining carfulness of men for this life. For if
we would seriously weigh and deeply consider the provident care that God has
had for his children in all ages, touching food and raiment; and how strangely
he has provided for them, it might suffice to correct this evil in us, and
minister unto us a notable preservative against covetousness.

We read how wonderfully the Lord did provide for his Prophet Eliah, in the
time of the great dearth and drought, that was in Israel. Did not the Lord
command the ravens to feed him, by the river Cherith? did not the ravens bring
1. Ki. 17.
him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, and he
drunk of the River?

What should I speak, how miraculously God provided for Hager and her infant,
when they were both cast out of Abraham's house, and brought to great extremity!
even both of them ready to give up the ghost for want of food.

Did not God help at a pinch, as his manner Genesis 21. 15.
has always bin? did not he send his angel unto them, and both comfort the^,
and provide for them? What should I speak how strangely God provided Exodus 15.
4. Exodus 17. 6. Psalm. 7. 8.
for his church in the wilderness? Did he not feed them with Manna from heaven,
and gave them water to drink out of the Rock? Has not our heavenly Father
made many royal and large promises, that he will provide necessaries for his
children? Shall we not think that he will be as good as his word? Does he Ps.
34. 10.
not say: The Lions lack, and suffer hunger; but they which seek him, shall
want nothing that is good? Does he not say: Fear him all ye Saints; for
nothing is wanting to them that fear him? Does he not say: No Psalm. 8. 4. 11.
Mat. 6. 33.
good thing shall be withheld from them that walk uprightly? Does he not say:
Our heavenly father knows, that we have need of these things: and that all
these things shall be cast upon us, if we earnestly seek his kingdom? Does he
not bid us, cast all our care upon 1 Pet. 5. 7. Luke 12. Heb. 13. 5.
him? For he cares for all. Does he not bid us, take no thought what we shall
eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we shall be clothed? Meaning
thereby, no distracting or distrustful thought. Does he not say, He will not
leave us not forsake us? Does he not say: The Lord is at hand: in nothing be
careful? Phil 4. 5.
Are not these large promises sufficient to stay up our faith in Gods
providence? shall we think God iesteth with us? shall we think he means no
such matter? shall we imagine he will not keep touch? Oh, it were blasphemy
once to think it: For God is true, and all men liars. He is faithful that
has promised. His word is more then the faith of a Prince: more then ten
thousand Obligations: Why then do we not rest upon it? why go we any further?
why do we not take his word? why do we not depend wholly upon him? why are we
still covetous? why are we still distrustful? why do we dissemble, and deceive?
Oh we of little faith! Our Lord Jesus (knowing right well the distrustfulnesse
of our nature, and the deep root it has in us) is not only content to make
these great and royal promises unto us which were enough; but also
strengthens and backeth us with many strong reasons, to support our weakness
in this behalf. He therefore brings us back, to a due consideration of
things. Consider (says he) Luke 12.
the Ravens; consider the fowls of the heavens; For they neither sow nor
reap, nor carry into barnes; and yet God feeds them; they want nothing.
Consider the Lillies how they grow; they neither labor, nor spinne; yet
Solomon in all his royalty, was not clothed like one of these. Oh therefore
that we would consider these Considers! Oh that we would consider that our
life is more worth then meat, and our bodies then raiment! Oh that we would
consider, that with all our carking and caring, we can do no good at all; no,
not so much as add one cubite to our stature! Truly, truly, if we would
deeply ponder these reasons of our Savior, and apply them to our selves, they
might serve for a bulwark and sure defense against Covetousness. If men would
consider how that great King of heaven (who has his way in the whirlwind, and
the clouds are the dust of his feet) cares for the little wren, and silly
Nahun. 12.
sparrow; how he looks to them, how he tendereth them, how he provides for
them every day, both breakfast, dinner, and supper: it might serve to correct
our distrustfulnesse. For who ever saw these, or any other soul starve, for
hunger? so good a father, and so good a nurse have they. And are not we much
better then they? has not God more care of us, then of them? yes verily, a
thousand times. For he loves them, but for our sakes: how much more then does
he love our selves? Therefore I say again and again: if we would consider these
things, and lay them to heart, they would nip covetousness on the head, and drive
it quite out of our hearts. Let us consider therefore, that God provided for
man before man was: then how much more will he provide for man, now that he is?
Is he our Father, and will he not provide for us? Is he our king, and will he not
regard us? Is he our shepherd, and will he not look to us? Has he provided
heaven for us, and will he not give us earth? Has he given us his son Christ,
and shall he not with him give us all things? Does he provide for his enemies,
and will he not provide for his friends? does he provide for whoremongers; and
will he neglect his chosen? Does he send his rain, and cause his Sun to shine
upon the unjust, and shall he not upon the just? Does he provide for them which
are not of the family, and will he not provide for his own family? Will a man
feed his Hogs, and not care for his servants? Or will he care for his
servants, and not regard his own children? Oh then let us consider these
reasons: let us remember, that our heavenly Father has as great care for the
preservation of his creatures, as once he had for their creation. Let us
therefore remember, that our life consists not in these things; but in the
providence of God. Let us remember, that he which gives the day, will provide
for the things of the day. Let us remember, that God always gives for
sustentation, though not for satietie. Let us remember, that God will not
famish the souls of the righteous. Pro. 10. 38.
Let us remember how God never failed his. For who ever trusted in the Lord,
and was confounded?


Phila. What then is the cause that many do want outward things?


Theol. The cause is in themselves, because Ierom. ad. Heliodorum. Cyprian. in
Oratione dominica.
they want faith. For if we had faith, we could want nothing. For faith
fears no famine, as says an ancient Father. And another says: For as much
as al things are Gods, he that has god can want nothing: if he himself be not
wanting unto God. Therefore to have God is to have al things. For if we have
him our friend we have enough, we need go no further. For he will make men
our friends: yea he will make Angels, and all creatures to be serviceable unto
us: he will give them a special charge to look to us, to guard us, and to do
continual homage unto us. Therefore let us make God our friend, and then have
we done all at once, that may concern our good, both for this life, and a
better. But if he stand not our friend, if we have not him on our side, if he
back us not, then all other things whatsoever, can do us no good: all August.
is not worth a button. For Quid prodest, si omnia habes, eum tamen, qui omnia
dedit, non habere? What is a man the better though he have all things, and be
without him which is the author of all things?


Phila. Herein you speak very truly, no doubt. For we see, many have great
plenty of outward things: but because they have not God, they can have no true
comfort in them, or blessing with them.


Theol. True indeed: For man lives not by bread only (says our Lord Jesus)
but by Matthew. 4.
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. And again he says:
Though a man Luke 12.
have abundance, yet his life consists not in the things that he has. For
without Gods blessing, there can be no sound comfort in any thing. We see by
daily experience, how the Lord curses the wicked, though they have abundance.
For, some having abundance, yet are visited with continual sicknesses. Some
having abundance, pine away with consumptions. Others having abundance die of
surfeiting. Others are snatched away by untimely death, in the midst of all
their iollitie. Others are visited with great losses both by sea and by land.
Others are vexed with cursed wives, and disobedient children. Some again commit
murders, and treasons, and so lose all at once. Others are wasted and consumed,
by the secret curse of God; no man knows how. Some having great riches, are
given over to the murderer, some to the thief, some to the poisoner.
Therefore the wise king says: There is an evil sickness under the sun;
riches reserved to the owners thereof, for their evil. Eccles. 5. 12.

Zophar also, the Naamathite, says; When Job 20. 22.
the wicked shall have sufficient and enough, he shall be brought into straits:
The hand of every troublesome man shall be upon him. When he should fill his
belly, God will send upon him his fierce wrath: which he shall rain upon him
in stead of his meat.

Thus then it is clear, that man's life and good estate, depends not upon the
abundance of outward things, but only upon the blessing and providence of God.
For, His blessing only makes rich, and it does bring no sorrow Pro. 10. 12.
Psa. 37. 16.
with it. For, Better is a little unto the inst, then great abundance to many
of the wicked. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than Pro. 25. 16.
Pro. 16. 8.
great treasure, and trouble therewith. Better is a little with righteousness,
then great reuenews, without equity.

Thus then I conclude this point. Man lives not by bread, but by a blessing
upon bread; not by outward means, but by a blessing upon means. For how can
bread, being a dead thing, and having no life in it self, give life to others?


Phila. I do not well understand the meaning of these words: By every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God.


Theol. Thereby is meant, the decree, ordinance, and providence of God, which
vpholdeth all things, even the whole order of nature:

For the Scripture says: He spoke and it was Psalm. 33. 9.
done: he commanded and they were created; In which words we plainly see, that
God does but speak, and it is done: he does command, and all creatures are
preserved. For God does all things with a word. He created all with his word:
he preserves all with his word: he speaks and it is done. His words are
words of power, and authority. Whatsoever he says, whatsoever he calls for,
it must be done presently, without any delay, there is no withstanding of him.
He calls for famine, and behold famine. He calls for plenty, and behold
plenty. He calls for pestilence, and behold pestilence. He calls for the
sword, and behold the sword. All Angels, all men, all beasts, all fishes, all
fowls, all creatures whatsoever must obey him, and be at his beck. He is the
greatest Commander: his word commands heaven and earth and the sea. All
creatures must be obedient to his will, and subject to his ordinance.

This is the cause, why all things both in heaven, earth, and the sea, do keep
their immutable, and unvariable courses, times and seasons, even because he
has charged them so to do. And they must of necessity always, at all times,
and for ever obey, for the creatures must obey the Creator. This act of
Parliament was made the first week of the world, and never since was or can be
repealed.


Phila. But to call you back again, to the point we had in hand: resolve me,
I pray you, of this; Whether many of the dear children of God, do not in this
life sometimes want outward things, and are brought into great distress?


Theol. Yes certainly. For Eliah did want, and 1 Reg 17. 2. Cor. 1. 8. 2. Cor.
11. 25. Heb. 11. 36.
was in distress. Paul did want, and was in many distresses. The holy
Christians, mentioned in the Hebrews, did want, and were in marvelous
distresses. Many of Gods dear ones have in all ages wanted, and at this day
also do want, and are greatly distressed. But this is a most infallible truth,
that howsoever Gods children may want, and be low brought; yet they are never
utterly forsaken, but are helped even in greatest extremities: yea, when all
things are desperate, and brought even to the last cast.

To this point, most notably speaks the Apostle saying; We are afflicted on
every side, but yet we despair not: we are persecuted, but 2. Cor. 4. 8.
not forsaken: cast down, but we perish not. The Prophet Jeremy also says;
The Lord will Lament. 3.
not forsake for ever: but though he send affliction, yet will be have
compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies. For he does not punish
willingly, or from his heart, nor afflict the children of men. The kingly
Prophet says; Surely the Lord will not fail his Psalm. 94. 14. Esa. 55. 8.
people, neither will he forsake his inheritance. The Lord himself says; For
a moment in mine anger, I hid my face from thee; but with everlasting mercy
have I had compassion on thee. So then we may fully assure our selves, and even
write of it (as a most undoubted and sealed truth) that Gods children shall
never be utterly forsaken, in their troubles.


Phila. Since the care and providence of God is so great for his children, as
you have largely declared: what then I pray you is the cause, why God suffers
his to be brought into so many troubles and necessities.


Theol. Their profit and benefit is the cause, and not their hurt. For he
loves them, when he smites them: He favors them, when he seems to be
most against them. He aymeth at their good, when he seems to be most angry
with them. He wounds them, that he may heal them. He presses them, that he
may ease them. He makes them cry, that afterward they may laugh. He always
means well unto them, he never means hurt. He is most constant in his love
toward them. If he bring them into necessities, it is but for the trial of
their faith, love, patience, and diligence in prayer.

If he cast them into the fire, it is not to consume them, but to purge and
refine them. If he bring them into great dangers, it is but to make them call
upon him more earnestly, for help and deliverance.

He presses us, that we might cry: we cry, that we may be heard: we are
heard, that we might be delivered. So that here is no hurt done: we are worse
scared, then hurt.

Even as a mother, when her child is wayward, threatens to throw it to the
Wolf, or scareth it with some pocar, or bul-begger, to make it cling more unto
her and be quiet: So the Lord oftentimes shows us the terrible faces of
troubles and dangers, to make us clean and cling faster unto him: and also to
teach us to esteem better of his gifts when we enjoy them, and to be more
thankful for them; as health, wealth, peace, liberty, safety, etc. So then
still we see, here is nothing meant on Gods part, but good: As it is written;
All things work together for good, to them that love Romans 8.
God. For even the afflictions of Gods children Heb 12. 10. Heb. 12. 14. 1.
These. 1. 6. Gal. 6. 14. Phil. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 32. Romans 5. 3. 4.
are so sanctified unto them by the spirit, that thereby they are made
partakers of Gods holiness. Thereby they enjoy the quiet fruit of
righteousness. Thereby they attain unto a greater measure of joy in the holy
ghost. Thereby the world is crucified to them, and they to the world. Thereby
they are made conformable to Christ's death. Thereby they are kept from the
condemnation of the world. Thereby they learn experience, patience, hope, etc.
So that, all things considered, Gods children are no losers by their
afflictions, but gainers. It is better for them to have them, then to be
without them: they are very good for them. For when Gods children are
chastised, it is as it should be. For to them, the cross is mercy, and loss
is gain. Afflictions are their schooling, and adversity their best Uniuersity.
Psa. 119. 27.


It is good for me (says the holy man of God) that I have been afflicted,
that I might learn thy statutes. By his afflictions therefore, he learned
much, and became a good scholar in Gods book, and well seen in his Statutes
and Laws. He grew to great wisdom and judgment by his chastisments. All
things turned about, in Gods merciful providence, to his everlasting comfort.
For I say again, and again, that all things tend to the good of Gods chosen
people. And therefore that estate, which GOD will have his children to be in,
is always best for them. Because he, who can best discern what is best,
sees it to be best for them: whether it be sickness or health, poverty or
plenty, prison or liberty, prosperity or adversity. For sometimes sickness is
better for us then health, and poverty then plenty. Are therefore the children
of God sick? it is best for them. Are they poor? it is best for them. Are
they in any trouble? it is best for them: because their good Father will turn
it to the best. He will oftentimes cut us short of our lusts, and desires;
because he sees we will bane our selves with them. He, in fatherly care,
will take the knife from us; because he sees we will hurt our selves with
it. He will keep us short of health, and wealth, because he knows we will
be the worse for them. He will not give us too much ease, and prosperity in
this world; for he knows it will poison us. He will not allow us continual
rest, like standing pondes: for then he knows we will gather scum and filth.
He deals fatherly and mercifully with us in all things, even then seeking our
greatest good, when we think he does us most harm.

And to speak all in a word; he brings us into troubles and straits, to
this end especially, that he may hear of us. For he right well knows our
nature: he is well acquainted with our disposition. He knows we will not come
at him, but when we stand in need of him: we care not for him, so long as all
goes well with us. But if we come into distress, or want any thing that we
would feign have, then he is sure to hear of us. As he says by the Prophet:
In Hos. 5. 15.
their affliction, they will seek me early.

And another Prophet says; Lord, in trouble Esa. 26. 16.
have they visited thee. They powered out a prayer, when thy chastisement was
upon them. So then now I hope, you do plainly see the cause, why the Lord
brings his children into so many troubles and necessities.


Phila. I do see it indeed: and I am very well satisfied in it. But yet let me
ask you one thing further. Are Gods children always sure to be delivered, out
of their troubles?


Theol. Yes verily: and (out of doubt) so far forth, as God sees it good for
them. For it is written: Great are the troubles of the righteous; Ps. 34. 20.
but the Lord delivers them out of all. S. Peter says: The Lord knows how
to deliver 2. Pet. 1. 9.
the godly out of temptation. As if he should say: He is beaten in it, and
well seen and experienced in it: so as he can do it easily, and without any
trouble at all. It is said of Joseph, being in prison: that, when his appointed
Ps. 105. 19. 20.
time was come, and the counsel of the Lord had tried him, the King sent and
loosed him, the Ruler of the people delivered him. And again, the Scripture
says; The righteous cry, and the Psalm. 34.
Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their troubles. The Angel
of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. And
in another place, the Lord himself says, concerning the righteous man; Ps.
91. 14. 15.
Because he has loved me, therefore I will deliver him. I will exalt him,
because he has known my name. He shall call upon me in trouble, and I will
hear him. I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and glorify
him. So also says Eliphas the Temanite: He Job. 5.
shall deliver thee in six troubles: and in the seventh, the evil shall not
touch thee. Come my people, says the Lord, enter thou Esa. 16. 20.
into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors after thee; hide thy self for a very
little while, until the indignation passover. And the Prophet says: Upon
Mount Zion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy; and the house of Jacob
Obad. 17.
shall possess their hereditary possessions. Almost innumerable places of the
Scriptures might be alleged, to this purpose: but these may suffice. Therefore
let us know for a certainety, that so sure as trouble and affliction are to the
Children of God, so sure also is deliverance out of the same. As we may write
of the one, and make reckoning of it as sure as the coat of our back; so may
we also, in Gods good time, write of the other, and make full account of it as
sure as the Lord is true. Abraham was in trouble; but delivered. Job in
trouble; but delivered. David in great troubles; but delivered. The three
Children in the Furnace; but delivered. Daniel in the Lions den; but delivered.
Jonas in the Whales belly; but delivered. Paul in innumerable troubles; but yet
delivered out of all.


Phila. All this being true, that you say, it follows, that Gods children are
chastised only for their good, and evermore sure of deliverance in his
appointed time. Which thing being so, me thinks there is no cause at all why
they should be over heavy, or too much cast down in their afflictions.


Theol. Assuredly there is no cause at all; but rather cause why they should
rejoice, clap their hands, and sing care away. For can a father forsake his
children? a sing his subjects? a Master his servant? or a Sheep heard Heb. 13.
his sheep? Does not Jehovah say, I will nor leave thee nor forsake thee? Does
not our heavenly Father know, we have need of these things? Has not God
given us his word, that we shall not want outward things? Has he not said:
They shall be cast upon us? Why then should we be dismayed? Why should we
hang down our heads? Why do we not pluck up our hearts? and be of good
cheer? God is our dear Father: he is our best friend: he is our daily
Benefactor: he keeps us at his own costs and charges: he grudgeth us
nothing: he thinks nothing too much for us. He loves us most dearly: he is
most chary and tender over us: he cannot endure, the wind should blow upon
us: he will have us want nothing that is good for us. If we will eat gold, we
shall have it. He has given us his faithful promise, that as long as we
live, we shall never want. Let us therefore rejoice and be merry. For Heaven
is ours, earth is ours, God is ours, Christ is ours, all is ours.

As the Apostle says: All is yours, and you 1. Cor. 3. 22.
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The world clap their hands, and crow long
before it be day, saying, all is theirs: but the children of God may say, and
say truly: All is ours. For they have a true title, and proper interest,
through Christ in all the creatures. Many are their privileges, great are
their prerogatives. They are free of heaven, and free of earth. They are the
only free Denisens of the world. Christ has purchased them their freedom.
Christ has made them free, and therefore they are free indeed. They are free
from sin, free from hell, free from damnation. They are at peace with God,
men and Angels. They are at peace with themselves. They are at peace with all
creatures. They are young Princes, Angels fellows, descended of the highest
house, of the blood royal of heaven, states of Paradise, and heirs apparent
to the immortal Crown. Therefore God has commanded his Angels to guard them,
being such young Princes as they are: yea, he has given a very straight charge
to all his creatures, to look to them, to see to them, that they want nothing,
that they take us hurt; so teasous, so chary, so tender is he of the^. The
angels must comfort Jacob. The whale Genesis 32. 1. Kin. 17. Iona. 2. Ios. 10.
must rescue Jonas. The ravens must feed Elias. The Sun and Moon must stay for
Joshua: The Sea must divide it self, that Moses and his people may pass
through. The fire must Exodus 14. Dan. 3. Dan. 6.
not burn the three children. The Lions may not devour Daniel. All the
creatures must change their nature, rather then Gods children should not be
helped and delivered. Oh therefore how great is the happiness of Gods chosen!
Who can express it? who can utter it? They know not their own happiness: it
is hid from them. Afflictions do cloud it; troubles do ouershadow it; crosses
do dim it: and there is an interposition of the earth, betwixt their sight and
it. But this is most certain and sure, that the best is behind with the
children of God: all the sweet is to come. Their happiness does not appear in
this world. Their life is Col. 3. 3. 4.
hid with Christ in God. When Christ shall appear, then shall they also
appear with him in glory. It does not yet appear, what they shall 1. Ioh. 3.
1.
be: but when he comes, they shall be made like unto him. Their names are
already taken, and entered into the book of life: and one day, they shall be
crowned. One day it shall be said unto them: Come ye blessed, etc. One day,
they shall enjoy his presence, where is fullness of joy; and at whose right
hand, there is pleasure for evermore. Psalm. 16. Therefore let all Gods secret
ones rejoice, sing and be merry. For howsoever in this world they be contemned,
trodden under the foot, made no bodies, and walk as shadows; being counted as
the very rags of the earth, and the abiects of the world: yet the time will
come, when their happiness and felicity shall be such, as never entered into
the heart of man, it is endless, unspeakable, and inconceivable.


Phila. I do now plainly see, that there is no cause why Gods people should
be too heavy and dumpish in their afflictons. I see, that though they be not
free from all afflictions, yet are they free from all hurtful afflictions. For
no rod, no cross, no chastisement is hurtful unto them: but all in the
conclusion comes to a blessed issue.


Theol. You have uttered a great, and a most certain truth. For there is no
affliction or trial, which God imposes upon his children, but if they endure
it quietly, trust in his mercy firmly, and tarry his good pleasure obediently,
it has a blessed and comfortable end. Therefore the people of God may well be
merry, in the midst of their sorrows. They may, with patience and comfort,
submit themselves to their Fathers corrections; taking them patiently, and even
kissing his holy rod, and saying in themselves: Since my Father will have it so.
I am content; seeing it is his mind, I am willing withal. As old Ely said: It
is the Lord, let 1. Sam. 3. 48.
him do what he will. And as David in like submission, said in a certain
case: Behold, here 2. Sam. 25. 26.
am I: let him do to me, as seems good in his own eyes. And in another
place, he says: Psalm. 39.
I was dumb, and opened not my mouth: because thou Lord have done it. Behold,
here then the patience of Gods Saints, and their humble submission unto his
most holy will. They know all shall end well; and that makes them glad to
think of it. I conclude then, that the children of God are happy, in what
state soever they are: happy in trouble, happy out of trouble, happy in
poverty, happy in Deuteronomy. 28.
plenty, blessed in sickness, blessed in health, blessed at home likewise, and
abroad, and every way blessed. But on the contrary, the wicked are cursed, in
what state soever they are: cursed in sickness, cursed in health, cursed in
plenty, cursed in poverty, cursed in prosperity, cursed in adversity, cursed
in honor, cursed in dishonor. For all things work together, for their
destruction. Nothing does them any good. They are not any thing the better,
either for Gods mercies or judgments. All weathers are alike unto them. They
are always the same, in prosperity and adversity: they are no changelings.
And, as we say: A good year does not mend them; nor an ill year pair them.


Phila. You have long insisted upon this point. Now proceed to the fourth sign
of a man's damnation; which is the contempt of the Gospel: and lay open both
the greatness of the sin, and the danger of it.


Theol. This sin is of another nature, then the former. It is a sin against
the first Table. It touches the person of God himself. For to contemn the
Gospel, is to contemn God himself; whose Gospel it is. If to contemn the
Ministers of the Gospel, be to contemn God and Christ, as our Lord Jesus
avouches (Luke 10. 16.) how much more then, to contemn the Gospel it self?
Therefore it is dangerous meddling in this sin. It is to meddle with edged
tools, to meddle with princes matters, to touch the Arc, to come here the
holy mountain: which all were things full of great peril and danger. Yea, it
is to spill the Sacrament. It is Noli me tangere. It is to rail at a King. It
is to spit God in the face. It is high treason against the King of glory.
Therefore this sin, of all other, can never be endured; and may, at no hand,
be borne withal. For can a mortal King endure the contempt of his laws? can
he put up the contempt of his own person? Can he abide any to spit at his
Scepter, or to throw a stone at it? No surely, he will not.

Therefore the holy Ghost says: He that despises Moses Laws, dies without
mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer He. 10. 28.
punishment suppose ye shall he be worthy, which treads under foot the
Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing
(wherewith he was sanctified) and does despise the Spirit of grace. And
again; If they were punished which obeyed Heb. 2. 5.
not the word spoken by Angels; how shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? If they Heb. 13.
escaped not, which refused him, that spoke on earth; how shall we escape, if
we turn away from him that speaks from heaven? Therefore our Savior Christ
says; That it shall be Luke 10. 12.
easier for Sodom in the day of judgment, then for the contemners of the
Gospel.

Moreover he says; The Queen of the Matt. 12.
South shall rise up in judgment, against all froward despisers of his Word.
For she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon: and behold a greater then Solomon is here. For Christ is greater then
Solomon, his doctrine and wisdom far more excellent. And therefore their
sin is the greater which contemn it. They shall never be able to answer it.
For the spirit says; He that despises the word, shall be destroyed. Par. 13.
13


S. Peter also tells us, that the old world, Pet. 3. 19.
and men of the first age, are now in hell fire, because they both despised,
and were disobedient to 2. Pet. 2. 5.
the doctrine of Christ, which (though not personally, yet in his divine
spirit) he spoke by Noah. So then we see clearly, God will never take it at
our hands, that his glorious Gospel should be so universally and openly
contemned as it is.


Phila. You have spoken most truly, and also showed it out of the Scriptures,
that the contempt of the Gospel is a most heinous sin: yet for all that, it is
most lamentable to consider, how little men esteem it, and how light they make
of it. Many regard it, no more then an eg-shell; they think it is not worth a
gally halfpenny; they will not go to the door to hear it; they take it to be
but a breath from us, and a sound to them: and so the matter is ended. They
esteem it but as a noise, or empty sound, in the air; or, as a voice afar
off, which a man understands not: they never felt the power of it in their
hearts. Therefore they prefer their sheep, their Farms, their Oxen, their
profits, their pleasure, yea every thing before it; they know it not to be any
such precious jewel, as it is. Although our Lord Jesus himself compare it to
a hid treasure, and a most precious pearl; yet these filthy Swine of the world
tread it under feet. For they know not the price of it; though Solomon the wise
says; All the merchandise of gold and silver, pearl and precious stons, are
not to Pro. 3.
be compared unto it: yet these beasts, these dogs and hogs of the world
contemn it. They esteem a cow more, then Christ's most glorious Gospel. They
are like Esops cock, which made more account of a Barlie corn, then all the
precious stones in the World: they are like little children, that esteeeme
their rattles, more then a bag of gold: they are like the Gadarenes, which
esteemed their Hogs, more then Christ and his Gospel: they make nothing of it.
They think it not worth the while. Many of them sit idle in the streets even
upon the Sabboths. While the Gospel is preached in their churches, many are at
cards, and tables, in Alehouses. Many, upon the Sabboths, sleep upon their
beds, all the Sermon while, in the afternoon. Many will hear a Sermon in the
fore-noone: and they take that to be as much as God can require at their hand,
and that he is somewhat beholden unto them for it; but as for the afternoon
they will hear none: then they will to bowls or Tables. These men serve God
in the forenoone, and the devil in the afternoon; some run after whores and
harlots on the Sabboths; some run to dancing and bear-baitings; some sit upon
their stalles; some sit in their shops; some by the fire side; some sit idly in
the streets; some go to the stoole-ball, and other look on. O miserable
wretches! O cursed catifes! O monstrous hel-hounds: which so grossly and openly
contemn the Gospel of Christ! What will become of them in the end? Assuredly
their damnation sleeps not. A thousand deaths wait for them: they lie open
on all sides to the wrath of God. And we may wonder at his marvelous
patience, that he does not throw down balls of wildfire from heaven, to
consume and burn up, both them, their shops, and houses, and even make them
spectacles of his vengeance, for so notorious contempt of such sacred, holy,
and high things.


Theo. You have spoken very truly, zealously, and religiously; and I do
greatly commend you for it. And I must needs affirm the same things. For they
cannot be denied. And for mine own part, I think the Gospel was never so
openly contemned in any age (of a people living under the profession of it, and
under a godly and christian prince) as it is in this age. For howsoever some
make a show of religion, yet they have denied the power thereof. They turn the
grace of God into wantonness, as S. Jude says, verse. 4. They make the Gospel a
cloak for their sins. They receive it and embrace it, as it will best stand
with their profits and pleasures, their lusts and likings, their credit and
policies, and not a jot further. They will practice it at their leisure. These
men profess they know God: but by their works they deny him, and are
abominable, Tit. 1. 10.
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate; This age is full of such
carnal Protestants.


Phil. This age indeed abounds with many hollow hearted hypocrites,
dissemblers and timeseruers; which howsoever they make a face, and bear a
countenance as though they loved the Gospel, yet their heart is not with it.
Their heart is with Atheism; their heart is with Popery. They have a Pope in
their belly; they be Church-Papists. Howsoever, now and then, they come to
the Church, and hear a Sermon, and show a good countenance to the preacher;
yet their heart goes after covetousness. The Lord complains of this, by his
Prophet Ezechiel, saying; This people will sit before thee Eze. 33. 32
and hear thy words; but they will not do them. For, with their mouths they
make jests; and their heart goes after covetousness. God complains of this
also, by his Prophet Jeremy, saying; Will you steal, murder, and commit
adultery, and Ie^. 7. 9.
swear falsely, and stand before me in this house, whereupon my name is called,
and say we are delivered, though we have done all these abominations? Is this
house become a den of thieves, whereupon my name is called? Where we see, how
the Lord does chide his people, and sharply reprove them, for abusing of his
temple, worship and sacrifices; making them a cloak for their sins; and making
his house a den of thieves, which should be an assembly of Saints. Now all
this is a lively description of our time; wherein many use the exercises of the
world, prayer, and sacraments, not to kill and mortify sin, but to nourish and
shelter their sins. For they blindly imagine, that if they come to the church
and pray, and hear the Sermon, they are discharged of their sins, though they
leave them not. They imagine they have given God his full due; and that
therefore they may be the more bold to sin afterward. These kind of hypocrites
are like rogues, which use medicines, not to cure sores, but to make sores.
These are like the Papists, which think, if they hear mass in the morning,
they may do what they list, all the day after.


Theol. I see now, you have very well profited in the knowledge of God, and
true religion. You have spoken soundly, and like a man of knowledge, in Gods
matters. For the common sort of people think indeed, that all religion
consists in the outward service of God, though their hearts be far from him.
To whom God may justly say: This people draws near me with their lips but
their hearts are far from me. Mat. 15. 8.
Of whom also God may justly take up all his just complaints of his people
Israel and Judah; which are so frequent in all the Prophets: to wit, that he
did abhor their sacrifices, loath their oblations, detest their incense,
despise their Esa. 66. 3
new Moons, disdain their rams, lambs, and goats: accounting them all but as
man's blood, dogs blood, swines blood: and all, because their hands were full of
blood; because they executed not justice and judgment in the gate; because they
were not obedient to his will; because their hearts were not with him; because
they used or rather abused all these things, as shelters for their sins.


Phila. The great contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel in this age, does
strongly argue the contempt of the Gospel it self. For a man cannot love the
Gospel, and hate the faithful Ministers thereof. But we see, by lamentable
experience, that the most grave, godly and learned Ministers, are had in
derision of very base and vile persons. And as Job says: They Job 30. 1.
whose fathers I have refused to set with the dogs of my flock, they were the
children of fools, and the children of villains, which were more vile then the
earth; For now every Rascal dares Tit. 1. 7. 1. Cor. 4. 1 Mat. 16. 19. 2. Cor.
5. 20. Apoc. 3. 7 14. 2. Cor. 8. 23.
scoff and scorn at the most grave and ancient Fathers and Pastors of the
Church, dares flout them as they walk in the streets, and as they ride by the
highways. And though the holy Ghost gives them glorious and lofty titles
(as, the Stewards of Gods own house, disposers of his secrets, disbursers of
his treasure, keepers of the broad seal, keepers of the keys of heaven, Gods
Secretaries, Gods Ambassadors, Angels; yea, the very glory of Christ: and all
this, to express the excellency of their calling) yet these vile varlets and
venomous vermin of the earth, dare call them proud prelates, pild parsons,
pelting priests. O monstrous and intolerable impiety! Now it is come to pass,
that this most sacred function (which is glorious in the sight of God, and his
Angels, and in it self most honorable) is had in greatest contempt, of all
callings. For now the earth is full of rank Atheists, and mock-gods; which
scoff at the Gospel, and bleare out their tongues at all Religion. These kind
of fellows never dissemble for the matter. They make no show at all, they are
no hypocrites, they hide not their sins; but declare them openly, like Sodom.
They care not if they never come to the Church: they are too full of it. They
live like brute beasts. They think the Scriptures are but fables. They rail at
the Ministers and Preachers. They make flat opposition against them, and are
notorious mockers and past-graces.


Theol. Of such the Apostle S. Peter foretold, 2. Pet. 33.
that in the last days should come mockers, and such as would live after their
own lusts, etc.

Of such, a godly writer says: Verbum Dei secure Calvin.
contemnitur, promissiones inanes esse creduntur, minae pro fabulis habentur.
That is, The word of God is carelessly contemned, his promises are counted
vain, and his threatenings fables. Of such the Poet says;

Heu viuunt homines, tanquam mors nulla sequatur:
Aut velut Infernus fabule vana foret.
Alas, men live, as they should never die:
Or as though all speech of hell were a stark lie.
Now is also the time, wherein the world swarmeth with papists and Atheists;
and most men live as if there were no God. For now religion is hated, true
godliness despised, zeal abhorred, sincerity scoffed at, uprightness
loathed, preachers contemned, professors disdained, and almost all good men had
in derision. For now we may justly complain with the Prophet: Esa. 59. 14.
Judgment is turned backe-ward, and Justice stands far off. Truth is
failen in the streets, and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth fails; and he
that refraineth from evil, makes himself a pray. The Prophet Micha bewaileth
the times saying: The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
righteous Mic. 7. 2.
among men. They all lie in wait for blood: every man hunreth his neighbor
with a net. The Prophet Jeremy complains of the same evil in his time;
namely, that the people were come to be past shame in sinning. Were they Ier.
8. 12.
ashamed (says he) when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not
ashamed, neither could they have any shame. This is a lively picture and a very
counterpane of our time. For now we have put on a brow of brass: we are become
impudent in sin. We cannot blush: we cannot be ashamed. We are almost past
shame, and past grace. O Lord what will this geere grow to in the end!


Phila. We may justly fear some great judgment of God to be near us; yea
even to hang over our heads. For the Lord will never leave the contempt of his
Gospel and his ministry unpunished.


Theol. You have spoken a truth. And we have heard before how the old world
was plagued for it. And we read how grievously the Jews were asflicted by the
Romans for this sin: as our Lord Jesus did plainly foretell. We read also,
that after the Lord had broached the Gospel himself, and spread it abroad by
his Apostles, conquering the world thereby (which thing was signified by the
white horse, his rider, his bow and his crown) and yet shortly after, saw that
the same began to be contemned Apoc. 6. 2.
in the world and made light of; then he did in most fearful manner plague
the earth with wars, blood-sheddings, tumults, dearth, famine, and
pestilence: which all are signified by the red horse, the black horse, and the
pale horse, which did appear at the opening of the second, third, and fourth
seal. So likewise undoubtedly, God will severely punish all injuries, wrongs,
and contempts, done to his faithful ambassadors; as appears Apocal. 11. 5.
where it is set down, that if any would hurt the two witnesses with their two
Olives, and two candlesticks, (whereby is signified the faithful Preachers of
the Gospel, with all their spiritual treasures and heavenly light) fire
should proceed out of their mouths, and devour their adversaries. That is,
the fire of Gods wrath should consume all that had oppressed them, either by
mockes, flouts, railings, slanders, imprisonment, or any other kind of
indignity. Of this we have a plain example or two, in the Scripture. First, we
read how fire came down from Heaven, and consumed the contemptuous 2. King 1.
10. 2. King. 1. 23.
captain and his fifty, at the threatening and calling for of Eliah. Secondly,
how two Bears came out of the forest, and tare in pieces 42. yonkers, which
mocked Elishah the Prophet of God; calling him bald-head, bald-pate. So then by
these examples, it is manifest, that howsoever the Lord may wink at these
things for a time, and make as though he saw them not: yet the time will come,
when he will rain fire and brimstone upon all the scoffers of his faithful
Ministers; and contemners of his Gospel. All this is plainly declared in the
5. Chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon: where is showed how the wisdom of God,
even Jesus Christ the highest wisdom, does cry aloud all abroad in the world,
and manifest himself in the open streets: but yet is contemned of wicked
worldlings and scoffing fools. Therefore says Christ: Because I have called,
and ye ^ro. 1. 24. ^8.
refused, I have stretched out my hand, but none would regard: ye have hated
knowledge, and despised all my counsel; therefore I will laugh at your
destruction, and mock when your fear comes upon you like sudden desolation,
and your destruction like a whirle-winde. Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Here
then we see is terrible wrath and vengeance threatened from heaven, against all
profane contemners of Christ, and his everlasting Gospel, or any the
faithful publishers, and proclaimers thereof. Behold therefore, ye despisers,
and wonder: consider well what will become of you in the end. Dee not think,
that the most just God will always put it up at your hands, that ye should so
manifestly contemn both his Word, and the most zealous Preachers and
professors thereof. No, no: assure your selves he will be even with you at
last. He will smite you both sidelings and overthwart; he will dog you and
pursue you with his judgments and never leave following the chase with you,
till he have destroyed you, and consumed you from off the face of the earth.
For remember, I pray you, what he says in Deuteronomy. If I whet my glittering sword,
and my hand take hold of judgment, I will execute vengeance on mine enemies,
and I will reward them that hate me; I will make mine arrows drunk with blood,
and my sword shall eat the flesh of mine adversaries.


Phila. Truly Sir, you may justly fear, that for our great contempt of the
Gospel, and general coldness both in the profession and practice thereof,
God will take it from us, and give it to a people that will bring forth the
fruit thereof.


Theol. We may well fear indeed, lest for our sins, especially our loathing
of the heavenly Manna, the Lord remove our candle-sticke, take away our silver
trumpets, let us no more hear the sweet belles of Aaron, cause all vision to
fail, and our Sabbaths to cease, and bring upon us that most grievous and sore
famine of not hearing the word of the Lord, spoken of by Amos the Prophet. Then
shall all our Halcion Amos. 8.
days, and golden years, be turned into weeping, mourning, and lamentation.
God, for his infinite mercy sake, turn it away from us.


Phila. Amen, Amen; and let us all pray earnestly, night and day, that those
fearful judgments may according to Gods infinite mercies be held back, which
our sins do continually cry for: and that his most glorious Gospel may be
continued to us and our posterity, even yet with greater success.


Asune. No doubt, it is a very great sin to despise the word of God: and I
think there is none so bad that will do it. For we ought to love Gods word:
God forbid else. He that loves not Gods word, it is pity he lives.


Theol. These are but words of course. It is an easy matter to speak good
words. And very many will say as you say: but both you, and they, in your
practice do plainly show that you make no reckoning of it: you esteem it no
more then a dish-clout. I think, if the matter were well tried, you have scant
a Bible in your house. But though you have one, it is manifest that you seldom
read therein, with any care or conscience: and as seldom hear the word
preached. How else could you be so ignorant as you are?


Asune. I grant, that I and some others are somewhat negligent in the hearing
and reading of the word of God: but you cannot say therefore we do contemn it.


Theol. Yes verily. Your continual negligence, and carelessness, does argue a
plain contempt. Sure it is, you have no appetite, nor stomach to the holy
word of God. You had rather do any thing, then either read or meditate in it.
It is irksome unto you. You read not two Chapters in a week. All holy
exercises of religion are most bitter and tedions unto you. They are as vinegar
to your teeth, and smoke to your eyes. The immoderate love of this world, and
of vanity, has taken away your appetite from all heavenly things. And where as
you shift it off with negligence, as though that would excuse you; the Apostle
hits you home, when he says: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Heb.
2. 3
salvation? Mark that he says: if we neglect.


Antile. Belike you think men have nothing else to do, but read the
scriptures, and hear sermons.


Theo. I do not say so. I do not say ye should do nothing else. For God does
allow you, with a good concience, and in his fear, to follow the works of
your calling: as has been said before. But this I condemn in you, and many
others; that you will give no time to private prayers, reading, and meditation
in Gods word: neither morning, nor evening, neither before your business, nor
after. And although you have often vacant time enough, yet you will rather
bestow it in vanity, and idle prattling, and gossipping, then in any good
exercise of Religion. Which does plainly show, that you neither delight in
holy things: neither is there any true fear of God before your eyes.


Antil. I tell you plainly, we must tend our business; we may go beg else; we
cannot live by the Scriptures. If we follow Sermons we shall never thrive. What
do you think every man is bound to read the Scriptures? Have we not our five
wits? Do we not know what we have to do? You would make fools of us belike.
But we are neither drunk nor mad.


Theol. That every man (of what condition soever) is bound in conscience to
hear and read the word of God, has been showed, and proved in the beginning
of our conference. But as for your five wits, they will not serve your turn in
these matters: though you had fifteen wits. For all the wit, reason, and
understanding of natural men, in Gods matters, is but blindness, and mere
foolishness. The Apostle 1. Cor. 3. 19. Romans 8. 7.
says, that the wisdom of the most wise in this world, is not only
foolishness with God; but indeed very enmity against God. And again, he
says, that the natural man (with all his five wits) understands not the
things of the Spirit 1. Cor. 2. 14.
of God; because they are spiritually discerned. Most prudently to this point
speaks Elihu, saying: There is a spirit in man; but the Job. 32. 2.
inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding.


Antile. I understand not these Scriptures which you do allege: they do not
sink into my head.


Theol. I think so indeed. For the holy ghost says: Wisdom is too high for
a fool. Pro. 24. 7.



Antile. What do you call me fool? I am no more fool then your self.


Theo. I call you not fool: but I tell you, what the Scripture says; which
calls all men (though otherwise never so wise, politic, and learned) very
fools: till they be truly lightened, and inwardly sanctified by the Spirit of
God; as appears, Tit. 3. 3. Where the Apostle affirms, that both Titus and
himself, before they received the illuminating Spirit of Gods grace, were very
fools, without wit, and without all sense in Gods matters.


Phila. I pray you, good M. Theologus, let him alone; For he will never have
done cauilling. I see, he is a notable cauiller. Let us therefore proceed to
speak of the fifth sign of Condemnation; which is swearing.


Theol. It may well indeed be called a sign of condemnation. For I think it
more then a sign; it is indeed an evident demonstration of a Reprobate. For I
never wist any man, truly fearing God in his heart, that was an usual and a
common swearer.


Phila. I am flat of your mind for that. For it cannot be, that the true fear
of God, and ordinary swearing should dwell together in one man: since swearing is
a thing forbidden by flat statute. And God adds a sore threat to his Law:
that he will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; but will
most sharply and severely punish that man.


Theol. You say true. And God says moreover, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
that if we do not fear and dread his glorious and fearful name Iehoua, he
will make our plagues wonderful. He says also by his Prophet Malachie, that
he will be a swift witness Mal. 3. 5. Zach. 5. 2. 4.
against swearers. The Prophet Zachary says, that the flying book of Gods
curse and vengance, shall enter into the house of the swearer, and he shall be
cut off.

Therefore let all swearers take heed and look to themselves in time. For we
see, there is a rod in piss, laid up in store for them.


Phila. These threatenings being so great and grievous, and that from the God of
Heaven himself, a man would think should cause men's hearts to quake and
tremble, and make them afraid to rap out such oaths as they do; if they were
not altogether hardened, past feeling, and past grace.


Theol. True indeed: but yet we see, by lamentable experience, how men are
given over both to swear, and for swear, For at this day there is no sin
more common amongst us then swearing. For many there be which cannot speak ten
words, but one shall be an oath. And numbers have got such a wicked custom of
swearing that they can by no means leave it: no more then a Black-moore can
change his skin, or a Leopard his spots. For it is made natural unto them,
through custom: and they have got the habit of it. I do verily think, if it
were high Treason to swear, yet some could not leave swearing. And sure I am
(as light as we make of it) that it is high Treason against the crown of
Heaven. Yea, it is a sin immediately against God: even against his own
person. And therefore he has forbidden it, in the first Table of his Law.


Phila. Questionless, this vice of swearing is of all other sins most rife
in this Land. For you shall hear little boys and children, in the streets,
rap out oaths, in most fearful manner. It would make a man's heart quake, to
hear them. We may think, they have sucked them out of their mothers breasts:
but sure we are, they have learned them from the evil example of their
parents. And now adays we cannot almost talk with a man, but (in ordinary
speech) he will belke out one oath or another.


Theol. I will tell you a strange thing; and with great grief I speak it. I
do verily think there are sworn in this land an hundred thousand oaths, every
day in the year.


Phila. No doubt, Sir, you are within compass. For now almost so many men, so
many oaths; excepting some few in comparison. Nay, I know diverse of mine own
experience, which if they may be kept in talk, will swear every day in the
year an hundred oaths for their parts.


Theol. Oh what a lamentable thing is it! We may well take up the old complaint
of the Prophet Jeremy, who says; that in his time the Land did mourn,
because of oaths. Iere. 23. 20.
And we may well wonder, that the land sinketh not because of oaths. For, if
God were not a God of infinite patience, how could he endure his most sacred
and glorious name to be so many thousand times blasphemed in one day? and that,
by such miserable wretches as we be.


Phila. We may indeed admire and wonder at the patience and long suffering of
God, that he spares us so long, and gives us so large a time of repentance;
but sure it is that the Prophet says; That, howsoever the Lord is slow to
anger, yet he is great in power, and will not surely clear the wicked. Though
he Nah. 1. 3.
may wink at their monstrous oaths for a time, yet he forgets them never a
whit, but scoreth them up, and registreth them in his book of accounts; so as
they stand in record against them. And when the great day of reckoning shall
come, he will set them all in order before them, and lay them to their charge.

Let not wicked swearers and blasphemers therefore think that they shall always
escape scot-free, because God lets the^ alone for a while, and deferreth
their punishment. For the longer God deferreth, the more terrible will his
strokes be when they come. The longer an arrow is held in the bow, the
stronger will be the shot when it comes forth. Though God have leaden
feet, and comes slowly to execute wrath, yet has he an iron hand, and will
strike deadly when he comes. Though God gives the wicked security for a time
(says Job 24. 23.
Job) yet his eyes are fixed upon all their ways. And in an other place he
says; The wicked is reserved unto the day of destruction, and they shall be
brought forth unto the day of wrath Job 21. 30
. So then the holy man Job plainly affirms, that the state and condition of
all the rich and wealthy worldlings is, as the condition of an Ox that is
fatted up against the day of slaughter. For in the same Chapter he says; They
Job. 21.
spend their days in wealth, and suddenly go down to hell. But now I pray
you nominate the oaths which are so rife and common amongst us.


Theol. There be six oaths, which are (of all other) most rife and common, in
every man's mouth; and they be these: By my Faith. By my Troth. Six common
oaths.
By our Lady. By S. Mary. By God. As God shall judge me.


For you cannot lightly talk with a man, but he will flush out some of these,
in his ordinary speech.


Asune. Do you count it so great a matter, for a man to swear by his faith,
or his troth?


Theol. Yes indeed do I. For our faith and our troth are the most precious
jewels we have. Shall we then lay them to gage, for every word we speak? It
shows we are of small credit: nay, very bankrupts. For who but a bankrupt
will lay the best jewel in his house to pledge, for every small trifle?


Asune. I know a man, that will never swear, but by Cock or Pie, or
Mouse-foot. I hope you will not say they be oaths. For he is as honest a man
as ever brake bread. You shall not hear an oath come out of his mouth.


Theol. I do not think, he is so honest a man as you make him. For it is no
small sin to swear by creatures. The Lord says by his Prophet Jeremy: They
have forsaken me, and Iere. 5. 7.
sworn by them that are no Gods. So then to swear by creatures, is to forsake
God. And I trow you will not say, he is an honest man which forsakes God.


Asune. I do not believe that to swear by small things is a forsaking of God.


Theol. You, and such as you are, will believe no more of the word of God, then
will stand with your fantasy. But whatsoever you believe, or believe not, the
word of God stands sure: and no jot of it shall ever be proved false. But
this I will say unto you, because you think it so small a matter to swear by
creatures; that the more base and vile the thing is which you swear by, the
greater is the oath: because you ascribe that unto a base creature, which is
only proper to God: namely to know our hearts, and to be a discerner of secret
things. For whatsoever a man swears by, he calls it as a witness unto his
conscience, that he speaks the truth, and lies not: which thing only
belongs unto God. And therefore in swearing by creatures, we do rob God of
his honor. Therefore to swear by the cross of the money, or by bread, or a
mouse foot, or the fire which they call Gods Angel, or any such like, is a
robbing of God of his Honor, and an ascribing of that to the creature, which
is proper only to the Creator.


Asune. What say you then to them, which swear by the Mass, and by the Rood?


Theol. Their sin is as great as the other. For it is an heinous thing to
swear by idols: as S. Mary, our Lady, by the Mass, by the Rood, etc. The
Prophet Amos says: They that Amos 8. 4
swear by the sin of Samaria, and that say; thy God, O Dan, lives; even
they shall fall, and never rise up again. To swear by the sin of Samaria,
is to swear by Idols: for Samaria was full of idols.

Moreover the Lord threatens by the Prophet Zephany, that he will cut off them
that Zep. 1. 5.
swear by the Lord, and by Malcham, or by their King. For the idolaters called
their idol, Molech, their King.


Asune. Seeing you condemn both swearing by creatures, and swearing by idols,
what then must we swear by? You would have us swear by nothing, belike.


Theo. In our ordinary communication we must not swear at all, either by one
thing or another. But (as our Lord teaches us) our communication Ma. 5. 37.
must be, yea, yea; nay, nay. For whatsoever is more then these, comes of
evil. And Saint James says: Before all things, my Iam. 5. 12.
brethren, swear not: neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath:
but let your Yea be yea, and your Nay nay, lest you fall into condemnation.


Antile. It seems you are an Anabaptist. You condemn all swearing; you will
have no swearing at all.


Theol. Not so. For though I condemn swearing by creatures, swearing by idols,
and vain swearing; yet do I allow swearing before a Magistrate, and privately
also, in matters of weight and importance, for the further bolting out of the
truth.

This is warranted from Gods own mouth, where he says: Thou shall swear, The
Lord Iere. 4.
lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. And in these cases
only, the name of God is to be sworn by; as it is written: Thou Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
shall fear the Lord thy God, and thou shall serve him, and shall cleave unto
him, and shall swear by his name.


Asune. May we not swear by God in our common talk?


Theol. At no hand. For that is to take the name of God in vain: which you
know is forbidden.

And one of the wise Heathen could say thus: When an oath is laid upon thee,
undertake it for two causes: either to deliver thy self from some grievous
crime and accusation, or else to preserve thy friends from danger. So then that
Isocra. ad Demon.
Heathen man in common talk, will not allow any oath, much less, to swear by
God. Another says: Avoid an oath, though thou swear Phocilid.
truly. So then we see vain swearing condemned, even by Heathen.


Asune. Yea, but for all that, we must swear; men will not believe us else.


Theol. Neither yet will they believe you any whit the more for your swearing.
For it does manifestly appear, that thousands make no conscience at all of it.
They make no more conscience of it, then of cracking of nuts: and therefore
what wise man will believe them, though they swear never so much? But, if you
would make conscience always to speak the truth, from your heart, without any
oaths at all, you should be better believed of all honest and wise men, then
otherwise with a thousand oaths.


Antile. It is the custom to swear.


Theol. But a wicked and devilish custom.


Antile. I hope, sir, we may swear, as long as we swear truly, and swear by
nothing but that which is good.


Theol. It has been answered before, that in vain matters you may not
swear at all.


Antil. As long as we do no worse than that, I hope God will hold us excused.


Theol. God will not hold you excused, when you break his commandments, and
continue so doing.


Antil. What say you then, to them, that swear wounds and blood, and such
like, in a bravery, thinking that it sets out their speech very well?


Theol. Hell gapeth for them. And they shall know one day, what it is to
blaspheme God.


Antil. What may we think of such as swear by Gods life, Gods soul, Gods
body, Gods heart?


Theol. That their cause is most woeful and dangerous: and I quake at the
naming of them. They are most horrible, monstrous and outrageous blasphemies:
enough to make the stones in the street to crack, and the clouds to fall upon
our heads. And we may think, that all the Devils in hell are in a readiness,
to carry such blasphemous villains headlong into that lake, which burns with
fire and brimstone, for ever.


Antil. Do you find in the Scriptures, that God will so severely punish
swearers?


Theol. Yes verily. For besides that which has been spoken before, we have
diverse other examples: First of Senacherib, the King of Ashur, who for his
outrageous blasphemies against the God of heaven, was in most fearful and
tragical manner slame by his own sons, Adramelech, and Sharezer: and that,
in the 1. Kin. 19. 35.
Temple, when he was worshipping his Idol God, Nisroch. And yet behold a more
fearful example of Gods wrath, against blasphemers.

We read that an hundred thousand of the 1. Kin. 20. 29.
Aramites were slain, by the Israelites, in one day, for blaspheming of God:
And seven and twenty thousand being left, and flying into the city of Aphek for
refuge, were all slain, by the fall of an huge great wall. What should I here
speak how the seven sons of Saul, the King of Israel, were hanged up before
the Lord in mount 2. Sam. 21. 9.
Gibeah, for the breach of the oath made to the Gibeonites long before? In
these examples, we may plainly see, that the just God, even in this life,
sometimes will be revenged of blasphemers, and oath-breakers. And therefore the
very Heathen in all ages have been very careful for the performing of oaths:
as Pharaoh King of Egypt willed Joseph to go up into the land of Canaan, to
bury his father, according to his oath made to his father.


Phila. Me thinks, these so terrible, and fearful examples of Gods vengeance
against swearers, and blasphemers, should strike some terror into the hearts of
our blasphemers.


Theol. One would think so indeed, if any thing could do it. But alas, they
are so hardened in it, and in all other sin, that nothing can move them:
except peradventure there were a Law made, that every swearer and blasphemer
should hold his hand a quarter of an hour in boiling lead. This or some such
like severe law, might peradventure curb them a little, and make them bite in
their oaths. But otherwise, they will never fear any thing, till they be in
hell fire, when it will be too late to repent.


Phila. What may be the cause of this so often, and great swearing? for surely
it is no inherent and inbred sin in our nature, as some of the other sins
be.


Theol. No verily. But these three I judge to be the cause of it: Custom. Want
of admonition. Want of punishment.



Phila. What then are the remedies for it?


Theol. The remedies are these: Disuse. Prayer. Friendly admonition. Some
sharp Law.



Phila. Well Sir, now we have heard enough of swearing, I pray you proceed to
the next sign of damnation: which is lying.


Theol. Swearing and lying be of very near kindred. For he that is a common
swearer, is for the most part a common lier also. For he that makes no
conscience of swearing, will make no conscience of lying. And as the Lord
hates the one, so also he hates the other. And as he punishes the one, so he
will punish the other. Therefore Solomon says: Lying lips are Pro. 12. 22.
Apoc. 22. 15.
an abomination unto the Lord. Saint John says: Without shall be dogs,
enchanters, whoore-mongers, murderers, and whosoever loves or makes lies.
Again the same holy man of God says: that liers shall have their Apoc. 21. 8.
part and portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is
the second death.


Phila. These scriptures, which you allege, do manifestly declare that God
abhors liers, and has reserved great torments for them. Therefore the
princely Prophet David says, that he would banish all liers out of his house.
Psa. 101. 7.
He that tells lies (says he) shall not remain in my sight. A lying tongue
is one of the six Pro. 6. 7. 8.
things which God does hate, and his soul abhor. Yet for all this, we see the
lamentable experience, how many have even taught their tongues to lie (as the
Prophet says) and there ^^. 9.
is no truth in their lips. This vice is almost as common as swearing. For it
is hard to find a man that will speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth from his heart, in simplicity and plainness, at all times, in
all places, and amongst all persons, without all glozing or dissembling, either
for fear, gain, flattery, men-pleasing, hiding of faults, or any sinister
respect whatsoever. Where, I say, is this man to be found? I would fain see
him. I would feign look upon such a man. It would do my heart good to behold
him. I would rejoice to set mine eyes upon such a man.


Theo. Such a man, as you speak of, is hardly to be found among the sons of
men. They be black Swans in the earth, they be white crows: they be rare
birds. For there be very few that will speak the truth from their heart: yet
some such I hope there be. But, for the most part, and amongst the greater
sort, lying, dissembling, and fraud, do bear all the sway. There is no truth,
no honesty, no conscience, no simplicity, no plain dealing, amongst men in
these most corrupt times. Faith and truth are parted clean away. And as the
kingly prophet says: The faithful are failed, from among the children Psalm.
12.
of men. They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor; flattering with
their lips, and speak with a double heart. Men now adays study the Art of
lying, flattering, fawning, glosing and dissembling: they have a heart and a
heart. They have honey in their mouth; and gall in their heart. Their tongues
are as soft as butter and oil: but their hearts are full of bitterness,
poison and wormwood. They are full of outward courtesy and ciuility, full of
court holy water, when there is no truth nor plainness in their inward
affection. They will speak you fair, when they would cut your throats. They
will show you a good countenance; when they would eat your heart with
garlic. In outward show, they will carry themselves plausibly, when their
hearts are full of venom and malice. This viperous brood do but watch their
times and opportunities, till they can get a man upon the hip: and then they
will sting him, and work their malice upon him. These fauning curs will not
bark till they bite. They will lurk, and lie close, til they spy their
vantage, and then they will show themselves in their kind: then they will hoist
a man, and turn him over the perke, if they can. These men are like the
waters, which are most deep, where they are most calm: like a dangerous
rock, hid under a calm sea; or, as the Heathen say, like the Sirens song,
which is the Sailers wrecke; like the Fowlers whistle, which is the birds
death; like the hid bait, which is the fishes bane; like the Harpyes, which
have virgins faces, and Uultures tallons; or like Hyena, which speaks like a
friend, and deuoureth like a foe; or, as the Scripture says; like Ioab, the
captain of the 2. Sam. 20. 10.
host, which spoke kindly to Amasa an other Captain, and kissed him, when
presently he stabd him; or like unto the Herodians, and Pharisees servants,
which came to our Lord Jesus with many fawning insinuations, calling him good
master, and telling him that he was the plain truth, that he taught the way of
God truly, he regarded no man's person, and many good morrows, and all this
geere, when as, in very deed, their purpose was to entangle him in his words,
and to entrap him, that they might catch advantage against him, and so cut his
throt, and give him pap with a hatchet. This it is which Pro. 2. 9. 5
the wise man says: A man that flattereth his Pro. 26. 23. Pro. 26. 24.
neighbor, spreads a net for his feet. And again; As silver dross,
ouerlaid upon an earthen pot: so are fawning lips, and an evil heart. And in
another place he says: He that bears hatred, will counterfeit with his
lips: but he lays up deceit in his heart. When he shall show his voice
favorably, trust him not. For their are seven abominations in his heart. He
will cover hatred by deceit: but his malice shall be discovered in the
congregation. In another place he pronounces a curse upon all these hollow
hearted hypocrites, and meale-mouthed flatterers. For says he; Unto him that
blesses his friend, with a loud voice, betimes in the morning rising up
early, a curse Pro. 17 14.
shall be imputed.


Phila. You have very well described the conditions of the men of this age,
which have faces, countenances, and tongues, but no hearts; which profess lying
and dissembling; which say, he cannot live, that cannot dissemble, which have
fair faces, and false hearts, which have forgotten, that plain honesty is
deep policy.


Theol. The holy Ghost, often in the Proverbs of Solomon calls all
unregenerate men fools: or as it is in the Hebrew, men without hearts. Because
they have no heart to God, no heart to his word, no heart to his children, no
heart to godliness, no heart to any thing that good is. They are without an
honest heart, an upright heart, a plain heart. They are all in words, nothing
in deeds. They promise mountains, and perform mol-hils. They will speak well
of religion, and practice nothing. They will give fair words to their friends,
and do just nothing for them.


Phila. The world is full of these masked counterfaits: and lying and
dissembling did never more abound.


Theol. It is too true, that lying and dissembling are most rife, and over
common vices amongst all sorts of men: but especially it does ouerflow and
super abound in shop keepers, and servants. For both these make a trade and
occupation of it, they can do no other but lie. It cleaves unto them, as the
nail to the door.


Phila. I do certainly know some shop keepers, which (to utter their bad
wares, and to blind the eyes of the simple) do trade in lying, all the day
long, from Sun to Sun; from the opening of the shop and windows, to the
shutting of the same. And what is their life (if customers come in apace) but
swearing, lying, dissembling, and deceiving? they will lie as fast as a dog
will trot, as we say. It is a wonder, that their shops and all their wares do
not fire over their heads, for their so common, so lewd, and so abominable
lying; and that against their own knowledge, against their conscience, against
God, against their neighbor, against heaven and earth, men and angels.


Theol. True it is, we may marvel at the long suffering of God in this
behalf. But this is to be noted, that God does not immediately punish all
notorious sinners in this life: but reserueth thousands to the judgment of the
great day. In this life he only culleth out some few, whom he smites for the
example of others, that they might fear and tremble, and learn by other men's
harms to beware.

Therefore, even in this life, we see before our eyes, some liers, some
drunkards, some whoremongers, some swearers, some misers of the world, some
ruffians, and cutthroats, stricken down, by the revenging hand of God. But
whereas God smites one of these, in this life, he lets an hundred escape.
For if he should punish all offenders in this life, to what purpose should the
judgment to come serve? If he should punish none, then we would think there
were no God, or that he were shut up idle in heaven, and would do neither
good, nor evil, nor once meddle in the matters of the earth: as some Epicures
have dreamed. Therefore, to avoid both these extremities, God in his heavenly
wisdom has thought good to meet with some, even in this world.


Phila. I am of this mind, that the goods which men get by swearing, lying,
and deceit, will never prosper long.


Theol. You are not therein deceived. For God will blow upon all such kind of
evil gotten goods, and they shall put it in a bottomless purse, as the Prophet
says, Hag. 1. 6. The holy Ghost, in the book of the Proverbs, has many
excellent sayings to this effect: as chapter 13. The riches of vanity shall be
diminished, but Pro. 13.
he which labors with the hand, shall increase them. Again: He that
deals with a Pro. 10.
deceitful hand shall become poor: but the hand of the diligent makes rich.
In another place he says: The deceitful man rosteth not Pro. 18. 27.
that which he has caught in hunting. That is, he shall not long enjoy or taste
the pray, which he has gotten by fraud. For either one trouble or other will
come upon him, that he shall not be able to possess, or take delight in the
spoil. Therefore it is said: The bread of deceit is Pro. 10. 17.
sweet to a man: but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. That is,
in the end the crafty person shall meet with many troubles. For either his
conscience will vpbraid him and check him, or vengeance will plague him, for
his deceit. The fears, cares and sorrows, which he shall have, shall be as it
were so many sharp stones, to set his teeth on edge, and to vex him.
Wherefore, in stead of meat, he shall feed on gravel: and in steed of wheat,
on pebble stones. Small pleasure is taken in the end in goods ill gotten, or
livings unlawfully come by. For the holy Ghost has passed sentence upon them,
that they shall never prosper.


Phila. It sometimes falls out, that they prosper for a time: but as we say,
the third heir shall never enjoy them. For God will curse them in our
posterity: and our childrens children shall feel the smart of our sins.
Therefore the holy man, Job says: the offspring of the wicked shall not be
satisfied with bread. For Job. 27. 14.
out of doubt, God will bless that only, which is got with a good conscience
in the works of our calling; and it shall remain blessed to us, and our
posterity. Therefore the Spirit says, Pro. 20. 7.
The just man that walks in his uprightness is blessed, and blessed shall
his children be after him. But God will not bless, but curse that, which is
got with an evil conscience; as swearing, lying, dissembling, deceiving, etc.


Theol. Some ancient writers have spoken very prudently to this point. For one
says: Iniusta lucra breues habent voluptates: longos autem dolores. That is,
unjust gain has long sorrow, Ierom.
and short joy. Another says: Eligas damnum, potius quam turpe lucrum illud:
enim semel tantum te dolere afficiet; hoc vero semper. That is, choose August.
loss, rather then filthy lucre. For the one will grieve thee but once; the
other, for ever. A third says; Melius est honest pauperem esse, quam turpiter
diuitem. Hoc enim commiserationem, illud vero reprehensionem adfert. It is
better Bernard.
to be honestly poor, then wickedly rich. For the one moves pity, the other
reproof. One of Euripid. Pheniss.
the wise Heathen also says: We may not wax rich unjustly; but live of just
things; which he calls holy things.


Phila. Have we not examples in the Scriptures of such as have been punished
for lying?


Theol. Yes. For we read how the Gibeonits, Ios. 9. 23.
for their lying and dissembling, were made drudges and slaves to the
Israelites. Gehezi also 2. King. 5
the servant of Elisha the prophet, for his lying and covetousness together,
was smitten with a most grievous leprosy. Ananias and Sapphira Act. 5. 5.
his wife, for their lying and dissembling, were stricken down stark dead, by
the immediate hand of God, at the rebuke of Peter.

Zophar one of Jobs friends, speaking of these kind of men, says: They shall
suck the gall of Job. 20. 16. 24.
Aspes, and the Vipers tongue shall slay them. They shall flee from the iron
weapons, and a bow of steel shall strike them through.

Now then by all these examples we may plainly see, how greatly God abhors
lying and dissembling.


Phila. Oh therefore that we could follow Col. 3. 9.
the counsel of the Apostle, who says: Lie not one to another: since ye have
put off the old man, with his works. And again: Cast Ephesians. 4. 5.
away lying, and speak every one the truth to his neighbor. The manner of
speech which the Apostle uses is very forcible, implying this much; that we
should in a kind of disdain or detestation, cast it away, and throw it from
us, as a filthy, stinking and beraied clout, hanging about a man's neck: which
he does suddenly snatch away, and hurleth into the fire; as being ashamed,
that ever it should be seen or known. Would to God therefore that we were come
to such a detestation and loathing of lying, that we would even spattle at it,
and cry fie upon it, and all that use it! Oh that we could hate it as the
devil, which is the father of Homer. Iliad. 3.
it; and as hell fire, which is the reward of it! Oh that we were come but so
far as the heathen man, who says; I hate him as the gates of hell, who has
one thing in his tongue and another in his heart!


Antil. Yet for all this we find in the scriptures, that even some of the godly
have been taken tardie in lying, and yet have not sinned in so doing; as
Abraham, Jacob, Rahab, the Midwiues of Egypt; And therefore why may not we do
so to.


Theol. I told you before, that you may not make the infirmities of Gods
people, rules for you to live by. And further I answer, that all these did
offend in their living. Some of them indeed, I grant, are commended for their
love to the church and charitable affections to Gods people, but none of them
simply for lying: which is a thing condemned eue^ of the heathen. For says
Eurip. Pheniss.
one of them: Lying does corrupt the life of man: and every wise and godly man
does hate lying.


Antile. But may we not lie, now and then, for a vantage?


Theol. No verily: neither is there any good vantage to be got that way. For
when you have made up your accounts, all charges deducted, and all expenses
defraied, your clear gains will be very small. For by your wilful and
customary lying you gain inward grief, and lose true joy; you gain short
pleasure, and lose perpetual glory; you gain hell, and lose heaven; you make
the devil your friend, and God your enemy. Now then reckon your gain.


Phila. I pray you let us grow toward a conclusion of this point: and show us
briefly the chief causes of lying.


Theol. The chief causes of lying are these: Custom. Fear. Covetousness.
The devil.



Phila. What be the remedies?


Theol. The remedies be these: Disuse. Godly boldness. Contentation. Earnest
prayer.



Phila. You have spoken enough of this vice to cause all such to abhor it and
forsake it, as have any drop of grace, or spark of Gods fear in them: but
as for them that are filthy, let them be more filthy. Now I pray you speak
your judgment of the seventh sign of condemnation: which is drunkenness.


Theol. It is so brutish and beastly a sin, that a man would think, it
should not need to be spoken against: but that all reasonable men should even
abhor it, and quake to think of it. For it is a most swinish thing: it
makes of a man, a beast: it takes away the heart of a man from all goodness,
as witnesses the Prophet Hosea, saying: Whoredom, wine, and new Hos. 4 11.
wine, take away their heart. For, what heart, what stomach, what appetite can
whoremongers and drunkards have to any thing that is good? either to hear or
read the word of God, or to pray or to meditate in the same? Alas, they are
far from it, far from God, and far from all grace and goodness. Therefore
the Prophet Joel says: Awake ye drunkards: weep and Joel. 1. 5.
howl ye drinkers of wine. Yea, the mighty God of heaven does pronounce a woe
against them, saying: Woe unto them that rise up early Esa. 5. 11.
to follow drunkenness: and to them that continue until night, till the wine
do inflame them. Our Lord Jesus himself gives us a caveat, to take heed of
it: Take heed, says he, that Luke. 22. 24.
your hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of
this life: and so that day come upon you unawares. Thus you hear, how both
Christ himself, and sundry of the Prophets, do thunder down from heaven
against this gross beastliness, which now abounds and reigns amongst the
sons of men.


Phila. True indeed. But yet almost nothing will make men leave it: for it is a
most rife and over common vice. We see many, that think themselves some bodies
(and as we say, no small fools) which yet will be overtaken with it: and
thereby lose all their credit and reputation with all wise men: yea, do prove
themselves to be but swine, and bruit beasts, as the holy Ghost avouches,
saying: Pro. 21. 1.
Wine is a mocker and strong drink is raging: Whosoever is deceived therein, is
not wise.


Theol. The wise king in the same book, does most notably and fully describe
unto us the inconveniences and mischiefs, which do accompany drunkenness, and
follow drunkards at Pro. 23. 29.
the heels. To whom (says he) is woe? to whom is alas? to whom is strife? to
whom is babbling? to whom are wounds without cause? to whom is the redness of
the eyes? Even to them, that tarry long at the wine: to them, that go and seek
out mixed wine. In the same chapter he says: Be Pro. 23. 19.
not of the number of them, which are bibbers of wine, or of them which glut
themselves with flesh: for the drinker and the feaster shall become poor: and
the sleeper shall be clothed with rags. Moreover he says: Their eyes shall
behold Pro. 23.
strange women: and that they shall be like him that lies in the midst of the
Sea, and sleeps in the top of the Mast. In all these speeches, the holy Ghost
does, in most lively manner, describe unto us the properties of drunkards: even
their staggering, their reeling, their snorting, their senseless sensuality.
Behold then what be the cursed fruits and events of drunkenness. Even these
which follow: woe, alas, grief, misery, beggerie, poverty, shame, lusts,
strife, babbling, brauling, fighting, quarelling, surfeiting, sickness,
diseases, swinish sleeping, security, and sensuality. So then I conclude,
that drunkenness is a vice more beseeming an hog, then any reasonable man.
And as one says: It is the Metropolitan City of all the Province of vices.

Well therefore says the Heathen writer: Demost. Olinth.
When the wine is in, a man is as a running coach without a Coachman.


Phila. Let us hear what executions have been done upon drunkards in former
ages, that now men may learn to take heed by their examples.


Theol. Ammon, one of David's ungracious 2. Sam. 12. 28. 2. King. 20. 16.
children, being drunk, was slain by his brother Absalon. Benhadad, King of
Syria, being drunk, was discomfited by Ahab, King of Israel. Elah King of
Israel, being drunk, was slain by Zimri his servant, and captain of his 1.
King. 16. 9.
Chariots: who also succeeded him in the kingdom. Lot, being drunk, committed
incest with Genesis 19. 37.
his own daughters: and therefore was punished in his posterity. Thus we see,
what executions have been done, even upon Kings, for this kind of sin.
Therefore let men learn, once at last, to shun vice, and embrace virtue: and
as the Apostle says, to make an end of their salvation in fear and trembling.
For all our shifts and starting holes will serve us to no purpose in the end:
but when we have fisked hither and thither, never so much, yet at the last we
must be feign to be shut up in Gods wrath.


Antile. What I pray you, do you make it so great a matter if a man be a little
ouertake^ with drink, now and then? There is no man but he has his faults:
and the best of us all may be amended. If neighbors meet together now and
then, at the Ale house, and play a game at Maw, for a pot of Ale, meaning no
hurt: I take it to be good fellowship, and a good means to increase love
amongst neighbors: and not so heinous a thing as you make it.


Theol. I see you would fain make fair weather of it; and smooth over the
matter with sweet words: as though there were no such great evil in it. But
howsoever you mince it, and blaunch it over, yet the Apostle says flatly: That
drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom 1. Cor. 5.
of God. I think, this one sentence is enough to amaze and strike through the
hearts of all drunkards in the world: For it is as much in effect, as if the
Apostle had said: All drunkards are notorious Reprobates, and hell hounds,
branded of Satan, and devoted to perpetual destruction and damnation.

But you say, you mean no hurt. I answer, whatsoever you mean, your actions
are naught, and your fellowship as bad. For what good meaning can you have? or
what good fellowship call you it, for poor laboring men, artificers, and such
like, to sit idly all the day long in Tauernes and Alehouses, mispending
their time, and their money in gaming, rioting, swearing, staring, swilling,
bezzeling, bibbing, brauling, and brabling? There is no true fellowship in it:
it is mere impiety: if we may call it impiety, for poor men to live idly,
dissolutely, neglecting their callings, while their poor wives and children
sit crying at home for bread, being ready to starve, to beg or to steal. I
pray you speak your conscience, what good fellowship is there in this?


Antile. Yet for all that, there be some which abstain from Alehouses, and
yet are as bad as any other. For they will backe-bite and slander their
neighbors: they will do them a shrewd turn, as soon as any other: they are
envious, they censure us, and disdain our company. Yet we think our selves as
good as they: for all their shows of holiness.


Theol. You speak more then you know, or can justify, against some better
then your self. But if it were so, you should but justify one sin by another,
a lesser by a greater: which is to no purpose.


Antile. Will you then condemn all good fellowship?


Theol. No no: I do greatly allow godly and Christian fellowship: and
acknowledge it to be one of the chiefest comforts we have in the world. I know
we are commanded to love brotherly fellowship. But as for your
potcompanionship, 1. Pet. 2. 1.
I hate it, and abhor it. For it is written: He that follows the Heb. 13.
idle, shall be filled with poverty. And again: He that keeps company with
banquetters, Pro. 28. 1.
shameth his Father. And in an other place: He that loves pastime, shall be a
poor man: Pro. 28. 7.
and he that loves Wine and Oil, shall not be rich.


Phila. Good M. Theologus, talk no more Pro. 21. 27.
with him: but let us draw near unto the windevp of this matter: and tell us
in a word, which be the chief causes of Drunkenness.


Theol. The causes are these: Causes of drunkenness.
Ill company. Alehouses. Idleness. A wicked humor.



Phila. Which be the true remedies?


Theol. The remedies are these: Avoiding of ill company. Remedies for
drunkenness.
Shunning of Alehouses. Labor in our callings. A good course of life.



Phil. Well Sir you have waded far enough in this point: let us now come to
the eighth sign of condemnation: which is idleness.


Theol. Concerning idleness, this I say briefly: that it is the mother of all
vice, and the stepdame of all virtue: yea, it is the very veldame of all
enormities: It is the mother of whoredom, the mother of pride, the mother of
theft, the mother of drunkenness, the mother of ignorance, the mother of
error, the mother of poverty, the mother of slandering and backbiting,
prattling, and gossipping, brawling, scolding, quarelling: and what not?
Idleness was one of the principal sins of Sodom, as the Prophet Ezechiel
testifies, saying: pride, fullness Ezech. 16. 29.
of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters. Solomon
is very plentiful in this matter: For, says he, the sluggard Pro. 13. 4.
lusts and has naught. And again: The sluggard is wiser in his own
conceit, then Pro. 16. 16.
seven men that can give a sensible reason. That is; he takes himself the
wisest of many; because he spares his body, when others take Pro. 24. 33.
pains: he says; Yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a little
folding of the hands: and his poverty comes like a traveler; that is
unawares: and his necessity like an armed man: that is strongly. Then he
foldeth his Eccl. 4. 5. Pro 26. 15.
hands together, and eats his own flesh. For, he hides his hand in his
bosom: and it wearieth him to put it to his mouth again.

In an other place the holy Ghost says: The slothful man will not plough,
because of winter: Therefore he shall beg in summer, and have nothing.

Again: the slothful man is brother to him Pro. 16. 8.
that is a great waster.

Moreover it is said, that the sluggard turns Pro. 26. 14.
himself upon his bed, as the door does upon the hinges:

That is, he keeps his bed, as if he were fastened to it.

And, because the Spirit will abound in this point: it is further written of
the slethfull man that he says; An huge Lion is in the way: I Pro. 26. 11.
shall be slain in the streets. That is, when any good matter is in hand (as
preaching, praying, reading, giving to the poor, etc.) then he draws back,
he shrinketh into the shell, he finds one let or other, one excuse or other.
Then profit, and pleasure, business, and idleness, matters at home, and
matters abroad, company, and a thousand occasions will lie in his way, as so
many Lions, to let and hinder him. So then we see, how lively and plentifully
the holy Scriptures do paint out the lazy lubbers of this world, and sons of
idleness: which are as hardly drawn to any good thing, as a Bear to the
stake. As for the duties of Religion, they go as lively and as cheareful about
them, as a thief goes up the ladder, to be executed for his theft.


Phila. I do plainly see, that this sin of Idleness is a very gross
evil, and the root of many vices: yet for all that, there be a great number
which think they were borne to live idly; as many young Gentlemen, and such
like: which imagine, they came into the world for no other purpose, but to hunt
and hawke, card, and dice, riot and revel, and to spend their days in
pleasure and vanity. Again, there be many lazy lozels, and luskish youths,
both in Towns and Villages, which do nothing all the day long, but walk in
the streets, sit upon the staules, and frequent Tauernes and Alehouses. Many
rich Citizens, especially women, do ordinarily lie in bed till nine of the
clock, and then forsooth rise and make themselves ready to go to dinner. And
after they have well dined they spend the rest of the day, and a good part of
the night also, in playing, prattling, babbling, cackling, prating and
gossipping. Fie of this idle life. Many profane serving men also do falsely
suppose, that they were borne only to game, riot, swear, whore, ruffle it,
and roist it out, and to spend their time in mere idleness. But, of all these
well said the Aristotle*
Heathen Philosopher: Illi pariter indignantur and dij and homines, quisquis
otiosus. Both God and man do hate the idle person.


Theol. It is a lamentable thing to see so many men and women live so idly,
and so unprofitably as they do. For alas, there be too many, which fellow no
honest calling, live to no use, no body is the better for them. They do no
good, neither to the Church or Commonwealth. They are like drone bees: they are
unprofitable burdens of the earth. God has no use of them, the Church no
good, the Common wealth no benefit, their neighbors no profit, the poor no
relief. They imagine, they came into the world, to do nothing but eat, and
drink, and sleep and rise up to play. They think they should spend their
time in dicing and dancing, in whoredom and bravery, in gluttony and
belly-cheere: in masting themselves, like hogs of Epicurus heard: in pampering
their paunches, and cramming their bellies: in fatting themselves like Boares
in a Frank, till they be well brawned: and (as Job sath) till their bones
run full of marrow, their faces strout with Job. 15. Job. 21. 21.
fatness, and they have collops in their flank. Oh, what a beastly life is
this! Fie upon it, fie upon it. It is more meet for Epicures, then Christians:
for swine, then for men: for Sardanapalus, and Heliogabalus, and such like
belligods, then for the professors of the Gospel. But, of all such, Job says
enough; They spend their Job. 21.
days in pleasure: and suddenly go down to hell.


Phil. But may it not be allowed unto Lords and Ladies, Gentlemen and
gentlewomen, and other great ones, to live idly, since they have wherewithal
to maintain it?


Theol. God does allow none to live idly: but all, great and small, are to be
employed one way or other: either for the benefit of the Church, or common
wealth: or for the good government of their own households, or for the good of
towns and parishes, and those amongst whom they do converse: or for the
succor and relief of the poor: or for the furtherance of the Gospel, and
the maintaining of the Ministry: or for one good use or other. To these ends,
our wits, our learning, our reading, our skill, our policy, our wealth, our
health, our wisdom, and authority, are to be referred: knowing this; that
one day, we shall come to give an account of our Bally-wicke, and to be
reckoned withal, for the employment of our Talents. For this cause Job says:
that, man is borne to Job. 5. 5. 7.
travel: as the sparks fly upward. And God has laid this upon Adam, and al
his posterity: Genesis 3.
In the sweat of thy brows, thou shall eat thy bread. Some do set down four
causes, why every man should labor diligently in his calling:

First, to bear the yoke laid upon all mankind, by the Lord.

Secondly, to get the necessaries of this life.

Thirdly, to live unto the profit of humane society.

Lastly, to avoid evil thoughts and actions.

Saint Paul finds great fault with some in the Church of Thessalonia, because
they walked 2 These. 3.
inordinately, that is idly, and out of a lawful calling: and therefore
concluded, that such as would not labor, should not eat. So then we do plainly
see, that God allows idleness in none. For when we are idle (as has been
showed before) we lie open to the devil and his temptations: and he gets
within us and prevails against us. While David tarried idly at home in the
beginning of the year, when kings used to go forth to the battle, he was
soon overtaken with those two foul sins of adultery, and manslaughter. So
long as Sampson warred with the Philistims, he could never be taken or
overcome: but after he gave himself to idleness and pleasure, he not only
committed fornication with the strumpet Dalilah, but also was taken of his
enemies, and his eyes miserably pulled out. These examples do show, what a
dangerous sin idleness is. Therefore the holy Ghost sends us to school, to
the little creature, the Ant, to learn of her both to avoid idleness, and
also to use wisdom and providence in our actions. Go to the Pismire, O
sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise: For she, Pro. 6. 6.
having no guide, task-maister, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the summer,
and gathers her food in harvest. And in goodsooth it is wonderful to
observe, what indesinent pains, and unwearied labor, this silly creature
takes in summer, that she may be well provided for against winter. Let us
therefore learn wisdom from her example: and let us set before our eyes the
looking glass of all creatures. Let us consider how the birds fly, the
fishes swim, the worms creep, the heavens turn, the elements move, the sea
ebbeth and flows incessantly: yea the earth it self, which is the most heavy
and unwieldy creature of all other, yet never cease his working, bringing
forth his burden in summer, and laboring inwardly all the winter, in
concocting and digesting his nourishment for the next spring. Thus we see, how
all creatures are diligently and painfully exercised in their kinds. And
therefore it is a great shame for us to live idly, carelessly, and
dissolutely. Let us therefore learn (once at last) to fly slath, and every
one to live faithfully, diligently, and industriously in our several callings.
So shall we both keep Satan at the staves end, and also much sin out of
our souls; which otherwise idleness will force in upon us.


Phila. I must needs confess, that idleness is a gross vice in whomsoever it
is found. But specially, in my judgment, it is most odious in Magistrates and
Ministers.


Theol. That is so in truth. For they ought to be the guides, governors,
shepherds, and watchmen over the people of God. And therefore for them to
neglect their duties and charges, is a most horrible thing, since it concerns
Homer. Iliad. 2.
the hurt of many. Therefore well said the Heathen Poet: A magistrate, or a
Minister, may not be lazy and slothful, to whom the nursing of the people is
given in charge, and of whom many things are to be cared for.

What a lamentable thing therefore is it, when Magistrates are profane,
irreligious, popish, vicious, and negligent in the duties of their calling? And
how much more lamentable is it, when Ministers neglect their studies, slack
preaching, and prayer, and give up themselves, some to covetousness, some to
pride, some to husbandry, some to other worldly affairs, and some to spend
their time idly in Lauerns, Alehouses, gaming, rioting, and lewd company?
Would to God therefore that both these kind of public persons would cast off
idleness and sloth; and with diligence, faithfulness, care and conscience,
perform the duties of their places. For it is an excellent thing for any to be
a good man in his place: As a good Magistrate, that rules well, that governs
wisely, which favors good men and good causes, and defends them: which
also sets himself against bad men and bad causes, and punishes them
sharply and severely: which moreover maintains virtue, even of a very love
he bears unto it in his heart: and punishes vice of a very zeal and hatred
against it: and not for his credit only or to please some, or because he must
needs do it, and can do no less, or for any such sinister respect: but even
of a love to God, a care of his glory, a conscience of duty, and a fervent
zeal against sin. So likewise, it is a notable thing for a Minister to be a
good man in his place; to be studious in the law of God, diligent and painful
in preaching; and that of a love to God* a zeal of his glory, deep pity and
compassion toward the souls of the people, seeking by all means possible to
win them unto God* carrying himself in all his actions amongst them, wisely,
religiously, unblameably, and in offensiuely.

So again, it is a worthy thing to be a good rich man which does much good
with this riches, which keeps a good house, relieueth the poor, ministers
to the necessity of the Saints, and gives cheerfully, and with discretion,
where need is.

So also, it is a commendable thing to be a good neighbor, or a good Towns*
man* by whom a man may live quietly, peaceably, joyfully, and comfortably.

And lastly, to be a good poor man: that is, humble, lowly, duetifull,
painful, ready to help, and ready to please. Oh, I say, this is a most
excellent and glorions thing, when every man keeps his standing, his range,
and his rank: when all men, with care and conscience perform the duties of
their places: when the husband does the duty of an husband, and the wife of a
wife: when the father does the duty of a Father, and the child of a child:
when the Master does the duty of a Master, and the seruantof a servant: when
every man sets God before his eyes, in doing those things, which especially
belong unto him. For herein consists the honor of God, the glory of the
Prince, the crown of the Church, the fortress of the Commonwealth, the
safety of Cities, the strength of kingdoms, and the very preservation of all
things.


Antil. You have said well in some things. But yet I do not see, but that rich
men and women may live idly; since they have enough, where withal to
maintain it. For may not a man do with his own what he list?


Theol. No verily. For you may not take your own knife, and cut your own
throat with it: neither may you take your own are, and kill your own child
with it. Therefore that reason is naught. Albeit therefore wealthy men and
women have great plenty of all things, so as they need not to labor; yet let
them be profitably employed, some other way. Let them exercise themselves in
one good thing or other. If they can find nothing to do, let them give
themselves much to private prayers, and reading of the scriptures, that they
may be able to instruct and exhort others. Or else let Ladies and Gentlewomen
do, as that good woman Dorcas did: that is, buy cloth, cut it out, work it,
sewe it, make shirtes, smockes, coats, and garments, and give them to the
poor, when Acts 9. 36. 39.
they have so done. For it is said of Dorcas, that she was a woman full of
good works and almsdeeds, which she did. She was a merciful and tender
hearted woman, she was the poor man's friend, she clothed the poor and naked,
she knew it was a sacrifice acceptable to God. Oh, that the wealthy women of
our land would follow the example of Dorcas. But alas, these days bring forth
few Dorcasses:


Phila. As you have showed us the causes of the former evils: so now, I pray
you, show the causes of this also.


Theol. The causes of Idleness are: Causes of idleness.
Evil examples. Bad education. Living out of calling.



Phila. Show us also the remedies.


Theol. The remedies are: Remedies against Idleness.
Good education. Labor in youth. Good examples. Diligence in a lawful calling.



Phila. Now then let us come to the last sign of condemnation; which is
oppression. And I beseech you, good sir, speak your mind of it, our of the
Scriptures.


Theol. It is so infinite a matter, that I know not where to begin, or where to
make an end of it. It is a bottomless sink of most grievous enormities. I
shall enter into a Labyrinth, where I shall not know now to get out again. But
since you are desirous to hear something of it, this I say, that it is a most
cruel monster, a bloody vice, a most ugly and hidious fiend of hell. The
Scriptures in very many places, do cry out upon it, arraigning it, adiudging
it, and condemning it down to hell. They do also thunder and lighten upon all
those, which are stained and corrupted with this vice; calling them by such
names and giving them such titles, as are taken from the effects of this sin,
and most fit for oppressors: as namely, that they grind the faces of the
poor; that they Esa. 3. 15. Amos. 8. 6 Mic. 3. 2. Psalm. 14. 4.
pluck off their skins from them, and their flesh from their bones; that
they eat them up, as they eat bread. These are they; which strive to devour
all (like savage beasts) and to get the whole earth into their hands, either by
hook or by crook, by right or by wrong, by oppression, fraud, and violence.
These Caterpillars, and Cormorants of the earth, are like unto the Whale-fish,
which swalloweth up quick other little fishes. They are like the Lion, that
deuoureth other beasts. They are like the Falcon, which seizes, plumeth, and
prays upon other fowls. These greedy Wolves devour all, and swallow up the
poor of the Land. Therefore the Prophets of God do thunder out many great woes
against them.

First, the Prophet Esaias says; Woe unto them Esaias 5. 8.
that join house to house, and field to field; till there be no place for the
poor to dwell in; that they may be placed by themselves, in the midst of the
earth.

Secondly, the Prophet Jeremy says; Woe Iere. 22. 13.
unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers without
equity.

Thirdly, the Prophet Micah says: Woe unto Mic. 2. 2.
them that covet fields, and take them by violence; and so oppress a man and
his house, even a man and his heritage.

Fourthly, the Prophet Abacuc cries out Abac. 2. 12.
saying; Woe unto him that builds a Town with blood, and erecteth a City by
iniquity. S. James also most terribly threatens these kind Iam. 5. 1. 2.
of men, saying: Go to now you rich men, weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you. Your gold and silver is cankered: and the rust of
them shall be a witness against you; and shall eat your flesh, as it were
fire.

Lastly, S. Paul says flatly, that extortioners 1. Cor. 6. 10.
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Thus we see, how many fearful woes
and threats are denounced from heaven against these pestilent cutthroats of
the earth.


Phila. And all little enough. For they are steeped in their sin, and the
stain of it is so soked into them, as it will hardly ever be washed out. True
it is, that you said, that these cruel oppressing bloud-suckers are the most
pernicious and pestilent vermin, that creeps upon the face of the earth; and
yet I think there were never more of them, then in these days. For now the
wicked world is full of such, as do sundry ways bite, pinch, and nip the
poor, as we see by every days lamentable experience; but you can speak more
of it then I. Therefore, I pray you, lay open the sundry kinds of oppression,
used in these days.


Theol. There is oppression, by usury.
Oppression, by bribery. The sundry kinds of oppressions.

Oppression, by racking of rents.
Oppression, by taking excessive fines.
Oppression, in bargaining.
Oppression, in letting of leases.
Oppression, in letting of houses.
Oppression, in letting of grounds.
Oppression, in binding poor men to unreasonable covenants.
Oppression, in thrusting poor men out of their houses.
Oppression, in hiring poor men's houses over their heads.
Oppression, in taking of fees.
Oppression, by Lawyers.
Oppression, by Church Officers.
Oppression, by engrossers.
Oppression, by forestallers.
Oppression of the Church.
Oppression of the Ministry.
Oppression of the poor.
Oppression of widows.
Oppression of Orphans.
And thus we see, how all swarms with
Oppressions: and nothing but Oppressions, Oppressions.

Phila. In truth, this is a most cruel and oppressing age, wherein we live;
yea, a very iron age. It seems, that the great ones mind nothing else, they
are altogether set upon oppression, they dote and dream of it, they find
sweet in it, and therefore they are mad of it. As Eccl. 7. 5.
Solomon says; Oppression makes a wiseman mad. It seems therefore, that
this vice is of such marvelous force, that it can bereave men of their wits,
and make men stark mad of getting goods by hook or by crook, they care not
how, nor from whom; so they have it. Yet, no doubt, the most wise God has
enacted many good laws for the suppressing of this evil: and does threaten
the execution of them in his own person: and especially his Law does provide
for the safety of the poor, the fatherless, the widow and the stranger. But
you M. Theologus, can repeat the statutes better then I; because you are a
professed Divine. Therefore, I pray you, let us hear them from you.


Theol. In the 22. Chapter of Exodus, God made this law following: You shall
not trouble any widow or fatherless child; if thou Exo. 22.
vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his
cry. Then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword, and
your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Again, he says:
Thou shall not oppress an hired servant, that is Deuteronomy. 22.
needy and poor; but thou shall give him his hire for his day: neither shall
the Sun go down upon it (for he is poor, and therewith sustaineth his
life,) lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.
Moreover, the Lord says: Thou shall do no injury Exodus 22.
to a stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. And God himself
threatens that Mal. 3.
he will be a swift witness against those which keep back the hirelinges
wages, and vex the widow, and the fatherless. The Apostle says: Let no man
oppress or defraud 1. These. 4. 6.
his brother, in any matters. For the Lord is an auenger of all such things.
Solomon also says: If in a country thou feast the oppression of the poor, and
the defrauding of justice and judgment, be not astonished at the matter: for he
that is higher then the highest regards: and there be higher then they.
Eccles. 5. 7. All these holy statutes and laws, enacted and provided against
oppressors, do plainly show what care the Lord has for his poor,
distressed, and desolate people.


Phila. But these oppressing hel-hounds are such as care for nothing. No Law of
the Almighty can bridle them: nothing can fear them: nothing can restrain
them. They have made a covenant with Hell and death. They are frozen in the
dregs; they are past feeling. And as Job says: These are they, that abhor
Job. 14. 13.
the light, they know not the ways thereof, neither continue in the paths
thereof. Their hearts are as hard as the Adamant. Nothing can move them:
nothing can work upon them. There is great crying out every where of the stone
in the reins, which indeed is a great torment to the body (but there is no
complaining of the stone in the heart. I mean a stony heart: which is the
sorest disease that possibly can fall into the soul of man) and yet in these
times it grows very rife. For men's hearts are as hard as brass, and as the
nether Millstone: as the Scripture speaks. For many, especially of these
unmerciful and oppressing Zeph. 1. 12. Amos 6. 3. 6.
tyrants, say in their hearts; God will do neither good nor evil. Therefore
they put the evil day far from them, and approach unto the seat of iniquity.
They are at ease in Zion; they lie upon beds of Iuory, and stretch themselves
upon their beds; and eat the lambs of the flock, and the calves out of the
stall. They sing to the sound of the vial; they invent instruments of music,
like David. They drink wine in bowls, and no man is sorry for the affliction of
Joseph; that is, the troubles of Gods people. The Prophet Esaias also Esa. 5. 12.
Psalm. 10. 14. 6.
complains of these kind of men, saying; They regard not the work of the
Lord, neither consider the work of his hands. And another Prophet says; they
say in their hearts God has forgotten; he hides away his face, and will never
see. They are so proud, that they seek not for God. They think always, there
is no God; his judgments are far out of their sight. Their ways always
prosper; and therefore they say in their hearts; Tush we shall never be moved,
nor come in danger.


Theol. You have spoken very well, touching the steelinesse and hardness of
these men's hearts, who are so unmerciful to their poor neighbors, that almost
none can live by them. They do so disturb and disquiet al things, that poor
men can dwell in no rest by them. Therefore truly says the wise king: A
mighty man molesteth all, and Pro. 18. 2.
both hireth the fool, and hireth those that pass by. But the poor man
speaks with prayers: that is, by the way of entreatie and supplications. For
the poor are afraid of them. They quake when they see them: as the beasts
quake, at the roaring of the Lion. Many poor Farmers, poor Husband men, poor
Herds, poor Laborers, poor widows, and hirelings, do quake and tremble,
when these greedy wolves come abroad. And (as Job speaks) the poor Job. 24.
4.
of the earth hide themselves together. For (alas) in their hearts, they cannot
abide the sight of them: they had as leeue meet the devil as meet them, for
fear of one displeasure or another. For either they fear that they will warn
them out of their houses, or parley about more rent and straighter covenants,
or beg away their best kine, or borow their horses, or command their carts, or
require a weeks work of them, and never pay them for it, or a twelve months
pasture for a couple of Geldings, or that they will make one quarrel or another
unto the^, or one mischief or another. Se that these poor souls cannot tell
what to do, nor which way to turn them, for fear of these cruel termagants.
They are even weary of their lives. For they have no remedy for these things,
but even to bear it off with head and shoulders. Therefore they often with
they were out of the world, and that they were buried quick. They say, if any
will knock them on the head, they will forgive him. O most pittious case! O
lamentable hearing! These poor silly creatures are feign to drudge and moile
all the year long, in winter and summer, in frost and snow, in heat and cold,
to provide their rents, that they may be able to pay their cruel Landlord at
his day: For else, how shall they be able to look him in the face? Yet their
rent is so rackt, that all that they can do is little enough to pay it. And
when that is paid, (alas) the poor man, and his wife, and children have little
left to take to, or to maintain themselves withal: they are feign to gnaw of a
crust, to fare hardly, and go thinly clad. Sometimes they have victuals, and
sometimes none. The poor children cry for bread. Poor widows also, and poor
fatherless children, are found weeping and mourning in their houses, and in
their streets. So that now we may with Solomon, turn and consider Eccle. 4. 1.
all the oppressions, that are wrought under the Sun. We may behold the teeres
of the oppressed, and none comfort them. For the mighty ones do wrong the
weaker: even as the strongen beasts do push and harm the feebler. These
griping oppressors do pinch the poor even to the quick. They pluck away from
the fatherless and widows, that little which they have. If there be but a
cow, or a few sheep left, they will have them. If there be a little commodity
of house or land, oh what devises they have to wind it in, and to wring it
away! These tyrants will go as nigh, as the bed they lie upon. They know well
enough, the poor men are not able to wage law with them: and therefore they may
do what wrong they will, and show what cruelty they list. Hence comes the
teeres of the oppressed; hence comes the weeping and wailing of the poor.
But alas (poor souls) they may well weep, to ease their hearts a little; but
there is none to comfort them: remedy they can have none. But yet assuredly the
everlasting God does look upon them, and will be revenged. For the cries of
the poor, the fatherles, and the widows, have entered into the cares of the
Lord of Hosts, who is an auenger of all such things; yea a strong revenger, as
Solomon says: Enter Pro. 23. 14.
not into the field of the fatherless: for their revenger is strong. He
himself will plead their cause against thee. And again he says: Rob Pro. 22.
2.
not the poor, because he is poor: neither tread down the afflicted in the
gate: for the Lord pleads their cause: and will spoil their soul that
spoil them. We see then, that the most just God will be revenged on these
unmerciful tyrants. He will not always put up these wrongs and injuries, done
to the poor.

In the eight chapter of the Prophet Amos, he swears by the excellency of
Jacob, that he will never forget any of their works. And again, he says by
his Prophet Jeremy; Shall I not be avenged, on such a Nation as this? Surely
he will set his face against them to root them out of the earth. For indeed
they are not worthy to crawle upon the face of the earth, or to draw breath
amongst the sons of men. It is written in the book of Psalms; that God will
set their fellows opposite against him, as a Butte to shoot at: that he will
put them apart: Psalm. 21. 13.
and the strings of his bow shall he make ready against their faces. Be
astonished at this, O ye heavens; and tremble, O thou earth. Hear this, O ye
cruel landlords, unmerciful oppressors, and blood-suckers of the earth. You
may well be called blood-suckers: for you suck the blood of many poor men,
women and children: you eat it, you drink it, you have it served in at your
sumptuous tables every day, you swallow it up, and live by it. And (as Job
says) The wilderness gives you and your children food. That is, you Job. 24. 5.
live by robbing, and murdering. But woe, woe, unto you that ever you were born.
For the blood of the oppressed, which you have eaten and drunken, shall one day
cry for speedy vengeance, against you: as the blood of Abel cried against Cain.
Their blood shall witness against you, in the day of judgment; and the teeres
of many poor starued children, orphans, and widows shall cry out against you.
Was the Lord revenged of Achab, for his cruel and vninst dealing 1. Reg. 21.
with poor Naboth, and shall he not be revenged of you? Did the dogs lap the
blood of Achab, and shall you escape? No, no: you shall not escape. The Lord
will be a swift witness against you; as he says in Malachie. Was the Mal. 3.
Lord angry with the rich of his people, for oppressing the poor (so as the
cry of the people and of their wives, against their oppressors, was Neh. 5.
heard of the Almighty) and do you think, you shall escape scot-free? Does not
the like cause, bring forth the like effect? the like sin, the like
punishment? know therefore for a certainty, that the Lord has coffers full of
vengeance against you, and one day he will unlock them, and bring them forth,
in the sight of all men.

Know also, that the timber of your houses, and the stones of your walls,
which you have built by oppression and blood, shall cry against you in the day
of the Lords wrath, as the Prophet Abacuck tells you. The stone (says he)
Abac. 2. 11.
shall cry out of the wall; and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.
Where the Prophet tells you, that the walls of your houses, built in blood,
shall cry out loud, and shall, and play the Quiristers in that behalf: so as
they shall answer one another, on either side. The one side sings, behold
blood: the other, behold murder. The one side, behold deceit: the other, behold
cruelty. The one, behold pilling and poling: the other, behold covetousness.
The one, behold robbery: the other, behold penury. And thus you see how the
stones and timber of your houses shall descant upon you. And howseeuer you put
on your brazen brows, and harden your hearts against these threatenings of the
most terrible God and Lord of hosts: yet one day, you shall (spite of your
hearts) will ye nill ye, be brought forth unto judgment: you shall once come
to your reckoning, you shall at last be apprehended, conuented, and arraigned
at the bar of Gods tribunal seat before the great Judge of all the world. Then
sentence shall pass against you: even that most dreadful Mat. 25.
sentence: Go ye cursed into hellfire, there to be tormented with the Devil
and his Angels for ever. O then, woe, woe unto you. For, Mat. 16.
what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul?
says our Lord Jesus. Surely even as much, as if one should win a farthing,
and lose an hundred thousand pound. For, if he shall be cast into Hellfire,
Mat. 25.
which has not given of his own goods righteously gotten, as our Savior
avouches; where then shall he be cast, that has stolen other men's goods?
And if he shall be damned that has not clothed the naked, what shall become of
him that has made naked them that were clothed? Oh, therefore repent in time,
O ye cruel oppressors; seek the Lord whilst he may be found; call upon him
while he is near; lay aside your savage cruelty, visit the fatherless and
widow, in their distress; deal your bread to the hungry; help them to their
right which suffer wrong; deal mercifully with your tenants; rack not your
rents any more; pinch not the poor souls, for whom Christ died; pity them,
I say, but pinch them not; deal kindly and friendly with them; remember your
great accounts; consider the shortness of your days, and the vanity of your
life; rent your hearts, and not your clothes. Turn unto the Lord, with all
your heart, with weeping, fasting, and mourning; prevent Gods wrath with a
sacrifice of teeres; pacify his anger with the calves of your lips, and with a
contrite spirit; be grieved for that which is past, and amend that which is to
come; stand it out no more at the swords point against God. For it will not
boot you to strive; he is too strong for you. Your only wisdom is, to come in.
Come in therefore, come in, ye rebellious generation; submit your selves to the
great King, humble your selves under his mighty hand: cast down your swords
and targets: yield unto your God. So shall you escape the vengeance to come; so
shall God accept you, have mercy upon you, receive you to favor, grant you a
general pardon for all your rebellions, and admit you into the number of his
faithful and loyal subjects.


Phila. I do conceive by diverse speeches which you have alleged, that goods
gotten by oppression and cruelty, will never prosper long. For oppressors coin
their money upon their neighbors skins. How then can it be blessed?


Theol. You have spoken a truth. For, as it has been showed before, that those
goods which are gotten by swearing and lying are cursed: so all these that are
gotten by oppression and violence are more cursed. Therefore the Lord says by
his Prophet Jeremy: as the Partrich gathers Iere. 17. 11.
the young which she has not brought forth, so he that gathers riches, and
not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days: and at his end shall
be a fool, and his name shall be written in the earth.


Phila. Would to God our Magistrates and Governors would take speedy order for
the remedying of these things, and for the redressing of such grievous
enormities as are amongst us: or that they themselves would step in, and
deliver the oppressed, from the hand of the oppressor.


Theol. Job was an excellent man for such Job. 29. 17.
matters. For it is said of him: That he brake the jaws of the unrighteous
man, and plucked the prey out of his teeth. Where we see, how Job was a means
to deliver the innocent, and to pull the Lamb out of the Lions claws.
Moreeuer, it is written of him in the same chapter: Job. 29. 15.
that the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him, and that he
caused the widows heart to rejoice: that he was the eye to the blind, the feet
to the lame, and the father to the poor; and when he knew not the cause, he
sought it out diligently. Oh, what a notable man was this! Oh that we had many
Jobs in these days! Wise Solomon does most gravely advise us all, to follow
Jobs example in this behalf. Deliver, says he, them that are oppressed Pro.
14. 11
and drawn to death. For should thou withdraw thy self from them which go
down to the slaughter? would to God that this holy counsel were well weighed,
and practiced amongst us!


Phila. I marvel much, with what face these cruel oppressors can come before
God in his holy Temple, to pray, and offer up their sacrifices unto him. For we
see, many of them though they have such foul hands, and foul hearts, as we
have heard; yet for all that, will most impudently presume to come to the
church and pray; or at least, when they are laid in their beds a nights, and
half asleep, then will they tumble over their prayers, or be pattering some
Pater nosters.


Theol. Alas, alas, poor souls: all that they do in matters of Gods worship,
is but hypocrisy and dissimulation. For in truth, they care not for God: they
love him but from the teeth outward: their mouths are with him, but their heart
goes after covetousness, and their hands are full of blood. And therefore God
does both abhor them, and their prayers. For says he; Though they stretch
out their hands, yet will I Esa. 1. 15.
hide mine eyes from them; and though they make many prayers, yet will I not
hear them. For their hands are full of blood.

Moreover the holy Ghost says: He that turns Pro. 28. 9.
away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer is abominable. David
says: If I regard Psa. 66. 18.
wickedness in my heart, God will not hear my prayer. Our Lord Jesus also
affirms, that Ioh. 9. 31.
God hears not sinners: that is, stubburne and careless sinners. So then we
may clearly see (by all these testimonies of holy writ) what account God
makes of the prayers of oppressors, and all other profane and ungodly men:
namely, that he does hate them, and abhor them, as most loathsome and odious
in his sight.


Phila. Now in conclusion, show us the causes of oppression.


Theol. The causes are these: Causes of Oppression.
Cruelty. Covetousness. Hard-heartednesse. An evil conscience. The Devil.



Phila. Let us hear also of the remedies


Theol. The remedies are these: Pity. Remedies for oppression.
Contentation. Tender affections. A good conscience. Much prayer.



Phila. Now sir, as you have at large uttered your mind, concerning these
gross corruptions of the world, and have plainly and evidently proved them to
be the deadly poison of the soul; so also I pray you satisfy us in this:
whether they be not hurtful also to the body, goods, and name.


Theol. I have dwelt the longer in these common vices of the world, because
almost all sorts of men are stained with one or other of them: and therefore
they can never be enough spoken against. For the whole world lies in them, as
S. John testifies. If men therefore could be recovered 1. John. 5.
of these diseases, no doubt there would be a ready passage made for the
abundance of grace; and we should have a most flourishing Church and
Commonwealth; but as long as these do lie in the way, there is small hope of
greater mercies and blessings to be powered upon us; or that ever we shall come
to have an inward conversation with God. For these vices blind our eyes,
burden our hearts, and (as the Prophet Jeremy says) hinder many things from
Ier. 5. 25.
us. But touching your petition, I must needs grant; that, as these vices are
the very bane of the soul, and most certain signs of condemnation; so are
they very dangerous to the body, goods and name; yea, and to the whole land,
both Church and Commonwealth.


Phila. Show us out of the Scriptures what danger they bring to the body.


Theol. The Lord our God says, that if we will not obey him, nor keep his
commandments (but break his covenant) he will appoint over us hasty plagues,
consumptions, and the burning ague, to consume the eyes, and to make the heart
heavy. So also he says, that if we will Leui. 26. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 21.
not obey his voice, to observe all his commandments and ordinances, that then
he will make the pestilence cleave unto us, until he have consumed us; that
he will smite us with the Fever, with the botch of Egypt, with the Emeroids,
with the Scabbe, and with the Itch; that also he will smite us with madness,
and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart. So then you see what great
evils the Lord threatens to inflict upon our bodies in this life, for these
and such like sins. But on the centrary, the holy ghost says: Fear God, and
depart Pro. 3. 7.
from evil: so health shall be unto thy navel, and moisture unto thy bones.


Phila. What evil do these forenamed sins bring upon us, in our goods and
outward estate?


Theol. They cause God to curse us in all that we set hand unto, as plentifully
appears in the forenamed Chapters; where the Lord says thus: If thou will
not obey the commandments Deuteronomy. 28.
of the Lord thy God, cursed shall thou be in the town, cursed also in the
field, cursed shall be thy basket and thy store, cursed shall be the fruit of
thy body, and the fruit of thy land, and the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed
also when thou go out. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, trouble, and
shame, in all that thou set thy hand unto. And further he says: That he
will break the staff of their bread: that ten women shall bake their bread in
one oven, Deuteronomy. 28.
and they shall deliver their bread again by weight: and they shall eat and
not be satisfied. You do therefore apparently see, that these sins will draw
down Gods wrath upon us, and all that we have.


Phila. What hurt do these sins to our good name?


Theol. They bring reproach, shame, and infamy upon us, and cause us to be
abhorred and contemned of all good men. They do utterly blot out our good
name. For as virtue makes men honorable and reverend; so vice makes men vile
and contemptible. This is set down, where the Lord threatens Israel; that for
their sins 2. Kin. 9. 7.
and disobedience, he will make them a proverb and common talk; yea, a
reproach, and astonishment amongst all people. In sundry other places of the
Prophets, he threatens for their sins, to make them a reproach, a shame, and
Eze. 5. 5.
hissing, and nodding of the head to all Nations.


Phila. I do verily thus think: that as sin generally does stain every
man's good name, which all are charie and tender of: so especially, it does blot
those which are in high places, and of special note, for learning, wisdom,
and godliness.


Theol. You have spoken most truly, and agreeable to the Scriptures. For the
Scripture says: As a dead fly causes the Apothecaries ointment to stink: so
does a little folly, him that is in estimation, for wisdom and for honor.
Where Solomon shows, that if a fly get into the Apothecaries box of
ointment, and die, and putrify in it, she marreth it, though it be never so
precious. Even so, if a little sin get into the heart, and break out into
the forhead of a man of great fame for some singular gifts, it will blurre him,
though he be never so excellent.


Phila. Show this, I pray you, more plainly.


Theol. We observe this, in all experience: that if a Noble man be a good man,
and have many excellent parts in him of courtesy, patience, humility, and love
of Religion: yet if he be covetous, the common people will have their eye
altogether upon that: and they will say; Such a Noble man, is a very good man,
but for one thing: he is exceeding covetous, oppresses poor men, and deals
hardly with his tenants, keeps no house, does little good in the country
where he dwells. And this is it that marreth all.

Moreover, let a Judge, a Justice, or a Magistrate, be endued with excellent
gifts of prudence, policy, temperance, liberality, and knowledge in the law:
yet, if they be given to anger, or taking of bribes, oh, how it will grieve
them amongst the people! For they will say: He is a worthy man indeed, but
there is one thing in him that marreth all: he is an exceeding angry and furious
man; he is as angry as a waspe: he will be in a pelting chafe for every trifle:
he will fret and fume, if you do but blow upon hun. And besides this, he is a
very corrupt man: he is a great taker of bribes, he loves well to be
bribed: he will do any thing for bribes.

Furthermore, if any Preacher be a man of great gifts, the common people will
say of him: Oh, he is a worthy man indeed, an excellent Scholar, a profound
Divine, a singular man in a Pulpit: but yet, for all that, he has a shrewd
touch which marreth all; he is an exceeding proud man: he is as proud as
Lucifer. He has very great gifts indeed, but I warrant you he knows it well
enough. For he carries his crest very high, and looks very sternely, and
disdainefully upon all other men. He is vnmeasurably puffed up with ouerweening,
and thinks that he touches the clouds with his head. Thus therefore we see,
how the dead flies mar all: and how some one sin does disgrace a man, that
otherwise does excel.


Phila. What is the cause, why some one sin does so blot and smut the most
excellent men?


Theol. The reason hereof is, because such men are as a candle, set upon a
candle-sticke, or rather upon a scaffold or mountain, for all men to behold
and look upon. And sure it is, they have a thousand eyes upon them every day;
and that not only gazing upon them, but also prying very narrowly into them,
to spy out the least moat, that they may make a mountain of it. For, as in a
clean white paper, one little spot is soon espied; but in a piece of brown
paper, twenty great blurs are scant discerned: even so in Noble men, Judges,
Magistrates, Justices, Preachers, and Professors, the least spot or specke is
soon seen into; but amongst the baser sort, and most gross livers, almost
nothing is espied or regarded.


Phila. Since the eyes of all men are bent and fixed upon such men as are of
some note, therefore they had need very heedfully to look to their steps,
that they may take away all advantage from them that seek advantage.


Theol. Yes verily. And furthermore, they had need to pray with David always:
Direct Psalm. 119. 133.
my steps O Lord in thy word: and let none iniquity have dominion over me.
And Psalm. 41. 12.
again: Order my doings, that my footsteps slip not: uphold me in mine
integrity. For if such men be never so little given to swearing, to lying, to
drink, or to women, it is espied by and by: and therewithal their credit is
cracked, their fame ouer-cast, their glory eclipsed, and the date of their good
name presently expired.


Phila. Now, as you have showed what great hurt these sins do bring upon our
soul, bodies, goods and name; so also, I pray you; show what danger they do
bring upon the whole land.


Theol. Questionless they do pull down the wrath of God upon us all, and
give him just cause to break all in pieces, and utterly to subvert and
overthrow the good estate, both of church and Commonwealth: yea, to make a
final consumption and desolation of all. For they be the very firebrarnds of
Gods wrath, and as it were touch-wood, to kindle his anger and indignation upon
us. For the Apostle says: For Col. 3. 6.
such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disodedience.


Phila. Declare unto us, out of the Scriptures, how the Lord in former times
has punished whole Nations and Kingdoms for these and such like sins.


Theol. In the fourth of Hosea, the Lord tells his people, that he has a
controversy Hos. 4. 2.
with the inhabitants of the Land (and the reason is added) because there was
no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. By swearing, lying,
killing, stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood.
Therefore shall the land mourn; and every one, that dwells therein, shall be
cut off.

Here then we see, what it is that will incense God against us, and cause us
all to mourn. So likewise the Lord threatens by his Prophet Amos, that for
the cruelty and oppression of the poor, he would plague the whole land. Shall
not the land tremble for this (says the Am. 8. 8.
Lord) and every one mourn that dwells therein?

Again, the Lord says by his Prophet Jeremy; Ier. 7. 19. 20.
Do they provoke me to anger, and not themselves, to the confusion of their
own faces? Therefore thus says the Lord: Behold mine anger and my wrath shall
be powered upon this place, upon man, and beast, upon the tree of the field,
and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and not be quenched.

Again the Lord says: If ye will not hear Ier. 2^.
these words, I swear by my self (says the Lord) that this house shall be
waste, and I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his weapons,
and they shall cut down thy chief Cedar trees, and cast them in the fire.

Likewise the Lord threateneth, by his Prophet Ezec. 5. 7.
Ezechiel, saying: Because ye have not walked in my statutes, nor kept my
judgments; therefore behold; I even I, come against thee, and will execute
judgment in the midst of thee; even in the sight of Nations: and I will do
in thee, that I never did before, neither will I do any more the like, because
of all thine abominations. For, in the midst of thee, the fathers shall eat
their sons: and the sons shall eat their fathers. Again, by Eze. 7. 23.
27.
the same Prophet, the Lord says: The land is full of the judgment of blood,
and the city full of cruelty. Wherefore, I will bring the most wicked of the
Heathen, and they shall possess their houses. I will also make the pomp of
the mighty to cease, and the holy places shall be defiled. When destruction
comes, they shall seek peace, and not have it. Calamity shall come upon
calamity, and rumor upon rumor. Then shall they seek a vision of the
Prophet, but the law shall perish from the Priests, and counsel from the
ancient. The King shall mourn, and the Prince shall be clothed with
desolation, and the hands of the people in the land shall be troubled. I will
do unto them according to their ways: and according to their judgments will
I judge them: and they shall know, that I am the Lord. Last of all, the Lord
says by his Prophet: Hear O earth: behold, I will cause a plague to come Ier.
4. 19.
upon this people, even the sruit of their own imaginations, because they have
not taken heed to my words, nor to my Law; but cast it off. Almost innumerable
places to this purpose are to be found in the writings of the prophets: but
these may suffice to prove the maine point: to wit, that the just God does
punish whole nations and kingdoms, for the sins and rebellions thereof.


Phila. Since all these sins (for the which the Lord did execute such
universal punishments, upon his own people) do abound and ouerflow in this
land, may we not justly fear some great plague to fall upon us? and the
rather, because our transgressions do increase daily, and grow to a full
height and ripeness: so as it seems the harvest of Gods vengeance draws
near, and approaches.


Theol. We may indeed justly fear and tremble. For if God spared not the
Angels that sinned, how shall he spare us? If he spared not his own people,
what can we look for? If he spared not the natural branches, how shall he
spare us which are wild by nature? Are we better then they? Can we look to
be spared, when they were punished? Are not our sins as many, and as great
as theirs? Does not the same cause bring forth the same effect? Is the arm of
the Lord shortened? Or is not God the same just God, to punish sin now, that
he was then? Yes, yes, assuredly. And therefore we have great cause to mourn
and lament, to quake and tremble; because there is a naked sword of vengeance,
hanging over our Ier. 4. 19. Am. 5. 6. Abac. 3. 16.
heads. Thus did Jeremy, thus did Amos, thus did Abacuck: when they plainly
saw the imminent wrath of God approaching upon the people of Israel and Judah.


Phila. I think, we may the rather doubt and fear, because the punishment of
these forenamed vices, is neglected by the Magistrate. For commonly, when they
that bear the sword of Justice, do not draw it out to punish notorious
offenders and malefactors, the Lord himself will take the matter into his
own hands, and be revenged in his own person: which is most dreadful and
dangerous. For it is a fearful Heb. 10. 31.
thing, to fall into the hands of the living God.


Theo. You have spoken a truth. For if those, which are Gods deputies and
vicegerents in the earth, do their duties faithfully in punishing vice, and
maintaining virtue; in smiting the wicked, and favoring the godly: then
assuredly evil shall be taken out of Israel, Gods wrath prevented, and his
judgments intercepted; as it is written: Phineas stood up and executed
judgment, and the plague was stayed. 1 Ps. 106. 30
But if they (for fear, favor, affection, gain, flattery, bribery, or any
other sinister respect) will be too sparing and remiss in punishing of gross
offenders, and be rather ready to smite the righteous: then do they
exceedingly provoke Gods wrath against the land, and against themselves.


Phila. One thing I do greatly lament: that there be either none at all, or
very slender censurers, either by the Civil, or Ecclesiastical authority, for
diverse of these forenamed vices: as pride, covetousness, oppression, lying,
idleness swearing, etc.


Theol. It is a thing to be lamented indeed. For where do we see a proud man
punished, a covetous man punished, an oppressor punished, aswearer punished, a
liar punished, an idle person punished? Now, because they know they cannot, or
shall not be punished, therefore they are altogether hardened, and imboldned in
their sins: as the wise man says: Because sentence Eccl. 8. 11.
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the
children of men are fully set in them to do evil.


Phila. One thing I do much muse at, wherein also I desire to be further
satisfied, to wit, what is the cause, that under so godly a prince, so many
good laws, and so much good preaching and teaching, there should
notwithstanding, be such an excess and ouerflowing of sin, in all estates.


Theo. The causes here of are diverse and manifold. But I will nominate sour
especial ones, in my judgment. The first is, man's natural corruption; which
is so strong, as almost nothing can bridle it. The second is ill presidents,
and external prouocations to evil. The third is the want of teaching, in many
congregations of the land; by reason whereof, many know not sin to be sin.
The last reason is, the corruption and negligence of some such as are in
authority.


Phila. Does not this inundation and ouerflowing of sin, with the impunity of
the same, Prognosticate great wrath against us?


Theol. Yes undoubtedly, as has in part been showed before. And there he
diverse other presages of wrath, though not of the same kind: which are these:
Unthankfulness for the Gospel. The abuse of our long peace. Our general
security. Our secret Idolatries. Nine predictions, or foresignes of wrath.
Our ripeness in all sin. Our abuse of all Gods mercies. Our abuse of his
long patience. The coldness of professors. Our not profitting by former
judgments: as pestilence, famine, dearth, and the shaking of the Sword.



Phila. This last I take to be a special token of approaching vengeance; that
we have not profited by former warnings.


Theol. True indeed. For it is an ordinary thing with God, when men will not
profit by mild corrections, and common punishments, then to lay greater upon
them. And when a former trouble does us no good, we are to fear a final
consuming trouble. For so we read in the Prophecy of Hosea; that at the
first, God was to Ephraim as a moth, and to Judah as rottenness: but
afterward, when as they profited not by it, he was to Ephraim as a Lion, and to
Judah Hos. 5. 12.
as a Lions whelpe. So the Lord says in another place, that, if they will not
come in, and yield obedience at the first call of his wrath, then he will
punish them seven times more. But if Leu. 26. 18
they continue in their stubbornness, then he threatens to bring seven times
more plagues Verse 21.
upon them, according to their sins. If by all these they would not be
reformed, but walk stubbornely Verse 24.
against him, then he threatens yet seven times more, for their sins: and the
fourth Verse 28.
time, yet seven times more. The proof hereof we have in the book of the
Judges. Where Judge. 3. 8.
we read, how the people of Israel, for their sins, were in subjection to the
King of Aram Naharim, eight years: afterward, because they profited nothing by
it, but returned to their old sins, therefore they served Eglon king of Moab,
eighteen years. After that again, for their Judge. 3.
new sins and prouocations, the Lord gave them up into the hands of Midian,
seven years. Judge. 6. 1.
After all this, for the renewing of their sins, the Lord sold them into the
hands of the Philistines Iud. 10. 7. Psa. 106. 3.
and the Amonites, which did grievously vex and oppress them, for the space of
eighteen years. Last of all, we read, that when neither famine nor
pestilence could cause them to return unto him, then he delivered them up to
the sword of their enemies, and held them in bondage and captivity, threescore
and ten years. After all this, when they were delivered out of Captivity, and
returned home safely to their own nation, and inioyed some good time of peace
and rest, yet at last they fell to renewing of their sins: and therefore the
Lord plagued Ezec. 3. 8. Dan. 7. Dan. 11.
them most grievously, by the divided Greek Empire: even by Magog, and Egypt,
Seleucidae, and Lagidae, and that by the space almost of three hundred years.
And this is it, that the Prophet Hosea did foretell: that the children Hos. 3.
4.
of Israel should remain many days without a King, and without a prince,
without an offering, and without an image, without an Ephod, and without
Teraphim.


Phila. You have very largely laid open this last token of vengeance; to wit,
that God at the first does but beat us upon the coat: but if we continue in
sin, he will whip us on the bare skin: and if men will not yield at the
first gentle strokes, then he will strike harder and harder, till he have broken
our stout stomachs, and made our great hearts come down. Therefore it is good
yielding at the first: for we shall get nothing by our sturdinesse against him.
We do but cause him to double his strokes, and strike us both sidelings and
ouer-thwart: For he cannot endure that we should gruntle against him, with
stubborn fullennesse. But now to the point. Since there are so many presages,
and foresignes of Gods wrath, I pray you show, what it is that staieth the
execution, and very downfall of the same.


Theo. The prayers and teeres of the faithful, are the special mean, that
stay the hand of God from striking of us. For the prayers of the righteous are
of great force with him: even able to do all things. Saint James says, that
the Iam. 5. 17.
prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent: and brings the
example of Elias, to prove it: For says he, Though Elias was a man subject to
the like passions that we be, yet was he able, by his prayers, both to open and
shut the heavens. Abraham likewise prevailed so far with God, by his prayers
for Sodom, Genesis 18.
that if there had been but ten just men found in it, it had been spared. The
almighty God says in the 15. chap. of Jeremy, Though Iere. 15. 1.
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection could not be toward
this people. Which does plainly show, that Moses and Samuel might have done
much with him, had he not been so fully bent against his people for their
sins, as he was. So likewise he says in the Prophecy of Ezechiel; Though
these three Ez. 14. 14.
men, Noah, Daniel and Job, were amongst them, they should deliver but their
own souls, by their righteousness. Which also shows, that if there had
been any possible entreating of him for the Land, these three men might have
done it: but now he was resolutely determined to the contrary. In respect
therefore that the zealous preachers, and true professors of the Gospel do so
much prevail wish God by their prayers, they are said to be the defense and
strength of Kingdoms and Countries, of Churches and Common wealths: as it is
said of Eliah; that he was the Chariot of Israel 2. King. 2. 12. 2. King. 6. 17.
and the horsemen thereof. Elishah also was environed with a mountain full of
horses, and Chariots of fire. And sure it is, that Eliah and Elishah are not
only the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, but also by their prayers, they do
cause God himself to be a wall of fire round about it: as the Prophet says in
the 22. of Ezechiel, verse 30. the Lord God says: I Eze 22. 30
sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gappe before me for the land; that I might not destroy it: but I found none.
Which shows, that if there had been but some few to have stood in the
breach, he would have spared the whole land. This also appears more plainly,
in the Prophecy of Jeremy; where the Lord says thus: Run to and fro, by the
streets of Jerusalem; Iere. 5. 1.
behold and inquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a man, or if
there be any that executes judgment, and seeks the truth: and I will spare
it. Oh then mark and consider, what a man may do: yea, what one man may do:
what an Abraham may do: what a Moses may do: what an Eliah may do: what a
Daniel, what a Samuel, what a Job, what a Noah may do! Some one man (by reason
of his high favor with the Eternal) is able sometimes to do more for a land, by
his prayers and teeres, then many prudent men by their counsel, or valiant men
by their swords. Yea, it does evidently appear (in the sacred volume of the
holy Ghost) that some one poor Preacher, being full of the Spirit and power of
Eliah, does more in his study (either for offense, or defense: either for the
turning away of wrath, or the procuring of mercy) then a Campe-royall, even
forty thousand strong: or, as the Spirit speaks: though they all have Cant.
3. 7.
their swords girded to their thighs, and be of the most valiant men in
Israel. All this is clearly proved in one verse of the book of the Psalms:
where the Prophet having reckoned up the sins of the people, adds: Therefore
the Lord minded to destroy them, had not Moses (his chosen) Ps. 106. 23.
stood in the breach, to turn away his wrath: lest he should destroy them. See
therefore, what one man may do with God! Some one man does so bind the hands
of God, that when he should strike, he has no power to do it: as it is said
of Lot: I can do nothing, till Genesis 19. 22
thou be come out. See how the Lord says, he can do nothing: because he will
do nothing! He does wittingly and willingly suffer his hands to be manacled
and bound behind him, for some fewes sake, which he does make more account of,
then all the world besides: so precious and dear are they in his sight.
Likewise it is written, that the Lord was exceedingly incensed against the
Israelites for their idolatrous Calfe, which they made in Horeb: yet he could
do nothing, because Moses would not let him. And therefore he falls to
entreating of Moses, that Moses would let him alone, and entreat no more for
them. Oh, (says Exo. 32. 10.
the Lord to Moses) let me alone: that my wrath may wax hot against this
people, and that I may consume them. Thus we see, that except Lot go out of
the City, and Moses let him alone, he can do nothing. Oh the profoundnesse
and altitude of Gods mercy, toward mankind! Oh, the height and depth, length
and breadth of his love toward some! Oh that the most glorious and invisible
God should so greatly respect the sons of men! For what is man, that he
should be mindful of him? or the son of man, that he should regard him? Let
us therefore that are the Lords remembrancers, give him no rest, nor let him
alone, until we have some security, and good assurance from him, that he will
turn away from us the wrath which we most justly have deserved: that he will
spare us, and be merciful unto us. Yea, and as the Prophet says, Let us never
leave him, nor give him Esa. 62. 7.
over, till he repair and set up Jerusalem, the praise of the world: lest for
default hereof, that be charged upon us, which was charged upon the head of
some of the Prophets in Israel: that they were like the foxes in the waste
places, that they had not risen up in the gaps, neither made up the hedge for
the house of Israel. Eze. 13. 45.
For now adays, alas, we have many hedgebreakers, few hedg-makers: many
openers of gaps, few stoppers, many breakers of breaches, to let in the floods
of Gods wrath upon us, but very few, that by true repentance go about to make
up the breach, and to let down the sluices, that the gushing streams of Gods
vengeance may be stopped and stayed.


Phila. I do now plainly see, that there be some in high favor with God,
and, as we say, greatly in his books; since his love is so great unto them,
that for their sakes he spares thousands.


Theol. It is written in the Proverbs of Solomon, that the righteous in a land,
are the establishment of the kings throne; and the wicked, the overthrowing of
the same. The words are these: Take away the dross from the silver, Pro. 25. 4.
and there will proceed a vessel for the finer. Take away the wicked from the
King, and his throne shall be established in righteousness. Likewise in
another place the wise man affirms, that the righteous are the strength and
bulwark of Cities, Towns, and Corporations: but the wicked are the weakening
and undoing of all. Scornful men, says he, set a City Pro. 29. 8.
on fire; but the wise turn away wrath. To this purpose, most excellent is
that saying of Eliphas in Job; The innocent shall deliver the Island; and Job.
23. 30.
it shall be preserved by the pureness of their hands. We read in the book
of the Chronicles, that when the Levites and the Priests were cast out by
Jeroboam, they came to Jerusalem, and all such as set their hearts to seek the
Lord God of Israel came with them. And then afterward 2. Chron. 11. 13.
it is said, they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the
son of Solomon mighty. By all these testimonies it is evident, that princes,
kingdoms, cities, towns and villages, are fortified by the righteous therein:
and for their sakes also great plagues are kept back. Which thing one of the
heathen did well see into, as appears by his words, which are these: When God
means well unto a city, and will do good unto it, then he raises up good
men: but when he means to punish a city or country, and do ill unto it,
then he takes away the good men from it.


Phil. It is very manifest by all that you have alleged, that the wicked fare
the better every day in the year, for the righteous that dwell amongst them.


Theol. All experience does teach it: and the scriptures do plentifully avouch
it. For did not churlish Laban fare the better for Jacob his Genesis 30. 27. Genesis
39. 5.
kinsman? Does he not acknowledge, that the Lord had blessed him for his sake?
Did not Potiphar fare the better for godly Joseph? Does not the Scripture say,
that the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph his sake? and that the
Lord made all that he did to prosper in his 2. Sam. 6. 11.
hand? Did not Obed-edom fare the better for the Arc? Did not the seventy and
six souls, that were in the ship with Paul, speed all the Act. 27. 24.
better for his sake? Did not the Angel of God tell him in the night, that God
had given unto him, all that sailed with him? for otherwise, a thousand to one,
they had been all drowned. Therefore the children of God may very fitly be
compared to a great piece of cork, which though it be cast into the sea, having
many nails fastened in it, yet it bears them all up from sinking: which
otherwise, would sink of themselves. What shall we say then? or what shall we
conclude? but that the ungodly are more beholden to the righteous, the^ they
are aware of.


Phila. I do think, if it were not for Gods children, it would go hard with
the wicked. For, if they were sorted and shoaled out from amongst them, and
placed by themselves, what could they look for; but wrath upon wrath, and
plague upon plague? till the Lord had made a final consumption of them, and
swept them like dung, from the face of the earth.


Theo. Sure it is, all creatures would frown upon them. The Sun would
unwillingly shine upon them: or the Moon give them any light. The Stars
would not be seen of them: and the Planets would hide themselves. The beasts
would devour them: the fowls would pick out their eyes. The fishes would
make war against them: and all creatures in heaven and earth would rise up in
arms against them. Yea, the Lord himself from heaven, would rain down fire
and brimstone upon them.


Phila. Yet for all this, it is a wonder to consider how deadly the wicked hate
the righteous, and almost in every thing oppose themselves against them: and
that in most virulent and spiteful manner. They rail and slander, scoff and
scorn, mock and mow at them: as though they were not worthy to live upon the
earth. They esteem every pelting rascal, and prefer every vile varlet,
before them. And though they have their lives and liberty, their breath and
safety, and all that they have else, by them, yet, for all that, they could be
content to eat their hearts with garlic: so great, so fiery, so burning and
hissing hot is their fury and malice against them.


Theol. They may very fitly be compared to a Moth that fretteth in pieces the
same cloth wherein she is bred. Or to a certain worm, or canker, that
corrodeth, and eats through the heart of the tree that nourishes her. Or unto
a man that stands upon a bough in the top of a tree, where there is no more:
and yet, with an axe choppeth it off, and therewithal falls down with it,
and breaks his neck. Even so, the fools of this world do what they can, to
chop asunder the bough that vpholds them: but they may easily know what will
follow.


Phila. I see plainly, they be much their own foes, and stand in their own
light, and indeed know not what they do. For the benefit which they receive by
such, is exceeding great; and therefore by their mangling of them, they do but
hold the stirrup to their own destruction.


Theol. Now to apply these things to our selves, and to return to the first
question of this argument: may we not marvel, that our nation is so long
spared; considering that the sins thereof are so horrible and outrageous as
they be?


Phila. We may justly marvel at the wonderful patience of God. And we may
well think that there be some in the land, which stand in the breach; being
in no small favor with his highness; since they do so much prevail.


Theo. The merciful preservation of our most gracious king (who is the breath
of our nostrils) the long continuance of our peace, and of the Gospel: the
keeping back of the sword out of the land, which our sins pull upon us: the
frustrating of many plots and subtle devices, which have been often intended
against our state, yea, and the life of his Majesty's most royal person: make
me to think, that there be some strong pleaders with God, for the public
good of us all.


Phila. You may well think so indeed: For, by our sins, we have forfeited
(and daily do forfeit, into Gods hands) both our King, our Country, our
Peace, our Gospel, our lives, our goods, our lands, our livings, our wives,
our children, and all that we have: but only the righteous (which are so
near about the King, and in so high favor) do step in, and earnestly entreat
for us, that the forfeitures may be released, and that we may have a lease (in
parley) of them all again; or at least a grant of further time. But I pray you
sir, are not we to attribute something, concerning our good estate, to the
policy of the land, the laws established, and the wisdom and counsel of our
prudent Governors?


Theol. Yes assuredly, very much: as the ordinary and outward means, which God
uses for our safety. For though the Apostle Paul had a grant from God for the
safety of his own life, and all that were with him in the ship; yet he said,
Except the mariners abide in the ship, we can not be safe. Showing thereby,
that unto faith Act. 17. 3.
and prayers, the best and wisest means must be joined. We are therefore,
upon our knees every day to give thanks unto God for such good means of our
safety, as he has given us.


Phila. Well then, as the prayers of the righteous have been hitherto great
means, both for the auerting and turning away of wrath and the continuance of
favor; so show, I pray you, what is the best course to be taken, and what in
sound wisdom is to be done, both to prevent future dangers, and to continue
Gods favors and mercies still upon us.


Theol. The best and surest course, that I can consider or conceive of, is, to
repent heartily for sins past, and to reform our lives in time to come, to
seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near:
to forsake our own ways, and our own imaginations, and to turn unto him
with all our hearts, with weeping, with fasting, and with mourning; as the
Prophet Joel advises: For Joel. 2.
our God is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. All the Prophets do counsel us to follow this
course, and do plainly teach, that if we all (from the highest to the lowest)
do meet the Lord with unfeigned repentance, and offer him the sacrifice of a
contrite spirit, undoubtedly he will be pacified toward us, and be merciful
to our transgressions. This is most plainly set down in the seventh of
Jeremy, where the Lord says thus to his people: Ier. y.
If you amend and redress your ways and your works: If you execute judgment
betwixt a man and his neighbor, and oppress not the stranger, the fatherless
and the widow, and shead no innocent blood in this place, neither walk after
other gods, to your destruction: then will I let you dwell in this place; even
in the land which I gave unto your fathers, for ever and ever. So likewise he
says by the same Prophet. Execute ye judgment and Ier. 22 3.
righteousness, and deliver the oppressed from the hand of the oppressor, and
vex not the fatherless, the widow or the strangers; do no violence, nor shead
innocent blood in this place. For if you do this thing, then shall the Kings
sitting upon the Throne of David, enter in by the gates of this house, and ride
upon chariots and upon horses, both he, and his servants and his people. And
again: O ye Ier. 3. 22.
disobedient children return, and I will heal your rebellion. The Lord also
says by his Prophet Esaias; If ye consent and obey, ye Esaias. 1. 19.
shall eat the good things of the land; but if ye refuse and be rebellious,
ye shall be devoured with the sword. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
The Prophet Hosea says: Come let us return to the Lord: for Hos. 6. 1.
he has spoiled, and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind
us up. And again: O Israel return unto the Lord, (for Hos. 13. 1.
thou have fallen by thine iniquity) and I will heal thy rebellion, and will
love thee freely: for mine anger is turned away from thee. I will be as the
deaw unto Israel; he shall grow as the Lilly, and fasten his root as the tree
of Lebanon; his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive
tree; and his smell as Lebanon.

The Prophet Michah tells us what is good for us, and what is our best
course, and what the Lord requires at our hands: namely these four things: To
do justly, to love mercy, Mic. 6. 8.
to humble our selves, and to walk with our God. The Prophet Amos gives the
same Amos. 5. 14.
counsel, saying: Seek the Lord, and ye shall live. Seek good, and not
evil. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate. It
may be, that the Lord of Hosts will be merciful unto the remnant of Joseph.
Also the Lord himself says; If this Nation, against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague I thought to bring
upon them. Iere. 8. 8. Thus we do plainly see, what advice and counsel the
Prophets and holy men of God do give unto us. The sum of all is this; that
if we do truly repent and turn unto him with all our hearts (studying to obey
him, and walk in his ways) then he will grant us any favor, that we will
require at his hands. For, even as woolpacks, and other sost matter, beats
back, and dampeth the force of al shot: so penitent, melting, and soft hearts,
do beat back the shot of Gods wrath, and turn away his vengeance from us.
Moreover, we may observe in all experience, that when potentates are offended,
or any great man has conceived a displeasure against a poor man, that then he
must run and ride, send presents, use his friends, break his sleeps, and
never be quiet till he have pacified him. Even so must we deal with our God,
seeing he has taken a displeasure against us. Oh therefore that we would
speedily use all possible means, to pacify his wrath! Oh that we would, with
one heart and voice, every one of us (from the highest to the lowest) humble
our selves before our God, forsake our former evil ways, be grieved for that
we have done, and purpose never to do the like again! Oh that it might go to
the hearts of us, that we have so often and so grievously offended so loving a
God, and so merciful a Father! Oh that we would awakeonce at last, and rowse
up our drowzie hearts, and ransack our sleepy consciences, crying out against
our sins; that our sins might never cry out against us! Oh that we would judge
our selves, accuie our selves, endite our selves, and condemn our selves; so
should we never be adjudged, accused, endited or condemned of the Lord! Oh
that all hearts might sob, all souls might sigh, all loins might be smitten
with sorrow, all faces gather blackness, and every man smite himself one the
thigh, saying: What have I done? Oh, that both Magistracy, Ministry, and
communaltie, would purpose and vow, and even take a bond of themselves, that
from hence forth, and from this day forward they would set their hearts to
seek the Lord: and that they would wholly give up themselves to his obedience!
Oh that all men, women, and children would fear God, and keep his
commandments: would eschew evil, and do good: would study to please God in
allthings, and to be fruitful in all good works: making conscience to
perform the duties of their general callings, and duties of their special
callings: duties of the first Table, and duties of the second Table: that so
God might be sincerely worshipped, his name truly reverenced, his Sabbaths
religiously observed; and that every man would deal kindly, mercifully,
justly, and uprightly with his neighbor: that there might be no complaining,
no crying in our streets! Oh I say again, and again, that if all of us, of
what estate, degree, or condition soever, would walk in the paths of our God;
then doubtless we should live and see good days, all future dangers should
be prevented, our peace prolonged, our state established, our King preserved,
and the Gospel continued. Then should we still enjoy our lives, our goods, our
lands, our livings, cur wives, our children, our houses, and tenements, our
Orchards, and Gardens: yea, as the Prophet says, we should eat the good things
of the land, spending our days in much comfort, peace and tranquillity: and
leave great blissings unto our children and posterity, from age to age, from
generation to generation.


Phila. You have fully answered my question, and well satisfied me therein, out
of the scriptures: yet I pray you give me leave to add one thing unto that,
which you have at large set down. The Lord says by the Prophet Amos, that for
their sins and rebellions, he had given them cleanness of teeth: that is,
dearth and scarcity: and yet they did not turn unto him. Also he withheld
the rain from them, and punished them with drought, and yet they did not turn
unto him. Moreover he smote their Corn, their great Gardens, their Orchards,
Vineyardes, Figtrees, and Oliue-trees, with blasting and mildeaw, and the
Palmer-worme did devour them; and yet they did not return unto him. Last of
all, he smote them with pestilence, and with the sword, and overthrew them, as
he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and they were as a firebrand plucked out of
the burning: yet, for all this, they did not turn unto him. Ye have not
turned unto me, says the Lord. But now to come to the point. Out of this I
Amos. 4. 6. 7.
gather, that if we multiply our transgressions, God will multiply his plagues
upon us: but on the contrary, if we would unfeignedly turn unto the Lord our
God with all our hearts, all plagues should be stayed, all dangers prevented;
and no evil should fall upon us. For because they would not turn, therefore
he smote them. If therefore they had turned, he would not have smote them.
But now I pray you briefly conclude this point, and declare in few words, what
it is that does most materially concern our peace, and public good.


Theol. These few then briefly, I take to be the things which belong to our
peace: Let Solomon execute Ioab and Shemei. Ten things concerning our peace.
Let John and Eliah slay the Priests and Prophets of Baal. Let Aaron and
Eleazar minister before the Lord faithfully. Let Jonas be cast out of the ship.
Let Moses stand fast in the gap, and not let down his hand. Let Iosuah succed
him. Let Cornelius fear God, with all his household. Let Tabitha be full of
good works, and almesdeeds. Let Deborah judge long in Israel, prosper, and be
victorious. Let us all pray that the light of Israel may not be quenched.


And this I take to be the sum of all, that belongs to our peace.


Phila. The sum of all our conference hitherto, as I remember, may be reduced
unto these few heads: First, man's natural corruption has been laid open.
Secondly, the horrible fruits thereof. Thirdly, their evil effects and
workings, both against our souls and bodies, goods, name, and the whole land.
Lastly, the remedies of all. Now therefore I would grow to some conclusion of
that which you touched by the way, and made some mention of: namely, the signs
of salvation and damnation: and declare unto us plainly, whether the state of
a man's soul, before God, may not by certain signs and tokens, be certainly
discerned even in this life.


Theol. Besides those which before have been mentioned, we may add these
nine following: Reverence of Gods name. Nine signs of a sound soul.
Keeping of his Sabbaths. Truth. Sobriety. Industry. Compassion. Humility.
Chastity. Contentation.



Phila. These indeed, I grant, are very good signs: but yet all of them are
not certain. For some of them may be in the Reprobats.


Theol. What say you then to Saint Peter's signs, which are set down in the
first chapter of his second Epistle: which are these eight?

Faith. S. Peter's eight signs of salvation.
Virtue: Knowledge. Temperance. Patience. Godliness. Brotherly kindness.
Love.


Saint Peter says: If these be in us, and abound, they will make us neither
idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus. Which is as much as
if he had said: they will make us sound and sincere Professors of the Gospel.


Phila. All these, I grant, are exceeding good signs and evidences of a man's
salvation: but yet some of them may deceive; and an hole may be picked in some
of these evidences. I would therefore hear of some such demonstratiue and
infallible evidences, as no Lawyer can find fault with. For I hold, that good
Divines can as perfectly judge of the assurances and evidences of men's
salvation: as the best Lawyer can judge of the assurances and evidences,
whereby men hold their lands and livings.


Theol. You have spoken truly, in that. And would to God all the Lords people
would bring forth the evidences of their salvation: that we might discern of
them.


Phila. Set down then, which be the most certain and infallible evidences of
a man's salvation: against the which no exception can be Seven infallible
signs of salvation. Acts 16. 31. Pro. 11. 20. Ioh. 1. 47.
taken.


Theol. I judge these to be most sound and infallible: Assured faith in the
promises. Sincerity of heart. The spirit of adoption. Sound Regeneration, and
Sanctification. Romans 8. 14. Ioh. 4. 3. 1. These. 4. 5. Romans 5. 1. Col. 1. 23.
Mat. 24. 13.
Inward peace. Groundednesse in the truth. Continuance to the end.



Phila. Now you come near the quick indeed. For, in my judgment, none of
these can be found truly in any reprobat. Therefore I think no Divine can
take exception against any of these.


Theo. No, I assure you: no more then a Lawyer can find fault with the Tenure
of men's lands, and fee-simples, when as both the Title is good and strong by
the law, and the evidences thereof are sealed, subscribed, delivered, conveyed,
and sufficient witness upon the same, and all other signs and ceremonies (in
the delivering and taking possession thereof) according to strickt law
observed. For if a man have these forenamed evidences of his salvation, sure it
is, his Title and interest to heaven is good, by the law of Moses, and the
Prophets: I mean the word of God. God himself subscribeth to them: Jesus
Christ delivers them as his own deed: the holy Ghost seals unto them:
yea, the three great witnesses, which bear record in the earth (that is,
water, blood, and the spirit) do all witness the same.


Phila. Now, you have very fully satisfied me touching this point. And one
thing more I do gather out of all your speech: to wit, that you do think, a
man may be assured of his salvation, even in this life.


Theol. I do think so indeed. For he, that knows not in this life that he
shall be saved, shall never be saved after this life. For S. John 1. John. 3. 2.
says: Now are we made the sons of God.


Phila. But because many doubt of this, and the Papists do altogether deny
it: therefore I pray you confirm it unto us out of the Scriptures.


Theol. The Apostle says: We know that if 2. Cor. 5. 1.
our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given
us of God: that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.
Mark, that he says, both he, and the rest of Gods people, did certainly
know, that heaven was provided for them. For the spirit of adoption bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. And again, the same
Apostle says: From henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Romans 8. 15. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
Judge shall give me at that day; not to me only, but to all them that love
his appearing. Here we see, that he knew there was a crown prepared for him,
and for all the elect. And the same spirit, which did assure it unto Paul does
assure it also to all the children of God. For they all have the same spirit:
though not in the same measure. S. John says also: 1. Ioh 2. 3.
Hereby we are sure we know him; If we keep his Commandments. In-which words,
S. John tells us thus much: that if we do unfeignedly endeavor to obey God,
there is in us the true knowledge and fear of God: and consequently, we are
sure we shall be saved. S. Peter says: Give all diligence, to make your 2.
Pet. 1. 10.
calling and election sure. Wherefore should the Apostle exhort us, to make our
election sure, if none could be sure of it? In the second to the Ephesians the
Apostle says flatly, that in Christ Jesus we do already sit together in the
heavenly places. His meaning is not, that we are there already in possession:
but we are as sure of it, as if we were there already. The reasons hereof are
these: Christ our head is in Ioh. 22. 32. Ioh. 14. 13
possession: Therefore he will draw al his members unto him, as he himself
says.

Secondly, we are as sure of the thing which we hope for, as of that which we
have. But we are sure of that which we have; which is the work of grace;
Therefore we are sure of that we look for; which is the crown of glory. Many
other places of the holy Scriptures might be alleged to this purpose: but I
suppose, these may suffice.


Phila. As you have showed this by the Scriptures; So also show it yet more
plainly, by evident reason out of the same.


Theol. How can a man in truth call God his Father? (when he says: Our Father
which art in Heaven) and yet doubt, whether he be his Father or no? For if God
indeed be our Father, and we his children, how can we perish? how can we be
damned? will a father condemn his own children? or shall the children of God
be condemned? No, no. There is no condemnation Romans 8. 1. Romans 8. 33. 34.
to them that are in Christ Jesus. And, who can lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? It is God that justifies, who can condemn? It is therefore most
certain and sure, that all such, as do in truth call God their Father, and
have God for their Father, shall be saved. Again, how can a man say, in truth
and feeling, that he believes the forgiveness of sin, and yet doubt whether
he shall be saved? For if he be fully persuaded that his sins are forgiven,
what lets why he should not be saved? Moreover, as certainly as we know that
we are called, justified, and sanctified: so certainly we know we shall be
glorified. But we know the one certainly: and therefore the other.


Asune. I will never believe, that any man can certainly know in this world,
whether he shall be saved, or damned; but all men must hope well, and be of a
good belief.


Theol. Nay: we must go further then hope well. We may not venture our
salvation upon uncertain hopes. As, if a man should hope it would be a fair
day to morrow: but he cannot certainly tell. No, no. We must in this case,
being of such infinite importance as it is, grow to some certainety, and full
resolution. We see, worldly men will be loath to hold their lands and leases
uncertainly, having nothing to show for them. They will not stand to the
courtesy of their landlords, nor rest upon their good wills. They will not
stay upon uncertain hope. No; they are wiser then so. For the children of this
world are wiser in their generation, then the children of light. They will be
sure to have something to show. They will have it under seal. They will not
stay upon the words and promises of the most honest Luke. 16.
men, and best Landlords. They cannot be quiet, till they have it in white
and black, with sound counsel upon their Title; and every way made as sure
unto them, as any Law of the Land can make it.

Are then the children of this world so wise in these inferior things, and
shall not we be as wise in matters of ten thousand times more importance?
Are they so wise for earth, and shall not we be as wise for Heaven? Are they
so wise for their bodies, and shall not we be as wise for our souls? Shall we
hold the state of our immortal inheritance by hope well; and have no writings,
nor evidences, no seals, no witnesses, nor any thing to show for it? Alas, this
is a weak Tenure, a broken title, a simple hold indeed.


Asune. Yet for all that a man cannot be certain.


Theol. Yes, S. John tells us, we may be certain. For he says: Hereby we
know we 1. John. 4. 13.
dwell in him, and he in us; because he has given us of his spirit. He says
not, we hope; but we know certainly. For he that has the spirit of God,
knows certainly he has it; and he that has faith, knows that he has
faith; and he that shall be saved, knows he shall be saved. For God does not
work so darkely in men's hearts, by his spirit, but that they may easily know
whether it be of him or no, if they would make a due trial. Again, the same
Apostle says: He that believes in the Son of God, 1. John. 5. 10.
has the witness in himself. That is, he has certain testimonies in his own
conscience, that he shall be saved. For we must fetch the warrant of our
salvation from within our selves: even from the work of God within us. For
look, how much a man feels in himself the increase of knowledge, obedience,
and godliness; so much the more sure he is, that he shall be saved. A man's
own conscience is of great force this way: and will not lie, or deceive. For
so says the wise man: As water shows face to Pro. 27. 19.
face, so does the heart, man unto man; That is, the mind and conscience of
every man tells him justly (though not perfectly) what he is. For the
conscience will not lie: but accuse, or excuse a man; being in stead of a
thousand witnesses.

The Apostle also says; No man knows the 1. Cor. 2. 11. Pro. 20. 27.
things of man, but the spirit of a man that is in him. And again, the
Scripture says; Man's soul is, as it were, the candle of the Lord: whereby he
searches all the bowels of the belly. So then it is a clear case, that a man
must have recourse to the work of Gods grace within him, even in his own
soul. For thereby he shall be certainly resolved, one way or another. For
even as Rebecca knew certainly, by the striving and stirring of the twins in
her womb, that she was conceived and quick of child; so Gods children know
certainly, by the motions and stirring of the holy Ghost within them, that they
have conceived Christ, and shall undoubtedly be saved.


Phila. I pray you, let us come to the ground work of this certainty of
salvation, and speak somewhat of that.


Theo. The groundwork of our salvation is laid in Gods eternal election,
and in respect thereof it stands fast and immovable; as it is written: The
foundation of God stands fast. 2. Tim. 2. 19. 1. These. 5. 2. Tim. 2. 13.
And again: He is faithful, that has promised: though we cannot believe, yet
he abides faithful. So then, as we know it certainly in our selves, by the
consequents of election; so it stands most firm in respect of God, and his
eternal and immutable decree. And a thousand infirmities (nay all the sins
in the world, nor all the devils in hell) cannot overthrow Gods election. For
our Lord Jesus says; All that the Ioh. 6. 37.
Father has given me, shall come unto me. And again: This is the Fathers will
that has Ioh. 6. 39.
sent me: that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing: but should
raise it up again, at the last day. And in another place, Ioh. 10. 27.
our Savior Christ says; My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish:
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is
greater then all; and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. We
ought therefore to be as sure of our salvation, as of any other thing which God
has promised, or which we are bound to believe. For to doubt thereof, in
respect of Gods truth, is blasphemous against the immutability of his truth.


Philag. But, are there not some doubts, at some times, even in the very Elect,
and in those which are grown to the greatest persuasion?


Theol. Yes verily. For he that never doubted, never believed. For whosoever
believes in truth, feels sometimes doubtings and wauerings. Even as the
sound body feels many grudgings of diseases, which if he has not health,
he could not feel: so the sound soul feels some doubtings: which if it
were not sound, it could not so easily feel. For we feel not corruption, by
corruption; but we feel corruption, by grace. And the more grace we have, the
more quick are we in the feeling of corruption. Some men of tender skins,
and quick feeling, will easily feel the lightest feather, in softer manner
laid upon the ball of their hands; which others, of more slow feeling and hard
flesh, cannot so easily discern. So then it is certain, that although the
children of God feel some doubtings, at sometimes; yet the same do no whit
impeach the certainety of their salvation: but rather argue a perfect
soundness and health of their souls. For, when such little grudgings are felt
in the soul, the children of God oppose against them the certainty of Gods
truth and promises: and so do easily overcome them. For the Lords people need
no more to fear them, then he that rides through the streets upon a lusty
gelding with his sword by his side, needs to fear the barking and bawling of a
few little curres and whappets.


Phila. Show yet more plainly, how, or in what respects the child of God may
both have doubtings, and yet be fully assured.


Theol. Even as a man, set in the top of the highest steeple in the world, and
so fast bound unto it, that he cannot fall though he would; yet when he
looks downward, he fears, because man's nature is not acquainted, nor
accustomed to mount so high in the air, and to behold the earth so far
beneath: but when he looks upward, and perceives himself fast bound, and
out of all danger, then he casts away all fear. Even so when we look
downward to our selves, we have doubts and fears: but when we look upward
to Christ, and the truth of his promises, we feel our selves cocke-sure, and
cease to doubt any more.


Phila. Declare unto us, what is the original of these doubts and fears, and
from whence they spring in the children of God.


Theol. They spring from the imperfection of our regeneration, and from that
strife which is in the very mind of the elect, between faith and infidelity.
For these two do mightily fight together in the most regenerate, and strive to
over master, and ouershadow one another. By reason whereof, sometimes it comes
to pass, through the prevailing of unbelief, that the most excellent servants
of God may fall into fits and pangs of despair, as Job and David, in their
temptations did. And even in these days also, some of Gods children at
sometimes are shrewdly handled this way, and brought very low; even unto
deaths door: but yet the Lord in great mercy does recover them, both from
total and final despair. Only they are humbled and tried by these sharp
fits, for a time, and that for their great good. For as we use to say, that an
Ague in a young man is a sign of health: so these burning fits of temptations,
in the elect, for the most part, are signs of Gods grace and favor. For, if
they were not of God, the devil would never be so busy with them.


Phila. Is it not mere presumption, and an overmuch trusting to our selves, to
be persuaded of our salvation?


Theol. Nothing less. For the ground of this persuasion is not laid in our
selves, or any thing within us, or without us; but only in the righteousness
of Christ, and the merciful promises of God. For, is it any presumption for us
to believe that, which God has promised, Christ has purchased, and the holy
Ghost has sealed? No verily, it is not any presumption; but a thing which we
all stand bound unto, as we will answer it at the dreadful day of judgment.
As for our selves, we do freely confess, that in Gods sight we are but lumps
of sin and masses of all misery; and cannot of our selves move hand or foot
to the furtherance of our salvation. But being justified by faith, we are at
peace with God, and fully persuaded of his love and favor toward us, in Christ.


Phila. Cannot the Reprobates and ungodly be assured of their salvation?


Theo. No. For the Prophet says: There is Esaias. 57. 22.
no peace to the wicked. Then I reason thus: They which have not the inward
peace, cannot be assured. But the wicked have not the inward peace. Therefore
they cannot be assured. Steadfast faith in the promises does assure. But the
wicked have not steadfast faith in the promises. Therefore they cannot be
assured. The spirit of adoption does assure. But the wicked have not the spirit
of adoption. Therefore they cannot be assured.

To conclude, when a man feels in himself an evil conscience, blindness,
profaneness, and disobedience, he shall (in despite of his heart) sing this
doleful song: I know not whether I shall be saved or damned.


Phila. Is not the doctrine of the assurance of salvation, a most comfortable
doctrine?


Theol. Yes doubtless. For except a man be persuaded of the favor of God,
and the forgiveness of sins, and consequently of his salvation, what comfort
can he have in any thing? Besides this, the persuasion of Gods love toward us,
is the root of all our love and cheerful obedience toward him. For therefore
we love him and obey him, because we know he has loved us first, and written
our names in the book of life. But on the contrary, the Doctrine of the
Papists, which would have men always doubt and fear in a servile sort, is
most hellish and uncomfortable. For so long as a man holds that, what
encouragement can he have to serve God? What love to his Majesty? What hope in
the promises? What comfort in trouble? What patience in adversity?


Antil. Touching this point, I am flat of your mind. For I think verily, a
man ought to be persuaded of his salvation. And for mine own part, I make no
question of it. I hope to be saved, as well as the best of them all. I am out
of fear for that. For I have such a steadfast faith in God, that, if there
should be but two in the world saved, I hope I should be one of them.


Theol. You are very confident indeed. You are persuaded before you know. I
would your ground were as good, as your vain confidence. But who is so bold as
blind Bayard? Your hope is but a fancy, and as a sick man's dream. You hope
you can not tell what. You have no ground for that you say. For, what hope can
you have to be saved, when you walk in no path of salvation? What hope can a
man have to come to London speedily, that trauelleth nothing that way, but
quite contrary? What hope can a man have to reap a good crop of corn, that
uses no means, neither ploweth, sows, nor harroweth? What hope can a man
have to be fat and well liking of his body, that seldom or never eats any
meat? What hope can a man have to escape drowning, which leapeth into the Sea?
Even so, what hope can you have to be saved, when you walk nothing that way,
when you use no means, when you do all things that are contrary unto the
same? For, alas, there is nothing in you of those things, which the Scriptures
do affirm must be, in all those that shall be saved. There be none of the
fore* named signs and tokens in you. You are ignorant, profane and careless.
God is not worshipped under your roof. There is no true fear of God in your
self nor in your household. You seldom hear the word preached. You content
your self with an ignorant Minister. You have no prayers in your family, no
reading, no singing of psalms, no instructions, exhortations, or admonitions,
or any other Christian exercises. You make no conscience of the observation of
the Sabbaths; you use not the name of God with any reverence; you break out
sometimes into horrible dathes and cursings; you make an ordinary matter of
swearing by your faith, and your troth. Your wife is irreligious, your children
dissolute and ungracious, your servants profane and careless. You are an
example in your own house of al Atheism, and conscienceles behavior. You are
a great gamester, a rioter, a spendthrift, a drinker, a common
ale-house-haunter, an whore hunter; and, to conclude, given to all vice and
naughtiness. Now then, I pray you tell me, or rather let your conscience tell
me, what hope you can have to be saved, so long as you walk and continue in
this course? Does not S. John say; If we say we have fellowship 1. Ioh. 1. 6.
with him, and walk in darkness, we are liers? Does not the same Apostle
avouch, that 1. Ioh. 2. 4.
such as say they know God, and keep not his commandments, are liers?

Again does he not say: Heth at commits 1. Ioh. 3. 8. 10.
sin, is of the Devil; And whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God?
Does not our Lord Jesus flatly tell the Jews (which bragged that Abraham was
their father) that they were of their father the devil: because they did his
works? Does not the Apostle Paul say; His Rom 6. 16.
servants we are, to whom we obey; whether it be of sin, unto death, or of
obedience, unto righteousness? Does not the scripture say; He that Ioh. 3. 7.
does righteousness, is righteous? Does not our Lord Jesus affirm: that nor
every one that Mat. 7. 21.
says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does
the will of my father which is in Heaven? Therefore I conclude: that, forasmuch
as your whole course is carnal, careless, and dissolute, you can have no
warrantable hope to be saved.


Phila. I do verily think, that this man's case (which now you have laid
open) is the case of thousands.


Theo. Yea, doubtless (of thousand thousands) the more is the pity.


Asune. Soft and fair, sir, you are very round indeed. Soft fire makes sweet
malt. I hope you know we must be saved by mercy: and not by merit. If I
should do all my self, wherefore serves Christ? I hope that which I cannot
do, he will do for me. And I hope to be saved by Jesus Christ as well as the
best of you all.


Theol. Oh, now I see which way the game goes. You would feign make Christ a
cloak for your sins. You will sin, that grace may abound. You will sin
frankly, and set all upon Christ's score. Truly there be many thousands of your
mind, which, hearing of Gods abundant mercy in Christ, are thereby made more
bold to sin. But they shall know one day, to their cost, what it is so to abuse
the mercy of God. The Apostle says: The mercy and loving Romans 2.
kindness of God should lead us to repentance. But we see, it leads many
to further hardness of heart. The Prophet says: With him is mercy, that he
may be feared. But many thereby are made more secure and careless. But to
come nearer the mark: you say, you hope to be saved by Jesus Christ. And I
answer: that if those things be found in you, which the Scriptures do avouch to
be in all that shall be saved by him, then you may have good 9. Things required
of all that shall be saved by Christ. 2. Cor. 5. 17. 1. Pet. 4. 2.
confidence, and assured hope: otherwise not. Now the Scriptures do thus
determine it, and set it down: That if a man be in Christ, and look to be
saved by him, he must be endued with these qualities following: First he must
be a new creature. Secondly, he must live, not after the lusts of men: but
after the will of God. Thirdly, he must be zealous of good works. Tit 2. 14.
Romans 6. 14.
Fourthly, he must die to sin, and live to righteousness. Fifthly, he must
be holy and unblameable. Sixthly, he must so walk, as Christ has walked. Col.
1. 22. John 2. 6. Gal. 5. 24.
Seventhly, he must crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
Eigthly, he must walk, not after the flesh, but Romans 8. 1.
after the spirit. Last of all, he must serve God in righteousness Luke. 1. 75.
and true holiness, all the days of his life.


Lo then what things are required of all that shall be saved by Christ. Now
therefore, if these things be in you in some measure of tenth, then your hope
is current, sound, and good: otherwise, it is nothing worth. For in vain do
men say, they hope to be saved by Christ, when as they walk dissolutely. The
reason hereof is: because the members must be suitable to the head. But Christ
our head is holy: therefore we his members must be holy also; as it is written:
Be ye 1. Pet. 1. 16.
holy, for I am holy. Otherwise, if we will join profane and unholy members
to our holy head Christ, then we make Christ a monster. As if a man should
join unto the head of a Lion, the neck of a Bear, the body of a Wolf, and
the legs of a Fox: were it not a monstrous thing: would it not make a
monstrous creature? Even such a thing do they go about, which would have
Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and such like, to be the members of Christ,
and to have life and salvation by him. But since you do so much presume of
Christ, I pray you let me ask you a question.


Antil. What is that?


Theol. How do you know that Christ died for you particularly, and by name?


Antile. Christ died for all men, and therefore for me.


Theol. But, all men shall not be saved by Christ. How therefore do you know
that you are one of them that have special interest in Christ, and shall be
saved by his death?


Antil. This I know that we are all sinners, and cannot be saved by any other
then by Christ.


Theol. Answer directly to my question. How do you know in your self, and for
your self, that you are one of the Elect, and one of those, for whom Christ
died?


Antil. I know it, by my good faith in God: because I put my whole trust in
him, and in none other.


Theol. But, how know you, that you have faith? or how shall a man know his
faith?


Antile. I know it by this; that I have always had as good a meaning, and as
good a faith to Godward as any man of my calling, and that is not
booke-learned. I have always feared God with all my heart, and served him with
my prayers.


Theol. Tush: now you go about the bush, and houer in the air. Answer me to
the point. How do you know certainly and assuredly, that Christ died for you
particularly and by name.


Antil. You would make a man mad. You put me out of my faith: you drive me
from Christ. But if you go about to drive me from Christ, I will never believe
you. For I know we must be saved only by him.


Theo. I go not about to drive you from Christ, but to drive you to Christ. For
how can I drive you from Christ, seeing you never came near him? How can I
drive you out of Christ, seeing you were never in him? But this is it, that
deceives you, and many others; that you think you believe in Christ, because
you say you believe in Christ. As though faith consisted in words: or, as
though a man had faith, because he says so, If every one that says he has
faith, therefore has faith: and every one that says he believes in Christ,
does therefore believe: then who will not have faith? who will not believe? But
in very deed, your faith, and the faith of many others, is nothing else but a
mere imagination. But all this while, you have not answered my question,
touching your particular knowledge of Christ.


Antile. I can answer you no otherwise then I have answered you. And I think I
have answered you sufficiently.


Theol. No, no; you faulter in your speech: your answer is not worth a button,
you speak you wot not what, you are altogether befogd and benighted in this
question. But, if there were in your heart the true knowledge, and lively
feeling of God, then I am sure you would have yielded another, and a better
answer. Then you would have spoken something from the sense and feeling of your
own heart and from the work of Gods grace within you: but because you can
yield no sound reason, that Christ died for you particularly, and by name;
therefore I suspect you are none of them which have proper interest in him, and
in whom his death takes effect indeed.


Phila. I think this question would gravel a great number: and few there be
that can answer it aright.


Theol. It is most certain. I do know it by lamentable experience, that not
one of an hundred can soundly and sufficiently answer this question: none,
indeed, but only those, in whom the new work is wrought, and do by the inward
work of the spirit feel Christ to be theirs. I have talked with some, which
are both witty, sensible, and learned: who notwithstanding when they have been
brought to this very point and issue, have stuck sore at it, and staggred very
much. And howsoever they might by wit and learning shuffle it over, and in a
plundered sort, speak reason: yet had they no feeling of that which they said,
and therefore no assurance: and consequently as good never a whit, as never the
better. It is the sanctifying spirit, that gives feeling in this point. And
therefore, without the feeling of the operation of the same spirit, it can
never be soundly answered. Thus then, I do close up this whole matter: As the
vinebrauch cannot live and bring forth fruit, except it abide in the Ume: no
more can we, except we abide in Christ, and be truly grafted into him by a
lively faith. None can have any benefit by him, but they only which dwell in
him. None can live by Christ, but they which are changed into Christ. None are
partakers of his body, but they which are in his body. None can be saved by
Christ crucified, but they which are crucified with Christ. None can live with
him being dead, but those which die with him being alive. Therefore let us
root down-ward in mortification, that we may shoot upward in sanctification.
Let us die to sin, that we may live to righteousness: Let us die while we
are alive, that we may live when we are dead.


Asune. If none can be saved by Christ, but only those which are so qualified
as you speak of, then Lord have mercy upon us: then the way to heaven is very
straight indeed, and few at all shall be saved. For there be few such in the
world.


Theo. You are no whit therein deceived. For when all comes to all, it is most
certain, that few shall be saved. Which thing I will show unto you, both by
scripture, reason, and examples.


Asune. First then, let us hear it proved by the scriptures.


Theo. Our Lord Jesus says: Enter in at the Mat. 7. 1.
straight gate. For, it is the wide gate and broad way that leads to
destruction: and many there be which go in thereat: because the gate is
strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that find
it. Again he says, Many are called, but few are chosen. In another Mat. 20.
16.
place, we read of a certain man which came to our savior Christ, and asked
him of purpose whether few should be saved. To who^ our Lord Jesus answered
thus: Strive to enter in at the straight gate. For many (I say unto you) Luke
13. 14.
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. In which answer, albeit our
Savior does not answer directly to his question, either negatiuely or
affirmatively; yet does he plainly insinuate by his speeches, that few shall
be saved. For first he bids us strive earnestly: noting thereby, that it is a
matter of great strife against the world, the flesh, and the devil. Secondly,
he affirms, that the gate is very straight: noting, that none can enter in,
without vehement crowding, and almost breaking their shoulder bones. Lastly, he
says; that many which seek to enter in, shall not be able: noting thereby,
that even of them that seek, many shall step short; because they seek him not
aright. Esaias also says: Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a Esaias. 1. 9.
seed, we had been as Sodom, and had been like to omorrha. The Apostle also
all ageth Esaias. 10. 22. Romans 9. 28.
out of the Prophet: That the Lord will make a short account in the earth, and
gather it into a short sum, with righteousness. These scriptures, I think,
are sufficient to prove that few shall be saved.


Asune. Now let us hear your reasons.


Theol. If we come to reason, we may rather wonder that any should be saved,
then so few shall be saved. For, we have all the lets and hindrances that may
be, both within us and without us. We have (as they say) the Sun, Moon,
and seven Stars against us. We have all the Devils in Hell against us, with
all their horns, heads, marvelous strength, infinite wiles, cunning devices,
deep sleights, and methodicall temptations. Here runs a sore stream
against us. Then have we this present evil world against us, with her
innumerable baits, snares, nets, gins, and grins to catch us, fetter us, and
entangle us. Here have we profits and pleasures, riches and honor, wealth
and preferment, ambition and covetousness. Here comes in a Camp royal of
spiritual and invisible enemies. Lastly, we have our flesh, that is, our
corrupted nature against us: we have our selves against our selves. For we our
selves are as great enemies to our salvation, as either the world, or the
Devil. For, our understanding, reason, will, and affections, are altogether
against us. Our natural wisdom is an enemy unto us. Our concupisences and
lusts do minister strength to satan's temptations. They are all in league with
Satan against us. They take part with him in every thing against us and our
salvation. They fight all under his standard, and receive their pay of him.
This then goes hard on our side, that the Devil has an inward party against
us: and we carry always within us our greatest enemy, which is ever ready,
night and day, to betray us into the hands of Satan; yea to vnbelt the door,
and let him in to cut our throats. Here then we see an huge army of dreadful
enemies, and a very legion of Devils, lying in ambush against our souls. Are
not we therefore poor wretches in a most pitiful case, which are thus
betrayed and besieged on every side? All things then considered, may we not
justly marvel, that any shall be saved? For who sees not, who knows not,
that thousand thousands are carried headlong to destruction; either with the
temptations of the world, the flesh or the Devil? But yet further, I will
show, by an other very manifest and apparent reason, that the number of Gods
Elect upon the face of the earth, are very few in comparison: which may thus
be considered. First, let there be taken away from amongst us all Papists,
Atheists, and Heretics. Secondly, let there be shoaled out all vicious and
notorious evil livers; as Swearers, Drunkards, Whooremongers, Worldlings,
deceivers, couseners, proud men, Rioters, gamesters, and all the profane
multitude. Thirdly, let there be refused and sorted out all Hypocrites, carnal
Protestants, vain professors, backesliders, decliners, and cold Christians.
Let all these, I say, be separated: and then tell me, how many sound,
sincere, faithful, and zealous worshippers of God, will be found among us. I
suppose, we should not need the Art of Arithmetike to number them. For I
think, there would be very few in every Uillage, Town, and City; I doubt,
they would walk very thinly in the streets: so as a man might easily tell them
as they go. Our Lord Jesus asks a question in the Gospel of S. Luke,
saying: Do you think, when the Son of man comes, Luke 18. 8.
that he shall find faith on the earth? To the which we may answer, Surely
very little.


Asune. Now, according to your promise, show this thing also, by examples.


Theol. In the first age of the world, all flesh had so corrupted their ways,
that God could no longer bear them; but even vowed their destruction, by the
ouerflowing of waters. When the flood came, how few were found faithful? Eight
persons only were saved by the Arc. How few righteous were found in Sodom,
and the Cities adjoining; but one poor Lot, and his family? How few believers
were found in Jericho; but one Rahab? How few of the old Israelites entered into
the Land of Promise; but two, Caleb and Iosuah? The Heb. 3. 19.
rest could not enter in, because of unbelief. The true and invisible Church
was small, during the government of the Judges: as appears plentifully in
that book. In Elias time, the church was so small, that it did not appear. In
the reign of the Kings of Israel and Judah, 1. Kin. 17.
the sincere worshippers were very few: as appears by all the Prophets.
During the captivity, the Church was as the Moon voder a cloud, she was
driven into the Wilderness, where she hid her self. During the persecutions
of the Greek Empire, by Gog, Magog, and Egypt, they were fewest of all. In
Christ's time, what a silly company did he begin withal! How were all things
corrupted by the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees! In the beginning of the
Apostles preaching, there were few believers. After the first six hundredth
years, what an eclipse was in the Church, during the height of Antichrists
reign! How few true worshippers of God were in the world, for the space of*
almost seven hundred years! Since the Gospel was broached and spread abroad,
how few do believe! And as the Prophet says; Esaias. 53. 1.
Lord who has believed our report? Thus the^ you see, it is apparent (both by
Scripture, reason, and examples of all ages) that the number of the Elect is
very small: and when all comes to all, few shall be saved.


Phil. I pray you tell us, how few, and to what scantling they may be reduced:
whether one of an hundred, or one of a thousand, shall be saved?


Theol. No man knows that: neither can I give you any direct and certain
answer unto it. But I say, that, in comparison of the Reprobate, there shall
be but a few saved. For, all that profess the Gospel are not the true
Church, before God. There be many in the Church, which are not of the Church.


Phila. How do you prove that?


Theo. Out of the ninth to the Romans: where the Apostle says: All are not
Israel, that are of Romans 9. 6.
Israel. And again, Esaias cries, concerning Israel: Though the number of the
children of Romans 9. 27
Israel were as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved.


Phila. How do you balance it in the visible Church: or in what comparison do
you take it? Let us hear some estimate of it. Some think, one of a hundred;
some but one of a thousand shall be saved.


Theol. Indeed I have heard some learned and godly Divines give such
conjectures: but for that matter, I can say nothing to it. But Romans 9. 27.
only let us observe the comparison of the holy Ghost betwixt a remnant, and
the sand of the sea, and it will give some light into the matter.


Phila. Does not the knowledge of this doctrine discourage men from seeking
after God?


Theol. Nothing less. But rather it ought to awake us, and stir up in us a
greater care of our salvation, that we may be of the number of Christ's little
flock, which make an end of Phil. 2. 12.
their salvation in fear and trembling.


Phila. Some make light of all these matters. Others say; As for the life to
come, that is the least matter of an hundred to be cared for. As for that
matter, they will leave unto God, even as pleases him, they will not meddle
with it. For they say, God that made them, must save them. They hope they shall
do as well as others, and make as good shift as their neighbors.


Theol. It is lamentable, that men should be so careless, and make so light of
that, which (of all other things) is most weighty and important. For, it shall
not profit a man to win the Math. 16. 2.
whole world, and lose his own soul, as the author of all wisdom
testifies.


Asune. I pray you Sir under correction, give me leave to speak my mind, in
this point. I am an ignorant man: pardon me, if I speak amiss. For a fools
bolt is soon shot.


Theol. Say on.


Asune. I do verily think, that God is stronger then the devil. Therefore I
cannot believe that he will suffer the Devil to have more then himself. He
will not take it at his hands. He loves mankind better then so.


Theol. You do carnally imagine, that God will wrestle and strive with the
devil about the matter. As for Gods power, it does never cross his will. For
God can do nothing against his will and decree, because he will not.


Asune. Yea but the Scripture says, God will have all men saved.


Theol. That is not meant of every particular man, but of all sorts some. Some
Jews, some Gentiles, some rich, some poor, some high, some low, etc.


Asune. Christ died for all: therefore all shall be saved.


Theol. Christ died for all, in the sufficiency of his death: but not in
efficacy, unto life. For only the Elect shall be saved by his death. As it is
written; This is my blood in the new Testament, Luke 22. 20.
which is given for you: meaning his Disciples, and chosen Children. And
again, Christ being consecrated, is made the author of Heb. 5. 9.
salvation, to all that obey him.


Asune. God is merciful, and therefore I hope he will save the greatest part,
for his mercy sake.


Theol. The greatest part shall perish: but all that shall be saved, shall be saved
by his mercy. As Rom 9.
it is written; He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: And whom he will
he hardneth. And again: It is not in him that wills, Romans 9.
or in him that runs: but in God, that shows mercy. Therefore, though God
be infinite in mercy, and Christ infinite in merit, yet none shall have mercy,
but only the vessels of mercy.


Antile. Can you tell who shall be saved, and who shall be damned? Do you know
Gods secrets? When were you in Heaven? When spoke you with God? I am of the
mind that all men shall be saved. For Gods mercy is above all his works. Say
you what you will, and what you can, God did not make us, to condemn us.


Theol. You are very peremptory indeed: you are more bold then wise: for Christ
says, few shall be saved: you say, all shall be saved. Whether then shall we
believe Christ or you?


Antil. If there should come two souls, one from heaven, and another from
hell, and bring us certain news how the case stood, then I would believe it
indeed.


Theol. Put case, two souls of the dead should come, the one from heaven, the
other from hell: I can tell you aforehand certainly what they would say, and
what news they would bring.


Antil. What I pray you?


Theol. They would say, there be few in heaven, and many in hell: heaven is
empty, and hell is full.


Antil. How know you that? How know you, they would say so?


Theol. I am sure, if they speak the truth, they must needs say so.


Antil. Must they needs? Why, I pray you, must they needs?


Theol. Because the word of God says so. Because Moses and the Prophets say
so. If you will not believe Moses, and the Prophets, neither will you believe,
though one, though two, though an hundred should rise from the dead.


Antile. Yes, but I would.


Theol. I pray you let me ask you a question. Whether do you think, that God
and his word, or the souls of dead men are more to be credited?


Antile. If I were sure that God said so, then I would believe it.


Theo. If his word say so, does not he say so? Is not he and his word all one?


Antile. Yet for all that, if I might hear God himself speak it, it would
move me much.


Theol. You show your self to be a notable Infidel. You will not believe Gods
word, without signs and miracles, and wonders from the dead.


Antile. You speak, as though you knew certainly, that hell is full. You do
but speak at random: you cannot tell: you were never there to see. But for
mine own part, I believe there is no hell at all, but only the hell of a man's
conscience.


Theol. Now you show your self in kind what you are. You say, you believe no
hell at all. And I think, if you were well examined, you believe no heaven at
all neither God nor devil.


Antile. Yes: I believe there is an Heaven, because I see it with mine eyes.


Theol. You will believe no more belike then you see: but blessed is he that
believes, and sees Ioh. 20. 29.
not. You are one of the rankest Atheists that ever I talked withal.


Antile. You ought not to judge: you know not men's hearts.


Theol. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. You have
sufficiently bewraied your heart by your words. For the tongue is the key of
the mind. As for judging, I judge you only by your fruits: which is lawful.
For we may justly say, It is a bad tree which brings forth bad fruit; and
he that does wickedly, is a wicked man. But it is you, and such as you are,
that will take upon you to judge men's hearts. For, though a man's outward actions
be religious and honest, yet you will condemn him. And, if a man give himself
to the word and prayer, reformeth his family, and abstaineth from the gross
sins of the world, you will by and by say, he is an hypocrite. And thus you
take upon you to judge men's hearts, as though you knew with what affection
these things are done.


Antile. I confess, I am a sinner: and so are all other for ought I know.
There is no man, but he may be amended. I pray God send us all of his grace,
that we may please him, and get to heaven at last.


Theol. Now you would shuffle up all together, as though you were as good as
the best, and as though there were no difference of sinners: but you must
learn to know, that there is great difference of sinners. For there is the
penitent, and the unpenitent sinner; the careful, and the careless sinner;
the sinner whose sins are not imputed, and the sinner whose sins are
imputed; the sinner that shall be saved, and the sinner that shall be damned.
For it is one thing to sin of frailty, another thing to live in it, dwell in
it, and trade in it, and (as the holy Ghost speaks) to suck it in, as the
Esaias. 5. 18.
fish sucketh water, and to draw it unto us with cart-ropes and cords of vanity.

To conclude therefore, there is as great difference betwixt a sinner, and a
sinner, as betwixt light and darkness. For, though Gods children be sinners,
in respect of the remnants of sin within them, yet the Scriptures call them
just and righteous: because they are justified by Christ, and sanctified by his
grace and holy spirit. And, for this cause, it is, that S. John says, 1. Ioh.
3. 6.
He that is borne of God sins not.


Antile. What, I pray you, did you never sin?


Theo. Yes, and what then? what are you the better?


Antile. You Preachers cannot agree amongst your selves. One says one thing,
and another says another thing: so that you bring the ignorant people into a
mammering: and they know not on which hand to take.


Theol. The Preachers, God be thanked, agree very well together, in all the
maine grounds of religion, and principal points of salvation. But, if they
dissent in some other matters, you are to try the spirits, whether they be of
God or no. You must try all things, and keep that which is good.


Antile. How can plain and simple men try the spirits and doctrines of the
Preachers?


Theol. Yes. For the Apostle says: The spiritual 1. Cor. 2. 15. 1. Ioh. 2. 26.
man discerns all things. And S. John says to the holy Christians: You have
received an ointment from that holy one, and know all things; that is, all
things necessary to salvation. Those therefore which have the spirit of God,
can judge and discern of doctrines, whether they be of God or no.


Antile. I am not booke-learned: and therefore I cannot judge of such matters.
As for hearing of Sermons, I have no leisure to go to them: I have somewhat
else to do. Let them that are bookish, and hear so many Sermons, judge of
such matters. For I will not meddle with them, they belong not unto me.


Theol. Yet for all that, you ought to read the Scriptures, and hear the word
of God preached, that you may be able to discern betwixt truth and falsehood
in matters of religion.


Antile. Belike you think none can be saved without Preaching; and that all
men stand bound to frequent Sermons; but I am not of your mind in that.


Theol. Our Lord Jesus says; My sheep Ioh. 10. 27. Ioh. 8. 47.
hear my voice. And again he says; He that is of God, hears Gods word. Ye
therefore hear it not; because you are not of God. You see therefore how
Christ Jesus makes it a special note of Gods child, to hear his word
preached.


Antile. But I think, we may serve God well enough without a Preacher. For,
Preachers are but men; and what can they do? A Preacher is a good man, so long
as he is in the Pulpit; but if he be out of the Pulpit, he is but as another
man.


Theol. You speak contemptuously of Gods messengers, and of Gods sacred
ordinance. But the Apostle does fully answer your objection, saying: Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing Romans 10.
by the word of God; and how can they hear without a Preacher? In which words,
the Apostle tells you flatly, that you can neither have faith, nor serve God
aright, without preaching.


Antile. When you have Preached all that you can, you can make the word of God
no better then it is: and some put in and put out what they list. The
Scriptures are but men's inventions: and they made the Scriptures.


Theol. We preach not to make the Word better, but to make you better. As for
putting in and putting out, it is a mere untruth. And whereas you say, the
scriptures were made by men, it is blasphemy once to think it: and you are
worthy to receive your answer at Tiburne.


Antile. Now I see you are hot. I perceive, for all your godliness, you will
be angry.


Theol. I take it to be no sin to be angry against sin. For your sin is
very great: and who can bear it?


Antile. All this while you speak much for Preaching: but you say nothing for
Prayer. I think there is as much need of Prayer, as Preaching. For, I find
in the Scriptures, Pray continually; but I find not, Preach continually.


Theol. No man denies, but that prayer is most needful, always to be joined
unto preaching and al other holy exercises: for it is the handmaid to all. But
yet we prefer preaching above it, because preaching is both the directour and
whetstone of prayer: yea, it stirs us aright in all spiritual actions and
services whatsoever: without the which we can keep no certain course, but
are ever ready to err on this hand, or that. Now, whereas you say, you find
Pray continually, but not Preach continually: you might (if you were not
wilfully blind) find also, Preach continually. For the Apostle says to
Timothy, Be instant: Preach the word in season, 2. Tim. 3. 2.
and out of season: that is, always; as time and occasion shall serve.


Antile. You extol preaching: but you say nothing for reading. I believe, you
condemn reading.


Theol. Does he that highly commends gold, condemn silver? I do ingenuously
confess, that both public and private reading of the scriptures, are very
necessary and profitable, and would to God, it were more used, then it is. For,
it is of singular use, both to increase knowledge and judgment, and also to
make us more fit to hear the word preached. For, such men, as are altogether
ignorant of the History of the bible, can hear the word with small profit or
comfort.


Phila. It seems, that this man neither regards the one nor the other:
because, for ought that I can see, he cares not greatly if the Scriptures
were burnt.


Theol. Oh sirrah, you speak very malapartly: you may speak when you are
bidden. Antile.
Who made you a Judge? You are oue of his Disciples, and that makes you to
speak on his side.


Phila. No sir. I hope, I am Christ's Disciple, and no man's. But assuredly, I
cannot hold my peace at your vile cauilling, and most blasphemous speeches.


Antile. I cry you mercy sir. You seem to be one of these Scripture-men: you
are all of the spirit: you are so full of it, that it runs out at your
nostrils.


Phila. You do plainly show your self to be ascoffing Ismaelite.


Antil. And you do plainly show your self to be one of these folk of God,
whieh know their seats in heaven.


Phila. I pray God be merciful unto you, and give you a better heart. For I
see you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.


Antil. You think there is none good, but such as your self, and such as can
please your humor. You will, forsooth, be all pure. But by God, there be a
company of pure knaves of you.


Theo. Nay, now you do manifestly show of of what spirit you are. For, you
both swear and rail with one breath.


Antile. God forgive me. Why did he anger me then? There be a company of such
controllers as he in the world, that no body can be quiet for them.


Theol. I perceive a little thing will anger you, since you will be angry with
him for speaking the truth.


Antil. What has he to do with me? He is more busy then needs. Why does he
say, I am in a bad case? I will not come to him to learn my duty. If I have
faults, he shall not answer for them. I shall answer for mine own faults, and
every fat shall stand on his own bottom. Let him meddle with that he has to
do withal.


Theo. You are too impatient: you take matters at the worst. We ought friendly,
and in love to admonish one another: for we must have a care one of another
salvation, I dare say for him, that he speaks both of love and compassion
toward you.


Antil. I care not for such love. Let him keep it to himself. What does he
think of me? Does he suppose that I have not a soul to save as well as he;
or that I have no care of my salvation? I would he should know, that I have as
great care for my salvation as he, though I make no such outward shows. For,
all is not gold that glistereth. I have as good a meaning as he, though I
cannot utter it.


Theol. These words might well be spared, I hope you will be pacified, and
amend your life, and draw nearer to God here after.


Antile. Truly, Sir, you may think of me what you please. But I assure you, I
have more care that way, then all the world wonders at: I thank God for it. I
say my prayers every night when I am in my bed. And if good prayers will do us
no good, God help us. I have always served God duly and truly, and had him
in my mind. I do as I would be done to. I keep my Church, and tend my prayers
while I am there. And, I hope, I am not so bad as this fellow would make me. I
am sure, if I be bad, I am not the worst in the world: there be as bad as I. If
I go to hell, I shall have fellows, and make as good shift as others.


Theol. You think, you have spoken wisely: but I like not your answer. For
your words smell strongly, both of ignorance, pride, and unbelief. For first
you justify your self in your faithles and ignorant worshipping of God. And
secondly, you justify your self by comparison with others; because others are
as bad as you, and you are not the worst in the world.


Antile. Now I know, you speak of ill will. For, you never had any good
opinion of me.


Theol. I would I could have as good an opinion of you, as I desire; and that I
might see that wrought in you, which might draw my love and liking toward you.
And as for ill will, the Lord knows I bear you none. I desire your
conversion, and salvation, with my whole heart. And I would think my self
happy, if I might save your soul with the loss of my right arm.


Antile. I hope I may repent. For the scripture says: At what time soever a
sinner does repent, God will have mercy on him. Therefore if I may have space
and grace, and time to repent before death, and to ask God forgiveness, and
say my prayers, and cry God mercy, I hope I shall do well enough.


Theol. You speak as though repentance were in your power, and at your
commandment, and that you can put it into your own heart when you list; and
that makes you, and many others presume of it, three hours before death. But
you must know that repentance is the rare gift of God: and it is given but to a
few. For God will know him well that he bestows repentance upon, since it is
proper only to the Elect. It is no word matter. It is not attained without
many and fervent prayers, and much hearing, reading, and meditating in the word
of God. It is not so easy a matter to come by, as the world judges. It is not
found but of them that seek it diligently, and beg it earnestly. It is no
ordinary three hours matter. Cry God mercy a little for fashion will not
do it. Coursarie saying of a few prayers a little before death avails not.
For, though true repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is seldom
true. Herein delays are dangerous; for the longer we defer it, the worse
is our case. The further a nail is driven in with an hammer, the harder it is
to get out again. The longer a disease is let run, the harder it is to cure.
The deeper a tree is rooted, the harder it is to pluck up again. The longer
we defer the time of our repentance, the harder it will be to repent; and
therefore it is dangerous driving it off to the last cast. For an ancient
Father says: Augustine.
We read but of one that repented at the last, that no man should presume: and
yet of one, that none might despair.

Well then, to conclude this point, I would have you to know, that the present
time is always the time of repentance. For, time past can not be recovered,
and time to come is uncertain.


Antile. Sir, in mine opinion, you have uttered some very dangerous things, and
such as were enough to drive a man to despair.


Theol. What be they, I pray you?


Antile. There be diverse things. But one thing does most of all stick in my
stomach, and that is, the small number that shall be sa ued, as you say. But I
can hardly be persuaded that God made so many thousands to cast them away when
he has done. Do you think that God has made us, to condemn us? Will you
make him to be the author of condemnation?


Theol. Nothing less. For God is not the cause of men's condemnation, but
themselves. For every man's destruction comes of himself: as it is written: O
Israel, thy destruction is of thy self. As for God, he does (in great Hos. 13.
mercy) use all possible means to save souls; as he says by the Prophet:
What could I Esa. 5. 4.
have done more to my vineyard, that I have not done unto it? But to come
nearer to your question. I deny, that God has created the most part of men
only and solely unto perdition, as the proper end which he did aim at in
creating them: but he has created all things for the praise of his glory; as
it is written: He has created all things for himself; Pro. 16. 4.
and the wicked also for the evil day. Then it follows, that the cause and
end why the wicked were created, neither was, nor is the only destruction of
his creature, but his own praise and glory; that that only might appear and
shine forth in all his works. Yet certeins it is, that God, for just causes
(albeit unknown and hid to us) has rejected a great part of men. The
causes, I say, of reprobation are hid in the eternal counsel of God, and
known to his godly wisdom only. They are secret and hid from us; reserved in
his eternal wisdom to be revealed at the glorious appearing of our Lord
Jesus. His judgments Psalm. 36. Romans 11.
(says the Scripture) are as a great deep, and his ways past finding out. It
is as possible for us to comprehend the Ocean sea in a little dish, as to
comprehend the reason of Gods counsel in this behalf.


Antile. What reason, justice, or equity is there, that sentence of death
should be passed upon men before they be borne, and before they have done good
or evil?


Theol. I told you before, that we can never comprehend the reason of Gods
proceeding in this behalf: yet we must know that his will is the rule of
righteousness, and must be unto us in stead of a thousand reasons. For
whatsoever God wills, in as much as he wills it, is to be holden just. We
cannot conceive the reason of many natural things, and things subject to
sense; as, the motion of the celestial bodies, their inconceivable
swiftness, their matter and substance, their magnitude, altitude, and
latitude. We can not thoroughly find out the causes of the thunder, lightning,
winds, earthquakes, ebbing and flowing of the sea, and many other things
under the Sun: how then can we possibly ascend up into the privy chamber and
counsellhouse of God, to sift and search out the bottom of Gods secrets; which
no wit or reach of man can any way attain unto! Let us therefore learn in
Gods fear to reverence that which we can not in this life comprehend.

This one thing I must say unto you, that whatsoever God decrees, yet does he
execute no man, till he have ten thousand times deserved it. For, betwixt the
decree and the execution thereof, comes sin in us, and most just causes of
condemnation.


Antil. If God have decreed men's destruction, what can they do withal? who can
resist his will? why then is he angry with us? For all things must needs come
to pass according to his decree and determination.


Theol. First, I answer you with the Apostle: O man, who art thou which
pleadest against Romans 9. 20
God! Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me
thus? Has not the Potter power of the clay, to make of the same lump one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? Moreover, I answer, That Gods
decree does not enforce the will of man: but it works, and moves of it
self. It has in it self the beginning of evil motion, and sins
willingly. Therefore, though the decree of God imposes a necessity upon all
secondarie causes (so as they must needs be framed and disposed according to
the same) yet no coaction or constraint: for they are all carried with their
voluntary motion. Even as we see the plumbe of a clock, being the first
moouer, does cause all the other wheels to move, but not to move this way or
that way: for, in that they move some one way, and some another, it is of
themselves; I mean of their own frame. So Gods decree does move all
secondarie causes, but not take away their own proper motion. For God is the
author of every action, but not of any evil in any action. As the soul of
man is the original cause of all motion in man, as the Philosophers dispute,
but yet not of lame and impotent motion; for that is from another cause; to
wit, some defect in the body. So, I say, Gods decree is the root and first
cause of motion, but not of defective motion: That is from our selves.
Likewise, that a bell sounds, the cause is in him that ringeth it: but that
it iarreth, the cause is in it self. Again, that an instrument sounds, is
in him that plaieth upon it: but that it iarreth, is in it self; that is, in
it own want of tuning. So then, to shut up this point, all instruments and
middle causes are so moved of God, being the first moouer, that he always
does well, holily, and justly in his moving. But the instruments moved, are
carried in contrary motions, according to their own nature and frame. If they
be good, they are carried unto that which is good: but if they be evil, they
are carried unto evil. So that according to the double beginning of motion and
will, there is a double and diverse work and effect.


Antile. But from whence comes it, that man of himself, that is, of his own
free motion, does will that which is evil?


Theol. From the fall of Adam, whereby his will was corrupted.


Antile. What was the cause of Adams fall?


Theol. The Devil, and the deprauation of his own will.


Antil. How could his will incline unto evil, it being made good, and he being
made good?


Theol. He and his will were made good, yet mutably good. For to be immutably
good, is proper only to God. And Adam did so stand, that he might fall, as the
event declared.


Antile. Was not the decree of God the cause of Adams fall?


Theol. No: but the voluntary inclination of his will unto evil. For Adams
will was neither forced, nor by any violence of Gods purpose, compelled to
consent: but he, of free will and ready mind, left God, and joined with the
Devil.

Thus then I do determine, that Adam sinned necessarily, if you respect the
decree or event: but if you respect the first moouer and inherent cause, which
was his own will, then he sinned voluntarily and contingently. For the decree
of God did not take away his will, or the contingencie thereof; but only order
and dispose it. Therefore (as a learned writer says) Volens Beza.
peccauit, and motu. He sinned willingly, and of his own motion. And therefore
no evil is to be attributed unto God or his decree.


Antile. How then do you conceive and consider of the purpose of God in all
these things?


Theol. Thus:

That God decreed with himself, vno actu, at once;
That there should be a world,
That Adam should be created perfect,
That he should fall of himself,
That all should fall with him,
That he would save some of the lost race,
That he would do it of mercy through his son,
That he would condemn others for sin.

Antile. But how do you prove the decree of reprobation? to wit, That God
has determined the destruction of thousands before the world was.


Theol. The Scripture calls the reprobates The vessels of wrath, prepared to
destruction. To. 9. 22.
The Scripture says: God has not appointed 1. These. 5.
us unto wrath. Therefore it follows, that some are appointed unto wrath. The
Scripture says of the reprobates, That they were 1. Pet. 2. 8.
even ordained to stumble at the Word. The Scripture says, They were of old
ordained to this condemnation. Iud. ver. 4



Antile. But how answer you this? God wills not the death of a sinner.
Therefore he Ezec. 18.
has predestinate none to destruction.


Theol. God wills not the death of a sinner simply, and absolutely, as it is
the destruction of his creature; but as it is a mean to declare his justice,
and to set forth his glory.


Antile. God did foresee, and foreknow, that the wicked would perish through
their own sin: but yet he did not predestinate them unto it.


Theol. Gods prescience and foreknowledge cannot be separated from his decree.
For whatsoever God has foreseen and foreknowen in his eternal counsel, he
has determined the same shall come to pass. For as it apperteineth to his
wisdom to foreknow and foresee all things, so does it apperteine to his power
to moderate and rule all things according to his will.


Antil. What do you call prescience in God?


Theol. Presence in God, is that whereby all things abide present before his
eyes: so that to his eternal knowledge, nothing is past, nothing to come; but
all things are always present. And so are they present, that they are not as
conceived imaginations, forms, and motions: but all things are always so
present, before God, that he does behold them in their verity and perfection.


Antil. How can God justly determine of men's destruction, before they have
sinned?


Theol. This objection has been answered in part before. For, I told you,
that God condemns none but for sin, either original only, or else both
original and actual. For howsoever he does in himself, before all time,
determine the reprobation of many, yet he proceeds to no execution, till
there be found in us both just deserts, and apparent cause. Therefore they
deal unsoundly and foolishly, which confound the decree of reprobation, with
damnation it self: since sin is the cause of the one, and only the will of
God of the other.


Phila. Well Sir, since we are so far proceeded in this question, by the
occasion of this man's objections and cauils, I pray you now, as you have spoken
much of reprobation, and the causes thereof, so let us hear somewhat of
election, and the causes thereof: and show us out of the Scriptures, that God
has before all worlds chosen some to eternal life.


Theol. Touching the decree of Election, there are almost none that make any
doubt thereof: therefore small proof shall serve for this point. Only I will
confirm it by one or two testimonies out of the holy Scriptures. First the
Apostle says; Blessed be God, even the Father Ephesians. 2. 3
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
Heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him, in love.
You see, the words are very plain and pregnant for this purpose. An other
confirmation is taken out of the 8. Chap. to the Romans, in these words: Those
whom he knew before, did Rom 8.
he also predestinate to be like to the image of his own Son; that he might
be the first borne of many brethren.


Phila. Which be the causes of Election?


Theol. The causes of Election are to be found only in God himself. For his
eternal election depends neither upon man, neither yet upon any thing that
is in man, but is purposed in himself, and established in Christ in whom we
are Elected. This is fully proved in these words: Who has predestined us to
be adopted Ephesians. 1. 5. 6
through Jesus Christ in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,
to the praise of his glory, wherewith he has made us freely accepted in his
beloved. Where we see, the apostle tells us, that his free grace, and the
good pleasure of his will, are the first motives or moving causes of our
Election.


Phila. But the Papists fetch the first motive of election out of man's merits,
and foreseen works. For, say they, God did foresee who would repent,
believe, and do well: and therefore he made choice of them.


Theol. But they are greatly deceived. For I say again, and again, that there
was nothing in us which did ever move God to set his love upon us, and to
choose us unto life: but he ever found the original cause in himself. As it
is Romans 9.
written; He will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy: and whom he will,
he hardneth. Romans 9.
And again: It is neither in him that wills, nor in him that runs; but in
God that shows mercy. The Lord himself Deuteronomy. 7. 7.
also testifies, that he did choose his people, not for any respect in them;
but only because he loved them, and bare a special favor unto them. So then
it is a certain truth that Gods eternal predestination excludes all merits
of man, and all power of his will, thereby to attain unto eternal life: and
that his free mercy, and undeserved favor, is both the beginning, the midst,
and the end of our salvation. That is to say, all is of him, and nothing of our
selves.


Phila. Whether then does faith depend upon election, or election upon faith?
That is, whether did God choose us because we do believe? or whether do we
believe, because we are chosen?


Theol. Out of all doubt, both faith, and all fruits of faith, do depend upon
election. For, therefore we believe, because we are elected: and not therefore
elected, because we believe. As it is written: So many as were ordained to
everlasting Act. 13. 48.
life, believed.


Antil. If men be predestinate before they be borne, to what purpose serve all
precepts, admonitions, laws, etc? It forces not how we live. For neither our
godly, or ungodly life can alter the purpose of God.


Theo. This is a very wicked and carnal objection, and shows a vile and
dissolute mind in them that use it. But I would wish such men to consider the
end of our election: which is that we should lead a godly life. As it is
plainly set down in the first to the Ephesians, where the Apostle says: God
has chosen us before Ephe. 1. 3.
the foundation of the world. But to what end? that we should line as we lift?
No, no, says he: But that we should be holy, and unblameable before him.
Again he says: We are perdestinate Romans 8.
to be made like the image of his Son; that is, to be holy and righteous.
For most certain it is, that we can judge nothing of predestination, but by
the consequents: that is, by our calling, justification, and sanctification.
For when once we feel the work of grace within us, (that is, that we are
washed by the new birth, and renewed by the holy Ghost, finding in our selves
an unfeigned hatred of sin, and love of righteousness) then are we sure, and
out of all doubt, that we are predestined to life. And it is even as much, as
if God had personally appeared unto us, and whispered us in the ear, and told
us that our names are taken, and written in the book of life. For, whom he
has predestinate, Romans 8.
them he has called; and whom he has called, them he has justified; and whom
he has justified, them he has glorified. Now therefore, till we feel these
marks of election wrought in us, we can be at no certainty in this point;
neither are we to take any notice of it, or meddle in it: but we must strive,
according to that power and faculty we have, to live honestly, and ciuilly,
waiting when God will have mercy on us, and give us the true touch. As for them
that are careless and dissolute, setting all at six and seven, there is small
hope that they are elected, or ever shall be called.


Antil. I think the preaching and publishing of this doctrine of
predestination has done much hurt: and it had been good it had never been
known to the people, but utterly concealed. For, some it drives to despair,
and others it makes more secure and careless.


Theol. You are in a great error. For this Doctrine is a part of Gods revealed
Truth, which he would have known to his people. And, in good sooth, it is of
very great and comfortable use to the children of God, against all the assaults
of the Devil, and temptations of desperation whatsoever. For, when a man has
once in truth felt, by the effects, that God has chosen him to life: then
though the Devil lie sore at him, and the conscience of sin and his own
frailties most vehemently assault him; yet he knows certainly, that the
eternal purpose and counsel of God is immutable; and that because his
salvation is not grounded upon himself, or his own strength, but upon the
unchangeable decree of God, which is a foundation immovable, and always
standing sure and firm; therefore, do the devil and sin what they can, yet
he shall be vpheld in righteousness and truth, and even (as it were) borne up
in the arms of God, even to the end. For whom God loves, to the end he loves
them. Moreover, when once the Lords people perceive (by their sanctification,
and new birth) both that the Lord has rejected and reprobated so many thousand
thousands, and made choice of them to be heirs of his most glorious kingdom,
being in themselves of the same mould and making that others are; and that be
has done all this of his free grace, and undeserved mercy toward them: oh,
how does it ravish their hearts with the love of him! Again, how frankely and
chearefully do they serve him! How willingly and faithfully do they obey him!
Yea, how are they wholly rapt, and infiamed with the desire of him! For it is
the persuasion and feeling of Gods love toward us, that draws up our love to
him again; as S. John says: We love him, because he has 1. Ioh. 4.
loved us first.

Moreover, it is said of Mary Magdalen, Luke. 7.
that she loved much, because much was forgiven. For, after she felt her many
and great sins freely pardoned, her affections were kindled with the love and
obedience of Christ. So likewise the Church in the Canticles, after she had
been in the banqueting house of all spiritual Cant. 2. 5
grace, and felt the banner of Christ's love displaied upon her, forthwith she
was rapt therewith, and cried out (as it were in a swoune) that she was sick
of love. So again, when Christ put Cant. 5. 4.
in his hand by the hole of the door (that is, touched the very inward parts
of her heart, by his spirit) then her heart yearned, and her bowels were
affectioned toward him. This is it which Saint Paul prays for upon his
knees, that it may be granted to the Ephesians, that Ephesians. 5.
they may be able to comprehend with all the Saints, what is the breadth and
length, height and depth of Gods love toward us, and to know the love of
Christ (which passes knowledge) and to be filled with all fullness of God.
Thus then you see the great and comfortable use of this doctrine of election,
both in that it ministers strength and comfort against all temptations, as
also because it constrains us to love God and of very love to fear him, and
obey him.


Phila. Well Sir, I think now you have spent time enough in answering the
objections and cauils of Antilegon. In all which, I do observe one thing; that
there is no end of cauilling, and obiecting against the truth; and that a man
may object more in an hour, then a learned man can well answer in a day.


Theol. You say truth. And the reason hereof is, because men have sin in them
out of measure, and the spirit of God but in measure. Therefore they can by the
one, object and conceive more against the truth, then by the other they shall
be able to answer, and say for it.


Phila. It appears indeed, that errors be infinite, and objections
innumerable, and that there is no end of men's cauilling against Gods sacred
truth. It is good for us therefore to be thoroughly settled in the truth, that
we be not entangled or snarled with any cauils, or sophistications whatsoever.
But I do verily think (notwithstanding all his objections, and exceptions)
that he does in his conscience desire, with Balaam, to die the death of the
righteous, and to be as one of them, whom he seems to despise.


Theol. I am so persuaded too. For this is the triumph that virtue has over
vice, that, where she is most hated, there she is often desired and wished for.
And this is the great punishment, that God brings upon the wicked; Virtutem
vt videant, intabescantque relicta, as says the Poet; That they shall see
virtue and pine away having no power to follow it.


Phila. But now let us return to the point we were in hand with, before we
fell into these objection and cauils: which was concerning the small number of
them which shall be saved. And as you have showed us many reasons thereof, so
proceed to speak yet more unto that point.


Theol. As I have showed you of sundry lets, both within us, and without us,
which do keep us back from God, and hold us fast in our sins: So now, unto
all that has been said before, I will add nine great hindrances unto
eternal life: which may not unfitly be termed nine bars out of heaven, and
nine gates into hell.


Phila. Which be they? Nine gates into hell.



Theol. They be these; Infidelity. Presumption of Gods mercy. Example of the
multitude. Long custom of sin. Long escaping of punishment. Hope of long
life. Conceitednesse. Ill company. Evil example of Ministers.



Phila. These indeed be strong bars out of heaven; and wide gates into hell.
I pray you therefore prove them out of the Scriptures, and lay them forth
somewhat more largely.


Theol. The first, which is Infidelity, is proved out of the fourth chapter to
the Hebrews, where it is written; Unto us was the Gospel preached, as unto
them: but the word, which Heb. 4. 2.
they heard, profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those
that heard it. And again: They could not enter in, because of unbelief. Here
we see that unbelief did bar out the old people, from entering into the land
of promise, which was a figure of Gods eternal kingdom. And sure it is, that
the same unbelief does bar out thousands of us. For many will believe
nothing, but their own fancies. They will not believe the word of God:
especially, when it is contrary to their lusts and likings, profits and
pleasures. Though things be manifestly proved to their faces, and both the
Chapter and the Uerse showed them, yet will they not believe: or though they
say they believe, yet will they never go about the practice of any thing, but
reply against God in all their actions. And, for the most part, when God says
one thing, they will say another. When God says yea, they will say no: and so
give God the lie. Some again will say, if all be true that the Preachers say,
then God help us. Thus you see, how Infidelity does bar men out of Heaven,
and cast them into hell.


Phila. Let us hear of the second gate, which is Presumption of Gods mercy.


Theol. This is set down in the 29. of Deuteronomy; where the Lord says thus.
When a man hears the words of this curse, and yet flattereth himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according to the
stubbornness of mine own heart (thus adding drunkenness to thirst, that is,
one sin to another) the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but the wrath of
the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man; and every curse that
is written in this book, shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his
name, from under heaven.

Here we see, how the mighty God does thunder down upon such as go on in
their sins, presuming of his mercy, and saying in their hearts, If I may have
but a Lord have mercy upon me, three hours before death, I care not. But it is
just with God, when those three hours come, to shut them up in blindness, and
hardness of heart, as a just plague for their presumption. Therefore the
Prophet David, seeing the Psalm. 19.
grieuousnesse of this sin prays to be delivered from it. Keep me, o Lord
(says he) from presumptuous sins: let them not reign over me. Let all men
therefore take heed of presumptuous sins: For, though God be full of mercy: yet
will he show no mercy to them that presume of his mercy. But they shall once
know, to their cost, that justice goes from him, as well as mercy.


Phila. Let us come to the third gate, which is the Example of the multitude.


Theol. This is proved in the 23. of Exodus where the Lord says flatly, Thou
shall not Exo. 23. 2.
follow a multitude to do evil. In another Leuit. 18. 3.
place the Lord says* After the doings of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt,
shall ye not do: and after the manner of the land of Canaan, whither I will
bring you, shall ye not do, neither walk in their ordinances.

Against this Law did the Children of Israel offend, when they said in the
stubbornness of their heart, to the Prophet Jeremy; The word Iere. 44. 16.
that thou have spoken unto us, in the name of the Lord, we will not hear.
But we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth: and we will do as we
have done, both we and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the cities
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem.

Note here, how they do altogether refuse the word of the Lord, and how to
follow the example of the multitude. We see, in these our days, by lamentable
experience, how thousands are violently carried down this stream: and for
defense of it, some will say: Do as the most men do, and the fewest will
speak of you: Which is a very wicked speech. For, if we will follow the
course of the most, we shall have the reward of the most: which is eternal
perdition.

Let us therefore take heed of bending with the sway. For, the sway of the
world does weigh down all things that can be spoken out of the word of God,
and opens a very wide passage into Hell*


Phila. Proceed to the fourth gate into Hell, which is the Long custom of
sin.


Theol. This is noted by the Prophet Jeremy, to be a very dangerous thing. For
he says, Can Ier. 13. 23.
the black More change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also
do good, which are accustomed to do evil. Noting thereby, that it is as hard
a matter to leave an old custom of sin, as to wash a black-more white, or to
change the spots of a Leopard: which because they are natural, are most
impossible. So, when men through custom, have made swearing, lying, adultery,
and drunkenness (as it were) natural unto them, oh how hard it is to leave
them! For custom makes another nature, and takes away all sense and feeling
of sin.


Phila. Let us hear of the fifth gate; which is the Long escaping of punishment.


Theol. This is avouched by the wise man, in these words; Because sentence
against an evil Eccl. 8. 11.
work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the children of men
are set in them to do evil. Where he shows, that one cause why men are so
hardened in their sins, is, because God winketh at them, and lets them
alone, not punishing them immediately after they have sinned. For if God should
forthwith strike down one, and rain fire and brimstone upon another, and
cause the earth to swallow up the third, then men would fear indeed. But it
has been showed before, that God takes not that course: but though he meet
with some in this life, yet he lets thousands escape: and that makes them more
bold, thinking they shall never come to their answer. Even as an old thief,
which has a long time escaped both prison and gallows, thinks he shall
always so escape, and therefore goes boldly on in his thefts. But let men
take heed. For as the proverb says, Though the pitcher goes long to the
well, yet at last it comes broken home: So, though men escape long, yet they
shall not escape always. For there will come a day of reckoning, a day that
will pay it home for all. Thus you see, how impunity leads numbers to
destruction. That is, when men are let alone, and neither smitten by the hand
of God, nor punished by the law of the Magistrate.


Phila. Let us come to the sixth gate: which is the Hope of long life.


Theol. This is affirmed by our Lord Jesus concerning that rich worldling, who,
when he felt the world come in upon him with full stream, said he would pull
down his barnes and build greater, and say to his soul; Soul, Luke 12. 19.
thou have much goods laid up for many years: Live at ease, eat, drink, and
take thy pastime. But our Savior calls him fool, for flattering himself in
security, and promising unto himself long life. Moreover he plainly told
him, that the same night, he should make a hellish and miserable end. Note, I
pray you, how Jesus Christ, the fountain of all Wisdom, calls this man a
fool; and yields a reason thereof: to wit, because he gathered riches to
himself, and was not rich in God; he had great care of this life, and none at
all for that which is to come. So then it follows, that all such are right
fools indeed, and may be Chronicled for fools, (how wise soever they be taken
and reputed in the world) which have much care for their bodies, and none for
their souls: great care for this life, and little for that which is to come.
Well, let all such profane worldlings, as dream and dote of long life, (and
therefore defer the day of their repentance and conversion unto God) take heed
by this man's example, that they reckon not without their Host, and be suddenly
snatched away in the midst of all their pleasures, and iollities; as Job Job.
21. 23.
says: Some die in their full strength, being in all ease and prosperity.
Their breasts run full of milk: and their bones run full of marrow. We see
therefore, how dangerous a thing it is for men to flatter and sooth up
themselves with hope of long life.


Phila. Proceed to the seventh gate; which is Conceitednesse.


Theol. This is indeed a very broad gate, into hell. For the Scripture says:
See thou a Pro. 26. 12. Pro. 26. 16.
man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool then of such a
one. And again, The fool is wiser in his own eyes, then seven men that can
give a sensible reason. The holy ghost, we see, affirms, that such as are
puffed up with an ouer-weening of their own gifts, are farthest of all other
from the kingdom of Heaven. For they despise the wisdom of God, to their
own destruction. They hold scorn to be taught. They will say, they know as
much as all the Preachers can tell them. For, what can all the Preachers say
more then this; We are all sinners, we must be saved by Christ; We must do as
we would be done to? There is no more, but do well, and have well, etc. Alas
poor souls, they look aloft: they are desperately haven up with
conceiptednesse; not knowing that they are poor, naked, blind, and miserable.
Reu. 3. 17.


These men trust altogether to their own wit, learning, policy, riches, and
great reputation in the world. And because all men crouch to them, and clap
their hands at them, therefore they swell like Turkey Cocks, set up their
feathers, and draw their wings upon the ground with a kind of snuff and
disdain of all men: as if they were the only wights of the world. Moreover,
when men do praise them for their gifts, soothe them, and applaud unto them,
then is it a wonder to see how they streake themselves; as though they would
forthwith take their flight, and mount into the clouds. But let all insolent
and conceited men hearken unto the woe that is pronounced against them, by the
eternal King of glory, saying, Woe unto Esa. 5. 21.
them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. Again,
let them hearken to the counsel of God, which says, Trust unto Prou. 3. 5.
the Lord, with all thy heart, but lean not unto thine own wisdom. Be not
wise in thine own eyes: but fear God, and depart from evil. These silly
conceited fools think, that because they have the cast of this life, and can
cunningly compass the things of this world and go through-stich with them,
therefore they can compass heaven also by their fine wits, and deep devices.
But, alas, poor wretches, they are greatly and grossly deceived. For the
wisdom of the world is foolishness with God: and 1. Cor. 3. 19.
he catches the wise in their own craftiness. And again the Lord says, I
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding 1.
Cor. 1. 19.
of the prudent. Let not these men therefore stand too much in their own
light: let them not trust to their own policies. For, they are all but as an
ice of one nights freezing, which will deceive them that trust unto it. Let
them therefore become fools in themselves, that God may make them wise. Let
them deny themselves, that God may acknowledge them. Let them be humbled in
themselves, that God may exalt them. For assuredly, there is no use after this
life, of the most exquistte wisdom of flesh: it all ends when we end. For
how dies the wise man? Even as dies the fool, says the Eccl. 2. 16.
holy Ghost. And where all worldly wisdom ends, there all heavenly wisdom
begins. Thus therefore we see, what a wide gate into hell, conceitednesse
is, and how many enter in thereat.


Phila. Now let us understand of the eight gate into hell: which is ill company.


Theol. The spirit of God foreseeing the great danger of this, and knowing how
ready we are to be carried away with ill company, does give us most earnest
warning to take heed of it, as a most dangerous thing. Enter not (says Pro. 4.
14
he) in the way of the wicked: and walk not in the way of evil men. Avoid it,
go not by it, turn from it, and pass by. The reason hereof is yielded in
another place: where it is said. A companion of fools shall be made Pro. 13.
20.
worse. Let men therefore take heed of ill company. For, many thereby have
been brought to the gallows, and have confessed upon the ladder, that ill
company has brought them unto it: and therefore have admonished all by their
example, to take heed, and beware of lewd company. Moreover, the Scripture
says: He that follows vain companions, shall be filled with poverty. And
again in the Pro. 28. 19.
same Chapter, He that keeps company with banquetters, shameth his Father.
Let us therefore with David say, I am a companion of all Ps. 119. 63.
them that fear God, and keep his commandments. And, on the contrary, let us
say with him, I have not haunted with vain persons, Ps. 26. 4
neither kept company with the dissemblers. I hate the assembly of the evil,
and have not companied with the wicked. Let us therefore, by David's example,
shun the company of the wicked: For, as a man is, so is his company. It is the
surest note to discern a man by. For, as al unlike things are unsociable, so
all like things are sociable. Herein let us beware, we deceive not our selves
with vain words, and an opinion of our own strength: as if we were as strong
as Christ, and could not be drawn away with any company. No, no: we are more
apt to be drawn, then to draw: to be drawn to evil by others, then to draw
others to good. Therefore God says by his prophet: Let them return unto thee,
but return not thou unto them. Undoubtedly Iere. 15. 19.
he is an odd man, that is not made worse with ill company. For can a man
touch pitch, and not be defiled therewith? Can a man carry coals in his
bosom, and not be burnt? Daily and lamentable experience shows, that many
of them, which think themselves strong, are this way most grievously smutted.
Let a man think therefore, he never abandoneth evil, till he abandon ill
company. For no good is concluded in this Parliament. For ill company is the
suburbs of hell. Furthermore, it is to be observed, that some upon
admonitions, and some inward compunctions of their own conscience, do leave
their sins, until they have new prouocations, and until they come amongst
their old copesmates and sinne-companions: and then are they carried back
again to their old bias, and return to their folly, as a Pro. 26. 11.
dog returns to his vomit. For we see some, which otherwise are of good
natures and dispositions, most pitifully, and violently carried away with ill
company. For even as green wood of it self is unapt to burn, yet being laid
on the fire, with a great deal of sear wood, it burns as fast as the rest:
So, many toward youths, which of themselves are not so prone unto evil, as
others: yet with this violent stream and blustering tempest of ill company,
are carried clean away.


Phila. Let us come to the last gate: which is the Evil example of Ministers.


Theol. It greeueth me, and I am almost ashamed, to speak of this point. For,
is it not a woeful and lamentable thing, that any such should be found amongst
the sons of Leui? Is it not a corsey, that the Ministers of Christ should be of
a scandalous conversation? For if the eye be dark, how great is the darkness?
If they be examples of all evil to the flock, which should be patterns,
lights, and examples of all goodness, must it not needs strengthen the hands
of the wicked, so as they cannot return from their wickedness? But this is an
old disease and evil sickness, which has always been in the church. The
Prophet Jeremy does most grievously complain of it in his time, and says;
That from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is wickedness Ier. 23. 14.
gone forth into all the land. For, both the Prophet and the Priest do
wickedly. I have seen, says he, in the Prophets of Jerusalem, filthiness. They
commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of the
wicked, that none can return from his wickedness; they are all unto me as
Sodom: and the Inhabitants thereof, as Gomorah. And in the ninth verse of the
same Chap. he shows, that it was no pleasure or toy unto him, so publicly to
reprove them: but, that he did it with exceeding grief, as being forced
thereunto, both in regard of Gods glory, and the good of his Church. His words
are these, Mine heart breaks within me, because of the prophets, and al my
bones shake. Moreover, in the same Chapter is set down, how the Lord would
feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall, and sundry
other ways plague them, for their flatteries, seducements, corrupt doctrine,
and evil example of life.


Phila. Most certain it is, that the evil example of Ministers, and
especially of Preachers, is very dangerous, and offensive: for thereby
thousands are hardened in their sins. For men will say, Such a Minister, and
such a Preacher, does thus, and thus, and therefore why may not we do so too?
They are learned, and know the word of God: therefore, if it were evil, I hope
they would not do it. For they should be lights to us, and give us good
examples. Therefore, since they do such things, we cannot tell what to think,
or what to say to the matter: they bring such simple folk as we are, into a
mammering.


Theol. Oh that I could, with the Prophet Jeremy, quake and shake to think of
these matters! Oh that I could mourn as a Dove, in penning of it! Oh that I
had in the wilderness a cotage, and could with Job be a brother to the
Dragons, and a companion to the Ostriches, whilst I have any thoughts of those
things* Oh that I could weep and mourn without sin, before I yield you an
answer i For weep indeed I may: but answer, I cannot. Alas (with much grief I
speak it) all is too true, that you say. And herein the people have a vantage
against us: if I may call it vantage. But let this be mine answer: If the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. Blind guides Math 15. 14.
and blind people, shall perish together. If because we are wicked, they will
be more wicked, then both they and we shall burn in hell fire together. Then
let them reckon their gains, and see what they have got. They have small cause
so to triumph over us. For, thereby their market is never a whit amended: let
them take this for answer. And let us that are the Ministers of Christ, and
Preachers of the Gospel, look narrowly to our selves, and make straight steps
to our feet. For if we tread never so little awry, we may see how many eyes are
upon us. Let us therefore with David pray continually, Order my goings, O Lord,
that my footsteps slip not. For when my foot slipped, they rejoiced against me.
And as for the people, let them follow the examples of those, which walk
unblameably (as God be thanked, some such there be) and let them fly the
examples of such as are offensive. So shall God have more glory, and they more
peace in their own hearts. Thus have we heard, what a wide gate is opened into
hell, by the evil example of Ministers, and especially of Preachers.


Phila. Well, since there be so many bars out of heaven, and so many gates into
hell, it is a very hard matter to break through all these bars, and so to
enter into life: and as hard a matter, to miss all these gates, and to escape
hell. He quits him well, that can do it.


Theol. True indeed. And as hard a thing as this is, so hard a thing is it for
flesh and blood to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And yet most men make
light of it, and think it is the easiest matter of an hundred.


Asune. As hard as it is, yet I hope by the grace of God, I shall be one of
them, that shall enter in. For, so long as I do as I would be done to; and say
no body no harm, nor do no body no harm, God will have mercy on my soul. And
I doubt not, but my good deeds shall weigh against my evil deeds, and that I
shall make even with God, at my latter end. For I thank God for it, I have
always lived in his fear, and served him with a true intent. Therefore I
know, that so long as I keep his commandments, and live as my neighbors do,
and as a Christian man ought to do, he will not damn my soul.


Theol. Can you then keep Gods commandments?


Asune. As near as GOD will give me grace.


Theol. Nay, but I ask you whether you keep them or no?


Asune. I do say to keep them, as near as I can; I do my true intent. Though
I keep them not all, yet I am sure I keep some of them.


Theol. Because you say you keep some of them, I pray you let me be so bold
with you, as to examine you in the particulars. You know, the first
commandment is this; Thou shall have none other gods in my sight. How say
you, do you keep this?


Asune. I am out of all fear of it. For I never worshipped any God, but one. I
am fully persuaded, there is but one God.


Theol. What say you to the second commandment; Thou shall make to thy self
no graven image? etc.


Asune. I never worshipped any Images in my life; I defy them. I know they
cannot help me; for they be but stocks and stones.


Theol. What say you to the third commandment; which is this; Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy GOD in vain? etc.


Asune. Nay certainly, I was never counted a swearer in my life; but I have
feared God always of a child, and have had a good faith in him, ever since I
could remember. I would be sorry else.


Theol. What say you then to the fourth commandment; Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath day? etc.


Asune. Nay, for that matter, I keep my church as well as any man in the
parish where I dwell, and mind my prayers as well, when I am there. I thank
God for it (though I say it my self) I have been always well given, and have
loved Gods word with all my heart; and it does me good to hear the Epistles
and Gospels read every Sunday, by our Vicar.


Theo. Tell me, what say you to the fifth commandment, which is; Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, etc. Do you keep this?


Asune. I have always loved and obeyed my Father and Mother from my heart. I
hope there is no body can accuse me for that, and I am sure, if I keep any
commandment, it is this. For, when I was a boie, every body said that I was
well given, and a toward child. Therefore, if I should not keep this
commandment, it would be a great grief to me; and go as near my heart, as
any thing that came to me this seven year.


Theol. What say you to the sixth commandment; Thou shall not kill?


Asune. It were strange, if I should not keep that.


Theol. What say you to the seventh: Thou shall not commit adultery?


Asune. I thank God for it, I was never given to women. God has always kept
me from that, and I hope, will so still.


Theo. What say you to the eight: Thou shall not steal?


Asunetus. I am neither whore-master, nor thief.


Theol. What say you to the ninth: Thou shall not bear false witness? etc.


Asune. I defy all false witnesse-bearing from my heart.


Theol. What say you to the last: Thou shall not covet? etc.


Asune. I thank God for it, I never coueted any man's goods but mine own.


Theol. Now I perceive, you are a wonderful man: you can keep all the
Commandments. You are like that blind Ruler, which said unto Christ; All these
things have I kept Math. 19. 20.
from my youth. I perceive now indeed, that it is no marvel though you make so
light of preaching: for you have no need ofit. You are whole, you need not the
Physician: you feel no misery, and therefore you care not for mercy. For
where misery is not felt, there mercy is not regarded: but I see, you need no
Savior.


Asune. You say not well in that. I need a Savior: and it is my Lord Jesus
that must save me: for he made me.


Theol. What need you a Savior, since you are no sinner?


Asune. Yes believe me, I am a sinner. We are all sinners: there is no man but
he sins.


Theo. How can you be a sinner, since you keep all the Commandments?


Asune. Yes: I am a sinner, for all that.


Theo. Can you both be a sinner, and be without sin too? for he that keeps
the commandments, is without sin. Which thing you say you do. But I see how
the case stands; that a great number of such ignorant and sottish men as you
are, will in general say you are sinners, because your conscience tells you
so: but when it comes to particulars, you know not how you sin, nor
wherein. I pray you therefore, let me lead you through the Commandments
again, and deal with you in particulars: that I may bring you to the sight of
your sins. How say you therefore, do you upon your knees, every morning and
evening, give God thanks for his particular mercies, and manifold favors
toward you: And do you call much upon him privately, and much also with your
family? answer me plainly and simply.


Asune. I cannot say so.


Theol. Then you have broken the first commandment; which charge us to give
God his due worship; whereof, prayer and thanksgiving are a part. So then
here, at the very entrance, you are found guilty. Further, I demand of you,
whether you never had any by-thoughts in your prayers, and your heart has not
been upon other matters, even then while you were in prayer?


Asune. I cannot deny that. For it is a very hard matter to pray, without
by-thoughts.


Theol. Then (by your own confession) you have broken the second commandment,
which does command the right manner of Gods worship; that is, that as we must
worship God, so we must do it in says, love, zeal, and pure affections. So
that here you are guilty also; because when you pray, your mind is of other
matters, and you do it not in sincerity and truth. Further, I demand of you,
whether you did never swear by your faith, or troth, or ty our Lady, S. Mary,
and such other oaths?


Asune. Yes by S. Mary have I: I must needs confess it.


Theol. We need no further witness. Your very answer proves it; for your
answer is an oath. Therefore here also you are guilty; because you swear by
idols. Further, I demand of you, whether you did never travel to Faires on the
Sabbath day, or make bargains on that day, or take iourneies, or talk of
worldly matters, neglecting holy duties?


Asune. Yes, God for give me, I have.


Theol. Then are you guilty of the breach of the fourth commandment: which
charge us, on pain of death, to spend the Sabbath day in holy and religious
duties, both publicly, and privately. Further I demand, whether you instruct
your wife, children, and servants, in the true knowledge of God, and pray with
them, or no?


Asun. I am sure, you would have me speak the truth, I must needs confess, I
do not, neither am I able to do it.


Theol. Then you are guilty of the breach of the fifth commandment; which
commands all duties of superiors, toward their inferiors; and of
inferiors, toward their superiors, whereof prayer and instructions are a
part. Moreover, I demand, whether you were never angry or no?


Asune. Yes, an hundred times, in my days. And I think, there is no body, but
will be angry at one time or other; especially when they have cause.


Theol. Then you have broken the sixth commandment: which charge us to avoid
wrath, anger, malice, desire of revenge: and all such like forerunners unto
murder. Further, I ask you: whether you did never look upon a woman with a
lust in your heart?


Asune. Yes. For I think there is no man free from thoughts that way. I had
thought, thoughts had been freee.


Theol. No: thoughts are not free before God. For, God knows our thoughts:
and will punish us, arraigne us, and condemn us for thoughts. Men know not
thoughts: and therefore can make no Laws against thoughts: but because God is
privy to all our most secret thoughts, therefore he has made Laws against
them, and will condemn them. Therefore I conclude, that if you have nourished
adulterous thoughts in your heart, you are guilty of the breach of the seventh
commandment: which forbids all secret thoughts and prouocations whatsoever
to adultery. But further, I demand, whether you did never pilfer, purloine,
and steal some small things from your neighbor: as pasture, poultry, conies,
apples, and such like?


Asun. I cannot clear my self in these things. For I had thought, they had
bin no sin.


Theol. Then have you broken the eight commandment, and stand guilty of
eternal death. For God, in this commandment, charge us to have as great
care of our neighbors goods, as of our own: and not to iniure him any manner
of way, in thought, word, or deed. Therefore all deceit, pilfering, oppressing,
and all unjust dealing with our neighbors goods, is here condemned. Moreover,
let me ask you, whether you did never lie, or dissemble?


Asune. Yes assuredly.


Theo. Then have you broken the ninth commandment: wherein, God charge us,
both in witnesse-bearing, and all other matters, to speak the plain truth
from our heart, without lying or dissembling.

Last of all, I demand whether you did never in your heart desire something that
was not your own: as your neighbors house, or ground, kine, or sheep, etc.
therein bewraying the coffeehouse of your heart?


Asune. I am as guilty in this, as in any thing. For (God forgive me) I have
often desired and lusted after this, and that, which was none of mine own, and
so have bewraied my coffeehouse.


Theol. Then I perceive (by your own confession) that you are guilty of the
breach of all the Commandments.


Asune. I must needs confess it. For I see now more into that matter, then
ever I did. I never heard so much before in my life, nor was ever asked any
such questions, as you ask me. I had thought many of those things, which you
asked me, had been no sins at all.


Theol. I could have convicted you in a thousand other particulars, wherein you
do daily and hourly break the Law of God. But my purpose was only to give
you a taste of some particular transgressions, and there withal some little
light by the way into the meaning of the law: that thereby you might be brought
to some better fight of your self, and might a little perceive in what case
you stand before God; and by that little, conceive a great deal more.


Asune. Well: now I do plainly see, that I have been deceived; and am not in
so good estate before God, as I thought I had been. Moreover I see, that
thousands are out of the way, which think they are in a good case before God:
whereas indeed they are in blindness, and in their sins. But Lord have mercy
upon us. I do now plainly see, that I am far from keeping the
commandments: and I think no man does keep them.


Theol. You may swear it, I warrant you. For neither S. Paul, David, or the
virgin Mary, could ever keep any one of the Commandments. I am glad you begin
to see into the law of God, and to have some taste that way. For, as a man's
knowledge and insight is into the law, so is the knowledge and insight into
himself. He that has a deep insight into the law of God, has also a deep
insight into himself. He that has no sight into the law, can have no insight
into himself. For the law is that glass wherein we do behold the face of our
souls, before God. The Apostle says: By the law comes Romans 3. 20.
the knowledge of sin. Therefore those which are altogether ignorant of the
law, and never behold themselves in this glass, do commit an hundred sins a
day, which they know not of; and therefore are not grieved for them. For, how
can a man be grieved for that, which he knows not? But now further, I pray
you give me leave to ask you some more questions of the principles of religion:
to the end, that you knowing and feeling your ignorance, may be humbled
therewith, bewail it in time, and seek after the true knowledge of God. But
yet, by the way, I will ask Antilegon, a question, or two; because I desire to
understand what knowledge he has in the grounds of religion. Tell me therefore
Antilegon, what was the reason why Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost?


Antil. I could answer you: but I will not. What authority have you to examine
me? Show your Commission. When I see your warrant, I will answer you. In the
mean time, you have nothing to do, to examine me. Meddle with that you have
to do withal.


Theol. I perceive you are not only ignorant, but wilful, and obstinate, and
refuse all instructions. Therefore I will leave you to God, and to your galled
conscience. But I pray you Asunetus, answer that question. What think you,
what is the reason that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost?


Asune. Believe me Sir, that is an hard question. You may ask a wise man that
question: For I cannot answer it.


Theo. What say you then to this: Who was Christ's mother?


Asune. Mary Sir, that was our blessed Lady.


Theol. What was Pontius Pilate?


Asun. I am somewhat ignorant, I am not booklearned: but if you will have my
simple opinion, I think it was the devil. For none but the devil, would put
our sweet Savior to death.


Theo. What is the holy Catholic Church, which you say you do believe?


Asune. The Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins.


Theol. What do you pray for, when you say, Thy Kingdom come?


Asune. I do pray, that God would send us all of his grace, that we may serve
him, and do as we ought to do, and keep us in a good mind to God ward, and to
have him much in our mind: For some (God bless us) have nothing but the devil
in their mind: they do nothing a Gods name.


Theol. What is a Sacrament?


Asune. The Lords Supper.


Theol. How many Sacraments be there?


Asune. Two?


Theol. Which be they?


Asune. Bread and Wine.


Theo. What is the principal end of your coming to receive the Sacrament?


Asune. To receive my maker.


Theol. What is the principal use of a Sacrament?


Asune. The body and blood of Christ.


Theol. What profit and comfort have you by a Sacrament?


Asune. In token that Christ died for us.


Theol. I can but pity you, for your ignorance: for it is exceeding gross and
palpable. Your answers are to no purpose, and bewray a wonderful blindness and
senselessness in matters of Religion. I am sorry, that now I have not time and
leisure to let you see your folly, and extreme ignorance, as also to lay open
unto you the sense and meaning of the Articles of the faith, the Lords prayer,
and the Sacraments, and al other the grounds of Christian Religion.


Asune. What course would you wish me to take, that I may come out of
ignorance, and attain unto the true knowledge of God?


Theol. Surely, I would wish you to be diligent in hearing of Sermons, and
reading the Scriptures, with prayer and humility. Also that you would peruse
Catechismes, and other good books: and especially Vi^els grounds of Religion,
and the works of the two worthy servants of God, Master Gyffard and Master
Perkins, and other men's that have done great service to the Church, and for
whom thousands are bound to give God thanks. If you take this course, you shall
by Gods grace, within a short time, grow to some good measure of knowledge, in
all the maine grounds of Christian religion.


Phila. I had not thought any man had been so ignorant, as I now perceive this
man is.


Theo. Yes verily: there be thousands in his case. And I do know by
experience, that many will use the very same answers: or at least, very little
differing.


Phila. I warrant you, if you had questioned with him of kine, or sheep,
purchasing of lands, taking of Leases, or any other matter under the sun, you
should have found him very ripe and ready in his answers.


Theol. I am so persuaded too. For let a man talk with worldly men of worldly
matters, and their answer is never to seek. They will talk very freshly with
you of such matters, if it be all the day long. For they have a deep insight
into earthly things: and do wholly delight to talk of them, being never
weary. For it is their joy, their meat, and their drink. But come once to
talk with them of Gods matters (as of faith, repentance regeneration etc.) you
shall find them the veriest dullards, and dunces in the world. For, when
speech is had of these things, they are so befogged, that they can not tell
where they are, nor what they say.


Phil. In my judgment, such men's case is very pitiful, and dangerous. And so
is this man's case also, if God do not very speedily pull him out of it.


Theol. Questionles. For God says, My people Hos. 4. 7.
perish for want of knowledge. Our Lord Jesus says, that ignorance is the
cause of all errors. Ye err, says he, not knowing the scriptures. Math. 22.
The Apostle says, that ignorance does alienate us from the life of God. For
says he, The gentiles were darkened in their cogitation, Ephesians. 4. 18.
being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them.
So then it is clear, that ignorance is not the mother of devotion, as the
Papists do avouch: but it is the mother of error, death and destruction, as
the Scripture affirms. Our Lord foreseeing the great danger of ignorance (how
thereby thousands are carried headlong into Hell) does admonish Ioh. 5. 39.
al men to search the Scriptures, which do testify of him: that so they might
get out of the most dangerous gulf of ignorance, wherein multitudes are
implunged. Therefore the Noble men of Berea are commended, by the Act. 17. 11.
holy Ghost, because they received the word, with all readiness; and searched
the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Oh therefore that men would
earnestly seek after the knowledge of God in time: and (as the Prophet says)
Seek the Lord, whilst he may Esaias. 55. 6.
be found: call upon him whilst he is near*


Phila. I do see, that all ignorance in matters of faith, is dangerous: but I
think, wilful ignorance is of all other most dangerous.


Theol. Wilful ignorance (no doubt) is a plain prognostication, and
demonstratiue argument of eternal death: For it is a most horrible and fearful
thing, for men to refuse instructions, despise counsels, harden their hearts,
stop their ears, and close up their eyes against God. This is the very vp-shot
of our decay.


Phila. I pray you, what call you hardness of heart?


Theol. An heard heart is that, which is neither moved with Gods mercies, nor
scared with his judgments: neither fears the law, nor regards the Gospel:
neither is helped by threatenings, nor softened by chastenings: which is
unthankful for Gods benefits, and disobedient to his counsels: made cruel by
his rods, and dissolute by his favors: unshamefast to filthiness, and
fearelesse to perils: discourteous to men, and retchlesse to God: forgetful of
things past, negligent in things present, and improuident in things to come.


Phila. Lay forth yet more plainly the state of ignorant and hard hearted
men; and show how lamentable it is.


Theol. If a man be outwardly blind, we do pity him, and say: There goes a
poor blind man: but if he be both blind and deaf, do we not more pity him,
and say? Oh, in how miserable a case is that man! But if he be both blind,
deaf and dumb, do we not most of all pity him, and say? Oh, that man is in a
most woeful taking, and in a most pitiful plight!

How much more then are they to be pitied, which as concerning their souls,
are both blind, deaf, and dumb? For the diseases of the soul are far more
dangerous, and more to be pitied, then those of the body.

Would it not pity a man's heart, to see a poor sheep in a Lions mouth,
whilst he teareth him, renteth him, and pulls out his guts? Even such is the
case of ignorant men, in the claws of the devil. For the devil has them
under him, rides them at his pleasure, and teareth their souls in pieces. the
gronings of soldiers wounded, and the doleful sighs and gronings of many
Captains and Coronels, giving up the ghost: were not this a most woeful
spectacle? Even so, when we do clearly see Satan wound and murder
thousand, thousands souls, is it not a far more tragical and lamentable
sight? and ought it not even to kill our hearts, to behold it? But alas, men
have no eyes, to see into these things. And yet certain it is, that Satan
does continually, and in most fearful manner, massacre innumerable souls.
Thus have I showed you, the woeful estate of profane and ignorant men.


Phila. If it be so, you that be Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, and
have taken upon you the cure and charge of souls, have need to look about
you, and to do what in you lies, to save souls, and as good shepherds, in
great pity and compassion, to labor to pull them out of the paws of this
roaring Lion, which goes about continually seeking whom he may devour.


Theol. It stands us upon indeed, very seriously and carefully to look to
it, as we will answer it at the dreadful day of judgment. For it is no small
matter that we have taken in hand; which is, to care for the flock, which
Christ has bought with his blood. Would to God therefore that we would leave
striving about other matters, and strive together all about this; who can pull
most out of the kingdom of Satan, sin, and ignorance: who can win most
souls, and who can perform best service to the church. This were a good
strife indeed: and would to God that we might once at last with joined forces
go about it, and with one heart and hand, join together to build up Gods
house. If through our own follies the work has been hindered, or any breach
made, let us in wisdom and love, labor to make it up again. If there has
been any declining and coldness, let us now at last revive: let us stir up
our selves, that we may stir up others. Let us be zealous and fervent in
spirit, that we may through Gods grace put life into others, and rowse up this
dead declining and cold age wherein we live: So shall God be glorified, his
church edified, his Saints comforted, his people saved, his throne erected, and
the kingdom of the Devil overthrown.


Phila. What think you were the best course to effect this which you speak of?


Theol. This is a thing that must be exceedingly labored in of us, which are
the Ministers, and Preachers of the Gospel. And here is required diligence
and (as we say) double diligence: for the people are, every where, very
ignorant. Some are stones, altogether incapable of instruction: others are
froward and wilful. Some will receive the doctrine: but not the practice: some
again are altogether set upon peevishness, and cauilling. So that a man were
better take upon him the charge of keeping Wolves and Bears, then the charge
of souls. For it is the hardest thing in the world, to reform men's disorders,
and to bring them into order, to pull men's souls out of the kingdom of
Satan, and to bring them to God. It is as we say, an endless piece of work,
an infinite toil, a labor of all labors: I quake to think of it. For, men
are so obstinate and irrefragable that they will be brought into no order: they
will come under no yoke. They will not be ruled by God, nor bridled by his
word. They will follow their own swinge. They will run after their own lusts
and pleasures. They will kick and spurn, if they be reproved. They will rage
and storm if you go about to curb them, and restrain them of their wills,
likings, and liberties. They will have their wills, and follow their old
fashions; say what you will, and do what you can.

Is it not think you a busy piece of work, to smooth and square such
Timber-logs, so full of knots and knobs? Is it not a tedious and irksome
thing, to think upon? And would it not kill a man's heart to go about it? For,
how hard a thing is it, to bring such into frame, as are so far out of frame?


Phila. Well sir, you can but do your endeavor, and commit the success to
God. You can but plant and water: let God give the increase. You are Ministers
of the letter: but not of the spirit. You baptize with water: but not with the
holy Ghost. If you therefore preach diligently, exhort, admonish, and reprove,
publicly, and privately: studying by all good example of life, and seeking
with all good zeal, care, and conscience, to do the uttermost that in you
lies, to reduce them from their evil ways; I take it, you are discharged,
though they remain stubborn and incorrigible. For you know, what the Lord
says by his Prophet: If you do admonish them and give them warning, then you
shall be discharged, and Eze. 33. 9.
their blood shall be required at their own hands.


Theol. You have spoken the truth. And therefore, since some must needs take upon
them this so great a charge, it will be our best course, to labor much with
them in Catechizing, and private instructions: and that in most familiar and
plain manner. For much good has been done, and is done, this way. The
ignorant sort must be much labored upon this way: and so, no doubt, much good
may be done. For, in all labor there is profit. Herein, we Pro. 14. 23.
(that are the Ministers of Christ) must be content to be abased, and to teach
the poor ignorant people in most plain manner, asking them many easy
questions, and often questioning with them in most plain and loving manner,
till we have brought them to some taste and smacke of the principles of
Christian Religion. We must not be ashamed to use repetitions, and tautologies,
and to tell them one thing twenty times over, and over again, here a line,
and there a line: here a little, and there a little: precept Isa. 28. 10.
upon precept, as the Prophet speaks. I know riht well, nothing goes more
against the stomach of a scholar, and him that is learned indeed, then to do
thus. It is as irksome and tedious, as to teach A. B. C. Some can, at no hand,
endure it. But truly, truly I find now, after long experience, that if we
will do any good to these simple and ignorant souls, we must enter into this
course: and we may not be ashamed of it. For, it will be our crown, and our
glory, to win souls, howsoever we be abased. Let us therefore be well
content to stoop down, that Christ may be exalted. Let us be abased, that God
may be honored. Let us do all things in great love to Christ, who has said:
If thou love me, feed, feed, feed Ioh. 21. 15.
my flock. Let us therefore testify our love to him, by feeding his flock.
Let us do all things in great love and deep compassion toward the poor
souls, that go astray. As it is said, that our Lord Jesus was moved to pity,
and his bowels did yearne, to see the people as sheep without a sheepeheard.
Let it likewise move us thoroughly, and make our hearts to bleed, to see so
many poor sheep of Christ wandering and straying in the mountains, and
wilderness of this world, caught in every bramble, and hanged in every bush,
ready to be devoured of the Wolf. Thus have I showed you, what course (in my
judgment) is best to be taken, for the delivering of poor ignorant souls,
out of the captivity of Satan and sin.


Phil. Now, as you have declared, what course is best to be followed of your
part, which are the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel; so I pray you show,
what is best to be done of us, which are the people of God.


Theol. The best counsel that I can give you if it were for my life, is, to be
much exercised in the word of God, both in the hearing, reading, and meditation
thereof: and also to purchase, unto your self the sincere ministry of the
Gospel, and to make conscience to live under it, esteeming your self happy if
you have it, though you want other things: and unhappy if you have it not,
though you have all other things. For it is a peerless pearl, an
incomparable Jewel. For the purchasing whereof, we are advised by our Lord
Jesus, to sell all that we have, rather then to go without it. Again, Mat. 13.
44.
our Savior Christ gives the same counsel, to the Church of Laodicea, in
these words: I counsel Apo. 3. 18
thee, to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou may be rich: and white
raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness do not
appear: and anoint thine eyes with eie-salue, that thou may see. Where you
see, the word of God is compared to most precious gold, whereby we are made
spiritually rich: and to glittering attire, wherewith our naked souls are
clothed: and to an eyesalue, wherewith our spiritual blindness is cured. We
are advertised also by Jesus Christ whose counsel is ever the best, that we
should buy these things, whatsoever they cost us. The same counsel also gives
wise Solomon, saying, Buy the truth: but sell it not. So then you see, Pro. 23.
23.
the counsel which herein I give you, is not mine own; but the counsel of
Jesus himself, and Solomon the wise. And who can or who dare except against
their counsel?


Asune. Is your meaning, that men must of necessity frequent preaching of the
word? will not bare reading serve the turn?


Theol. I told you before, that reading is good, profitable, and necessary:
but yet it is not sufficient. We must not content our selves with that only:
but we must go further, and get unto our selves the sound preaching of the
Gospel, as the chiefest and most princiyall means, which God has ordained
and sanctified, for the saving of men. As it is plainly set down, 1. Cor. 1.
21. When as the world (by wisdom) knew not God, in the wisdom of God, it
pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. The
meaning of it is, that when as men, neither by natural wisdom, nor the
contemplation of the creatures, could sufficiently attain to the true
knowledge of God; the Lord, according to his heavenly and infinite wisdom
thought of an other course: which is, to save men by preaching; which the world
counts foolishness. And by the way note, that the preaching of the word is
not a thing of humane invention: but it is Gods own device, and came first out
of his brain, as the next and nearest way to save men's souls.

Wise Solomon also in the Book of the Proverbs tells us, that the preaching
of Gods word (which he calls Uision, using the word of the Prophets, which
called their Sermons Uisions) is not a thing that may be spared, or that we
may be at choice whether we have it or no: but he makes it to be of absolute
necessity unto eternal life. For he says, Where vision fails, the people
are left naked. Pro. 29. 18.
So indeed, it is in the Original. But the old translation gives us the
sense, thus: Where the word of God is not preached, there the people perish.
Then you see that Solomon strikes it dead, in telling us, that all they which
are without preaching of the word, are in exceeding danger of losing their
souls. Oh that men could be persuaded of this! Saint Paul also says, that
faith comes by hearing the word preached. For he says: How can they Romans
10. 14.
hear, without a Preacher? If faith come by hearing the word preached, then I
reason thus* No preaching, no faith: no faith, no Christ: no Christ, no
eternal life. For eternal life is only in him. Let us then put them together,
thus: Take away the word, take away faith: take away faith, take away Christ:
take away Christ, and take away eternal life. So then it follows; Take away
the word, and take away eternal life.

Or, we may read them backward thus: If we will have heaven, we must have
Christ: If we will have Christ, we must have faith. If we will have faith, we
must have the word preached. Then it follows thus. If we will have heaven, we
must have the word preached. Then I conclude, that preaching generally, and for
the most part, is of absolute necessity unto eternal life; as meat is of
absolute necessity, for the preservation of our bodies; as grass and fodder
are of absolute necessity, for the upholding of the life of beasts; and water
of absolute necessity, for the life of fishes. Then, this being so, men are
with great care and conscience to hear the Gospel preached, to frequent
Sermons, to resort much to Gods house and habitation, where his honor
dwells: with David to say; One thing have I desired Psalm. 27. 4.
of the Lord, that I will require: even that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord, all the days of my life; to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit
his holy Temple. With godly Luke. 14. 42. Ioh. 5. 7.
Mary to say; One thing is necessary; and so choose the better part. With the
poor Cripple at Bethesda, to wait for the moving of the waters by the Angel,
that his impotency may be cured: I mean, that we should tie our selves to the
first moving of the spiritual waters of life, by the Preachers of the
Gospel; that our spiritual impotency may be helped and relieved. For the
ministry of the Gospel is that golden pipe, whereby and where-through all the
goodness of GOD, all the sweetness of Christ, and all heavenly graces
whatsoever are derived unto us. Which thing was shadowed, in the law by the
Pomegranates in the skirts of Arons garments, and the golden Belles between
them round about: that is, a golden Bell, and a Pomegranate; a golden Bell, and
a Pomegranate. The golden Belles xod. 28. 33.
did signify the preaching of the Gospel, and the Pomegranates the sweet
savor of Christ's death. Noting thereby that the sweet savor of Christ's
death, and all the benefits of his passion, should be spread abroad by the
preaching of the Gospel. Thus you see, that if ever men purpose to be saved,
they must make more account of the preaching of the Gospel, then they have
done, and not think, (as most men do) that they may be without it, and yet do
well enough. And some had as leeue be without it, as have it. For it does but
disquiet them, and trouble their consciences: but woe be unto such.


Phila. Yet we see, where the word is soundly preached, there be many bad
people: and the reasons thereof, in mine opinion, are two. The one, that God
takes his holy spirit from many in hearing the word: so that their hearing is
made unfruitful. The other, that the devil has an hundred devices, to hinder
the effectual working of the word: so as it shall do no good at all, nor take
any effect in multitudes of men. But you, Master Theologus, can better lay
open this matter, then I. I pray you therefore speak something of it.


Theol. The sleights of Satan, in this behalf, are more and more sly, then I,
or any man else can possibly discover. For who is able to descrie, or in
sufficient manner, to lay open the deep subtilties, and most secret and
sinful suggestions of the Devil in the hearts of men: He is so cunning a
crafts master this way, that none can perfectly trace him. His workings, in the
hearts, of men, are with such close and hid deceits, and most methodicall and
crafty conueyances, that none can sufficiently find them out. But yet
notwithstanding, I will beewray so much as I know, or can conceive of his
dealings with men that hear the word, that he may steal it out of their
hearts, and make it fruitless and unprofitable. First of all, he bestirreth
him and labors hard, to keep men fast asleep in their sins, that they
may have no care at all of their salvation: and therefore disswadeth them from
hearing, or reading the word at all; lest they should be awaked. If this will
not prevail, but that they must needs hear, then his craft is, to make their
hearing unprofitable, by sleepiness, dullness by-thoughts, conceitednesse, and
a thousand such like. If this will not serve the turn, but that the word does
get within them, and work upon them (so as thereby they grow to some knowledge
and understanding of the truth) then he practices another way, which is, to
make them rest themselves upon their bare knowledge, and so become altogether
consciencelesse. If this will not suffice, but that men fall to doing, and
leave some sins, especially the gross sins of the world, and do some
good, then he persuades them to trust to those doings without Christ, and to
think themselves well enough, because they do some good, and leave some
evil. If this be not enough, but that men attain unto the true justifying
faith which apprehends Christ, and rests vpen his merits, then he deuiseth
how to blemish the beauty of their faith, and weaken their comfort, through
many frailties and wants, yea gross downefalles, and rank evils: so as they
shall be but spotted and leaprous Christians. If this weapon will not work,
but that Christians do join all good virtues with their faith, and abundantly
shine forth in all fruits of righteousness, then he casts about another
way: which is, to daunt and dampe them with discouragements: as poverty,
necessity, sickness, reproaches, contempts, persecutions etc. If none of all
these will do the deeds, but that men constantly believe in Christ, and
patiently, and joyfully endure all afflictions, then his last refuge is, to
blow them up with gunpowder: that is, to puff them up with a pride of their
gifts, graces and strength, and so to give them an utter overthrow whilst they
do not walk humbly and give God the praise of his gifts.

Thus have you a little taste of Satan's cunning, in making the word
unfruitful amongst us.


Asune. I pray you good sir (seeing I am ignorant and unlearned) give me some
particular directions out of the word of Gnd, for the good guiding and ordering
of my particular actions, in such sort, as that I may glorify God in the
earth, and after this life be glorified of him for ever.


Theol. It were an infinite thing, to enter into all particulars: but briefly
do this: First, seek God earnestly in his word: pray much: in all things give
thanks. Eschew evil, and do good: Fear God and keep his Commandments:
reform your self, and your household: love virtue, and virtuous men; keep
company with the godly, and avoid the society of the wicked. Live soberly,
justly, and holily, in the present evil world. Speak alwais graciously, ^
beware of filthy communication. Recompense to no man evil for evil; but
recompense evil with good. Be courteous, and pitiful toward all men. Take
heed of swearing, cursing, and banning. Beware of anger, wrath, and
bitterness. Praise your friend openly: reprove him secretly. Speak no evil
of them that are absent, nor of the dead. Speak evil of no man: speak
always the best, or at least, not the worst. Reverence Gods name, and keep
his Sabbaths. Avoid all the signs of condemnation, and labor after all the
signs of salvation. Above all things, take heed of sin: for that is the very
cutthroat of the soul, and bane of all goodness. Tremble therefore, and sin
not. For if you sin, mark what follows.

Six great dangers in sin:
God sees. His Angels bear witness. The conscience pricketh. Death
threatens. The Devil accuses. Hell deuoureth.


You see then, that sin is no scarcrow, or jesting matter. Every sin* that a
man commiteth, is as a thorn thrust deep into the soul, which will not be
got out again, but with many a sigh, and many a sorrowful oh, oh. Every sin
Ier. 17. 1.
is written with a pen of iron: and the point of a diamond upon the conscience,
and shall in the last day (when the books shall be opened) accuse Note this.
us, and give in evidence, against us. If a man commit sin with pleasure, the
pleasure passes away, but the conscience and sting of the sin abides, and
tormenteth deadly: but if a man do well, though with labor and painfulnesse,
the pain passes away, yet the conscience of well doing remains, with much
comfort. But, the best end of sin is always repentance: if not in this life,
then with woe, and alas, when it is too late. Therefore take heed in time; take
heed I say of sin.

Six most hurtful effects of sin.
Sin hardneth the heart. Heb. 3. 13. 1. Sa. 25. 31. 1. Pet. 2. 11. Iam. 1.
15. Romans 6. 21. Deuteronomy. 28.
Sin gnaweth the conscience. Sin fights against the soul. Sin brings
forth death. Sin makes ashamed. Sin procures all plagues of body and
soul.


Behold, therefore the evil effects of sin. For this cause, Zophar, the
Naamathite, speaks Job. 11. 15.
very wisely to Job, saying; When thou shall lift thy face, out of thy sin,
thou shall be strong, and shall not fear; thou shall forget all sorrow; thou
shall temember it, as the waters that are past. Where, Zophar plainly shows,
that the avoiding of sin is our strength, and the committing of it, our
weakening. According to that of Solomon; The way of the Pro. 10. 29.
Lord is the strength of the upright man. Therefore walk in the way of God,
and take heed of the ways of sin. For God punishes every sin, his way;
some one way, and some another; and no sin can escape unpunished. For because
God is just, therefore he must needs punish sin in all men, though in diverse
manners; as the wicked, in their own persons; the godly, in Christ. Beware of
it therefore, and flatter not your self in your sins. Remember how every
disobedience, and every transgression, has had a just recompense of reward.
God has in all ages matched the causes with Note how God in all ages has
punished the breaks of his law. Exo. 32. 10. Leuit. 10. 2. Number. 15. Number. 15
52.
the effect; that is, sin with the punishment of sin. The Isralites, for
breaking the first commandment in making other Gods were often smitten by the
hand of God. Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, for the breach of the second
commandment, in offering strange fire upon Gods Altar, were consumed with
fire. He that blasphemed and transgressed the third commandment, was stoned to
death. He that brake the fourth commandment, in gathering sticks upon the
Sabbath, was likewise stoned. Absolon transgressing the fifth Commandment, was
hanged in his own hair. 2 Samuel 18.
Cain, transgressing the sixth, in flaying his brother Abel, was branded with
the mark Genesis 4. 15.
of Gods wrath. Sichem the son of Hamor, Genesis 34. 26.
transgressing the seventh, in defiling Dina the daughter of Jacob, was slain
by Simeon and Leui, the sons of Jacob. Achan, sinning against Joshua 7. 25.
the eight Commandment, in stealing the wedge of Gold, and the Babylonish
garment, Act. 5. 6.
was stoned to death. Ananias and Sapphira, sinning against the ninth
commandment, in liing and dissembling, were suddenly smitten 1. Re. 21. 24.
with death. Ahab, transgressing the tenth commandment, in ceueting and
discententment, was devoured of dogs. Or if you will have original sin
therein only forbidden, then infants Romans 5. 14.
are therefore punished with death.

Thus we see there is no dallying with God; but if we sin, we are as sure to
beierkt for it, as the coat is on our back. Therefore let us not deceive our
selves, nor make light of sin. For sin is no scar-bugge; and we shall one day
find it so. And howsoever we make light of some sins, yet in very deed all
sin is odious in the sight of God, yea all sin is heinous and capital, in
this respect, that it is against a person of infinite being; it is against God
himself; it is against the highest Majesty. For the greatness of the person
offended, does enhaunce and increase the greatness of the sin.

As for example: If a man rail at a Justice of peace, he shall be stocked; if
he rail (...) being the sons of idleness, will step short (in the end) of
that they looked for. For the spirit says: The sluggard lusts, but his soul
has Pro. 13. 4.
naught. We must therefore leave bare words, and come to deeds. For our Lord
Jesus says: Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter Mat. 7. 21.
into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is
in heaven. Where we see, Christ (in plain terms) does exclude out of his
kingdom, all those whose Religion consists only in good words and smooth
speeches: but make no conscience to practice the Commandments of God.

David, having made some good preparation for the building of the Temple, and
perceiving his son Solomon to have stuff and provision enough to perfectt
and finish it, does most wisely encourage him to the work, in these words: Up,
and be doing, and the Lord shall be with 1. Chro. 12. 16.
thee. Oh, that men would follow this counsel of David: That they would up,
and be doing; And not sit still, and do nothing: that they would leave words
and countenances; and set upon the practice of Gods Law: and study with all
care and conscience, to be obedient to his will. Then assuredly God would be
with them, and bless them: and much good would come of it. For the Scripture
says: In all labor Prou. 14. 23.
there is profit, or increase: but the talk of the lips only brings want.


Phila. Most men's minds are so wholly drowned in the love of this world, that
they have no heart to obey God, nor any delight in his commandments.


Theo. The greatest part of men are like unto the Gadarens, which esteemed
their Swine more then Christ. As we see in these our days, how many make more
account of their kine and sheep, then of the most glorious Gospel of Christ.
They highly esteem dung, and contemn Pearl. They are careful for trifles,
and regard not the things of greatest moment. And therefore may very fitly be
compared to a man, who having his wife and children very sick, does utterly
neglect them, and is altogether careful for the curing of his hogs ears.


Phila. We are somewhat digressed from the matter we had in hand: I pray you
therefore, if you have any more matter of good counsel to give unto Asunetus,
that you would presently deliver it.


Theol. I have little more to say: save only I would advise him often to
remember, and much to muse of these nine things.

The evil he has committed. The good he has omitted. The time he has
misspent. The shortness of this life. The vanity of this world. The excellency
of the world to come. Death, then the which, nothing is more terrible. 9 Things
much to be thought of.
The day of judgment, then the which nothing is more fearful. Hell fire,
then the which, nothing is more intolerable.



Phila. This is short and sweet indeed. You have touched some of these points
before, in this our conference. But I am very desirous to hear somewhat more
of the two last, which yet have not been touched.


Theol. Since you are desirous, I will briefly deliver unto you, that which I
have received from the Lord. First concerning the day of judgment, I find in
the volume of Gods book, that it shall be very terrible and dreadful. For,
Math. 24. 30.
The son of man shall come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great
glory.

S. Peter says; The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night. In the
which, the heavens 1. Pet. 3. 10.
shall pass away with a noise, the elements shall melt with heat; and the
earth, with the works that are therein shall be burnt up. The Apostle tells
us, that at the coming of Christ, all the whole world shall be of a light
fire: and that all castles, towers, goodly buildings, gold, silver, veluets,
silks, and all the glittering hue, glory, and beauty of this world, shall be
consumed to powder and ashes. For he says plainly; The heavens and the earth,
which are now, are 2. Pet. 3. 7.
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and of the destruction of
ungodly men. Moreover, he does strongly prove, that as the world was once
destroyed by water; so the second time, in the end thereof, it shall be
destroyed by fire. The Apostle Paul does witness the same 2. These. 1. 7. 1.
These. 4. 16.
thing: For he says; Christ shall come from heaven, with all his mighty Angels
in flaming fire. And in another place, he notes the terror of his coming to
judgment, saying; He shall come with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel,
and the trumpet of God. We see by experience, that the coming of mortal
Princes to any place, is with great pomp and glory. They have great trains
and troops behind them and before them. They are accompanied with many Nobles,
goodly Lords; and gallant Ladies do attend upon them. The Sword Bearer,
Trumpetters, and harbengers go before; many flaunting and stately personages
follow after. Now then, if the coming of mortal Princes be so pompous, and
glorious: how much more glorious shall the coming of the son of man be, in
whose sight, all mortal princes are but dust? The Scriptures do affirm, that
his second coming unto judgment, shall be with such resplendent and
unspeakable glory, that even the most excellent creatures shall blush at it.
For the Sun shall be darkened: the Math. 24. 29.
Moon shall not give her light: and the stars shall fall from heaven.
Meaning thereby, that the most glorious and bright-shining creatures shall be
clouded and obscured, by the inconceivable brightness of Christ's coming.

Moreover, is noted unto us the terror of Christ's coming, in this; that
immediately before it, the very sea shall quake and tremble, and in his kind
cry out. For it is said, that the Luke 21. 25. 1.
sea shall roar (and make a noise in most doleful and lugubrious manner) and
men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after those things,
which shall come on the world: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Oh,
what shall become of swearers, drunkards, whore-mongers, and such like, in that
day! They shall seek to creep into an auger hole, to hide their heads. They
shall then cry woe and alas, that ever they were borne. They shall wish that they
had never been borne, or that their mother had born them toads. And, as it is
said in the Apocalypse, They shall say to the mountains and rocks, Fall Apoc. 6.
16.
on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who
can stand?

We see therefore, that the coming of Christ shall not be base and
contemptible, as in his first visitation: but it shall be most terrible,
princely, and glorious. And as the Scriptures do affirm, that his coming
shall be with great terror and dread: so also they do show, that it shall be
very sudden and unlooked for. For the day of the Lord shall come as a thief 2.
Pet. 3. 10. 1. These. 5. 2. Luke 21. 35.
in the night: as the travel that comes upon a woman. As a snare shall it
come on all them that dwell on the face of the earth. That is, it shall
suddenly catch and entangle all men, wheresoever they be in the world: As the
Earthquake, which was some twenty years ago, did suddenly take the world
tardy, they not thinking of any such matter: So shall the coming of the son
of man to judgment, take the world tardy and unprepared. For few there be that
think of any such matter. Since therefore the second appearing of Christ shall
be with such suddenness, let us fear and tremble: for all sudden things are
to be feared.


Phila. Well sir, as you have showed us the terror, and suddenness of Christ's
coming, so show us the purpose and end of his coming.


Theol. The principal end of his coming, shall be to keep a general audit,
to call all men to an account, to have a reckening of every man's particular
actions, and to reward them according to their deeds; as it is written: The Son
Math. 16. 27.
of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels: and then shall
he give to every man, according to his deeds. Again, the Apostle says to the
Corinthians: We must all appear 2. Cor. 5. 10.
before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things
which are done in his body, according to that which he has done, whether it be
good or evil.

Here we do plainly see, that the end of Christ's coming shall be, to judge
every man according to his works, that is, as his works shall declare him, and
testify of him and of his faith. In another place the Apostle says; That 2.
These. 1. 9.
the end of his coming shall be to render vengeance unto them which know not
God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be
punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. Woe then unto two sorts of men, the ignorant and the
disobedient. For, the Apostle says flatly, they both shall be damned. Me
thinks, both the ignorant and disobedient, and all other profane men, should
tremble to think of this, that Christ shall come to render vengeance unto
them. If we did certainly know, that the Spaniard should invade our Nation,
ouerrunne it, and make a conquest of Note this.
it, that he should shead our blood, destroy us, and make a massacre amongst
us: yea, that we should see our wives, our children, our kindred and dear
friends slain before our faces, so as their blood should stream in the
streets: what a wonderful fear and terror would it strike into us? we would
quake to think of it. Shall we not then be much more afraid of the damnation
of our souls? Shall we not quake, to think, that Christ shall com to take
vengeance? If the Lion roar, all the beast of the field tremble, and shall not
we be afraid of the roaring of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? But alas, we are
so hard hearted, and so rockt aslepe in the cradle of security, that nothing
can move us, nothing can awake us.


Phila. Now as you have showed us the terror, and end of Christ's coming: so
also declare the manner of it.


Theol. The manner of it is this; that the whole world shall be cited to appear
personally at the general Assizes, before the great Judge. No man shall be
admitted to appear by his attorney: but all must appear personally. None
shall be suffered to put in sureties: but all must come in their own persons,
without bail or maine prize; as it is written: We must all appear, 2. Cor. 5.
10.
high and low, rich and poor, king and beggar, one and other; as it is
plainly set down in the 20. Chapter of the Revelation: where the spirit says,
I sawche dead both great and small stand before God: and the sea gave up the
dead which were in her, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in
them. So then it is clear, that all, without exception, shall make their
appearance at the great and dreadful Assizes. Oh what a great day will that
be, when as the whole world shall appear together at once! If a king marry his
son and dif other Kings, Emperors, Dukes, and Nobles to the marriage, with
all their pomp and train, we use to say: Oh what a marriage, what a meeting,
what a do, what a great day will there be! but when the universal world shall
be assembled together (not only al Monarks, Kings, and Princes, but all other,
that ever have been from the beginning of the world, all that are, and shall be)
what a day will that be! No marvel therefore, though the Scriptures call it the
day of God and the great day of the Lord. Now then when all flesh is come
together, to make their personal appearance, then shall the son of God aseend
unto his tribunal seat, with great Majesty and glory. For a fiery stream
shall issue and come forth before him: thousand thousand Dan. 7. 10.
Angels shall accompany him, and minister unto him: and ten thousand thousand
shall stand before him: the judgment shall be set and the books opened. All
the Saints also, and true worshippers of God, shall attend him, and accompany
him unto his judgment seat. And not only so, but they shall sit upon the
Bench and Throne, with him; as it is written: The 1. Cor. 6. 2.
Saints shall judge the world: they shall judge the Angels; that is, the
devils, the Angels of darkness. Our Lord Jesus himself does avouch the same
thing, when he said to his Disciples, and Mat. 19. 28.
in them to all true Christians: Verily I say unto you, that when the son of
man shall sit in the throne of his Majesty, ye which followed me in the
regeneration, shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel. That is, the Saints of God shall bear witness that the judgment of
Christ, and sentence of condemnatien which he passes against all unbelievers,
is according to justice and equity. Thus then we see, how Christ shall be
accompanied to his throne; and with what glory and Majesty he shall ascend
unto it. Experience teaches, that when mortal Judges hold their Sessions and
general Assizes, they are brought unto the Bench and judgment seat, with
pomp and terror. For the Shiriffe of the Shire, and Holbard-men, with many
Justices of peace, and trains of others, do accompany them unto the Bench.
Then with how much more glory and majesty shall the Son of God be brought
unto his royal Throne! Thus then Christ being set upon his judgment seat, all
the ungodly shall be conuented before him, and he shall stand over them with a
naked sword in his hand. The devil shall stand by them on the one side, to
accuse them, and their own conscience, on the other side: and the gaping gulf
of hell, underneath them, ready to deucure them. Then shall the books be
opened; not any books of paper and parchment, but the books of men's
consciences. For every man's sins are written and recorded in his conscience,
as it were in a Register book. Then will God bring every work to judgment,
with every secret thought, and set them in order before all the Reprobates.
Then will God lighten the things that are hid in darkness; 1. Cor. 4. 5
and make the counsels of the heart manifest. Then shall all the ungodly be
arraigned, convicted, and hold up their hands at the bar of Christ's tribunal
leat, and shall cry guilty. Then shall that most dreadful sentence of death
and condemnation be pronounced Math. 25. 41.
against them by the most righteous Judge, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire;
which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Oh dole full sentence! Oh
heavy hearing! Whose heart does not tremble at these things? whose hair does
not stand upon his head? For then shall thousands, which in this world have
flourished as the cedars of Libanus, be cast down for evermore; and shall
drink (as a just recompense for their iniquity) of the bitter Cup of Gods
eternal wrath and indignation in the kingdom of darkness, and in the
fearful presence of Satan, and all the rursed enemies of Gods grace.


Phil. Well now as you have declared unto us the terror, the suddennes, the
end, and the manner of Christ's coming to judgment; so lastly show unto us,
the right use of all these things.


Theol. S. Peter tells and teaches us the 2. Pet. 3. 11.
right use of all: for says he; Seeing all these things must be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness?
As if he should say; Since the heavens shall pass away with a noise, the
Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth, with the works that are therein,
shall be burnt up: since also the coming of Christ shall be with great terror,
to a fearful end, and in fearful manner; O how ought we to excel in goodness!
So then S. Peter tells us, that the true use of all is this: that hereby we
be brought nearer unto God, even to be more obedient to his will, and to walk
in all his commandments, making conscience of all our ways, and studying to
please God in all things, and to be fruitful in all good works, living
soberly, justly, and holily in this present evil world, and showing forth the
virtues of him which has called us out of darkness to this marvelous light;
so that we may be prepared against the day of his appearing, that it may not
take us tardy. For our life ought to be a continual meditation of death. We
should always live as if we should die, or that our bed should be our grave:
we must live continually, as if Christ should come to judgment presently. As
it is reported of a godly man in the Primitue church; that whether he eat or
drank, or whatsoever he did, he thought always he heard the trumpet of the
Lord, with these words; Arise ye dead, and come unto judgment. Put case it
were certainly known, that Christ would come to judgment the next
Midsommer-day; Oh what an alteration would it make in the world, how would men
change their minds and affections! who would care for this world! who would set
his heart unto riches! Who would regard brave apparel! Who durst deceive or
oppress! who durst be drunk! Who durst swear, lie, and commit adultery! Nay,
would not all men give up themselves to the obedience of God? would not all
serve him diligently? would not all men and women flock to Sermons? would they
not give themselves to prayer and reading? would they not repent them of their
sins? would they not cry for mercy and forgiveness? See then, what the
knowledge of a certain day approaching would effect. And ought we not to do
all these things with as great care and zeal, seeing the day is uncertain?
For, who knows whether Christ will come this month, or the next; this year,
or next? He Mat. 24. 44.
himself says; Be ready, watch: for, in the hour that ye think not of, will
the son of man come. We think he will not come this year, nor next year, nor
this hundred year. It may be therefore, that he will come suddenly upon us: we
know not how soon. For in an hour that we little think of, will he come.
Therefore our Savior says in the 13. Chapter of Mark. Take Mark. 13. 33.
heed, watch and pray: for, you know not when the time is. And in the Gospel
of S. Luke, he Luke 21. 34.
says; Take heed that your hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life; and so that day come upon you
unawares. For, as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell upon the face
of the earth. We hear therefore how many watch words and caueats our Savior
gives us, when he says: Be in readiness, awake, take heed, watch and pray,
and look about you, lest that day come suddenly upon you, and take you
napping. It stands us all therefore upon, to be at an hours warning, upon
pain of death, and as we will answer it at our uttermost peril.


Phil. Proceed to speak of the torments of hell.


Theol. Concerning the torments of hell, (I do note three things which I will
briefly speak of) and they be these: The extremity, perpetuity, and
remedilesnesse thereof. First, touching the extremity thereof, it stands
specially in these three things. First, that it is a separation from all joy
and comfort of the presence of God. Secondly, that it is an eternal fellowship
with the devil and his angels. Thirdly, it is a feeling of the horrible wrath
of God; which shall seize upon body and soul and shall feed on them (as fire
death upon pitch and brimstone) for ever. The Apo. 21. 8. Luke. 13. 28. Mat. 9.
44.
scriptures do note the extremity of it, in calling it a lake, that burns
with fire and brimstone, for ever: in saying, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth: in affirming, that their worm dies not, (meaning the worm
that gnaweth their conscience, or their torment of conscience) and the fire
never goes out: in tearming it Tophet, which is deep and large: and the
burning thereof is fire and much wood: and that the breath of the Lord, as a
river of brimstone, does kindle it All these things he terrible to our senses:
and yet can they not fully express the thing, as it is indeed. For, no heart
can conceive, or tongue express the greatness and extremity of the torments
of hell. As the joys of heaven never entered into the heart of man: no more did
the torments of hell. All the torments and troubles that fall upon men in this
life, are but as sparkles of the furnace of Gods total wrath. All fires are
but as it were pictures of fire, in comparison of hell fire. For as one
writes: Hell fire is so extremely hot, that it will burn up a man seven mile,
before he come at if. Yet the reprobates, being always in it, shall never be
consumed of it. As the Salamander is always in the fire, and never consumes
so the wicked shall be always in the fire of hell, and never consume. For hell
is a death always living, and an end always beginning. It is a grievous thing
to a man that is very sick, to lie upon a featherbed: how much more upon a hot
gridiron! but how most of all to burn always in hell fire, and never be
consumed! An other extremity of it consisseth in this, that the torments of
hell are universal: that is, in every memberat once: head, eyes, tongue,
teeth, throat, stomach, back, belly heart, sides, etc. All punishments of
this life are particular. For some are pained in their head, some in their
back, some in their stomach, etc. Yet some particular pains are such, as a
man would not suffer, to gain all the world. But, for a man to be tormented in
all parts at once, what sight more lamentable! who could but take pity of a dog
in the street, in that case! Thus then we see, that the extremity of Hell
torments is greater, then can be conceived or uttered. For, who can utter that,
which is incomprehensible? We can go no further in comprehending that which is
incomprehensible, then to know it to be incomprehensible.


Phila. As you have showed us the extremity of Hell torments: so now proceed
to the perpetuity.


Theol. The Scriptures do set forth the perpetuity of hell torments, in saying:
they are for ever. The wicked shall be cast into the lake, that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever. The fire never goes out. When as many hundred
thousand years are expired, as there be stones by the Sea side: yet still
there be so many more to come. For that which has no end, can never come to an
end. If all the Arithmeticians in the world were set a work to do nothing but
number all the days of their life, even the greatest numbers that they could
possibly set down, and should in the end add all their numbers together; yet
could they never come any thing near to that length of time, wherein the
wicked shall be tormented. If the whole circumference of the heavens were written
about with figures of Arithmeticke, from the East to the West, and from the
West to the East again; yet could it not contain that infinite time, and
innumerable years, wherein all unbelievers shall suffer eternal torture. For,
in things infinite, time has no place. For time is the measure of those things
which are subject to measure. Therefore, because Hell torments are infinite,
they cannot be measured by any time: neither can that which is infinite, be
diminished. For if you subtract from that which is infinite, ten thousand
thousand millions of milions, yet it is thereby nothing diminished or made
less. Put case a man should once in an hundred thousand years, take a
spooneful of water, out of the great Ocean Sea, how long would it be, ere he
had so emptied it! Yet shall a man sooner empty the Sea, by taking out a
spoonful once in a hundred thousand years, then the damned soul shall have
any ease. Therefore a certain writer says, If a damned soul might be tormented
in Hell but a thousand years, and then have ease, there were some comfort in
it: (sor then there would be hope it would come to an end,) but, says he, this
word ever kills the heart. Oh consider this ye that forget God! O ye carnal
worldlings, think on this in time! For, if you will not now be moved in
hearing, you shall be the^ crushed in pieces in feeling. What avails it, to
live in all possible pleasures, and carnal delights here, for some 60.
years, and then to suffer this eternal torment? What shall it profit a man, to
win the whole world and lose his soul? they be more then mad, which will
hazard their souls, for a little profit, and a few stinking pleasures. But
this is the nature of men; they will have the present sweet (come of it what
will) though they pay never so dear for it: though they go to the highest
price: though hey lose their souls for it. Oh the unspeakable blindness and
madness of the men of this world! The devil has put out their eyes: and
therefore leads them whither he list. For who cannot lead a blind man whither
he list? Nahash 1. Sam. 11. 2.
the Ammonite would make no covenant with the Israelites, but upon condition
that he might put out all their right eyes. So the devil does covenant with all
the wicked, to put out both their eyes; that he may lead them directly into
Hell.


Phila. Now sir, a word or two more of the remedilesnesse of hell fire.


Theol. The scriptures do affirm, that as the torments of hell are extreme, so
they are without all hope of remedy; as it is written: A man can Psalm. 49. 8.
by no means redeem his brother; he can not give his ransom unto God: so
precious is the redemption of the soul, and the continuance for ever. To this
purpose Abraham said to the Luke 16. 26.
rich man, being in hell torments: Betwixt you and us, there is a great gulf
set; so that they which would go from hence to you, cannot: neither can they
come from thence, to us. Our Lord Jesus also says; What shall a man give Math.
16.
for the recompense of his soul? Where our Savior does plainly affirm, that
there is no ransom or recompense, though never so great, to be given for a
damned soul. For the soul being in Hell, can never be released, it is past
remedy. No means whatsoever can do any good. No gold, no silver, no friends,
no riches, no power, no policy, no flattery, no bribery, no reach, no fetch or
device whatsoever can prevail one jot. For a man being once in Hell, has no
remedy. He is in close prison, he is shut up under the hatches for ever: there
is no getting out again. He must suffer perpetual imprisonment. He cannot
bring a writ of false imprisonment: (because he is laid in by the most
righteous and just Judge, who cannot possibly do any wrong,) but he must lie
by it. For being there once, he is there for ever. If all the Angels of Heaven
should entreat for a damned soul: If Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, should make
great suit: If all the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, should be continual
solicitors of Christ for release: if the father should make request for his
son, or the mother for her daughter: yet can none of these be heard: they must
all have the repulse. For, the sentence of Christ cannot be reuersed; his
decree is vnrepealeable. The due consideration of these things, may make all
hearts to quake, and all knees to tremble. In the troubles and afflictions of
this life, though a man come in never so great dangers, yet he may wind out
again, by one means or another, by money, or friendship, or rewards, or such
like means: but in Hell fire this is it that gripes, and makes the heart
despair, that there is no remedy at all to be used. If we should ask of a
damned soul, or an afflicted conscience, what they would give for the ease and
redemption of their souls: they would answer, the whole world; howsoever
secure worldlings, and wicked Atheists (which see nothing, nor feel nothing)
make nothing of it.

Here, by the way, let us consider the greatness of the loss of a man's
soul; which we shall the better perceive and see into, if we can aright value
and prise the soul. If therefore it be demanded, what is the price of the
soul, or what is it worth; our Lord Jesus answers; that it is more worth,
then all the world. For says he, What shall it profit a man, to win all the
Math. 16.
world, and lose his soul? Therefore the soul of the poorest beggar is more
worth then all the world. Then I reason thus: if the soul be more worth then
all the world, then the loss of it is greater, then the loss of the whole
world. For indeed it is a loss of all losses; an unrecoverable loss. If a man
should have his house burnt over his head, and all that he has consumed in one
night, it were a great loss. If a Merchant venturer should lose twenty
thousand pound in one venture, in one ship, or, as they say, in one bottom,
it were a very great loss. If a king should lose his crown and kingdom, it
were an exceeding great loss. But the loss of the soul is a thousand time
more than all these: it is a matter of infinite importance. If a Tenant be
cast out of the favor of his Landlord, it is a matter of grief. If a
Noblemans Secretary be cast out of favor with his Lord, so that he takes a
pritch against him, it is a matter of great sorrow. If a Nobleman himself be
discountenanced, and cast out of all favor with his Prince, that was in great
favor, it is a corsey, a heart smart, and a matter of exceeding greeuance.
But, to be eternally separated from God, to be shut out of his favor, and to be
cast away from his presence, and the presence of his Angels, is a matter of
infinite more dolor and torment. Mark then and behold, what a thing it is for
a man to lose his soul. Oh therefore that men would be wise in Gods fear,
that they would look out in time, and make provision for their souls. Now
then, to close up this whole point, the sum of all that has been said, is
this: That the torments of Hell are endless, easelesse, and remediless.


Asune. The laying open of these doctrines of hell fire, and the judgment to
come, makes me quake and tremble: I am thereby much perplexed, I feel great
terror in my conscience, I am afraid I shall be damned.


Antil. Damned, man! What speak you of damning? I am ashamed to hear you say
so. For it is well known that you are an honest man, a quiet liver, a good
neighbor, and as good a towns man, as any is in the parish where you dwell:
and you have always been so reputed and taken. If you should be damned, I
know not who shall be saved.


Asune. I regard not your flatteries, I believe God; I believe his word. I
believe those things which M. Theologus has alleged out of the holy
scriptures, pointing me both to the chapter, and the verse: and whether it be
more meet that I should believe the Scriptures, or your soothings, judge you.
No, no: Now I do clearly see by the glass of Gods law, that my state is
wretched and miserable. For I have lived in sin and ignorance all the days
of my life, being utterly void of all Religion, and true knowledge of God. I am
not the man indeed that you and others take me for. For though outwardly I have
lived honestly to the worldward, yet inwardly I have not lived religiously to
Godward.


Antile. Tush, tush, now I see you are in a melancholy humor. If you will go
home with me I can give you a speedy remedy: for I have many pleasant and
merry books, which if you should hear them read, would soon remedy you of
this melancholy passion. I have the Court of Venus, the Palace of pleasure,
Beuas of Southhampton, Ellen of Rummin; The merry Jest of the Friar and the
Boy; The pleasant story of Clem of the Clough, Adam Bell, and William of
Cloudesley; The odd tale of William Richard, and Humfry; The pretty conceit of
John Splinters last Will and Testament; which all are excellent and singular
books against heartqualmes; and to remove such dumpishnesse, as I see you are
now fallen into.


Asune. Your vain and frivolous books of tales, jests, and lies, would more
increase my grief, and strike the print of sorrow deeper into my heart.


Antile. Nay, if you be of that mind, I have done with you.


Phila. I pray you if a man may be so bold with you: How came you by all these
good books? I should have said, so much trash and rubbish.


Antile. What mattereth it to you? What have you to do to enquire? But I pray
you Sir, what mean you to call them trash and rubbish.


Phila. Because they be no better. They be goodly geere, trim stuff. They
are good to kindle a fire, or to scour a hot oven withal. And shall I tell
you my opinion of them? I do thus think, that they were devised by the
devil, seen and allowed by the Pope, printed in hell, bound up by Hobgoblin;
and first published and dispersed in Rome, Italy, and Spain: and all to this
end, that thereby men might be kept from the reading of the Scriptures. For
even as a Lapwing with her busy cry, draws men away from her nest: so the
Popish generation, by these fabulous devices, draw men from the Scriptures.


Antile. Ah sir; I see now, a fools bolt is soon shot. You are more precise
then wise. The Vicar of Saint fools shall be your ghostly father. What tell
you me of your opinion? I would you should well know, I neither regard you, nor
your opinion. There be wiser men then you, which do both read, allow, and
take pleasure in these books.


Theol. Let him alone, good Philagathus; for you see what he is. There is no
end of his crossing, and cauilling. But he that is ignorant, let him be
ignorant. And he that is filthy, let him be more filthy. Let us now turn our
speech to Asunetus, for I see he is heavy hearted, and troubled in his mind.
How do you Asunetus? how do you feel your self? me thinks you are very
sad.


Asune. I am the better for you Sir, I thank God. I never knew what sin
meant till this day. It has pleased God now to give me some sight and feeling
thereof. I am greatly distressed in my conscience to think what I have been.
The remembrance of my former sins does strike an horror into me, when I
consider how ignorantly and profanely, and how far off from God, I have
lived all my life: it stinges and gripes me to the heart. I do now see that
which I never saw; and feel that which I never felt. I do plainly see that if
I had died in that state wherein I have lived all my life, I should certainly
have been condemned, and should have perished for ever in my sin and
ignorance.


Theol. I am very glad that God has opened your eyes, and given you the sight
and feeling of your misery, which indeed is the very first step to eternal
life. It is a great favor and special mercy of God toward you, that he has
so touched your heart: you can never be thankful enough for it. It is more
then if you had a million of gold given you. It is the only rare privilege of
Gods elect, to have the eyes of their souls opened, that they may see into
heavenly and spiritual things. As for the world, it is just with God, to leave
them in their blindness.


Asune. I do feel the burden of my sins, I am greatly grieved for them, I am
weary of them, I am sorry that ever I sinned against God, or that I should be
such a wretch as to incur his displeasure, and provoke his Majesty against me.
But I pray you good M. Theologiu, since you are a spiritual Physician, and I am
sick of sin, that you would minister unto me, out of Gods word, some
spiritual Physic, and comfort.


Theol. Truly, I must needs think that the promises of mercy and forgiveness
of sin, made in the Gospel, do belong unto you, and that Jesus Christ is
yours: you are truly interested in him, and have a proper right unto him. For
he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. You do now
feel your self to be a finner, you are grieved for your sins, you are weary
of them: therefore Jesus Christ is for you: all the benefits of his passion
belong to you. Again he says, The whole need not the Matt. 9. 12.
Physician, but they that are sick. But you do acknowledge your self to be
sick of sin: therefore Christ Jesus will be your Physician; he will swaddle you,
and lap you; he will bind up all your sores; he will heal al your wounds;
he will anoint them with the oil of his mercy; he will smile upon you, and
show you a joyful countenance; he will say unto you, your sins are forgiven.

In him you shall have rest and peace to your soul: Through him, you shall
have ease and comfort. For he takes pity of all such as mourn for their
sins, as you do. He diddeth you, and all that are in your case, to come
unto him, and he will help you. Come unto me Math. 11. 28.
(says he,) all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. You
are one of them that are bid to come: for you are weary of your sins, you
feel the burden of them. Christ is altogether for such as you are. He
regards not the world, that is, the profane and unregenerate men. He bids
not them come, he prays not for them. I pray not for the world, says he.
Ioh. 17. 9.
They have no part nor interest in him. They have nothing to do with him, nor
with his merits and righteousness. He is only for the penitent sinner, and
such as mourn for their sins. He is a pillow of down to all aching heads, and
aching consciences. Be of good comfort therefore, fear nothing: for assuredly
Christ and all his righteousness is yours. He will cloth you with it. He will
never impute your sins (...) you or lay any of the^ to your charge, though they
be never so many so or so (...) happy are you that have such a Mediator and
high Priest. Rest therefore wholly upon him, and upon that perfect, eternal,
and propitiatory sacrifice which he has once offered. Apply Christ, apply his
merits, apply the promises to your self, and to your own conscience: so shall
they do you good and bring great comfort to your soul. For put case you had a
most excellent and sovereign salve, which would cure any wound it were laid
unto; yet if you should lock it up in your chest, and never apply it to your
wound, what good could it do you? Even so the righteousness and merits of
Christ are a spiritual salve, which will cure any wound of the soul: but if
we do not apply them to our selves by faith, they can do us no good. You must
therefore apply Christ, and all the premises of the Gospel, to your self by
faith, and stand fully persuaded, that whatsoever he has done upon the Cross,
he has done for you particularly. For what is the justifying faith, but a full
persuasion of Gods particular love to us in Christ? The general and confused
knowledge of Christ and of his Gospel, avails not to eternal life. Labor
therefore to have the true use of all these great and precious promises: stick
fast to Christ, for through him only we have remission of sins, and eternal
life. To him all the Prophets give witness (says S. Act. 10. 45.
Peter) that through his name, all that believe shall receive remission of their
sins. Where the Apostle tells us, that if a graund Jury of prophets were
panelled to testify of the way and means to eternal life, they would al with
one consent bring in a verdit, that remission of sins and eternal life are only
in Christ. Let us hear the foreman speak, and one or two of the rest, for in
the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word stand. The Prophet Esaias
says: He was wounded for our Esa. 53. 5
transgressions; he was broken for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. This great Prophet we
see does plainly affirm, that Christ suffered for our sins and by his
suffering we are saved. The Prophet Jeremy testifies the same thing, saying;
Behold the days come (says the Lord) Ier. 23. 5
that I will raise unto David a righteous branch and a king shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days,
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is the name whereby
they shall call him; the Lord our righteousness. This Prophet tumpeth with the
other. For he says, that Christ is the righteous branch, and that he is our
righteousness, which is al one as if he had said, our sins are pardoned only
through him, and through him we are made righteous. Moreover he affirms, that
Judah and Israel, that is, the Church, shall be saved by him. The Prophet
Zachary, that I may speak it with reverence, tells the same tale word for
word. He avouches the same thing with the other two Prophets. For he says:
In that day a Fountain shall be opened to the house of Zach. 13. 1.
David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness.
The meaning of the prophet is, that in the days of Christ's kingdom, the
fountain of Gods mercy in Christ, should be opened, and let out, to wash away
the sins and uncleanness of the Church. So then we see, that these three
great witnesses do all agree in this, that through Christ only, we are
washed from our sins, and through him only we are made righteous. Seeing then
that eternal life is only in the son, therefore he that has the son has
life. Be of good courage therefore, O Asunetus, for no doubt you have the son,
and therefore eternal life. Fear not your sins, for they cannot hurt you. For
as all the righteousness of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the most
righteous men that ever lived upon the face of the earth, if it were yours,
could do you no good, without Christ; so all the sins in the world can do
you no hurt, being in Christ. For there is no condemnation to them which are in
Romans 8. 1.
Christ Jesus. Pluck up a good heart therefore, be no more heavy and sad; for
if you be found in Christ, clothed with his perfect righteousness, being made
yours through faith, what can the devil say to you? what can the Law do? They
may well hiss at you, but they cannot sting you: they may grin at you, but they
cannot hurt you. For who shall lay any thing to the charge of Romans 8. 33.
Gods elect? It is God that justifies; who shall condemn? It is Christ which
is dead, or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God,
and makes request for us. Rejoice Phil. 4. 4.
in the Lord therefore: and again I say rejoice. For greater is he that is in
you, then he that is in the world: our Lord Jesus is stronger then all. None
can pluck you out of his hands: he is a strong Mediator; he has conquered all
our spiritual enemies; he has over come hell, death, and damnation; he has
led captivity captive; he has spoiled principalities and powers; and has
Col. 2. 15.
made an open show of them, and triumphed over them in his cross. He has most
triumphantly said, O death, I will be thy death; O grave, I will Hos. 13. 14. 1.
Cor. 15. 55.
be thy destruction: O death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory?
Seeing then you have such a Mediator and high Priest, as has conquered the
hellish army, and subdued all infernal power, what need you to doubt, what
need you to fear any more? Moreover you are to understand, and to be
persuaded, that Gods mercy is exceeding great toward penitent sinners, and all
such as mourn for their transgressions; Ezech. 18.
according as he says: At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his
sins from the bottom of his heart, he will put them all out of his
remembrance. The Prophet David does most lively and fully describe unto us, the
merciful nature of God, in the 103. Psalm; where he says: The Lord is full
of compassion and Psalm. 103.
mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness: he will not always chide, neither
keep his anger for ever; he has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as high as the heaven is above the
earth, so great is his mercy toward those that fear him. As far as the East
is from the West, so far has he removed our sins from us. As a father has
compassion on his children; so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him.
For he knows whereof we be made; he remembers that we are but dust. The
History of the lost son does most notably set forth the wonderful mercy
of God toward penitent sinners. There is showed, how the Lord does embrace,
tender and make much of such poor sinners, as have broken and contrite hearts
for their sins: for it is said; that when the father saw his repenting son
a Luke 15.
great way off, he had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his neck, and
kissed him, and clothed him with the best robe, put it on him, put a ring on
his hand, and shoes on his feet, and caused the fat calfe to be killed for
him. Even so the ever lasting father does rejoice at the conversion of any of
his lost sons. Yea, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God, for one
sinner that conuerteth. Moreover the Lord does most lively express his
merciful nature and disposition, in this, that he is very loath we should
perish and willingly cast away our selves. Therefore often in the holy
scriptures he does mourn for us, bewail our wretchedness, and takes up many
pitiful complaints and lamentations for Psalm 81. 13.
us, saying: Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in
my ways. And again: Oh that thou had hearkened unto my commandments; then
had thy prosperity been Esaias 48. 18.
as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. Again he
mourningly complains Hos. 6. 4.
by his Prophet Hosea, saying: Oh Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? Oh Judah,
how shall I entreat thee? And in another place: What could I do more unto my
vineyard that I have not done? Mark here how compassionately the Almighty God
does yearn over us, and even as it were blee^ upon our wounds. The Apostle also
does note the rich mercy, and marvelous love of God to mankind, in this, that
he does beseech us, and pray us by the ministers of the gospel, that we would
be reconciled unto him. The words are these: Now then are we ambassadors for
Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's sted, that
you be reconciled unto God. Is it not a strange thing that the omni potent God,
should fall to entreating of us poor wretches? It is all one, as if a King
should entreat a beggar, whom he may will and command: But the abundant mercy
of God toward mankind, does most of all consist in this, that he has given
his only son for us, when we were his enemies. As it is written: God John 3.
so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son; that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Again: God sets out his love toward us, Romans 5. 8.
seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much more then
being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For
if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. In all this then we may
clearly behold the infinite mercy of God toward us poor sinners. For is it
not a great matter that the son of God should take our nature upon him,
should be so abased as he was, and should humble himself Phil. 2. 8.
to death, even to the death of the Cross? For as the shadow of the Dial went
back ten degrees that Ezechias might receive length of days, and much
happiness: so Christ, the son of righteousness, has gone back many
degrees, that we might have eternal life. His humiliation therefore, is our
exaltation: his sufferings our joy: his death, our life. For we have no other
remedy or refuge but only his merits and righteousness. He is our city of
refuge, whither we must fly and where we must take sanctuary. He is the Ier. 8.
John 5. 2.
Balm of Gilead, whereby our souls are cured. He is that poole of Bethesda,
where every man may be cured of what disease so ever he 2. King. 5
has. He is the river of Jordan, where Naaman may wash away all his Leprosy.
He is that Pelican, who by pecking a hole in his own breast, does restore his
young to life again by his blood. Yet one thing we must note by the way, which
has been partly touched before: that all the mercy of God, and merits of
Christ, are to be restrained only to the elect: only to the true members of
the Church. As plainly appears in the 103. Psalm. Where the mercies of God,
which there are largely described, are restrained only to them that fear him,
keep his covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them. And touching
Christ, it is said, that Psalm. 130. Heb. 5. 6.
he is a prince, and a Savior unto Israel: and that he shall redeem Israel
from all his iniquities. Again it is written: That Christ being consecrate,
was made the author of eternal salvation, to them that obey him. None do or
can obey him, but only the Elect: therefore he is the author of salvation
only to the Elect. And consequently, the profane world, whatsoever they say,
whatsoever they brag and boast, have no true title or interest in him. This
thing was figured in the law, in this, that the mercy seat, which was a type
of Gods mercy in Christ, and the Arc which was a figure of the Church, were by
the express commandment of God, fitted each to other, both in length and
breadth. For as the Arc was two cubits and a half Exodus 25. 10.
long, and a cubit and a half broad: just so was the mercy seat. Noting
thereby, that the mercy of God in Christ, should only be fitted to his
church, and belong only to the Church: so as not one without the Church should
be saved. For he that has not the church for his mother, cannot have God for
his father. Lastly we are to observe, that as God is infinite in mercy, and of
great compassion toward penitent sinners: so also is he most constant in the
course of his mercies toward his children. And therefore one of the Psalms
carries this foot: His mercy endures Psalm. 138.
for ever; his mercy endures for ever; his mercy endures for ever. Noting
thereby both the constancy and eternity of Gods mercy. To the same purpose it
is thus written: It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed; it is
because Lament. 3. 22.
his compassions fail not. Let us know therefore, that God, as touching his
mercy to his children, is of a most constant and unchangeable nature. As he
says: I am the Lord I change not. For if God were of a changeable nature, as
we are, and subject to passions, then were we in a most miserable case. Then
must he needs smite us down, and take vengeance of us every day and every
hour in the day: because we provoke him every day, and every hour in the day.
But the God of heaven is not as a man, that he should be subject to passions
and affections: he is of a most constant and immutable nature. For though we
provoke him every day with new sins, yet is he so far off from taking
revenge, that the next day he rewards us with new mercies, and breaks
through all our unkindness, to show kindness unto us: and through all our
naughtiness to do us good. All our infirmities cannot make him break off
with us, or cease to love us. He is content to take us with all faults: and to
love us dearly, though we have great faults. He regards not our infirmities,
though we be oftentimes waiward and eluish, yet for all that, he loves us
nevertheless. Even as a loving mother, though her young suckling cry all
night, and be exceeding treafe and weiward, so as she cannot rest an hour in
the night: yea, though she endure much loathsomeness and trouble with it, yet
in the morning, when she arises, she loves it nevertheless, but dandles it,
plaieth with it, smileth and laugheth upon it: so the God of all mercies, whose
love toward us far passes the love of mothers, though we grieve him with our
infirmities continually, yet loves us nevertheless, and is content to put up
all, to forget and forgive all: for he is a most constant lover. Where he once
sets and settles his love, he loves most constantly, nothing can alter him,
nothing can remove him, Even as a Father, when his little child catches a
fall, breaks his shinnes, and hurts his face, is so far from being offended
or displeased with him therefore, that he does pity him, and bemone him,
seeking remedies for his hurt: so our merciful Father, is so far off from
being angry and displeased with us for some slips and falls, that he does the
more pity us, and lament our case. Even as a loving and wise husband, though
his wife have many infirmities, yet knowing that she loves him dearly, and
that her heart is with him, he is well content to wink at all her faults, to
hide them, to bear with them, yea and to make nothing of them, loving her
nevertheless for them. So our dear husband and Spouse Jesus Christ, because
he knows we love him, and that he has our hearts, is content to bear with
all our infirmities, and to make light of them. For this cause it is that he
says to his Spouse in the Canticles: Though she was Can. 4. 1.
black and full of infirmities, behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art
fair, thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee. Mark that he
calls his Church fair, all fair, and without spot, not because she was so
in herself, but because she was made so in him. And assuredly the eternal God
beholding her in his son does so esteem and account of her. For as he that
beholds any thing thorough a red glass does take it to be red, as is the
color of the glass; so God the Father, beholding us in his son, does take us
to be of the same nature and quality that he is: that is, perfectly righteous.
For this cause it is that he loves us, and sets his heart upon us, and will
not be removed from us. For his love to his children, is always one and the
same: although we have not always the like sight and feeling of it. As the
Moon is always the same in substance and quantity, though sometime it seems
unto us to be wasted into a very small scantling. Let us know then to our great
comfort, that the love of God toward us in his dear son, is constant and
always alike, and that he will not discountenance us or shake us off for some
infirmities, no nor yet for many infirmities: for the merciful God does accept
of his children, because their general care is good, and the universal Tenor
of their life tends unto righteousuesse, howsoever they may greatly fail in
many particular actions. Two or three fits of an Ague, do not prove a diseased
body: nor two or three good days a sound body: even so some few infirmities
do not argue a wicked man; nor two or three good actions, a good man: but we
must have an eye to the certain and settled course of a man's life. Even as men
are truly said to walk in a way, when they go in it, although sometimes they
trip and stumble: so Gods children do walk in the way of righteousness,
although sometimes they stumble, and step out of it; or sometimes be violently
haled out of it by thieves. For Satan and the violence of our lusts, do often
hale us out of the way, but we must get into it again as soon as we are
escaped. Now then to conclude and draw to an end, since God is so infinitely
merciful, and constant in his mercy: since such great and precious promises are
made to us in Christ: since the Lord does not regard our infirmities when our
hearts are with him: Therefore O Asunetus, be of good cheer, let nothing
trouble you, fear not the assaults of the Devil, regard not his temptations:
for assuredly your sins are forgiven. Christ is yours, heaven is yours, and
all the promises of life and salvation belong unto you: so as you need not to
doubt, you cannot miscarry, your name is written in the book of life.


Asune. I am greatly comforted and cheared up with your words: your preaching
of the Gospel, and laying open of Gods abundant mercy in Christ, and of the
promises, do exceedingly revive me, and even as it were put new life into me:
they are as Sack and Sugar unto my soul, and more sweet then the honey, and
the honey comb: they are as Physic to my sick soul, and as ointment to my
spiritual wounds. I do now begin to see what misery is in man, and what
mercy is in God. And I know by woeful experience, that where misery is not
felt, there mercy is not regarded: but now it has pleased God to give me some
feeling of mine own wretchedness and misery, and yet with good comfort in his
mercy. For I thank God for it, I begin now to grow to some persuasion, that
the promises do belong unto me, my sins are forgiven, and that I am one of
them that shall be saved.


Theol. I do greatly rejoice, that God has according to his rich mercy,
wrought this good work in you. I do from the bottom of my heart give him the
praise and glory of it. Happy are you, that ever you were borne, in whom God
has wrought so gracious a work. It is of his high favor and special mercy
toward you, for it is the only privilege and prerogative royal of Gods own
children, truly to repent and believe. I beseech God therefore to increase
your faith, and to fill you full of joy and peace in believing, that you may
abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost.


Antile. The Sun draws low Asunetus, it is time for you and me to be going.


Phila. Indeed the night will approach by and by: and therefore we must of
necessity break off.


Theol. Since it is so, we will here surcease and go no further.


Asune. Sir, I will now take my leave of you. I can never be thankful enough
for all the good instructions and comforts which I have heard from you this
day; I hope I shall remember some of them whilst I live: I do therefore praise
God for you, and for your counsel, and for this day, which I hope shall be the
first day of my repentance, and true conversion unto God.


Theol. The Lord for his infinite mercies sake grant it. And I most humbly
beseech the Almighty God to establish you with his free spirit, that you may
proceed and go forward in a Christian course unto the end.


Phila. I pray you good M. Theologus pardon my boldness: for you see I have
been very bold to propound many questions unto you, wherein you have fully
satisfied me, to the great joy and comfort of my soul. I do therefore praise
God for you, and I hope I shall never forget some things which you have
uttered. But I will now commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build further.


Theol. Farewell good Philagathus. The Lord bless you, and keep you in all
your ways: and the God of Heaven preserve us all, and continue us in his fear
unto the end.


All glory be given to God.
FINIS.
A Table containing all the principal matters contained in this Book, and
directing to the Page where they are set down.
Man's natural corruption. Page 5 Man's misery in nature. 6 Man's nature
corrupted, but not destroyed by Adams fall. ibid. Some sparks of Gods Image,
still remain after the fall. 7 Man in the state of nature, cannot do any
thing that pleases God. ibid. Man naturally neither sees, nor feels his
misery. 8 Man in nature is under the tyranny of Satan, and curse of the Law.
9 Man grown to years, living and dying in the state of nature, perishes for
ever. 11 Man continues cursed till he be borne again. ibid. None can be
saved, but only the regenerate. 12 Regeneration what. ibid. The quality of
regeneration. 13 Remnants of sin after regeneration. 14 Regeneration
imperfect in this life. ibid. Means of regeneration. 23 Eight infallible
signs of salvation. 30 Eight signs of damnation. 31 Nine manifest tokens of
damnation. ibid. Pride described. 33 Pride of gifts condemned. 35 Pride in
apparel condemned. 40 Rules of the world for apparel. 49, 51 Whooredome, and
the dangers thereof. 54 Excuses of whooredome. 56 The fearful effects of
whooredome. 60 The punishment of whooredome. 56, 57 The causes of whooredome.
63 Remedies against whooredome. 67 Covetousness what. ibid. Covetousness
wherein it does consist. 68 Four notes to discern the inward covetousness of
the heart by. 69 The evil effects of covetousness. 71 The vanity of this
world, and all worldly things. 76 Excuses of covetousness. 90 Remedies against
covetousness. 97 Gods providence for his children in the things of this life.
98 For the things of this life, Gods blessing is all in all. 104 Outward means
alone do not uphold us. ibid. and 105 Gods children sometimes are brought to
great distress. 108 Gods children always sure to be delivered out of trouble.
113 The great privileges of Gods children. 116 Contempt of the Gospel, a
grievous sin. 120 Contempt of the Gospel punished. 121 Contempt of the
Gospel the sin of this age. 122 Contempt of the Gospel, a foresigne of
wrath to the Land. 130 Swearing, and the punishments thereof. 138 Excuses for
swearing. 146 Causes of swearing. 149 Remedies against swearing. ibid. Lying,
flattering, and dissembling. 150 Punishments for lying. 158. 159 Excuses of
lying. 160 Causes of lying. 161 Remedies against lying. ibid. Drunkenness, and
all the evil effects thereof. 163 Excuses of drunkenness. 167 Causes of
drunkenness. 167 Remedies for drunkenness. 168 Idleness, and the woeful
effects thereof. 174 Causes of Idleness. 179 Remedies against Idleness. 179
Oppression, a most horrible sin. 180 Many woes denounced against oppressors.
181 Sundry kinds of Oppression. 182. 183 Causes of Oppression. 197 Remedies of
Oppression. 197 Sin hurts men in their bodies, goods and name. ibid. Sin
brings great danger to the whole Land. 205 Nine predictions of wrath to the
Land. 210 The prayers and tears of the faithful, keep back the wrath of God
from the Land. 213 Prayers of the elect of great force. 214 The wicked fare the
better for Gods children. 220 The best course to prevent Gods judgments, and
to keep back his wrath from our Land. 224 Ten special things concerning
the continuance of our peace. 230 Nine signs of a found soul. 232 Saint
Peter's eight marks of salvation. ibid. Seven infallible tokens of salvation.
223 Assurance of salvation in this life proved. 352 Objections against the
assurance of salvation answered. 237. The groundwork of our salvation. 241
Some doubts may stand with the assurance of faith. 242 It is no presumption to
be persuaded of our salvation. 244 The wicked cannot be assured of their
salvation. 245 The security of salvation which the wicked brag of is vain.
247 Nine things required of all that shall be saved by Christ. 250 Many say
they hope to be saved by Christ, but few can give a reason why Christ died for
them particularly, and by name. 252 Few shall be saved: proved by scriptures,
reasons, and examples. 256 But few even in the visible Church shall be saved.
262 Objections against the small number of the elect answered. 263 Objections
of Atheists and unbelievers answered. 264 Reading of the Scriptures much
commended. 272 Deferring of repentance dangerous. 277 God no author of man's
condemnation, but himself. 278 Objections against predestination answered.
279. 280 Gods decree no cause of Adams fall. 283 The decree of reprobation
proved. 284 Prescience in God what. 285 The decree of election proved. 286
The first mouiue of election, is in God himself. 287 Foreseen faith, and
foreseen works, no motives of salvation. ibid. Faith depends upon election,
not election upon faith. 288 A reason yielded, why there is no end of cauilling
and obiecting against the truth. 292 Nine bars out of heaven. 293 Nine gates
into hell. 294 The ignorance of the world. 301 The answers of ignorant men to
the grounds of religion. 319 The means to get out of ignorance. 322 Ignorance
a most dangerous thing. 323. 324 The charge of Ministers exceeding weighty,
and most carefully to be looked unto. 328 What is the best course for Ministers
to take, to bring the people out of ignorance. 331 What is the best course for
the people to take, that they may be brought out of the bondage of sin and
captivity of Satan. 333 Preaching, a matter of absolute necessity unto
eternal life. 337 Without preaching, the people are in great danger of losing
their souls. 336 Satan's cunning in frustrating the hearing of the Word and
making all preaching utterly unprofitable. 339 The Preachers counsel to the
ignorant man. 341 Six great dangers in sin. 342 Six most fearful events of
sin. 343 God in all ages has severely punished the transgressers of his law.
344 Every sin, though never so little in our eyes, is heinous and capital,
because it is against a person of infinite majesty. 346 Nine profitable
considerations. 346 If men would leave words, and fall to doing, great good
would come of it. 348 Nine things much to be thought upon. 350 The description
of Christ's coming to judgment. 351 The terror, the suddenness, the end, the
manner, and the use of Christ's second coming described. 352, 353 The torments
of hell, with the extremity, perpetuity, and remedilesnesse thereof
described. 361 The ignorant man, upon the hearing of the day of judgment, and
hell fire laid open, is pricked in his conscience, bewaileth his former life,
repents earnestly for his sin and ignorance, and desires spiritual
Physic and comfort of the Preacher. 374 The Preacher ministers unto him much
spiritual comfort, and does in ample manner lay open unto him all the sweet
promises of the Gospel, and the infinite mercy of God in Christ, to all true,
penitent, and broken hearted sinners. 375 The ignorant man, being afflicted in
his conscience, is exceedingly comforted with the hearing of Gods abundant
mercy preached unto him, and thereupon does gather great inward peace,
conuerteth unto God with all his heart, and does exceedingly bless God for the
Preachers counsel. 391
FINIS.
A Morning prayer, to be used in private families.
O Lord our God, and heavenly Father, we thy unworthy children do here come
into thy most holy and heavenly presence to give thee praise and glory, for all
thy great mercies and manifold blessings toward us: especially for that thou
have preserved us this night past from all the dangers and fears thereof, have
given us quiet rest to our bodies, and brought us now safely to the beginning
of this day, and do now afresh renew all thy mercies upon us, as the Eagle
renews her bill, giving us all things abundantly to enjoy; as food, raiment,
health, peace, liberty, and freedom from many miseries, diseases, casualties,
and calamities which we are subject unto in this life, every minute of an
hour: and not only so, but also for vouchsafeing unto us many good things,
not only for necessity, but even for delight also. But above all (dear
Father) we praise thy name for the blessings of a better life, specially for
thy most holy word and sacraments, and all the good we enjoy thereby; for the
continuance of the Gospel amongst us; for the death of thy son, and all that
happiness which we have thereby; also because thou have chosen us to life
before we were, and that of thy mere goodness, and undeserved favor toward us,
and have called us in thine appointed time, justified us by thy grace,
sanctified us by thy spirit, and adopted us to be thine own children, and heirs
apparent to the great crown. O Lord open our eyes every day more and more, to
see and consider of thy great and marvelous love to us in all these things;
that by the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be drawn yet nearer unto
thee, even more to love thee, fear thee, and obey thee: that as thou art
enlarged toward us in mercy, so we may be enlarged toward thee in
thanksgiving: and as thou do abound toward us in goodness, so we may abou^d
toward thee in obedience and love. And since (dear father) thou art never
weary of doing us good, notwithstanding all our unworthiness and naughtines:
therefore let the consideration of thy great mercy, and fatherly kindness
toward us even as it were force our hearts, and compel us to come into thy
most glorious presence with new songs of thanksgiving in our mouths. We pray
thee (O most merciful God) to forgive us all our unthankfulness, unkindness,
prophannes, and great abusing of all thy mercies, and specially our abuse and
contempt of thy Gospel, together with all other the sins of our life, which we
confess are innumerable and mo then can be reckoned up, both in omission of
good things and commission of evil. We most humbly entreat thee to set the^
all over to the reckning which thy son Christ has made up for them upon his
cross, and never to lay any of them to our charge, but freely forget all, and
forgive all; Nail down all our sins and iniquities to the Cross of Christ,
bury them in his death, bathe them in his blood, hide them in his wounds, let
them never rise up in judgment against us. Set us free of the miseries that
are upon us for sin, and keep back the judgments to come, both of soul, body,
goods, and good name. Be reconciled unto us in thy dear son, concerning all
matters past, not once remembering or repeating unto us our old and abominable
iniquities: but accept us as righteous in him, imputing his righteosnes to us,
and our sins to him. Let his righteousness satisfy thy justice for all our
unrighteousness, his obedience for our disobedience, his perfection for our
imperfection. Moreover we humbly beseech thy good majesty to give us the true
sight and feling of our manifold sins, that we may not be blinded in them
through delight, or hardened in them through custom, as the reprobates are: but
that we may be even weary of them, and much grieved for them, laboring and
striving by all possible means to get out of them. Good Father touch our hearts
with true repentance for all sin. Let us not take any delight or pleasure in
any sin: but howsoever we fall through frailty (as we fall often) yet let us
never fall finally, let us never lie down in sin, nor continue in sin; but let
us get upon our feet again, and turn to thee with all our hearts, and seek
thee whilst thou may be found, and whilst thou do offer grace and mercy
unto us. O Lord increase in us that true and lively faith whereby we may lay
sure hold on thy son Christ, and rest upon his merits altogether. Give us
faith assuredly to believe all the great and precious promises made in the
Gospel, and strengthen us from above to walk and abound in all the true and
sound fruits of faith. Let us walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Let us feel the power of thy sons death killing sin in our mortal bodies,
and the power of his resurrection, raising us up to newness of life. Let us
grow daily in the sanctification of the spirit, and the mortification of the
flesh. Let us live holily, justly, and soberly in this present evil world,
showing forth the virtues of thee in all our particular actions; that we may
adorn our most holy profession, and shine as lights in the midst of a
crooked and froward generation amongst whom we live, being gaineful to all by
our lives and conuersations, and offensive to none. To this end we pray thee
fill us with thy spirit and all spiritual graces; as love, wisdom, patience,
contentment, meekness, humility, temperancy, chastity, kindness, and
affability: and stir us up to use prayer and watchfulness, reading and
meditation in thy law, and all other good means whereby we may grow and
abound in all heavenly virtues. Bless us in the use of the means, from day to
day; make us such as thou would have us to be, and such as we desire to be,
working in us both will and deed, purpose and power. For thou, O Lord, art all
in all, thou will have mercy upon whom thou will have mercy, and whom thou will
thou hardenest. Have mercy upon us therefore (dear Father) and never leave us
to our selves, nor to our own wills, lusts, and desires, but assist us with thy
good spirit, that we may continue to the end in a righteous course; that so at
length we may be received into glory, and be partakers of that immortal
crown which thou have laid up for all that love thee, and truly call upon
thee.

Further, we entreat thee, O heavenly father, to give us all things necessary
for this life: as food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, and such freedom
from those manifold miseries which we lie open unto every day, as thou see
meet. Bless unto us all the means which thou have put into our hands for the
sustenance of this frail life. Bless our stock, and store, corn, and
cattle, trades and occupations, and all the works of our hands: for thy
blessing only makes rich, and it brings no sorrows with it. Give us therefore
such a competency and sufficiency of these outward blessings, as thou in thy
heavenly wisdom see most needful for us. Moreover, we humbly beseech thee,
(most loving Father) in great mercy to look down from heaven upon thy whole
Church, and every member of it. Be favorable unto Sion, and build up the walls
of Jerusalem. Behold with the eye of pity, the great ruins and desolations of
thy Church. Heal up the wounds, and make up the breaches thereof in all
Nations. Regard it as thine own flock, tender it as thine own family, dress
it as thine own vineyard, love it as thine own spouse. Think thoughts of
peace to it, and always look upon it in deep compassion. Bless it with thy
grace, guide it with thy spirit, and defend it always with thy mighty power:
scatter the devises confound the counsels, and overthrow the forces of all that
fight against it. Specially we entreat thee (dear Father) to set thy self
against that antichrist of Rome, that man of perdition, which sets himself
against thee, and against all thy people. In thine appointed time we pray thee
give him a deadly downe-fall. Beat down all his power and authority daily more
and more: give free passage to thy Gospel in all kingdoms, that Babylon may
fall and never rise up again. The more the favorites and adherents of Rome
labor to uphold their Idolatrous kingdom, the more let it fall down, even as
Dagon before the presence of thine Arc. Pour down the vials of the fullness
of thy wrath upon the kingdom of the beast, and let their riches, wealth,
credit, and authority dry up every day more and more, as the river Euphrates.
Let it pity thee, O Father, to see thine own spouse sit as a deformed and
forlorn woman here below, weeping and mourning with her hair about her
neck, having lost all her beauty and comeliness: cheer her up (dear Father)
glad her with the joy of thy countenance, and so deck her and trim her up,
that thou may delight in her, as a Bridegroom in his Bride. Specially we
entreat thee to have mercy upon thy Church in this land: intend good unto us
and not evil: give us not over into the hands of the cruel Spaniard, as our
sins have deserved. Scatter we pray thee, O Lord, the devises, and break the
plots of all such as have plotted the overthrow and utter subversion of this
church and commonwealth. Bless this Church more and more, with the
continuance of true Religion amongst us. For thy great names sake, and infinite
mercies sake, deal graciously and favorably with us, and our posterity.
Turn from us that vengeance which is due to us for our sins. For thou see
how iniquity prevails and the wicked go away with the goal. Atheism
ouerspreadeth every where, and Popery seems to get a head again. Now
therefore (dear Father) we most humbly beseech thee to take order speedily for
the remedying and repressing of these manifold disorders, and grievous
enormities that are amongst us. Be entreated of thy poor children to be good
to this English Nation. Hear the cries of thine elect: hear the mourning of
them that mourn in Sion. Let the cries of thy children cry down all the cries
of the sins of the land, and be reconciled unto us in the multitude of thy
compassions: that so thou may still continue a most merciful protector of
this thine English vineyard. We pray thee (good Father) show special mercy to
our most Noble and gracious King James thine anointed servant: bless him, and
keep him in all his ways. Bless his government unto us. Let thine Angels
encampe about him, and let thy holy hand be always over him, keep him from
treasons, and deliver him from the treacheries of his enemies: give him to see
what belongs unto his peace, and give him a heart earnestlybent to set upon
the practice of the same: give him all graces necessary for his peace, and
necessary for his salvation: continue his government peaceable and prosperous
amongst us: and as thon have made him the breath of our nostrils, and a
gracious instrument for the saving of many thousand souls, so let his own
soul be saved in the day of thy Son Christ. Bless his Majesty's most
honorable privy Counselors, and give such good success unto all their
Counsels and policies in matters of state, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Bless all the Nobility, work in
them a care to glorify thy name in their places, make them faithful to thee,
and faithful to the Land. Direct with thy good spirit all such as bear the
sword of Justice, that they may draw it out to punish the wicked, and to defend
the godly, and that they may with all good care and conscience discharge the
duties of their places. Increase the number of faithful and zealous Ministers,
in this church. Send thy Gospel to those places where it is not, and bless it
where it is. Remember them in thy mercy O Lord, that are under any cross or
affliction whatsoever: be comfortable unto them, heal up their wounds, bind
up their sores, put all their tears into thy bottle, and make their bed in
all their sorrows, and put such a good end to all their troubles, that they
may redounde to thy glory, and the furtherance of their own salvation. In the
mean time give them patience and constancy to bear whatsoever it shall please
thy merciful hand to lay upon them. Last of all, in a word, we pray thee
bless magistracy, ministry, and commonalty. Bless all thy people; do good
to all that are true and upright in their hearts. And so (dear Father) we do
commit and commend our selves, our souls and bodies into thy hands, for this
day, and the rest of our life, praying thee to take care and charge of us;
keep us from all evil, watch over us for our good, let thine Angels encampe
about us, let thy holy hand be over us, and keep us in all our ways, that we
may live to thy praise and glory here in earth, keeping faith and a good
conscience in all our actions; that after this life we may be crowned of thee,
for ever in thy kingdom. Grant these things (good father) to us here present,
and to all thine absent; praying thee in special favor to remember our
friends, and kinsfolks in the flesh, all our good neighbors and welwillers,
and all those forwhom we are bound to pray by nature, by deserts, or any duty
whatsoever, for Jesus Christ's sake our only mediator; to whom with thee, and
the holy Ghost, be given all praise and glory, both now, and for evermore.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer, to be used in private families.
OEternall God, and our most loving and dear Father, wethy unworthy children
do here fall down at the foot of thy great Majesty, acknowledging from our
hearts, that we are altogether unworthy to come near thee or to look toward
thee: because thou art a God of infinite glory, and we are most vile, and
abominable sinners, such as were conceived, and borne in sin and corruption,
such as have inherited our fathers corruptions, and also have actually
transgressed all thy holy statutes and laws, both in thought, words, and
deeds, before weknew thee: and since, secretly and openly, with our selves and
with others, our particular sins are more then can be numbered: for who knows
how often he offends? But this we must needs confess against our selves,
that our hearts are full of pride, covetousness, and the love of this world,
full ofwrath anger, and impatiencie, full of lying, dissembling, and deceiving,
full of vanity, hardness, and profaneness, full of infidelity, distrust, and
self-love, full of lust, uncleanness, and all adhominable desires: yea our
hearts are the very sinkes of sin, and dunghils of all filthiness. And
besides all this, we do omit the good things we should do: for there are in
us great wants of faith, of love, of zeal, of patience, of contentment, and of
every good grace; so as thou have just cause to proceed to sentence of
judgment against us, as most damnable transgressors of all thy holy
commandments: yea such as are sunk in our rebellions, and have many times and
often committed high treason against thy majesty, and therefore thou may
justly cast us all down into hell fire, there to be tormented with Satan, and
his Angels for ever. And we have nothing to except against thy majesty for so
doing: since therein thou should deal with us but according to equity, and
our just deserts. Wherefore dear Father, we do appeal from thy justice to thy
mercy, most humbly entreating thee to have mercy upon us, and freely to forgive
us all our sins past whatsoever, both new, and old, secret and open, known
and unknowen, and thatfor Jesus Christ's sake our only mediator. And we pray
thee touch our hearts with true grief, and unfeigned repentance for them, that
they may be a matter of continual sorrow, and hart-smart unto us, so as
nothing may grieve us more then this, that we have offended thee being our
special friend and Father. Give us therefore (dear Father) every day more and
more sight and feeling of our sins, with true humiliation under the same.
Give us also that true and lively faith, whereby we may lay sure hold on thy
Son Christ, and all his merits, applying the same to our own souls; so as
we may stand fully persuaded that whatsoever he has don upon the cross, he
has done for us particularly, as well as for others. Give us faith (good
Father) constantly to believe all the sweet promises of the Gospel, touching
remission of sin, and eternal life, made in thy son Christ. O Lord increase
our faith that we may altogether rest upon thy promises which are all yea, and
Amen. Yea, that we may settle our selves, and all that we have wholly upon
them: both our souls, bodies, goods, name, wives, children, and our whole
estate, knowing that all things depend upon thy promises, power, and
providence, and that thy word does support and bear up the whole order of
nature. Moreover, we entreat thee, O Lord, to strengthen us from above, to
walk in every good way, and to bring forth the fruits of true faith in all
our particular actions, studying to please thee in all things and to be
fruitful in good works, that we may show forth unto all men by our good
conversation whose children we are: and that we may adorn and beautify our
most holy profession by walking in a Christian course, and in all the sound
fruits, and practice of godliness, and true religion. To this end we pray thee
sanctify our hearts by thy spirit, yet more and more: sanctify our souls and
bodies, and all our corrupt natural faculties, as reason, understanding, will,
and affections, so as they may be fitted for thy worship and service, taking a
delight and pleasure therein. Stir us up to use prayer, watchfulness,
reading, and meditation in thy law, and all other good means whereby we may
profit in grace and goodness from day to day. Bless us in the use of the
means, that we may daily die to sin, and live to righteousness: draw us yet
nearer unto thee: help us against our manifold wants. Amend our great
imperfections, renew us inwardly more and more, repair the ruins of our
hearts, aid us against the remnants of sin. Enlarge our hearts to run the way
of thy Commandments, direct all our steps in thy word, let none iniquity have
dominion over us. Assist us against our special infirmities, and master sins,
that we may get the victory over them all, to thy glory, and the great peace
and comfort of our own consciences. Strengthen us good father by thy grace and
holy spirit, against the common corruptions of the world, as pride, whoredom,
covetousness, contempt of thy Gospel, swearing, lying, dissembling, and
deceiving. O dear father, let us not be overcome of these filthy vices: nor
any other sinful pleasures, and fond delights, wherewith thousands are carried
headlong to destruction. Arm our souls against all the temptations of this
world, the flesh, and the devil: that we may overcome them all through thy
help, and keep on the right way to life, that we may live in thy fear, and
die in thy favor, that our last days may be our best days, and that we may
end in great peace of conscience. Furthermore, dear father, we entreat thee
not only for our selves, but for all our good brethren thy dear children
scattred over the face of the whole earth, most humbly beseeching thee to
bless them all* to cheer them up, and glad them with the joy of thy
countenance, both now and always. Guide them all in thy fear, and keep them
from evil, that they may praise thy name. In these dangerous days, and
declining times, we pray thee, O Lord, raise up nursing fathers, and nursing
mothers unto thy Church. Raise up also faithful Pastors, that thy cause may be
carried forward, truth may prevail, Religion may prosper, thy name only may be
set up in the earth, thy Sons kingdom advanced, and thy will accomplished.
Set thy self against all adversary power, especially that of Rome, Antichrist,
Idolatry, and Atheism: curse and cross all their counsels, frustrate their
devises, scatter their forces, overthrow their armies. When they are most wise,
let them be most foolish: when they are most strong, let them be most weak.
Let them know that there is no wisdom, nor counsel, power nor policy against
thee the Lord of hosts. Let them know that Israel has a God, and that thou
which art called Jehovah art the only ruler over all the world. Arise
therefore O most mighty God, and maintain thine own cause against all thine
enemies, smite through all their loins, and bow down their backs, yea let
them all be confounded, and turned backward that bear ill will unto Sion. Let
the patient abiding of the righteous be joy: and let the wicked be disappointed
of their hope. But of all favor, we entreat thee O Lord to show special mercy
to thy Church in this Land wherein we live. Continue thy Gospel amongst us yet
with greater success, purge thy house daily more and more, take away all
things that offend. Let this Nation still be a place where thy name may be
called upon; and an harbor for thy saints. Show mercy to our posterity, dear
Father, and have ^are of them, that thy Gospel may be left unto them as a most
holy inheritance. Defend us against foreign invasion, keep out idolatry, and
Popery from amongst us. Turn from us those plagues which our sins cry for.
For the sins of this Land are exceeding great, horrible, and outrageous, and
give thee just cause to make us spectacles of thy vengeance to all Nations:
that by how much the more thou have lifted us up in great mercy, and long
peace, by so much the more thou should press us down in great wrath and
long war. Therefore dear father, we most humbly entreat thee for thy great
names sake, and for thy infinite mercies sake, that thou would be reconciled
to this land, and discharge it of all the horrible sins thereof. Drown them
O Lord in thy infinite mercy through Christ, as it were in a bottomless gulf,
that they may never rise up in judgment against us. For although our sins be
exceeding many, and fearful, yet thy mercy is far greater. For thou art
infinite in mercy: but we cannot be infinite in sinning. Give us not over into
the hands of the Idolaters, left they should blaspheme thy name and say, Where
is their God in whom they trusted? But rather, dear Father, take us into thine
own hands, and correct us according to thy wisdom: for with thee is mercy,
and deep compassion. Moreover we most heartily beseech thy good Majesty to
bless our most gracious King James, and to show much mercy to him in all
things. Guide him in thy fear, and keep him in all his ways, working in his
soul unfeigned sorrow for sinue, true faith in the promises, and a great care
to please thee in all things, and to discharge the duties of his high place, in
all zeal of thy glory, and faithfulness toward thy Majesty: that as thou
have crowned him here in earth, so he (spending his days here below in thy
fear) may after this life, be crowned of thee for ever in the Heavens. We
beeseech thee also to bless his Majesty's most henorable privy Counselors.
Counsel them from above, let them take advise of thee in all things: that they
may both consult, and resolve of such courses as may be most for thy glory, the
good of the Church, and the peace of this our Commonwealth. Bless the
Nobility, and all the Magistrates in the Land, giving them al grace to execute
judgment and justice, and to maintain truth and equity. Bless all the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, increase the number of them, increase thy
gifts in them: and so bless al their labors in their several places and
congregations, that they all may be instruments of thy hand to enlarge thy
Sons kingdom, and to win many unto thee. Comfort the comfortless with all
needful comforts. Forget none of thine that are in trouble: but as their
afflions are, so let the joys and comforts of thy spirit be unto them; and so
sanctify unto all thine, their afflictions and troubles, that they may tend to
thy glory, and their own good. Give us thankful hearts for all thy mercies,
both spiritual and corporal: for thou art very merciful unto us in the
things of this life, and infinitely more merciful in the things of a better
life. Let us deeply ponder and weigh all thy particular favors toward us:
that by the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be gained yet nearer
unto thee, and that therefore we may both love and obey thee, because thou art
so kind and loving unto us: that even thy love toward us, may draw our love
toward thee, and that because mercy is with thee, thou may be feared.
Grant these things good Father, and all other needful graces for our souls
or bodies, or any of thine throughout the whole world, for Jesus Christ's sake.
In whose name we further call upon thee as he has taught us in his Gospel,
saying; Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A prayer to be used at any time, by one alone privately.
O Lord my God, and heavenly Father, I thy most unworthy child, do here in
thy sight freely confess that I am a most sinful creature, and damnable
transgressor of all thy holy Laws and Commandments: that as I was borne and
bred in finne, and stained in the womb, so have I continually brought forth
the corrupt and ugly fruits of that infection and contagion, wherein I was
first conceived, both in thoughts, words, and works. If I should go about to
reckon up my particular offenses, I know not where to begin, or where to make
an end. For they are mo then the hairs of my head, yea far more then I can
possibly feel or know. For who knows the height, and depth of his
corruption: who knows how often he offends? Thou only O Lord know my
sins, who know my heart: nothing is hid from thee, thou know what I have
been, and what I am: yea my conscience does accuse me of many and grievous
evils, and I do daily feel by woeful experience how frail I am, how prone to
evil, and how untoward to all goodness. My mind is full of vanity, my
hartfull of prophanenes, mine affections full of deadness, dullness and
drowzinesse in matters of thy worship and service. Yea, my whole soul is full
of spiritual blindness, hardness, unprofitableness, coldness, and security.
And in very deed I am altogether a lump of sin, and a mass of all misery: and
therefore I have forfaited thy favor, and incurred thy high displeasure, and
have given thee just cause to frown upon me, to give me over, and leave me to
mine own corrupt will and affections. But (O my dear father) I have learned
from thy mouth, that thou art a God full of mercy, flow to wrath and of great
compassion and kindness, toward all such as groan under the burden of their
sins. Therefore extend thy great mercy toward me poor sinner, and give me a
general pardon for all mine offenses whatsoever: seal it in the blood of thy
son, and seal it to my conscience by thy spirit, assuring me more and more
of thy love and favor toward me, and that thou art a reconciled father unto
me. Grant that I may, in all time to come love thee much, because much is
given, and of very love fear thee, and obey thee. O Lord increase my faith,
that I may steadfastly believe all the promises of the Gospel made in thy son
Christ and rest upon them altogether. Enable me to bring forth the sound
fruits of faith and repentance in all my particular actions. Fill my soul full
of joy and peace in believing. Fill me full of inward comfort and spiritual
strength against all temptatious: give me yet a greater feeling of thy love and
manifold mercies toward me, work in my soul a love of thy Majesty, a zeal
of thy glory, an hatred of evil, and a desire of all good things. Give me
victory over those sins which thou know are strongest in me. Let me once at
last make a conquest of the world, and the flesh. Mortify in me whatsoever is
carnal, sanctify me throughout by thy spirit, knit my heart to thee for ever
that I may fear thy name, renew in me the image of thy son Christ daily
more and more. Give me a delight in the reading and meditation of thy word. Let
me rejoice in the public ministry thereof. Let me love and reverence all the
faithful Ministers of thy Gospel. Sanctify their doctrines to my conscience,
seal them in my soul, write them in my heart; give me a soft and melting
heart, that I may tremble at thy words, and be always much affected with godly
sermons. Let not my sins hold back thy mercies from me, nor mine unworthiness
stop the passage of thy grace. Open mine eyes to see the great wonders of thy
law. Reveal thy secrets unto me: be open hearted toward me thy unworthy
servant. Hide nothing from me that may make for thy glory, and the good of my
soul. Bless all means unto me which thou use for my good. Bless all holy
instructions unto my soul. Bless me at all times, both in hearing and reading
thy word. Give me the right use of all thy mercies, and corrections, that I may
be the better for them. Let me abound in love to thy children. Let my heart be
very nearly knit unto them, that where thou love most, there I may love most
also. Let me watch and pray, that I enter not into temptation: give me patience
and contentment in all things. Let me love thee more and more, and the world
less and less. So draw my mind upward, that I may despise al transitory
things. Let me be so rapt and ravished with the sight and feeling of heavenly
things, that I may make a base rekoning of al earthly things. Let me use this
world, as though I used it not. Let me use it but for necessity, as meat and
drink. Let me not be carried away with the vain pleasures and fond delights
thereof. Good Father work thy good work in me, and never leave me, nor
forsake me, till thou have brought me to true happiness. Oh dear Father, make
me faithful in my calling, that I may serve thee in it, and be always
careful to do what good I may in any thing. Bless me in my outward estate.
Bless my soul, body, goods, and name. Bless all that belongs unto me.
Bless my goings out, and commings in. Let thy countenance be lifted up upon
me, now and always: cheer me up with the ioies and comforts of thy spirit:
make me thankful for all thy mercies. For I must needs confess that thou art
very kind unto me in all things. For in thee I live move and have my being: of
thee I have my welfare and good being, thou art a daily friend, and special
good benefactor unto me. I live at thy cost and charges. I hold all of thee in
chief, and I find that thou art never weary of doing me good: thy goodness
toward me is vnstanchable. Oh I can never be thankful enough unto thee for
all thy mercies, both spiritual and corporal. But in such measure as I am
able, I praise thy name for all, beseeching thee to accept of my thanksgiving,
in thy son Christ, and to give me a profitable use of al thy favors, that
thereby my heart may be fully drawn unto thee: give me O Father to be of such
a good nature, and disposition, that I may be won by gentleness and fair
means, as much as if thou gave me many lashes. Pardon all mine
unthankfulness, unkindness, and great abusing of thy mercies, and give me
grace to use them more to thy glory in all time to come. Strengthen me dear
Father thus to continue praising and glorifying thy name here upon earth: that
after this life I may be crowned of thee for ever in thy kingdom. Grant these
petitions most merciful God, not only to me, but to all thy dear children
throughout the whole world, for Jesus Christ sake: in whose name I do further
call upon thee, saying as he has taught me: O our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

FINIS.

