A Lecture or Exposition upon a part of the. v. chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. As it was read in Paul's the. 6. day of December. 1572. By Edward
Deryng.

Prepared and given for a New years gift to the godly in London and else where,
for this year. 1573.

Imprynted at London by John Awdely.

To his very loving friend Master M. F.
THe outward afflictions and manyfolde troubles of a great number of Gods
Children, whose travail and labor from day to day I had still in experience:
and the inward feeling of many wounded spirits, whose woeful sighs and bitter
mourninges I beheld in other, and had tried in my self, it made me very
desirous to seek for remedies, to stop the complaints of so grecuous cryings,
and to prepare our hearts in a strong defense, that the firye darts of the
Devil might not wound us. Upon this occasion, when I had to expound that place
of the Apostle, full of notable comfort: That Christ in the days of his flesh
offered up prayers and supplications to him that was able to save him from
death, with strong cryinges and with tears, and was delivered from the things
he feared: I tarried the longer in that matter, and declared more at large, what
great boldness and assurance of hope was offered here unto all that should obey
the word. Which when I had done, as God gave me utterance, the poor in
spirit, to whom I applied my self, one or two required me to set it down in
writing, that it might be profitable to many, which was comfortable to them. I
durst not reject such a good request, but though some time I differred it, yet
I never forgot it, till I had written all as I was required. Which when I had
done, I purposed then with my self to make it yet more common, and set it
abroad in print: Knowing assuredly, where God would give it increase, it
should bring forth the fruit of consolation, that we might stand vpryght in
the day of evil.

Thus having performed both the request of other, and mine own desire, and the
time falling out with the beginning of a new year, I thought it not amysse,
to offer my labor unto you, who (I know well) would accept it as a New years
gift, though of no great price, yet of great good will, and though easily
obtained, yet not little to be esteemed. And therefore my dear brother, whom I
love in Christ, and reverence in the world, as many ways I have cause, so I
offer it unto you. The Lord for his mercies sake work his own good pleasure,
that I may have of you the fruit that I desire, and you the grace that you
stand in need of: that as God has greatly blessed you, and made you abound in
many graces, to the glory of his name, the comfort of your friends, and the
benefit of his people: so your joy, that it might be made perfect, you might
also abound in this, to have a strong faith against the day of trial: Which
God of his mercy will surely grant unto you, and finishe the good work that
he has begone. Though I love not to speak fair for fear of slatterie* and
deceitful praises I see what mischief they breed, yet I fear not to bear
you wytnes of your well doing: the spirit of God has planted humility more
deep in your breast, then that pride and arrogancy can pull it out. And in
deed the better you are, the more effectually you do see your own unworthiness,
that all your righteousness is as a defiled cloth: and the more you approach unto
God, the more you abhor your self, and know that in your flesh there dwells
no goodness.

Abraham our father, Job, Esaias and many other* men of excellent virtue, in the
sight of God they have been all astonished, to see how their righteousness has
been scattered away as the clouds of the heavens. Paul cries out: O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? But
because we have an enemy that spares not to display all our corruptions
before our eyes, to the end he might make us despair, therefore we may be
bold to the strengthening of our hope, to set before us again the spiritual
graces that work within us, to assure our selves that we be borne of God. So
our Savior Christ praised many that believed on him, so did his Apostels, so
may we. And our heavenly father will ratefie and confirm our words, when we
speak the truth according to the measure of faith that every one has
received. So S. John byddeth us all be bold, and not be deceived: He that does
the things that are righteous him self is righteous, and like unto Christ in
whom he is sanctified.

So may I say unto you, the grace of God has wrought happily in you, in these
years and condition of life, that so unfeignedly you have sought the Lord. It
can not be of your self, who are not able so much as to think a good thought,
but it is of him whose seed abides in you. And although, because you have
that treasure in a brittell vessel, you see sometime the fruit of old ^dam,
and the pricks of his transgression within your bowels, yet fear not his
malice that has wrought this woe. You are bought with dearer price, then that
syn may raygne again within you, and he that has purchased you, he will not
so suffer his enheritaunce to be spoiled. It is necessary you should know your
sin, or you could not understand how great were your redemption. But your
sins cannot separate you away from him, who has buried them in the earth,
and will not see them any more. When you shall ascend to come into his sight,
the earth will hold her own, and keep your sins behind you. The pearcing
Serpent shall not clyme to accuse you, nor the crooked Serpent shall hyde your
redemption from you. Your care is cast upon him that cares for you, and you
know him who has spoken: All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
You know him who has a name above all names, that in the name of Jesus all
knees shall bow: Even he has bought you with a price, and you are not your
own. If it be possible for you to perish, then is it possible again that
Christ should suffer injury.

This boldness you have through him who has made manifest his grace unto you,
that you denying impiety and worldly concupiscence, should live soberlye,
purelye and godly in this present life, and look for the blessed hope that
shall be revealed, when all secrets shall be opened. To which issue and happy
end of life, the Lord bring both you and yours in the fellowship of his
Saints to praise his holy name, when he shall make unto you his glory
unspeakable, and crown it with immortality. AMEN.

Fare well in Christ Jesus, and pray for me. The. 26. of Dece^ber. 1572. Yours
in the Lord to command. Ed. De.

An exposition of a part of the. v. Chapter to the Hebrews, as it was read in
Paul's the. vj. day of December. 1572. By Edward Dering.
Hebr. 5.7. Which in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him, that was able to save
him from death, 8 was also heard in that which he feared. And though he were
the son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered 9 And
being consecrate was made the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that
obey him.


THe Apostle in this chapter begins to prove our Savior Christ to be ye
only hie Priest of the new Testament. And because the people of Israel had so
great affiance in the Priesthood of Aaron, that they could hardly be drawn
away from the deteining of it, thine-king assuredly that unto that priesthood
the law and testimonies of God had been tied for ever: and not knowing that all
the Ceremonies of the law were ordained until the time of reformation, in
which Christ should appear and change that Priesthood, to become him self
unto us a Priest of a better Testament, therefore ye Apostle first sets forth
the properties of the Priesthood according unto the law, and after by
comparion applies the^ unto Christ, in who^ they al shine in a much more
excellent sort then before in Aaron, and therefore it cannot be neither breach
nor dishonor unto the law of God nor the Priesthood of it, if the shadow and
the figure, which was Aaron, should now be taken away, and the body and the
truth, which is Jesus Christ, should be established for ever.

The properties which the Apostle speaks of, necessarilye appertayning unto
every Priest, as unto one that must be a Mediator, are these: that first he
should be man as we are, as Aaron and his posterity were. For neither Angel,
nor Archangel, nor principalities, nor powers can do this work, to present
flesh and blood unto the majesty of God, when them selves are but Spirits: And
therefore Christ, that he might be hye Priest, took not an Angels nature, but
was made of the seed of Abraham, like unto us, that as there is but one God,
so there might be but one Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ
Jesus, in this respect as able to be hie Priest as Aaron him self, being as
naturally and as truly clothed with our flesh, as Aaron was.

The second property of the Priest is, that he should be ordained, not only
for him self to make his own atonement, but also for other men, to
accomplish whatsoever was between God and them, that where they were before
enemies and strangers, they might by him be reconciled, and have free access
unto the throne of grace, to find mercy and succor in due time. And for this
cause Christ alone is a perfect priest, more excellent the^ Aaron, who was
encombred with his own sins, to make first reconciliation for them, and
therefore could not profit other. And as this was the Priests office to be a
Mediator for other, so the means he must use, and the mediation to be wrought
in this work, was to offer up gifts and sacrifices for syns: that is, to
present unto God the sacrifice of righteousness, pure and holy in his sight, in
which he might be pleased, and the sins of the people might be taken away.
The which sacrifice, because it must be so pure, that in it they for who^ it
was made must be sanctified, and so precious, yt it must be a sufficient
purchase to redeem man from al transgression: therefore it could not be made
with ye blood of Calves or Goats, which cannot take away sin, nor with gold
nor silver, which cannot redeem our Souls, nor with meats and drinks, which
profited not them that were exercised therein, nor in any such carnal rites,
for which the Priesthood of Aaron was ordained: and therefore an other Priest
must make this sacrifice, which cannot be any other then Jesus Christ, who being
made hye Priest of the good things to come, by a greater tabernacle, and a
more precious sacrifice, even by his own blood has obtained for us an
everlasting redemption, and therefore is now to be acknowledged our only
Priest, the first Priesthood and the first law being altogether abrogated.

One other property of the Priesthood is, that none thrust in him self being
not appointed, nor take unto him self this honor, being not called unto it.
And God ever showed him self a ready revenger against all such as should
defile his Priesthood, to take to them selves the dignity to which they were
not appointed. But this calling also was given unto Christ from God his Father,
as before unto Aaron, both by word and by oath, that no flesh should resist it,
even as it is written: The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech: So that in this behalf, our
says must be ever strong, that the calling of Christ is of the Lord, even as
the calling of Aaron was: and with so much the greater judgment it shall be
rejected, because it was confirmed with an oath.

The last property in this comparison is, that the hye Priest of the law
should have an inward compassion toward them that were ignorant and were
deceived: in which perfect knot of unfeigned love, his ministry was accepted of
God, and his sacrifices received and accounted holy. And lest he should cast
from him this brotherly affection, God printed in his own body the infirmities
of his brethren, that according to the measure of grace which he had receued,
he might in deed be moved with his brothers harms, as with his own: So that
he did not withdraw him self from the service of the Sanctuary, but put on
the holy garments, was anointed with the holy oil, bare the names of his
brethren before the Lord, presented their sacrifices, abstained from wine and
strong drink, mourned not for his friends that were departed, taught
diligently the people, prayed for their transgressions, and bare the burden of
his people, as God had laid it upon him.

But yet this property exceeded more in Christ then in all the tribe of Levy,
and the bowels of all compassion were more large within him; then the utmost
branches of it in any other creature. And this the Apostle notes in this
place which now we have in hand, in which we may see as in a most lively glass,
the perfect beutye of all excellent love. The things they were not light, nor
the sorrows small, nor the sighinges few in number, nor the prayers faint, nor
the anguish of spirit little, nor the death easy, by which he has sealed it
unto us, that he had compassion on his people, but as the Apostle says: In
the days of his flesh, while he was here clothed in mortality, like unto one
of us, to the end he might be faithful for our sakes, he did offer up prayers
and supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save
him from death, and was also heard in the things which he feared. And being him
self the son, yet he learned obedience by the things which he suffered, and
being consecrate, was made the author of eternal salvation to them that obey
him.

These words my dear brethren, we have now in hand, to search and examine
what ye spirit teaches us, so much the more carefully to be harkned unto of
us, how much the more plainly it sets forth unto us the great love and
compassion that Christ bears toward us. Two things especially here the
Apostle testifies: First the sufferinges of our savior Christ, and then the
benefit that we enjoy by the same, according as his sufferinges were only for
our sake. His sufferinges what they were, and how great sorrow oppressed him, he
shows by those effects which his sorrows brought forth, that is, prayers,
supplications, cryinges, tears, fear, and anguish of spirit, which things
waited ever upon him, even to the accomplishing of all his passions, which was
the death of his cross. The fruit that we do reap of those afflictions which
he suffered, is the salvation of our souls and eternal life, if we will obey
him.

In this description of his sufferinges, though the things are set forth which
were common and usual unto him al his life, yet it appears especially the
Apostle means that greatest conflict of sorrow which he had a little before his
passion, described by the Evangelists, in all similitude like unto this which
the Apostle here declares. For as it is here said: he made prayers, noting by
the word that they were many in number: so it appears in the Gospel, yt
beside other prayers, three times he repeated this one: ^^th 26
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And as it is said, he
made supplications, humblyng him self low under the hand of his Father: so it
is said in the Gospel, that the^ he kneeled down, fell upon his face, and so
prayed unto God. Luk 41.
And as the cause of his prayers is here mentioned, to be delivered from death:
so the words of his prayer in the Gospel are like: Father, if it be possible,
let this cup pass from me: meaning the death of his cross to which he was
condemned. And as here is mentioned his great and loud crying: so there the
Evangelist says, he cried out with a loud voice: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And like as here is said, he prayed with weeping teates: so
there is witnessed, that he was sorrowful and grievously troubled, that his soul
was heavy even unto death, and that in a great agonye his sweat was like unto
drops of blood. A woeful kind of weeping, but such was his compassion, that we
might have sure hope. And as here is said, he was delivered from his feate: so
at that time when all his spirits were troubled, the Angel came from heaven
to bring him comfort.

These similitudes they are all so agreeable, that it is evident the Apostle
respected especially above other, this part of his passion, in which his
perfect love and unchangeable affection toward us, shined in most fulness of
beuty, in that it was so fervent and so deeply rooted, that neither fear, nor
trembling, nor any anguishe of spirit could make it shake, nor the force of
death, nor any bloody sweates could pull it out of his bowels.

In this one sentence (dearly beloved) there is more for us to learn, then
either eye has seen, or ear has heard, or all flesh in this life shall
attain unto. It is the deapth of the glorious Gospel, which the Angels do
desire to behold. But to note unto you somethings in which our faith may be
strengthened, we have to learn by the example of our savior Christ in this
place, that in all temptacions we should approach unto our God, and make our
complaints unto him, who is only able and ready for to help us. He has not
forgot his promise that he has made of old: Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble, Psa. ^
and I will deliver thee. He is a place of refuge, and of sure defense, a
strong tower against al assaults. The ryghteous man that shall hasten unto him,
he shall be surely saved. The author and finisher of our faith, he is gone
before us: we shall be surely partakers of the same mercy. It skilleth not how
great our te^ptacions ar into which we are fallen, nor how many in number, the
Lord will deliver us out of all. It skilleth not how many one sins are, nor
how great in our eyes, that have procured out troubles, the Lord will scatter
the^ as the clouds from the heavens, and they shall not turn away his loving
countenance from us. Let us look on this pattern Jesus Christ that is set
before us. It would crush our flesh in pieces, to bear with him the wayght of
his afflictions, from which he was delivered: and it would make our tears to
be as drops of blood, to be partakers of so great anguish of spirit as he
sustained, and yet it was not so great, but the comfort of the Angel sent from
his Father, was much greater: So that by prayer he obtained a most excellent
victory, and has bruised the Serpents head, and broken all his force. And why
should we then be discouraged? If our syns be as crimosin, or if they be red
like scarlet, yet they are the syns of our own bodies: but not ours only, but
also the sins of the world, they rested all upon Christ our Savior, and yet
he prayed for delyuerance, and has obtained: and therefore we may say with
boldness: Forgive us our trespasses. If the love of Christ were so great to
bear the syns of us all, and of them every one has gotten forgeuenes, how
should not we that are laden with our own syns lift up our heads into great
assurance of hope, and hear with joy fulness the word of promise: I will be
merciful to their unrighteous, Heb ^
and I will remember their syns and their iniquities no more.

And what though our afflictions are exceeding many, that the whole head be
sick, and the whole heart be heavy: that from the sole of our foot unto our
heads there be nothing whole in our bodies, but al wou^des and swellings, and
sores full of corruption, yet all this is nothing unto his passions, by whole
stripes we are healed. And these troubles are nothing unto his mighty
cryinges, who was compassed about for our sakes with fears and horrors, til
his sweat was as drops of blood, and his bones bruised in his flesh. Then let
the whyps and scourges of our chasticement be grievous, and let us yet be
beaten (if the will of God so be) with Scorpions, Christ in great compassion
suffering with our infirmities* has borne yet a more heavy weight of
iniquities, and has been delivered. So that if we obey, we are partakers of
his mercies, and we have full persuasion, that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor deapth, nor any other event are shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yea, and greater
boldness then this if it be possible to dwell within us, the Apostle here has
offered it in Christ Jesus. If all the syns were upon him, and all sorrows in
his flesh, and yet from them al God has heard his prayers, why should we not
be sure that our syns and sorrows they shall be done away? Why should we not be
sure that God him self has appointed unto all that mourn in Syon (as the
Prophet says) to give unto them beutye for ashes, the oil of joy for
mournyng, the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heauynes? Let us therefore
be bold dearly beloved, for he was wounded for our transgressions, and broken
for our iniquities, the chasticement of our peace was upon him. These prayers
are ours, these supplications for us, auailable for more sins then we are able
to commit. This is our victory that shall overcome the world, even our faith.
In all miseries and multitudes of woe, we are not sonken so deep in sorrow as
he that for our sakes made prayers and supplications, with strong cryinges and
with tears, and was delivered from his fear.

The second point that we have here to learn in this example of our Savior
Christ, is to know unto whom we should make our prayers in the day of trouble,
which the Apostle testifies in these words: that Christ made his prayers unto
him that was able to save him from death. A rule to be kept of us in all manner
of our peticions and supplications whatsoever, to make them known unto him
that can grant our request, that is, unto God. This rule was kept of the
Church of God from the beginning. When men were once turned from their Idols,
^n 4.26
then in all their prayers they began to call upon the name of ye Lord. And God
him self at no time does more sharplye reprove his people, then when they
would ask of those that had no power to help them. This lesson that poor
Leaper so defiled in flesh, had yet humblye learned, and with a pure heart he
prayed accordingly: Lord, if thou wylt thou can make me whole. Man 14.
Upon this foundation our savior Christ has built up all the prayers of his
true Disciples, adding it as a special clause unto the prayer that he taught
them: For thine is the kingdom, Man 10.
the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then let us learn, so many as will pray in spirit, to make our prayers unto
him alone, who is able to save us. It is the sacrifice of ye new Testament that
he has appointed us, that we should offer up unto him and not unto other, the
fruit of our lyps, which may confess his name. And because this doctrine has been trodden down under feet, and defited by the man of syn with all spiritual
uncleanness, I beseech you add unto this, one reason or two more, that you may
answer the adversary, and be able to stand in the day of evil. When our
savior Christ was purposed to teach his Disciples a true form of prayer, and
a perfect pattern unto which they must frame their peticions (or it is
impossible they should be accepted) he teaches them that their beginning must
be from hence: Our Father which art in heaven. What blessyng so ever we would
have, or from what plague so ever we would be delivered, he alone must be the
person of who^ we crave, to whom this name and calling does belong: Our Father
which art in heaven. If this name be none of his, he is no Patron to be
called on: or if we will needs call upon him, we give him this name whether it
be his or no. Christ is our good warrant, who has made this the beginning of
al christian prayer: Our Father which art in heaven. Therefore the Idolaters of
all ages, that have made the^ selves Saints to pray unto, according to the
number of their prayers, so they have multiplied their Idols, and the Children
of God, to whom they have sacrificed, they shall wytnes against them in the day
of Christ. And you my dear brethren, against all your enemies defend thus the
holiness of your prayer, that you know no other way of speaking, then as you
are taught: Our Father. Add yet unto this one reason more, which you learn of
S. Paul, and I doubt not but you shall be well established in this present
truth.

We know al and do confess, that we are able to do no good thing of our
selves, but all our sufficiency is of God: we are not able so much as to
think a good thought. Yea, the very wisdom of the flesh is enmity unto all
ryghteousnes: so true it is that the Prophet says: Every man is a beast in
his own understanding. And how much less then are we able to offer up unto
God that most precious sacrifice of prayer and thanks geuyng, to make it
acceptable in his sight, if we consult with our own flesh and blood, and after
the will of man so make our prayers unto God? We must needs acknowledge our own
infirmities, and confess with S. Paul, that we know not what to pray as we
ought, but it is the spirit of God that makes request for the Saints,
according to the will of God: and in this holy spirit alone we must pray, if we
look for ye mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life. The spirit that
bears rule in our heart, he must teach us althinges, or else we can do
nothing that God aloweth. Now the voice of this spirit that always sounds
within us, it speaks not thus, either Sancta Maria, or Sancta dei genitrix,
neither S. Paul pray for us, nor S. Peter pray for us. These are but the
spicinges of the dronken cups of Rome, the sou^des of words which the spirits
of errors have blown. But the holy spirit of God, that teaches us how to
pray, it cries thus in our hearts, Abba, Pater, Our Father which art in
heaven. As Christ him self has been our scoolemaister of no other prayer, so
the spirit that he has given us, it knows no other sound, but Abba Father:
these are the beginninges of our prayers. If we speak not unto him, to whom
do we bow our knees? If we will make the spirit subject to any other, let us
take heed that we grieve not the holy spirit of God, (...). 4.30
by which we be sealed against the day of redemption. Thus much I have added to
the example of our savior Christ, who made his prayers to his Father, who
alone could deliver him, yt he might the more assuredly be bold to abide in his
steps.

It follows in the text: with great cryinges, and with tears. Here we have
to note in what measure our savior Christ was afflicted, eue^ so far, that he
cried out in this bitterness of his soul. This the Evangelists do express in
more words, testifiyng of him, (...), that he was greatly afraid, all together
astonished, eue^ fainting for great anguish of mind, and full pensive sorrows.
For his father had broken him with one breaking upon an other: so he kyndled
his wrath against him, and accounted him as one of his enemies. The heavy hand
of God was so grievous upon him, that it bruised his very bones, and rent his
raines asunder, he could find no health in his flesh, but was wounded unto
death as without recouerye. The Evangelist him self bears witness of this
miserye, addyng unto his loud crying this sound of words: My God, my God why
have thou forsaken me? This sorrow, because it was not as waged with words, he
cried out alowd, and because in silence he could find no case, his face was
wrinckled with weeping, and the shadow of death was upon his eyes. For what
grief could be like unto this? Or what condemnation could be so heavy? when
there was no wyckednes in his hands, and when his prayer was pure, when he was
the brightness of glory, and the sun of ryghteousnes that shined in the
world: yet as it were to see his days at an end, and his enterprises broken,
his careful thoughts to be so deep graven in his breast, that they changed
even the day into night unto him, and all light that approached in to darkness,
this was a sorrow above all sorrows. When his excellency was such above all
creatures, that the world was not worthy to give him breath, yet he to be
made a woorme, and not a man, a shame of men, and the contempt of the people,
all that saw him to have him in derision, and to shut up his life in shame and
reproaches, so unworthy a reward of so precious a servant: how could it but
shake all his bones out of joint, and make his heart to melt in the myddest of
his bowels? How could his strength not be dried up like a potshard, and his
tou^g not cleave unto the jaws of his mouth? Who has been ever so full of woe,
and who has been brought so low into the dust of death? His virtues were
unspeakable, and righteous above all measure: yet was he accounted among the
wicked. His temperancie in perfect beutye, and his appetites bridled with all
holy moderation: yet they said of him, behold a glutton and a drinker of wine.
His behavior honest, without al reproof and his conversation unspotted: yet
they sclaundred him as a friend of Publicans and sinners, and reported him as
a companion of thieves. He loved the law of his father with such fulness of
desire, that he would not suffer one jot, nor one title unaccomplished: and
yet they accused him as an enemy unto Moses, a breaker of the law, a
subuerter of the Temple, and a teacher of new doctrines, such as were not of
God. He harkened unto his Father in all humility, and loved him with all his
heart, and with all his soul, so that he was obedient unto him unto death, yea
even the death of the cross: yet they said of him presumptuously that he
blasphemed, and robbed God of his honor. He was an enemy of Satan even unto
death, and by death over came him that brought death into the world, he hated
him with so perfect hatred, and held steadfast the enmity that was between
them, until he had spoiled his principalities and powers, and triumphed over
them in an everlasting victory: yet horribly they reproched him by the naine
of Beelzebub, said he had a devil, and by the power of Satan he wrought all
his miracles. O the depth of all abominations, and the bottomless pyt of al
uncleanness. Who could once have thought so lothsom a sincke to have been covered
in the heart of man? O God, ryghteous in judgment, and true in word, is this it
that the Prophet has told before, that the thoughts of many hearts should
be made open? Then create we beseech thee, Luke ^ 38.
new hearts within us, and take not thy holy spirit for ever from us.

And you dearelye beloved, if these were the causes that Christ had to
complain, then think not that his cryinges were above his sorrow, to see so
nere unto his heart, even in his own person, innocence blamed, virtue defaced,
ryghteousnes trodden down, holiness profaned, love despised, glory contemned,
honor reviled, all goodness shamed, faith onpugned, and life wounded to death.
How could he yet abstain from strong crying and tears, when the malice of
Satan had gotten so great a conquest? If just Lot, dwelling among the
Sodomites, and seeing and hearing such a wicked people, 2 Pet ^
vexed from day to day his righteous soul with their ungodly deeds: what shall
we think of Christ living in such a generation? But O my brethren, beloved of
the Lord, open the eyes of your faith, and you shall see these things they were
but the begynnings of sorrow. What shall we think was his grief of mind for ye
Jews his brethren, that were thus poured out unto wickedness? How did his great
love boil in sorrows of heart, to see their destruction? If Moses, when he
beheld the anger of God against his people, in great compassion of their
miseries, prayed earnestly unto the Lord: (...) 32.33
Forgive them O God, or raze me out of ye book that thou have written: If
Ieremye in foreseing the captivity of Jerusalem, had so great grief that he
cried out: O that my head were full of waters, (...) 9.2.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
flaine of the daughter of my people: If Esaias in like abundance of love
bewailed his brethren that would needs perish, with these words of complaynt:
Esa. 2^^
Turn away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because
my people perish: If Paul that most excellent Apostle, having received but his
portion of the great love of Christ, called God to witness, that he spoke the
truth, Rom ^
how he had great heauynes and continual sorrow of heart for his brethren, and
that for their sakes him self wished to be separate from Jesus Christ: what
manner of tears shall we think were those which Christ him self poured our
when he wept over Jerusalem? Luke ^
what sorrow of mind, which then interrupted his speeches, and made the^
imperfect? How deep was that angry grief printed in his bowels, when he
beheld the blindness of his people, and was sorrowful for them? Mark ^
What manner of affliction was it, yt in the midst of so great reproaches and
mockes could never be changed, but prayed still: Father, forgive them, ^^ke 23.
they know not what they do? If it be grievous unto us to lose the thing that
is most dear unto us in this earthlye tabernacle, how much more did this
sorrow pearce even through the bowels of our savior Christ, to see man taken
from him unto destruction, for whose sake he would so willynglye sacrifice up
his life? This is an other spectacle in which we may behold his great dolor
and anguish, to know the pains he endured, and the causes of his mighty
cryinges.

But this also dearelye beloved, though it were exceeding, yet it was not all,
no it was but a taste of grief in comparison of the rest. Behold if you can,
his person here, and see the residue, and so you shall know ye love of God. His
grief was exceeding, to see all virtue and godlynes so trodden vnderfeete: and
it was yet more infinite to behold Satan to prevail against man, to his
everlasting condemnation. No creature could ever bear such a perct image of a
man of sorrow. But the height and depth of all miseries, it was yet behind: the
sin that he hated, he must take it upon his own body, and bear the wrath
of his Father that was poured out against it. This is the fulness of all pain
that compassed him round about, which no tou^g is able to utter, and no heart
can conceive. This anger of his father it burned in him, even unto the botome
of hell, of the which anger ye Prophet speaks: Nahu^.
Who can stand before his wrath, or who can abide the fearcenes of his wrath?
His wrath is poured out like fire, and the rocks are broken before him. When
the Prophet was not able to conceive the weight of his anger, and his voice
cleaued unto his mouth when he went about to utter it, the hardest of all
creatures he took for example, that the hard rock did cleave asunder at the
sound of his words: And as is said in an other place, such a voice as makes
the forlorn wilderness to tremble: (...). 29.8.
A voice so full of terror in the ears and hearts of the wicked, that the
sun shall be darkened at the sound of it, and the Moon shall not give her
light, the Stars of the heaven shall fall away, and the powers of heaven shall
be shaken. No creature at all shall yield his service unto them, the elements
of the world shall seem to melt away.

This state of misery Christ entered into, and soonke down deep in this
confusion, and who can express his sorrow? Being full of goodness, he had the
reward of evil: Full of obedience, he was punished as wicked: Full of faith, yet
had the reward of a sinner: Inheritour of al things, and Lord of all: yet
nothing at all to do him duty: The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, yet made
an outcast and abject of ye people: The ruler of all, and God of glory, yet
compassed with shame and great confusion: The author of life, yet wrapped in
the chains of eternal death: The onel^^ begotten of his Father, and his best
beloved, yet cast off as a stranger, and chasticed as an enemy: The brightness
of glory, and the beutye of the h^ghest heavens, yet crucified in dishonor,
and thrown down into hell. O picture of perfect wretchedness, and image of
misery: how just cause found he to cry out alowde: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? His whole body and nature like unto us, altogether broken
with the reward of syn: his soul poured out into all calamity: the wrath of
his father and condemnation resting upon him. How truly may we here say and
confess the article of our faith: He descended into hell? How lively do we see
it performed that the Prophet speaks of: The snares of death compassed me,
and the pains of hell took hold upon me: (...) 9.3
I found trouble and sorrow. This was the compassion that he had toward us, by
which he suffered with our infirmities more then Aaron, or all the Priests of
the law could possibly have done for us. If we could possibly consider dearly
beloved as we should, we would gladly embrace him as ye hie Priest for ever of ye
new testament: and when we shall be made of one fashion with him through some
measure of his afflictions to feel the weight of our own syns, then we shall
confess what cause he had of complaining, and how dearly he has bought the
honor of the hye Priest and Mediator. The Lord lighten the eyes of our mind,
that with open countenance we may behold him, who for our sakes endured such a
death of the cross: We should not then need many exhortations, the
remembrance of the latter end would keep us safe from syn. But let us now see
what the Apostle further teaches us, and while our savior Christ is in these
great extremities, what fruit of well doing he has learned by it.

It follows: And although he were the Son, yet learned he obedience by the
things he suffered. Lo, dearly beloved, this was no little profit of al his
troubles. He learned thereby how, and what it was to obey his father, that when
these things rested all upon him, and yet he could say in meekenes of spirit:
Not my will my father but thy will be done* he might have great boldness yt his
obedience was perfect. The shame of the world, the a^flictions of the flesh,
the vexations of the mind, the pains of hell, when these could make him utter
no other words, but Father as thou wylt, so le^ it be done: what hope, what
faith did he surely build on, that his obedience was precious in the sight of
his father? This example is our instruction. We know then best how we love the
Lord, when we feel by experience what we will suffer for his sake. It is an
easy thing to be valiant before the combat, or to dream of a good courage
before the heart be tried: but indeed to be unshaken in the mydst of the
tempest, and to stand vpryght when the ground under thee does tremble, this is
to know assuredlye thou art strong in deed, and to say with boldness, thou
shall never be moved. This our Savior Christ might thoroughly glory of. The
heaven, earth and elements they were all his enemies: his Father in who^ he
trusted, showed him an angrye countenance. He that faints not, but cries
still: Thy will be done O Father, he may be bold of his obedience: there is no
creature can make him falsify his faith. If this be the fruit of our
afflictions, the Apostle speaks not without great occasion: Account it for an
exceeding joy, when ye fall into sundry troubles. For what can be more joyful
unto the soul that is oppressed, then to have this in experience, ye neither
height nor deapth shall remove him from the Lord.

The glory of Abraham was exceeding great when he had sealed it with practice,
Gene. ^
that he would forsake his country and his kindred, and his fathers house, at
the commandment of God, to go whether he would show him. Then he knew by good
proof he was made worthy of Christ, when he could forsake Father, Mother,
house, land, and all things, to come unto him. The patience of Job was not
throughlye known, till all his goods were spoiled, and he left exceeding
^are, in that case when he spoke so boldly: Naked came I out of my mothers
womb, (...) 2.
and naked shall I return again, the Lord has given, the Lord has taken away,
as the Lord will so is it done, the name of the Lord be praised for ever. Now
might Job be sure of the strong patience which should bring forth hope that
never should be confounded.

Our brethren before us, which so constantly have holden the profession of
their faith that the flames of fire could not make it waver, they had a good
witness that their election was sure, when they might speak by experience, that
neither life nor death could remove them from the love of God. Thus the good
ground is known what it is, when the heat cannot scortch it, nor brears and
thorns turn the good corn into weeds, but through all storms it will give
nourishment to the seed, till it give greater increase to Gods honor and
glory. The best of us all let us thank God for this profitable experience, for
before it come unto us, we know not how great the rebellion of the flesh will be.

The Apostels of Christ they bragged not a little, that they would never
forsake their Master Christ, he alone had the words of eternal life, and they
would not change him for an other: They believed him, they knew him to be
Christ the son of the living God, and there was no other Savior. But when
they saw the swords and staves, the rulers offended, the people in an uproar,
the cross at hand: their courage fell down, they forsook him all, and fled
away. Peter was not a little stout, as him self was persuaded: he would never
forsake Christ, though he should dye for his name, and for proof of his
courage he drew his sword, and stroke so ve^terously, that he had almost
slain one. He seemed to be at a point, and fully resolved, that he would not
leave his Master, till the sword should divide them: but alas, this boldness was
but a blast of words. When there was no remedy but Christ must be had to
Caiphas, Peter began to faint, and to draw behind. When the peril was more
increased, and they began to cry Crucifige, Peter was more afraid and began to
swear he knew him not. So great infirmity is in mortal flesh: experience is
the greatest warrant to know what it can bear. It is our bounden duty, and
the Lord requires it, that we should determine with our selves in all
things, to approve our selves the witnesses of his Gospel in patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in stripes, in tumultes, in labors, in
watchinges, in fastings, in honor, in dishonor, in good report, in shame, in
life, in death: and our comfort is great, when we be persuaded of these
things, that we would contemn them. But how violently the flesh will fight
against us, we can not well declare, till we have made the trial.

We therefore dearelye beloved, whom it has pleased God so keep in heaviness
through many temptations, we have here a salve against the wounds of sorrow.
Our afflictions do teach us how far we can obey the Lord. If in all grief of
body I can say with patience: I have held my peace O Lord because thou have
done it: then I know that in all sorrows of flesh. I have glorified God and my
heart rejoices. If my mind be full of anguish and sorrow, so that al hope be
faint within me: if I can say yet unto my soul, I will wait patientlye for
the Lords leisure: then I know assuredlye God has made me obedient, and he
will hear my prayer: So that this experience has bred in me the hope that
shall never be confounded. I may speak the words which the heavens shall seal
unto with everlastyng truth: Neither fire nor sword, nor principalities nor
powers shall remove me from the love where with God has loved me. A sure token
of this salvation I have found in mine afflictions. When I traueiled in sorrow
both of body and mind, I found the grace to say: O Lord do thy will. This is
no small cause why we should rejoice, when God does make us worthy to feel the
trial of our faith. So dearelye beloved, faint not in your mourninges, but
endure patiently: you know not the happynes of that which seems your miserye.
Let this be the first cause why we should be glad of temptations. And to thend
we may help our common infirmities, let us learn yet more why it is good for
us to be brought low.

A most notable commodity the Apostle rehearses, where he writes to the
Romans: Those who^ God has fore known, he has also predestinate, to be
made like unto the image of his son. Lo my dear brethren, these are the
healthful counsels of the Lord toward us, that we should be made like unto
his son Christ in many afflictions, that at the last we might be also like
him in eternal glory. These are the riches of Gods unsearchable wisdom.
Death once reigned through s^n, and he has found a way to rise from it again
into greater glory.

This victory, because it was to great for Saint or Angel to obtain, he has
appointed it to be the work of his only begotten. Son, who has made it
perfect in a most excellent conquest. He has taken upon him our nature to make
it strong, and in his own person he has filled it with the fulness of
miseries, with al sorrows of flesh, with all anguish of mind, with
persecution, with death, with sin, with hell, with condemnation, and from al
these, by the mighty power of his Godhead, he is risen again in our flesh,
ascended up into glory, and sytteth on the right hand of Majesty and of power,
being a mighty. Savior unto every one that shall follow him. So that this is
our glory in all afflictions: we are fashioned by them into the similitude of
Christ, and we are made like unto him. So it pleased God, when he would bring
many children into glory, to consecrate the Prince of their salvation through
afflictions, and to make both him that sanctifies, and those that are
sanctified all of one, that they yt suffer with him, should also raygne with
him, and they that dye with him, should also live with him. So we, when we
feel many troubles to rest upon us, we may say now we are like unto Christ:
especially when we feel that greatest trouble, fullest of bitter sorrow, that
is, ye mind oppressed, it makes us especially like unto him, that we may
say with Paul: Now we supply in our flesh the remnant of the afflictions of
Christ.

Let me look into ye whole course of my life, and what soever pleases me
best, health, honor, riches, favor, authority, friendship, wife, children, in
all these things I cannot yet behold ye lively image of Christ. Affliction and
trouble, a mind broken with remembrance of sin, a troubled spirit, these
are the beginninges of great reioycinges: with the horrors of death, and a
constience burdened with the wrath of God. Here light shines out of darkness,
and hope out of despair. As I think my self furthest of from the Lord, so
in deed I am nearest unto him: And when I think my self fullest of
confusion, then the image of Christ is most lyuelye within me. The Lord may
hyde his face for a while, for a moment in his anger, as he did from Christ,
but he must needs return unto me with everlasting mercies, for the image of
his son is clear within me. A blessed sorrow and woe full of happiness, that
fashioneth these days of my vanity into the similitude of the age of Christ,
that with him at the last I might raygne for ever. A precious countenance it
is in the sight of God, that seems without beuty in the eyes of man: and an
unspeakable treasure of joy and gladness engraven in these vessels that are but
earth and ashes. When Christ is the pattern whose similitude we do bear, who
can be discouraged under the cross? We are afflicted on every side, but not in
such a strayte that we are shut from hope. We are in poverty, but not overcome
of poverty. We are persecuted, but not forsaken. We are cast down, but we
perish not. We are troubled in all things, fightings without, and terrors
within, but God that comfort the abiects, he will comfort us. Unto this he
has predestinate us, that we should be like unto his son in all afflictions,
and so be glorified with him in the day of honor. Thus f^rre we have heard two
special causes why we ought to rejoice in all temptations: the one, that so
we leayne true obedience: the other, yt by the^ we be made like unto Christ.
Add yet unto these, one sh^ed cause out of the scripture, which when you shall
have learned, be bold dearly beloved in all the fires of the enemies. For
behold, in the truth of Jesus I dare be yo^t warrant, the greater are your
afflictions, the lyket you are unto Christ: yea, if it should happen you to fall
down into hell, Christ has descended also: you should then be most like him in
his agonies and bloody sweates.

The third cause at this time which I will touch, is this. God sends us
sundry chasticementes, and especially that which is most grievous of al other,
the anguish of spirit and affliction of the soul, for this purpose that we
should be warned in time how to turn unto him, and be free from the plague
when it comes. For the judgments of God that are daily preached unto us,
they pearce deep into the hearts of the true beleuers, and the word that they
hear, it works mightily in them, more sharp in their ears then a two edged
sword: it enters through them, even to the deuidyng asunder of the soul and
of the spirit, and of the joints, and of the marowe, and examineth all the
thoughts and the ententes of the hurt, so that it is impossible that any part
of them should be hyd, but they are all open unto judgment, and hear the
voice of the Lord. Then their syn is revived in the midst of their bowels,
their conscience has no rest, they feel death working in their hearts, and hell
is before them. They see syn on their right hand, and Satan on their left,
shame under their feet, and an angrye Judge above them, the world full of
destruction without, and a worm gnawing the heart within: the poor sinner
knows not what to do. To hide him self it is impossible, and to appear it is
intolerable. Then he breaks out into loud cryings: O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He gives no rest unto his
eyes, nor sleep unto his eye lyds, until he find him that is able to save him
from this wrath. In his bed by night he seeks him whom his soul loves: in
the streets and open places he enquireth after him, and after many days in
which he can not find him, Christ shows him self at the last a perpetual
deliverer, a victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah, in who^ he has strong
salvation. When he has mourned, because of the plague that was before him,
Christ will approach nere, and wipe away the tears from his eyes. This the
Prophet Abacuck sets forth in his own person: When I heard (says he) the
word of God, Aba^
my bellye trembled, my lyps shook at the voice, rottennes entered into my
bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might have rest in the day of trouble.

Even so dearly beloved, it is with us all. The plagues of God, because they
are pronounced against iniquity, it makes the Child of God to fear and
tremble, that so foreseing the harm, he might prepare him help, and because
of the destroyer, seek without wearynes unto the Savior. Though he hide him
self at the first, the wounded spirit and troubled heart must needs find him
out. A great cause of unspeakable gladness, though we seem swalowed up of
pensive sorrow. We are full of grief: but we are chasticed of the lord, because
we should not be condemned with the world. We dye with Christ, but because we
should live with him. We lament and weep, but because that Christ might wipe
away al tears from our eyes. We are delivered unto death for Jesus sake, but
because the life of Jesus should be made manifest in our flesh. We bear about
in our bodies the mortification of the Lord Jesus, but because the life of
Jesus might be manifest also in our bodies. We have anguish of spirit and
vexation of mind, such as has not been from the beginning, but for this
cause, y^ when sudaine destruction shall come upon the careless world, we might
lift up our heads, and behold our redemption at hand. Let us then be bold,
and in patience possess our souls. For these causes we are now afflicted,
that we might receive mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need:
And for this cause we treble and are afraid, that after many prayers and
supplicatio^s we might be delivered from the things which we have feared. It
follows in the Apostle: And being consecrate, he was made the Author of
salvation to all them that obey him.

In these words we are taught what fruit and commodity we have through these
bitter sufferynges of our savior Christ, and also by what means we are made
partakers of it. The fruit is eternal salvation, the means to go unto it is
obedience. In the first we learn, that all promise and hope of life is in
Christ alone. He has alone the words of life, he is alone the bread of life,
the water of life, the author of life, the word of life; the tree of life, the
only life. He that believes in him, he has everlasting life, and he that
dwells not in him, shall see no life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
Take hold of Christ, and take hold of life. Reach forth thine hand to any
other thing, and thou reachest unto vanity, which cannot help. Look not for
life, but where it dwells: in the flesh of Christ alone there it rests.
Death has raygned in all the world beside, and led every creature into
bondage. If thou look unto the heavens, there is but vexatio^ and anguish: If
thou look unto the earth, there is but darkness and sorrow: If thou call unto
Abraham, he knows thee not: If thou cry upon Angels, they cannot help thee:
If thou look unto thy works, they are all unclean: If thou trust in thy
prayers, ye Lord has no pleasure in the^. Call for the help of al creatures,
they are subject to vanity, there is no life but in Christ alone. The Elders,
the Angels, the Beasts, and the creatures, they gave this honor unto Christ a
Salvation is of him that sits upon the throne, and of the Lamb, and
altogether they cry, Amen. And if all the creatures, which yet are excellent
good, are not of power to give any piece of this life: the^ what shall we
think of those people, enemies to God and murderers of his Saints, which so
long have made us believe that they have life in them selves: that they can
forgive us our sins for years, even as they will, many or few: that they
c^n make sacrifices propitiatory for us: that they can purge us by Purgatory
fires: that their Pilgrimages, their Pardons, their Vows, their holy orders,
and such other spiritual dronkennes of their sick brains, that these be
available to purchase life. If they will not be reclaymed, let us rest in the
counsels of our God, and say with John: He that hurts, let him hurt still,
and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still. It is enough for us ye Christ
is our life, that our life is hid with Christ in God: when Christ which is our
life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory.

Now while we are in the days of our pilgrimage, the way that we must walk
unto this life in Christ, is to be obedient unto his will. Whatsoever be the way
that he will show us, and bid us walk in it, let us neither decline to the
right hand, nor to the leaft, but go forward in the same. We are not to look
into the world how our Fathers before us have walked. Our iniquities and the
iniquities of our Fathers shall be bound together, if we be partakers of their
evil doings. If we go after Baalims, which our Fathers have taught us, we shall
be fed with the woormewood which our Fathers have eaten. The government of the
Church is upon the shoulders of Christ. He gives us the laws by which we
live, he rules alone in ye house of Jacob, his voice must be followed. We may
not now every one say we have a vision, we have a dream: God has spoken by
his son, and charged all to hear him. We may not boast our selves of saint
or Angel to harke^ to new doctrines which we have not learned, for God has not
put in subjection unto Angels these days of the Gospel in which we are, but
unto Christ who is made the head of his people, and all things are in
subjection under his feet. So that this is the way we have to walk: Christ
is our Lord, let us receive his laws: he is our Master, let us follow his
rules: he is our Apostle, let us hear his Gospel: Let us obey in all things,
and we shall be established.

This is the glory that God has given unto his son: he is our lawgeuer, we
have no other. If we will leave the stubbernnes of our own hearts and obey him,
as life is in him, so we shall surely live. For the Lord has not as great
pleasure in burnt offeringes and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is
obeyed. It is an everlasting truth, that to obey is better then sacrifice, and
to harken is better then the fat of Rams. For to disobey is the syn of
witchcraft, and to change the law that is set before us, this is wickedness and
idolatry. Let us not be wise in our own conceits, to frame God a religion,
such as we will. This is to draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and to pull syn
after us as with cartropes. A just recompense of such weery labors, when God
shall say unto us: Who has required these things at your hands? Let us then
follow so as we be called, and bring into captivity every thought of man, to the
obedience of Christ. And the Lord our God for his Christ's sake give unto us
hearts full of humility, that we may think him wisest, and rest in his decrees:
that we be never spoiled through vain Philosophy, and the traditions of men,
but harken unto him who is only wise, that at ye last we may live with him,
who has alone immortality, and shall fill us with his glory for evermore. Which
times the Lord God bring speedely upon us, and finish the days of syn for his
mercies sake, that we may enter into the heavens, whether Christ is gone before
us, and reign with him for ever, who is our only savior. To whom with the
father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God be all honor* and glory,
world without end.

AMEN.

