An Epitaph upon the death of the right honorable Edward Earl of Darby, Lord
Stanly and Strange of Knocking, Lord and Governor of the Isles of Man, Knight
of the Noble order of the Garter, and one of the Queens Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel. Deceased the. xxiiij. of Nouem. 1572.
SHall shaking hand with drilling tears, deliver rural verse?
my mourning Muse does bid me stay, unable to rehearse.
The noble acts of Derby Earl, that late had breath and life:
who was through Realm and foreign land, beloved of man and wise.
But sure as tears do case the heart, that plunged is in pain:
and Sorrow she will belch forth sobbes, in seeking rest again.
Can country now at once refuse, with dolors thus oppressed?
To shed forth tears, since Darbye Earl, is thus now clapped in chest.
Who though in years he was, more fitter for the grave,
then long to live, yet may we say, to soon did death deprave.
This noble valiant Earl, of his aspiring breath:
whose sage advise thus lost may be, his countries second death.
Though he in Ormeschurch lie, enclosed now in slime:
yet shall his factes enforce his fame, up to the skies to clime,
Though ougly Mors with spite, have reft him of his life:
yet shall his worthy deeds declare, his knowledge was full rife.
That he in setting joint and bone, as stanching bloody wound,
to few that Surgery does profess, so much does understand.
Let Sicophantes that nolve do seek, by this his death to raise:
yet let them know his worthy factes, has merited great praise.
No fines no time he raysde, but Tenauntes were content:
and yet ye shall not hear of world, he greatly raysde his rent.
No toyler in the law, though he had profred wrong:
nor yet would seem to 'ppresse his foe, though he was mighty strong.
But he by meekness made, his foe to be his friend:
the wisest way, all wisemen say, all quarrels so to end.
You nobles do behold, your peer do not forget:
who did not long in Merchants book, delight to stand in det.
Who knew the Merchants trade, his money was his plow:
and would not payment long delay, that dishonor should not grow.
Oh noble Earl of stature mean, but yet of manly heart:
in Scotland thou, with Northfolke Duke, at Kelzey playde thy part.
Of Darby Earl, as Lord of man, and of the Garter Knight:
and one that in his Princes grace, had very much delight.
Both for his faith the which, unto her grace he owde:
and also for his wisdom grave, in counsel often showed.
A mind that did delight, in yelding Justice dew,
an ear still bending down to hear, poor Sewtors that did sewe.
A heart that rude the plight, of those that were oppressed:
a knee to bend to Princely throne, to have their cause redrest.
A foot that ready was, to ride, to run, or go:
to help the weak that Mydas might, was like to ouerthro.
An eye that single was, and not with lucre staind:
a hand to help the hungry poor, he in nowise refraind.
How many now shall want, to have wherewith to feed?
their hungry corpse which in his life, received relief at need.
What mourning make his friends, of him that are bereft?
what mourning make his yomen all, that he behind has left?
How does his neighbors all, that dwell in Lancashire?
with sobbes and tears they do deplore, this death of his to hear.
With tears we all are forced, this noble Earl to wayle:
although that death has brought to him, a life of greater veil.
Though Mors his corpse have seast, that danger none could daunt:
yet in his end a subject true, as fame shall aye auaunt.
No Traitor could him train, at no time to rebel:
nor Papist could him ought persuade, he liked them not so well.
To deal by their device, to hold with Scottish dame:
nor Duke that's dubd, nor Percies pride, that sought their countries bane.
Though Papists him extol, and make the world believe:
yet at his death he them renounst, and to his Christ did cleave.
He knew their trash be such on, Mass he did not build.
but only calde one Jesu Christ, to help him win the field.
And thus he died in Christ, no help he sought from Pope:
but in the death and blood of Christ, he put his fixed hope.
Though slow of tongue to talk, of curious questions fine:
yet one that read the Scriptures much, no doubt a good Divine.
He practizd that in life, that he in Scriptures found:
and so he built upon the rock, and not on shiueling sonde.
No blood he brought in Mary's days, to burn or for to broyle:
nor well he likt of Spanish pride, that sought this Realm to spoil.
Now is this Earl from Lathum gone, turn horse another away:
the saint is fled, though shrine remain, where he was wont to stay.
Let Lancashyre, and Chesshyre both, with tears bring Corpse to grave:
For lo, his happy soul in heaven, the blessed Angels have.
As he in honor run, a happy race to end:
So to his son now Noble Earl, God grant him grace to bend.
To tread his Fathers trace, to stay in Gospel pure:
so shall he live in fathers fame, that ever shall endure.
Viuat post funera Virtus.
John Denton Minist.

Imprinted at London by VV. Williamson, dwelling in Distaffe Lane.


