PROFITABLE Instructions;

Describing what special Observations are to be taken by Travelers in all
Nations, States and Countries; Pleasant and Profitable.

By the three much admired, ROBERT, late Earl o^ Essex. Sir PHILIP SIDNEY,
And, Secretary DAVISON.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Fisher, at the Sign of the Talbot, without
Aldersgate. 1633.

To the Reader.
IT has bin lately maintained in an Academicall Dispute, That the best
travailing is in maps and good Authors: because thereby a man may take a view
of the state and manners of the whole world, and never mix with the corruptions
of it. A pleasing opinion for solitary prisoners, who may thus travel over the
world, though confined to a dungeon. And, indeed, it is a good way to keep a
man innocent; but withal as Ignorant. Our sedentary Traveler may pass for a
wise man, as long as he converseth either with dead men by reading; or by
writing, with men absent. But let him once enter on the stage of public
employment, and he will soon find, if he can be but sensible of contempt,
that he is unfit for Action. For ability to treat with men of several humors,
factions, and Countries; duly to comply with the^, or stand off, as occasion
shall require, is not gotten only byreading of books, but rather by studying
of men. Yet this ever holdstrue; The best scholar is fittest for a Traveler,
as being able to make the most useful observation: Experience added to
learning, makes a perfect Man.

It must, therefore, be confessed, That to fit men for Negotiation, the visiting
of foreign Countries is most necessary: This kingdom justly glories in many
noble Instruments, whose Abilities have been perfitted by that means. But
withal it cannot be denied, that many men while they aim at this fitness
make themselus unfit for any thing* Some go over full of good quality, and
better hopes; who, having as it were emptied themselves in other places, return
laden with nothing but the vices, if not the diseases of the Countries which
they have seen. And, which is most to be pitied, they are commonly the best
wits, and purest receptacles of sound knowledge, that are thus corrupted.
Whether it be, that they are more eagerly assaulted with vice then others; or
whether they do more easily admit any obuiousimpression: howeuer it be; fit it
is, That all young Travelers should receine an Antidot against the infectious
Air of other Countries.

For this purpose, diverse learned men have prescribed rules and precepts: which
have done much good, howeuer in many things defective. For as he that read a
Lecture to Hannibal of the Art of war, showed that himself was no soldier, and
therefore unfit to teach a great Commander: so He, that never traveled but in
his Books, can hardly show his learning, without manifestation of his want of
experience.

It has therefore been much desired, that some men who had themselves bin
Travelers, and had made lest use of their travels, would give some vnfailing
directions to others. Such are here presented to thee; and in such a volume, as
they may be an helpful, though vnchargeable companion of thy travel. Pity it
is that such monuments of wisdom should have perished for the Authors sakes:
men famous in their times for learning, experience nobility, and greatness of
place; but the loss would have been thine, which may now reap the benefit.
Thy favorable acceptance may occasion others to publish larger pieces of this
kind, to the increase of their own honor, because for the good of the noble
youth of this flourishing kingdom.

B. F.

MOST NOTABLE AND EXCELLENT INSTRVCTIONS FOR Travelers.
FOr your better information in the state of any Prince, or Country, it shall
be necessary for you to observe,

1 The Country. 2 The People. 3 The policy and government.
In the Country you are to consider,
I. The situation and nature thereof; As whether it be 1 Island, or continent;
near, or far from thesea. 2 Plain, or hilly; full or scarce of Rivers.
II Quantity, 1 length, 2 breadth, 3 circuit,
where also the 1 Form. 2 climat,
III. How it confineth with other Countries; and* 1 What these Country are, 2
What their strength and riches are. 3 Wherein they consist. 4 Whether friends
or enemies.
IIII. The fertility thereof, and what commodities it does either, 1 Yield and
bring forth, and what part thereof has bin or is 1. Consumed at home. 2.
Vented abroad

2 Want; and how, and from whence it is supplied.
1. Nature. V. Of what strength it is and how defended against the attempts of
bordering neighbors, either by 1 Sea, where may be observed what
I Ports and havens it has, and of what 2 Other defense upon the Coast.
1 Access 2 Capacity. 3 Traffik 4 Shipping.
2 Land, what 1 Mountains, 2 Rivers, 3 Marshes, 4 Woods.

2 Art: As what Cities, Towns, Castles, etc. it has either within the Land,
or upon the Frontiers: And how they are

1 Fortified. 2 Peopled.
VI. What Universities or places of learning it has, and of what 1 Foundation,
2 Revenue, 3 Profession.
VII. What Countries and Provinces are subject thereunto; And what 1 The same
contain in 1 quantity 2 quality.
2 People are for 1 Number, 2 Affection
3 The form of government, and by whom administered.


Secondly is to be considered the People.
I. Their number; As whether they be, 1 Many, 2 Few.
II. Quality: As, Their trade and kind of life whereunto they give themselves,
and whereby they live; As whether by

1 Exercise of 1 Mechanical arts and merchandises. 2 Husbandry 3 Arms.
2 Their rents and revenues.
III. Kinds and degrees. 1 Natives 1 Noble, 2 Not noble.
2 Strangers 1 Denizens. 2 no denize^s


1 Noble.

Generally as their

1 Number, 2 Quality and degree of Nobility, 3 Residance and place of aboade,
4 Religion, 5 Gifts of body and mind, where also their 1 Virtues, 2 Vices, 3
Studies, 4 Exercises.

6 Profession of life, 1 Civil, 2 Material,
7 Means wherein are 1 Their revenues and commings in. 2 Their issuings and
goings out.
8 Offices and Authority they bear in the State. 9 Credit and favor, or
di^fauour with the 1 Prince, 2 People. And upon what cause.
10 Factions and partialities, if any be, with the grounds causes; and
proceedings thereof, 2 Particularly, As their 1 Original, Antiquity, Arms. 2
Names and titles of dignities 3 Alliances, Offsprings, Genealogies.

Thirdly the Policy and Government.
In the Policy and government falls to be considered, 1. The Laws whereby it
is governed. 2 Persons that govern.


In the Laws you have to note, I. Their kinds; As, 1 Civil. 2 Canon or
municipal.
II. Their conformity with the nature of the people.


The persons that govern are the magistrates, 1 Sovereign. 2 Subalternall.


The Sovereign is either 1 One, as a monarch. 2 More, as 1 Optimates or
magmagnates. 2 Popular.



In the former may be comprehended I. The means whereby he attaineth the
same, whether by sovereignty, As, 1 Succession. 2 Election. 3 Usurpation.
II. How he does carry him self in administration thereof, where may be
observed, 1 His Court. 2 His wisdom. 3 His inclination to 1 Peace. 2. War.
4 How he is beloved or feared of his 1 People. 2 Neighbors.
5 His designements, enterprises, etc. 6 His disposition, studies, and
exercises of 1. Body. 2. Mind.
7 His Favorites. 8 The confidence or distrust he has in his people.



In the things that concern his estate fall chiefly to be confidered, I His
Revenues, 1 Ordinary, 2 Extraordinary, abroad and at home.
3 In his friends and Consederacies you are to consider how and upon what
respects they are leagued with him; what help, succor, and commodity he, has
had, or expects from them, and upon what ground. 4 His power and strength for
offense and defense are to be measured by the 1 Strength of his Country. 2
Number and quality of his forces, for 1 Nature. 2 Art.

1 Commanders. 2 Soldiers. 1 Horse. 2 Foot.
3 Magazin and provisions for his wars, either by 1 Sea. 2 Land.
4 Wars he has made in times past are to be considered the 1 Time, 2 Cause,
3 Precedence, 4 Success.




The subalterne Magistrate is either, 1 Ecclesiastical, 2 Civil.


Under the titles of the Ecclesiastical Magistrate, you may note, 1 The
Religion publicly professed, the form and government of the Church. 2 The
persons employed therein, as, 1 Archbishops. 2 Bishops. 3 Deanes, with the 4
Abbots 1 Number. 2 Degree. 3 Offices. 4 Authority. 5 Qualities. 6 Revenues.




The Civil Magistrates subalternall, are those which under the Sovereign have
Administration of 1 The State* 2 Justice.


Among the Magistrates that have the managing of the state follow chiefly to be
considered, I. The Counsel of Estate, 1 Ordinary, attending on the Princes
person. As the 1 Great Counsel. 2 Privy Counsel. 3 Cabinet Counsel.
2 Extraordinary, as the Estates of Parliament. 1 Their number. 2 Their
quality; as, 1 Place and authority in Counsel. 2 Their wisdom. 3 Fidelity. 4
Credit and favor, with 1 Prince. 2 People.



II. What Counsels of 1 Finances 2 Wars 3 Prouincials He has, and by who^
administered.

III. Lieutenants and Depuputies of Provinces, employed either 1 At home. 2
Abroad.
IIII. Officers, etc. 1 Admiralty. 2 Ordinance.
V. Ambassadors, public Ministers, and Intelligemors, employed with 1
Princes. 2 Commonwealths.




In the administration of Justice, you have to consider,
I. The order and form observed in Causes 1 Civil. 2 Criminal.
II. The persons of the 1 Presidents. 2 Confederates. 3 Advocates.

Besides these three, occure many other things to be observed; as the Mint,
valuation of Coins, Exchanges, with infinite other particularities, which for
breuities sake Iomit; and which your self by diligent reading, observation,
and conference may easily supply.

TWO EXCELLENT LETTERS CONcerning Travel:

One written by the late Earl of ESSEX, the other by Sir Philip SIDNEY.

LONDON; Printed for Benjamin Fisher, at the Sign of the Talbot, without
Aldersgate. 1633.

The Late E. of E. his advice to the E. of R. in his travels.
My Lord,
I Hold it for a principle in the course of Intelligence of State, not to
discourage men of mean capacity from writing unto me; though I had at that
same time very able aduertisements: for either they sent me matter which the
other omitted, or made it clearer by describing the circumstances, or, if added
nothing, yet they confirmed that which coming single I might have doubted.
This rule I have, therefore, prescribed to others, and now give it to my self.
Your Lordship has many friends who have more leisure to think, and more
sufficiency to counsel than my self; yet does my love direct these few lines
to the study of you. If you find out nothing but that which you have from
others; yet, perhaps, by the opinion of others, I confirm the opinion of wiser
than my self Your Lordships purpose is to travel; and your study must be
what use to make thereof. The question is ordinary, and there is to it an
ordinary answer; that is, your Lordship shall see the beauty of many Cities,
know the manners of the people of many Countries, and learn the language of
many Nations. Some of these may serve for ornaments, al of them for delight:
But your Lordship must look further than these things; for the greatest
ornament is the beauty of the mind, and when you have as great delight as the
world can afford you, you will confess that the greatest delight is Sentire
teindies fieri meliorum. Therefore your Lordships end and scope should be, that
which is moral Philosophy, we call Cultum Animi, the gifts and excellencies of
the mind. And they are the same as those are of the body, Beauty, Health, and
strength. The beauty of the mind is showed in grateful and acceptable forms
and sweetness of behavior; and they that have that gift, cause those to whom
they deny any thing, to go better contented away, than men of contrary
disposition do those to whom they grant. Health of mind consists in an
immovable constancy and freedom from passions, which are indeed the sickness
of the mind; strength of mind is that active power which makes us perform good
and great things, as well as health, and even temper of mind keeps us from
evil and base things. First, these three are to be sought for, although the
greatest part of men have none of them. Some have one and lack the other two;
some few attain to have two of them, and lack the third; and almost none of
them have all.

The first way to attain to experience of forms or behavior, is to make the
mind it self expert; for behavior is but a garment, and it is easy to make
a comely garment for a body that is well proportioned; whereas a deformed body
can never be helped by Tailors art, but the Counterfetting will appear. And
in the form of the mind it is a true rule, that a man may mend his faults
with as little labor as cover them.

The second way is by imitation; and to that end, good choice is to be made
with whom we converse. Therefore your Lordship should affect their company
whom you find to be worthiest, and not partially think them most worthy whom
you affect.

To attain to the health of the mind, we must use the same means which we
do for the health of our bodies; that is, to make obserua^ce what diseases we
are aptest to fall into, and to provide against them: for Physic has not more
remedy against the difease of the body, than Reason has preservatives against
the Passions of the mind.

To set down means how a man may attain to the active power mentioned in
this place, (I mean strength of mind,) is much harder then to give rules in
the other two: For behavior and good form may be gotten by education; and
health, and even temper of the mind, by good observation; but if there be not
in nature some partner in this active strength, it can never be attained by any
industry; for the virtues that are proper unto it, are Liberality, Magnanimity,
Fortitude and Magnificence: And some are by nature so covetous, and cowardly,
as it is as much in vain to inflame or enlarge their minds, as to go about to
plough the Rocks. But where these active virtues are but budding, they must
be repaired by ripeness of judgment, and custom of well-doing. Clearness of
judgment makes men liberal, for it teaches them to esteem of the goods of
Fortune, not for themselves (for so they are but Iaylors to them) but for their
use, for so they are Lords over them. And it makes us know, that it is Beatius
dare, quam accipere; the one being abadge of Sovereignty, the other of
subjection. Also it leads us to Fortitude; for it teaches, that we should
not too much prize life, which we cannot keep; nor fear death, which we
cannot shun; That as he which dies Nobly, does live for ever; so he that
does live in fear, does die continually. I shall not need to prove these two
things; for we see by experience, they hold true in all things which I have
hitherto set down. What I desire or wish, I would have your Lordship to take
in mind, what it is to make your self an expert man, and what are the
general helps which all men must use which have the same desire. I will now
move your Lordship to consider what helps your travel will gain you.

First, when you see infinite variety of behauior and manners of men, you must
choose and imitate the best; when you see new delights that you never knew, and
have passions stirred in you which you never felt, you shall know what disease
your mind is aptest to fall into, and what the things are that bred that
disease: When you come into Armies, or places where you shall see any thing of
the wars, you shall conform your natural courage to be fit for true Fortitude;
which is not given unto man by nature, but must grow out of the discourse of
reason: And lastly, in your travel you shall have great help to attain to
knowledge, which is not only the excellentest thing in man, but the very
excellency of man.

In Manners, your Lordship must not be caught with novelties, which are
pleasing to young men; nor infected with Custom, which makes us keep our
own all graces, and participate of those we see every day; nor given to
affectation, which is a general fault amongst English Travelers; which is
both displeasing and ridiculous.

In discovering your passions, and meeting with them, give no way, or dispense
with your self, resolving to conquer your self in all; for the stream that
may be stopped with a man's hand at the Springhead, may drown whole Armies when
it has run long.

In your being in wars, think it better at the first to do a great deal
too much than any thing too little; for a young man, especially a strangers
first actions are looked upon, and Reputation once gotten, is easily kept; but
an evil impression conceived at the first, is not easily removed.

The last thing I am to speak, is but the first you are to seek; It is
Knowledge. To praise knowledge, or to persuade your Lordship to seek it, I
shall not need to use many words; I will only say, Where it is wanting, that
man is void of any good.

Without it there can be no Fortitude, for all dangers come of fury, and fury
is passion, and passions ever turn to the contraries; and therefore the most
furious men, when their first blast is spent, be commonly the most fearful.

Without it, there can be no Liberality; for giving is but want of audacitie
to deny, or else discretion to poyse.

Without it, there can be no Justice; for giving to a man that which is his
own, is but chance, or want of a corrupter or seducer.

Without it there can be no Constancy or Patience; for suffering is but
dullness or senselessness.

Without it there can be no tempera^ce; for we shall restrain our selves from
good as well as from evil. For he that cannot discern, cannot elect or
choose. Nay, without it, there can be no true Religion; all other devotion
being but a blind zeal, which is as strong in Heresy as in Truth.

To reckon up all the parts of knowledge, and to show the way to attain to
every part, is a work too great for me to undertake at any time, and too long
to discourse at this time; therefore I will only speak of such a knowledge as
your Lordship should have desire to seek, and shall have means to compass: I
forbear also to speak of Divine knowledge, which must direct our Faith; both
because I find my own insufficiency, and because I hope your Lordship does
nourish the seeds of Religion, which during your education at Cambridge were
sown in you: I will only say this; That as the irresolute man can never
perform any action well; so he that is not resolved in Religion, can be
resolved in nothing else. But that Civil knowledge which will make you do well
by your self, and good unto others, must be sought by Study, by Conference,
and observation.

In the course of your Study, and choice of your book, you must look to have
the grounds of learning, which are the Liberal Arts; and then use study of
delight but sometimes for recreation, and neither drown your self in them,
nor omit those studies whereof you are to have continual use. Above all other
books, be conversant in Histories, for they will best instruct you in matters
Moral, Politic, and Military, by which, and in which you must settle your
Judgment.

I make Conference the second help to Knowledge in order, though I find it
the first and greatest in profiting; and I have so placed them, because he
that is not studied, knows not what to doubt, nor what to ask. To profit
much by Conference, you must choose to confer with expert men; for men will be
of contrary opinions, and every one will make his own probable. In Conference
be neither suspicious, nor believing all you know, what opinion soever you
have of the man that delivers it, nor too desirous to contradict. I do
conclude this point of Conference with this advice, That your Lordship should
rather go an hundred miles to speak with one wise man, than five miles to see
a fair Town.

The third way to attain to Knowledge is Observation, and not long life, nor
seeing much; because as he that rides a way often, and takes no care of notes
or marks to direct him if he come the same way again to make him know where
he is if he come unto it, he shall never prove good guide; So he that lives
long, and sees much, and observes nothing, shall never prove any wise man.

The use of Observation is in noting the coherence of causes, effects,
counsels, and succcesses, with the proportion and likeness between Nature and
Nature, Fortune and Fortune, Action and Action, State and State, Time past and
Time present. Your Lordship now sees, that the end of Study, Conference, and
Observation is Knowledge; you must know also that the true end of knowledge is
clearenesse and strength of Judgment, and not ostentation, or ability to
discourse; which I do the rather put your Lordship in mind of, because the
most part of Noblemen and Gentlemen of our time have no other use nor end of
their learning but their Table-talke. But God knows they have gotten little
that have only this discoursing gift; for though like empty vessels they sound
loud when a man knockes upon their out sides; yet if you peer into them, you
shall find that they are full of nothing but wind.

This rule holds not only in knowledge, or in the virtue of knowledge, or in
the virtue of Prudence, but in all other virtues.

I will here break off, for I find that I have both exceeded the convenient
length of a Letter, and come short of such discourse as this subject does
deserve.

Your Lordship, perhaps, may find many things in this paper superfluous; and
most of them, lame. I will, as well as I can, supply that defect upon the
second advertisement, if you call me to an account. What confusion soever you
find in my order or method, is not only my fault (whose wits are confounded
with too much business) but the fault of this season, being written in
Christmas, which confusion and disorder has by tradition not only been winked
at, but warranted. If there be but any one thing which your Lordship may make
use of, I think my pains well bestowed in all. And how weak soever my counsels
be, my wishes shall be as strong as any man's for your Lordships happiness.

Your Lordships affectionate Cosen, E.
Greenwich, Ianu. 4. 1596. Postscript.
IF any curious scholar happening to see this discourse shall quarrel with my
division of the gifts of the mind, because he finds it not perhaps in his
book, and faith that health and even temper of mind is a kind of strength, and
so I have erred against the rule, that Membra diuidenda non debent confundi; I
answer him, The qualities of health and strength, as I have set them down, are
not only unlike, but mere contraries, for the one binds the mind and
restrains it, the other raises and inlargeth it.



A Letter to the same purpose.
MY good Brother; you have thought unkindness in me, that I have not written
oftener unto you, and have desired I should write unto you something of my
opinion touching your travel; you being persuaded my experience therein to be
something, which I must needs confess; but not as you take it. For you think
my experience grows from the good things which I have learned: but I know the
only experience which I have gotten, is, to find how much I might have learned,
and how much indeed I have missed, for want of directing my course to the right
end, and by the right means. I think you have read Aristotle's Ethiques; If
you have, you know it is the beginning and foundation of all his work, the end
to which every man does and ought to bend his greatest and smallest Actions, I
am sure you have imprinted in your mind the scope and mark you mean, by your
pains, to shoot at. For if you should travel but to travel, or to say you
had traveled, certainly you should prove a pilgrim, no more. But I presume so
well of you (that though a great number of us never thought in our selves why
we went, but a certain tickling humor to do as other men had done,) you
prupose, being a Gentleman borne, to furnish your self with the knowledge of
such things as may be serviceable for your Country and calling. Which
certainly stands not in the change of Air, (for the warmest Sun makes not a
wise man) no, nor in learning Languages (although they be of serviceable use)
for words are but words in what Language soever they be; and much less in that
all of us come home full of disguisements not only of apparel, but of our
count nances, as though the credit of a Traveler stood all upon his outside:
but in the right informing your mind with those things which are most notable
in those places which you come unto. Of which as the one kind is so vain, as
I think, ere it be long, like the Mountebanks in Italy, we Travelers shall
be made sport of in Comedies; so may I instly say, who rightly travels with
the eye of Ulysses, does take one of the most excellent ways of worldly
wisdom. For hard sure it is to know England, without you know it by comparing
it with some other Country; no more than a man can know the swiftness of his
horse without seeing him well matched. For you that are a Logician know, that
as greatness of it self is a quantity, so yet the judgment of it, as of
mighty riches and all other strengths stands in the predicament of Relation: so
that you cannot tell what the Queen of England is able to do defensively or
offensively, but by through knowing what they are able to do with whom she is
to be matched.

This therefore is one notable use of Travelers; which stands in the mixed and
correlatiue knowledge of things, in which kind comes in the knowledge of all
legues betwixt Prince and Prince; the Topographicall description of each
Country, how the one lies by situation to hurt or help the other, how they
are to Sea, well harbored or not, how stored with ships, how with Revenue,
how with fortification and Garrisons, how the people, warlike trained or kept
under, with many other such warlike considerations; which as they confusedly
come into my mind, so I, for want of leisure, hastily set them down: But these
things, as I have said, are of the first kind which stands in the ballancing
one thing with the other.

The other kind of knowledge is of the^ which stand in the things which are in
themselus either simply good or simply evil, and so serve for a right
instruction, or a shunning example. Of these Homer meant in this verse, Qui
multos hominum mores cognouit et vrbes. For he does not mean by Mores, how to
look, or put off ones Cap with a new found grace, although true behavior is
not to be despised: marry my Heresy is, that the English behavior is best in
England, and the Italians in Italy. But mores he takes for that from whence
Moral Philosophy is so called; the certainnesse of true discerning of men's
minds both in virtue, passion, and vices. And when he says, Cognouit vrbes,
he means not (if I be not deceived) to have seen Towns, and mark their
buildings; for surely houses are but houses in every place, they do but differ
secundum magis et minus; but he intends to their Religion, Policies, ^awes,
bringing up of children, discipline both for war and peace, and such like.
These I take to be of the second kind which are ever worthy to be known for
their own sakes. As surely in the great Turk, though we have nothing to do
with them, yet his Discipline in war matters is, propter se, worthy to be
learned. Nay, even in the kingdom of China, which is almost as far as the
Antippodes from us, their good Laws and Customs are to be learned: but to
know their riches and power is of little purpose for Us; since that can neither
advance us, nor hinder us. But in our neighbor Countries, both these things
are to be marked, as well the latter, which contain things for themselves as
the former which seek to know both those, and how their riches and power may
be to us available, or otherwise. The Countries fittest for both these, are
those you are going into. France above all other most needful for us to mark,
especially in the former kind. Next is Spain and the Low Countries, then
Germany; which in my opinion excels all others as much in the latter
Consideration, as the other does in former, yet neither are void of neither*
For as Germany me ^^inks does excel in good laws and well administering of
Justice; so are we likewise to consider in it the many Princes with whom we
may have league; the places of Frade, and means to draw both Soldiers and
furniture there in time of need. So on the other side, as in France and Spain
we are principally to mark how they stand toward us both in power and
inclination; so are they, not without good and fitting use, even in the
generality of wisdom to be known; As in France the Courts of Parliament,
their subulter Jurisdiction, and the it continual keeping of paid Soldiers:
In Spain, their good and grave proceedings, their keeping so many Provinces
under them, and by what manner; with the true points of honor. Wherein since
they have the most open conceit wherein they seem over curious, it is an easy
matter to cut off when a man sees the bottom Flanders likewise, besides the
neighborhood with us, and the annexed considerations thereunto, has diverse
things to be learned, especially their governing their Merchants and other
trades. Also for Italy, we know not what we have, or can have to do with
them, but to buy their Silks and Wines: And as for the other point, except
Venice, whose good Laws and customs we can hardly proportion to our selves,
because they are quite of a contrary government; there is little there but
tyrannous oppression, and seruil yielding to them that have little or no right
over them. And for the men you shall have there, although indeed some be
excellently learned, yet are they all given to counterfeit learning: as a man
shall learn among them more false grounds of things then in any place else I
know. For from a Tapster upwards, they are all discoursers in certain matters
and qualities; as Horsmanship, weapons, waiting; and such are better there then
in other Countries: But for other matters, as well (if not better) you shall
have them in nearer places.

Now rests in my memory but this point, which indeed is the chief to you of
all others; which is, the chief of what men you are to direct your self to,
for it is certain no vessel can leave a worse taste in the liquor it contains
than a wrong teacher infects an unskillful hearer with that which hardly will
ever out: I will not tell you some absurdities I have heard some Travelers
tell; taste him well before you drink much of his Doctrine And when you have
heard it, try well what you have heard before you hold it for a principal; for
one error is the mother of a thousand. But you may say, how shall I get
excellent men to take pains to speak with me? Truly in few words; either much
expense or much humbleness.

FINIS.

