A MOST EXCELLENT AND PROFItable Dialogue, of the powerful justifying Faith:
Showing what it is to believe in God, and what wonders are wrought by the power
of Belief, be it worldly or Divine; and what things do hinder Belief.

Also how a man may hate himself, and by Faith forsake himself, and kill the
deeds of the flesh. The effect of the talk is this: That he which believes in
God, and in his Son Jesus Christ, is able by the power of that Belief, to
mortify his flesh, with the lusts thereof, through the holy Ghost, and to
serve God in spirit and truth.

Translated out of Latin by Arthur Golding.

LONDON Printed by N.O. for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his shop on
Holburne bridge. 1610.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
GOod Reader, amongst the multitude of books both written and printed, that be
at this day spread abroad in the world, I lighted upon this little Treatise of
Faith: wherein perceiving a matter handled, so necessary and needful to be
read and known of all men, especially in these dangerous (if not desperate)
days, wherein iniquity have gotten the upper hand: and men are grown so
blind, that they strive more about the chafe, then for the pure wheat corn
it self, and content themselves to feed rather on the leaves then on the
fruit of the fig tree; that is, more to talk of an imagined faith, then to
know, have, and enjoy in themselves, the true, powerful, and living faith, 2
These. 1.11. Romans 6.2.4. Prou. 15.
which is a daily dying to sin, and rising to righteousness. Seeing the same,
I say, a work so necessary to be known of all men, I thought it good, being
also persuaded thereto by many that have found great benefit by it, to be a
means for the printing of it; that whosoever have any zeal or desire to know
the true faith, and to have it with the fruits thereof effectually in
himself, as is said he may view himself in this little pithy Treatise of the
powerful faith. The title with the Authors name was torn out before it came to
my hands: but whosouer was the Writer, the matter will show from whence it
came. And so the almighty God which lives everlastingly, plant his true fear
and faith in our hearts, Romans 5.1. Gal. 5.6.
that being justified by this powerful faith that works through love, we may
have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A MOST EXCELLENT AND PROFITAble little Book, concerning the true Christian
Faith. The persons that talk together are Lewis and Frederike.
Lewis. GLadly in good sooth, friend Frederick, have I heard your talk both
yesterday and today, and thereby I have learned many things which I knew not
before; and this is one thing which has chiefly moved me, that you have
showed that our Lord commands not any thing which is impossible to be done.
He begins at the difficulties of obeying GODS healthful commandments.
For I was of belief before, that (as it is commonly heard and taught) Gods
commandments are impossible to be obeyed. Which persuasion (to tell you the
truth) has made me slow to obey, so as I never strained my self to obey with
my whole power.


Fred. The like has befalne unto me also, and I could never yield my self
truly and earnestly to obeying, before I believed that it was possible to obey:
And truly hereby I have learned the force of Belief, which Belief makes a
man desirous and willing to obey: The effectual power and force of belief.
And desire being afterward matched with power given of God, brings to pass
that a man does the things which he has believed himself to be able to do,
and so he is saved by obeying, as he was erst undone by disobeying. And so
being led by the spirit of Christ, he fulfilleth the righteousness of the law,
not walking after the flesh, but living after the spirit: which righteousness
is therefore called the righteousness of the law, The righteousness of the
law, and why it bears that name.
not for that it makes the believer righteous, but because the law requires
it. For the whole performance thereof is Christ's, because it is brought to
pass by his power and spirit, living and working in those that are his. The
law the^ commands, and Christ fulfilleth, and so the praise is due, not to
the commander, but to the performer. Nevertheless it were to small purpose to
believe that it is possible to obey God, unless a man do also know the way how
God may be obeyed, without the which obedience faith is dead, and without faith
no man can be saved. Belief without obedience is dead:
But this I would have you to be persuaded of my Lewis, that the discourses
both of us and of all others are (to say no worse of them) unprofitable, if
they train us not to obedience, and to the renewing of the man.


Lew. These things are true Frederike. Therefore that I may fare somewhat the
better by your communication, I pray you show me by what mean I may attain to
obey God. For inasmuch as you have showed me by your talk, that it is possible
to be done, I have conceived a desire of obeying.


Fred. O my Lewis, A godly and Christian wish concerning obedience.
would God that I my self were rightly obedient, to the intent I might lead
thee by the hand, to obedience. As now it is impossible for me to lead you
further then I my self have attained unto.


Lew. Yet notwithstanding I believe you have proceeded further forward then I
have done, and therefore I beseech you show me but as far as you your self are
gone.


Fred. Willingly will I do that, Lewis: but I am afraid the hardness and
roughness of the way will scare you from it.


Lew. Fear not: I hope I am ready to al things, be they never so hard, so I
may attain to the end that I desire.


Fred. I pray God to establish this willingness of yours, and to bring it
throughout to the end. And therefore to go in hand with the matter, you know
how the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews has written, that without says
it is impossible to please God.


Lew. I know it well.


Fred. Belief in God is most necessary to the obtaining of salvation.
First of all then you must believe in God if you will be saved.


Lew. Proceed on then to the other things my Frederick. For as concerning
belief, I have ever from my childhood believed in God: and truly I am of
opinion, that there be very few (if there be any at all) which believe not in
God.


Fred. Many things are easy to be said which are hard to be done.
Indeed it is very easy to be said, and so are men commonly persuaded. But I
fear me it is said rather rashly, and of custom, then of truth. For the time
has been, that even I also have believed the same, both of my self, and of
others; but when it came to the trial, then I saw how far of I was.


Lew. Think you then that I have no faith?


Fred. I am not of opinion that you have no faith Lewis, but I think you have
so slender a faith, as it cannot rightly be said to be faith, or save you. And
I pray you be not offended with me, for in as much as you have said that you
are ready to all things, be they never so hard, it is meet before all things
that you should suffer to have it showed, that you want the thing which you
ween you have abundantly: and soothly, The first way to the knowledge of the
truth
the first entrance to the knowledge of truth, is to unlearn the untruth, or
else there will be no room for seed, where all is ouergrowne with weeds. Come
on therefore: let us examine your belief. I pray you Lewis, when you were a
child did you believe in your father? What it is to believe in the Father, is
showed by the gathering together of certain circumstances.



Lew. What mean you by believing in my father?


Fred. That you took him for your father, and depended wholly upon him.


Lew. Yea that I did.


Fred. Then if you wanted any thing, as shoes, apparel, or meat, you
resorted to none but him, neither doubted you any whit his good will toward
you.


Lew. Surely no more then of mine own.


Fred. Again, if any mis-hap befell you, you had your eye upon him only.


Lew. Yea verily.


Fred. Also if he promised you any thing, you doubted not of his performance.


Lew. No more then if I had had the thing already in my hand.


Fred. Then took you no thought for his behavior toward you, but only of
your own toward him.


Lew. You say truly.


Fred. Moreover, if he either commanded you any thing, How needful obedience to
the Father is, is showed by examples.
or did any thing himself, whereof you being a child knew not the reason, or
which seemed to you against reason: yet notwithstanding you did it, and stood
not skanning doubtfully upon his doings.


Le. So is it. For upon a time, when new grapes were brought in, and he bad me
tread upon the^ with my feet, surely me thought it was a fond thing to tread
upon so good and fair grapes, which I had rather should have been saved to
eat. But because he was my father, I thought he commanded me not without a
cause, and therefore I obeyed him. Also at another time, when he shredded his
vines, and grafted trees to my seeming it was against reason to cut off ye
boughs which nature had brought forth, and which were likely to have brought
forth fruit. But yet this thought ran always in my mind, Unless this were
good, my father would not do it.


Fred. Now let us come unto God. You say you believe in God the Father, and by
that name you call upon him, saying: Our Father which art in heaven, and so
forth. Surely it is meet therefore that you should depend upon him no less
then you depended upon your father when you were a child.


Lew. Yea.


Fred. Then if you want any thing, you fly unto God alone, and you doubt not at
all but that he will give you all things bountifully. What? Doubt ye? why
answer you not my Lewis? Fleshly fear, (...).
Confess the truth, and let not fleshly fear restrain you, which is wont to
withold men from being aknown of their vices, because they are afraid, lest
he to whom they be to be uttered, should mislike of them as of sinful folk, or
make the less account of the^. But there is no such perrill toward you at my
hand: for I cannot find in my heart to mislike of any man for those things
which I both see and bewail in my self not long ago; and I doubt not, but
are in others also, unless they be come already to their ways end, which
certesse we two (that is to say, you and I) have not yet attained unto; neither
will I make the less account of you for confessing the things with your mouth
to your friend, which I am sure you acknowledge already in your heart.


Lew. O my Frederike I am ashamed to be acknowne of it. Uerily I am (yea even
very sore) afraid lest I should want bread and drink, and such other things,
specially when I see I have but a little money left, and no likely mean at
hand whereby to get new money.


Fred. What if you have your purse full, or some mean in a readiness whereby
to come by money? the^ you take no thought at all, or at leastwise, your
thought is the less.


Lew. It is so.


Fred. Ergo, you trust to your money, or to your own policy, How belife in God
is neglected, by trusting too much to these tra^sitory and flightfull things.
more then to God.


Lew. Truly it is even so.


Fred. But when you were a child, you trusted only to your father.


Lew. Yea.


Fred. Now then you see how you believe not in God, but in your money, and in
your own policy. Verily I believe these things seem boisterous unto you, in
that you be not able to deny them, and yet are either doubtful or ashamed to
confess them so soon. But enforce your self Lewis. Many things are to be
sifted out which lie lurking in our hearts, and the very root must be gone
unto, without the plucking up whereof we cannot be saved. Let us go on. What
say you to adversity Lewis? Is your mind nothing troubled at it?


Lew. Yes very sore. I can very ill away with it; and besides that, I seek all
the corners of my wit for worldly help.


Fred. What do you concerning Gods promises? That Gods promises deceive not the
believers.
He has promised to give all things needful for your life, if you first
seek his kingdom and righteousness. Do you certainly believe that promise,
so as you doubt no more of his faithfulness then you did of your fathers when
you were a child.


Lew. Alas, I am far from it.


Fred. But if your neigbour Henry Rottenfield, a rich man, and (in account of
the world) a man of good credit, had promised you three hundred crowns, I am
of opinion you were rid of that care for a good sort of years.


Lew. Yea that I were.


Fred. Now God has promised not 300. crowns, but all things that you have
need of, and yet you distrust him.


Lew. O how truly you say?


Fred. Less therefore do you believe in God, I say not than in your own
father, but than in Henry Rottenfield.


Lew. I am compelled to confess the truth.


Fred. And yet men may start from their promises, Two things may let me^ from
performing their promises*
either through untrustiness, or for want: whereof none of both can befall unto
God. You therefore by this distrust of yours, do falsely accuse God, either of
untrustiness, or of want.


Lew. I do so indeed.


Fred. Now if you do thus distrust of God in the sustenance of your body,
which notwithstanding you have never wanted to this hour, can you trust to him
for the blessed and endless life which you never yet tasted of? For consider
the matter after this sort with your self: If a king should now send an
Ambassador unto you to adopt you for his son, and you believed him, how would
you behave your self?


Lew. Truly what substance soever I have, I would make no reckoning at all of
it; and being here as a Way farer in body, I should have my mind running upon
the Court: for a much like thing happened to me when I was a stripling. For
whereas I lived in very slender state, I was called into the household of a
certain Gentleman of great worship and wealth, Honors change manners, as the
common proverb says.
whereupon I felt my mind so altered, yt I thought of none of the things which I
had thought of before, neither was I pincht with any further care. Insomuch
that when my father and my mother were about to have sent me a little money, I
sent them word again, that thenceforth I should need no money. What need many
words? I imagined aforehand in my mind, a kind of fashion of the buildings,
and of the place, and of the persons among whom I was to dwell, and yet had I
never seen them.


Fred. I believe you Lewis. For I my self have had experience of the like. But
what if you had not believed that message?


Lew. Surely I had continued in mine old state still.


Fred. And what if a man had seen you abiding in your former state? might he
not well have auowed, that you believed not the message?


Lew. Yes, very well.


Fred. Now let us come to the matter. To them that love God, How bou^tifull God
is to them that love him.
God has promised such good things, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
nor heart of man conceived. Let us confess the truth here also my Lewis. If we
believed this promise thoroughly, should not our minds be ravished up into
heaven, so as no earthly care might touch us, and much less trouble us?


Lew. Proofs or tokens of mistrust in God.
Yes verily.


Fred. But now when we be glad of gain, sorry for loss, greatly grieved and
cast down with reproach, hoysed up with honor, and ouerioyed with pleasure;
all which things are earthly: is it not an apparent proof, that we believe not
Gods promises, but stick still to the earthly inheritance?


Lew. Yes that it is.


Fred. What if God should promise us some thing that might seem impossible, as
when he promised old Abraham a son by Sara, being old and barren too? Or what
if he should command us a thing that might seem unreasonable? as when he
willed the said Abraham to offer up his son in sacrifice, by which son he
had promised him an offspring without number.


Lew. Surely I am afraid we would not believe him.


Fred. And yet was Abraham the father of the faithful; Abraham's faith is of
necessity to salvation.
so, as if we will be saved, we must have the faith of Abraham. And thus much
concerning belief in the Father. This (as I take it) is that which they call
the historical faith.


Now if we come to the Son, I fear me, we much less believe in him. For I
take not faith (as a number think it) to be a believing that Christ has done
and suffered the things which are written of him: for as for that faith or
belief, the very devils have it. But I speak of the true, lively, and
mightfull faith, which is able even to remove mountains; whereof the Lord
speaks thus. The signs that are peculiar to the believers.
The signs that shall follow those which believe, are these: In my name they
shall cast out Devils, speak with new tongues, and drive away serpents: if
they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them. When they lay their hands
upon sick folks, the sick folks shall recover. Do these tokens follow your
faith, Lewis?


Lew. No verily,


Fred. Then you have not faith.


Lew. Why? They deny that there is now any need of miracles.


Fred. Neither do I now require any such, neither were they at that time
wrought by all believers. For Paul writes: Do all work miracles? Have all the
gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? The thing that I require, is the
same that Peter requires: Get you strength to your faith, (says he.) For
needs must the faith of any man or of any time have strength, if it be matched
with love. Which thing, that you may the better understand, consider the force
of worldly belief. The force of worldly faith, and how wonderfully it moves
men.
A man believes that riches are good, and that it is possible for him to
attain to it by merchandise. Hereupon, leaving oftentimes a very fair and
deare-beloued wife, and young children at home, he undertakes the unmeasurable
perils of robbers, of ways, and of seas, and endures intolerable pains to
feth the riches whereon he has set his belief and love, even from Taprobane,
and the Isles of Canarie, which are the uttermost parts of the world: and it is
his belief that purchases him this stoutnesse. For unless he believed, he
would not do it. And therefore it may be said that this man is enriched by
belief.

What shall we say of Learning, Lewis? The child believes that learning and
humane arts are a very goodly thing, and to be sought with all his power. And
thereupon applying himself to them day and night, he endures poverty, cold,
and whatsoever else, in seking them with all his might, to the intent he may
attain to the thing which he believes to be good.

He proceeds in showing the strength of the worldly belief.
Also what do soldiers? What kind of calamity is there which they undertake
not, to obtain either victory or reward* How often watch they all the night
long How often are they pinched with hunger, insomuch that sometimes they eat
Mice, Rats, Horses, yea and even their own shoes, and afterward make their
boast thereof? Whence have they so great strength? Whence, but of belief? For
they believe the thing which they covet, to be good.

Again, what do hunters do? do they not spend oftentimes the whole winter
nights abroad, when the cold is so great that it gives even the flints?

Yea and what do lovers? what inconveniences do they not most gladly endure to
the intent to please the party whom they be in love withal? And still they
deem themselves happy that they have suffered those things for her sake.

And this force of belief is seen, no only in several persons, How great
force worldly belief has even among some whole Nations.
but also even in whole nations. For whereof comes it, that our Italians do so
easily abstain from drunkenness? or that the Swissers are so resolute in
battle, that they will rather be slain then fly? Even of this, that they are
persuaded in themselves, that so they ought to do. And surely if they
persuaded themselves alike in all other virtues, they should excel alike in
all other virtues. Many other things of the same sort may be gathered: so great
is the power of the belief that works in the^. Therefore let us examine our
faith, that we may seee whether Christ's spirit do dwell in us or no.

Christ tells us that they be blessed which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness: and he commands us to hoord up treasure in heaven. Come on.
Do you feel as great thirst of righteousness, A trial of Christian faith
most worthy to be observed.
as ever you have selt at any time of water? or as great desire of Gods
kingdom, as the covetous man feels desire of money? Do you watch day and
night to please God? Have you ever spent a whole year or twain in the study
of godliness?


Lew. Nothing less.


Fred. Well: What strength have you in suffering of wrongs? If a man strike you
on the right cheek, can you turn to him the left? Can you bless him that
curses you? Can you wish well to him that reuileth you? Can you pray for him
that raileth upon you? Can you seek his welfare which practices your death?


Lew. Soothly, I am very far off from these things.


Fred. Where obedience is not, there is not faith
Then do you not believe in Christ. For if you did, you would obey his
commandments.


Lew. But I never referred belief to this obedience.


Fred. What manner of thing then did you take faith to be?


Lew. I took it to be a trust of Gods free-bestowed mercy, offered unto us in
Christ.


Fred. To what purpose then deem you Christ's commandments to serve?


Lew. To put us in mind of our infirmity, in that we be not able to perform
the things which we ought to do, and so to make us hang wholly upon Christ,
who has performed them for us, and imparteth them unto us.


Fred. Even the Apostles themselves trusted to Gods free-bestowed mercy, and
yet they obeyed Christ's commandments. Neither do I set salvation in our own
obedience, The mark whereat man's salvation shoots.
but in Gods free mercy. But this I say, that whosoever believes Gods free
mercy aright, obeys Christ's commandments. And if a man do believe but Gods
free mercy only, and not also his commandments, threatenings, promises, and
sayings whatsoever: What things our forefathers attained to by their faith.
I say, his says is maimed, and unavailable. For the full and mighty faith or
belief, is that whereby the Saints have subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained the promises, and done such other things as any man may
wonder to think of the^. For that man does not rightly believe in God, which
upon a rashness does but only beheight himself sauation by his free mercy,
The fond and idle belief of the Jews.
(after which manner the Jews do believe still yet to this day:) but he which
does so flatly yield credit and assent, not to some one piece of Gods sayings
and doings, but to all of them: as you have reported your self to have
believed your father when you were a child: or as we spoke of the covetous and
lecherous persons, which have such a faith or belief, as is not dead and idle,
but effectual and workfull, counterfeiting the spirit of Christ, and never
resting till it have obtained the thing that it desired. Such a one is the true
Christian faith, The work fullness of Christian faith appears in charity.
which works through love: and whosoever has not such an one, does falsely
boast himself of says. Therefore whereas men do commonly challenge faith to
themselves, and yet live in all kind of wickedness, they lie, and have not
the true faith, but a dead one, which is no more worthy of the name of faith
then a dead man is worthy of the name of a man. That this is not faith indeed,
Christ himself shows sufficiently when he says, that at his coming he
shall not find faith upon the earth. And also when unto these which say, Lord,
Lord, have we not cast out Devils in thy name? Have we not wrought wonders in
thy name? and have thou not taught in our streets? he shall say, I know you
not, get you hence ye workers of wickedness. Who they be which have the true
Christian faith
Ye see he will admit none for faithful, but only the weldoers and the obeyers.
For they be the only persons which have the true faith, of whom it is written
thus: These are they which have maintained Gods commandments, and the faith of
Jesus. Now if you have not the faith which may make you righteous, (that is to
say, chaste, lowly, gentle, liberal, and endued with such other of the
virtues:) see how far you be off from being able to work the miracles which
Christ has told us should be the signs of faith. I require not here bodily
miracles, which were appointed to the first trayning of the Church unto faith:
To what purpose bodily miracles are wrought.
But the thing that I require, is, that he which believes in Christ should
breed the same virtues in other men, which God has bred in him: that is to
say, that of drunkards, he should make them sober: of lecherous, chaste: of
irefull, mild: and at a word, of unrighteous, righteous, The devils that lurk
within us, and what is meant by speaking with new tongues.
For, to cast out Devils, is to cast out the vices of lechery, covetousness,
wrathfulnesse, and such other. Also to speak with new tongs, is to speak with
fiery and burning speech, such as no man can withstand; of which sort theirs
is, which speak the things, not which they have heard, but which they have
seen with their eyes, heard with their ears, and felt with their hands: that
is to say, which they have printed thoroughly in their hearts, and which they do
as verily believe, as you do verily believe that it is now day, or that anon
it shall be night. The works of such as speak with new tongs.
With such tongues they be able, truly and effectually to comfort the
afflicted, to hearten the weak minded, to relieve them that are in despair,
to strengthen the feeble, to counsel the fearful, and to perform such other
things, which I make far greater account of, then of the working of outward
miracles, and of such as belong but only to the body. If a man have not these
things himself, he can convey them into others: I see not by what right he ca^
claim faith, unless it be the faith which the Devils have, who do believe
that there is a God, and do quake at him. But I speak of the true and
justifying faith, which makes a man partaker of the nature of God, and causes
all things to be possible to him. Of the true and justifying faith, and how
mighty it is in working.
I have showed before, how great force belief has in matters of this world:
and the same is to be seen even in religion, be it false or true. The Turks
believe that wine is not to be drunk, and therefore they cannot forbear wine.
The Jews believe that a man ought to abstain from the things which the law
forbids: and therefore they abstain. There are to be found which do pine
themselves to death with long ouer-fasting: some whip themselves, I say not
grievously, but even cruelly, till the blood follow: other some for religion
sake do take upon them long pilgrimages, No man doubts but that all these
things are spoken of the wicked believers.
wherein they endure beggary and many other inconveniences and perils. What
shall I say of those which have gelded themselves? What shall I say of the
Circumcellions, who (as the report goes of them) to the intent to become
Martyrs themselves, and to make otherfolks Martirs with them, destroyed
themselves by sundry sorts of death, as drowning, burning, and leaping from
high places; and persuaded other men to do the like: al which they did
thoroughly believe. For unless they had believed that those things were to be
done, they would not have done them. By an argument from the lesser to the
greater, he shows the force of true faith.
To be short, whatsoever thing men believe is to be done, they ca^ (endeavor to)
do it. Now if their belief being false, and not only not grounded upon Gods
commandment, but alse clean contrary thereunto, have notwithstanding such
strength: I pray you what is not that faith or belief able to do, which is
both commanded, and also procured and strengthened by him? Shall Gods spirit
have less power in man then the spirit of Satan? Shall light be of less
force then darkness? Ye see what force Paul's faith had: Paul's faith
warranted by his own record.
Unto this hour, (says he) we be hungry and thirsty, naked, and buffeted; we
be tossed and turmoyled, we labor and work with our own hands. Being rayled
at, we wish well: being vexed, we suffer it: being reviled, we take comfort
at it. If they be ministers of Christ, much more am I: In labor I exceed
them: In taking stripes I go beyond them: In being imprisoned I pass them: In
death I have often been: Of the Jews I have five times received forty stripes
save one. Thrice have I been whipped. Once have I been stoned: thrice have I
suffered shipwreck: day and night have I spent in the deep seas. Often have I
iourneyed. Often have I been in danger of Rivers, of Robbers, of mine own
Countrymen, and of strangers; in the City, in the Wilderness, on the sea, and
amongst false brethren: Often have I bin tired with traveling and with
watching: often have I fainted for hunger and thirst in fasting: often have I
been a cold for want of clothes. And besides, all the other things which daily
distress me, What thing held Paul occupied chiefly and above all other things.
verily the care of all Churches lies upon me. Who is weakened and I am not
the worse at ease for it? who is offended and I am not grieved at it? This is
the almighty strength of faith Lewis, wherewith he being armed, was enabled to
do al things by him which stre^gthned him: and if we have the same strength,
then surely there is cause for us to think our selves to have the same faith:
if not, the^ let us not bear our selves in hand that we have the thing which
we want; lest it befall unto us as it does to that man which dreameth that he
has found a treasure, and when he awaketh, he has not an halfepeny?


Lew. O my Frederick, my imagination that I abounded in faith, The true faith
has scarce any place in the world.
is but a dream: but now being wakened by your words, I see plainly, that I am
quite and clean without it, as the rest of the world is. For as for this
effectual power of faith, I neither find it in my self, nor perceive it in
the world.


Fred. That you be faithless Lewis, it is to be lamented: but that being so,
you see your self to be so, that is not only not to be lamented, but also to be
rejoiced at: like as a sickness is it self to be misliked, but the knowledge
of the sickness is to be well liked.


Lew. By what mean then, or by what medicine may this my disease of unbelief
be cured?


Fred. By taking away the impedime^ts of unbelief.


Lew. Which are those?


Fred. You have heard them of me already in my former talk. Howbeit for as much
as you have scantly conceived them, as things that your ears have not heard
of: for our manner is not to be ouerhasty in bearing words or things away which
we have not heard of before, I will tell you the^ more plainly. Give good heed.
What think you to be the cause why no man in matters of justice, The
impediments of faith showed by an argument taken from the Court bar, or from
a case in Law.
is admitted to be a witness in his own case?


Lew. Because all men do love themselves, and therefore will ever speak for
themselves, or at least wise, never against themselves.


Fred. You say rightly. And if they be not willing to speak against
themselves, neither are they willing to hear any thing against themselves. For
the truth that is against them, misliketh them less out of another man's mouth,
then out of their own.


Lew. It does so.


Fred. And if they be unwilling to hear those things, truly they be not
willing to believe the^. For no man will willingly believe the things which he
is loath to hear of: but al men do easily believe the things which they like
of. An example by the use of things in common.
As for example. If a man should say, that the goods of Christians ought to be
common among them, whether sort would easiliest believe it, the rich or the
poor?


Lew. The poor.


Fred. Why so?


Lew. Because that by that match they should not lose, but rather win.


Fred. What would the rich folk do?


Lew. Hardly, or not at al rather, would they believe it; because they should
thereby become the poorer, which thing they mislike of.


Fred. What if a man should deny that men's souls are delivered out of
Purgatory by Masses? Another example by the delivering of souls, etc.
whether would the Clergy or the Laytie soonest believe it?


Lew. Not the Clergy because that opinion would be a diminishing of their
revenues.


Lewis. What if it should be said that usury were unlawful for Christians:
were it possible to make those believe it which live upon usury, and become
rich by it?


Lew. Scarcely.


Fr. The last example by the persecution for religions sake.
What if one should teach, that men ought not to be put to death for religion:
whether would they soonest believe it which are in credit with the Magistrates,
and are Divines themselves, and yet are persecuters of other men, or at the
leastwise willing to persecute them; or the contrary sort?


Lew. The contrary sort. For I know some Divines, who as long as they wanted
that authority, and were troubled for religions sake, taught that men ought not
to be molested for religion. And yet the self same persons having gotten
wealth and authority, have both taught and done the contrary.


Fred. You see then how faith is hindered by self-love, Self-love is the
hinderer of faith.
so as men do not easily believe the things that are contrary to their liking.


Lew. I see it plainly.


Fred. Let us consider then whether the same cause be not an impediment to our
belief in Christ. In the doctrine of Christ are histories, promises, and
commandments. As for the histories, and promises, almost all men believe them,
because that in them no duty on man's behalf is required. Neither is there any
controversy among Christians, There is no boubt among Christians concerning
the doings of Christ:
whether Christ have done the things which are reported of him in the holy
Scriptures, or whether he have promised the things that are contained there.
But what is the cause that so few believe his commandments?


Lew. Do fewer folk believe his commandments, then do believe his doings and
promises?


Fred. Doubt you of that? First, as touching Gods commandments, whereas our
masters universally be wont to teach, that they be not set down to the intent
we should obey them, but to make us acknowledge our infirmities: what else is
it then a discrediting of Gods commandments. For seeing our Lord has said,
that all things are possible to him that believes: and Paul says, he is able
to do all things through him that strge^thneth him: surely that man which not
only obeys not Gods commandments, What is the cause that so few believe
Gods commandments.
but also believes that it is impossible to obey them, does not believe the
commandments aright. Whereupon it follows, that look how few folk obey the
commandments, so few do believe them.


Lew. But this saying which you allege, namely, that all things are possible
to the believer, seems to be spoken of miracles, and not obedience.


Fred. It is spoken generally of all the works of faith which I spoke of in
alleging that place of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Through faith the Saints
conquered kingdoms, wrought righteousness, etc. For surely, to work
righteousness is a deed of faith. Besides this, if Gods will be, that me^ should
through faith be able to work miracles, Not miracles, but belief is needful
to salvation.
which notwithstanding are not of the necessity of their salvation: much more
is it his will that they should by the same faith be able to obey his
commandments; seeing that without obedience a man cannot be saved: and that to
obey is not a harder matter then to work miracles; and yet that to obey
belongs to all believers: whereas to work miracles belongs not to all, as I
have showed before.


Lew. Indeed these things are true Frederick, but yet there remains one
thing which I would feign have opened unto me. You said even now, that all men
believe Christ's histories, but not his commandments likewise. The believing of
Christ's resurrection makes all the rest of his sayings and doings credible.
But if they believed ye whole story of Christ, and specially his resurrection,
in my opinion they should believe all the other things also. For no doubt but
if they believed that Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, in so doing they
should both believe that he is the very son of God indeed, and moreover give
credit to all his sayings. In which respect John said: These things are written
to the intent ye might believe that Jesus is the anointed son of God; and
that through believing it, ye should obtain life by his name.


Fred. Whereas I deny that they believe his commandments, I would not have it
so taken, as though they believed not that his commanding of those things was
well, and as became the son of God to do: but that forasmuch as they believe
not that the things which he commanded to be done, What is meant by not
believing of Christ's comma^dements, and who they be that offend in that behalf.
are either possible or needful to be done, misconstruing them after their own
fancy, and not according to his mind: I say they believe them not aright. For
your better understanding whereof, I will give you an example. When God having
brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, commanded them to enter into the
land of Canaan, did they believe that God commanded it?


Lew. Yea verily. Or else they would never have sent spies into the land of
Canaan.


Fred. Why then did they not obey him?


Lew. Because they were of opinion that the Canaanites could not be overcome;
and that God had brought them out of Egypt, How the Israelites believed not God
in that they believed not his co^ma^deme^ts
not to conquer Canaan, but to perish wretchedly in the wilderness.


Fred. Then did they not believe Gods commandment according to Gods meaning;
forasmuch as his meaning was that they should have invaded Canaan, and subdued
the Canaanites.


Lew. You say the truth.


Fred. The^ did they not believe aright


Lew. No, not aright.


Fred. Whether then are they to be called believers, or unbelievers?


Lew. Truly by this reason they should be called unbelievers.


Fred. And soothly so they be (Lewis) in very deed. For in the very same place
God calls them unbelievers in these words: How long will this people spite
me? How long will it be ere they will believe me, for all the miracles which I
have wrought among the^? Now if these be justly called unbelievers, the same
reason leads us to call the others unbelievers, and distrusters of Christ's
commandments, forasmuch as they do no less misconstrue the precepts of
Christ, tha^ the Israelites did the commandments of God. For Christ has not
wrought fewer miracles to us, then Moses did to them. Neither did Christ
command us less earnestly to subdue sin, then God commanded them to subdue the
Canaanites. Neither are we less spiteful and distrustful toward him, if we
deny that sin may be subdued, when as he both commands us, and promises us
strength; then they were spiteful and distrustful toward God, in denying it
to be possible to overcome the Canaanites. Neither do we offend less against
the meaning of Christ, when we deny that it is either possible for us, or meant
by Christ, that we should do the things which he has commanded us to do,
then the Israelites offended against the meaning of God, when they wrested it
another way then his open words imported. And therefore in denying them to
believe Christ's commandments, I do them no wrong. As touching the place of
John by you alleged, How the place taken out of John is to be understood.
it is to be taken as if a man should have said at that time to the Israelites,
GOD has wrought these miracles for your sakes in Egypt, to the intent you
should believe, and by believing, enter into the resting place of Canaan. But
the cause why all of them came not there, was not Gods purpose, but their own
hardening of their hearts against him: which thing would God were not done in
Christ also. But we see it is so: howbeit the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews warns us not to do it, citing this saying out of a certain Psalm:
Psalm. 95.8
To day if ye hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as your forefathers did
harden theirs. Self love dazeleth men's eyes that they cannot see to believe
the truth.
Therefore to return again to the matter: Whereas these men are wont so
diligently to pick out the things to believe, which belong to the office of
God, and to refuse the things that pertain to the duty of man, I pray you what
a dealing is it? Gods gracious goodness has yielded salvation to all men: O
how gladly is this admitted? But as for that which follows, namely, to teach
us to forsake ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godlily in this world, that is a seed which few men receive. Many believe
that Christ has so performed that point, as that we need not to perform the
same. Again, that the man is blessed to whom the Lord imputes no sin, is
easily believed of all men: but as for that which is annexed to it, namely, and
in whose heart there is no guile, that they believe to be impossible. Likewise,
it is commonly vaunted with full mouth, that they which are in Christ Jesus,
are not subject to any condemnation: for it is a very sweet saying indeed: but
as for this, Which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, it is
bitter, and of very few believed. And (to make few words) men do easily
believe that they shall reap with joy: but if you tell them that they must sow
with tears, they put that sentence over unto Christ. What is the cause why
false Prophets do easily find credit.
Hereupon it comes to pass, that the false prophets, because they teach
delectable things, and blaze abroad Gods pleasant promises with open mouth, do
easily find credit: whereas the true Prophets, because they urge men, and make
them afraid with threats, and teach the truth severely, do bear sway among
very few; according as Esaias cries out: Lord who has believed our preaching?
Hereby it appears plainly (my Lewis) that self-love is the lot that men
believe not the truth. And if self-loue were done away, they would believe
nothing so easily as the truth, as who are born unto truth, and do by and by
fall in acquaintance with it, as a thing of their own kin, if there be no
impediment to let it. Therefore if you will rightly believe the truth, (that is
to say, God,) you must needs put away self-love, or rather conceive a hatred
toward your self.


Lew. We must (...) hate our selves, and not love our selves.
Truly Frederike* you win me to be of your mind in these things: but it is no
small matter for a man to hate himself. Neither do I see how I may attain unto
it, or yet perceive whether it be possible for me to attain thereto, I am so
far in love with my self.


Fred. I know Lewis, that it is a very hard thing, and passing the strength of
a man but in this case we must bear in mind, how that when Sara believed not
that she might breed child, All things, be they else never so impossible are
possible to the power of God.
our Lord said of her: Is there any thing which God cannot do? The things that
are impossible to man, are possible to God, and where God is our guide, nothing
is to be despaired of.


Lew. I beseech you then show me the way to attain thereunto.


Fred. By Gods leave I will do it: give ear unto me. How pernicious self-love
is, is showed by certain familiar examples
If I had a servant in whom I very much delighted, faire-spoken, and
serviceable, which should prepare me some meats that best liked mine
appetite, and with the same meats should mingle poison to bereave me of my
life; and you, who love me, should have knowledge thereof, what would you do?


Lew. Surely I would speedily and earnestly give you warning, that you should
not taste of those meats, nor love that servant; for that he lay in wait for
your life.


Fred. What if I should say, that I am delighted with the serviceable behavior
of that servant, and with the sweetness of his cooquery?


Lew. I would counsel you that you should not make so great account of your
present pleasure, as to lose your life for it.


Fred. What if some friend of yours were in love with a flattering and painted
harlot, which were diseased with the French pockes* and you knew of it: what
would you do?


Lew. I would make him privy to her disease, and (to the uttermost that I
could) I would dissuade him from her company.


Fred. What if he said he were delighted with her?


Lew. Men are ^aught with pleasure as ^^shes are (...) an an^gle and a ba^t
(...) their undoing.
I would tell him that fishes also are delighted with baits: but yet that it
were folly to purchase so small pleasure with so great sorrows, or rather with
death.


Fred. What if he should say, that he cannot but like well of the pleasure?


Lew I would counsel him, that if he could not yet restrain the desire of
his mind, he should at leastwise resist it, and not yield to obey it.


Fred. But what if he obeyed it for all that?


Lew. Then would I think him foolisher then the brute beasts, and worthy of
any mischief. For fishes, wolves, foxes, puttockes* and such other, be they
never so hungry, will nevertheless forbear the bait, if they spy or
mistrust any snare, or any thing wherewith they may be caught.


Fred. You say truth Lewis. Every ma^s own flesh is a harlot, of whom he
warns men to take very good heed.
Thus then stands the case. Every man's own flesh is as a harlot (as Judas
terms it in his Epistle,) yea and a painted harlot, which with her
enticements and fair fawnings, does allure, delight, and egg the man to
sin, and hold him down in sin, and at length throw him down into death of
the soul. And man being ignorant of the poison, embraces the pleasures, and
yeeldes himself over to them. Now comes in truth as a friend unto him, and
warns him that the wages of sin is death, declaring unto him that his flesh
whom he took to have been his friend, Most wholesome counsel, and worthy to be
followed.
is his deadly enemy. Therefore if thou desire to be saved, thou must believe
that thou have not a more noisome enemy to thee then thy self, that is to say,
then thy flesh, or thy lustfulnes; and that as thou have hitherto loved it,
thou must he^ceforth hate it and resist it, because it is noisome and deadly.
And although thou can not rid away her allurements out of hand, as indeed
thou can not, for they stick fast to thee: the truth will say unto thee, as
it said in old time unto Moses; Go thy way into Egypt (for it lies in thee
to do that) and I will be with thy mouth, and I will enable thee to do that
which thou can not do. Even so Lewis, the truth says unto thee as now: Do
thou what thou art able, and God will enable thee to do that which thou can
not do. As for examples sake. Thou sit at a well furnished table, and have
eaten enough already to refresh thy powers, and to staunch hunger. Now there is
brought in some delicate dishe, made to provoke gluttony withal. By and by thy
flesh is tempted with it, and puts such an imagination as this in thy head:
This is a fine dish, if I eat of it, I shall receive pleasure by it. But the
spirit strives against the flesh, and warns thee thus: Beware Lewis, that
thou yield not unto voluptuousness, for voluptuousness is a poysoner. The
incomparable harms that come of pleasure.
For first, it calls away thy mind from God, than the which there can be no
greater mischief: for seeing that no man can serve two masters, thou can
not serve both voluptuousnes and God; because voluptuousness ouerwhelmeth the
mind, bears it down to the ground, and separateth it from God. Besides this,
it also hurts the body with surfeiting, insomuch that although thou had no
soul, yet ought thou to abstain from superfluity, even for thy bodies
sake. I require not now that you should not be tempted with the inticements of
the flesh, but that you should not obey them. And whereas you allege that you
cannot but obey the^, you be easily disproued. For if a man would give you a
floren to abstein from the said dish, would you not abstain? (Yes.) And will
you not abstain by reason of the truth? Do you not hereby bewray, that the
truth bears less sway with you then one floren? Or if some man should
threaten that he would give you a blow on the ear if you refrained not: surely
you would refrain. Behold God threatens a blow unto your soul, and yet you
refrain not. The like I say of all other things. You be minded to have to do
with a whore, but because a boy is by, you do it not. Behold God is present,
and yet you be not ashamed to do it. The preposterous (...)re(...)erri(...)g
(...) the fear (...) worldl^ (...)unishne^t (...)fore the (...)are of GODS
(...)rath and (...)engea^ce.
Do you not now make less account of Gods presence then of the presence of a
boy? Or if you forbear for fear of punishment at man's hand, and not as well
for fear of Gods punishment: do you not prefer man before God? You are
angry with a man, and would feign cudgel him, but you forbear for fear of the
magistrate: Why forbear you not as well for fear of God? I pray you make as
great reckoning of God, as you do of men; why does the fear of God bear
less sway with you then the fear of men? You slander your neighbor: God
sees the slander, and yet you do it nevertheless. But if men saw it, The
co^clu(...)o^ gathe(...)ed of the (...)ings go(...)g before.
you would not do it. Run through all things after the same sort Lewis, and you
shall see that whosoever does more for the love or fear of men, then of God,
does believe in men rather then in God.


Lew. O my Frederick, my conscience bears me witness, that ye things which
you say, be true and rightful: but thereof springs a grief in my heart.


Lew. Why so? did you feel any such grief when we treated of Predestination,
or of Free Will?


Lew. No, none at all.


Fred. I believe you Lewis. The knowing of many, yea or of al things is no let
(...) that (...) may serve the Devil.
For knowledge brings no grief, but rather gladness, as which leaves the
old man vnminished. For although you could skill of all manner of mysteries, yet
might you serve the Devil ever still. But now when we deal with the forsaking
of our selves, the flesh perceiving that she must go to wrack for it* plays
as harlots are wont to do when young men give them over. They vex them with
the desire of them, and try all means to hold them still. Even so that harlot
the flesh, which bewitcheth al men with the cup of her uncleanness, as soon
as she perceives that a man minds to give her the slip, does vex him
with the desire of her still, and leaves nothing unattempted, that she may
hold him still. Hereof breeds great grief, according to the greatness of
the love toward the flesh; like as if you were to forsake your country, look
how much you were in love with your country, (...) being (...) native
(...)ountry, (...)annot be (...)orsaken without grief to us.
so much would it grieve you to forgo it. And surely sin is our country, (for
in sin have our mothers conceived us) which cannot be forsaken without grief.
Here is that cross of Christ, whereof he himself says, If any man be minded
to come after me, let him take up his cross and follow me. And if any man
come unto me, and hate not father and mother, wife and children, brethren and
sisters, yea and even his own life, so as he be contented to bear his cross
and to follow me, he cannot be my Disciple. And to the intent you may
understand what the hating of a man's self is, and what cross it brings with
it, consider it thoroughly by the hating of another man. If you hated a man
deadly, how would you be minded toward him? or what would you do to him?


Lew. I would wish him all evil even from my heart, and likewise envy him any
good: I would be sorry for his welfare, and glad of his adversity. If a man
brought me word of any mischa^ce of his. I would rejoice at it, and ge^tly
entertain him, and liberally reward the messe^ger with some gift. To be short,
I would love mine enemies foes, and do them good; and I would hate his friends,
and do them harm if I could. All his sayings and doings would I prye at, and
take advantage of them, and by all means possible (yea many times even to mine
own harm) would I hurt him. Finally I would kill him if I could, and that not
by any common manner, but with the grieuousest death that could be: and I would
do what I could to wipe the very remembrance of him out of the world.


Fred. Now turn this your hatred Lewis, toward your self: Every man is a
deadly enemy to himself, and how such an enemy is to be dealt with.
for you are a deadly enemy to your self, and ought to hate your self deadly,
and not other men, who cannot kill you, that is to say, your soul. And
therefore you must take pains to wish all manner of evil, yea and even death to
your self, that is to say, to your flesh; and to envy her all good things, and
to be sorry for her prosperity, and to be glad of her adversity. And that if
any man tell you any thing amiss of your self, you may rejoice thereat in
spirit, and liberally reward the reporter thereof: and (to be short) that you
may devise and do all things against your self, as men are wont to do against
those with who^ they be at deadly hate, and that you never rest till you have
killed your self. And forasmuch as no man has ever yet hated his own flesh,
(as says S. Paul) you must first and foremost be divorced from your flesh, The
flesh and the spirit are clean co^traries, and fightful* but one against
another.
that she may no longer be your flesh, but strange flesh: and in her steed you
must place the spirit, between whom and the flesh there can never be any more
concord or agreement then between fire and water.


Lew. O my Frederick, to tell you the truth, me thinks the things that you
speak of, are as hard as stone.


Fred. I believe you Lewis, and so must it needs be. But be of good cheer,
and begin even now to love me in spirit, because I am an adversary to your
flesh. For it is for your benefit, and you cannot be saved so long as your
flesh is alive. Wherefore if you will be saved, see that ye hate your self,
and forsake your self. A familiar example,
And I will tell you an example of this forsaking. If a servant give over
himself in bondage to you, he abandoneth himself, that is to say, wha(...) by
(...) goet(...) about to teach a man how to forsake himself.
his own liberty and will, thenceforth to follow your will and not his own.
Oftentimes when he would sleep, he must watch if his master command him:
when he would go abroad, he must tarry at home: when he would play he must
work: and (at a word) he so forgoeth his own freedom, that if he be asked
what he will do, or what he minds to do, he must answer, what his master
lists, at whose appointment he is. So we (if we belong to Christ, who has
bought us at a great price,) are not at our own disposition or appointment,
but at Christ's: and therefore we must do, not what we list, but what he
lists; and worthily. For if he, being the way and the truth, did
notwithstanding so submit his will to the will of his Father, that he said, Not
my will be done, but thine: what becomes it us to do, which are over covered
with errors and leasings? Therefore when you be about to be angry without
cause, you must restrain your anger at the appointment of Christ. When you
would give your self to voluptuousness, you must abstain, and give your
self to sorrowing. When you would be avenged of any body, you must forgive
him. When you would do a man harm, you must do him good. When you would
laugh, you must weep. When you would sue for honor, you must endure shame.
When you would seek riches, you must suffer poverty. And (to be short) you
must in such wise depart from your own will, as if you be asked what you would,
That to the believer all things, seem they never so high, hard, or above
power, are notwithstanding easy to be done.
you may answer, nothing but what Christ lists. And all these things shall you
do through faith: for unless you believed, you would not do the^. But it is
necessary to be understood, what is meant by this saying of S. Paul's, that we
must proceed from faith to faith. There is a certain first and imperfect
belief, whereby a man is moved to renounce himself. This being once kindled,
becomes daily greater by a man's holding on, until at length he become so
far, that he does as certainly believe all Gods sayings, commandments,
promises, and threatenings: as you believe that the day shall succeed the night.
Hence springs that almighty power of faith, wherethrough it is able to
remove mountains: so as there is no pride, no covetousness, no lechery, nor
(to be short) no vice so huge and great, which that faith is not able to put
away, and to pluck up by the root. Howbeit ere ever a man attain to that
strength, he is to endure many hard things in the way of his forsaking of
himself; and without such hardness there is no access to be had to that
strength; like as a fig or a grape cannot become sweet except it be first
sour. And because I my self have not yet attained the victory, but do yet
still sweat in the encounter of forsaking my self, and as yet am far off
from the garland: I will say no more concerning the victory, that is to say,
concerning the thing which is unknown to me: but yet as much as I can, I will
help you (by Gods grace) in the encounter, if you will be my companion.


Lew. Truly for my part, although my self do shudder and start back at it,
yet am I carried with my spirit and mind, to follow you. There is but only one
right way to the attainment of salvation.
For I see no other way for a man to be saved, but by departing out of his own
nature, that he may put upon him the nature of Christ; and by caring,
studying, striving, and taking pains, to repair the image, whereafter we were
created. And therefore beseeching God yt it may be to his glory, (...) mine
own salvation, henceforth I yield my self into this way, as a follower of
Christ, taking God for my guide.


Fred. And I thank God for this willingness which he has given you,
beseeching him to finish his work which he has begun in you; and to bring
you to that point, that ye may at length serve righteousness, as ye have
served unrighteousness; which thing he will undoubtedly do, except you grieve
his spirit, and cast it out through your disobedience. Men must not conceive
spa(...)ingly, and niggardly, but largely (...) aboun(...)antly of (...)
gra(...)dnesse.
Finally, of this I will warn you, that you must have a rich faith, because
you believe in him that is rich in doing good. For men have ever sinned in
believing unto wardly, and more niggardly of Gods gracious goodness, then they
ought to do. Abraham and Sara were rebuked for laughing, as though it had been
a matter to be laughed at, that God promised them issue when they were both
old, and Sara moreover barraine. Zacharias the father of John Baptist, was
stricken dumb for a time, because he believed not the Angels words. We be
commonly more forward in following the weak belief (or if I may so term it)
the unbelief of the godly, then in following their full and rich belief. Why
do we not rather follow those which durst believe all things? Elizeus durst
crave double the spirit of Elias, (which soothly was a great thing even by the
record of Elias himself) and yet he obtained it: We cannot ask so largely at
Gods hand but that his bounty wi(...) surmoun(...) it.
so impossible is it for any faith to be so great, but that Gods gracious
goodness and power do surmount the same. All things (says he) are possible
to the believer. Again, Whatsoever you ask, believe that you shall obtain
it, and ye shall have it in deed. Remember (I say) the saying of Elizeus,
speaking after this manner to the poor woman: Borrow oil vessels of thy
neighbors, yea borrow a great sort, and the Lord will fill them all full. Even
so Lewis, let us do our endeavor, that we may have such a faith, as may be
able to receue the greatest good things, and let us be bold to believe that God
both can and will bring to pass, that we shall love him alone with our whole
heart, soul, power, and strength. And he of his own gracious goodness, God
will grant us all good things for Christ's (...)ke.
will bestow all things upon us, much more largely then we can even think,
for his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to whom be honor, glory and
dominion for ever. Amen.


FINIS.

