DESIDERIVS.

A MOST GODLY, RELIGIOUS, AND delectable Dialogue, teaching the true and ready
way, by which we may attain to the perfect Love of God.

FIRST WRITTEN IN SPAnish, and since translated by diverse persons into the
Italian, French, Dutch, and Latin tongue, and now lastly into the English.

Imprinted at ROANE, by the permission of Superiors, Anno 1604.

A MOST GODLY, RELIGIOUS, and delectable Dialogue, teaching the true and ready
way, by which we may attain to the perfect love of God.
CHAPTER 1. Desire goes on Pilgrimage.
THere lived sometimes in a vast and solitary desert, a holy and Religious
Father, whose chiefest care, and daily exercise, was with fasting, watching,
and praying, continually to serve God. This holy Father was moved on a time
with a zealous and hearty desire, to find out the true and ready way, (if
possibly he cold,) to true wisdom, and the love of God. Therefore he resolved
with himself to travail over the whole world, if happily he could find a
Master able to instruct and direct him herein. With this resolution he departed
from his Cell, and then first began his determined journey. Now after this
holy Father, (whom we will call, Desiderius or Desire) had measured the
desert, with a long and wearisome travail he first encountered a reverend old
shepherd: who fed his flock, in a pleasant green meddow, beautified with
variety of sweet smelling flowers: with the sight of whom, being greatly
comforted: having long travailed, and yet met with no man, he saluted him in
manner following. My loving Brother, now thanked be God who has directed me to
meet you here. To whom the shepherd returned answer: I likewise am glad
of this our meeting: tell me, what seek you in this solitary desert? I seek
quoth Desire a certain Knight, who as I understand is travailed this way.

CHAPTER. 2. He instructs Prelates and spiritual Pastors.
THis Pilgrim, and this Pastor, thus met together, Desire attentively noted
with admiration, the great care, and diligence, which this good shepherd
used, toward the flock committed to his charge, first, he had in his hand a
rod, or wande, on his right side, there hong a scrippe, or bag: on his
feet, he wear wodden pattens, his garment was a long coat; on his left
side, at his girdle, there hong a little horn, and on his right side, an other
somewhat greater, two great dogs followed him on each side, and fast by, was
his homely cottage, fensed and compassed about with bushes, and thorns. The
shepherd, perseauing how attentively Desire beheld and noted him, asked of
him, the cause thereof: and if he never had seen a shepherd before? DE.
Truly Brother, I have often seen many, but never one so well provided as your
self, wherefore pardon me: and if it be nto troublesome to you, answer me to
that I shall ask of you. SH. You shall not be offensive to me, if your
demandes, be but such as I may answer. DE. Wherefore do you carry this
staff in your hand? SH. I marvel not a little, why you ask me that, for
considering, your self are a Shepherd, as I am, how can you be ignorant of
the use of it? I use this staff, both for my aid, and stay, that going up and
down, with my sheep, I stumble not and fall: and also, therewith I order and
rule my flock, directing them therewith, to keep their right way, and
prohibiting them, to wander and stray, but to keep together, not allowing each
one to go several ways: for if any one chance to sever from my flock, or
to follow after any other, then my self, with this staff, enforce him and
drive him, until he unite himself again to his fellows. DE. What do you
carry in this Scrippe that you wear? SH. Four things: A tinder box to
strike fire, wherewith in cold winter I may warm my self, and dress such
meat as serves my fellows, and me, also bread, onyons, a box of ointment,
and salt, whereof especially, I often give my sheep. DE. Why do you wear wodden
pattens on your feet. SH. To keep me warm in Winter, when it is Frost, and
Snow: for if I should wear more costly, or curious, they would soon be worn
out with much going about. DE. What signifies this long garment that you
wear? SH. This is my habit, without which, no man would know me to be a
sheephearde. DE. Whereof is this garment made? SH. of sheep skins. DE. Might
it not be made of Wolves or other beasts skins? No, for my sheep would
easily find that by the smell, and so would presently fly away from me: but
seeing me cladde in their own skins; they love and follow me continually.
DE. What have you in the horn that hangs on your left side? SH. An ointment,
wherewith I dress my sheep that be infected with the scabbe. DE. What in the
bigger, that hangs on the right side? SH. A marking stone, whereby I know
them from other men's sheep. DE. For what use do you keep these dogs? SH.
They bark in the night, and keep away the wolves, whereby, both my sheep be
in more safety, and I my self take my rest more quietly. DE. Why are you so
careful over this your charge? SH. Because I have a kind and bountiful
Master, who has promised me a great reward, although I do it not in regard
of reward, but rather for the love I bear to him.

CHAPTER. 3. Of the same Argument.
DESIRE now grew into great admiration with him self, and was greatly
pleased, hearing that this shepherd did undertake this charge for love, and
said to him. My brother, considering you co^uerse for the most part in these
pleasant fields, can you certify me of a certain Knight which wandereth
solitarily, up and down alone? by reason that being expelled his possession by
his own subjectes, he is constrained to seek some place of abode where he may
rest and settle him self. SH. What is the name of this Knight, you enquire
after? DE. He is called, the Love of God. SH. I know right well the place of
his abode. And if thou had experience to keep my flock as I have, and werte
every way sufficient for such a charge, I would my self bring thee to him,
that thou might not as heretofore wander up and down to seek him, he
loves sheepheardes, and willingly conuerseth with them. And although he be a
noble, and renowned knight, yet is he notwithstanding the soune of a
shepherd. But perceauing thee, to be a man of a weak, and tender
constitution, and unfit of thy self, to undertake the charge of my flock,
not able to follow them, though this solitary desert, I think it meet, thou
should assay an other journey. DE. What other journey do you advise me to
take? SH. First must you pass through this solitary desert, and not far
hence, shall you find a fair and stately Monastery: this Monastery is
inhabited only with Virgins, of whom you shall learn the abode of this Knight:
for such is the courtesy, affability, and honest carriage of him, that
willingly, he conuerseth with all, that seek after him. This descourse of the
shepherd, pleased Desire not a little, and the rather, being put in hope, by
him to find out the Love of God. Who said to him, teach me, I pray you the
ready way that I must take: least that perhaps through ignorance, I hap to
go awry. SH. I may not my self forsake my flock, yet will I appoint thee a
convenient companion in this thy journey, who accompaning thee, that by the
assistance of God, thou shall not easily go out of thy way: take here with
thee this my dog. DE. What is his name? SH. Good will. DE. Farewell my
Brother. SH. And you also, to whom I wish a prosperous journey.

CHAPTER. 4. Of the house of Humility.
HEre Desire leaving the Shepherd, undertook his journey, accompanied with
his dog; running by his side: which was no little comfort to him on the way,
and now having travailed, many days, and nights, he entered on a Sunday, into a
most pleasant green meadow, seated in a dry, and rocky soil, whereat, Desire
meruailed not a little, to see so pleasant, and so green a meddow, lying in so
stony, and so barraine a place, ouergrowne about, with bushes, and thorns.
And entering farther in, he found there builte, a stately, fair Monastery: the
sight whereof, pleased him much. But coming near, he found the gates shut,
and a certain Virgin standing without, modest as to him seemed, both in her
attire, and behavior: who at the sight of Desires dog, began to be afraid.
Whom Desire comforted, and hid not to fear, assuring her, his dog would
not hurt her. And meruailing, to see her stand thus alone without, he demanded
of her, why she stood there, who answered him, that she expected the
opening of the gates to go in. Then demanding farther her name of her, she
answered, saying; I am cal-called Vainglory. Now Desire having long expected
the opening of the gates, and perceuing his attendance to be all in vain,
began to call, and knock at the gate with a hammer, hanging thereat, called
Longanimitie, and presently came forth can ancient reverend man, who opened
the gate. This man was called the Fear of God, who was both porter and keeper
of all this Monastery, whom Desire seeing, and finding a grave and wise
reverend man, was greatly cheared in beholding him, and after due reverence
done to him, spoke to him in manner following. Good Sir (quoth he,) my coming
hither, is to seek out a Knight, called the Love of God. Who as I am told, is
travailed through this desert, and has his abode now in this Monastery,
wherefore I humbly desire of you, to know if he be here within or no. At this
demand of his, the porter rejoiced, for he loved the Love of God even as his
own Brother, and asked of him, why h sought ofter this Knight. DE. I seek him
not only because I am greatly delighted with him, but also because it is very
behouefull for me to find him; FEAR OF GOD. What? have you any thing so
secret that you dare not reveal it? DE. Truly Sir. only I desire his company
and conversation, and wish I were his servant to attend on him, coveting
nothing more than such a Master and instructor, for in all this country, I
cannot find a Master answerable to my mind, although many have bin willing to
entertayne me. But I have learned from many, that the Love of god, is a most
noble gentle, and bountiful Master: who in that he is rich, often bestows
great preferments on his servants. FEAR OF GOD. True it is, he passed, his way
accompanied but with few, who at this present is not within, but have patience
a while, and I will call a Virgin to you, who is able to direct you, where you
shall find him out.

CHAPTER. 5. How Vainglory watches at the gate.
Mean time, now Desire joyfully expected the coming of the Porter, and Virgin
he spoke of, and not weighting long, there came to him a modest and seemly
Virgin, who saluting him courteously, was in like manner resaluted again, of
whom Desire craved her name, who answered, my name is called Nihili-pensio,
because I entermedle not in superfluous and unnecessary things, and demanding
farther the name of the Monastery, she told him it was the house of
Humility, because within, there dwelt many virgins, who lived under the
obedience and rule of humility, he again asked: what maid is that which
stands without the gate, her name quoth she, is called Vainglory: who
sits continually at this gate until it be opened, and then, if the Porter
be negligent, and look not strictly to his office, (but leave open the gates)
she presently enters. Why do you not admit her in said Desire, considering
both in speech, habit, and gesture, she seems modest, virtuous, and honest.
You know not (quoth the Virgin) her conditions, I perceive: For I assure you,
she is a most dangerous beast, for how much the more modest, and religious
she seems by her external carriage, so much I hold her, to be more
dangerous. What, says Desire, does she at any time hurt you? yea truly said
the Virgin, so far as lies in her power: her father is a wicked man, called
Self Love, her mother as ill, called Self Estimation, neither have we three
greater enemies in all the world, and farther, they are enemies to the Love of
God, a Knight who is Master of this Monastery, in which we live. And that you
may farther know, what hurt Vainglory does us: I say, so soon as she
enters in, she is so gluttenous, and ravening, that first she goes into
our Orchards, and there deuoureth, and eats up al our fruit, which is both
fair and good, which is the fruit, we have to live with, neither have we
more than one tree of it, which carries so little, that hardly are we sustained
therewith, which being taken away from us, by Vainglory, we remain so poor,
that nothing is left us. And yet worse than this, after she is once come in,
she is so crafty, and deceitful, that we cannot expel her, labor we never
so much, until we call the assistance of our Mother, at whose only sight,
she runs away: wherefore we think it good, not to admit her at all,
which to prevent, we purposely keep this Porter continually at our gate, who
is a severe and stern man, and still shuts the gate, that she cannot
enter: whom we entreat to be circumspect, that when he admits any, he
through negligence, leave not open the gate. Desire stood amassed, at the
discourse of this Virgin, and replied, considering she is so dangerous an
enemy to you, you cannot be too careful, to keep her out of your house.

CHAPTER. 6. By what means, we may attame to Humility.
DEsire continuing his speech with this Virgin, asked her who brought her into
that goodly, and Religious Monastery, adorned, and shining, with so rare
virtues, Two Virgins (quoth she) guided me hither, whereof the one is called
Contempt of the world, a Virgin endued with singular virtues the other called
Contempt of her self, exceeding the first by many degrees. These two Virgins
leading me in, entreated our Mother and Mistress to receive me, which
notwithstanding she had not done, but for the love of a certain Knight, which
met us in our journey, and came in here with us, who bestowed on me this
habit I wear, and admitted me into the society of his Virgins, and had it not
been granted us by special grace, that, that Knight had entered in hither
with us, I had never been received, but had lost my labor. DE. What is the
name of the Knight you speak of? VIRGIN: The Love of God. It pleased desire
much, that the Love of God was of that account, that so many, and so great
things where done: only for his sake, and now he began more earnestly to
Desire his presence, and said. DE. Dear sister, tell me what were the parents
of these two Virgins, which brought you hither, for it avails much to the
honesty and reputation of a man, to be borne of honest and virtuous parents,
for commonly the tree takes the virtue from the root. VIR. I know right well
their parents names, their father is one of chiefest authority in our Princes
palace, who is called, To know, also I know as well their grandfather, whose
name is To Consider, who is a wise and discreet man, and one that discharges
his office duly: he married a wife called Wisdom. DE. Had the Knight when
he met you no man in his company? VIR. Yes, he had a boy with him whom he
loves dearly, this boy is, called the Love of our neighbor. DE. Can you
direct me whither this Knight is gone? VIR. I could direct you, but let us go
in, and I will bring you to those that can instruct you certainly: but tell me
I pray you, why do you carry this great dog with you? DE. He was given unto
me by an other, for I my self had first but a little whelpe, which I bredde up
in my chaber, until I met a certain shepherd that bestowed, his bigger
dog on me, to accompany me through this vast and solitary desert, in which
(as I was told) lived many hurtful serpe^ts, and dangerous wild beasts, from
which I might be defended by the assistance of this dog. VIRG. What is the
dogs name? DE. Good will. VIRG. The dog surely is a very good dog, if you
know how to keep him: and assure your self, so long as you have him, he
will suffer no ill to befall unto you, neither need you to fear, to stray out
of your way. DE. But tell me I pray you? of whom may I enquire, where I may
find this Knight that I seek after? VIR. Truly Brother, he dwells far
hence, and thou have a long journey to go through this desert, before thou
can come to the place of his abode: thou must travail at the least, seven
days journey, for there be seven Monasteries, seated in this desert, neither
is there any other way to pass, but this: yet for the love of the Love of God,
considering, I see thee so desirous of him, I will direct thee a short way to
go, by the which thou shall sooner come where he is, wherefore, it is
requisite that thou follow my advise. Desire hearing what see said, rejoiced
greatly, but especially, because she said she would do it for the Love of
God, and said to her. DE. I will do, what ere you bid me, so I may find the
Love of God. VIR. Here, within this desert, there are eight Monasteries,
whereof, this which is the house of Humility, is the first, the second, is of
Justice, the third, is of Wisdom, the fourth, of Fortitude, the fifth, of
Tempera^ce, the sixth, of Faith, the seventh, of Hope, the eight, of Charity:
in this last of Charity, remains the Love of God, and there discharges the
office of a porter. This whole journey, thou must undertake, if thou will be
sure to go the right way, but as I said, I will teach thee a shorterway, by
which, thou may sooner come to him: yet notwithstanding, it is of necessity,
that thou abide a time here in this Monastery, that thou may learn, mark,
and remember, all our orders, and be acquainted with our Mistress, and all herd
daughters, and learned, and remember their names behuiours, and lius. Moreover,
thou must diligently note, al things in this Monastery, and carry to the Love
of God, Certain rules of ours, for the great love he bears to this our
Monastery before others, then will he without delay, most willingly receive
thee, the rather, if thou bring letters of commendation from our Mistress. DE.
What is the reason, the Love of God should so prefer you; considering (as me
seems) you are the poorest, meanest, and fewest in number. VIR. This was the
first Monastery that was founded in this Desert, and all the other are
depe^ding on this, besides our chie fest founder, and governor, the builder,
and workman of this Monastery, makes his abode and dwelling amongst us: And
although he walk up and down this Desert, to visit and keep in order the
other Monasteries, yet will he not permit himself to be otherways called, then
a child of this Monastery, and first of al, we gave him an habit. desire was so
much delighted with the discourse of this virgin; that he felt his heart
inflamed with love, for he noted her words well, and said, he desired nothing
more, than to spend long time in this place, and with great diligence to note
and mark their orders. Then the virgin taking him by the hand said, let us now
go in.

CHAPER. 7. The purpose, or intent of Humility, and her talk with Desire.
THe building of this house much pleased Desire, and he admired the beauty
thereof, considering it was plain, without any cou^terfet: for neither was it
builte high, not yet set forth, with any imagery or painting; but low, and
convenient, not founded upon sand, but on a firm rock. After Desire had a
time atte^ded his devotions in the Oratory, the Virgin brought him to the
chamber of their Mistress, or mother, who received him courteously, seeing him
virtuous, and devoted to Gods service, and making him sit, said unto him, what
cause my Son has brought thee, amongst us, considering we are so poor, so
mean, and such abjects? DE. Lady mother, I seek after a knight, called the
Love of God. And as I am instructed, I cannot find him, except I make my abode
here some time with you: wherefore (if it be not troublesome to you,) I desire
to live under your obedience, and government. HVM. Your desire and purpose
pleases me well, but first consider, and weigh with your self, what it is
that you go about to undertake, least having once entered, you repent you of
your purpose. DE. I beseech God assist me with his grace and help, that I may
persevere in virtue, and all goodness. HVM. I wish the same, and pray to God, to
accomplish this good work, which he has begone in thee. But farther, it is
requisite, that thou thy self endeavor all that in thee lies, that God may
prosper this thy good purpose. DE. What think you needful for me to do? HVM. My
Son, I will tell thee. If thy desire be to remain here amongst us, and not
to be expelled from hence by my Virgins; thou must take my youngest daughter,
which brought thee in hither, who is called Nihili-pensio, that is, contempt of
al unnecessary cares: and her thou must obey as thy gouernesse or Mistress, to
whom, purposly we have committed the charge, to entertayne strangers, and be
the directix of nouices, and whosoever refuse to be obedient to her, never
persevere in that they undertake. DE. Most willingly I admit her, and receive
her my gouernesse; and desire to know of you Lady mother, your name, stock,
conditions, and degree, and how, you come to be mother over these Virgins? For
as it is told me, I must know, and learn, the properties, conditions, and
state, of all these Virgins under your government to the intent, that the better
I know them, the more I may love them; and that when I shall depart from hence,
I may the better be able to answer, and direct those that shall ask, or seek
to learn any thing of me. HVM. My name is Humility, my Father, Contempt of
him self, Knowledge of himself, my Grandfather, and his wife is called
Knowledge of God. My fore named Grandfather, comes from a city, called To
mark, and consider what I am, what I have been, what I shall be. My
Grandmother from a town, called Consideration of the Love of God. There are
but two ways, to go to the country of my Grandfather, and only two gates,
whereby to enter in, the first is, Man himself, the other All creatures, and
men say, no man can enter into either of these gates, but by flying: and that
our Lord God himself builded this city, with his own hands, considering,
that none but he, could finishe so commodious, so beautiful, and so firm a
building. DE. Would our Lord God, whose majesty, and excellency is so great,
put himself to the building, of such stony, and clay works? HVM. Yea truly,
for he is an excellent workman, and both a stilfull mason, and carpenter, and
takes great delight in making earthen works, and buildings. DE. What is the
cause that he does this, considering that he has need of nothing? HVM.
Nothing, but his own goodness, does constrayne, or move him to do this: whence
it proceeds, that he never cease to benefit others, neither seeks he, or
studieth with all things that he makes, and goes about, any other thing,
but the benefit, felicity, and salvation, of all men, the honor and praise, to
himself alone reserved. And for this cause, does he make of so base, and vile
a matter, so goodly, and beaufull works, as he does, that the worthiness of
the work, being compared with the baseness of the matter, all men might admire
him, praise him, and love him. DE. I meruail that so excellent a Lord as he is,
would seek for praise, considering thereby he may be touched with vainglory?
HVM. There is nothing less to be feared, than that in him, he being so perfect,
that no greater perfection can be added to him, and all honor and glory, that
can be yielded to him, cannot be said vain, being only proper to him; And how
great honor soever we can give to him, yet in regard of that which beseems
him, and is due to him; we can never honor him, answerable to his dignity. And
for that cause will he be exalted, and praised, not that he desires glory, but
because he is most just, and will, that every one, have that which is due to
him: then seeing all praise, honor, and glory is due to him alone, being only
good, his will is, that all praise, honor and glory, be yielded only to him.
But if any other shall seek or desire after glory, they may justly be called
vaineglorious, because they take it from him, to whom it only appertains,
and he may truly be called a thief, that takes to himself, an other man's
goods, against the will of the true owner.

CHAPTER. 8. Humility continues her speech.
DESIRE. Now Lady Mother, that you have told me your parentage, and stock, I
desire to know, how you came to be chief Gouernesse of this house: for in my
opinion, it is a great honor and dignity, and I my self, in time may come to
be a governor: for there is great difference, between commanding, and
obeyinge, Humility hearing what he said, began to weep, of whom, Desire
demanded the cause of her weepinge. HVM. My Son, I cannot conteyne my
tears, to see, that outwardly thou seem clad with the habit of humility,
and yet inwardly thou appearest naked, and bare, and that in show, thou semest
religious and virtuous; but in heart, and mind, void of virtue, and devotion.
In vain have we used our passed discourse, seeing these thoughts, and desires
of thine, are so clean repugnant from the will of my father, and most dearly
beloved Lord Jesus, who neither in word, nor deed, ever sought, or desired rule
or government, and came not into this world, to be served, but to serve. From
which path who soever turns, and strayeth: walks the way of damnation, not
salvation. But Oh unhappy and miserable creaturs that we are, to whom it is
allotted, to rule and govern others: considering how hard a task we take in
hand, if we will but command our selves as we ought. Such honor is in deed but
misery, and full of cares, labors, wearines, afflictions, sorrows, dangers, and
most horrible fears and which if it be not well ordered and governed, is in
the end accompanied with ignominy and shame. Oh over heavy burden of rule and
commandment: in which nothing is found, put labor, and trouble, wherein
hatred, repining, and il will is received from those that should acknowledge, and
yield obedience and thanks. If thou remainest any time here amongst us, thou
shall find by experience my sayings true. Now, to answer thy demand, how I
came to be gouernesse: I will, for the Love of God acquaynte thee with the
mean. When first, I entered into this house: I purposed and so persuaded my
self, that I was but a laboring beast, and the servant of the other Virgins:
and this determination of mine, I so resolved to perform, and imprinted it,
deeply in my mind, and heart, continually calling it freshly to my mind, and
prayinge to God, to make me still desire it, and that it would please him to
make me worthy to be his Spouse, and so through his appoynte-ment I came to
be gouernesse, although of my self, I neither would, or desired it. Desire
hearing Humilities discourse, thought her a Virgin, of very rare virtue, in
that for the Love of God, she had so dejected, and debased her self; and
perceauing her to be yet a Virgin, understood the Matrimony that she spoke of,
to be spiritual, and not carnal, and said. DE. Then I perceive, who so will
be a Superior, and ruler, must according as you have done, first humble and
debase himself. HVM. It is true my Son as by experience thou may find it.
DE. And how may I try it? HV. By seeing those that humble themselves to be
exalted: yet, to take heed, that thou humble not thy self to that end, that
thereby thou desire to be exalted, for so, thou shall sin in pride: And
pride, and humility are open enemies, and ever oppose themselves, one against
the other. For what so ever thou do, if thou truly humble thy self, thou
can not, in the same action, exalte thy self. But if thou humble thy self,
because thou would be exalted, thy show, is humble, but thy act, is proud.
And because, the action is to be taken, according to the intent of the mind,
such humility is called pride. By which reason, humility, may diversely be
termed pride. For if we have respect to the action of such a man outwardly, he
carries a show of humility, but looking to the end of his humble action, we
shall find it, wholly to proceed from pride. And to speak properly, humility
it self, contendeth not with pride, but the spirit of humility, and it is
impossible, to have these two agree in one: for humility is but an act, but the
spirit of humility, conteyneth both the act, and the cause, and intention, of
humbling, and dejecting our selves.

CHAPTER. 9. Humility continues her discourse, and teaches how to strive
against vice.
NOw my forenamed husband, (I mean my purpose I undertook to humble my self,
like a laboring beast, and the servant of all men,) assisted me faithfully,
in a certain conflict I had with an other Lady, and her maidens, of the house
of Pride, whose gouernesse was called Pride of life: which daily endeavors to
scrach out mine eyes, and still brauleth with me: An she brings with her,
both the under gouernesse of her house, called Concupiscence of the flesh; and
her steward, Concupiscence of the eyes. To these three associates, her self a
lewd maid, both mother, and nurse of them, called Negligence, who being
often weak, and feeble, is easily overcome: but sometime she so fills her
self, with eating, and drinking, that she becomes fat and strong, and
then is she very dangerous. She has attending on her, a certain maid,
dull, foolish, and will brought up, called Malice: with whom come hither,
three other Maids, Anger, Sloth, and Envy. And unto the three last, associate
them selves, two other, that is, Naughty Suspicion, and Rash Judgment. All
these, are at mortal enmity with me, and still oppose them selves against me,
with whom I am daily, to contend, and fight. Therefore, so often as they enter
in here, I with the assistance of my husband, strait drive them out, and force
them to fly. And then have we can other fear, least the Maid which
continually watches at the gates, I mean Vainglory, presently step in.
For if once, we giu her opportunity to enter, she robs us of the fruit, and
benefit which we got, by expelling our other forenamed enemies: so that then we
are barraine of all goodness, and loose the labor we took in our former
conflicte. DE. How then chances it, that when these other your enemies enter
in here, she standing at the gates, does not also enter. HVM. This is the
reason, those other Maidens, use the benefit of wings, and enter not by the
gate, but fly over the walls, and often they hide them selves, so secretly in
some corner of the house, that when we least suspect them, they walk and
wander up and down amongst us, wherefore we are of necessity, to keep a
careful watch, least suddenly they come upon us, and spoil us unlooked for.
DE. Let us discourse, yet longer of this matter, and tell me why? You are at
such debate, and contention with them, considering how il a thing it is, to
give such example to worldly me^, when they shall see such discord, and
dissension amongst Religious persons; who they know, should be gentle,
pitiful, and mild, for the Love of God to all men? HVM. The cause of our
strife, and dissension with them, is al only for that cause, we expel them our
house, because they are open and professed enemies, to the Love of God, who is
our chief Lord and Master, and whosoever is an enemy to the Love of God, we
will have neither friendship, or familiarity by any means with him.

CHAPTER. 10. Of Concupiscence of the flesh.
DESIRE was greatly pleased to hear, how great confidence Humility had, in the
Love of God, and desired of her, to instruct him, by what means and helps
they overcame, and expelled: those dangerous Maidens, their professed enemies.
HVM. I would willingly do it, but because I am not yet fully acquainted with
thy nature, life, conditions and mind, but only go upon conjectures and
imaginations; I rest yet doubtful, whither I may instruct thee herein or no.
For considering the contrariety, and difference of men's natures, the sweetest
honey, tastes not sweet to all men. DE. What soever I seem in show to your
judgment: or what opinion soever you have of me: yet I wholly submit my self
to your will, and yield me to be ordered by your direction, only desiring to
be instructed by you, what means to use, to find the Love of God. HVM. Upon
that condition I will satisfy your desire, and will impart and make known to
you my exercises, and course of life. First that holy purpose, and
determination of mine, which I spoke of before, has made me Mistress of the
whole world, so long as I shall contemn, and despise it. And Mistress over my
own body by fasting, and discipline, and by my voluntary and willing humility?
I say, not only Mistress and commandresse over my ghostly enemy, but over all
the world and yet farther which is greatest Mistress and commandresse over my
self, for when the world sees me to labor, and endeavor, with all my
diligence to please the Love of God, it repugneth me and all my family, yet I
still reteyne, peace and tranquillity with my forenamed husband. Now Desire,
greatly admired the virtue and force of him, whom Humility so often had named
her husband, and said. DE. I beseech you Lady Mother, instruct me by
similitudes that I may more plainly conceive your meaning. For I am but of
dull and slow concepte, and by examples I shall better conceive your sayings.
This request of Desire pleased Humility well, finding that by acknowledging
this own dullness, he was now become both modest and humble, whereupon she
said to him. HVM. So soon as I see, any of my before named enemies enter in
hither, I thus behave my self, if it be the first which is Concupiscence of
the flesh. I foreknowe already her conditions, and behauiours, which are to be
exceedingly given to gluttony, and to pamper her body by excess of eating and
drinking. Therefore first I take from her all kind of delicate diet, neither
do I allow her, her fill of ordinary meat and drink; And because I am not
strong enough of my self, to tame and master her, in regard that my
domestical servants assist her, I use others help, and place on my right
hand. Gods grace, which may strengthen and defend me from this dangerous
enemy. I also crave the aid and assistance of my husband, and then say to her.
Sister, I have my self despised my flesh, and make no better account of my
self than of a laboring beast, and beasts seek not after dairity and
decliate fare, but only that, as may be sufficient to sustain nature, and are
content with that, which is allowed them, by the discretion of their Master.
And if the Master find him to be wanton and devouring, he musleth him, that he
never eats, but when and what in his discretion he shall like of. And so
Sister, in this respect I am content to be used and ruled like a beast, besides
the Love of God, has given me a bridell, which is made of Sobriety, that I
cannot eat but at wonted times, and that I desire not, or look to have any
other meat, or more daintely dressed then such as ordinariley is set before
me, and therewith I satisfy and content my self. Farther the Love of God has
enjoined me to this also, if I will serve and please him as I ought, to eat
temperately, and moderately, and only for necessary sustenance, of that, what
soever it be that is set before me: and that for good manners I always leave
some what in the dish, thereby to show that more is allowed me, then I can
well eat. For when all is eaten that is set before us, it is as much as if
you shoud say, my allowance is not sufficient for me, neither am I content
therewith, therefore I desire to have more set on the table. And yet farther
this rule is given me to observe for the Love of God. That I would and should
desire less to be allowed me, and the same worse dressed, then the allowance
of my Sisters: and always to wish something to be wanting about me, and
therein to rejoice for the Love of God. By these and like means, this malepert
wanton maid is overcome, and driven away from olesting me. But when again
she shall provoke and stir me, to wanton pleasure, not only by my own
flesh, but also by others. I then fly from her, as fast as I can secluding my
self from al such company, as may allure or entice me to pleasure or
concupiscence. And against this assault, I find that to seclude my self from
company, is a present remedy and most sovereign preservative. Neither, does
this enemy assault me only in my body, but in my soul also, by suggesting many
ill thoughts. Against which also I use, the remedy of flight and hide my self,
either in some corner of a rock, or else in some unfrequented and solitary
place, and there settle all my thoughts and cogitations, upon my most sweet
Savior JESUS, calling to mind his most holy life, his passion, torments, and
most bitter death. Also meditating upon the cruel torments of Hell, the severe
and just Judgment of Almighty GOD. My own departure from this miserable
world, and that of necessity I must appear before the Judgment seat of God:
there to give account of al my thoughts, words, and deeds. By these and like
means, I overcome, and put to flight, this forenamed maiden, who is the
Lieuetenant of the castle of Pride.

CHPATER 11. Of the concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life.
YEt farther, to overcome and clean subdue this enemy, it is also requisite to
vanquish and conquer her companion, I mean Cocupiscence of the eyes, the
steward or governor of the house of Pride: who always gives wings to
Concupiscence of the flesh. For continually she ministers occasion to her
companion, who not-withstanding, I overcome with my holy purpose. For so soon
as she comes, I say thus to her. Sister, I am no better then a laboring
beast, who never desires superfluities, or more then is allowed him, but
always is contented with so much as is necessary, neither expects curiosity
in that which is to be had of necessity, little regarding whether his saddell
and bridle be gilded or imbrodered, or whether the stable be curiosly adorned,
but content if conveniently he may stand and lie. Considering then, that for
the Love of God, I account my self no better then a beast: I will also use my
body as if it were a beast. And as the breaker, and rider, of a stiff necked
horse, with the raines of a bridle, enforces him to stop and turn: so the
Love of God, has briddeled and tide me, with the bridell and chain of
Schamefastnes and Bashfulnes: that I shall not curiuously see, and covet the
vanities of the world. For I ought not behold: that I ought not desire. And the
Love of God has taught me to say, when I see a thing beautiful, pleasing rare,
singular, or curious, I never will settle my love on thee, but refuse thee, and
hold thee but as a mere vanity, therefore remebring the worthiness of my
creation, I will not bestow my love or fix, my affection, on so vile, so base,
and so transitory a thing: but on that which in it self is the only treasure,
and goodness, and a beauty which neither age or sickness can blemish, I mean on
my sweet Savior and Redeemer JESUS; who demands of me my love and
affection, and may justly challenge the same as his own. By these and like
means this other Maid is overcome. Now these two being vanquished in manner
as I have told you, there yet remains the last which is Mistress of these, one
more terrible, crafty and more subtle than the other, ever lying in wait to
hinder good actions, her name is called Pride of Life, who when soever she
comes in hither amongst us, is always attended with one or other hand-maide,
and still brings with her either Good or evil estimation. But straight I say
to her, a beast is no better to be accounted of than a beast neither is to be
thought, worthy of honor, or estimation, but rather ignominy, and base
contempt. Then sometime she comes complaining to me, and says: see how my
superiors behave themselves toward me, and use me, both in age, wit, and
judgment: I am not their inferiors, yet they use such and such a one, with
better respect then me. But presently I find out her craft and subtelty, and
preventing her, reply: A beast is not to be used but basely, and according to
his Masters discretion, to be whipped and beaten. For If at any time his Master
shall use him but gently, and play with him; he presently will kick, and
forgette the duty due to him. Therefore a wise Master, and men of good
government, although they love their beasts never so well: yet will never use
extroardinary, and undue familiarity to them: but always carry themselves with
a kind of severe gravity; considering such familiarit6y is never attributed to
humility, courtesy, love, or affability, but rather to simplicity, and mere
fondness. For such familiarity, does rather hurt, then benefitte a beast. But
a discreet, and wise Master, will rather endeavor with all possible diligence,
that his beast, or horse, keep his right way in their journey, and carry
carefully, the burden laid on their backs, then that the world should
think him fond of them, or expect to be held a kind, and loving Master, and
one that should seek to be praised of them. For by these means it might
happen, as often we see it, that either the Master toward the beast, or the
beast forgette himself toward the Master, when the Master uses not such
reason, moderation, and discretion, as he ought: and that indiscretion may give
occasion to the beast, to stray out of their bounds, farther then is allowed,
and so by little and little, using an ill custom, the Master shall not dare to
direct, or govern according to the superiority he has over his beast; but if
he chance for their negligence to strike or beat them, they presently will
resist, and kick again at him. And then if the beast happen either to cast
off his burden, or else to carry it contrary to his Masters mind, he must
needs wink at it, and suffer him to go, where, and as he will himself, and
so, he to be obedient to the beast, not the beast to him. Even so Sister, were
it like to prove with me, if I should yield to my own sensual affections,
and be carried away with worldly pleasures, and vanities. But he that loves
me, and has care over me, does with his discretion correct me, and bridle my
will; that I fall not to open shame, and so be undone, but for the love he
carries to my soul, he does chastise and discipline my body at his
discretion. Neither do I my self wish to be used better then a beast. At some
other time the same Pride of life, comes to me under the color of Envy, and
complains thus. See how such and such an office is given to this, and that
body: But no reckening or account is made of me. One is made gouernesse, and an
other vndergouernesse, the third the steward, and an other secretary; but my
self, which am inferior to none of them in years, or desert, am neglected
and nothing regarded at all. No place of credit is committed to me, wherein I
might rule or command over others: but always I am dejected like a base
kitchen Wench: Yea, I am made the underling of the meanest maid in the house.
And now I find it true that they of best desert; are commonly and for the most
part least considered. For which cause hence forth, I will deserve less: for I
see, they that counterfette to be lambs are deuored of Wolves. Such and like
complaints, does she often make to me, as though I knew not the ground from
whence it came. To whom I answer; Sister, I have not given over and forsaken
the world, and betaken my self to this solitary, and sequestered life; thereby
to rule others, and to moderate their causes. For since my first entrace
heather, I have vowed obedience: and therefore will perform that which I came
hither to do, and for which I was called, and which I undertook to accomplish
at my entrance. For God will never demand or ask account of me, how much I
have commanded and ruled others, or with how much honor, or how great offices I
have bin exalted in the world: but how humbly, and dutifully, I have obeyed his
commandments, and how willingly I have humbled my self to my superiors, and
subjected and debased my own wilful and stubborn rude mind. Therefore Sister,
I look only to discharge and perform my own office, in that place and
degree, to which I am called by God, and suffer others to look likewayes to
that charge of theirs, to which by Gods providence they are as my self called.
Mean time this one thing I know for certain, that I live in the state of
assured salvation. (That is under true obedience, humility, and subjection;)
from which no man can fall, except he first clyme higher. And so hereof I have
no just cause to complain, but rather to rejoice, praise, and yield daily
thanks to Almighty God in that he has debarred, and as it wear taken from me,
the means and occasion of falling into the great perils and dangers; into
which high offices and places of dignity and preferment: are wont to draw,
and throw headlong men that seek not after perfection. Which is truly
verified by this saying of Saint AUGUSTINE. I never found Gods ire and
indignation more against me: then that it pleased him to appoint me a co^mander
over others. which truly Desire ought not seem strange to thee. For as this
wicked Wench, which bears such sway in the house of Pride, is more prone ti
wickedness, then all her fellows: so must we (if thoroughly we will subdue her)
use greater policy, strength, and exercise of virtue. And to the end I
protract not the time with circumstances, I now will deliver no vain discourse
to thee, but will instruct thee, by what means and grounds, thou shatl be
able: to overcome and put to flight, this crew of wicked Maidens. When any of
these which so ever she be shall come: and seem to complain as I have
declared before: be thou ruled by me and follow my example; As if Concupiscence
of the flesh shall come and say, I am allowed both to little meat, and yet
that is cold, and not cleanly dressed: my wine is sowren, and every thing in
our house is sluttishly ordered, answer her but thus, she that has more then
she deserves, has no cause to complain: But thou deseruest not brown bread,
and cold water, which most holy and Religious men have been contented to live
with. Therefore thou, which art so wicked, so sloathfull, so disdainefull, and
ready to complain, void of all devotion, inconstant, enuous amd unthankful
to God: do not deserve the coursest bread and water. Which being true, and
yet having good bread, wine, and other meat. Why should thou complain and
have more then thy desert? answer her a like if she find falte with her
apparel. The like reply make also to Concupiscence of the eyes, if she seek
after or wish for this thing or that, and say, O wreatch that thou art, who by
thy own desert, art not worthy to enjoy the least good that is. Yet have thou
the use, of many devout and virtuous books, by reading of which if thou
would, thou might become good. And although (nevertheless) one where
sufficient for thee. Yet have thou holy books of prayers and meditations. Tell
me what is it thou desire more? truly under a show of desiring things of
necessity: thou longest after and seek for things of superfluity, then the
which nothing can be more opposite to the vow of Poverty. And although
thereby thy merit be not clearly lost: Yet assure thy self, it is much
impaired. And nothing can more dishonor and shame him, that professes in
poverty to imitate our Savior, then to have less virtue and taste of Religion,
then the Heathens who professed the worship of false gods. Amongst whom Seneca
showed him self a worthy Captain and teacher of Poverty, as we may find if
we read what is written of him. The same answer give I to the third, that is,
Pride of life, when she comes to me, with a desire to be honored, loved,
acco^pled of, exalted or preferred to some office. For then say I to her. Thou
wreatched Wench, thou have more honor already then thou deseruest: what have
thou not through the number of thy sins deserved, to be thrown headlong
down, into the bottomolesse pit of hell? here to be partaker of the pains of
the damned, and yet behold, how much thou art honored of God, who not only does
tolerate thee, to live amongst his creatures, but has admitted thee, also
into his house and family: and willingly would have thee, not only his servant,
but also if thou would one of his daughters. And although thy own
unworthiness be such, that thou deseruest not to be reckened amongst his
inferior servants; yet has he admitted thee into his private chamber: and
willingly would have thy presence, both night and day, that thou might
freely talk with him, praise him, honor him, and serve him; and that yet
living here in this mortal life, thou amist be honored with the office of
Angels, be chosen as one of his most special Friends, sit at his own table,
and feed on the food him self feeds. And now proud Wench what is it thou
would more, whither would thou, through thy pride clyme? would thou
ascend again from whence thou once did fall? that thou might be plunged
as deep in the bottomless pit of hell, as is Lucifer thy father, whose pride
threw him thither, what would thou desire? would thou be God? Truly thou
can not say that thou wa^test any thing, open thy blind eyes, and willingly
confess, that thou have received greater benefits from God: than thy base
deserts, could any way challenge, content thy self with that, which it has
pleased God to bestow on thee, and rest satisfied with that estate and degree;
which God by his servants has allotted to thee, and assure thy self that all
things have their effect: according to the providence and permission of God.

CHAPTER 12. By what means the other forenamed naughty Maids may be overcome.
NOw these thee principal enemies being clean overcome, Negligence their
nurse is easily vanquished, who by a thousand secret corners steals in here
amongst us. Sometime at time of prayer: and sometimes again when we should
attend our works and labors. But still I answer her with this or like
answer. Sister, a laboring beast, or a horse, is not kept in the stable, to
be idle, live easily, eat, drink and sleep: but still contentedly to labor,
and take pains. For except he be accustomed to labor, watch, and fast; he
grows rest and takes stomach, and will strike at his Master, who so sone as
he perceaueth the ill conditions of his beast, presently will beat him, and
kick him with a spure; Eue^ so the Love of God does give me a spur, I mean
Fear, wherewith when I wax sloathfull he pricketh me. And I my self, who am
but a servant and a base vassal of this house, do find by proof, that the
Maidens of this place must be made to labor, and that they must not be
favored, in that, which is commanded them, neither are to be suffered to live
idelly and wantonly, least they grow to have wills and repugne their
superiors. For no creature is worse then a proud and naughty servant. Farther
I demand whither she think the Kingdom of heaven is to be obtained, by
eating, drinking, sleeping and living idly, which she for shame cannot
affirm. For our Savor JESUS Christ walked a clean contrary way. And if he
chose a different way, to come to perpetual felicity, and would suffer his
bitter passion, and that way enter into glory: we likewise if we desire to be
partakers with him in glory, must also walk the path of patience, persecution,
and poverty. For so long as our head will go one way, and our foot an other;
our whole body can never be directed the true way. Therefore, except we walk
the path of persecution, affliction, labor, and contempt; we cannot think to
be incorporated with him, but like corrupt members, must look to be cut of,
and thrown into hell fire: there to be consumed. For except we be pertakers of
our Saviors passion, and seek him, and suffer with him on the Cross: we must
not expect to partake with him, any part of his glory, or of his resurrection.
And to conclude except we be partakers in this life with our Savior JESUS
Christ, who was whipped, spit upon, despised, wearied and toyled with daily
labors, poor, continually suffering hunger and thirst, and at last enduring
for our sins his bitter passion, and suffering like an offender his pains on
the Cross; when not withstanding he was void of all fault, and of all
innocents the most innocent that lived, except I say we imitate him herein: we
shall never find him a sweet, gentle, and friendly King of glory, and Prince
of peace. Sometime this naughty Wench, I still mean Negligence, creeps into
our Oratory, and there being weary, through lasines and sloth, is perplexed as
if she where cast into a parison. Then say I, Sister, true and perfect
Religion, never complains of troublesomnes or wearynes. What can I give
again to our Lord, for the many benefits he has bestowed no me? What ca I do
or suffer enough for my sweet Savior and redeemer JESUS, who of this
exceeding love and voluntary will, continewed on the Cross, not sitting as I
do, but streatched thereon, not clothed, but naked and trembling with cold,
not in a house as I am, but in the open cold air: not having shoose on his
feet to keep them warm, but nailed to the Cross, with great, boysterowes,
and cold iron nails; all which pains and torments, he suffered for my sake.
Why then should I show my self so ungrate: that althopugh not all: Yet I will
not suffer some what again for him? he suffered here for my sake, most
exceeding miseries and painful labors, and those not for an hour a night
or a day, but all his life which was 33. years: he hong a live three hours
upon the Cross, in exceeding pains, most bitrter torments, and insufferable
griefs, such I say, whose like was never felt of man: and yet he a most
loving Savior esteemed them but small in regard of his love and kindness
toward me; and willingly would have suffered yet greater than these, if
necessity any ways had urged him to it. Considering then that he is a King,
and I no better then a most base bandslaue; he God, and I durte, dust, and
corruption; he most holy and innocent, I a sinner worthy of naught but
punishment, then he having suffered all this for me: shall I grudge or repine
to suffer a little for him? What? is the seruante to be regarded above the
Master? No. Away then Negligence. For I must be busied in those things which
are my fathers. Small is the merit we shall receive here: if we be not free
from all weariness of the place. For cursed is he that does the works of God
sloathfully and negligently. For God seeks not service that is done him by
compultion, neither is he delighted with unwilling sacrifices: but with that
which is done with a willing mind, and proceeds from a sincere and perfect
heart. Now this old accursed Wench, being put to her flight, we must also banish
her foolish hadmaydes: who by how much the more they be wicked and dangerous:
by so much the more are they vehemente and strong: and the less we labor to
mortify and subdue them: the harder shall we find it to banish and expel
them. The first of them which is Malice, accompaned with her daughter Anger. I
answer in this manner, so sone as she assaulteth me. Sister, Charity is
patient and gentle, then taking the assistance of my husband: my Purpose, I
suppress her and again. Nothing can be inflicted to this beast so seueare,
but that she has deserved far greater correction. If then I have deserved
greater punishments, I may justly say, I am favorably spared, not being used
in rigor according to my deserts. And it is the part of a gentle beast, not to
behave himself stubbournly or rudely to his master, and his whole family; but
far contrary to that, quietly, modestly, and gently to all men. For although
perhaps to day his Master beat him: Yet to morrow again he will feed him
wa^tonly, and will behave himself toward him, like a loving and kind Master.
And although perhaps outwardly he make no shows of affection; Yet inwardly
doubtless he esteems him hightly; but yet dissembleth his affection, and love,
least he take stomach being pampered, and so kick against his Master.
BEsides a beast does sone forget: any wrong or injury, and is pleased again,
if his master but stroke him on the head, or the neck. So I my self being
injured by any one of my Sisters, imagining I am a beast and a base vassal,
bear it patiently for the Love of God, and suffer them to use me according to
their pleasures, assuing my self, that I cannot endure so many injuries from
them; as my own unworthiness does daily deserve. And knowing farther, that our
lord permits for the heynousnes of my sins: that I be afflicted of them here
in this life, so to learn to suffer afflictions for his sake. And now se this
maid, who thou say does wish me nothing, but hurt and offense, and that
other who thou say does secretly backbite me, and al these other, of whom I
am so hated as thou say. These I say hate not or malice me: but my vices,
faults, defectes, my malice, my ill manners and conditions, and most of al my
obstinate, and stubbourne will. Therefore I have cause rather to think they
love me; for what herein they do, proceeds from zeal and a most holy
purpose, neither have they any agreement with Malice, or think her meet to
comfort with Virtue. Let us now therefore consider more iudicially. If I be, or
would be thought the ha^dmaide of God. I must hate and detest (even from my
heart) al my sins, defectes, offenses, and imperfections, and the pronesse of my
fraylty, which draws me to these, which being true, why should I malice or
stomach those, which do but that which my self am bound to. To conclude.
Know that these who thou say speak ill of me, and detract me, yet not
withstanding are my sisters, whom I am commanded to love, not to hate. And
therefore will I do that which I am enjoined. Yet mean while let them consider,
and weigh with themselves, why and to what end they afflict and iniure me. Now
again at some other time she tries me with Envy a maid who uses a two
edged sword and hurts her Sisters both in body and soul. This Wench is
indeed a dangerous enemy, whose chiefest felicity is in her Sisters hurt:
and is never more grieved then at there virtue and good life. Therefore when
she comes to assault me, I say Sister you complain and seem to be grieved
that others in this world possess greater riches, that others, are endued with
more rare beauty, that others have more abundantly the gifts of nature then
your self, but I take comfort and rejoice even in that, and think my self
happy in wanting them. For neither in this life or the life to come: Desire I
any thing but JESUS Christ my Savior, he is my treasure, and the treasure of
Angels, he is my beauty, and the beauty of all creatures, he is my gain, and
the fountain of all goodness. Let others fix their love where best it shall
like them; I desire only my Savior JESUS, and his love ever do I thirst after
with him is no difference twixt rich and poor, he never distinguishes twixt
beautiful and foul. Yet here thou complaniest and say to me: this and that
body abound, and excel in wealth and beauty: such and such happiness is given
them, and not me. But on the contrary this I reply. Although these parties are
possessed of these pleasures; yet have I my self things of greater esteem.
For so noble and so great is the mind that I carry, that it skorneth to
bestow love or affection: on so base, so abject, and so transitory pleasures.
And considering that my name is called HUmility, by humility mean I to conquer
my self. And I find the servants and children of God, to abound with these,
and greater blessings: but not my self, who am a base vassal, and no way
worthy to be partaker thereof. Now Envy seeing she preuayleth little with her
former objections, urges in an envious manner, the gift of spiritual virtues,
saying, behold such a sister who thou know right well, is more given to
virtue and devotion, then thou art; is more conversant with God, and more
exercised in contemplation, and is a Virgin of noted sobriety, and modesty. To
whom I straight answer. For what cause desire I to be religious, or to be
virtuous and devoted to prayer? because others should think better of me, then
they do of my sisters, praise me, honor me, or admire my virtues? or else
because I would be more daintely fed, cladde more costly, or abound in
worldly pleasures. No truly, but for this cause only, that I may serve and
please God, and that my sweet Savior Jesus, may by me, and in me, be praised
and honored. Therefore is it my duty, and that which I am bound to rejoice
in, when I see that my most loving Lord and Master, has such virtuous devout
servants, that be wholly given to his service and prayer, and endued with most
rare holiness of life, and spend their time in Religious exercises. And I hold
it my duty to pray to God, to give them greater perfection, and more abundat
grace, whereby he may be more highly honored of them. For if I had but the
least taste of Gods love in me, wherein not my part and duty to labor what I
cold: that he might be known, honored and loved of all the world, and to pray
that he would bestow his grace on all men, whereby he might of them be
continually honored? Therefore most accursed Wench, fly far from my sight.
Thou know not what charitable Love is, considering thou art the daughter of
that wicked, damnable, and false Apostata. For I would if it pleased God, that
he deprived me of all spiritual and corporal good, which of his bounty he
has bestowed on me, and give them to others, who with them would honor, and
praise him more then I do, who am so barraine and unfruitful a soil, and
have received his grace and gifts in vain. For I desire nothing in this
world, but Gods praise and honor; and will daily seek it, how dearly so ever
I obtain it. See then wreatched Wench how far thou art deceived. Markest
thou not that God knows what he does? he sees plainly that these vessels,
into which so abundantly he infuseth his blessings: be far more pure, and of
a more humble spirit then I my self. And therefore justly has denied me such
grace, seeing right well that I am full of pride, and a vessel filled with
anger and malice, which through haughtines of mind would proudely attempt: to
scale (if it cold) the heavens themselves, which duly pondered, I rest
contented with the will and pleasure of my sweet Lord JESUS, neither desire I
to find ought else but him.

CHAPTER. 13. By what means we may expel all Malice from our selves.
THe third daughter of Malice, is called Sloth, a most dangerous enemy, who is
cold and lasie in spiritual exercises, and the service of GOD: Wherein
consists the sum of our salvation. Her am I wont to answer in this
manner. Thou desire Sister and willingly would persuade me, neither to
frequent the service of GOD: nor to use at all any spiritual exercises. And
therefore of purpose to conquer and subdue thee: I will spend more time, in
watching, and praying, and diume contemplation, where unto she thus replyeth.
See not thou thy self even frozen with a cold devotion, and to feel no
whitte at all any zeal of Gods service in thee, but to use thy exercises,
against thy own voluntary disposition, which provoke justly the indignation
of God. Neither do thou ought else but tempt God therein: who desires no
unwilling, or impulsive services; but such as proceed from a cheerful and
willing mind. Then reply I again. Away thou wicked wreatch, I perceive thy
meaning. Know thou not that at such time I show my love greater to God, when
I serve him with my own will be it never so small: then when I find my self
endued with extraordinary devotion by him? art thou ignorant that God sometimes
of purpose withdraws his grace: thereby to try and prove our strength? And
then when he perceaueth us to offer up, and bestow on him that little devotion
which is remaining in us: he doubleth his grace, and heavenly consolation in
us. Yet so, that finding our selves void of inward sensible grace, we cast
not clean away our good will, and hearty desire. Therefore whereas thou ask
why being so cold, and clean void of devotion, yet I go to pray (considering
as thou say, that is but to tempt God) assure thy self, although I felt in
me far less devotion, and will to serve God: yet that not withstanding I
would frequent my prayers, and would set my self in the sight of our Lord,
neither would I speak or desire ought of him, but standing before him, would
yield to him al due honor and reverence, imagining himself to be present in my
sight, and that I beheld him, and that there I stood before his high, divine,
and fearful Majesty. That he who is the fire of love would inflame my heart
when he should think convenient. Therefore submit I my self to his holy will,
and am content with that which it shall please him to grant me. And the
weaker, fainter, and colder I find my self, so much the nearer I will come to
this fire. For if I will depart from it, then shall I find my self far
colder then before. Therefore depart from me thou naughty Wench. For I do not
use and frequent my daily prayers, my devout contemplations, and spiritual
exercises for my own contentment, comfort, or delight; but only to this end,
thereby to serve my Lord God and honor him, considering I know we it to be his
holy will and pleasure, that I should do so, and that I exercise my self in
all virtue, and holiness to the honor and praise of his holy name. Now when
this wicked maiden with her practices cannot withdraw me from the Love of God.
She takes a new course, and labors to win my love from my fellow Sisters.
And taking the assistance of her before named Nouices, Suspicion, and rash
judgment assaulteth me again, and persuades me to hate and malice my sisters,
and to carry a sinister opinion of them, whereby I should, either suspect some
ill in them, or else rashly without some just cause condemn the^: hence
proceed contempt, repining, murmuring, and detraction. But my self with the
assistance of my Purpose marking her; presently answer. It beseems not so
base, and so abject a maid as my self, to judge amiss of my sisters, or
Superiors: neither lawful for sinners to intermeddle with sacred vessels,
or for beasts to come nigh the holy mountain. It best beseems me to account
all my sisters, virtuous, and holy: but my self most wreatched, and full of
foul sin. For it is a secret to me, what all men are in the sight of GOD, or
in what manner they shall end this mortal life. As for my self, I know
right well, that my pronesse to sin, and naughty appetites and desires,
would draw me headlong to the pit of hell, were I not preserved by Gods
divine grace and mercy. Therefore know I right well what I may fear of my
self and suspect, that is, whether my conscience, my words, and deeds, be
good: for I know my self, but am a stranger to others. And therefore so much
as appertains to my fellows, I will choose the safest course, that is, to
think, and speak all good of them; assuring my self thereby to gain, but
never to loose. For nothing is more dangerous, then to be ruled by our own
will, and to refuse a certainty, for an uncertainty. Charity never thinks
amiss. And I find it a charge great enough for me, to judge and discern mine
own conscience, my affections, my words, and deeds: and not to busy my
self in censuring these, not curiously to intermeddle in others actions. For
who made me a Judge, between God and my sisters? or between them and their
own consciences? Truly no man. Avoid thou therefore, or have thou ought else
to say? I plainly see thou art now overcome, in seeking to suggest to me a
suspicion of my sisters, which is a most damnable, and wicked thing, and wholly
repugnant to holy, and true meaning simplicity, whereof God himself is the
chiefest Author: with whom, no man may, or can at any time dissemble. And if
any man will say, that mistrust, or suspicion may be admitted, and allowed in a
Superior, or any one that has rule over others, and that my before alleged
reasons be not sufficient to refute him, let him assure himself, that great
diligence, much wisdom, and careful circumspection, must therein be used:
and that for this respect, as experience teaches us. If a man will be
suspicious of his wifes loyalty and honesty, and she shall perceive her
husbands distrust: although perhaps before sne were true to him, and honest;
yet may she thereby be moved to disloyalty. Whereupon Seneca says, Suspicion
is the cause of many men's sin. Therefore considering their intention and
purpose is good: why should thou say their actions are naught, when in all
likelihoode they might err, either through ignorance, or simplicity, or want
of experience, by some sudden motion, or humane frailitie, or by some natural
imperfection which they are subject to. And in all these accidents, no
malicious, or foolish rash judgment is to be given. But rather we must pity
and be sorrowful for such imperfections, and excuse them charitably for the
Love of God. But if this answer in reason will not suffice thee, because thou
say their offenses be too apparent, then I say, God by his secret judgment
suffers such things to happen, through whose providence, all things happen,
that exceed our gross capacities. And as he never cease of himself to do
good in us: so sometime permits he that we fall into such temptations, which
notwithstanding he often turns, either to the good of him that offended, or
else, to the good of others, that have seen it. Take thou heed therefore,
thou proceed no farther herein. For he that will take upon him to judge
others, undertakes that which appertains to GOD, or rather desires that
himself were GOD. Mark then wicked wreatch, what befell thy Father, when he
aspired to be like unto GOD. Farther, a horse, or any other laboring beast, is
not of so malicious, or envious a nature, that he suspect, or hold in
jealousy his fellow beasts, or censure their actions in a wrong
understanding. But has his mind only fette on his journey, and that he may
carry his burden according to his Masters mind. Neither regards he if any
of his fellows err in their way, but with an honest emulation will labor to
his power, to follow, or go before those he ought to imitate: which if he
cannot, yet will he keep the way that he is directed, and not intermeddle with
any but himself. Neither will he seek at any time to go back again, or
rest in his journey; except thereby he may perform what he undertakes the
better: neither grudge or repine at that he is commanded, or backbite, or
slander his Master, or any other. Considering then, that I have made my self
a beast for the Love of God: I must humble and carry my self like a beast, and
intermedle with nothing but with my self.

CHAPTER. 14 Of other exercises of Humility.
DEsire having with admiration attentively marked the exercises of Humility,
said unto her. Now find I that true Lady Mother, which I have heard: that
Humility conteyneth in her self, all justice, virtue, peace, quietness, and
happiness, and all spiritual, and temporal comfort, and contentation. Yet
farther, I desire to know one doubt; whether these naughty wenches, when they
come in here amongst you, be known by sight: or whether they take the habit of
your Virgins, and so by subteltie intermingle amongst them: or what mean and
way you have to discover them. HVM. Truly Son, thy question is a matter of
great importance. Know therefore that the Divine goodness has hanged up a
Lamp in the midest of our chamber, called good Conscience, which burns day
and night, being kindled with the oil of his Mercy, and the wicke, or cotton
of holy Scripture. Farther, this Lamp is to be tied with a rope, called Watch
over our hearts, to a nail, which is called, Watch over our senses: Now so long
as this Lamp is kindled and burns: we never fear them, because we do
presently know them. And although they intermingle themselves with the good:
yet by their gate, we easily discern the^. For they be croke shouldered, and
hault, and limp in their pase, so that they neither can go speedely, nor
according to the vow they made. But if through our sins this Lamp be
extinguished, or by our negligence the nail slip out, or the rope chance to
break, or our Lord for our demerits withdraw the oil (which he never does
except we first shed it) then are we in darkness, and all things fall out to
the worst for us. Therefore pray we daily to our Lord God, that it will please
him of his goodness, to lighten our Lamp, saying with the Prophet David: For
thou O Lord do lighten my Lamp: lighten O God my darkness. DE. God I beseech
him, give you his grace and charity: for you have greatly comforted my spirits.
HVM. Take now for thy companions these Virgins here, and let them so long
accompany thee, until thou be thoroughly armed with true fear: that if by
chance these wicked we^ches fortune to meet thee, they adventure not to show
their hate and malice against thee, nor endeavor to withdraw thee from among
us. Here have thou Severity against Concupiscence of the flesh the first.
Manhood or strength against Concupiscence of the eyes the second. Humility
against Pride of life the third. Diligence against Negligence, the fourth.
Gentleness against Malice, the fifth. And now the grace of God be always with
thee.

CHAPTER. 15. Of the virtues, that be daughters of Humility.
HVM. Thus by the grace of Almighty God, and the help and assistance of my
forenamed husband: Iouercome and subdue my enemies, and my self. Desire much
pleased with this discourse of Humility, said to her: DE. I entreat you Lady
Mother, that it may stand with your good likeing, that I may visit and be
acquainted with the Virgins of this society. HVM. Proceed my Son assisted
with Gods grace, most willingly I assent to thy desire. And thou daughter,
which art steward of this house, accompany him, and show him the house, and
bring him to the Celles of every Virgin. This said, Desire departed
chearefully out, of the Lady Mothers chamber, accompaned with Nihili-pensio or
Contempt of all unnecessary cares. Who was steward of the house, and gouernesse
of the Nouices, and was carried by her to the Cell of a Virgin, who was the
first, and eldest daughter of Humility, called Confession, of whom he asked
the manner, of her life and conditions. CONF. I am the daughter of our Mother
Humility, and the scholar of this Virgin here our gouernesse, with whom I often
frequent, and am much delighted with her familiarity, and acknowledge my self
what I am, according as I find my self in examining my conscience. Desire
thought this Virgin of rare and singular virtue, and departing from her was
brought into the Cell of an other daughter of Humility, whose name was Desire
of Contempt, who receiving him courteously, was asked of Desire, both her name
and conditions. VIR. my name is Desire of Coutempt, because I desire, not to be
honored or esteemed of any man. Desire wondered hearing this Virgin desire to
be so much contemned, considering how different it was from the minds of most
men. But admired her virtues, finding, she did it for the Love of God. And
leaving her, was brought into the Cel of an other Virgin, whose name was To
rejoice in being contemned. Of whom Desire being entertained, demaded likewise
her name and conditions. VIR. My name is To rejoice to be contemned. For I wish
to be despised, scorned, and injured for the Love of God. DE. Instruct me I
beseech you how I may attain to this virtue, for such is the haughtines of my
proud mind, that I do not only rejoice: but am grieved and repine if I be
contemned, scorned, despised, or injured, VIR. That proceeds from want of
Humility, whose virtue is to contemn, and neglect her self for the Love of
God. And truly this is an apparent token that thou aboundest with pride, and
over much self love. But seeing thou art by GOD conducted hither into this
Monastery, we will willingly instruct thee, in all kind of virtue, and
altering thy habit, will make thee a new man, and will direct and instruct
thee, how to speak with the Love of God, for other ways thou shall be sure
for to loose thy labor. Therefore if thou would attain to my virtue, thou
must imprinte in thy heart my Sister, Desire to be contemned, thinking and
determining thus with thy self, henceforth will I desire to be scorned and
contemned, and to be neglected of all men for the Love of God. This desire once
thoroughly fixed in thy heart, thou shall by degrees attain to my virtue,
through prayer study, and diligent endeavor. And although at the beginning thou
shall endure some labor and pain: by striving to subdue and master thy own
appetites: Yet persevere to the end, and thou shall get the victory. In so
much that thou shall rejoice; when any thing is said or done to thee, contrary
to thy likeing. Farther thou must by degrees enforce thy self to desire, to be
scorned, despised and contemned. For it is most true, that no man can be
humble, that is not just. And he that shall not desire, to be despised,
contemned, mocked, and debased, this man cannot be called just. DE. How may
that be, that whosoever desires and wishes not to be despised, should be
said to be a man unjust. For by that account, we shall find but few just
men, and in my opinion this cannot be true. VIRG. I will easily prove what I
have said. It cannot be denied but that he is jus, which gives to each man,
that which is right: if therefore man can challenge nothing else for himself,
but to be contemned, scorned, mocked and debased; he is not just which
desires, not to be so used. DE. I would hear you prove that, and show
plainly how, nothing but contempt is due to man. VIRG. I will. First there is
no question, but that all that which is good, ought be loved, honored, desired,
and praised, and how much greater and better it is, so much the more it ought
to be loved: contrary ways, that what so is naught, ought to be despised,
hated, rejected, and suppressed. Now if it be true that every men is ill, it
follows that of right he must be contemned and despised. DE. Tell me how
all men are to be said to be naught. VIRG. Only GOD is good, therefore all men
are naught. DE. I cannot yeald to that conclusion. VIRG. Logitians shall prove,
that none is good but God: and whatsoever is not God, is not good, but ill. And
if man be ill, that all shame, reproach, and contempt is due to him.

CHAPTER. 16. How all creatures are good, and yet none is good, but God
himself.
DESIRE. I am not yet resolved by thy alleged reasons, considering thou say
that God is good, and that whatsoever is not God, is not to be said good. And
the holy Scripture says, that God saw all things that he had made, and that
they were not only good, but very good. Farther, considering God is good (as
indeed he is the chief goodness it self, and the efficient cause, and
beginning of all things created) all things that he has made must of
necessity be good, that the work be answerable to the workman that made it.
Whereupon it follows, that whatsoever God has made must of necessity be
very good. Besides, considering man is the most excellent of all corporal
creatures, it is plain, that he is not only good, but very good. And then if
he be good, by thy own rule it follows, that both honor and love, are due
to him. VIRG. I will not maintain a long disputation with thee, for that
disagreeth with the rules of Humility, only I will open what I have said more
at large, that thou may better understand my meaning. The scripture says,
that none is good but only God. Which is thus to be understood, that only God
is essentially good; and to be good is only proper to him. And what soever he
has made, may be said to be good, participating in goodness, given to them by
God: For whatsoever goodness they have is Gods, not their own. So when thou
see good gifts bestowed on any creature from above, thou must honor and love
such a creature; But this honor and love must be referred to God, and not to
the creature. Therefore our selves and all creatures are to be loved of us,
because they be good in their essence or being, as the creatures of God and
this is, to love God in his creatures. Let not therefore any man desire, to be
praised or honored for his own sake: but for the goodness which God has
bestowed on him: attributing and referring it all to GOD. For it is one thing
that man has from God, but an other which he has of him self. From God he
has what good soever is, but from him self whatsoever is ill. He has from
God that he represents, and carries his Image and likeness. But of him
self through wicked life and evil manners, he is made altogether dislike to
God. Also it is given to him by the grace of God, to desire to be good and
endued with virtue: but of himself he desires ill, and does those things
that most displease God. From hence we learn that those things which are
bestowed on man from above, are greatly to be honored, and highly to be loved,
which are the conditions of his creation and his natural blessings, and yet not
to be loved for his own sake, but for the honor of God: contrary those things
to be hated, which are in man himself, as his vices offenses and al other
imperfections. So that diversely we honor and despise, love and hate some
things, in one and the self same man. And be he endued with never so great
virtue and devotion: Yet let him be assured, that of himself he has nothing
that is good, and still let him desire that in regard of the good gifts
bestowed on him by god, be they virtue, devotion or other spiritual benefits,
that God alone be honored and loved for them, and that all praise be given to
him as to the fountain of all goodness. But for the sin in him, which he
knows to be his own, let him desire to be despised, hated, and contemned of
all men. This doing I say he is to be accounted just. But if every just man
shall desire to be contemned after this sort, how great is the injustice of a
man desiled with sin, not only not to desire to be contemned as I have said:
but to desire and labor to be honored and extolled: Let not therefore a
wreatched sinner think and imagine that he has showed much Humility, in
desiring to be contemned, or let him not be the better persuaded of him self,
therefore considering the most holy, virtuous, and deuoutest man is bound of
duty to desire as much.

CHAPTER. 17. Of the same.
DEsire was not a little pleased herewith, and said to this Virgin. DE. I
beseech you Sister instruct and direct me, by what means I may attain to this
holy Desire. VIR. Two ways there be, by which thou may obtain it, which
are the Love of God, and a holy Purpose, to object and imbase thy self like to
a laboring beast: to which holy Purpose our Gouernesse has wedded her self.
And if thou will be ruled by my directions, thou shall find thy self not a
little assisteth thereby. DE. Most willingly will I be instructed by you. VIR.
Then assure thy self that the Love of God whom I perceive thou art so desirous
to find, has no more dangerous and hurtful enemy the^ is thy own body, Inure
thou thy self therefore daily to this custom that every morning thou say to
thy soul. Let me see now soul, how thou will this day hate thy body, which is
so great an enemy, to thy sweet Savior and Creator JESUS, and how much thou will desire, that it may be despised, afflicted, tormented, and scorned. At
night likewayes say thus again. Now show me my soul how this day, thou have
despised, thy body so rebellious against thy most sweet Lord JESUS, and how
thou have desired that it might be afflicted, and injured of all men, and have
labored that nothing be pardoned it, but have carried thy self most severe
against it. This doing dear Brother, and still conuersing in these good
thoughts, and ever perseuering in this thy desire, this only exercise in time
will bring thee, to an exceeding perfection of perfect Humility, and will teach
how to overcome, and put to flight the most dangerous enemy, and be trayer of
thy soul; and in conclusion thou shall thereby attain, to so great hatred of
thy self: that thou shall wish and labor to be contemned and despised. And
when hereafter thou shall happen to be contemned of some man; then stick fast
to me, and forsake not my virtue. But with rejoicing and thanks giving to God,
say thus to thy self. Now thanks be to God, who has revenged me of my
enemy. Desire being much contented with the direction of this Virgin, took
leave of her, and was brought into the Cell of an other daughter of Humility,
whose name was Simplicity, who receiving him lovingly, was asked by him her
name, virtue, and conditions. SIMP. My name is Simplicity. My office and
conditions is to behave my self simply, sincerely, and plainly toward all
men: and to conceane no hurt or ill meaning of any thing, that I shall happen
to hear or to see: but to think all things to be done rightly and holylie,
and to think ill of no body but my self: For I ever suspect and fear my
self, and continually watch over my thoughts and desires, still looking into
my self, and holding open the right eye of perfect wisdom, whereby I may
echewe and avoid all evil, and our Mother Humility, be made more strong in
her virtue. DE. What? is not Humility endued with all kind of virtue, except
thou hold, and keep open thy eye. SIMP. No considering Simplicity without
Wisdom, is of no estimation, but hurts rather then helps. For the Love of
God loves no man, but such as shall came with true knowledge and Wisdom.

CHAPTER. 16. Of the manners and conditions of Simplicity.
DESIRE. Now then I desire to be instructed by you my Sister, how and in what
manner you behave your self, simply toward all sorts of people. SIMP. In
three things, which are, in thought, word, and deed. First I never use to
think upon those things: which are above my knowledge and capacity, neither
desire I, th honors, estimations, and vanities of this world, but still persevere
in this humble thought, that I am the most abject of all the world, and
unworthiest that lives to be the servant of God: thinking all other holy and
virtuous, and replenished with all kinds of grace and virtue. Secondly I
resolve to use no flattering, feyned, or deceiptful words, but a plain
affirmation or else a denial, that is only, yea, yea: or no, no. For
whatsoever is more, proceeds not of good, but from the root and ground of
vanity. Thirdly I have determined to busy my self, in no worldly, curious, or
vain works, but in such only as are simple, and yet necessary, least thereby
I be drawn to vanity of singularity, and thereby be expelled and kept out from
hence. For to do an action simply, brings Humility of heart, but otherwise
to do is most full of perils. DE. As how. SIMP. Thou shall understand Desire,
that our gouernes and Lady Mother Humility, has set me here, and imposed this
charge on me, to keep safely in this Monastery two rare Jewels which are
remaining here, which are the one, Purity of heart, the other Innocence The
value whereof is of so high esteem, that they cannot be prised according to
their worthiness. For the obteyning whereof this monasery, and the other seated
in this desert: where at the beginning founded and built. And what good soever
we do, is referred to the getting and keeping these Jewels. But if Curiosity,
Vanity, or Singularity should enter by the gate of our heart, our mouth, or
else our action they would steal and carry away both these Jewels from us. And
therefore if any of our Virgins shall not employ all their thoughts, words, and
works to get and preserve these: we account them fools, not understanding
what they undertake. DE. Why do you so carefully preserve these Jewels
considering that by your profession you have vowed poverty? it is dangerous
lest you should offend in covetousness, keeping such unnecessary and precious
jewels, considering many poor people may sterue through want of them. SIM.
Herein thou art deceived: For although in possessing, loving, or desiring
riches or goods, a man may sin in covetousness, according to the inte^tion for
which he shall desire them: yet can there be no sin in possessing these Jewels,
in regard that we desire, keep, and preserve them only for the Love of God,
therewith to honor and serve him, at such time as it shall please him to come
hither amongst us; or when we converse with him in his holy house. Rust and
canker, consume and spoil other worldly Jewels: But these that are kept and
laid up in our hearts, no rust, no ca^ker, no corruption can consume. For no
man can se them but he, which does possess them. DE. If he shall lay them
open, cannot rust then hurt them? SIMP. No: for if purposely he snew them,
that others should see them, then does not he possess them any longer. For he
that has them does not think, he has them but labors still that he may
get them. And many times our Savior does so bestow them, that he that has,
them does not know he has them. Which our most loving Lord does to this
intent, that presumption and self liking which lurk in men's hearts, should not
secretly steal them and take them away. Therefore whosoever does most of all
other possess them: does with all secrecy that he can conceal them, and hide
them.

CHAPTER 19. How Purity of heart, and Innocence may be preserved.
DESIRE much delighted with this discourse of Simplicity, said to her. DE.
tell me by what means these precious Jewels may be preserved. SIMP. There is
one thing amongst others very necessary, for nouices and young folks, and the
same not unprofitable for those that be of more years, which is to fly and to
lock, and to keep close our gates from much company. For if a man will use
the familiarity, and fellowshippe of many, and take delight to hear and to see
many things, he shall hardly be able to preserve these Jewels, for our minds
many well be compared to a looking glass, which represents the likeness of
any thing set before it, or to wax which reteyneth the impression of a zeal.
DE. But how can one fly or shut the doors that lives continually in a
Religious society? for such a person has occasion to go into many places, and
the Superior commands sometimes one thing, some times an other, and such a
party is enforced to talk, with many and often commanded to converse with all
sorts of people. For other ways he shall be accounted singular, and
singularity although it be covered with a show of holiness and virtue: Yet is it
hateful, and ought to be eschewed and shunned. SIMP. It is true as thou
say, we must hear, see, and say many things for obedience, which if we
did of our own accord and desire, we should offend. But when obedience and
charity do move us there unto (provided we be not negligent but do our best
endeavors,) there is no doubt to be had for loosing these Jewels. DE. What must
we do in doing our endeavors? SIMP. It is needful that whosoever would keep
these Jewels of Purity and Innocence, and either for obedience or necessity
cannot be secluded, nor live in solitary or vnfreque^ted places, it is
necessary I say that he make me his companion, who trusting to my fellowshippe,
(he travail all the world about) yet needs not fear to loose these Jewels.
DE. I desire you to explain your meaning by similitudes, for so, such as be
but simple shall the better understand you. SIMP. It is requisite for a man,
that will have Puritte of heart and Innocence, (which are the especial manes
to attain to all virtues, and by which means to attain to all virtues, and
by which we may readily come to all perfection, perfect charity, and the chief
mark which we stoote at, that is the Love of God.) It is necessary as I have
said to attain to these virtues, to fly conversation, and shut the gates
against company. If he cannot do so, then let him take me a companion, and in
all things that he shall hear or see, still keep me in his right eye. And
when the left eye shall seek to behold any thing, that may taste of
covetousness, or of foolish, or of rash judgment, then let him behold the same
with the right eye of Simplicity, thinking and persuading thus simply with
himself. That every man and woman, brother and sister etc. is the Angel and
Son of Almighty God, and that all other things are certain instruments or
Organnes, which without intermission do laud and praise their Creator. And by
the same rule what ill so ever he shall hear, or se of his neighbor, let the
right eye excuse it, and co^ster it to the best. And let him praise and
glorify God, for all his creatures which the last eye of covetousness shall
allure him to desire, calling to mind the beauty, comlines and goodness of his
Creator, and all other his proprieties, saying thus to him self. I will not
desire, or love any thing created to any other end, but that in them, and with
them I may love and praise God, likewise in all his words and actions, it is
very necessary that he associate himself with me. DE. How shall we say, all the
actions of me^ are done in simplicity. SIMP. When their intention shall be
simple, pure; and right, and all that they do being of it self good, shall be
also just and right, in all circumstances of time, place and person, and shall
not do any thing, but either for the honor and praise of God, or for the good
of the soul, or body of himself, or his neighbor, or else for the benefit of
the whole common wealth, he that does thus, walks simply in all his actions.
And whosoever shall choose and keep Simplicity for his companion, he lives and
walks securely and happily.

CHAPTER. 20. Of Poverty.
DEsire much pleased with this discourse of Simplicity, taking his leave of
her was brought to the Cell of an other of Humilities daughters, whose name was
Poverty, of whom being lovingly entertained, he spoke to her as follows.
DE. I am not a little delighted with your fellowship and acquaintance, assuring
my self, how dearly you are beloved of the Love of God, and therefore desire
to know your conditions and course of life. POV. I contemn and refuse for the
Love of God, to have or possess any worldly or transitory goods. DE. In what
thing then, consists your joy and only comfort? POV. My only treasure and
riches is for the Love of God, to be poor, and possess nothing. DE. I cannot
but greatly marvel thereat, considering that as I have heard of others, this
Monastery was first founded and built by a Lord, that is the most noble, rich,
and bountiful of all the world. What then should be the reason, or his
intention, that the inhabitants of it, should be so poor and needy? neither
understand I how your poverty can be so acceptable to him. POV. I will tell
you. That Lord, which is founder and builder of this Monastery, is King and
Master of all the world, and has, and keeps his riches and treasures all in
his own hands. And yet notwithstanding, it is his will and pleasure, that we
should live in continual poverty, to the end we fix not, or settle our love
and affection, on any other creature, but on himself. He could if it so
pleased him, bestow abundance on us: but to his best beloved, he does not;
because they should love him only, and hate this world, and the vanities
thereof. And we cannot ask a more manifest token of his love toward us,
then that he suffers us to be in necessity in this miserable life, and
sends us not those pleasures, which frail flesh would covet. And yet
farther, he will have us spend our lives in poverty, least temporal, and
needles cares should overcome our weak minds; but will, that we should serve
him, with quiet contented thoughts and not be moved, either with loss, or
gain of worldly commodities, or too much rejoice or lament, in prosperity, or
adversity, with over great mirth, or exceeding sorrow: but have our hearts still
united to him; in peace, and contentation? without any mislike. For such is the
disposition of the Love of God, that he will not inhabit but in still and
sequestered places. DE. What is the especial virtue that is in you. POV To
conform and frame my self according to my sisters, amongst whom I live. And
although I desire to possess nothing: yet to keep out and expel an enemy of
ours, that seeks daily to enter amongst us, and destroy our garden, and eat
up our fruit, whose name is Singularity: our Lady Mother will have me live
like my other sisters. And yet that I loose not the reward of my virtue she
has married me to a holy Purpose, whose mame is, to ask nothing. And farther,
she tells me if I will attain to perfection, that I must rest content with
that which is given me, be it much, or little; and accept as thankfully, of
gross and homely diet, as of that which shall be provided at the costliest
price, and to leave part of that which is allowed to me, and to be content for
the Love of God, to take so much only, as necessity shall desire. DE. That is,
as if one should desire to be better then good, or labor to do more then he
were bound to do. For if I rightly understand it, that Lord which has founded
and erected this Monastery, commands you to have the spirit of poverty, as
the Prophet says. If thou abound in riches, beware thou settle not thy love on
them. Whereby I gather, that the virtue of poverty, does not consist in having,
or possessing much, or little: but in the love, or contempt we take in them.
POV. I do not deny, but that the spirit of poverty consists in the mind,
yet notwithstanding it is much safer for the Love of God, to possess nothing:
considering our love and affection to rich and beautiful things, is so frail
and prone, that hardly can we have them, without fixing our love on them.
Least therefore such worldly riches should gain some part of our love from
the Love of God which is already but small toward him, it is good (as the
saying is) to remove the straw farther from the fire. For the Love of God,
does challenge of duty all the love of man wholly to him self, and many there
be that herein flatter themselves, saying, I do not immoderatelie love this
or that thing, neither would I to much sorrow if it where taken from me. But
believe me affection, and love is so subtle a thing, that hardly are men
found not loving what they possess. Neither can we have a better example
hereof then our SAVIOVR CHRIST himself, who when he could have possessed the
whole riches of the world, without fear to love or affect them
extraordinarily: yet remember how needely, and poorly not himself lived, but
also his Blessed Mother and his Holy APOSTLES. Which, how can we any other
ways conceive: but that we must neither affect, or possess any worldly
riches: For which cause I have clearly forsaken all such unnecessary things,
as I used to have with me in my Cell reteyning nothing else, but the Image of my
sweet SAVIOVR hanging naked on the Cross, thereby to remember his great love
to me. I once used to keep many books with me, but now possess only a
Bible, the life of SAINTS, and the life of my SAVIOVR JESUS, with some few
other for my devotions. And rest fully contented to meditate on sweet Jesus,
and to busy my self with the book of his holy life.

CHAPTER. 21. Of Obedience.
DEsire receiving no less contentment from this Virgin, took leave of her,
and weas brought to the Cel of an other daughter of Humility, called Obedience.
To her Desire yealded very great reverence, in that she seemed to him to be of
high dignity, and authority, and of great estimation with the Love of God, and
more beloved of him, then her other sisters. Now Desire for reverence sake,
offering to kiss her hand, was denied of her, in regard that being the
daughter of Humility, she would not allow either reverence or honor, to be
showed to her, but willing Desire to sit down by her, he asked of her, her
orders and conditions. OBED. I am married to a holy Purpose, called, to omit
nothing I ought to do. He is a mighty, strong, and worthy Knight, who alone
is able to subdue and put to flight, the most dangerous beast in all the world,
called Self Will. Which beast does destroy, kill, and swallowe up: all that
love and obey her; and she does with a kind of flattering allurement, entise
and draw to her al obstinate people, of which, few forsake her, until she
draw them into hell, and utter damnation. The greatest part of people, and
almost all forsake me, notwithstanding it is most certain, that without me, no
man can find the Love of God, who is a Lord of so great dignity, and
excellency, that the whole world cannot be compared with him. And in regard it
has pleased almighty God: to bestow so good and noble a husband on me, I do
not any thing but what he shall command me. Neither do I desire to be eased,
or remitted, from that is commanded me, except some urgent necessity constrain
me thereunto. And in regard of thieves and robbes, which lie so secretly
amongst us, that hardly they can be discried, or discovered by us, I never dare
to walk alone. DE. What companion do you use? OBED. First I take with me my
dog for a companion, called as yours is, Good will. Next I join to me my
sister Simplicity, and my daughters Douotion, Cheerfulness, Diligence,
perseverance, and Purity. But chiefly our Lady Mother Humility, does always
assotiate her self with me. All these of necessity must I have with me, if I
will securely walk to do that, which I am commanded. DE. Tell me I beseech
you, How does your Mother HUmility join her self with you for that as yet I
do not understand? OBED. In any thing that I undertake and do, be it never so
great, I do not flatter my self that I have done it well, neither have I any
confidence in that I do, or by doing any thing well, grow into pride of
mind. Neither persuade I my self, that others could not do it besides my
self, or that they could not do it so well as my self, neither think I my
self good, if I do any thing that is good, or would be praised for doing it,
or thought by others apt and fit to do it; but with all humility I give the
thanks to God, in that it has pleased him, to bestow understanding,
wisdom, and ability on me: for the love of him to do so good a thing. And I
say to my self, in regard it has pleased God to bestow his grace on me, to
execute such a work, for this thing especially I hold my self bound to him.
And therefore desire I nothing else of others, but that they will honor and
praise God. And that until the last day of my life, nothing but labor and
pain be allotted to me, all honor, and praise be to Almighty God, and
benefitte, and all good unto my neighbor. Nothing in this world as Isay, I
wish to my self: being assured, I deserve nothing that is good of my self,
neither desire I any thing else, but that it would please our Lord to bestow
his love on me, that thereby I may daiely increase in virtue, and good life,
and never offend him, but that in the last hour of my death, it will please
him (as I hope) to show himself loving and merciful to me.

CHAPTER. 22. Of Chastity.
DEsire taking great comfort in this conference with Obedience, leaving her,
was brought to the Cell of the last daughter of Humility, whose name was
Chastity. Of whom as before desire demanded her conditions. CHASTE. I am as
thou know the daughter of Humility of heart, and have attending on me two
Virgins or handmardes the one called Abstmence, the other Bashfulnes. My spouse
or husband is called Watch of heart, who is always attended with a body, called
Watch of senses. DE. I beseech you bring me to the sight of this Boy. CHASTE. I
will do that willingly. Desire now much meruailed at the furniture of this
Boy, for in his hand he held a bridle and a stone, a kerchiefe or a veil, and
a chain with a lock, to whom he thus spoke, I desire thee my Son to
declare to me the true signification of this furniture of thine. BOY. This
bridle is to restrain a naughty beast of my Masters, which although she be
little, yet when she breaks lose she overthrows all men, neither can any
man rule her but our Porter the Fear of God. DE. What is the name of this
naughty beast? BOY. The Tongue. DE. What do thou with this stone? BOY. I
stop holes with it, which are in this house, called the Ears, least thieves
enter thereat, as often they do, when it chances that they be not stopped;
and sometimes also, I put it in my mouth, that thereby I may enjoyne my self
to silence. De. By that means, others will say thou art dumb. BOY. I am not
dumb, but for the Love of God, I make my self dumb. DE. What service can
thou show to him thereby? BOY. Much. Considering that by this door those two
jewelles are lost, which Simplicity spoke of, I mean Innocence and Purity of
heart, and so long as I continue dumb, I provide, that the wine which our
Virgins use, run not out, or be shed. DE. What? Could thou not look to
that, if thou should speak: BOY. No. For the spygotte cannot be pulled out,
but the wine will be shed. DE. Might not a vessel be set under, to save
the wine that runs out? BOY. There might, but great wisdom, understanding,
and fortitude, is to be used. And I am yet but little and young, neither can
easily perform that office, and so soon, all the wine might run out of the
vessel, and nothing but wind remain in it. DE. What signifies this
kerchiefe, or veil? BOY. It is called Purity, and it serves to cover the left
eye, which causes sensuality. DE. Do you cover the right eye also? BOY. No.
for that is the eye of Simplicity, which not only does hurt, but also brings
forth all good, and fruitful things. But the left, is the eye of Sensuality,
which is of a more sharp sight, then the left, and annoyeth us with many
disco^modities: and finally, brings death it self: wherefore it is of
necessity, that it be covered with this veil, that thereby we may perceive al
things with purity. DE. Deliueer it more plainly, how we may se al things more
purely and clearly. BOY. All things are seen with a pure heart: when they are
beheld with one of these three eyes. Either with the eye of taking good
edification for our selves, or with the eye of honoring and glorifying God, or
with the eye of excusing and pitying our neighbor DE. This yet is obscure,
declare your meaning more plainly. BOY. I know thou do understand me
sufficiently. DE. Although my self understand it, yet peradventure others
would expect to be in structed more plainly. Boy. I allow this will and desire
to profit others, to be both virtuous, and worthy praise: considering it is a
sign of no small virtue and charity, both to seek our own good and benefit:
and also that which may be the good of all men. And thou have heard many
things spoken in parables amongst us, the exposition whereof, is both profound
and fruitful: therefore when thou shall return hither again, thou may make
a certain co^mentary of such things as thou have heard, and seen: whereby
thou may draw them out more at large and (as S. Greg. did upon holy Job)
explain them more copiously. DE. You say well, and doubt not but (God
assisting me) I will perform as much. For notwithstanding to the learned, these
similitudes may serve, without farther explanation: yet to the simple sort, it
will be necessary to have a more plain exposition. And it will be a very
great encouragement to me, to undertake it: if I be advised to it by your
council. But now proceed to tell the meaning of your furniture. Why do you
carry this chain with a lock? BOY. It is called Te^perance of the mouth,
wherewith we lock the gates of this house, least the Virgins that dwell here,
might wander abroad. For if we had not this chain and this lock, there would
be no religion amongst us, but all things would be vain. And this know for
certain, so long as I keep my left eye covered, although my eyes be open, yet
I see nothing. DE. How can that be, that your eyes being open yet you shall not
see? BOY. Because my eyes are fixed in my head, and although sometime I look
down to the earth: yet the reflection of my eyes returns to my head.

CHAPTER. 23. The Conclusion of the first part.
DEsire having discoursed after this manner with Chastity, departed from her
with great contentment. And being guided out of this Monastery by the forenamed
Steward, who told him he had now seen all the virgins of this Monastery, he
asked if there were no other thing to be seen. ST. If thou shall well observe
what thou have here heard, and seen, and shall with thy best endeavor seek to
put them in execution, thou art sufficiently furnished to find out the Love of
God. But yet before thou depart hence, I will show thee a tree, that grows in
our garden. Desire beholding this goodly tree, began much to admire it, and
the rather, because it carried two sorts of fruit, and said to the Steward. DE.
What kind of fruit is this? ST. The fruit that grows on the lower boughs,
which are pale, and of diverse colors, is called Distrust of our selves. But
that which grows on the top of the tree, and is of a pleasant red color,
is called Trust in God, with which fruit all that come hither are to be fed.
For except they shall feed upon this fruit their labor is in vain, and to no
end come they hither. DE. Will it please you to bestow part thereof on me,
that I may eat thereof in my journey, I am to take. STEW. I will eat thereof,
of the fruit of the lower boughs which is, Distrust of thy self, as much as
shall be necessary: and fill all thy pockets with the fruit of the higher
boughs, that thou may eat thereof in thy journey and this will serve thee,
until thou come to the house of the Love of God. Now Desire sufficiently
satisfied, with the fruit of the low boughs, filled his pockets and bosom
with the fruit of the higher boughs, and said. DE. I beseech you Sister, now
show to me the speediest and most ready way to the house of the Love of God.
STEW. I rejoice to se thee so furnished, and desirous to undertake the journey
to find the Love of God. Yet not withstanding, I fear if thou travail alone,
thou will hardly find out the readiest way, therefore will I give thee trusty
companions of our society who shall do, and guide thee the right way thou art
to take. DE. Is not Good will my dog sufficient for that? STEW. No truly. For
although he be very good, yet is not he sufficient for such a journey, wherein
are encountered, not only many dangerous wild beasts, hollow pittes, rough
ways, bushes and briars: but thieves, spoylers, and robbers, and such as seek
to kill and destroy all passengers, wherefore it is wisdom not to trust, to
thy dog alone DE. For these alleged reasons I pray you, appoint me such
companions as you think necessary. STEW. Then take in thy company our Porter,
the Fear of our Lord, who is a worthy and excellent man, whose company if thou will not forgo, take likewise with thee his daughter Bashfulnes, whom to be
sure to keep, take an herb with thee, called Humble casting down of thy
eyes. And yet farther take with thee an other companion, called Simplicity.
And now Desire, go on thy way being guarded with Gods blessing. But yet mark
well this one lesson, although thou chance to loose the Fear of God, or
Simplicity; Yet be sure to keep warely thy dog about thee, for he will
serve to find them again. And see that thou give him of the fruit in thy
pocket, to eat of. And when thou art gone hence, keep the way which leads
on the left hand, where thou shall find a path, which is a nearer way, then
others, which will bring the directly to the house of Charity, wherein
dwells the Love of God. DE. What is the name of that path, that if I hap to
miss my way, I may ask it of other. STEW. It is called Patience, which is the
ready and nearest way to the house of Humility and Charity..

THE SECOND PART.
CHAPTER. 1. Of Patience.
DESIRE being now well refreshed with the above named fruits, and accompanied
with Good will his dog, and the Fear of God the Porter on the one side, and
with Simplicity on the other side, and having also his pockets filled with the
fruit of Confidence in God, departed cheerful out of the house of Humility
and willingly undertook the way of Patience. Which although he were told to be
short and pleasant: Yet found he it rough, had and unpleasant by reason of many
brables and bushes, which made him complain, and say to Simplicity. DE. O
good God how hard, and difficult a way is this, contrary to that I thought it
to be. SIMP. Let not that seem strange, to thee Desire for therefore is it
called the way of Patience, which if it were not sharp and full of
difficulties, it should not be calloed, and known by that name, neither should
the house to which it leads be held in so great esteem: if the way were
plain and easy, and passible for all people. But as it is, none pass it but
those that be thoroughly exercised. And have thou not heard the old proverb.
That no good thing can be obtained without labor and pain; or pleasant, but
first by tasting the sower? wherefore having now undertaken and entered the way:
thou must of necessity endure the hardness, comforted with this, that it will
not long continue. For whosoever will seek to take the fish, must be contented
to wette his foot. And coldest thou imagine, that a thing so precious as the
Love of God, cold be obtained without labor and pain. Remember the saying of
Seneca the Philosopher. A thing of worth cannot be bought for a trifle. For
with great labors we atchiue great matters. And thou art deceived, Desire if
thou think to get so rich a treasure with no labor, neither would thou make
any great account, of the Love of God, if thou coldest find him without any
travail. Go to therefore coragiously and fear not labor, considering that
after it, thou shall rest and be comforted with the Love of God,, and thou will esteem the greatlier of him, and love him better; for the more pain thou
endurest in finding him out: the greater will be thy joy and contentement
after. And if thou fortune to be weary in the way, eat of the fruit which thou
have, called Confidence of God; and thou shall find thy self to be
strengthened again. But if thou will not feel the weariesomes of thy journey,
do as trauailers do, that pass over the pain with singing as they go. Desire
some what comforted with this direction of Simplicity said. DE. How can we
sing, being accompaned with this reverend and grave old Father. SIMP. It is his
custom to show himself grave in gesture and apparel: but otherwise he is
sociable and pleasant in conversation, for he is the brother of the Love of
God, and sings sweetly, especially when he hears us sing, not for wantonness
and leuity, but to cheer up our spirits, and comfort our selves, being weary
in our journey. DE. How shall I sing that have no voice. SIMP. Thou can not
lack voice, that art a voice thy self. Desire meruailed to hear her say, he
was a voice and answered. DE. How can you say that I am a voice? SIMP. Thou, as
all other creatures wast created by Gods word, and it is plain that a voice
does follow a word, considering therefore that so sone as God had spoke the
word, presently all creatures were made: it follows that all creatures are
voices. DE. Explayne this yet more plainly. SIMP. Speech and the word are but
one thing. For speech is not that which is delivered with the mouth: but which
being conceived in the mind, is retained within. But that which is expressed
with the mouth, is a voice, declaring the speech or word, conceived in the
heart. As for example if I conceive such a thought in my mind, that thou art a
man, this is a word or speech, and although I utter it not, yet I hold it
within me. But if I shall express it with my mouth, and say thou art a man,
this is a voice, explayning the secret conceyte of my mind. De. If I be a
voice, whose voice am I. SIMP. Thou art the voice of God, by whom thou wast
created to this praise, honor and glory. DE. What thing then do I speak of my
self, if I be a voice? SIMP. Thou say God is good, by the goodness of that
essence, which thou have of God, even so by thy own beauty, thou give a
witness that he is beautiful, through whose beauty thou have attained to such
goodness and beauty, to conclude, whatsoever God has created in thee, it is but
a certain voice explayning the virtue and goodness of him. De. How can you say
that, whatsoever is in me created by God is a voice: and not absolutely
whatsoever is in me is a voice. SIMP. Thus, this sins and wickedness which God
has not made, are not his voices, but thy own, which speak and declare that
thou art filthy, naught, impure, and wicked. For as by the creatures of God we
are led and brought to the knowledge of him: so by those things which we do
our selves, we may attain to the knowledge of our selves.

CHAPTER 2. How God may be known by his creatures.
DEsire noted this discourse of Simplicity, not without great admiration, who
although she seemed in show but simple: yet found he her most wise in these
high and secret mysteries, and said to her. DE. To what end would you have us to
sing. SIMP. To the end we may forgett the difficulties, and sorrows of this
miserable banishment we live in: and loose not our hope to come to the house of
Gods Charity. Whereunto to attain, we shall find no small help in
meditating upon Gods creatures, which purposely I have placed in this journey
of Patience, that thou may the sooner come to the Love of God, if thou shall
be co^uersant in this book of his creatures. For by Patience we conceive a
greater hope of the divine scripture which is the whole world, which is no
other thing then the book of God. DE. Considering then that we must sing, let
us do that for which cause we are made voices, that is let us praise God. SIM.
I am well contented, for so many voices will join with us in singing. Sometime
desfca^t some time the Tenor, sometime the treble will meet us, and in the
beginning the Basse, in the midst the Tenor and descant, in the end the
Treble, and all sorts of voices, according to the multitute and variety of
creatures, farther it is necessary (if we will do according to the prescript
of music) that we endeavor to be skillful in our song, for considering we
have voices, we must learn and understand the knowledge of singing DE. Who
shall teach us that? SIM. Our own voices. For some creatures shall declare his
power and highness, others his goodness, others his wisdom, others his
ge^tlenes, others his beauty, others his sweetness, others his greatness, others
his justice, and others his liberality: and to this end God has bestowed on us
a kind of knowledge of him self, according to every man's capacity and nature,
that thereby we may sing and deliver his praise. For which cause I entreat
thee, endeavor in this thy journey to become as expert in singing as thou
can, and the rather because in the house of the Love of God, to which thou
do travail, there is nothing but singing whither when thou shall come, I
would have thee sufficiently instructed in this art. For whosoever shall have
a good voice in this jorney, and shall often exercise it, it is thereby so
amended, that it cannot change. And as every man through daily exercise shall
learn to sing in this life, so shall he be there more excellent then others.
DE. Teach me I pray you, how I must sing by Gods creatures; for of my self I
shall not easily learn it. SIMP. I will willingly do it. Now mean time Desire
having travailed far through the desert: learned and proved many virtues and
excellencies of our Lord and Savior JESUS Christ and the better, by the aid,
assistance, and direction of his guide Simplicity. Yet was he to pass many
great, dangerous, and hard labors: often did he stumble, but Simplicity
supported him, that he could not fall. Notwithstanding sometimes he fell, but
presently Simplicity gave him her hand. Sometimes he fell so dangerously, that
except he had been lifted up again by the help of the Fear of God he never
would, or could have rose again. Sometimes when he should go forward, he
retired back, and when he should have received benefit by Gods creatures, he
became much worse. For he was not sufficient careful to try out the secret
virtues of voices, neither did he greatly regard his song, but suffered him
self to grow hoarse, until being pricked and put forward with the Fear of
God, he labored to go forward. Often times did thorns and bushes run into his
feet, but Simplicity held him up, and the Fear of God plucked them out
again. Sometime was he mch oppressed with sleep, but the Fear of God awaked
him again. Often times being weary, he sat down to rest him, but Good Will his
dog never left barking, until he arose again. Sometime we he so weary, that
through inconstancy of mind he determined to go back: but presently eating
of the fruit in his pocket, he recovered strength and kept on his way.
Sometimes as he travailed in the darkness of the night: he lost both the Fear
of God and Simplicity, so that he wandered out of the right way, of his
journey: but so sone as the sun began to shine by the help of his dog, he
found his way again. Now after they had travailed thus many days, they came
to a pleasant and delightful meadow, in the midst whereof was seated a
princely Palace, called the house of Charity, the Porter whereof was the Love
of God.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAPTER. 1. Of the probation and exercise of the Love of God.
WHen Desire had beheld this goodly Palace, he rejoiced much, that his long
wearysome and painful journey, was come at last to so joyful an end.
Wherefore coming to the gates, and finding them locked: he began to call and
knock thereat. But not withstanding standing his calling and knocking, no man
appeared that would give him an answer. The^ spoke Simplicity. And told him it
were requisite that he cried louder, for by that means he should be hard,
although they with in were a sleep or else deaf, and bid him take the two
hammers: that hong at the gate, and presently some would come, and open it for
him. These two hammers were called, the one To sigh. The other To cry.

Therefore she bid him, knock and cry a loud for these doors, should not be
here if they were not to be opened, and therefore are these hamers hanged at
them, that such a shall knock may be admitted in. Thus continued Desire, still
crying and knocking long, before the Love of God would open the gate, neither
did Desire as yet know him, To whom the Love of God at length spoke as
follows. What seek you here brother, or what lack you to knock and call thus?
peradventure you are weary with your long expectation. But it is our custom
and manner to feign our selfs deaf, thereby to try their patience that come
hither. And it chances often, that when we so any wax weary and persuade
themselves that the gate must be opened to them, so sone as they come: we
suffer them to depart even as they came, for none are admitted to enter hither
that shall think themselves worthily to deserve the place, and that we ought
to receitie them of right and duty. Therefore tell me, art thou one of those?
De. No Sir, I am not. For notwithstanding I have passed and overcome many
labors, yet am I sure, that I have no way deserved to be admitted in here: but
altogether unworthy, except it shall please you to receive me upon your own
goodness and mercy. LOVE. etc. What is the cause thou desire to be admitted?
or what seek thou to find here within this house. DE. I am come sir hither
from the house of Humility accompaned with these grave and honest companions,
and have passed my jorney by the path of Patience Only to seek the Love of
God, who as it is told me dwells here within. LOV. etc. Do thou bring me
no token whereby I may know that thou come from the house of Humility. DE.
I bring two tokens. The one whereof was given me in the house of Humility, and
it is called, Knowledge of my self. The other have I got my self in my
journey, and that is called Knowledge of God. LOVE. etc. I am very well pleased
to se thee so provided, but yet tell me this one thing, do thou persuade
thy self, that by reason of these two knowledges we ought of duty to receive,
and admit thee. DE. Be it far from me to have such a thought. I desire to be
received only through your grace and mercy. For I am not sure whither both
these knowledges, wherewith I am instructed be truly written or no. This I know
for certain, that I continued sometime in the house of Humility, and there I
learned and knew the house, the Virgins, and their conditions, they themselves
telling me. But whether I have well digested the fruit I eat there, or whether
they agree well with my stomach, although they be sweet in taste, I confess
I know not, Neither am I sure whether I reaped any benefit by my journey. For
often did I fall, the bushes and brambles often pricked me, and in a manner I was
drawn hither by force of my companions. Therefore Sir, there is none of these
things that I bring with me, that I can tell you any certainety of, but mine
own malice, vileness, sloth, and imperfection. And amongst other things which
cause me to come hither to seek the Love of God, one especial cause is, that
I understand he is a singular good Surgeon, of whom I desire to be purged,
and to be let blood. And farther, men say, that with his only look he
presently discovers the imperfections and faults in the heart, and whosoever
he touches he does presently cure. LOVE. etc. Why do thou desire to be made
so pure, and sound? DE. Because (as I have learned of others) it is allowed to
none to enter in hither that shall be unclean, but to such as shall be only
pure, sound, and undefiled. LOVE etc. Considering them, that thou put thy
whole trust and confidence in us, stay here a while. For thou can not enter
in, or speak with the Love of God, except first thou talk with a Boy of his:
tarry here therefore, and I will call the Boy, who will direct thee what thou
art to do, and how thou may come to the speech of his Master.

CHAPTER. 2. Of the love of our Neighbor.
HEre Desire stayed, expecting greatly the coming of the Boy, that should
bring him in, to the speech of his Master: who presently came forth. His name
was caled the Love of our Neighbor, whom when Desire beheld, he could not
through joyrefraine from weping for the exceeding great love he carried to his
Master. LOVE etc. What is the cause that thou weepest thus, considering in this
house all are cheerful and merry, and none is heard to weep or lament? DE.
Joy, not sorrow makes me to weep. LOVE. etc. Who do you seek for here? DE.
The Love of God. LOVE. etc. I am his Boy: therefore if thou seek my master
thou must first talk and be acquainted with me. For my M. makes so great
account of me, that he will not speak with those that love not me. DE. I most
willingly would learn and know thy conditions, and for the love of thy M. be
acquainted with thee. LOVE etc. If thou would be admitted amongst the number
of my friends. Thou must every morning give me in steed of my breakfast, a
certain sauce called Humble thought, and an other at noone, called Humble
speech, and a third at evening, caled Humble work DE. Where shall I find out,
or get these sawces? LOVE. Humility and her husband holy Purpose makes the
first, which is Humble thought, where by she thinks and esteems her self
more vile, base, and inferior than any other, and accounts of her self no
better then a laboring beast. This holy purpose prepares a certain Electuary
for Humility, called Contempt of our self, and to make this swace which we
now speak of, an other herb is to be added, called Good opinion of our
neighbor, of which co^poundes humble thought is made. And in all this
province, is not a skilful ler man to make this swace, then the forenamed
husband of Humility, whom so soon as thou shall get thy friend, he will
instruct thee how to make this sauce. The other called Humble speech is made,
and compounded of three other herbs, which are, Humility, Gentleness, and
Affability, which must be strowed with a fine powder called Slownes, and
Sparing. The third which is Humble work, is compounded of many herbs. The
chief whereof, are Cheerfulness, Love, and Diligence. When thou shall bring
me these three sawces to eat, then shall our friendship and familiarity be
firm, and soon after will I bring thee to the speech of my M. Desire much
delighted with this direction of this boy, said to him. DE. Considering you
have acquainted me with your condition and desire, I will labor to make these
sawces, and give them to you. Thus Desire continued long in conference with
this Boy, treating and discoursing many matters with him, and be ga^ to be
familiar with him, and delivering to him, the fornamed sauce, at last he
desired him to open the gate, that thereby he might have access to his M.
LOVE. Thy request is reasonable, co^ sidering thou do what lies in thy
power, stay but a little, I will go call my M. and see if he will come forth
to speak with thee.

CHAPTER 3. Of the Love of God and our Neighbor, and of an other degree of
love, and of the of fiee and exercise thereof.
NOw Desire began to think thus with him self, whether the Love of God would
come forth to talk with him or no, considering he was so vile, miserable, and
wretched and altogether unworthy, with whom so great a Lord should voutsafe
to talk: and whilst he weas thus debating with himself, he perceived one
coming toward him, who asked him, what he would, or with whom he would
speak. DE. Sir I seek to speak with the love of God LO. I am he which so
soon as Desire heard, he fell to the ground, having lost his strength. Then
the Love of God taking him by the hand, raised him from the ground which made
Desire to weep so abundantly for joy, that hardly could he pronounce any word.
Whereat the Love of God being tender of heart, through the compassion he had of
him began to weep also, noting the great love and good will which Desire had
toward him, and sai. LOVE. etc. Cease off to weep, for I cannot without
grief behold the tears of him that loves me; but tell me, who told thee that
I was abiding in this house? DE. A certain shepherd, that I met on the
way, who directed me to this place, where I should find you. LOVE. etc. What
did he tell thee concerning me? and what is the cause why thou love me so
greatly, and have so great a desire to find me out? Is it because thou have
heard of others, that I bestow many great gifts on my friends, and use to
reward with great benefittes, such as serve and obey me? DE. No. But for
this cause do I love you, because you are, a good, a noble, and a famous Lord.
And because you bring your friends and serauntes to the place where they may
see, and behold God: then the which, there is no greater happiness, and
felicity in the world. The Love of god hearing what Desire had said, was much
plesed to hear his holy purpose and intent, and began to love him now more
then before, to whom Desire said, I cannot sufficiently marvel my Lord, that
you being so mighty and potent a Lord, and the Son of so great a King, admit
such as follow, and seek after you, to find you with so great labor and
difficulty. LOVE. etc. Do not so. For this is a mystery not known to all men.
For many there be that think they have not found, or know not me: when not
withstanding, I am near unto them, and then themselves abound with me. And
again there be others that persuade themselves, that they have found and
obtained me, when notwithstanding they be far from me, and have not the least
knowledge, and understanding of me. DE. I beseech you acquainte me with your
conditions, and office that I may understand whither I be near or far of
from you, for I hold and esteem of you, as of my Lord and friends. LOVE. etc.
My office and duty is to love God, for I am called the Son of the Knowledge
of God. DE. How do you love God? LOVE. etc. I have a vehement desire to love
him with all my heart, with all my strength, and with all my power, and with
assaying any thing, whereby I may feel him in such manner, as may please him,
in referring all things to his honor, praise, and glory, and the health and
benefitte of mine own soul. And likewise do I wish, that the whole world may
know and understand, him for his exceeding great goodness, and that all
creatures may honor him, and yield him daily thanks. And I enforce my self
with my earnest desire, that neither in great or small things, much or little
I offend or displease him, or that I do any thing contrary to his pleasure.
And if through mine own frailety and imbecility I chance to offend him: I
presently crave and ask forgiveness of him: and by that means our love is
repaired again. And although my Lord and Master be so good, so noble, and so
gracious to me: yet am I not content with this first step, and degree: but
yet proceed farther, and according to my power and ability, endeavor to
execute, nor only what he commands: but whatsoever the meanest in this
Monastery, shall command me in his name. And this accustom I my self to
do, with all reverence, denotion love, joy, humility, and ready will: and that
ever, in all places, and in every good action. And hereby do I know how
greatly I love him: when I do that thing which he commands me: For thus I
persuade my self, that nothing in the world is so grateful to him, (be it
to talk with him, do him reverence, or to show all service to him: as to do
that thing which either himself or someother shall command me in his name. For
my Lord and Master says thus to me. How think thou that thy services can be
acceptable to me, or that thou can be loved of me, if thou do not that
which I shall command thee to do? Or how can thou say thou love me? For
this know for certain, that in no other thing thou can so unite thy self
to me, or conform thy will so near to mine, as if thou willingly and gladly
execute what I command thee?

CHAPTER. 4. The Love of God proceeds in his discourse.
IN this degree of love, I have resolved with my self to perform whatsoever,
I hold my self bound to, by my vocation and office. For since I first
professed my self (of which I never repent me) I hold my self by vow bound
to perform that, which before I might either have done or omitted. And for
that cause I use diligently to think upon my duty and office, resoluting, and
determining still with my self, to execute and discharge, whatsoever I am
bound to by virtue of it, according to the direction of holy write, and learned
men. Being most assured, that many offend through ignorance of that, which
they are bound to by duty. And if they know what they ought to do: and yet
neglect and omit it; then is their offense far greater and more grievous: for
then they offend through malice, and not ignorance. Farther such things as I
have vowed and promissed to do (which to perform I am bound by duty) those
with all my endeavors, I labor to execute. And I have promissed and undertaken
to my Lord and Master, to keep for ever the faith, I have given to three
Virgins which abide and dwell in this Monastery, which are Obedience, Chastity,
and Poverty, which three he has given and assigned me as wives, therefore
morning and evening, I consider with my self, how that day following I may
best serve and please them. Saying to my soul. Let me se now my soul, how
thou will endeavor with thy self this day to obey, and please these Virgins,
and at night, show me my soul how thou have performed this day, what thou
did promise to do toward these Virgins, and whither thou have grieved or
offended any of them. Thus do I still endeavor, to show my self a faithful
servant to them. DE. Wherefore do you thus? LOVE. etc. Because these be the
chamber-keepers of my Lord and Master, and none are admitted or can talk with
him, except these Virgins procure him entrance. DE. Tell me I pray you, what
spiritual exercises have you, whereby you serve and keep promise with these
Virgins. LOVE. etc. Three things I propounde, and determine to my self, which
night and day I offer up to them, and which constrayne me to serve, and be
obedient to them. The first is called, To ask or demand nothing. The second To
covet or desire nothing. The third. To think on nothing. This first Purpose of
mine serves Obedience if so be, it be seasoned with a sauce, called To do,
and then may you call it to ask to do nothing. With which food Obedience is
sustained, and by how much more abundantly and purely I offer this up, by so
much the more am I in grace, and favor with my Lord, and the greater affection
does he carry to me. This self same food, called To ask, if I season it with
another sauce, called To have is called, To ask or desire to have nothing, and
with that do I feed the second Virgin, called Poverty. DE. Stay here a while,
I pray you. May I not ask to have any thing that I want, and have need of?
LOVE. etc. No, except the thing, you desire be most needful. For if there be
any thing necessary for thee to have, thou have thy Superior, who by himself
or his Official shall provide for thee, that thou need not ask, what thou
may not lawfully ask. For he whose charge it is to look to the whole
house: will provide necessaries for all as it becomes the Superior, to the
intent they may more freely serve GOD and attend their spiritual meditations,
neither shall there be need that any ask or crave such things as be
necessary for them. And it shall be no little fault in the Superior to want
that discretion, as not to give things necessary for those under his charge
except they dema^d them. Therefore that which I said of asking or demanding,
ought to be doubly understood; that without offending one may ask, if such
things as shall be necessary, be not given without asking, which thing may
justly be reprehended, especially in Religious persons, and if it be a thing of
great necessity, and not rather to satisfy our contentement. For in asking
otherwise it may proceed from superfluity, curiousity or some other
temptation. And assure thy self that under a color of necessity, many vices
are often covered, especially in things that appertain to the sustinance of
the body as meat, drink, clothing, and such like. DE. How shall I know
whither, that which I desire proceed of necessity or rather to satisfy my
contentement. LOVE. etc. If thou may forbear that which thou ask, and if
thou can live without it, and art not constrained to suffer some great or
notable hurt in thy body or thy soul, which may hap to thee in not asking. For
if thou shall be sure in not flattering thy self that in not asking, some
great peril or danger may happen to thee, then not to ask is a great offense,
and to ask, a merit if thou refer it to God. But if thou may conveniently
live without that, which thou ask, and endure no great hurt or danger
thereby, admit thou suffer some labor or grief in forbearing it, provided
still thou exceed not the bounds of discretion; in this case not to ask,
althopugh that which thou ask be some what needful, it shall be a great
merit to thee, and a token of thy virtue, although without offending thou may
ask as I have said. For happy in my opinion is the man that suffers any
thing for the Love of God. But if that which thou will ask be but such a
thing, which without hurt of thy body or soul thou may easily miss: thou
may think then, that to ask is but to satisfy thy mind and pleasure,
although it be covered with a pretext of some holy purpose. For sin does not
alwais show, it self openly, but is shadowed often with a color of holiness.
And thus may thou know if thou ask any thing, whither it proceed of
necessity or an vansatisfied will. And least thou be deceived through they
partial Judgment, it will be necessary for thee, to keep a diligent watch
over thy self, and to be exercised in virtue. Which if thou do not, it
will be good, that thou be ordered by the advice of discret men, and holy
Scripture.

CHAPTER. 5. Of the other two Purposes of the Love of God, to wit To desire
nothing, and To think on nothing.
LOVE. etc. having breefly explayned my first Purpose, wherewith the first two
Virgins, Obedience and Poverty, are as I have said before nourrished, I must
show and declare to thee the conditions of the other two, To desire nothing,
and To think nothing. Know therefore for most certain that this former
Purpose to ask nothing, is grounded upon the second, To desire nothing. For it
is most certain that, To have, proceeds only from To desire. Then the cause
taken away, which is To desire; the effect fails, which is To ask. And by
that is effected that which is contrary to this, which is Not to ask. This is
the other Purpose wherewith Chastity is nourished, which is the third Virgin,
whose office is, To desire no worldly or carnal thing. But because this herb
has an other root, from whence it springs, which is To think on nothing,
(for the thing cannot be desired, which is not first thought on) I adjoyne a
third Purpose, which is To think nothing. But in this place To think, must be
understood of that Thought, which is perseuerant and settled, with a consent
and liking of reason and will. For to think nothing, does not consist in the
power of man. But it rests in man not to continue, or persevere in ill
thoughts: but sone to collect himself, and to turn to God. Now when this
herb To think, is watered with the water, called to See. We must then add
to these holy Purposes a certain powder, that is called. Strict guard of our
eyes. For this is most necessary. These three Purposes, do not only purge and
make clean my soul from all worldly affares, from al self-will, and from all
spot and stayne: but besides (that I may with greater zeal serve my Lord God)
procure me great purity of heart, and rid me of all private affection and
love, and join, and unite me wholly to my Lord God and Savior. And to these
three Purposes I have reduced all my other spiritual exercises, as well those
which are appertayning to Humility: as such as are agreeable to al other
virtues, because I know, perfection to consist in them. And suffer not thy
self to be persuaded that in vain, I yield obedience to these three Virgins,
for I find their favor and goodness, great toward me, who plentifully bestow
on me all kind of goodness. The one of them called, Poverty, has lately
bestowed on me a rich ornament. DE. I desire to see it, where do you keep
it? LOVE. etc. I keep it in two places, in my heart, and in my chamber. And it
is so great, and of so high estimation, that I could not possibly keep it in
my heart, until I banished, and utterly excluded thence, all worldly love,
affection, and desire: neither could it possibly be contained in my chamber
until I had cast thence all superfluous things, reserving only the Crucifix,
and some few other books. DE. What is the name of this ornament? It is called
Nothing at all, and it is the especial and chiefest treasure of Poverty who is
the richest Lady of all the world, and who possesses so much treasure, as here
self does desire.

CHAPTER. 6. Of the office of the Love of God, and of prayer in the same degree.
IN this foresaid office of Love, which is to do that which my Lord and Master
commands, and my duty binds me to I must use a certain condition or
circumstance, which is, that if at any time according to my office and place I
am set in (as being attendant in his chamber) I come unto him, either to do
him service, or to crave something of him, or else to to speak to him; I
endeavor to show and present my self, with as great purity and humility of
heart, as I can. For by how much cleaner in heart I present my self to him, by
so much more clearness I see and behold him. And I accustom to crave the
fellowshippe of my Brother the Fear of God, that he with an Aunte of mine
called Reverence, would go also with me. De. What is the reason you take
Reverence with you? LOVE. etc. I weigh and consider with my self who I am, and
who my Lord and Master is. I think upon his most sacred Majesty, who of right,
and desert, ought to be reverenced, and feared as one most worthy of all
honor, and love. Father, I use to contemplate how all the blessed souls fall
prostrate before him, adore him, and praise him, and that by admiring, and
praising his so great and excellent goodness and Majesty, they be ravished, and
in a sort transformed into God himself. Yet farther, I am wont to consider,
how my heart, thought, will, and purpose, or intent is laid open before him, and
how he sees, and knows my secrets, better then my self. Also how according
to the pleasure of his divine holy will, he is able to do, alter, establish,
and abolish all things: and how life and death, being and not being, the
salvation, or damnation of the whole world, is in his hands. I farther meditate
with my self, how he is wholly and all good: and the chiefest, highest, and
purest goodness it self, which conte^plating rightly, I often tremble in heart,
fear, and almost faint: especially beholding my self, so wicked, so vile, so
abominable and so filthy a sinner, to presume, to speak to a Lord of so great
Majesty, and that he will admit me to come to him, speak with him, and eat
with him, as though I were united in great friendship with him. Often do I
use this or like speech to him. What need have thou, O my Lord and Master that
such sinners as my self, should present themselves before thee? Is it seemly,
O my Lord, that such unworthy persons should presume to serve or attend on
thee? where is the honor and reverence, that is due to thy Princely Majesty.
DE. What answer do you receive again from him? LOV. I cannot certaynely tell
thee, saving that he makes me weep for joy, and says. Care not thou much for
that, let not this thing trouble thee, consdering thou have not of thy self
procured this place, nor intruded into it, but art called to it, and chosen by
me. My self best knows why I have placed thee in it. Let thy only care be,
diligently to discharge thy office, and with thy uttermost power to perform,
what thy duty binds thee to, in the place thou art appointed, and then take
thou care for no other matter. DE. What say you to him, when you come before
him, accompanied with your associates Humility, Fear, and Reverence? LOVE.
etc. First I dispatch those prayers, and divine service which this order of
life, my vow, and profession bind me to, and that not sadly or unwillingly,
or only for necessity: but with as great attention, devotion, diligence,
willingness, chearefulnes, and reverence as I can. And although I be bound of
necessity to such prayers. Yet change I may necessity into a ready will; and
most joyfully perform what I am bound to do. Then, that I may crave something
of him, and may move him to grant it me; I endeavor with all my power to
praise and laud him, and cease not to honor him, assuring my self that, that
is acceptable to him. And in praising him, I desire his miraculous works which
he has done, pleasing and delighting my self in remembering them, and exercise
my self in telling his mighty power, high wisdom and exceeding goodness. And
farther I rehearce the great grace and large bounties, which he bestows on
his soldiers and servants, honoring exalting him for the same. Neither pass
I in silence his exceeding great mercy, which he ever has and still does show
toward his enemies, and am much amassed at his gentleness and clemency. That
not only he does not revenge himself on them: but besides bestows great
rewards upon them. Besides I render great thanks to him for the great
goodness, which is in himself, and recyte and number his virtues, and renown
his beauty, wisdom and exceeding goodness, praising him for them, and
rejoicing, and triumphing that he is so exceeding great and good. And this do
I often, knowing sufficiently his will herein, and not doubting, but that it is
acceptable to him, and that it is his pleasure that man should be conversant
with himself, that is with God, and confer with him of pleasant, joyful and
secret mysteries: whereof they are ignorant, that be careless thereof, and
will not enter into his secret chamber with him, although they be in his house,
and attend upon him. DE. Wherefore do you praise him with all these high
titles? LOVE. etc. Because the more I extol, commend, and praise him, the more
I displease, despise, and set at naught my self: which how acceptable it is to
him, cannot be declared with tongue. And this is his will and pleasure, that we
continually have set before our eyes his goodness, his excellency, and his
infinite greatness: and our own malice, our baseness, and exceeding misery. And
farther I am certain that I cannot be deceived, although I praise and honor
him all that is in my power: for he is far more noble, more excellent, more
potent, and greater, then either I or all creatures together, both Angelical
and human can comprehend with thought.

CHAPTER. 7. Of the office of the Love of God, in an other degree, and a
contmuation of that, which he began to declare, of the manner of praying.
LOVE. etc. After that I have endeavored to praise, and exalt him with the
uttermost of my power, I offer up to him my whole mind and will, with a chief
Purpose that I have, that for no worldly thing I would offend or displease him:
and also most earnestly I entreat him, that it may please him to keep and
preserve me in this will and mind, considering that without him, I am no way
able to do it. Then ask I forgiveness of him, for all the offenses and
injuries I have done unto him, and beseech him that he will permit me to think
upon, understand, or love nothing but himself. And yet farther I desire of him,
that considering he has voutsafed to admit me for his servant and friend, and
that into a place of so high a function: that it will please him to bestow on
me the holy spirit of Humility: which may withdraw and turn away my mind,
from all things displeasing, and hateful to him, that my service be not
hateful but acceptable to him. Also I crave of him that he will bestow on me
such things as he knows, I stand in need of, whither they be such things
as are necessary for me, or such as for his honor and pleasure, he will have
me endued with: and that, for no other cause, but that he would suffer me to
live and die in him, and not cast me from his sight according to my desert.
After this I pray for all those that I love most, and to whom either
spiritually or corporally I hold my self bound for all this society, and for
all living creatures, that it will please him to bestow his grace and mercy on
them; that according to their duties, they may know him, love him, honor,
praise, and worship him. All this do I labor to present to him, with
sincerity and purity of heart. DE. How do thou present thy self before him
with this purity of heart? LoVE. etc. As near as I can, I keep a watch over
my heart and mind, and take a care to my soul, restrayning as much as I may
all my senses, and continually setting before my self plain simplicity, which
does interpret to the best whatsoever I behold. And if I would be free and
secure from all fear: then do I remain and abide with my Lord and Master,
with whom to be present, and to talk and confer, and whose counsel and
advice to demand, is my chief good and joy, my only will and comfort. Neither
can I enjoy peace, quiet, or security, or find any manner of contentement, or
ease, but only when I am present in his company. And for this cause have I
determined with my self, to forsake all worldly pleasures, and to dwell with
him, and cleave to him, never to depart from him except he shall command me.
DE. Yet I think it very necessary sometimes to be busied in reading good
books. LOVE. etc. True it is, it is good to spend some time in reading, but
not with a mind to become learned and skillful, but that thereby thou may
find out GOD and his ways, and once having found him, may know and love
him. For this I shall not need many books. This one thing I look after,
will, and desire, that I may settle and fix my whole love on GOD, and may join
all my affection, reason, and understanding to him. For his love alone is
sufficient for me, he will teach me all things that shall be convenient for me
to know, and can open and discover more secrets and mysteries to me, how I
shall love and not offend him, then all the books that the whole world does
possessed. And I obtain greater purity of soul, fear, devotion, reverence,
compunction, fortitude and strength, and severity against the flesh, by being
in his presence, then by reading continually. Besides I know for certain, he
never will ask account how much I have read: but how much I have loved amd
esteemed him. Neither would I altogether exclude or banish reading, especially
for such as are yet simple and ignorant, and know not how to judge of their
thoughts, words, and works. For to such it is requisite to spend much time in
reading, and to learn the exercises of the spirit and mind. For as it would
be thought great folly, rashness, and disgrace to a Prince, if a rude country
fellow not accustomed to speak to a King, should presume in the presence of
all his nobility to come, and bouldly speak his mind, and if in speaking he
should use his accustomed, rusticall and indecent terms, it could not but be
thought so great a disgrace to the Prince, that he justly might command him to
be thrust out from his presence and far better had it been, he had never
presumed thither, even so stands the case in spiritual cases. But to those
that by reading, and hearing, have already attained to the knowledge of God, and
divine exercises, to such, the exercise of praying is more necessary then
reading, as being already expert how to behave themselves in the spiritual
Court. Farther when I present my self, before my Lord and Master. I am very
careful, that inconstantly I turn not my head or eyes, hither or thither. For
it would be taken a great dishonor to him, to look an other way, whilst on
should talk with him. DE. Tell me your meaning more plainly for as yet I
understand not. LOVE. When I speak to my Master, if at such time I busy my
thoughts, and reason upon any thing but only upon him I speak to: then turn
I my back not my face to him. For this cause when I persuade my self, that I
am present before him in sight, and that he does behold me, and never turns
his eyes from me, but marketh what I say: I use all reverence, devotion, love
and attention to him that I can. Then do I praise and thank him for all his
benefits bestowed on me, and all other his creatures, calling them often to my
mind, and rehearsing them, being most certain that he woul not have me
in-grate and unmindful of his gifts.

CHAPTER. 8. Of the third degree of Love.
LOVE. etc. Now although I have showed the first degree, or step, of my love,
which is to love my Lord and Master, and never to offend him: and also the
second, which is to perform and put in practice all his commandments: yet do
I not content my self herewith, in regard my love is so great to him, but
that I add yet a third degree, or step to his love, which is to do all
those things that I know are pleasing to him, or whatsoever I can imagine he
would I should do. DE. How know you, that you do those things that please
him? LOVE. etc. There be two things whereby I may know that easily: which
are, if I love that which he loves, and likewise hate, what is hateful to
him. Concerning the first, which is, to love what he loves: I love his Son,
the most beautiful, sweet, and noble, of all that ever were, and most like
his Father, and so obedient to him, as never was, or shall be Son more
obedient to a Father. Whom the Father loves even as himself, because he is
more like to him, then ever Son was to a Father. And so great is the love
and union which is between them, that they two be but one; of one will, like
power, and the self same knoweledge. Who although they be distinct in persons,
yet are they both one in essence. For this Son, the Father has made a
garment with the hands of his goodness, like to that which Sheepheardes do
wear, which the Son having put on, departed out of the privy Chamber of his
princely Father, and yet for ever remains with him. And thus he lives here
in this Monastery, and conuerseth with us. For otherwise we could not behold
him. Moreover when his Father would send him over all the world, cladde with
this garment, and a little traueling scrippe: he entered also into this desert,
to seek out his sheep that were wandered and strayed. And as he travailed
through this desert, the Father permitted that he should be killed of wolves,
and devoured of dogs, and would give him no help although he could: but would
have him endure a most cruel death by these wolves, more painful to him,
then ever any sffered, being his flesh most tender, in that he weas the Son of
a King. All this did our Lord of his exceeding love toward us, that all we
that dwell and abide in his house, might know, and try his charity, and
thereby might love him again, considering that first he loved us so greatly,
that he spared not his one only Son, but delivered him to die for the love he
bare to us al. Whilst the Love of God. was relating this discourse, Desire
being wholly wounded to the heart could not refrain from vehement weeping. But
the Love of God going on with his discourse, said farther. And although God the
Father has suffered his Son to be killed, yet notwithstanding he loves him so
exceedingly, that by his great omnipotency, he soon raised him from death,
much more beautiful, and gloriously triumphing, bringing with him, the sheep
which he came to seek others being left in this wilderness, that they might
be fed and become fat with the knowledge of him, he having a perpetual and
watchful care over them. So at length returning again to his Princely Father,
he sits now on his right hand, speaking and making intercession for us al,
being overcome with to great a love toward us. For I am of this opinion, that
except we were spared for his sake, long since had we been driven clean out
of this Monastery: so wicked and miserable we are, and so negligently, and
sloathfully we serve him, wholly forgette him and contemn him, and so little
care and remembrance we have of him. But the Omnipote^t father loves this Son
so greatly; that in my opinion nothing can be more acceptable to him in this
world, then that we should love this, his Son with him. For which cause I
endeavor and labor to love him, and to do those things which I think
pleasing to him. DE. What is it, that you can do acceptable to him? LOVE. etc
In remembering and speaking of his most holy life, his pains and labors, his
most bitter death and Passion, and his holy commandments, and as near as I
can conformity my self according to his manners. For who soever my Lord and
Master sees most carefully to imitate the life of his Son, him does he most
love, and hold dear to him. And for this cause, was it his holy will and
pleasure, that he should come and live here amongst us, that by that means he
might teach us how we should live, who before lived no better then brute
beasts. Therefore has our ord set him before our eyes, as a mirror, or
looking glass, that every one may know, whether he do, or omit what his
pleasure is, and may see and behold in the life of his Son, as in a glass,
whether his works be good or badde. Neither is there any thing in all the
world, by which we may more truly come to the knowledge thereof. And yet
besides this, there is one thing more, which my Lord and M. loves, that is my
Boy, called the love of our Neighbor, whom he esteems so much, and holds
so dear, that whatsoever we do to him, be it good or bad, he takes as if it
were done to himself. DE. How do you love this Boy? LOVE. etc. Even as my
self. And first I persuade my self that he is better then I am, and although
I execute a higher place, yet in all things that are agreeable to virtue, I
obey him. I farther am careful that by no means I afflict him, or give him
occasion of sorrow, but show all love and kindness to him that I can. I
never have sinister conceit of him, but rather excuse him all that I may. I
never call him by any name of disgrace. I most willingly dissemble, and hide
his natural defectes and imperfections. In distreste and adversity, I lament
and bewail him. In his absence I detract him not, neither suffer others to do
if I may hinder it. I wish and desire, that my Lord and Master be better
beloved of him, then of my self: and that it would please God to make him as
good, or better then I my self am. I envy him nothing either for corporal or
spiritual gifts bestowed on him by God, or for any thing which he enjoys in
this world, but rejoice in his prosperity, and lament in his adversity.
Farther, I think him to be the Angel of God; and my self to be unworthy to
be his servant. This do I, for that I know him to be beloved of my Master.
Also I love those things which appertain to our society, toward which, I
carry a very great zeal, in regard that they appertain to the worship, and
honor of my Lord and Master, and to the preservation and maintenance of this
his house. Wherefore I am very careful, that nothing be lost, or mislayed,
especially of those things which belong to the service of Religion,
Ceremonies, and the holy Canons of the Church. Which things although many do
not greatly esteem, yet I am fully persuaded, that the holy Ghost would never
have instituted them, except he had known them to be pleasing to God.
Therefore I hold the smallest Ceremonies, to be observed imagining they tend
to the honor of God, and most readely and willingly, with all humility, and
reverence do I keep them. And this thought do I still carry in my mind, if
I should not honor my Lord and Master, worship him carefully, serve him
dutifully, and show my self most zealous in his service, who should do it?
considering I am beholding to him, more then all other creatures. For if the
servants and attendants of great Princes and States serve and obey their
Masters, so carefully, diligently, and with so great a desire; why should not I
serve and honor my Master and Lord, that admits me to the familiarity of
his chamber. Therefore if the whole world should fall, and decline from his
obedience, and not one should persevere to show him reverence: yet would I
remain faithful, even until my last moment of life.

CHAPTER. 9. Of those things which the Love of God hates, and a conclusion of
his duty and office.
THe other thing of the two, which I spoke of before, wherewith I please and
content my Lord and Master, is, to hate such things as I know he hates. And
two especial enemies I know my Master has, which are The world, and My
flesh. Wherefore I have resolved with my self, to hate them all, that I can,
and to have neither friendship or peace with the^ which determination to
perform, I purpose an other thing, which is, to take no delight or recreation
with the^, never to talk or converse familiarly with the^, except it be by the
commandment of my M. which commandment is of more weight, the^ any Purpose I
can undertake. Therefore have I besought the Superior of this Monastery, that he
never send me abrod, into twon or contry for my recreatio^, or disport, which
is a thing different from my disposition, and which I hate: yet when he
commands it, I must needs obey him. And although for some causes my M.
command me sometimes to go abroad into the world, yet will he that I return
with all the speed that I can make, for fear lest I be caught and deceived
with the deceites thereof: being assured, that how warely soever men converse
therein, yet more hurt than good comes ever thereby. Likewise do I detest and
hate my own faults and uncleanness, my il motions and desires, my sudden
passions and promise to sin, not ignorant how hateful they be to my Lord and
M. And therefore for the love of him, I continually labor to amend my self.
Besides I sequester my self from all that dwell in this Monastery (for his
love) except when charity and necessity require the contrary. Neither do I it
for that cause that I contemn them, or think them unworthy of my company and
fellowship (for as I said before, I esteem them as Saints and Angels) but
rather because I think my self unworthy of their presence and conversation,
or meet to kiss the ground that they tread on. DE. Why do you so? LO.
Because in these times Religion is much decayed, by reason of to much
familiarity, and conuersing of such as profes monastical lives, not only
amongst themselves, but also amongst secular persons. Whereby it chances that
so little prayer, devotion and meditation is used. For in these days some
Monasteries are become like Princes Palaces, and only in name and habit they
show themselves religious: when they treat of, and handle naught, but worldy
causes: and holiness and religion is so rare amongst some of the^, that they
never frequent their devotions, but when they meet in their Oratories, out of
which they talk of nothing, but worldy businesses, and news, being always so
distracted, that they know not how to collect their minds to serve God: and
when they are called against their wills to their Oratories, to sing their
service they fear they shall not soon enough depart from thence again: and
thus they sing their service being full of high mysteries, with little reverence
or no devotion at al, having their minds and desire on the end, and in the
kitchen. And beause they understand little of God, or what appertains to him:
God likewise regards them not, but hates them. Therefore have I determined
to inure my self to a custom, and to endeavor to be always solitary, and
attend my devotions that so my mind may take delight in God, and those things
that appertain to him, and that I may learn to love him, as in truth it is
most requisite, considering that for that cause I have forsaken the world, and
withdrawn my self hither. DE. Some will say thou art singular, and will note
thee for it. LOVE. I regard not that, for I ought not desire to please men:
especially when it shall displease and offend God. And so long as I am not
scandalous to others, let them think or speak their pleasures of me. That
which I do, is but my office, and duty, if therefore thou seek me, do thou
as I have done.

CHAPTER. 10. The Love of God brought defire into the house.
IN this mean time Desire was much amazed, and bethought himself of those
things which he had heard of the Love of God, and said to him. DE. When you
have done all these things, is there cause that you should be in fear of any
thing? LOVE. etc. Yea truly. I must with great care and study endeavor, that
by doing well I fall not into vaineglory, and self liking. For if so I should
yield to them, presently my Master would expel me this Monastery. Therefore
have I always Humility my Mother by my side. DE. Carry me I beseech you into
the house. LOVE. Follow me, for thou have had conference enough with me. I
will bring thee unto an other fellow of mine, whose office is higher, and more
worthy then mine. DE. What is his name? LOVE. He is called Desire of God. Now
Desire went with a cheerful mind, accompanied with the Love of God, to
seek Desire of God, and having found him, he asked of him if he were Desire
of God. DESIRE OF GOD. I am he thou seek, what would thou with me DE. I
would entreat to be admitted to your service. Here Desire of God was delighted
with the ready will of Desire, and said to him. DESIRE OF GOD. If thou desire
to live with me, thou must be well instructed by my brother the Love of God. For
Desire of God is made of the wine that runs out of that vessel of the Love
of God. See therefore thou be first well instructed by the love of God, least
otherwise thou deceive thy self. DE. I have conuersed sometime with the Love
of God, who has instructed me of all things that are necessary for me to do.
Which I hope through Gods help, to be able to execute. But I cannot assure
you, making no doubt whether I am endued with the Love of God or no,
considering it is a thing known only to him self, who love, or do not love
him. Therefore herein I humble my self to his wisdom. Neither can I assure
you, I have any thing of my self, one thing excepted which is Good will my
dog, whom neither, I dare presume to challenge as my own, considering I have
him by the gift of another. These words of Desire, pleased Desire of God, the
rather considering, he perceived that Desire durst not attribute to him self
his love of God. DE. Now Sir, let me crave to know your conditions and office.
DESIRE. Even as a man through true knowledge of him self, attayneth to great
contempt, and hatred of himself, and as through true knowledge of God a man
likewise comes to perfect love of God. So by much loving of God, a man is
brought to the greater desire of God. And whosoever he be that gets me: he
desires nothing else that this world can yield. For with such virtue and
worthiness do I adorn his mind: that he thinks himself unmeet, to desire
any thing, besides that most excellent, most rare, and most to be desired good.
Which is only our lord Jesus Christ. I say, I make him the most excellent of
the world. For although he be borne but of mean parentage: yet do I make him a
mighty King. For whosoever is truly endued with me, he thinks on nothing but
only on God: he speaks nothing but only on God: because that whersoeuer his
treasure is, there he sets his heart. And whatsoever the heart profoundly
thinks, that especially the mouth utters. And those things which are
delivered by the consent of the mouth, apparently declare the thought of the
heart. I am the food and repast of that mind, which lives, and is nourisned
by good desire: in this house of Charity, I am of highest dignity, and keep
the door of the secret chamber of the foresaid Charity, and have authority to
admit such friends as I allow of. Here use I the office of a Crier, or a
Trumpetter, and walking about this Monastery, make certain cries and soundes,
until such time as I awake and stir up my Master, and cause him to come
forth to speak with such as seek him. Who does thou think awaked me even now,
when thou stoodest calling so long at the gate, and knockedst with the hammers
of tears, and sighs? truly the barking of thy dog. I am the truest messenger
of Charity and come first to the gate, speak first to my Mam nearest to him,
and am soonest heard of him. Farther, it is in me to distribute the fruit of a
most rare tree, which we have, called the sight of God and, I do give it to
others to eat. DE. Is this fruit pleasant in taste. For in the house of
Humility an other fruit was given me, most bitter to eat, especially at the
first it could hardly be swallowed. DESIRE. OF GOD. This fruit is most sweet,
yet far sweeter in the taste of some men, then of others, according as men are
more desirous and hungry after it, and as they have their taste and mouths most
perfect. Some there be whose teeth are but dull or blunt: with whom this fruit
agrees not, because they cannot hold it. Other some eat it without hunger or
appetite: having their stomakes full and ouercharged with other meats; to these
men likewise it tastes not pleasantly, neither is it lightly disgested of
them, yet never thelesse it does not hurt them. Some others there be, which by
reason of some ague or some immoderate heat have not their taste so good as
others, and these cannot judge the goodness of this fruit, but only according as
they shall hear by others. DE. I beseech you, give me leave to taste a little
of this fruit. DESIRE OF GOD. It pleases me that thou say to taste a little
thereof: for in this mortal life no man may eat thereof his fill: only he may
tas and try how sweet it is. DE. Why so? DESIRE OF GOD. If any man might
enjoy it here to the full of his desire, he would never desire to depart from
this world, and to go to heaven. Know therefore that living here in this value
of misery, almost dead through hunger, and deprived of strength, by reason of
long penury: we ought longly to watch and desire that day, wherein we may
enter, into that great supper of our King and Master, desiring and thirsting
after him in no other manner, then does the heart thirst for the clear
fountain in the hotest So^mer. And such is the virtue and force of this fruit,
that one little morsel be it never so small does satiate a man's stomach, be
he never so great an eater. But being once come to the presence of this King
and Master, he will make our stomach better and stronger, that we shall be
able to eat of this fruit, so much as we will, and never receive hurt or
prejudice by it. But here if any one eat more of it, then his stomach can
bear: he shall rather receive hurt then good thereby. Therefore must we
moderately eat of this fruit, until we arrive at that place of happiness,
where for ever we shall be filled all measure, with that same fruit which here
we do but only taste.

CHAPTER 11. How Desire of God prepared, Desire to eat of this fruit.
DE. Now then Sir, I beseech you bestow upon me to eat so much of this fruit,
as your self shall think good. DESIRE OF GOD. First then considering, this
fruit is not contained, but in a most clean vessel: it behooves that thou
cleanse and make clean thy teeth, and that thou wash thy mouth, thy eyes, thy
face, thyhandes and feet. DE. Where may I find water, wherewith to do it?
DESIRE OF GOD. I will bring thee to a living fountain, that continually
runs both night and day, called Holy Religion, also I will assemble the
Virgins of this Monastery, who shall assist to wash and purify thee. This much
contented Desire, and gladly did he expect the coming of these Virgins, when
behold he saw Desire of GOD, come and bring them with him, saying, these be
the Virgins that shall wash thee. The first is called Sweetness. The second
Concord. The third Pity or Compassion. The fourth Grace. The fifth Clemency.
The sixth Indulgence. The seventh Mercy. The eight Benevolence. The ninth
Gentleness. The tenth Sufferance. The eleventh Tranquillity. The twelfe
Security. The thirtenth Ior. The fourtenth Discretion or Moderation. The
fiftenth Devotion. Who will give thee a certain sauce, that shall procure thee
an appetite, whereby more willingly and pleasingly thou shall eat this fruit.
For it is only given to such a hunger after it, but others are sent away empty
without it. The sixtenth Virgin is Religion. The seuententh is Perseverance.
The eightenth is Prayer. The nintenth is Honesty, and my self Desire of God,
am the last, who am ever present at this holy Monastery of Virgins. And if thou will likewise associate thy self with them, it will prepare thee not a little
to eat this fruit, which so sone as thou have eaten, thou shall ever after
have these Virgins thy companions, who never will forsake thee, except thou
first abandon them. For they be very greedy to eat of this meat, and so sone
as they epsy this fruit. They fly to it, as bees will do to honny, and we
cannot better know when a man has this fruit, then if we see these Virgins
flocking about his gates. Now Desire being washed and well recreated with
eating this fruit, was wonderfully comforted, to whom Desire of God said,
considering Brother that thou have eaten of this fruit, it is now expedient
that thou do sing also. For the servants of GOD, after they have eat their
meat use to sing, giving thanks and praise to GOD, and none abides in this
house, that is not expert in singing. DE. After what manner shall I sing?
DESIRE OF GOD. We will go to the quyer where all the singers abide. The firs
is called, Benediction or Blessing. The second Honor. The third Praising. The
fourth Thanksgiving, amongst these must thou sing, who are excellent
Musitions, and have singular sweet voices. DE. What part must I sing? DESIRE
OF GOD. The first as I have said is called Beneduction, he sings the treble
and prayseth God for his high omnipotency. The second Honur, he sings the
Contertenor, and prayseth God for his infinite wisdom. The third Praising, he
sings the Tenor, and extolleth the wonderful goodness of God, and all his
virtues, his noblenes, and excellency, and all that is in him. The fourth
Thanksgiving, he sings the Basse and gives thanks to GOD for all his
creatures, and for all the benefits which he has bestowed on them.

CHAPTER. 12. How Desire learned to sing.
DEsire was now much delighted, both with the manner of singing, and also with
the song, to whom Desire of God said, now be think the self whither thou will
return from hence or no. DE. Whither can I go, that I may better my self,
especially, considering I am come hither with so great labor and difficulty.
For findingmy self to be well entertained here, and to live in peace, and all
contentement by no means will I depart from hence, for the old Proverb
says, he that is well let him not change his place, therefore Sir, I cannot
be persuaded to depart, except you will by violence expel expel me. DESIRE OF
GOD. It is not our custom to expel any against their wills, rather do we
entreat such as enter in, hither, that they will maketheir abodes here amongst
us. Yet that they may know, that we admit none for our own necessity:
sometimes we ask of them whither they will depart. But seeing thou have
determined to continue here, thou must not live and be idle here. For no idle
body dwells here, or that does not spend his time in good exercises. DE. What
must I do? DESIRE OF GOD. Whatsoever is commanded to thee. DE. If I am
commanded nothing, shall I be idie? DESIRE OF GOD. Thou shall sing, and give
thanks, and praise to God, for thou art admitted hither especially to sing.
And whilst thou art in doing, that which thou art commaded, thou may sing
to thy self lest tho be trobled with idle thoughts. But if thou desire to
profit much, and greatly to please our Lord and Master, and to insinuate thy
self into his friendship, as much as thou can, (if nothing else be
commanded to thee,) converse and confer with him alone. Then shall thou hear
what he will speak in thee, and thou shall learnemany secrets that he will
reveal to thee, andthou shall become his most inward friend. DE. May any enter
into his chamber, and speak with him? DESIRE OF GOD. Yea truly, so that he be
accompanied with Humility. And farther I assure thee he takes especial
delight, when any will come to him and seek to awake him. For it is his nature
not to desire to be alone, and be a man never so mean or base, yet does he
delight to have him desire his presence. And so great is his dignity and
worthiness that he regards not his person, or makes any diference of their
birthes that sue to him, regarding only the humility of their minds. One man
is as dear to him as an other, and he created them all of one and the same
matter. Yea more, the more base and vile the person is, so that he debase and
deject himself; the greater does he declare his love toward him. And to say
truth those which dwell in this Monastery amongst us, the greatest part of them
(some few excepted) are borne but of mean and base parentage. For such as the
world contemns as abjects, those does God choose for his faithfullest
servants, that none of this society should flatter themselves: that they
deserved of themselves to be admitted hither, and not through the special
grace and goodness of God. If therefore thou desire to continue amongst us, and
to sing amongst our other signers, and desire farther that thy singing may be
pleasing, and acceptable to God, thou must labor to observe these four
things. The first is A good will. The second Humility. The third Patience. The
fourth Charity. Which if thou do, thou shall never err in singing. And
although sometimes thou chance to neglect some part, yet by dilligent
observation, thou shall easily come into measure again. With the first measure
or tune, which is A good will, thou shall sing the plain song, which is (as it
were) he ground and fondation of the others. With the second and third, I mean
Humility and Patience, thou shall sing the Contertenor, for Humility and
Patience, are contrary to self will. With the fourth, which is Charity, thou
shall explayne, and declare the sound and tune, of the Organs, and that with
exceeding sweetness and harmony of thy soul and spirit. And if it fortune that
thou be out of tune presently, have recourse to the first note or measure. Also
if thou chance to sing contrary to thy fellows, observe him that directs
thee, who will bring thee sone into tune again, through his help and
assistance, and with the love of our Lord and Master. And in all thy singing
observe this one thing diligently, that thou forget not to eat the fruit,
which thou did gather, in the house of Humility, I mean Distrust of thy
self, for the more thou attaynest to the Love and Desire of God, the better
thou shall know him, and sweeter shall thou find him. To conclude the more
thou shall offer of this fruit to my Lord and Master, the greater shall thou
find his love and friendship toward thee, for willingly does he eat of
it, and most pleasing is it to him.

CHAPTER. 13. How Desire of God, brought Desire into the chamber of his Lord
and Master, and of the mannerof Praying.
DE. One thing there remains yet which I would enteate of you, that now
considering. You have granted me, to be a servant of this house, you will
farther bring me, to the knowledge of my Master, that I may se him and kiss
his hand. DESIRE OF GOD. Follow me in and I will grant thy desire. Now began
Desie to fear and to tremble, thinking that he must speak with a King of so
great Majesty in his privy chamber, and so great was his feae and his
astoynishment, that neither could he or durst he presume to come near him, but
now began to thinketo go back again. But aduising better with himself,
and thinking that he was a sweet, a noble, and an affable King, and courteous,
and gentle to all men, he took heart again trusting wholly to he gentleness of
him. He Desire of God bid him stay at the door, until he went in to his
Master, and told him how Desire desired to speak with him. And now again
began Desire to be doubtful, how, and in what manner he should speak to his
Lord and Master. When Desire of God coming to him told him, he had acuained
his Master with his beingthere, and therefore badde him go in, and he would
stay for him there. Now Desire began with exceeding great reverence to enter
the house, and go into the haule, who so sone as he espied his Lord and
Master, he fell prostrate on the ground, and began to weep, not presuming to
lift up either his head or eyes. For he had not forgot, what an enemy he had
been sometime to his Master, with how many wrongs and injuries he had
offended him, how ill and irreverently he had sometimes spoken of him, with the
remembrance hereof, he was not able to speak, but stood weeping and sighing,
seeing himself present before the Majesty of him he had so highly offended. OUR
L. What means this weeping? What do thou here? speak thou nothing? rise
and say what thou would have. DE. What may I presume to speak O Lord, in
presence of thy Majesty, I acknowledge my self unworthy, to open my unclean
mouth in the presence of such a Lord, admit me to be silent, and to stand still
and sigh, and to bewail and lament my own iniquity. OUR LORD. Wherefore then
art thou come hither. DE. I of my self never came in hither, for I hold my
self unworthy to abide in thy house, much less worthy to enter thy chamber.
OUR LORD. Who then brought thee hither? DE. Thy self sweet Lord, thou have
drawn me, thou have made me cry, and call upon thee, thou have commanded thy
gates to be opened, and that I should be brought in hither to thee. My self am
wholly ignorant of the cause hereof, or what has moved thee to it, or what
need thou have of me. For I hold in more sufficient, then that so unworthy a
wreatch a I am, should be thought worthy to be the meanest of thy servants, and
a bondsman and slave in this thy house: although of my self I cannot deserve
that, and hold my self unworthy to obtain it. But considering that it has
pleased thee to call me, and that it pleases thee, I shall abide with thee,
and speak to thee: open thou O Lord I beseech thee my lips, and teach me
what I shall say in thy presence. Plant in me thy spirit of fear and
reverence, that thy Majesty be not offended by me, or vnreuerendly worshipped,
or vnhonorably entreated from this time forewarde ofso vile a sinner as I
acknowledge my self. For it cannot be done without offering thee great
injury. And rather had I kill my self then to offer contempt, ignominy or
disgrace to thy Majesty. For thereby should I offer great injury and contempt to
all Angels, and Archangels, and the whole fellowshippe of heaven, who with so
great reverence, and fervor do love and honor thee. Teach me therefore O
lord, what I shall say or do to thee. For I wholly resign my self into thy
hands. Grant me therefore sweet Lord the spirit of Humility wherewith I may
serve thee, thy house and all thy servants; let my service be acceptable to
thee, and be thou O Lord honored and glorified in me.

CHAPTER 14. How our Lord instructed Desire, how he should behave himself.
OUR LO. Rise upandlay away all manner of fear. If he^ceforth thou will be
virtuous and Godly, and behave thy self according to thy duty: I will never
remember the wrongs and injuries thou have done me. And that thou may
henceforth amend and become, better, I will deliver thee only four words,
which if thou remember, and wilt only observe, shall be very beneficial and
available to thee. The first two are. I and Thou. The other two. A Servant and
a King. These four words when thou can well exercise and practice, will
bring thee to great perfection and purity of heart: and will defend and deliver
thee from all perturbatio^s of the mind, and will instruct thee to live
peaceably and friendly, etconuerse quietly with all men. DE. Voutsafe O lord to
direct me, how I may exercise these four words. OUR LO. Thou may refer all
thy exercises to these four words, for they are of great importace, and whole
volumes might be written of them alone, which of them selves were sufficient to
teach great perfection. Therefore when thou esoluest to speak unto me, if then
thou find thy self could, distracted, or disconte^ted for any thing that thou
art commanded, think to thy self that with these words alone I speak to
thee. I and Thou. And then exclude from thy mind the whole world, and what
soever thou have heard or seen in thy life, imagining that none, but I I Thou
are left in this world. The other two words, Servant and King, will avail
thee in living with thy Brothers in this House. The first, whereof Servant will
profit thee herein, that thou may imagine thy self, the servant of all men,
whereby thou shall attain, Humility and Obedience. The other word King, will
serve thee to remember that thou art King and commander over thy self. For
such Kings do I enritch and load with all treasures. For this time be content
with this direction, and have peace and quietness, and so depart. DE. Wherefore
O Lord do thou bid me depart, and wilt that I forsake thy presence? OUR
LO. Think not thy self worthy to abide always with me, but at such times
only as I will, and shall send for thee, and then take thou heed that thou do
not offend in vaineglory or presumption. For according to my own will and
pleasure I will call thee. But before thou go hence, leave thy heart here with
me, that whersoeuer thou co^uerse thy better part may be with me. DE. Most
willingly sweet Lord, I commit my heart to thy protection. OUR LO. I receive it
from thy willing offer, and yet think not always that I will do so, for
sometimes for thy benefit, and to humble thee I will refuse to keep it. And this
one thing I would not have thee ignorant of, which peradventure is unknown to
thee; That the greater comfort and consolation I desire to send my friends:
with the more troules, adversities, and afflictions, I use tovisit them. But if
thou will leave Good will thy dog herewith me, he may continually remain in
my presence, and shall never go from me, except thou thy self wilt, yet
nevertheless daily must thou commend him to me. DE. Why is it needeful that
I commend him to thee daily? suffices it not that I do it once. OUR LORD.
No, and not for fear, least I should forget thee; but lest thou thy self
prove unmindful of me, and that thou may have occasion ever to remember
and have me in thy mind, whereby I may gratify and reward thee daily, and
according to thy necessity and want may help and succor thee. For nothing it
is to me whither thou be mindful or unmindful of me. DE. I yield thee most
humble thanks my sweet Lord and Master. Long since have I proved thy goodness
and benevolence, for which thou workest all things in us only for our
salvation and benefit.

CHAPTER. 15. How Desire put in practice the scure words of his Lord and
Master, and what benefit he received thereby.
THus Desire departing out, of the chamber of his Lord and Master, and leaving
his heart still behind with him; he found Desire of God without the door,
expecting his coming, to whom he said. What have thou done so long time
within? think thou my Lord and Master, takes delight and is pleased with
many words? believe me, thou shall sometime prevail more with him, with one
word then with a hundred. DE. Me thinks I have stayed to short a time with
him. DE. OF GOD. Now view and consider all this house, considering thou art
receaned in hither. DE. I will go to my chamber. DE. OF GOD. Go in the name
of God. Now Desire did daily reuolue in his mind the four words, which his
Lord and Master had delivered him, and often would say to himself. I and Theu.
Servant and King. And whenever he spoke them, whither he divided them, or
joined them yet ever they agreed well together. For joining the first, which is
I. With the third, which is A Servant, he said to himself I pronounce them
rightly. For, for the love of my Lord and master. I am a servant. Then joining
the first with the last which is a King. Sill he seemed to pronounce them
rightly. For being the servant of God, he said he was a King. For to serve God:
that is to reign. Again speaking them an other way and joining, King with
Servant. Still they agreed well together. For the King of heaven to the intent
he might make me a King, made himself a Servant, and whosoever will be a King
it is necessary that first he make himself a Servant. Thus did Desire for his
benefit many ways join these four words together. For if at any time he
were oppressed with any external adversity, presently would he say to
himself, I nothing regard what men say or think of me, not esteeming whither
they honor or co^tenine me. I am a servant or bondsman, and these things are
meet for such an on. If he felt himself to be tempted with any voluptuous
pleasure, then said he to himself. Be it far from me, that am a King to
become, the salve of filthy vice and pleasure. So vile a servitude befitteth
not my Nobility. Thus received Desire exceeding benefits by these words:
whither he joined them in order, or placed them contrarily. For both did they
quench naughty desires kindled in him and appeased and mitigated all his
adjuersities. But now considering the explication of these words may be
infinite, least I seem to be tedious, I refer the rest to the good
consideration of others.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX, GATHERED out of the work of Ludouicus Blotius an Abbot,
containing briefly, the chief matter of the former Dialogue.
Thirteen short Precepts, most necessary for all men, that desire to attain
to the perfect love of God.
The first. FOr the love of thy Savior Jesus Christ, who suffered most bitter
torments for thy redemption, renounce and forsake all sensual delights and
pleasures: whenever thou would, or desire, to hear, see, smell, taste,
touch, or speak any thing: call to thy remembrance, and think that thou art
then to obey God, and reason speaking in thee, and not thy sensual appetite,
which shall move and stir thee. Be also ready, and content to want the
delights of the spirit, according to the pleasure and ordinance of God. And
whenever thou art comforted with an inward sweetness, and consolation; rest
not therein, but beware thou abuse it not according to thy own proper pleasure.

2. Keep ever a most careful watch over thy seeing, hearing, and over thy
speaking, that they decline not after unlawful, vain and unprofitable
things. Thou must be most vigilant, and wary in speaking, that thou utter not
more words, or in other manner, then shall beseem thee. Let all thy talk be
short, plain, and void of strife and contention. Govern, and order
carefully, all parts of thy body. Avoid, and shun immoderate laughter, and
all leuitie, and wantonness in thy behavior.

3. Love not any creature with an inordinate affection, but mortify thy self
to all transitory things, and carry a mind free from such allurements: for in
such a freedom is contained the most true, and pleasant life.

4. Kill and destroy with all possible care, through a full resignation and
denial of thy self: all thy passions, and finfull affections, and especial
thy stubborn and obstinate self-will. Love only before all things, the holy
will of God, and still wish that it may be done, and to that, wholly submit thy
self, in such sort, that whatsoever God will have done, that same thou shall
desire also. In all things, and at all all times, prefer the praise and honor
of God, before thy own profit and private commodity.

5. In all things that shall happen, wisely expect the providence of God, and
carefully commit thy self and all thine to him. Knowing that he has a care
over thee. All adversity and tribulation (be it internal or external) take as
sent from the hand of God. Believing for certain that he does send it thee,
for thy farther benefit and good of thy soul. Bear it therefore patiently
even to the last hour, giving thanks to God, and continually praising him,
through whose permission and ordinance such a thing is befalne thee. And be not
troubled or moved for any injury, that snall be offered to thee, nor
impatiently complain thereof to any man: but calling to remembrance thy own
iniquity and ingratitude, hold thy self worthy of all men to be reprehended,
blamed, contemned, vexed, scorned, and trod on. Why should thou be dejected
for the words of men, or for any thing that thou can suffer from them? Give
men leave to think and speak their plesures of thee, let the world, and the
Devil rage as they will at thee, considering it comes but by Gods
permission. Do thou in the mean time, lean wholly to our LORD JESUS, and
silently keep peace continually in thy heart. If thou do truly consider, how
shameful and sharp things, thy Creator and Redeemer IESVSCHRIST has
suffered for thee, most patiently thou would endure any affliction
whatsoever.

6. Imagine thy self more base, and abject, than any other creature remembering
thy own vileness, and what thy sins have deserved. If thou think any good
of thy self considering thou have none, if unwisely thou like thy own doings
and conceive well of them, herein thou show thy exceeding pride, for which,
thou stinkest before the face of God. What good soever is in thee, it is Gods,
and not thine, beware therefore in usurping that, which appertains to God.
Neither boast thereof, or secke to please thy self: in that which shall so
highly displease almighty God. Farther, think thy self unworthy of the
smallest benefitte it shall please God to bestow on thee.

7 Obey and follow in all lawful things, the will and commandment of other
men, thy own self-will clearly abandoned, and all appetites and desires
vanquished and overcome. Most readely submit thy self to Obedience, for
nothing is more acceptable to God then Obedience: and disobedience the thing
which God most hates.

8 Content thy self with few and simple things, following the example of our
Savior Christ and his most blessed Mother. Delight neither in vain apparel,
nor gluttenous diet. But think with thy self, how unthankful thou should
be, if thou should murmur for thy meat, not being curiously dressed;
considering our Savior JESUS CHRIST, was offered for thy sake, most bitter
gall and vinegre to drink. If thou want sometime even those things which are
needful for thee, yet ever honor God, and put thy trust and confidence in
him, who never forsakes those that serve him, although for their greater good
he suffer them sometime to want.

9 Love all men sincerely, as thy brothers and sisters, representing the Image
of GOD thy Creator: Heartily wish the good of all men. Show to all men,
especially to thy enemies, and persecutors, a mild, and gentle countenance,
and behavior, and let all thy words be civil to them,: suppressing in thy
self all bitterness of heart, with a mildness, and sweetness of holy
Charity. Be ever ready to comfort, and aid all men in necessity. Have pity
and compassion upon all in misery, rejoice at other men's virtues, as at thy
own: and take other men's miseries, as the misery of thy self, imagining thou
art subject to as much as any other.

10 Contemn no man; banish from thy heart, with all possible diligence, evil
suspicion, and rash judgment. Inure thy self to think well of all men.
Interpret with simplicity the sayings, and doings of others to the best.
Prefer plainly all other men before thy self. Imagine thou art more vile,
and ingrate, then any other man living. Say to thy self, say also to GOD, I am
unworthy to tread upon the earth. Oh that thou did understand how
willingly thou ought undertake all servile works for Gods sake: how gladly
thou should obey and serve other for him. For our Lord and Redeemer JESUS
CHRIST, himself being made man, became a servant, and with humility washed the
feet of his Disciples.

11. Labor to please God, rather then men, and wish rather to be despised then
honored.

12 Feed and nourish in thy self holy and virtuous thoughts, and every where
attend the presence of GOD, having thy thoughts continually fixed on him,
whether thou feel sensible devotion or no. These words following, being often
thought upon, will help greatly to recollect thy spirittes, and reuerendly to
think on the presence of GOD. O Lord God, thou art ever present to aid and
assist me; thou inhabitest and art abiding in the secrets of my soul.

13. Whatsoever is not of god, regard it not, nor think that it does
appertain to thee, so may thou with a quiet mind attend his service; And
one thing is necessary, which to obtain, thou must labor, endeavor, and do
what lies in thy power, yet so, that thou wholly distrust thy self, and all
thou can do, but have all thy confidence in God alone, in his mercy and
goodness, and in the help and assistance of his heavenly grace. For without
God, thou can do nothing but sin. Read over again, and again, these
short rules, and examine thy life and behavior by them.

AN INDEX OF THE CHAPters of this Dialogue, divided into three parts.
THE first Chapter. Desire goes on Pilgrimage. 2. He instructs spiritual
Pastors and Prelates. 3. Of the same Argument. 4. Of the house of Humility. 5.
How Vainglory watches at the gates. 6. By what means we may attain to
Humility. 7. Of the purpose of Humility, and her conference with Desire. 8.
Humility continues her discourse. 9. Humility still continues her speech, and
teaches how to fight against sin. 10. Of concupiscence of the flesh. 11. Of
concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life. 12. How the other wicked Maidens
may be overcome. 13. All malice may be expelled. 14. Of other exercises of
Humility. 15. Of the virtues that be daughters to Humility. 16. How all
creatures be good, and yet none is good but God. 17. Of the same Argument. 18.
Of the manners and conditions of Simplicity 19. How purity of heart, and
Innocence might be preserved. 20. Of Poverty. 21. Of Obedience. 22. Of
Chastity. 23. The Conclusion of the first part.
THE SECOND PART.
1. Of Patience. 2. How God may be known by his cretures.
THE THIRD PART.
1. Of the probation and exercise of the Love of God. 2. Of the love of our
Neighbor. 3. Of the Love of God, and of our Neighbor, and of an other degree
of love, and of the function thereof. 4. Of the same. 5. Of two other Purposs
of the Love of God, to wit, to desire nothing, and to think upon nothing. 6.
Of the same, and of prayer also. 7. Of the office of the Love of God in an
other degree, and a continuation of that, which he began of the manner of
praying. 8. Of the third degree of Love. 9. Of those things which the Love of
God hates. 10. How the Love of God brought desire into the house. 11. How
Desire of God prepared Desire to eat of the fruit he gave him. 12. How Desire
learned to sing. 13. How Desire of God brought Desire into the chamber of his
Lord and Master, and of the manner of praying. 14. How our Lord gave Desire
good directions, to govern him self well. 15. Desire exercised the four
words, which our Lord taught him, and what benefit he reaped thereby.
FINIS.

