Come ye Blessed, etc. Go ye Cursed, etc. OR, A Dial of Direction to
Doomes-day: denoting by the Seven deadly Sins, seven dangerous steps
descendant to destruction; and by their contrary opposite virtues, the
Seauenfold ladder ascending to everlasting Felicity.
Humility.
MElt throbbing Soul into a flood of tears,
And humbly hang thy vows at Heavens ears;
Thy God will hear, without an angry frown,
And raise thee up, as he has cast thee down.
Rip up thy breast with sighs, break heart in twain,
He Will make amends, and salve it up again.
True, true indeed; for he that Heaven will win,
Must be both new without, and new within.
Love.
Love is the life of Virtue, and the fire
Which kindles motion in a good desire;
She is the Queen, whom here portrayed you see,
Dandling her pretty Infants on her knee:
Now what relation they have to the Mother,
The same we have compared with one another:
If thus we love, at length the God above,
Will guide our feet into the place of Love.
Patien^.
WHy should I seek revenge, I Will rather die,
Then have my hands distaind with cruelty;
Rather then burnish in mine own defense,
Let me be blamed for sheepish innocence:
In hope thus mean I to continue still,
And wish their good, that shall desire my ill;
For well I know, Forgive, and be Forgiven,
Is one sure path, will lead us unto Heaven.
Labor.
THe portion ^^ his sons was sweat,
And through their Labor to procure their meat;
Fie then on those, that foolishly repine,
To see us work, before we seek to dine:
We stand not idle, like a lump of lead,
But plow, and sow, and so we get our bread.
For true it is, when God shall see it best,
We shall be brought unto the place of rest.
Liberality.
COme, come, you hungry souls, take what you lack
Food for your belly, raiment for your back,
Refresh your selves with that which God has sent us,
For what we have, we must confess is lent us:
To be employed on you, and take it as free,
As ever at the first it came to me.
And do so still, though the world never regard thee,
There Is one above that sees, and will reward thee.
Temperance.
IT is a noble thing, and worthy man,
To slack his power of doing what he can;
This is true Temperance, to see and taste
Gods creatures, never spending them in wast;
This is the Balsame for the Soul and brain,
To read, and drink, and then to read again.
No man can find the way to Heaven reeling,
It Is straight, and low, and only got by kneeling
Chastity.
ONe spotless couple with your tender young,
Fair like the stock, from whence at first they sprung;
Hie to the Temple, great Iehovahs place,
There you may look upon him face to face;
There you may read, and hear, and pray, and sing,
And warble out the praises of your King.
For he that bears unto this Church a love,
Shall be a member of the Church above.
Pride.
Fair, bright-celestiall Angel-like Face*
Adding a luster to the looking-glass;
Would Venus were alive, that I might prove
How far I went beyond the Queen of Love;
My Peacock-painted locks affirm the same,
Brighter then hers to whom Leander swame.
But stay, locks shead, and Peacockes loose their feather,
Your Beauty, and your Glass, may break together.
Envy.
O How my soul's tormented when I see,
Honors attend on others, and fly me!
I could ee'ne tear away my snakie twine,
For anger that those fortunes were not mine;
Well so be it, thrive on; I must and will
Spit my contagious envy at you still.
Hell's hard at hand, peace; for a time thou wilt see,
Thousands shall pity, but none envy thee.
Wrath.
CAn flesh and blood endure it? surely no,
I Will make you rue your faults or e're you go;
Your lift-vp hands, and tears can do no good,
Naught shall appease my fury, but your blood:
I Will carue ye up ye Scoundrels joint by joint,
And toss your limbs upon my daggers point.
Yet be advised, and learn this lesson well,
The blood of man will be revenged in hell.
Sloth*
RAther then work we will starve; now we are borne
We must be kept, though we be kept in scorn;
Let things go how they will, what need we care?
Sleeping, and feeding in the open air:
It is a bliss, what need our wishes clime
Farther than only to the present time?
Yet there is a world behind, and worth the thinking,
Which will not be obtained by Sloth and drinking.
Covetousness.
COme let us hug sweet soul, ye heaps of wonder,
We Will rather fry in hell, than part asunder:
O glorious metal! fair beyond the Sun!
That setts, but thou reflect'st when day is done;
Long may thou fire my coffers, and be bright,
To keep thy master from eternal night.
But let me tell you this; Bills, Bonds, and Leases,
Will never assure you of the place where peace is.
Drunkenness.
SIt close good fellows, tumble down the liquor,
It makes the wit, and understanding quicker,
It Is the directest physic for the brain,
To sit, and drink, and piss it out again:
Fill me a boule of Nectar, I Will begin
A health to him, that will this honor win.
And drink thy fill, a time will come e're long,
Thou shall not have a drop to cool thy tongue.
Lechery.
QVickly let us snatch the pleasures of the bed,
Embrace, and kiss, and cull a mayden-head;
A fire runs through my veins, like Aetna hot,
Yet what it meets I Am sure it scorches not,
Try first and trust; two is a number, one
Must live, and lie, and die, and all alone.
Why so? it is better go to Heaven single,
Then with the hellish multitude to mingle.


Printed at London for William Wilson, and are to be sold by Francis ^r^^e,
over against the Sarazens-head without Newgate.


