Here begins a dialogue between the comen Secretary and Ielowsy touching
the unstableness of harlottes.
Secretary. Ielowsy.


Ielowsy. WHat a world is this / I trow it be a cursed
Feign would I marye / if yt I durst
But I trow sith ye time yt god was born
So many honest me^ never held of ye horn

Secretary. What is the matter / be ye in any doubt
Pacyfye your mode / let it come out
Dyscharge your stomach / avoyde it forth
Sorrows in store be nothing worth

Ielowsy. Troth it is / I trust ye will not be grieved
To a small questyon be to you moved
In a matter / to me doubtful and defuse
Which I suppose ye have had in experyence and use

Secretary. That perauenture / but I will not promise you p^sysely
To assoyle your questyon very wisely
How be it that ye say / I am of experyence
So ye will be close / ye shall here my sentence

Ielowsy. Then thus / she that has a rollynge ey
And does convey it / well and wisely
And thereto has a waueryng thought
Trow ye this trull will not be bought.

Secretary. Yes / but take heed by the price ye have no loss
A made merchant yt will give.v. m^ke for a goose
Beware a rollyng ey with wauerynge thought m^ke yt
And for such stuff pass not / a dandy pratt

Ielowsy. She that is very wanton and nyse
Thynkyng her self maruaylous wise
And will come to him that does her call
Will she not wrastell for a fall

Secretary. Yes suerly / for a fall flat as a cake
And cares not how many falls she does take
There is no fall can make her lame
For she will be sure of the best game.

Ielowsy. She that does make it all strange and quaynt
And lokyth as she were a very saint
If a man in the dark do her assay
Has she any power to hold owte nay / nay

Secretary. Hold out / yes / or it is pyttye she was borne
A horse a whele barowe and a Rammys horn
It the other thing come ye Wott what I mean
For all her holly looks she will convey it clean

Ielowsy. She that does love much dallyng
With diverse men for fair speaking
And thynkys not on her own shame
Will not this wild foul be made tame

Secretary. Yes with good handlynge as Iayme
Even by and by ye shall her reclayme
And make her tame as ever was Turtyll
To suffer kyssyng and tyklyng under the kyrtell

Ielowsy. She that is sum what light of credence
And to make her fresh / large of expense
How say you and her money do fail
Will she not lay too pledge her tail

Secretary. Yes and if she be of that appetyte
She will pledge and sell out right
Head piece / tail piece / and all.iiii. quarters
To one or other / rather then fail to carters

Ielowsy. She that louys to sytte and muse
And craftly can her self excuse
When she is taken with a fault
Will she not be won with a small saulte

Secretary. What nedys a saulte / I dare say she will consent
That ye shall enter by a reasonable poyntment
And the^ take heed for i^ keeping of this ward and hold
Is more danger the^ in getting a thousand fold

Ielowsy* She that is of mind sum what rechelles
Gyuynge her self all to ydelnes
And louys to lie long in her bed
Who wayteth his time shall he not be sped

Secretary. Time nay nay wait / if she be in good mode
For out of church all times be good
But pass not thereon / though she say nay
For so she will when she has best lust to play

Ielowsy. She that can no counsayll keep
And lightly will sobbe and weep
Laughe again and wot not why
Will she not be sone tysed to folly

Secretary The tears be token a gracyous courage
And laugh^nge does all malice aswage
When she is in that taking mark well mark
Let slyp / spare not for one course in her park

Ielowsy. She that is fair and lusty young
And can common in terms with fyled tongue
And will bide whysperynge in the ear
Think ye her tail is not ^yght of the sear

Secretary^ By all these symblytudes me thynkes suerly
Her own tail she should occupy
Sometime for need her honest saved
She will wasshe often or she be ones shaued

Ielowsy. She yt paynteth her in staring apparel
Use hot wynes and daily to farewell
And loves to sleep at after none tide
Who list stryke trow ye she will not stryde

Secretary. I can not say if she will stryke
But if reason be offered nothing shall fall beside
For of a troth as frost engendereth hayle
Ease and rank fedynge does cause a lycorous tail.

Finis



