TWO PRECIOVS AND DIVINE ANTIDOTES against the Plague of Pestilence; or any
other judgment incident unto us. Giving excellent Instructions and Comforts
unto all that well use them in time of Need. The first prescribing holy
Preservatiues against this, or any other PLAGVE: Written by a Christian and
charitable well-willer unto his Country. The second, Setting down sweet
Consolations for such as be visited by the Plague: Written by a famous,
learned, and faithful Pastor, unto some of his flock in the time of their
visitation.

LONDON Printed for NATHANAEL NEVVBERY. 1625.

An Antidote against the Plague, or any other Judgment incident to this NATION.
IT is said of Laish, that they Judge. 18.
were a secure people and dwelt careless: poor silly souls, they never
dreamed of any harm, till the beesome of destruction came and swept them all
away. It is said likewise of the old world; that they Mat. 24. 38.
eat, they drank, they married and were given in marriage; they gave
themselves wholly to iovialitie and mirth, living so here as if they should
have lived here for ever; never considering, that the rejoicing of the wicked
is short, and the joy Job. 20. 5. Job. 21. 13.
of hypocrites is but for a moment; That they spend their days in mirth and
iollitie and suddenly go down to the grave: they lay in a dead sleep,
drowned in a deep security, till a fearful Genesis 7.
and universal Deluge came out from the Lord, and drowned them all: only
waking Noah was wonderfully preserved in the Arc. I would I could not say of
our Nation as it was said of Laish: we are a secure and careless people; I
would these Scriptures were not this day fulfilled in our ears; but alas it is
more then manifest, we are a Nation drowned in security; this is the fruit of
our long prosperity; we are at ease in Sion, we sit every man under his own
vine and under his fig tree, therefore we sing a Requiem unto our souls, and
say, We shall have peace though we walk after our own lusts; we shall never
be moved: Soul take Luke 12. 19 20
thy rest, thou have much goods laid up for many years, eat, drink, and take
thy pleasure, let thy heart cheer thee, be ioviall and merry; but alas poor
souls they never consider, that this night their souls shall be taken away
from them; That for all these things the Lord will bring them to judgment;
they Eccles. 11. 9.
put far from them the evil day. But in this sleepie and drowsy age, I
doubt not but there be some waking Noah's, who if they cannot prevail for
others, yet at least build an Arc for the safety of their own souls: in this
cold and frozen age, doubtless there be some zealous Moysesses, who stand in
the gap between God and his people, and hold Gods hand from smiting by their
incessant prayers: though Egypt be full of darkness, yet there is some light
in Goshen; some that shine as lights though the whole world lie in darkness:
though the world be full of folly and the most part run on as fools, and are
punished, yet questionless there be some prudent men that learn to foresee
the evil to come and hide themselves. Prove. 22. 3.


God has given to this Nation of ours many a fair warning, as loath to smite,
till needs he must: he has sent his Ministers early and late to thunder in our
ears; yet except we do repent, we shall all likewise perish, judgment will
come: he has set our neighbors house on fire as a beacon to give us warning,
I mean, the judgments that have befallen our brethren beyond the Seas: he
has sent many small judgments before, as forerunners of that great one to
come; as little gunshots before the great murdering piece: It has been told
us before, that if we repented not God would do such a thing in England, that
whosoever should hear thereof, both his ears should tingle; thus the Cocks
crowed before the storm, but we regarded it not: God has now sent a fearful
plague amongst us as another warning more heavy then the former, and if this
cannot move us to repent, we may still look for heavier, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it; I will yet punish them Levit. 26.
seven times more, and if that will not do seven times more; the Lord will not
cease to smite, so long as we cease not to sin; he has more scourges then
one; if the present Plague will not do, famine shall, if famine will not do,
the sword shall utterly cut us off from being a Nation. I beseech ye my
brethren consider it, even with tears I beseech ye: what a woeful spectacle
will it be to see our streets swim with the blood of us all, to see our women
ravished, and their little infants dashed against the stones; to see the cursed
and abominable Mass set up in our Churches, to see all turned topsie turvie,
vpside down; whose heart does not yearne and even melt within him, to think
on these things: oh consider the fearful desolation that befell Jerusalem:
Lamentatio^ the whole Book.
and the grievous calamities comne upon our brethren beyond the Seas, they were
God his people as well as we: oh that we could be warned by other men's harms.

But what have I done (says England) that such things as these should befall
me.

Gunpowder-Treason and Eighty-eight: then thou did promise better obedience:
he has given thee long peace and quietness, no noise of War has been
heard in thy streets: he has given thee plenty and prosperity, a land
flowing with milk and honey, even all that heart can wish: he has made thee
even a Mirror and a Wonderment to the whole world for his manifold blessings.
But how have thou now requited thy God, O England? 1. with ignorance not only
compelled but affected; Light is come into the world, but men love darkness
rather then light: 2. with contempt of the Gospel, a crying bloody sin, a
sin never heard of among the Jews: 3. with Blasphemy of all sorts, swearing,
forswearing, taking God his great and dreadful name in vain, nothing more
rife even in the mouths of children that can but newly speak: 4. with
profanation of the Sabbath, spending it in sports and idle pastimes. In thee
is secretly committed that cursed sin of Idolatry: in thee is Atheism,
drunkenness, rioting, feasting, when the Lord calls for fasting: in thee are
disobedient to parents, contemners of authority, despisers of God his
messengers, disdainers of equals; in thee are murderers, even
Soule-murtherers; contentious persons, whoremongers, adulterers; in thee is
Bribery, Oppression, Usury, Simony, fraud and cousenage; Justice and Truth is
perished from thy Land: in thee is lying, tale-bearing, false witnesse-bearing,
covetousness, pride, idleness, fullness of bread, deep security, even all
the sins of Sodom: in thee are many professors that make a show of
godliness, but deny the power of it; in thee are Lukewarm Christians. These
are the sins under which the Land groaneth; Do thou thus requite thy God O
foolish people? Shall we not think now that the Lord has a Controversy with
England? Shall I not visit for these things (says the Lord)? Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Let me alone that I may destroy them
at once. Hear O heavens, hearken O earth, I have nourished up children, Isa.
1. 2. 3.
and they have rebelled against me: the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass
his masters crib, but my people have not known me (says the Lord). Ah
sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, why
should they be smitten any more, they fall away more and more. I take no
delight to vpbraid mine own Nation, or to defile mine own nest; but for Sions
sake I cannot hold my tongue: let me perish if I see my Country perish, and
give them not warning. Wherefore I beseech ye my dear brethren (all true
hearted Englishmen) in the bowels of Christ Jesus, who died for us, and shed
his own heart blood for us, as you regard your own souls, bodies, and
estates; as ye wish and desire the peace and prosperity of this our Sion,
dally with the Lord no longer, God will not be always mocked, turn now at the
last unto the Lord with all your hearts; turn ye, oh turn ye, why will ye
die? seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near;
draw near to God and he will draw near to you. Oh that I could even weep
over this Land, as our Savior did over Jerusalem, and say: O England, England,
thou that reiectest my Prophets, and despisest those that are sent unto thee,
how often would I have gathered Luke 13. 34.
thee together, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not; wherefore thy house shall be left unto thee desolate: oh that thou
were therefore now wise yet in this thy day to consider those things that
belong unto thy peace, least at length they be hid from thine eyes. Woe to thee
O England, Mat. 11. 21.
if the great works which have been done in thee, had been done in Tire and
Sidon, in Sodom and Gomorrah, they had repented in sackcloth and ashes long
ere this: And thou London, London, which art lifted up to heaven, for abundance
23.
of spiritual means, shall be brought as low as hell, except thou repent:
wherefore I beseech ye again and again for Christ's his sake, for the Gospels
sake, for your Countries sake, for your own souls sake be entreated; Repent,
repent; Search, even search your selves O nation not worthy to Zeph. 2. 1.
be beloved, before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes on
a day: look into your lives, consider your ways, go apart, and seriously
ask your souls; What have we done? Let your mirth be turned into mourning,
your feasting Dan. 9. 19.
into fasting, weep and lament bitterly for your sins, cry mightily for mercy,
even as for life and death; cease to do evil, learn to do well; wash you,
make you clean, put away your sins from before God his eyes; rent your
hearts and not your garments, amend and change your ways, bring forth fruits
meet for repentance: that so ye may get the sword again into his sheath,
which is already drawn out, and will give every one of us our deaths wound,
except we repent; and may quench that wrath which is already kindled, and will
burn hotter and hotter, and never cease until it have utterly consumed us, if
in time we quench it not by the tears of true repentance: wherefore now
prepare to meet thy God, O England; It is more then high time to repent,
defer no longer, if the last blow be once stricken, that is, cut it down,
even utter desolation; there will then be left no place for repentance. Oh that
I could therefore persuade you; but it is not I, it is the Lord that must do
it; now Lord do thou persuade Iapheth; for we cannot: Turn thou us unto thee
O Lord of hosts, make thy face to shine and we shall be saved; convert us
unto thee, and we shall be converted, renew our days as of old; Lord thou
longest for our conversion; thou stand waiting and crying; Wash thine heart,
O England, will thou not be made clean; oh when Ierem. 13. 27.
will it once be? Lord cleanse thou us and we shall be cleansed; wash thou us
and we shall be whiter then snow; cause us to come unto thee, why have thou
hardened our hearts from thy fear: O Lord, thou art our Father, we are the
clay; Isay. 64. 8.
thou art the Potter, we are the work of thine hands; oh destroy not the work
of thine own hands; frame and fashion us, and make us such as thou would
have us to be: spare thy people, O God, spare thy people, and be jealous for
thine inheritance, why shall the people say; Where is their God? O Lord hear,
O Lord forgive, O Lord consider, and do it, defer not for thy name sake, for
thy Christ's his sake, pity the desolations of thy Sion, of the City where
thy name is called upon? Will thou O Lord, forsake for ever? Why is thy wrath
thus hot against the sheep of thy pasture? Our sins indeed testify against
us, that we are a rebellious and stifnecked people, we lie down in our shame,
and confusion covers us; thou art righteous and just when thou iudgest, but
we are a perverse and froward generation; we would not hear when thou
calledst, but stopped our ears, like the deaf Adder, therefore thou may now
justly laugh at our Prove. 1. 26. 27
destruction, and mock when our fear comes: but there is mercy with thee
that thou may be feared, we beseech thee in wrath remember mercy, have mercy
upon us according to the multitude of thy compassions, oh Lord save us or else
we perish. Comfort us according to the days that thou have afflicted us:
Return O Lord, how long? and be pacified toward thy servants. Continue still
to be our God, and let us be thy people; remove thy judgments which lie heavy
upon us, and destroy us not utterly for thy names sake: Make us all to turn to
thee from the highest to the lowest by speedy and unfeigned repentance, that so
thou may not utterly cut us off, even head and tail, root and branch, in
one day; but may still delight to do us good, to multiply thy blessings upon
us; and make us as worthy to be beloved in and through thy Son Christ Jesus,
that Son of thy love, as we have been for our long peace and prosperity of
all the Nations of the earth admired: even so be it, Lord so be it.

This is the first and general Remedy which a Nation must use for the
removal and preventing not only of the Plague, but of any other judgment
whatsoever; namely, true repentance, which stands in sorrow for sin, and
reformation 2 Chronicles. 7. 13. 14. Ierem. 18. 7. 8. Isa. 1. 19. 20. Iere. 14. 11.
12
of life. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good fruits of the Land;
but if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Now if so be I cannot prevail with the
whole Land; then I turn to you that fear the Lord: I hope to have audience in
your ears. If ye cannot prevail for others, yet make sure of your own
souls; learn to hide your selves, to build an Arc for the safety of you and
yours. But ye will say, how may that be done? I answer.

1. If ye would not partake with the Plagues of the times, be not pertakers of
their sins. Come out of her my Revel. 18. 4.
people (says God) be ye not partakers of her sins, least ye also be
partakers of her glagues; if ye will needs sin with them, look to be
plagued with them. Deuteronomy. 4. 3, 4. Those that went with others after Baal peor
were destroyed, but those that cleaved to the Lord were kept alive. Zeph. 2. 3.
Seek yet the Lord all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment, seek righteousness, seek lowliness, if so be ye may be hid in
the day of the Lord his wrath. The way to be hid in the day of the Lord his
wrath, is to seek after lowliness, to carry our selves meekly, and to walk
humbly, the lowest shrubs are safest from storms; to seek after
righteousness, to walk circumspectly, and warily, shunning the sins of the
times, even more then the Plague it self; to keep our selves unspotted of the
world, to save our selves from this froward generation: the infection of sin
is far more dangerous then the infection of the Plague; that indangers the
body only, this indangers soul and body for ever; how should we shun it
therefore? How had we need to abstain from all appearance of evil, not only
from the flesh, but from all the garments spotted with the flesh; the more
wicked 1 These. 5. 22. Jude. 23.
the times grow, the more holy we should grow; the more iniquity abounds, and
the love of many waxes cold, the more blameless, and zealous in good duties
we should strive to be: like bright orient stars, the deeper they go in the
dark night, the brighter they shine: thus Noah shined in his generation.
Though Egypt be full of darkness, yet let Goshen be light; though Israel play
the harlot, yet let not Judah sin. We are Christians, we profess our Hos. 4.
15. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17.
selves to be children of the light, let not us therefore have any fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather: let not
fornication or any other uncleanness be once named amongst us; let not us
defile our garments. Revel. 3. 4.


2. It is not sufficient that we partake not with the sins of the times, but
we must mourn for the sins of the times; we must take a view of the
abominations committed in Sion, and work our hearts to such a sorrow as may
make our eyes to gush out rivers of tears, because men keep not God Psalm.
119. 136.
his law, then God will wonderfully preserve us: As he preserved just Lot out
of Sodom, when it was consumed with fire 2 Pet. 2. 7.
and brimston from heaven, because his righteous soul was vexed from day to
day with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites. There was a mark set upon
all the true Mourners in Sion, that when the Angel of the Lord came to smite,
they might escape: so Ezekiel. 9. 4.
Jeremy, because he wished his head a fountain of tears, Iere. 9. 1.
that he might weep day and night for the sins of his people; see how the
Lord preserved him alone when all the rest Iere. 39. 11. 12
were carried into Captivity: these things are written for our learning.

3. We must mourn for our own sins and labor to forsake them. It is said
of Josiah, that because his heart melted 2 King. 22. 19. 20.
at the Law read, both for his own sins and the sins of his people, and he
humbled his soul before the Lord, that therefore he should be put to his grave
in peace, and his eyes should not see the evil that God would bring upon the
Land. So if like good Josiah, our hearts even melt within us, and we humble our
souls unfeignedly before the Lord for our sins, God will work wonderfully
for us, and we shall find gracious experience of his goodness toward us: if
God spared Ahab for his counterfeit humiliation, and would not 1 King 21. 27.
29.
bring the evil in his days; how much more will he spare those that humble
their souls before him in truth. And as we must grieve for our sins, so we
must forsake our sins: he that hides his sins shall not prosper, neither in
soul nor body, he lies open to all dangers; but he that confesses and Pro.
28. 13.
forsakes them shall find mercy; God will be merciful to his soul, and
preserve his body: He that walks uprightly, walks safely (says Solomon:)
he that labors to the uttermost of his power to clear himself from all
sin, to purge his heart from all hollownesse, not cherishng any one beloved
sin, to be upright in his way; walking in all the Commandments of God
without rebuke; such a man is a safe man, he is sure nothing can hurt him. It
avails nothing to burn Juniper, to smell to Wormwood, to take somewhat in a
morning, and to use many outward means against the Plague, so long as our
souls are not severed from our sins; it is this inward uncleanness that is
the cause of that outward, the Plague-soare of sin wherewith our souls are
infected, causes the Plague upon the body: sever your sins then from your
souls if ever ye mean to keep the Plague from your bodies, say to these
menstrous clothes; Get ye hence.

Fourthly: We must trust in God for safety and deliverance; though we may use
all good and lawful means, yet we must not rest in the means, but go to God
for his blessing, and depend upon him for the success. The Lord Nahum. 1. 7.
is good, and a strong hold in the day of trouble, he knows all those that
trust in him; he knows, that is, he approues of them after an especial
manner, He is a strong hold to such in the day of trouble. Psalm. 33. 18. 19.
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy; to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them in
famine. Psalm. 91. 1. and so forward: Who so dwells in the secret of the most
High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; I will say unto the Lord;
O my hope and my fortress, he is my God, in him will I trust: surely he will
deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence. He
will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his feathers; his
truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shall not be afraid of the
pestilence that walks in the night, nor of the Plague that destroys at
noone day. Thousands shall fall beside thee, ten thousands at thy right hand,
and yet it shall not come nigh thee. And why all this? Because thou have said,
the Lord Verse. 9.
is my hope, and have set the most High for thy refuge. Ye see then the
wonderful safety of that man that makes God his confidence. The name of the
Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous Prove. 18. 10.
run unto it, and are exalted. Great is the safety then of righteous
persons, of such as have gotten God to be their God in Christ, and stay their
whole affiance in him; God will be unto them a Tower, a Castle, a rock of
defense, a safe refuge to fly to in time of need. He will be their hiding
Ierem. 16. 19.
place; He will keep them safely under his wings till Psalm. 32. 7.
the indignation be passed over. He has an Arc for upright Noah, when he
means to destroy with a universal Genes. 7.
Deluge, an whole world of wicked ones. He has a Zoar for righteous Lot, when
he means to consume filthy Sodom Genes. 19.
with fire and brimstone from heaven. For the Lord knows how to deliver the
righteous out of tentation, and to reserve 2 Pet. 2. 9.
the wicked unto judgment. Therefore I conclude with that of David. Psalm. 73.
28. It is good for me to hold me fast by God, and to put my trust in the Lord
God: it is time for the chickens to run and shroud themselves under the wings
of the hen, when the storm begins once to arise.

5. The fifth and last remedy is, to betake our selves to our prayers and
tears, to cry mightily unto the Lord, to wrestle with him, as Jacob did: this
is that which holds God his hands from smiting: so long as Moses his hand is
lifted up, Amalek cannot prevail. I beseech ye therefore all ye that wish
well to this our Sion, pray for the peace of Jerusalem: give the Lord no rest,
but cry again and again, he loves to be importuned; the prayer of a righteous
man avails much, if it Iam. 5. 16.
be fervent: Pray, pray, pray therefore, cry and say: O Lord we know not what
to do, only our eyes are up toward thee: what shall we say unto thee O thou
preserver of men; we are even ashamed and confounded to lift up our eyes to
heaven; we have sinned exceedingly, we, our Rulers and Governors, Prince, and
people; we have all sinned; our sins are gone up as an heavy load, too heavy
for us to bear; heaven and earth even groan under the burden of them, they
cry mightily for vengeance, but hear the groans of thy servants, let their
cries be louder in thine ears; hear the pleadings and intercessions of thine
own son for us; his blood cries louder for mercy, then our sins can do
for judgment, had it not been for that, we had all long ago perished, and
been utterly consumed. O thou the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the
time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the land, as one that passes by
to tarry for a night? Why art thou as a man astonished, as a strong man that
cannot help? Ierem. 14. 8. 9.
Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, thy name is called upon us; forsake
us not. Have thou utterly rejected Judah? Has thy soul abhorred Sion? Why
have thou smitten us, that we cannot be healed? We looked for peace, and behold
no good; for health, and behold trouble: we acknowledge O Lord, our
wickedness, and the wickedness of our fathers, we have all sinned: do not
abhor us for thy names sake; cast not down the throne of thy Glory; remember
and break not thy covenant with us; we have no help but of thee, thou art our
God, therefore save us; oh be favorable unto thy Sion, build thou the walls
of Ieresalem: Psalm. 51. 18.
so shall we praise thy name for ever, and teach all ages to keep praises for
thee in store. Oh give salvation to thy people out of Sion; Psalm. 53. 6.
when thou shall restore again the captivity of thy people, then shall I acob
rejoice and Israel shall be glad.

But if ye cannot prevail for others, yet at least air your own houses with
daily and fervent prayers, and that will be a notable means to keep them from
the present infection: or if it please God to lay it upon you notwithstanding
ye have faithfully used all these means: then I dare boldly affirm, ye
shall find greater refreshings Psalm. 94. 19.
from God, then your affliction can afford you griefs: howsoever, it will but
rid you out of a valley of 2 Cor. 1. 5.
misery into everlasting glory. Consider what I say and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

FINIS.
A Letter full of sweet Comforts for such as are visited by the PESTILENCE.
GOD the Father of mercies, which has so loved us to give his only Son for
us before he gave us either children or our selves, be merciful unto you my
dear hearts in the Lord, Mr. A. and Mrs A. my bowels in the Lord: and so fill
you with his superabundant grace, that you may say; It is good for me that I
have been afflicted; The Lord Psalm. 119. Job. 1.
has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Amen.

Hearing of the Lords merciful visitation of you and yours, I was not a little
affected; neither has any particular loss since this hand of God has been on
the City, (though of friends and near kindred) more pierced my heart with
grief then this of yours. Which seeing the Church, which has called me to a
public Ministry, permits me not in presence privately to signify, I beseech
God to direct my pen to write somewhat for your comfortable application of Gods
correction to your souls health. It had much affected me to see the succession
of crosses in your imprisonment, your wives long sickness, with manifold
danger of life, etc. And on Thursday last I was very inquisitiue of Mr. D.
touching your wife and her delivery: for I had thought she had been sent into
the country, because such is now the fashion, and her time of deliverance I
thought had been expired long since. But I heard God had showed his power in
her weakness, and gave her (which had long ago given the sentence of death
upon her self) two children (which the Lord bless and make his own daughters
and heirs) before I heard that God had smitten one of the former. He gave two
before he would take one, and made her able to bear two at once, which in long
time had been scarsly able to bear her self; that he might make his goodness
and his power known. He I say, to show his goodness gave two for one; yea
gave one for all, his own Son for our selves, and for our sons and daughters:
to purchase us to be the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty. But 2.
Cor. 6.
he gave him first to suffer and then to reign, that he might lead the way to
us; for the servant is not greater than his Lord: the son himself learned
obedience by the things which he suffered. And he that made the world by his
Word, was made a man for us, that he might suffer for us: Heb. 5. 3.
in our nature fulfilled all the righteousness of God and yet suffered all the
unrighteousness of men, even to that bitter, that shameful death of the
Cross, which God himself had Gal. 3. 13.
mystically cursed, and he was made a curse for us that we might be made heirs
of blessedness. His Cross, figured in that tree cast into the bitter waters
of Marah, takes away Exodus 15. 25.
the curse from death and all afflictions in us and ours, and makes them
sweet; does season and sanctify them to us, and us to them. His presence does
still change water into Ioh. 2.
wine, if we make him our chief guest: and (like Elisha's stick) makes the
heaviest iron to swim, the heaviest heart, 2 King. 6. 6. Psalm. 25. 1. Job. 19.
25.
most cast down with sorrow, to sing, I lift my heart to thee. I know that my
Redeemer lives, made Job to live in the midst of manifold deaths and
spoils, and made him a gainer in and by all his losses. Though they assailed
him all at once, and all the children and substance which he had gotten all his
life before, were in one day taken from him, yet he lost not himself, by
impatience; he blessed God which had given him himself, a gift that could not
be lost; and as men in cold windy weather gird their garments closer to them,
so he proceeded in courage, and said; Though he slay me yet Job. 13. 15. Romans
15. 4.
will I trust in him. Th^se things are written for our learning, that through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures we may have hope. Yea tribulation brings
forth patience, patience experience, Romans 5. 3.
experience (of his deliverance from, or in, manifold troubles, as David's
deliverance from the Bear and the Lion, 1 Samuel 17.
made him bold on the Philistine) experience, I say, brings forth hope, even
that hope which never makes ashamed. The Israelites were not in Canaan
presently after their deliverance from Egypt, but walked through a tedious and
irksome Wilderness, where was neither harvest, nor pasture, nor sweet
waters, but their very food and raiment were miraculous provision. Yet did not
God fail them, and has promised never to fail nor forsake us: he which led
Heb. 13. 5.
them by a pillar of a cloud and fire, has given us his word, to be with us to
the end of the world. That history of the Israelites Mat. 28. 20.
is a mystery of every true Israelite his living by faith, as it is often
written, the Just shall live by faith. We now are travelers through the
Wilderness of the world to our heavenly Canaan, and for our spiritual life we
find the world as cross as they did the Egyptians, Amalekites, and Amorites;
our flesh is as distrustful as those which lusted for flesh in that desert,
and the Devil watches all occasions to mutiny and rebellion: all that we see
from our entering the red Sea till we be passed over Jordan (from Baptism to
death) is against us: yet our faith looks on him which is Heb. 11. 27. Heb.
11. 1. 1 Ioh. 5. 4. Ephe. 6.
invisible, and is the evidence of things not seen. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, this is the shield which quenches the fiery darts of
hell; to believe in Christ crucified, that God has given him to us, and for
us, and wtih him all things; this crucifieth the flesh, with all her
distrustful lusts and imaginations; makes us deny our selves, Mat. 16. 24.
our wills, our understandings, husbands, wives, lives, livings, all; and to
say to God with David, lo we are here, do 2. Sam. 15. 26.
with us as seems good in thine eyes. Should the Wheat say to the husbandman,
why do thou wound me with the sickle, why do thou beat and bruise me with
the flaile, why do thou grind me in the Mill, and put me after into the hot
Oven? We are Gods wheat, and before we can be manchet for the Lords Table, we
must likewise pass troubles in the flesh. Yea it is comfortable to us, because
God does thus show himself our Father, and that he does Heb. 12. 5. 7. 8.
esteem us as sons, and not as bastards; for judgment here begins at
Gods house: he does us conform us to his own 1 Pet. 4. 17. Romans 8. 29.
son Christ; he does thus prepare us as soldiers by traynings and skirmishes
to the battle with death it self, yea to the victory, to the crown; he does
thus show power in weakness, and makes us conquerors over sin and Satan.
Neither do men sow their corn and seeds till the ground Iere. 4. 3. Mat. 13.
22.
be dug or plowed, nor is Gods seed like to be profitable till the fallow of
our hearts be turned up by the plow or spade of affliction. Heaven will make
amends for all, and the afflictions Romans 8. 18.
of this present life are not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed.
These light afflictions which endure but for a moment, work out unto us that
far most excellent and eternal weight of glory. Courage then, courage my
hearts, comfort 2 Cor 4. 17.
your selves, your Captain Christ looks on and sees your sufferings and
fightings in the flesh; nay he it is which thus tries you: these crosses are
his permission, yea his Commission, without which no plague can strike a stroke
to the poorest sparrow, no not to the hairs of our head, all which are Mat.
10. 29. 30
numbered: yea he which strikes us or ours with his rod knows how to succor
them that suffer and are tempted, having been tempted himself with greater
sufferings: he was Heb. 2. vlt. Esa. 53. 4. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
wounded and buised, and was made sin for us, before he would wound or buise us
for our sins. Yea indeed all these blows are intended to the remainders of
sin in us, not to our selves, but that the spots of the soul may be drawn
forth by these Plague-spots on the body, and the sinne-sores of the soul may
run and be cut out of these bodily sores, that sin and death (if it proceed
so far) may be dead by that our bodily death (that the head of this Goliath
may be cut off by his own sword, and death by death destroyed) and our souls
may escape as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, and may flee to their rest
(not in the Tabernacle like David's Psalm. 84. Luke 16. 22.
sparrow, but) in Gods own bosom. As Lazarus when none of Dives household
would come at him, had Angels attending him to carry his soul into Abraham's
bosom: so when fear and danger (this is part of this chastisement) prohibit
others from us, he has given his Angels a charge concerning us to convoy our
souls to heaven, and mean whiles to guard Psalm 91. 11.
their unregarded bodies on earth. Lift up the eyes of your faith in belief of
Gods promises, and you shall see by faith, that which Elisha's servant did with
bodily eyes, the City 2 King. 6.
of London full of Charets and horses of fire round about every Elisha. God
himself is the refuge of his servants, a house to Psalm. 91. 1.
them in this time of grace, a temple to them beyond all times in glory. Come
Lord Jesus to fetch and receive me to Apoc. 21.
thy self, and come in what chariot it shall please thee, if in a chariot of
fire as thou did to Elias, or if in infected air by pestilent stroke; thou
that triumphedst on the Cross, over death, hell, and the devil, can triumph
over my crosses, and by suffering can make me triumph also over them all. Thy
coming to me by this or any other sickness or death, is but my passage to
come to thee: and to go to Christ and see him as he is, does infinitely more
then recompense Phil. 1. 21. 1 Ioh. 3. Romans 8. 18.
all the losses, rubbes, and whatsoever irkesomnesse in the way and passage.
And as for death, we and ours are vain and mortal, we die daily, our life is
but a Candle which in shining burns and wastes it self. Me thinks it is
better to have a summons, though by pestilentiall arrest, then to be dead
whiles we live, as many are which are giddy and drunken with full cups of
prosperity, or whiles 1. Tim. 5. 6. Pro. 1. 32. Luke 12. Heb. 6. 10.
we are singing, Soul take thine ease, suddenly to be snatched out of the
world. God is not unfaithful to forget your free will offerings lately to his
poor members, he will reward it with a new grant as to Hezekiah in his
pestilence with a new Esa. 38.
term of life here; or which is best of all, with that life where no plague,
nor Devil, nor sickness, nor death, nor Apoc. 21.
cross, nor grievance, shall have possibility to annoy, where is fullness of
joy in his presence, and pleasures at his right hand Psalm. 16.
for evermore, and those such, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart
conceived, where we shall drink of the River Psalm. 36. 8.
of his pleasures, etc.

But I must end, though They do not. Your visitation has not loft (...)
gotten all these lines, and my daily and more fervent prayer for you and yours
to him who is able to keep you that you fall not;

Your loving Pastor, S. P.

REad often Psalm. 119. and 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. and almost all of the
Psalms.

You have I think the Martyr book, read the Epistles of Bradford, Hooper,
Philpot, and Careless: with innumerable others you have there also.

Read often Heb. 11. and 12. and 13. and the story of Christ's passion. Esaias
from the forty Chap. to the end of that book, being full of sweet promises.
Also the eight to the Romans

Pray, pray, pray, and cast all your care upon God for he cares 1 Pet. 5. 7.
for you. With Peter agrees Paul. Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in
every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your request be
made known to God. and 1. Cor. 11. 32. When we are judged, we are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. It is a short hell
which we can have here, but our heaven will last for ever and ever.

My poor love will scarsly suffer me to leave you, as you see by this long
writing. But God is all love; he comes thus to build you, (that is to hew, saw,
cut with the chissell and with all his crosse-tooles to frame you) to be a
dwelling for himself, a temple for his spirit, a vine branch to his son,
thus purged to bring forth more fruit. Ioh. 15.

FINIS.

