RODOMONTHS INFERNAL, OR The Devil conquered. ARIASTOS Conclusions. Of the
Marriage of Rogero with Bradamanth his Love, and the fell sought Battle
between Rogero and Rodomonth the neuer-conquered Pagan.

Written in French by Phillip de Ports, and Paraphrastically translated by G.
M.

AT LONDON Printed by V. S. for Nicholas Ling. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable his very singular good Lord, the Lord Mount-eagle, all
that can be wished in his own best wishes.
THere is nothing more usually common in this last part of this worst age (most
Honorable, and virtuously Honorable Lord) then the publication of Books,
how-euer their genealogies spring even from the lightest vanities: amongst
whom, (to save the World and Bitterness a labor) I condemn my self, as an
Author and Abettor of that customary error, only with this halfe-part excuse,
that albe in my writings I have neither Feminine honey, nor Masculine gall, yet
I either do, or desire to retain a tastfull relish of a little saltness;
which, may it carry but the least imagined season in your Noble sense, I shall
slieghtly respect the curiosity of any other, how-euer his stomach be
esteemed for best judgment. The Noble Frenchman Mounsieur Ports, who was the
first Author of this work, was a man of great wit, famous learning, and Noble
place; each of which currie in them, defense sufficient to shield him from
imputation: so that questionless, the body of the work must needs be fair,
and only the deformity in his English apparel: and no wonder, for I protest
the Translation was finished, and forth of my hands above a dozen years agone,
a time wherein bumbasted breeches, and strait whale-bon'd dublets had neither
use nor estimation. How-euer, all mine escapes, both boldness in daring to
your presence, rudeness in the work, and wants in mine Arts perfection, must
fly under the covert of your Noble Patronage; a defense, that giving my Muse
an immortal life, shall bind my love and service to you, and your Honorable
house for ever.

Your Honors humbly devoted, G. M.

TO READERS OF both kinds.
TO find as many excuses, as curious senses can faults, were to begin a new
Legend Auri, or a second part of the Book of Martyrs: a pair of gates,
through which, this little Poem would not be seen to steal: wherefore,
briefly, to help what I know is weak, this Paraphrase was first intended for
one private man's repast, and not for a wedding table; the time when Poesy was
less, but more beloved: Poets fewer, but not so bitter: and Readers in
general, by much, much better affected. Now, since time, impudency, and other
powers, plucks the blush from my cheeks, and that perforce I am prostituted to
the rack of your imaginations, stretch me not beyond my strength, the rather
for my confession sake: but considering the days of this poor Poems creation,
take pity that he was too soon borne: and out of that clemency, it may be,
he will bring you as much delight, as some other children of his own year: and
my self shall extol that in you, which is seldom or never found in a
multitude: some Justice.

Farewell. G. M.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE POEM.
ROdomonth King of Argier and Sarza, being a man of most extreme pride and
courage, coming into France with King Agramant, who to revenge the death of
Trai^^o his father, slain by Pipin King of France, had conducted thither a
most puissant army against Charlimaine, the son of Pipin: after the wars
were almost finished, and both Agramant, Mandricard, Gradasso, and diverse other
Kings slain, this Rodomonth understanding that Rogero, a Prince of excellent
virtue and prowess, who also was a confederate and assistant unto Agramant,
was not only converted and becomed a Christian, but also should take to wife
Bradamant, the daughter of Duke Aimon, one of the twelve Peers of France;
being mightily enraged thereat, upon the wedding day, he comes and
challenges Rogero the combat, in which fight Rodomonth is slain: whose
soul, after his death (retaining the violence, fury, and madness, which he
possessed in his life) descending into hell, makes open wars against Pluto the
god of hell, and even conquereth and turmoileth all the devils therein: till
having ouer-heated himself, and seeking for water to quench his thirst, he
happens upon Lethe, the river of Forgetfulness; on which, when he had
drunk, he instantly forgot all that was past (except Love) and so returns
back to the earth: where he wandered, till he found the Castle of Isabella, the
daughter of the King of Spain; whom albe he had formerly loved most entirely,
yet he had slain unluckily: and about that Castle, he is bound by the
Destinies to wander for an hundred years, because his body wanted burial.

Rodomonths Infernal.
1
I Sing of him and his eternal ire,
Whose wraths high tempest never calm could boot,
That in his life shook heavens immortal fire,
And made the earth to tremble at his foot:
That first made air weep tears of wronged desire,
Of Furies tree both body, head, and root:
The high contemner of all deity,
Afflictions master and the wrack of Pity.
2
Of him I sing that washed all France in blood,
Great man, great might, but angers greatest great,
Whose soul when Roger sent to Charons flood,
Black Plutoes Mariner did fair entreat,
Shaking like reed that in some marrish stood,
And all hell skard, his rigorous arms await:
Palenes (forsworn) then seazd on Ditis face,
And Proserpine to new-felt fears gave place.
3
Then were the furies with his view affright,
And shrunk to hide their waue-like snakie hairs,
Whilst he through girt with mad outrageous might,
Thunders his bedlam wrath in dead men's ears:
And like an host drags forth the sole-sad Night,
To slay the beauty Heavens forehead bears.
God of my Muse and me grace of my song,
Sweeten my harsh lines with thy music tongue.
4
WHat time brave Leon had to Paris brought,
The soul of Virtu, Roger Prince of arms,
(Whom Charlemaine and all his Peers had sought)
And in the view of France ceasd those alarms,
Aimon.
Which old Mount Albans governors had wrought
Against him the dear controller of his harms:
Now to make sweet his life so loathsome led,
Roger unto his Bradamante is wed.
5
To Bradamante, the joy of Aimons age,
Bradamant was Aimons daughter, and sister to Rinaldo.
The martial Conqueresse of all the world,
Against whom, durst none but he strong battle gage,
For all Knights else by her were ouer-hurld,
Only his eyes lance did her power assuage,
And in her hairs twine were his senses curld:
That striving who the battles glory won,
Neither were conquered, both were overcome.
6
This nuptial wedding, this conjunct of hearts, Charles for Charlymaine.

Charles seeks to deifie with all renown
France could affoard, or hidden Magycke arts
Could dignifie with nights bright starrie crown:
Two days in neuer-equald joys departs,
Whilst Heavens forehead never lent a frown.
And in all Tilting, Tourney, and all fight,
The praise and prize on Rogers fortunes light.
7
Who of the glorious Architect would learn,
The rare pauilion, the enchanted tower,
Or who would Troyes rich miracle discern,
Wrought by divine hands in a holy bower:
Where humane art from heavenly arts did earne
Perfections title in a blessed hour, Ariosto can. 46.

Let him to Ariostoes Legend run,
Great light of Poesy, and Poets sun.
8
But when the third days curtine was o're-spred,
Giving the worlds eye leave to cheer the earth:
And Charlymaine emperiously was led
With drums, with trumpets, vialls, flutes, and mirth,
Such as no Age has known, or Time has read,
Unto Melissaes tent called Wonders birth; Melissa a famous inchauntresse.

Where all the heavenly reuells were contained
Whilst meaner objects, meaner eyes disdained.
9
Then when the Peers sat round about their king,
The 12. Signs.
Like Natures twins, through which the Sun does ride,
And monthly keeps a several progressing;
And every Baron sat by others side,
Taking what place Birth or Desert could win,
Lending abundance to abundant pride:
Cloyd with accates, yet still desiring more,
Digest with talk what they had taken before.
10
Confusedly like ouerflowing streams,
Ran the disturbed echo of their speech:
Or like tumultuous muttring heard in dreams,
Which through our troubled sense makes sensles brech:
Or like the clamors in the Suns pure beams,
Made by the busy Bees (which labor teach)
Such tingling music from their lips did break,
Till the fair Bride fairly began to speak.
11
With golden Oratorie guilding thought,
And sweetening ears with pleasant honey words,
She tells the fearful combats she had fought
Against Pagan Knights, Princes, and mighty Lords,
And most of all, the glory she had bought,
In foyling Rodomonth, whom fame affoards
More hie renown for martial chivalry,
Than Homer lent Achilles deity.
12
Unto her words her Auditors assume
The style of immortality and praise,
And that the times-wast richly might consume
Joined unto hers, they paint more bloody days,
Adding to battles past, a present plume,
Which warlike dangers hie to heaven might raise;
Whilst others told the sackings of great towns,
Where infants cries, the mothers shriekings drownes.
13
Thus deeply wading in their bloody theme,
Historifying mortal immortal deeds,
Charles like Apollo set in his golden teame,
Cheering with looks both plants and sovereign weeds
Now placed between the two united beams,
The Bride and Bridegrom, (on whom beuty feeds:)
He saw a mighty man clad all in black,
Mounted upon a mighty coursers back.
14
Who with a slow-foote majesty did pace
Toward them all, with a disdainful eye,
Sending contempt, the curtain of his face,
To plead the hate that in his heart did lie:
Reverence he scornd, nor did he yield one grace
To Charles, the ladies, or to any by,
Till all in muse what his amaze would make,
Thus unto Roger and the rest he spoke.
15
Roger, I am great Rodomount the King,
Of fruitful Argier on the Affricke bounds,
Whom Virtue and Renown does hither bring,
To challenge thee false traitor, whose name sounds
In heathen ears like Jews trumps when they ring,
And will approve, that in thy heart abounds,
Falsehood unto thy chieftaine, and thy faith,
Which from thy birth thou should preserve til death.
16
And therewithal auerre, that no true Knight,
Ought to dispute of thee, or of thy fame,
Though (brazen facde) thou shunnest not the light,
Which of thy monstrous perjuries exclaim:
All which to justify in single fight,
Behold my hand made ready for the same,
A mighty engine made by Natures skill,
To scourge thy damned execrable ill.
17
Yet if thy cowards heart pine with remorse,
And certain knowledge make thee faint in sin:
Choose for thine aid, to double thy dead force,
Some of these Knights that hemme thy courage in,
Four, five, or if full twenty, nere the worse,
The more they mount, the more my fame shall win,
Whilst I immortalized by this great deed,
Will triumph when thy tre^bling heart shall bleed
18
Here pawsde the Pagan, yet with staring eye,
Bright as a fiery Metyor in the dark,
Casting on all the assembly looks awry,
Stroke in them wonder that his words did mark:
Yet having leave, Roger did thus reply:
Stern king of Sarza, unto mine answer hark:
Pure as the Sun mine honor I respect,
And false thou lie that falsely do detect.
19
Unto my King I ever have bin true,
Linking Eternity unto my love,
Even from the first age, to this last, none knew
Spot in my faith, which evermore did move
Stainlesse, unblemished, whilst affection drew
My constant thoughts the highest heavens above:
And here (false Pagan) shall my life maintain,
That yet my life did never suffer stain.
20
And for these multitudes to aid my wrong,
My single self, single shall thee suffice,
Well shall thou find me bold enough and strong
To quell the storms that from thy furies rise,
And in my soul, I hope ere it be long,
Thou shall confess (with anguish from thine eyes)
That one alone contending in the right,
Is both too many, and of too great might.
21
This said; the two fair sons of Oliver,
Sanson, Orlando, Renald, and the rest,
Strove who should first Roger from wrong deliver,
Kindling a greedy ardor in their breast,
Alleging that his spowsals should disceuer
Him from this conflict, and to them addressed
This quarrels ground; whilst Bradama^t did swear,
Marfyza Rogers sister.
And fair Marfyza, they apart would bear.
22
But Roger fiercer, mad with their desire;
Breeding new Aetnas in his boiling heart,
Swore their excuse should not make him retire,
For sole to him belonged that dreadful part:
Here-with he takes his armor (bright as fire)
Made by enchantment, and by Magycke art;
And scarce would stay (so earnest was his flame)
Had not those states helped to put on the same.
23
Marfyza and fair Bradamant his bride,
Begyrt his curats on his manly back,
Charles coucht his trusty sword unto his side,
His spurs Orlando buckles; nor does lack
His helm, which on his head Astolpho ti'de,
Dudon his stirrup holds, and in this wrack,
Namus about the field takes special charge,
To martial it, and make it clear and large.
24
Rinaldo held his courser by the rain,
Whose hollow hoof beating the humble ground,
(As basest element) in high disdain
Spurned it, and gave it many a drierie wound:
And chiding his controlling bit in vain,
A milke-white foamy mantle bout it is wound;
The^ neying loud, charging his well pricked ears,
He shows his joys in warlike acts appears.
25
Like Danaes son on the Pegasian steed,
So mounted Roger on this princely beast,
Whilst Oliver gave to their further speed,
Spears of one length and strength; neither increas't,
But gave to equal chance their equal deed:
Then like two Bulls with fiery rage oppressed,
Leaving the Heard, retiring to their course,
So parted they, to meet with greater force.
26
The halfe-dead living Ladies looking on,
Trembled poor souls, as does the silly Doves,
Who in the mild air playing the sands upon,
By storms are drinen to shroud in houses roues,
Whilst under clouds the Sun to rest is gone,
And all the heavens with mourning vizage moves:
Even so the pitying Ladies wept no less,
When they beheld the Pagans mightiness.
27
The Pagan that even then spurrd forth his horse,
whose windlike fury flying more swift then thought
Made the amazed ground quake through his course
As if great Jove some new reuengement wrought.
On the other side, Roger with Princely force
Ran with such puissance, that his horse hoofs taght
The sullen earth (created dumb and lame)
To sing, to cry, to echo and exclame.
28
Or like a flood, that falling down a rock,
Reuerberats huge clamors through the stones,
So sounds his noise, till meeting in the shocke,
That crack of thunder drowns the lesser ones;
Bravely they meet, and in their meetings broke
Their shiu'red staves (whereat their palfries groa^s)
With such pure might, that as if splints would fly
Beyond all sight, they mounted in the sky.
29
Yet were their blows in nature different:
For why, the Pagan lighting on his shield,
Which Vulcan well had temperd, to prevent
A greater force than mortal man could yield,
With little hazard all in pieces rent:
But Roger (taught how mighty acts to wield)
With unknown puissaunce through his target stricke,
Albe it was of steel six inches thick.
30
And had his spear sustained his manly power,
And not like feathered plumes flowne in the air,
The combat had taken end in that same hour:
For why no armor able was to bear
The huge encounter of that stormy shower,
Whose lightning through his heart had made repair:
Yet break it did, and with a breach so sound,
That both the horses buttocks kissed the ground.
31
With help of bit and blame of angry spur,
Their skillful riders raised them up again,
Who in their saddles rock-like did not stir,
But like to Imps of Sagittarius strain,
All of one matter with their steedes concur,
And managed mighty actions unto pain:
And now with swords threatening the loss of breath
Began the wounded Proem unto death.
32
Hot was the assault, implacable the blows,
Eager the wishes, either for others end,
Each from his steeled coat maine lightning throws,
Which downward to the parched ground descend,
Whose sunburned face sweat to endure their woes,
That even to wonders did new wonders lend:
And in this fury both did seek a good,
To make the earth drunk with their worthy blood.
33
Like wanton Goats winding upon a plain,
Turning and tossing in their nimble salts,
Now on the right, then on the left again;
So did these knights, whom memory exalts,
Handle their horses, seeking to regaine
Mighty advantage, either by others falts:
And whilst their thoughts their furies ouerwhelms,
Their swords kept time upon their sounding helmes.
34
The Pagan which had lost his Serpents hyde,
That aged Time for Nemirod had made,
His first great Grandsire, Lord of Babels pride,
And left forlorn, his memorable blade,
Albe he now had gyrt unto his side,
Another which for strength might heaven invade:
Yet neither this, nor that, was found so hard,
As to withstand the edge of Balysard.
35
Of Balysard Rogeroes trusty sword,
Which through the Paga^s steel had beat his way,
For neither charm, nor temper could affoard
A suertie unto his skin that day:
Rebatelesse edge, hard stars, and might accord,
The fatal scene of bloody death to play:
Whilst Roger of the Pagans blood had made
A skarlet mantle to impale his blade.
36
But Rodomonth that felt his sword rebound,
Like to a tennis ball within a court,
As often as it on Rogers helm did sound,
And found with-all an infinite resort
Of painful thoughts, purchased by many a wound,
Albe he cloaks maine griefs (his mad consort:)
Yet when he saw the conduits of his blood,
He grew impatient, mad, and raging wood.
37
Even like a Boar chaste in the wilderness,
Enuyous of himself, wanting a mean
To be aueng'd of venging mightiness,
Gnashing his teeth, wrapped in a foamy strain:
Or like the seas distempered ouglinesse,
Hurld by the winter wind with might and maine;
Even so forsakes his shield, and does intend,
With both his hands to give the combat end.
38
Yet e're he heau'd his hands, he cursed the sky,
And slandred shamefully the god of war,
Then with such might as storms in spring do fly,
He lift them up, and fetching force from far,
Stroke that the earth between the poles did cry:
Or like an oak in a tempestuous jarre,
Rent by the roots, with unknown terror braues,
The broad vast deserts, and the hollow caves.
39
So fell on Rogers helm this hateful blow,
Which had it not by Magycke art been wrought,
His fame, no fame had lived to ouergoe:
Yet so the puissance had his sense bestraught,
That against the saddle pommell twice in shoe,
He knocked his head, robbed of recovering thought:
The Pagan now exalted in his pride,
Stroke with like strength another on his side.
40
The golden raines, guide of Rogeroes steed,
Fell from his hand, open flewe his holding thies,
And senseless with each motion moved like reed,
Whilst weeping Honor in her waining cries:
The Pagan hopeful, greedy in this deed,
Doubles maine strokes on stroks, and gods defies:
Till in the end with multitudes of blows,
He broke his sword, the terror of his foes.
41
Amazed at this, having but hilt in hand,
With a small remnant of the broken blade,
As if that heaven his will did countermand,
Against the heavens black protestations made,
Blasphemously the God of gods he band,
And Mahomet with sternie threats does lade:
And vows, in spite of heaven, and heavenly power,
Rogero shall not live to breath an hour.
42
At this, the help-forsaken Knight he takes,
And from his saddle lifts him up by force,
Thence to the earth he throws him, whilst earth makes
A silent sorrow for his murdered coarse:
Which seen, the Pagan smiles, and then forsakes
Thought of ensuing harm, and with his horse
Trots in disdain about Rogeroes head,
Saying, his work was done, his foe was dead.
43
But as the Libique sea wronged with the wind,
Recouers mightier forces in his foil,
So Roger by his fall new strength does find,
And as awak't, makes all his sense recoile:
And to augment his foes amazed mind,
Nimbly rose up, whilst blushing rage did boil
Fresh in his cheeks, for as his eyes did move,
The first he spied was Bradamant his love.
44
Eue^ Bradamant, whose pale, wan, troubled thought,
Had almost wed her princely life to death,
Which seen, with venging shame half captive brought,
Vows a requital, or to loose his breath:
At which, the Pagans bridle rain he caught,
And on his thies maine deadly woundings lai'th:
All which he felt so vehement and sore,
That Rodomonth grew madder than before.
45
The bedlam Turk, with whom their did remain
Part of the blade that was in pieces flowne,
With it smote so on Rogers helm again,
That once more almost he was overthrown:
But the mild Prince seeing there did remain
A great advantage, until then unknown,
By the left hand does take the Turk by force,
And spite of spite pulls him besides his horse.
46
Now whether it were his strength, fine ssieght, or chance,
I cannot guess, but on his feet he fell,
No vantage was between them, more or less;
Save in the swords, which Roger used so well,
That when the Pagan ouer-neare did press,
With point he kept him out, though nere so fell:
For he did deem in dangerous and ill,
To close with one of such huge strength and skill
47
Again he saw the Pagan bleed so sore,
That lingering time would give the conflict end,
For strength flew forth at his veins opened door:
Which Rodomonth perceiving, thought to lend
Despair a desperate hazard, less or more;
And therefore with a devilish force did send
The hilt and pommell of the broken steel
To Rogers head, which made him soundly reele.
48
It struck him twixt the shoulder and the head,
And gave to him a blow so firm and sound,
That good Rogero therewith staggered,
And hardly stood from falling on the ground;
Rodomonth to close with him then hastened,
But lo, his foot failed with his former wound:
So that his too much haste (as often we see)
Hurt him, and made him fall upon his knee.
49
Roger accepting Times advantage lent,
Wounded the Turk on head, on breast, and face,
But he got up again incontinent,
And made stark mad, with this most vile disgrace,
Ran upon Roger, and in's arms him pent,
Folding him with a most unkind embrace;
And then they strive, heave, shoue, thrust to and fro,
And either seeks the others overthrow.
50
With force they strive, with art, and with agilitie,
Whether shall sooner fall unto the ground;
The Pagans strength was weakened by extremity,
By means of many a deep received wound:
Rogers art was great, great his ability,
Much used to wrestle, and he quickly found
The Advantage, which he did not ouer-slip,
But on the weakest side, his foe did trip.
51
Down like a tower to the ground he went,
Or like a rock thrown headlong in the sea,
Whereby his blood in great abundance spent
Freshly began to spring; making that day
The earth (in skarlet clad) much to lament:
Down is he held, to rise he finds no way;
The while Rogero set his daggers point
Unto his throat, and to his chiefest joint.
52
And with sharp words (th'imbassadors of death)
Told him, except to mercy he submit,
Nothing should save his life, or lend him breath,
Such firm resolve within his heart did sit;
But Rodomonth, whose hie courageous faith,
Rather then yield, a thousand deaths thought fit,
Spoke not a word, but strove himself to sunder
From him; or if he could, to get him under.
53
Look how a Martin in a Mastiues fang,
Foames at the mouth, fights with his overthrow,
Whilst from his red eyes beams of fire flang:
And at the end, impatient of his woe,
Grinning, lifts up his lips, where slauers hang,
And his vain vnreuenging teeth does shoe:
So does the cruel Pagan strive and threat,
But all he can cannot his death defeat.
54
Yet with long striving, and with wondrous pains
He freed his better arm, and void of awe,
His ponniard, which in his right hand remains,
That in this latter conflict he did draw,
He seeks to stab into Rogeroes raines;
But when the valiant youth the peril saw,
Then for his safeties sake he was constrained
To kill the cruel Turk, that grace disdained.
55
And lifting his victorious hand on hie,
In the Turks face he stabd his dagger twice
Up to the hilts, and quickly made him die,
Ridding himself of trouble in a trice;
Down to the lake where damned ghosts do lie
Sunk his disdainful soul, now cold as ye:
Blaspheming (as it were) and cursing loud,
That was on earth so lofty and so proud.
56
The eie-beholders wondering at this deed,
In showtes and cries to heaven bore Rogers fame,
In gazing on him, Eyes and Ears do feed,
And from all mouths his all great praises came;
From age to sucking babes his acts succeed,
And infants sonet on his sacred name;
And all the Peers of France kindly embraced him,
And Charlimaine within his arms inlac't him.
57
He kissed him kindly, and overcome with joy,
Dissolved fair pearl, and silver on his check,
Kind thoughts, more kinder thoughts sought to destroy;
Eternal their abode, the King does seek,
As much Marfyza did, and would enjoy
Perpetual comfort from his looks so meek:
Orlandos love, nor yet Rinaldos lack,
Aquitan and Griffin.
Neither the warlike brothers, white and black.
58
Last, but not least, for she exceeded all,
Came Bradamant his bride, his love, his Queen,
Thought-guiding goddess, warlike principal,
Within whose eyes, are thousand Cupids seen,
She on his hands kisses and tears lets fall,
(So boundless her immortal pleasures been)
And from his face wipes with her cheeks so bright
The sweat and dust that hindered had his sight.
59
How many deaths, alas how many pains,
How many slain hopes, what abundant fears
Ran uncontrolled through this Ladies veins:
How many idle wishes, what dispaires,
Felt she forlorn; the while the fight retains,
A doubtful issue, who the triumph bears:
Trembling for her Roger, her purest heart,
Her god, her life, her love, and every part.
60
How many times succeslesse did she wish
Her self well armed, placed in her lovers stead,
Not that she feared his stars would run amiss,
But for the Pagans puissance made her dread;
Who lent no minutes respite to her bliss,
But with each stroke seemd to awake the dead:
And more the^ with the blows the Paga^ struck,
He pierced her soul and life with every look.
61
Now contrary, ravished with her delight,
She winds her arms like vines about his neck,
Calls him her love, her joy, and her lives spright,
Her better self, all that her comforts deck;
Now does she chide the day for too slow flight,
And evening for her lazy pace does check,
Making her prayers to Night, her welcome guest
Whose silence must to waking love yield rest.
62
During this joy, numberless people flow
About the body of the Pagan King,
Whose monstrous greatness seemd to ouer-goe
The Aetnean Cyclops, or some greater thing:
Some at his beard in admiration grow,
Some of his countenance, some of his shape do ring;
In brief, there is none believes that he is dead,
Or that one man, such might could captive lead
63
Till Charlimaine both to cut off amaze,
As also to make Rogers deeds divine,
Caused to disarme the Turk (on whom they gaze,)
And on fair pillars wrought of stately pine,
(Trophies that time nor ruin should down raze)
Within that place, most rich in Paris eine,
Hung up his head-peece, curats, and the rest,
With all that his great body did inuest.
64
The mass of flesh, by force of horse and man,
(For like a mountain it lay on the plain)
Was dragd into the Voyrie, and than
Left as a prey for Ravens to remain;
Who hiely feasted, in their croking began
Triumph upon his carrion, and grow feign,
Singing in base songs, that French babes to bear
Might wonder when of Rogers acts they hear.
65
And now by this th'outragious bedlam soul
Of euer-angrie Rodomonth was got
Down through the earths sad corners, to the foul
Black stream of Acheron, which first does float
About the bounds of hell; on whose ba^ks knowle
Millions of sprights he sees with clamors trot:
Crying on Charon, who transported then
His Bardge down laden with a world of men.
66
But he contemptuously hating to stay
The lazy pleasure of the old man's sloth,
Into the lake leaps headlong, and makes way
With his divided arms; yet as he goes,
With spightfull threatenings ever did inuay
Against the Bardge-man, who was likewise wroth,
And for he knew his Fare he had not paid,
With Oar in hand, his landing passage staid.
67
The Ambitious Pagan staring in his face,
First smiled, then said, alas poor silly man,
Think thou, whom age has linckt to weak disgrace,
Against immortal Rodomounth to stan;
If all the devils in hell be in thy case,
All shall be slaves to me, that all things can:
Say thus said Rodomount the god of hell,
Whose wil's a law, whose law dare none repel.
68
Pack hence then crooked lozzell, hide thy head,
A better man, a brauer boat I Will have,
The boat-swaine, who such words nere heard nor read,
Thinking to drown him in the inkie wave,
Taking a stretcher, at the spirit laid:
Which seen, the nimble Turk, with courage brave,
Into the boat leapes, that with force it reeles,
And therewithal strikes up the old man's heels
69
Then on his snowie beard he claps his hold,
Giving him buffets more then two or three,
The silly wretch singled with courage cold,
Yet to avoid him wants ability;
Both were impatient, both their strengths unfold,
Till they, the boat and all, orewhelmed be:
With such a noise, as hels vast vaults resounded,
And Charon cried for Plutoes aid, confounded.
70
The soul of Rodomont from Kings descended,
Swame down the river easily at his will,
And drags along with him madly offended
The boat and boat-man, whether he will or nill:
These as sad Trophies on his rage depended,
Whom he torments with worse then worst of ill:
Anon he lands them, and does then begin,
To look how he might hels great Palace win.
71
Pluto, that from hels tower looked down,
Sweats and torments himself to see this wrath,
Scarce can he tell how to preserve his crown,
All that by doom of destenie he has;
Now he begins to fret, to scold, and frown,
Vowing injustice manageth his scath:
And then he fears hie Jove is down descended,
To take from him the right he long defended.
72
The star of Sicill, Proserpin the fair,
Lantern of hell, the paramour to Dis,
Felt selfe-like pangs, and twice so great despair,
By which her plaints grew more extreme the^ his;
With heavy eyes, wan cheeks, and careless hair,
Round about hell she runs madly amiss:
And all the damned souls calls to her aid,
With flattering words, thus in sweet liquor laid.
73
You souls (she said) you spirits miserable,
That burn in ice, and frieze in scorching fire,
And you that nere to feel Loves darts were able,
To whom no golden touch of thoughts aspire;
Though pity here by course is detestable,
Yet pity me, pity my whole desire,
And with that pity, keep and hold my right,
For which, this proud imperious foe does fight
74
See how his rage claims this vast Emperie,
Needs will he rule this damned fatal place,
My crown he claims, my scepters dignity,
My husbands birthright, al black Nights embrace:
Down falls my rule, unless your chivalry,
Unto my eager hopes bid happy base:
Which if you do, and I thereby repair
My ruined thoghts, mark what I vow and swear.
75
By sacred Styx, by that obscure aspect,
By the dread spindle of the fatal three
Twins got by Erebus, and Nights defect;
And by the rock on which the world does lie,
I vow my thoughts no labor shall neglect,
Until those dames brands of your misery,
Come to this place, and either ease your smarts,
Or feel due pain for such stiff steeled hearts.
76
But as for you, that Loves flames have not tasted,
But live in hell for other heinous sins,
If through your aid my woes away be wasted,
And my joys Legend in your fame begins,
Then never more henceforth shall you be blasted
With tortures, woes, or ought that sorrow brings:
And if in hell sweet solace may be had,
I grant it them that make my sighings glad.
77
When fair Eurydice had spoken thus,
The shadows which in black Auernus lay,
Thundering came up, and of her words discuss,
Glad of her promise, and this holy day.
All promise aid, no threats were burdenous,
And Agrican himself did first display,
Then Agramant, then Mandricard, then more,
Each striving which should go the rest before.
78
All with imperious eagerness contend,
Which first shall triumph ore the Pagan King,
At which debate, heavens frame with grief did be^d
Bowing his breast, to peace them summoning:
But seeing that their rage did more extend,
From this his vault did stormy lightening fling;
Thunder and tempest flew from heavens door,
Such storms till then was never seen before.
79
Even from the highest round that moves all,
To the low center, Hell by some writers is said to be in the center of the
earth
where we hell repute,
The noise was heard, which did all ears appale,
And from the same consuming fire did shute,
Which like well armed warriors in a brawle,
Seemd wirh revenge each other to rebuke:
Whose broken spears like fiery arrows fell,
And hung from heaven unto the lowest hell.
80
Th'opposed earth at these extremes admired,
Seeing hell quake, and heaven thus inflamed
Stroke dumb and blind, mercy for sins desired;
Such prodigies fore times had never framed:
Earth thinks the day of Doom is full expired,
For all in all, and all things are ashamed:
Only the Pagans soul from earth divided,
Stood dreadlesse, and these hellish sights derided.
81
The Imperial seat of heavenly love he threats,
Bans air, and earth, and elementall powers,
Vowing by his own rage, which all things beats,
That if he meet, or find deaths hateful bowers,
The life he took from him with mild entreats,
He shall restore again in teary showers:
And he in spite of Plutoes deity,
Will there in hell erect his Emperie.
82
Where ere he went, the Furies fled before him,
The whilst his pride augmented by their flight,
All things without hell gates ran to adore him;
This bridge is fained to be kept by Cerberus the three headed dog.
And now the drawbridge stands within his sight,
On it he prowdly leaps, that quaking bore him,
And vaunts himself thereof Lord, king, and knight:
For why the Ecchiddnian curre for fear was fled,
And in the burning lake did hide his head.
83
And now he pulls the Eban bridge in sunder,
And having Charon this while by the heels,
Like to a maull makes his old pate to thunder,
Beating the bridge, whose rented pillars reeles,
Whilst Pluto (who at all these acts did wonder)
More woes than hell includes, with terror feels:
His austere look, black, swarthie, angry read,
Now grew exchanged pale, wan, dry, and dead.
84
Like hapless Pelops in an iuorie mount,
Unnaturally, so the black god stood,
Of woes the huge infinitive account,
With stearne impatience makes him grow stark wood:
This hard disasterous chance he does recount,
Boiling his heart in this distempered blood:
Now this, now that, are grounds of this strange war,
Now neither this, nor that, th'occasio^s are.
85
One while he thinks the bastard son of love,
Great Hercules is come from heaven again, Hercules brought Proserpina from
hell when Pluto had stolen her from her mother Ceres.

Led by a second fire, a greater love,
More fell than that of which the Poets feign:
He dreads that he his bed-right will remove,
Which very thought puts him to mighty pain:
Aie me he cries, Proserpina thy face,
From thence this furious war begins his race.
86
Scarce was that thought well settled in his thought,
But a new humor dispossessed it straight,
New broils, old wars unto confusion brought,
Conceit torments conceit; and then the weight
Of unknown sorrows madly him distraught,
Now woes in words flew far beyond woes height;
Until the anguish of his souls tormenting,
Showers forth black tears, to bath his heart relenting.
87
Then from those tears his sighs and sorrows fly,
And to the caves imparts his heavy groans,
From whose vast wombs impatient echoes cry,
Yet neither know nor understand his moanes:
The damned souls in Phlegeton that lie,
Daunc't to his sorrow in their fiery thrones:
But he that saw his loss grow greater great,
Implores their aides with this sad sweet entreat.
88
You airie ghosts and citizens of hell,
You sad abortiue monsters of the dark,
All you that in perpetual torments dwell,
Behold my woes, all my afflictions mark:
Come number my distempered thoughts, then tell
The fraught of fears borne in my bodies bark:
And though remorse did never you importune,
Yet for your selves and me, ease my misfortune.
89
I swear that he, what ever be his hap,
That against this man, this monster, or this devil,
Bravely will bear himself, and can entrap
Th'vnconquered strong, ridding us of his evil,
Shall as my son sit on my sacred lap,
And in our burning Palace bravely revel:
All pains from him I Will banish and exclude,
And call him hels new champion, Fortitude.
90
Nere shall he henceforth bath in frosty fire,
Or feel the iron torrents, hearts despite,
Which from the doom of Minos do aspire,
And on the poor condemned spirits light:
But as my self sit in a seat much hier,
As if from him I held my sovereign right:
And this he spoke with such a feeling passion,
As moved in all the ghosts a mild compassion.
91
Like Crows about a carrion newly slain,
Or like small flies about a candles flame,
So millions of the subjects unto pain,
Condemned souls about black Pluto came:
First they whose lives the whole world did distain,
Kindling mischievous brands with enuies blame;
Whose hie ambitions wed to Policy,
Stird civil wars to murder Piety.
92
Up came the tyrants gorgd with bloody goare,
And misers, whose insatiate greedy thirst,
Overthrew nobility, and slew the poor:
Then came the murderers, with blood half burst,
Whose hands the guiltless hearts in pieces tore:
The traitors came, up came the worst of worst,
The mutenous, the strife-ingendring flame,
The envious, and inconstant lovers came.
93
Up rize the souls, that had by favors hold,
Taken the poor man's right to make him great;
And with them those, which had for treasure sold
Their countries freedom, to a foreign seat:
Up came the slanderous wise, the desperate bold,
The wilful perjured, on whom shames awaite:
And these began aloft to eleuate
Their strengths and prowesses for Plutoes sake.
94
But when the king of Death had heard their vant,
He sent them back, and thus their prides represt;
Retire weak souls, vain, feeble, and inconstant,
It Is not on you my hopes or safeties rest,
For he that must give cure unto my want,
Confirm my peace, and make me happy blessed:
Must be a valiant Chieftaine full of might,
A famous warrior, and approved knight.
95
Even he whose fame is planted on the seas,
In heaven, in earth, and here with us in hell;
Who has transported armies through all these,
Whose blade has conquered men and monsters fell:
He that in chains of gold leads through dark ways
Inthralled kings, with whom all honors dwell:
This is the soul must shine in arms for me,
And venge my cause, and set mine Empire free.
96
The soul of king Gradasso hearing this,
Mounted aloft, and thus made his reply.
Leave to complain (thou god of devils bliss,)
For if on Fame or Knighthood thou rely,
Or on the Prince that nere led man amiss;
Whose troops have scaled those mou^ts which loss the sky:
Then is it only I must set thee free,
Though gods conspire to cope in arms with me.
97
A thousand wreaths of conquering Laurel binds
My holy temples, with fair tresses curld,
The rumor of my name spread in the winds,
Has dared the Champions of the Western world,
Spain have I sacked, my sword all Belgia blinds,
And France by me was topsie turuie turned:
Two vows I made, and brought to pass with pain,
The like, the world shall never see again.
98
And these they were; In spring time of my years,
Flying from Wealth, and Pleasure two fell foes,
That often thrals and conquers mighty Peers,
Deuote to Valor, vowed despite of nose
To give Orlando combat, and sans fears,
To try in fight what force from Reinald flows:
Which done, Orlandos horse I got as gain,
And wan the sword of Reinald for my pain.
99
This said, and seeking more his praise to say,
The soul of Mandricard which aie disdaind
Such base false bruits should bear the prize away;
Full fraught with fury, madly himself demeand,
And rushing forth, loud as the Lions bray,
Thunderd this answer, hardly well restraind
From handy blows; yet casting about his eye,
Looked on Gradasso most despightfully.
100
Hark (quoth he) how this terror, scourge of flies,
Warmd with the blood that boyleth on his heart,
Boasts his manhood in a thousand lies:
I saw the day, when spite of all his art,
He Spanniel-like for mercy to me cries;
I and I saw Astolpho, on whose part
Honor, nor any valiant act depended,
On whom the name of Knight never attended.
101
Even him I saw with a weak golden lance,
(A weapon far unfitting for the war)
Orethrow this mighty one, and in a trance
Left him disgraced, like a falling star;
And yet himself boue us he does advance,
Threatens bright heaven, which can well declare
That his contempt is false, his praise a shade,
And only our deeds are immortal made.
102
These orethwart words made proud Gradasso mad
(Madness is ever silent for a space)
At length his fury burst from humor sad,
And like a flame did all his soul embrace;
For advocate, strokes and not words he had,
Yet as he gave the lie, (words worst disgrace,)
The mighty ghost of Agramant vpraised,
Bade them be still until he were appaised.
103
Then with a voice huge as a Northern gale,
Doing to Pluto solemn reverence,
He thus proceeded in his hawty tale;
What fire is this, what winged violence,
What hie desire does these great Peers exhale,
And like false stars draw them unto offense,
Like old men that forget decaying might,
Making them graspe at what is mine by right.
104
For if the pride of arms this honor win,
Justice must plead me worthiest of the three,
For thirty two anointed Kings have bin
Vassals to me, and my huge dignity;
T'account my men, no number could begin,
For why, they were more then the world could see,
Exceeding all the sparkling starry light,
Which in clear Phebes hall do polish Night.
105
Hills with the hollow downs I level made,
Floods have I couerd with mine armed host,
Men on parcht plains in bloody seas did wade,
And hnnger-starued death through me did boast
An Empire, that no time should make to fade,
By me he got what ere fore times had lost:
For day and night I held him at a baie,
And still increast his kingdom and his sway.
106
Pluto thou know, and hell will witness bear,
(For in thine Eban book my fame is writ)
And from hels gates no Fate shall ever wear
My rumor out; or shall Oblivion sit,
And my lives Chronicle in pieces tear:
Thou know right well, that to this damned pit,
Millions of millions, weeping are descended
Of slaughtered souls, that my right hand condemned.
107
Call Charon forth, let him for me protest,
Whose arms in work did nere wax feeble weak,
Save with my powers, who numberless oppressed,
And almost made his withered sinews break.
Again, that these Kings souls may live at rest,
And vain hopes made no further vants to speak,
Fetch forth thy bedrolls, paper-books and notes,
Thy Chronicles, in which all souls thou coats.
108
Fetch forth the Antiquares of all those shades,
Sent from the earth by Nature, Murder, Fight,
Then shall they know I have inricht these glades
More in the circuit of a winters night,
Then they in all their lives, with all their blades,
Hell being peopled only by my might:
Thus did these three, with hauty terms contend,
And each to other hateful speeches lend.
109
Pluto agrieu'd to see this civil brawle,
Practizd to knit them in continuing peace,
To him new arguments this broyle did call,
Now does he sweat to make their wraths surcease,
And rage enraged, with rage he does forestall,
Their war does Rodomonts great war increase:
Who all this while upon the bridge did stand,
Tearing the iron bars up with his hand.
110
But more he speaks, the more their angers rise,
Like storms that make disturbed waves grow mad,
Anon the god with falling fiery eyes,
Thus to beseech with mildest terms was glad:
Cease conquering Kings, these civil arms despise,
A iuster cause may here with praise be had: These three were the Judges of Hell.

As for your strife, best time shall it discuss,
Fore Minos, Radamanth, and Eachus.
(...) 117
Thus to his grand tormentor having spoke,
He with disdainful semblance turned about,
And as like lightning from a dark clowd broak,
Looked on Gradas, and Agramant the stout,
And said, return poor fools, prides foolish yoke,
Unto the earth, and there anewe find out
Your leaden fames, which for a paltry sword,
To one of you, such hie praise did affoard.
118
Agramant was the son of Traiano, who was slain by Pipin king of France.
But as for thee Traianos youthful heir,
Led by young thoughts (inamorites to will)
In venging hate thy prowess does appear,
Where I have scornd any by hate to ill;
For all my acts Cupids light wings do bear
Up to fair Cytheron his mothers hill:
And he that offers Love his conquering sword,
Is truly valiant both in deed and word.
119
Yet gracious Pluto, first disgrace this flame,
And find a balm to cure Loves hateful grief,
Murder this fire, extinguish Cupids name;
Then will I fight, and purchase thee relief:
To this desire, thus Dis does answer frame,
Ha Mandricard, control that vain belief,
Which in Loves ease does any help assure,
Love is alone impossible to cure.
120
The God of gods, and I my self am thrald,
No Fate the bane of Venus bait escheweth,
Cupids keen shafts the Fiends in hell have gald,
And whilst his ceaseless rigor me pursues,
By whom is Deity alone forestald,
I find no mean nor man that on me rueth:
But look how fast my wretched flight prete^deth
So fast he flies, and on my sorrow tends.
121
Earnest to follow on his tale begun,
A sudden storm of tears fell from his eyes,
And from his talk so great controlement won,
That sound of words, strange sounding sighs supplies,
Sighs that in feruor did exceed the Sun,
Making hot flames on watery billows rise;
Whilst Rodomonth exlaimd on Dis from far,
And calls the fiends to combat, if they dare.
122
Now Mandricard the son of Agrican,
By this was chosen champion for the dark,
And armd in clouds, that Night from Nature wan,
Came marching forth, whilst every souie did mark
The comely puisance of the mighty man,
And to his courage every ear did hark:
Which he with hollow words bravely did cheer,
Swearing a second death shall slay their fear.
123
But when the Pagan saw him thus prepared,
Dissembling warlike Equipage in hell,
Fast by the foot takes Charon ouerdar'd,
And bout his head swings him, and makes him yell,
Thence throws him at the head of Mandricard,
Who with such violence upon him fell,
That spite his heart he made him reele and fall,
As when a Cannon beats a city wall.
124
Poor Charon thus the pellet of his might,
Having orethrowne the Tartar, tumbled by,
And through mischance, on Plutoes foot did light,
And with cold fear overcome began to cry,
And like a coward king, fit Lord for Night,
Let from his fist his iron scepter fly,
Which with a bought at each end seemd to be
Great as the heavens great seeming Appletree.
125
Which massy bar the Pagan soon surprizd,
And like a tennis tossed it in his hand,
Swearing no devil, nor devils damme suffiz'd
To quench his hates eternal burning brand,
New immortality (quoth he) disguised
Arms me to win this never conquered land;
Nor dare huge infinites my will resist,
Whilst I possess this weapon in my fist.
126
Thus mad with pride, proud that he was so mad,
He with this engine scald the gates of hell,
A second death by death the Furies had,
For never a blow that from his crotcher fell,
But made the shaking pit with terror sad,
That all the souls in which dead slumbers dwell,
Hied to their tombs by old confusion torn,
And there with tears wept that they were forlorn.
127
But this the brave Tartarians soul revived,
Like to a dreaming traveler from sleep,
And blushing to behold what Rage achieved,
With pensive looks seemd, though unseen to weep,
Whose dying shame (for shame is nere long lived)
Cast down his eyes much lower then the deep,
And lifting them again, whilst wrath repines,
Displaies a knot of fiery Serpentines.
128
Their backs and breasts were speckled blew and green,
Their eyes and nostrils spuing flames of fire,
Whose noisome smoaks palpable felt and seen,
Poisoned the air, and what than air was hier,
With liquid venime, and resistles tiene,
Which dropping from their scaly fins retire:
These Mandricard threw fiercely at his foe,
In hope to quittance his received woe.
129
But Rodomount whom nothing could apale,
Smild at revenge, weakened for want of breath,
And jesting at them, boldly gripes them all,
Squeezing the damned monsters to the death,
The sight whereof, broke the Tartarians gall,
When scorn by scorn made scorn of valures faith;
And with that thought, flies at the Pagans face,
And force perforce, justles him from the place.
130
Unawares assaild, down falls the Turkish king,
Into the damned poole of dead-mens bones;
The opening billows greedily sucked him in,
And yet aghast to hear his angry groans,
Mounted him up again, lest wrath should bring
Unto their source confused endless moanes:
And as he shakt himself, the drops fell down,
With pitteous grieuance to behold his frown.
131
Mad with disgrace (madness from envy grows)
The Pagan swimming, gaind the shore again,
Setting the lake on fire, where-ere he goes,
Throws forth hie mountains of admired disdain,
The while his body like a furnace glowes,
Lending new torments to vndying pain;
And foaming like a stormy beaten flood,
Belcht rivers forth, that no restraint withstood.
132
When Pluto saw him diuing in this brook,
(The altar on which all the gods do swear)
Unto his soul exalted joys he took,
And thus his fainting army new does cheer;
Friends (said he) fellow mates, gloss of my look,
My agents, even my self, my best compeere,
Mount you upon these walls, and then retort
This damned devil from a landing port.
132
Which, who effects by vnimagind might,
To him a wealthy coronet of Yew,
A wreath of Cypress, and a clowd of Night,
I do bequeath, whom all souls shall reuiewe:
But Mandricard, now iealeous of his right,
Seeing hell moved, cried, Pluto, is this true?
Will thou dishonor me, shall any say,
He seconded the Tartar in his fray?
133
False god, rebate thine idle promise past,
And keep thy damned souls in iron chains,
For if dishonor on my crest be placed,
This power of mine, that all great power sustains,
I Will turn upon thy head, and for disgraced,
Drown thee and him within these muddy streams:
Whilst this was speking, spite of might or main,
Once more the Turk came to the shore again.
135
And all his body mantled in filthy mire,
Like a stearne Boar soild in the Summer time,
Yet in his countenance flamed eternal fire
Much hier then infernal eyes could clime,
Like lightning Salmicis winged with desire,
Flies on the Tartar all besmeard with slime,
And with his airie arms gripes air so sore,
That Mandricard fell down, and could no more.
136
Hence does victorious Rodomont pursue
His all-wonne conquest to the gates of hell,
And Pluto swore, Destenie was untrue;
Yet trying all, what ever could repel,
From his near bosom fatal enchantment drew,
I mean Despair, Grief, and Amazement fell,
Which in a vial he had closely placed,
And these at Rodomont with rage he cast.
137
But these were made to wound the Lovers breast,
They had no motion in a flintie mind,
Of which the Pagan made an idle jest,
Spilt it upon the ground, said, foolish blind,
Poor god of hell, keep in thy rusty chest
These Pedlars trinckets, for some weaker kind,
For loving asses, and for wanton boys,
Slain and overcome with silly childrens toies.
138
For me, I fear no frost, no foil, no flame,
No monster, filth, nor hellish excrement:
To dread thy privy rage, were dastard shame,
Nothing mooues me under the firmament,
All things are held in awe by my great name;
And I as little fear thy worst intent,
As stubborn Northern blasts, or Summers hail,
Fear to encounter an unfolded Snaile.
139
Thus did he say (by rage taught what to say)
And saying what he said, burnt with his ire
Felt a strong drought make through his body way,
Setting his soul and aierie parts on fire;
All which, his labors, passions, and pains obey,
Adding huge violence to his desire;
For being with his dryness almost burst,
He leaves them all, and seeks to quench his thirst.
140
Like Hercules for Hyla, he runs mad,
Crying and seeking for some cooling stream,
Anon he finds one out, and then was glad;
Lethe he finds, Lethe which Poets dream,
That all Forgetfulness from it is had,
(Memory takes from that still pond his maime:)
The sight of which, when the proud Pagan
He lays him down, and takes a mighty (caught, draught.
141
Sooner he had not touched the fatal spring,
But all old memory and thought was gone,
His former war, his rage, his combating,
And every act before that present done:
Hell he forgot, Fiends, Furies, and their King,
(All which in consultation were alone,)
And had decreed, and taken Plutoes crown,
To make him King, and put old Ditis down.
142
But like a man that knows no former age,
Or infants that forget their mothers womb,
Meek as a Dove, that Lyon-like did rage,
He finds the way through which he first did come,
Passes ore Styx like a converted sage,
And so ascending up by fatal doom,
Once more the air, and earthly mansions won,
Cheering his dead eyes with the living son.
143
Restless he passed like a windy gale,
Through all the crooked corners of this round,
Till he found out again that bloody vale,
That ever to be memorized ground
On which he took his death, and there his pale
Dead mangled carcass, rent and torn he found;
With broken skull, and flesh delacerate,
About the which, a thousand Ravens sat.
144
Wrath at this sight wakened his sleepy brands,
And on the featherd tyrants spits his gall,
Railes, but his raylings nothing understands,
Ore mounts he chases them, ore rocks, ore dale,
Ore floods, and seas, beating the beaten strands,
Making the woods resound his hydeous tale:
Still following on, where ere they took their flight,
Threatening the silly birds to prove his might.
145
Led thus by conduct of his winged foes,
Not apprehending what, or where he was,
Stareth about, and then records his woes,
For well he knew the heavens adored place,
Within this Paradise his Trophies shoes,
Here all his thoughts, his cares, and wonder was:
A tower he saw out-braue the element,
Which was fair Isabellaes monument.
146
Fair Isabella, flower of virgin maids,
Whose fame is registered on heavens face,
In whose last end eternal virtue reads,
Faiths perpetuity, and chaste thoughts grace;
Whose neuer-mooued soul to ages pleads,
Life, that no life or death shall counterface:
Whose Angel love to Angel senses bared,
Her too untimely end too well declared.
147
This mighty Tower, the Pagans tears agniz'd,
He knew the gates, the bridge, the swans, the flood,
And all those knightly shields, by honor prized,
Which he had won in seas of purple blood;
For though that Lethe every thought surpised,
Yet Love it could not, Love all charms withstood:
And he that had forgot all other deeds,
Records his Love, Love that perpetual bleeds.
148
Like Centaures gazing on the Gorgon shield,
So on this castle stone-like looked this king,
And to it thousand orizons did yield,
Dear tomb of Chastity, O glorious thing.
And now since fates, that all the world does wield,
About whose work the frame of heaven does hing,
Have doomd unburied souls (though gods by birth)
An hundred years to travel on the earth.
149
Therefore the Destinies this Pagan bound,
So long to err about this holy shrine,
Constant and joyful in his Loue-sicke wound,
Showing himself fearful to mortal eine,
With cries and clamors shaking the trobled ground,
At whose huge noise, both gods and men repine;
Which seems to call, O pulchra clara stella,
Rodomount, Rodomount, Isabella, Isabella.
FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by V. S. for Nicholas Ling. 1607.


