Imprynted at London in Paul's church yearde, at the sign of the maidens head
by Thomas Petyt.

M.D.XLj.

The Antidotharius, in the which thou may learn how thou shalt make many,
and diverse noble playsters salues, oyntement, powders, hawmes, oyfes, and
wound drynkes, the which be very necessary, and behouefull, vtyle, and
profitable, for every Surgyan, therein to be expert, and ready at all times of
need.

printer's device of Robert Wyer, featuring John the Evangelist (McKerrow 70)

Gracia dei, like as master Peter de Argelata, set in the book of the flesh
making medycynes.
TAke white Rosyn, white wax Arimoniacum of each.xii. ounces, Turpentyne.vi.
ounces, Galbanum, Olibanum, Mastycke, clear good wine, of each an ounce,
Aristologia rotu^da half an ounce. And weak of this that is need to weak in
wine: therein is sodden Betonia, Veibena, Consolida mayor, and minor, Sentoria,
Pimpinella, Saint Iohn^s herb, or Ipericon, Storkes bylle, or herba Rubea in
latin, of each an handefull, and all this percelles ye shall set in the wine
till the wine be almost consumed, and after make it with woman's milk, as it
belongs, this plaster causes ye flesh to grow and heals, and it is
common for all wou^des and fractures of the bones. And the surgyans that now
be prayseth it much.

To make a grene wounded plaster.
THe good grene wounded plaster that the new surgyans occupy, yt heleth al
fresshe wounds without tents, and it is a mundificatluum, a conglutinatiuum,
and a consolidatiuu^. And this plaster is of many and diverse manners of
sou^drye masters maid, some take much Rosyn, and little wax. Some much
wax, and little Rosyn, and some take wax and Rosyn alyke much, and some take
no Rosyn at all. Therefore ye shall know as ye will that this same plaster shall
more heal than cleanse, like as it is nedesy in the wound of the heed, and in
a simple wound, there as no substance is lost. If that ye take more wax in
weight so much ye lesser take of Rosyn in weight, and let them twane every
time in his weight, and as ye will that it cleanse more taking to her the
matter, like as a deep stytched wound which makes much matter, than shall
you take more Rosyn than wax, as ye have said. If ye will that the plaster
shall make flesh to grow, and shall serve to all wounds, which somewhat has
lost of his substance, than take Rosyn, and wax of each alyke much, or if
ye will that it make the skin, and that the wound should close, than take wax
alone and no Rosyn, and as in this plaster is much Rosyn, and little wax,
then it is called a mundificatiuum, and attractiuum, that is clensynge, and
drawing out the matter, if there be therein much wax and lyter Rosyn, than it
is called congfutinatiuum, that is to gyther leuynge and closing of the
wound. And if there be therein wax and Rosyn like much: than it is called
incarnatiuum that is flesh making in the wound. Or if there be therein wax
and no Rosyn, than it is called consolidatiuum, that is helynge and skin
making. And this plaster is made thus.

Take resine de pino, that is white rosyn, Maiden wax, of each two pound, and
that rosyn which is clear as turpentyn, Dear suet of each.xii. ounces, greeks
pytche.viii. ounces, Sarcocolle small and great of each.iii. ounces, Turpentyne
talfe a pound, Mastyke, white Franke^sence of each.iiii. ounces, Dragantum,
Go^mi Arabici, Galbanum, Armoniacum of each one ounce and a half. Storacis
calamite.ii. ounces, Storacie liquide. iiii. ounces. And take the sap of these
herbs that ye can get, winter grene small and great or Pirola magoret minor,
Sanicle, or Diarensta in latin, Syndawe, Veronica mayor et minor, or herba
Saracenica, herba Solsequii, Co^solida minor, Moderworte, or Arthemesia in
latin, Planeayne small and great, Betonia, Agremonia, Farraria, Matrisilua,
Balderion, Iarrowe, or Cerifolium in latin, Sage or Saluia in latin, Vervena,
Mousere, waltrote or Ambora, of these herbs take sap.ix. pound and no less,
but rather more, because to each pound of the substance of this plaster
belongs full.iii. pound sappes. That sap, white rosyn, wax, Hearts suet,
and Rosyn, and Colofonia, ye shall sethe in a kettyll over the fire, without
flame or smoke till two parts thereof be consumed, than do therein Turpentyn. But
the go^mes as Dragantum, Gommi Arabici, Galbanu^, Armoniacu^. This shall be
first steped one night in vynegre of Roses, and as it is soden a walme or.iii.
than shall ye the other go^mes make in powder, and do it therein and let it
sethe again.ii. or.iii. walmes, and at the last do therein Storax liquida, and
Calamita, if ye will have better smellyng, than do thereto Bemesym or
Barotus.iii. ounces. And if ye will have it very well smelling than do
thereto.ii. or.iii. ounces of oil of spik, than strain it through a cloth, and
let it stand a night, the next day cut this salve in.iiii. pieces, and than
take it out of the ketyll, and make thereof rolls with fresshe oil of Roses,
if ye will have this plaster fair grene than do thereto ye sap of Nyghtshawe,
or Solatri in latin, and sap of Eldre, and Celidonia of each.iii. pound
therewith let the salve seth again. but not long, the longer it does seth the
paler it waxes. But these herbs be not so wholesome as the other be,
nevertheless some masters does this sap therein, and they know not what
virtue and power they have. The night shawe coleth and softeth, so does the
Elder also, and Celidonia clensyth, therefore as ye put in this salve much
Rosyn, so may ye the better this same sap do thereto, and.ii. or.iii. ounces of
Myrra, than cleanse it the more. Never can come a good consolidatiuum without a
mundificatiuum, for that mundificatiuum is the key of the incarnatiuum and
consolidatiuum.

For to make an Apostolicum salve, after the Antidothario Nicholai.
TAke Litargirium.xii. ounces, Greeks pytche, red wax, of each.iiii. ounces,
Oken mystyndyn, with wax of each.ii. ounces, Armoniacum, Magnete stone, which
is called the Lodestone of each an ounce and a half, Sarcocolle, Squama eris,
Dyptan and Aristologia longa, Spaynysshe grene, Appoponatum of each.iii.
dragmas, white Frankensence, Mastycke of each.ii. ounces, Tutpentyne, Galbanum,
Bdelium, Myrra, brent Coper of each.iii. dragma, that litagirium shall ye stamp
in powder, and thereto do.viii. ounces of oil Olyue, and let it seth together
on the fire yt it be thycke as wax, and that shall ye drope on a stone in a
proof. Than do thereto the Turpentyne, the white and red wax as yt is melted.
Than do therein the Galbanum, Appoponatum, Bdellium: Sarcocolle weked one night
in vynegre soden and strayned, and than put it therein together and than take it
from the fire and do therein the go^mes. And as it be warm, than shall ye do
therein all the other parcelles, the one after the other made in powder, and
styre it till it be cold, and than may ye make it in rolls.

Of the Exicrocium plaster writes Nicolaus in his Antidothario, and this is
needful to every good surgyan.
TAke Saffran, ship Pytche strayned, Greeks pytch, new wax of each.viii.
ounces, Turpentyne, Galbanu^, Armoniacu^, Myrre, Mastyke, white Frankensence,
of each.ii. ounces and.iii. dragmes. This plaster make thus, melte the wax,
ship Pytche, Greeks pytche, Turpentyne. And melte it together, when that is
molten do therein galbanu^, Armoniacum, one night steped in vynegre, sodden and
strayned and do it therein. Then shall ye seth it again till the Vynegre be
consumed, and styre it well together, and than do therein the other parcelles
made in powder, and styre it till it begin to wax cold, than cast it upon a
cold stone, and ye shall anoynte the stone first with oil of Bay leaves (or
olio Lauri in latin) and than work the Saffran therein, and when ye have so
done, than may ye make rolls of it.

Make this Diaquison plaster after the Antidothario Mesue.
TAke Litargerium.xxiiii. ounces, oil of blewe lylles, oil of camomyll, oil
of Dell, or Anetum in latin of each.xiii. ounces: Lynsedes sleme, Fenegrekes
sleme, hye Malow rotes sleme, sleme of Fyxe, sap of Yrios, sap of Mersybelen,
the greece soden of the woll that hangs between the fegges of the sheep, byrd
syme (or viscus querci in latin) of each.xxv. ounces, Turpe^tyne vi. ounces,
white Rosyn, yelowe wax of each.iiii. ounces, take Litargirium and make it in
powder, and dress it with ye oil sleme and grese, that it be thycke as wax
as it is dropped upon a stone, than do thereto that wax, rosyn, turpentyne, and
as it is molten together, than styre it together till it be cold, and thereof
make rolls with the oil of white Lyllyes.

To make a sere cloth plaster good for all members that is out of the joint,
and the consumynge me^bres, or which is greuyd with cold moystnes: that
consumyth, and brings the membre again in his right power.
TAke wax.vi. ounces: rosyn.iii. ounces, mastyke.ii. ounces, armoniacu^,
galbanum, white Frankensence of each an ounce and a half, oil of Bybergeylle
(or olinin Castorii in latin, oil of Camomyll of each an ounce, Fenegreke
meele, meele of wormwode, meele of Combarte, Common, meele of Camomylle flowers,
make all this in small powder of each a dragma, vynegre.v. or.vi. oilces meli
ye rosyn, wax, and the oil together, than do therein the galbanu^, and
armoniacu^ steped in vynegre and strain it, and at the last do to ye other
percelles, yt is made in small powder, and styre it well together till it be
cold.

To make a good Jews plaster to fresshe wounds.
TAke white wax.iiii. pound, Rasino de Pino, that is white Rosyn, Turpentyne
of each.ii. pound, oil of Roses one pound, mastyke, white frankensence,
myrra of each.ii. ounces, fresshe leaves of Roses.iiii. ounces, red wine one
mesure of three pound, of al these herbs take that ye may get, winter grene,
or Pirola in latin, Syndowe, Diape^sia, waltmaster, or Matrisisua in latin,
herba serasenica, herba tunici, herba solsequii, betonia, consolida minor,
furnus terre, Plantayne great and small, storkes byll, or herba Rubea in latin,
Valeriana, of each a like much, till ye have enough, and good wine, till ye
have enough, sta^pe the herbs, and threst therout the sap, and put ye wine on
the herbs yt they may become well moysty with the wine, and let it well sethe
with the aforesaid wine. Than strain it through a cloth, than do the sap and
the wine in a kettyll therein do the wax, Turpentyne, Rosyn, and oil, than
shall you sethe the Roses with the red wine until it give a blewe flame, than
strain it through a cloth, and do it also in the kettel, and let it seth
altogyther.v. or.vi. hours long, than take ii from the fire, and let it be
cold, and the next day melt it again, and do therein the Mastyke,
Frankencence, and Myrre, made all in powder, and do it in the kettyll, and let
it sethe together a walme, or twain, and than take it of from the fire, and
let it be cold, than ye have a right Jews plaster yt all wou^des heleth
without tents.

Emplastrum Attractiuum, that is mundificatiuum, that is to say, a drawyng
plaster, ye draws to him the matter, and all uncleanness of the impostumacyon,
vlceracyon, and swerynge and of all unclean wounds.
TAke white Rosyn a pound, maiden wax half a pound, hearts suet.viii.
ounces, turpentyne.iiii. ounces, Sarcocolle.ii. ounces, mastyke, white
Frankencence of each an ounce, Myrra, Aloe, Succrotini of each half an ounce,
melte that wax, rosyn, and the Hearts suet together, and strain it through a
clothe, than do thereto the turpentyoe, and the other parcelles in powder and
oil of roses.ii. ounces, styre this together till it be cold, will ye have
this red than do there in sinopre in powder, if ye will have it fair yelowe,
than do therein a dragma of saffron in powder, if ye will have it grene, so
sethe sap of ye herbs therewith, thereof is said before in the grene plaster.

A plaster that draws out arowe hedes, habergoynes, maylles, and all that of
iron is in the man's body.
TAke apostolicu^ Nicolai aforesaid two ounce, Magnete stone of Orient, that
has his power half an ounce, Hares grese, Hempsede oil, of each half an
ounce, whyts Diptum a dragma melte that grese, and the oil softly together,
and do the other parcelles therein, that is made in powder, and stir it
together till it be cold.

A plaster to take out thorns, splyntes, glass, bones, and other like things,
that is in man's body.
TAke Diaquilon plaster out of this antidothario.iii. ounces, Magnete stone
half an ounce, the rote of Polipodium, the root of white Dyptan, the rote of
Rethe, called in latin Aru^do, of each a dragma and an half, Hares grese an
ounce and an half, oil of Hempsede an ounce, hereof make a plaster as is
aforesaid.

A soft plaster yt cleanses all foul wou^des yt is old, they yt has roten
flesh or makes much matter, and is called mu^dificatinu^ de apiu^, this
has occupied wilhelmus, Lancfra^cus, Henricus de monte villa, Guido and all
surgyans of Paris.
TAke sap of A piu^.ii. ounces Barley, or wheete meele.iii. ounces, that shall
ye sethe with a soft fire, till it be thycke like a soft plaster, and as ye do
thereto sap of wormwode, it will let no fystyll come in the wound, and the
wound about frete not himself like the kancker, or if the wound have any
hotenes, than shall ye do thereto sap of Plantayne, or sap of Cresula, and ye do
thereto facinam, Fini greci, or Ferinam Cupinorum, that cutteth more stronger
with dryinge, as Theodoriens and Brunus says.

The manner how ye shall make salues, and oyntementes, very needful to all
surgyans.
AVreum vnguentum after the Antidothario Mesue, that all fresshe wounds
fylleth with flesh, and heals.

Take yelowe wax.xii. ounces, good oil of olyue a pound and an half,
turpentyne.iiii. ounces, greeks pytche, white rosyn of each.v. ounces, white
Franke^cence, mastycke of each.ii. ounces, saffran a dragma, melte the wax and
Oil with the Greeks pytche together, and afterward do therein turpentyne, and
set it then from the fire, and make the other parselles in powder, and do
this therein at the half colynge, and styre it than well till it be cold.

Auicenna says vnguentum apostolocu^ cleanses a fystule, makes it right good,
and cleanses all corrupt wou^des of the rotten flesh without pain, and
makes that the flesh may grow.
TAke white Rosyn, white wax of each an ounce, appoponati, spaynysshe grene of
each half an ounce, Armoniaci, mastyk, myrte, Galbani, of each an ounce,
Aristologie longa, white Frankencence of each an ounce and an half,
Litargirium, Bdellii.ix. dragmes. Oil Olyue in the somer a pound and a half,
and in the winter ii. pound: stepe this in vynegre.iii. days long, as is the
galbanum, armoniacum, Bdellium, than shall you melt and sethe it, than do
therein the Rosyn and wax. And as it is melted than do thereto the oil and
Turpe^tyne: and than do therein the other procelles made in powder.

To make a white salve after the Antidothario Nicolai.
TAke white Lead.iiii. ounces, Liturgiriu^.ii. ounces, white Frankencence iii.
dragmes, mastyke.ii. dragmes, each parcelles make in powder by him self, and
meddle the white Leed with a little oil, and do thereto Litargiriu^, thereafter
mastyke and Frankencence, and do styre it with a pestell often times, and at each
time do therein a lytest rose water, when it begins to thick put more oil
thereto, and to each time a little rose water, and do it so long that it be
another to thycke nor to thynne.

To make this white salve said Rasis, and called her vnguentu^ albu^ conferatu^.
TAke of oil Olyue a pound and a half, stamp white Lead a pound, white
way half a pound, Camphere.iii. dragmes.iii. yolks of eggs. This shall ye
stamp together in a mortar, and in the leest do therein Camphere in powder.

Basilicon magnu^ Mesue set in his Antidothario, and is a great helper to the
wou^des there hete is in, and above all in the wounds of the synewes, and does
cleanse, and cause to grow flesh.
ANd if you will make this salve after Mesue. Take white Rosyn, white wax,
Tallow of an ox, black pytche, bird lyme, Myrre, of each.iii. ounce, oil
Olyue that there be enough thereof, make a salve as thereto belongs.

This salve Dialthea make after the Antidothario Nicolai.
TAke hye Malowe rotes two pound, Lynsede, Fenygreke, of each a pound,
Squelle half a pound, ye shall wasshe it well, then shall ye take the rotes of
Lynsede, Fenygreke, Squelle, stamp it and lay it in.iiii. pound of water.iii.
days long, and on the.iiii. day set it on the fire, and let it sethe till it
begin to wax thycke, and do it by little and little in a lynnen bag, and
as ye will wrynge it out, and than do thereto a little hot water, that the
slyme well may come out, and of the slyme take.iii. pound. And do thereto,
oil olyue.iiii. pound, than let it seth till the slyme consumes, than do
therein wax a pound, and as that is melted do therein Turpentyne, Galbanum,
Gumi edere, of each.iiii ounces. In the leest do therein Grestes pytche, or
Colofonie in latin, Rosyn, of each a pound. And when it waxes cold, than do
it lightly out.

Vnguentum defensiuu^, and repercussiuum, occupyeth commonly all masters to
all wou^des and bones, and impostumacions it restrayneth and defends that no
swerynge nor swellynge, nor impostume comes to wounds or fracturs of ye
bones, as the member be anointed therewith round about.
TAke Rose oil.iiii. ounces, Bolus at menus.ii. ounces. Tarra sigillata,
vynegre, of each an ounce, Camfere a dragme, Nyghtshawe, or Solatrum in latin,
Howslyke, of each an handefull and stamp it and threst well out the sap, and
myngle it together cold like a white salve.

Vnguentu^ egipciacu^, lerneth Galenus, Rasis Albucasis, and is sore occupied
now in this time of the surgyans, it cleanses softly and takes away all
uncleanness.
TAke Ho^ny a pound, Vynegre half a pound, Spanysshe grene.ii. ounces, Alume
an ounce. This shall you seth all together on the fire till it be reed. And
this salve takes three manners of colors in his seething, if it is soden but a
little, it seems grene, is it soden well it seems reed, is it soden to much
than it seems black.

Vnguentum fuscum does flesh to grow, and cleanses and heleth.
ALso take oil Olyue a pound, and.iiii. ounces wax.viii. ounces, Greeks
pytche, Ship pytche, white Rosyn of each.iiii. ounces, Mastyke, Galbanum, white
Frankencence Turpentyne, Myrra, of each.ii. ounces, Appoponatum, Armoniacum, of
each an ounce, melt the Oil and the wax in a pa^ne. And then put therein the
Ship pytche and the Greeks pytche, and when it is molten strain it through a
cloth, and stepe the Gu^mes in vynegre and soften them so, and strain it
through a cloth, and put it therein and at the last put therein the other gu^mes
in powder, and the Turpentyne, and stir it together till it be cold.

Now a days the Barbours makes contrary Vnguentum Popule on Nicolai, and
otherwise then it should be, for sometime they put butter, sometime herbs that
heleth, and they lay the salve with lynt in the wound, and that is contrary
unto the powder of the Populer salve, for ye nature of them is for to cole, and
to take the pain away, therefore it ought not to be made none otherwise than
is hereafter following.
TAke Populer buddes a pound and an half, Hogs greece.iiii. pound, and
stamp them together, and let it stand till ye may have these herbs herafter
following. Folia Papaueris nigri, Bramble leaves of the first buddyng, Dolerote
leaves, or folia de Vua versa, Bilsem leaves, or folia Iusquiani, Nyghtshawe
leaves, or folia Solatri, folia de Satirion, Muerpepper leaves, or Crassula in
latin, Letuse leaves, Vyolette feues, Houseleke, great Burre leaves, or Lapatium
in latin, Grounswel leaves, of each.vi. ounces. And stamp these herbs together
with Hogs greece, and with the buddes of Populen, and let it stand the space
of.viii. days, and than put thereto wine.iii. pound. Than seth it in a kettell
till the wine be sodden away, and than strain it through a cloth.

For to make a salve that causes in all complections flesh to grow in
fresshe wounds.
TAke white fra^ke^cence, mastyke, aloe paticu^, Greeks pytche, Aristologia
adusta, yreos, sarcocolle: of each alyke much and thereof make a salve with
oil and wax.

A salve that causes flesh to grow in the wounds of young persons.
ANd if ye will make this same salve, Take Turpentyne which is not washed.ii.
ounces, Rose ho^ny a dragma, the yolke of an egg, oil Olyue, and wax, and
look that there he stuff enough, and than ye shall make thereof a salve.

A salve that cleanses the wounds of young children, and causes the flesh
to grow.
TAke white Turpentyne, which is not washed.iiii. ounces. The yolke of an
egg, and a little Barlye meele, and make thereof a salve.

A salve that cleanses and causes the flesh to grow in dry complections.
IF ye will make this salve, taste ship pytche well washed in good lie.vi.
ounces, reed ho^ny.ii. ounces, spanysshe grene half a dragma, The yolke of an
egg, barlye meele enough, and make thereof a salve.

An other salve that causes the flesh to grow in all manner of fresshe
woundres.
TAke Turpentyne.iiii. ounces, Ho^ny half an ounce, powder of the bark of
white Franke^cence a dragma, Saffran the third part of a dragma, and take
enough of oil of roses and wax, and make thereof a salve.

A salve which cleanses the matter, and causes flesh to grow.
FOr to make this salve: take Turpentyne, ho^ny of Roses strayned, of each
iiii. ounce. Myrre, Sarcocolle, of each iii. dragmes, Barley mele an ounce. The
yolke of an egg, and half a dragma of Saffran. And meddle them together: and
set it on the fire and styre it well, and when yt it is luke warm, put
thereto the yolke of an egg.

A salve that causes the wound to give matter.
FOr to make this salve, take Turpentyne.iii. ounces, Hearts greece, or the mary
of an heart.ii. ounces, oil of Roses an ounce, white fra^kence^ce half an
ounce.

A salve that causes matter to come in fresshe wounds shortly after it is
laid therein.
IF ye will make this take Turpentyn iiii. ounces, oil of Roses, and wax, of
each.ii. ounces. Melte these together, and as ye will occupy it, make it a
little warm and lay it with lynt upon the wound, and it will soon give
matter.

An other salve for a fresshe wound that makes matter.
TO make this salve take Hearts greece, Turpentyne, of each.iiii. ounces, oil
of Roses, white Frankencence, Mastycke, of each an ounce.

To make a salve for a membre yt has been out of the ioynte, or that has been
wounded, and after the helynge the ioynte can not be bowed.
LAnfrancus has taken this salve out of the book of Rasis, but he has amended
it. And he took old swynes greece.vi. ounces, Duckes greece, Goose greece, Hens
greece, of each.ii. ounces, old oil Olyue viii. ounces, fenygreke mele,
fynsede mele, of each.ii. ounces, bdellii, oppoponati, mastycke, Frankencence
of each an ounce. The gummes ye shall wete in wine, and afterward ye shall
meddle it with oil and greece. And put thereto a little wax and Turpentyne, and
than put therein the other hard gu^mes made in powder, and styre it together
till it be cold

Hereafter follows the manner to make powders necessary for surgyans.
A Reed powder that dries sore and makes that none evil flesh grow in the
wound. Take the mother of Perle, Burnet, Pompolix, Litargiriu^, Bolus armenus,
Terra sigillata, Dragons blood, Erugo eris of each an ounce, Ca^fere a dragma.
And stamp them together, and make a fair powder.

For to make a reed powder for all wounds, and fystules clensynge from evil
flesh, good for wou^des of the heed.
TAke Greeks pytche.iii. ounces, walte rotes, or Ambora in latin, Ematicis,
Mumie, Dragons blood, of each an ounce, Mastyk, white Frankencence of each
half an ounce. And make thereof a powder, and ye may occupye this powder
without harm, though the brain lie bare, this powder ye shall straw upon
lynte depte in wine, and lay that thereupon.

And if you will make a reed powder to stop blood, and in the wound makes
flesh to grow.
TAke drago^s blood, white fra^kence^ce, A lo paticu^, sarco colle of each an
ounce preos half an ounce, and make thereof a powder.

A soft powder which takes out of the wound, the superfluyte of evil
flesh, as Canfrancus says.
ANd if ye wys make the same powder. Take Hermadacteli, Aristologia rotunda, of
each an ounce, Spanysshe grene half an ounce, and make thereof a powder. A reed
powder which is profitable to the seem of the wound, and holds the lyppes
fast together and stops the blood, and heals the wound (as Albucasis and
Lanfra^cus writteth) but for ye vnflecked lyme. Guydo takes so much Bosus
armenus, And Haly abbas takes so much Sandali. And I take so much lyme of
egg shelles that is washed and dried again.

TAke white Frankencence.ii. ounces, Dragons blood, and vnslecked lyme, of each
an ounce (and Guydo says) Take for the lyme Bosus arinenne an ounce And Haly
abbas says, take Sandasy an ounce. And after my learning take an ounce of the
lyme of egg shelles, and thereof make a powder.

Wilhelmus de Saliceth makes another powder to lay on the same that is very
good, and yt lyketh me well.
ANd if you will make the same powder so: take Dragons blood, Dragaga^tum,
Gu^mi arabici, of each an ounce, And thereof make a powder.

A proved powder, for stoppyng of blood that the Lombardes surgyans occupyeth,
and this powder stops the blood, and heleth also.
FOr to make the same powder take Dragone blood, Bolus armenus, Terre
sigillate, of each an ounce, Psidie, Pomegarnade flowers, Accacia ipoquiscidos,
Cipresse nottes of each an ounce, Numye, mastyke, Frankence^ce with the bark
of each.ii. dragmes, Man's blood brent an ounce, wattes here brent.iii.
dragmes and make thereof a powder

For to make a powder, which stops blood.
TAke Cathapladis, Egg shells yt the Chekyns be come out of or moss growyng
upon deed me^nes hedes, or graves in ye church yard, small bre^ni^g Nettyls of
each alyke much dried, and made in powder

A powder that dries, heleth, and makes skyn, and restrayneth the matter.
FOr to make this powder, take Aloe paticum, Sarcocolle, of each.ii. ounces
Dragons blood, the bark of Frankencence, round holle rotes, or Aristologia
rotunda in latin, Casmey preparati, ye of our lady of each half an ounce,
Pomegarnade flowers, Balaustie, Psidii, Tutie preparate, Erugo eris, Cipresse
nottes, of each a dragma, Lynen cloth burned, half a dragma, and make all
these together in a powder.

Hereafter follows the manner for to make Oils, which be needful to the
Surgyans.
OLium Camomille is needful unto the Surgyan, for it resosueth the matter, and
also it tastes away the pain.

And for to make the same oil, take Camamell flowers in the month of June a
pound, oil Olyue strayned.iii. pound. And put them together in a glass,
and set it in the Son.xiiii. days, than strain it, and put therein again a
pound of fresshe Camamell flowers, and set it again in the Son.xl. of ye
dismol days and than strain it again. Oleum benedictum, that is the best
Oil to warm the cold me^bres, wherein the mary is become cold within the
bone, and this oil stops the glytterynge water and heteth fresshe wou^des,
the fistules, the cankers and dries the rennynge sores, and thus with great
dyfygence, and good understanding ye must make this oil.

TAke oil Olyue a pound, Turpentyne, oil Laure of each half a pound,
Synamon.iii. ounces, Clowes.ii. ounces, Euforbii, Galbani, Baye leaves, go^mi
edere, armoniaci, appoponati of each an ounce, Laudani.viii. ounces, white
frankencence, Castorie, Spicinardi, Lignum a soes, of each half an ounce. Make
all this in powder, and melte the other, and put thereto fresshe tyle stones
stamped in powder brennynge hot a pound, dystyle it per alembicum, and so it
will give or yield.iii. manner of lycoures. The first it gives water, the
second time it gives oil, and the third time it gives lycoure, like a
bawme, and keep each of them by himself.

The most best bawme artyfycyal to serve to all fresshe wou^des shall be made
thus.
TAke Lignum aloes.ii. ounces, Oppoponatu^, Refini de pino, Bdellii, Galbani,
Armoniaci, Masticis, Sarcocolle, Go^mi, Elempi, Olibani, Myrte, Bensium, Olium
lauri, Olium benedictu^, Laudani of each.iii. ounces, Carpobalsami,
Xilobalsami, appobalsami, in his place may be taken Olium balsami, of each an
ounce, Sanguinis draconis half an ounce, Castorii, Spicinardi, Galga^ti,
Cubebe, Maces, Sinamomi, Cardemumel, Grane paradisi Corticis cyrci, of each a
dragma, Olu turpe^tini, as much in wayght as of all the other aforesaid, and
dystyll it peralembicum. This bawme heleth fresshe wou^des, and stops
shortly the glytterynge water in the joints, if it be well made.

An other very good bawme, which serves for all manner of fresshe wounds.
TO make this bawme, take Olibant, Armoniaci, Storacis calimite, Stotacis
liquide, of each.iiii. ounces, Masticis, Colosonie, Dragaganti, Gommiarabici,
Eo^mibdellii, Go^mi elempi, of each.ii. ounces, Myrre, Euforbii, of each half
an ounce, Eommi edere, Serapini, Go^mi ficuum, Oppoponati, Bensium which is
Go^mi cedri, Visci querci, Gumi, and not the tree, Sanguinis draconis,
Aloepatici, Mumie, Xilobalsami, Carpobalsami, Boracis, Verticis, of each an
ounce, laudani mu^dati.iii. ounces. Olii rosarum.ii. pound, Olii laurini,
Turpentini rubii, of each a pound, Olii masticis oil of Camamyll, of each
half a pound, And of the foresaid bawme, Ieneper oil, Bramble oil, oil of
vyolettes, of each.viii. ounces, The soft go^mes wette in vynegee. And the
other make them in powder, than shall you seth this all together in Balneum
marie, and as you se that the go^mes will sit on the ground of the glass,
than it is soden enough, and if you will have the natural color of the
bawme, ye shall put therein half an ounce of Saffran of oryent stamped, for that
causes ye flesh to grow. Also if ye will have it seem fair and grene, than
put therein spanysshe grenl.iii. ounces grounden small. And at the last put
therein the Turpentyne, and oleum Turpentini.

Oil of Castory the which is much profitable and needful for a surgyan.
TAke oil Osyne.vii. ounces, Castory, iii. ounces, ye shall put all these
together in a pot and seth it in Balneum marie.iii. hours long, and than
keep it well in a glass.

Oil of Lylyes is also necessary for the Surgyan.
ANd if ye will make ye oil of lylyes. Take oil Olyue.v. pound, white Lyly
leaves a pound, Rose leaves half a pound, Mastyke.iiii. ounces, Saffran.ii.
ounces. And the Mastycke must be made in powder put them all together in a
glass, and set it in the son the space of.ix. days, and on the.x. day ye
shall sethe it in Balneu^ marie, and than strain it, or else take oil
Olyue.xii. ounces, white Lylye leaves.iiii. ounces, and make it as is aforesaid.

Olyum masticis must be made thus.
TAke Mastyke.vi. ounces. Oleum sisamini.xviii. ounces. And ye shall seth them
in Balneum marie so long till the third part be consumed. Or else make it
thus, take oil of Roses.xxiiii. ounces, Mastyke.vi. ounces well smelling
half a pound, and seth them in Balneum marie till the wine be consumed.

Oleum Nenufarie.
This oil is to the Surgyans most prefytable, for it coleth the persons, and
it must be made in likewise, as the oil of Camomyll is. And in the stead of
Camamyll, take white see flowers, which herb has broad leaves swymmynge upon
the water, and it is called flores Nenufaris in latin.

Oil of Roses without which oil no surgyan may be, and it must be made in
this manner as hereafter follows.
TAke the sap of dust, or Origani in latin, and water that Roses be soden in,
of each a pound, oleum sisamini washed, or take oil Olyue the grenest that
ye can get.iii. pound. Leaves of Roses a pound, and put them together in a
glass, and set it in the son the space of.xiiii. days, than shall ye seth
it in Balneum marie till the sap and the water be consumed, and than afterward
strain it, and put therein again as much water of Roses and sap as is before
rehearsed, and set it again in the son other.xiiii. days, and than seth it
again in Balneum marie as is before said, than strain it and set it in the
son, again, and let it stand there the space of.xl. days.

Oil of elder, or oil of Vygelet, or any other oils made of flowree, they
must be made thus, as herhafter follows.
TAke the flowers, or the herbs a pound, oil olyue.iii. pound. And put it
in a glass, and set it in the Son the space of.xl. days, than ye shall seth
it in Balneum marie, and than strain it and threst it out, and the oil of
Elder shall stand in the son but.iii. deyes, or else it will be corrupt.

Hereafter follows the manner for to make a drink for all wounds, and it is
needful for a Surgyan.
A Drink for all wounds and as a person is stryken through the body, which
Drink helps him inwardly without powder or other thing, never theles it is
good to lay on the wound a grene wounded plaster, for it cleanses the wound
and this drink shall be made thus.

TAke yue leaves or Edere arboria growing on an oken tree.iiii. ounces, winter
grene small and great or Pirola in tatyn, Sanycle or Diapensia in latin,
syndawe, herba Fortis, or Veronica, of each.ii. ounces, herba Solsequiian
ounce, chope all these herbs small together and put them in a pewter pot, and
put thereto.iiii. pound and an half of the best wine, and a pound and an
half of water, and ye shall fethe them in Balneu^ marie.iiii. hours long
without taking of the lyd of the pot, than on the morrow after put
thereto.viii. ounces of Sugar. If the wound be in the head, than put thereto
Beton ye.ii. ounces, Sage an ounce, Lafendell half an ounce. And if the wound
be in the breast, than put thereto Lycores.ii. ounces. Polipodium an ounce,
ysope half an ounce, and if the pacyent feeble sore, than put thereto buglosse
flowers, borage flowers of each an ounce. Roses half an ounce, than if the
pacyent have great here put thereto Vyolettes.ii. ounces. Flores nenufaris half
an ounce, if the wound be on the left side, than do thereto Lyuerworte an
ounce. Matrisilua half an ounce, also if ye have no going to ye drought than
it is needful to put thereto Seen leaves, Cassie fistule, of each.ii. ounces.
And if he be deep wounded, than put thereto Celidoni rotes.iiii. ounces, and
give it him to drink at morning, at none, and at evening, and at every
time.iiii. ounces.

An other good drink for a wound which is of truth and has been proved.
THis drink is given for the wound that is not deedly, and dryueth out of the
wound all corrupcyons within.xiii. days, and afterward it heleth the wound.
And thus this drink must be made. Take reed Coals, Parsely sede, Abrotanum,
Tanasetum, Strawbery leaves, leaves of Rubetinctorum, herba Tuberti, Plantayne
great and small, Appe leaves, or folia apii, Hemp sede, and seth all thief
together in wine, and put thereto a lytellhu^ny, and thereof shall the pacyent
drink evening and morning, and at every time.iiii. ounces, and wasshe the
wound therewith, and lay a reed cole left thereupon.

An other drink that is good for a wound.
TAke Pimpinella, Sanicle, or Diarenia in latin, walte rote, or ambrosia,
Agrimonia, ysop, tanascetum great, Plantayne, Strawberye leaves, of each an
handefull, and seth them in wine, or in water, and put thereto a little vyneger
and hu^ny, this Drink cures, or heals the wound by himself.

An other drink for a wound.
TAke herba Sarasenica, fyndaw, Diarentia, of each.xii. ounces, winter grene,
or Pirola in latin, Strawbery leaves of each.vi. ounces, Centimorbium,
Agrimonia, Betonica, reed motherwort, or Artimusia rubea of each.iiii. ounces,
Ambrosia, Pimpinella, Repontica, Ground worms, yarowe, or Milefolium, of
each.iiii. ounces, Mumic powder.iiii. ounces, clear hu^ny a pound and an
half, and take thereto.vi. pound of good white wine, and chop small these
foresaid herbs, than myngle them with the wine and hu^ny, and put it into a
great pot and cover it with a lydde of tree, and close the pot with clay, and
make above in the lyd a little hole that it may have air out, and it shall
sethe till the third part be consumed, and than give the pacyent thereof to
drink at morning, and at evening a sponfull, and it shall hele him, this
drink ye shall keep in a pewter pot, or in a close vessel.

A drink that dryueth out the engyled blood through the vryne.
TAke Syndawe, Fenell, small Sauge, Persely of each an handeful, ysop, Fenel
sede, Annes sede, the rote of Mandragora of each.ii. ounces. And ye shall seth
them together in.ii. pound of water, and give the pacyent thereof to drink.

An other drink for the same.
TAke Celidonia, Permacete, Stercus de muris, and make thereof a powder, take
the rote of great Tasyl, and small Sauge leaves, of each an handefull, and seth
it in good white wine till the third part be consumed, than take a little
glass full of the same drink, and take of the foresaid powder to the quantyte
of.iii. Hasyll nuttes and meddle them together, and if ye will have it stronger,
take Charuell water, Cycoria water of each two ounces, Stercus de muris a
little meddle it all together, and give the pacye^t to drink.

An other costly drink, for a wound.
TAke winter grene, or pirola, syndaw Matrisilua, musore, water cresses, or
Genacium in latin, Brunella, small planten, of each an handefull, herba Grace,
motherworte, Celidonia, of each.ii. handefull, herba Sarasenica an handefull
and an half, Sanycle, or Diarentia in latin, Herba tunici of each an handeful,
small Sauge half an handful, Serpe^tina with diptan or Diptanum album in
latin, of each.ii. ounces, Castorie, Mumie, reed Myrre, wormwode, or Absintium
in latin of each half an ounce, put al these together i^ a pot with good white
wine, and cover the pot with a lyd and close the lyd with Doughe, and in the
lyd make a small hole, and stop it with a tap of wood, and let it seth till the
third part be consumed, and draw the tappe sometime out that ye may smell when
it is enough, of this give the pacyent to drink at morning, and at evening
a sponeful, and though the pacient be metely in health yet shall he not drink
the less, and he shall in his daily drink meddle.iii. or.iiii. drops of the
same.

An other drink for a man that has fallen, and kroken a rybbe, which drink
cleanses the breast, and causes the breath to come and go at large.
TAke crefysshes iyes in powder a dragma, Diapenidion an ounce, Diadras ganiu^
half an ounce, stamp all these together in a mortar till they be small, and
than put thereto water of our Lady adylstell, or aqua de tribulis Marie, aqua
Cicorie, or herb solsequii, and make it thynne, and give it him to drink at
evening and morning.

An other costly drink for wounds in the head, and also for all other
wounds.
TAke the mydle pyll of the walte rote, or of Ambrosia in latin, and scrape
away the blackenesse thereof, take also great Sanycle, or Diarentia mayor in
latin, of each to the quantyte of an egg, and knytte them both together in a
lynnen clothe, and lay it in a pound of wine and let it lie therein.vi. hours
long, then give the pacyent thereof to drink at evening and morning, and at
every time a sponefull and no more, for the drink is strong, and stepe a
little cloth or a cole leave in the drink, and lay it on the wound, whyther it
be in the heed, or in any other part or membre of the body.

Perditur impune Medicina homo.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer / dwelling at the sign of saint John^ Euangelyst,
in saint Martyns parysshe, beside Charynge Cross.

printer's device of Robert Wyer, featuring John the Evangelist with eagle, and
Wyer's name below (McKerrow 68 and 69) ROBERT WYER.



