A DIALOGVE, CONCERNING the strife of our Church: Wherein are answered diverse
of those unjust accusations, wherewith the godly preachers and professors of
the Gospel, are falsely charged; with a brief declaration of some such
monstrous abuses, as our Bishops have not been ashamed to foster.

printer's device of Robert Waldegrave, featuring a swan standing on a wreath,
within a border of intertwined snakes: a man's head below (McKerrow 227) GOD IS
MY HELPER
GOD IS MY DEFENDER.



AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue, 1584.

To the Christian Reader.
GEntle reader, thou art not ignorant, that in this our Church of England,
there has been a scisme for sundry years, which of late is grown so strong,
that unless the Lord look upon us in great mercy, it will in short time
bring forth a very lamentable desolation. Now, it is the part and duty of
every true-harted Christian, to do his best both by heartye prayer and
otherwise so far as his calling does reach, to succor, aid, and support that
side, which has the truth. For this consideration have I bestowed my poor
travel in writing this little dialogue. In which I have as faithfully as I
can, set down the greatest accusations, and most usual crimes, that have any
color, which are slaunderouslye cast forth, and laid to the charge of Gods
faithful messengers: with a short answer to show the vanity of the same. On
the other side, I have lightly touched as it were, the heads or fountains of
diverse corruptions, maintained by the contrary part, which are so gross and
manifest, that he which shall say he knows not of them, may well be
suspected for untruth: and he that shall defend them, must put on his
foreheade of brass. My suit unto thee, gentle reader, is no more but this,
that thou will well weigh, and judge uprightly, which part follow the steps
of the blessed Apostles, and so be the true ministers of Jesus christ. I know
right well, some will be offended at this kind of dealing, and say it is
hurtful. But unless I would be unfaithful to my Lord and master Jesus Christ,
undutiful to his poor Church, and disloyal to my sovereign prince,
whatsoever I am bound to do more, I can with safe conscience do no less, then
I have here done. Some will say these are but words, and who can not easilye
make the like pretense for any matter whatsoever. I will therefore note some
particular causes, to show the truth of my words. He that will be the
faithful servant of Jesus Christ, must stand for the maintenance of the
Gospel, and not hold his tongue when the course thereof is stayed and
hindered. But the preachers are so plentiful, will some man say, that
although here and there a few which will not conform themselves, be put to
silence, yet the course of the gospel is not hindered. I would to God a true
suruaye were made, that first all those which have faithfully labored, who^
they term Puritans, being set aside, they would take the veiw and number of
such as have great titles and rooms, and yet feed not any flocks of sheep or
lambs: and in the next place set those which apply all their great learning,
to get liuinges and dignities, not caring for souls: as namely to heap
benefice upon benefice, to seek to be Archdeacons, Deanes, and bishops: For
these seek after the things which are their own, and not the things which are
Christ's: these serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own belly: and though they
can speak like angels, yet the Church shall not be blessed by them. For they
are not sent of God, they be not the ministers of Jesus Christ, by whom he
will advance his Gospel. If ye can also number those which go under the
names of Preachers, and do either so seldom, so slenderly, and unskillfully
teach, that their people are never the better. And in the last rank place the
unable men, with those of spotted life: I warrant ye the remnant will be
Methemispar, as the scripture speaks. There shall need no Arithmetrician to
take the account. Now to the second point.

When God has prepared the heavenly Manna, and appointed to his Church that
she should eat her fill thereof, even to the fatting of her soul, to make
her lively and strong: and that her Children and babes may suck from her
breasts the sincere milk of the word: Who is there that has a mind touched
with any care of duty and service toward her, that can hold his peace, and
not complain in her behalf, when she is denied her right, in being debarred
of this heavenly bread, or at the least so stinted and scanted, that she can
scarce have sufficient to preserve life. Solomon says, that the righteous man
considers the soul of his beast, whereas the bowels of the wicked are
cruelty. A righteous man can not behold an Ox, or an Horse pining to death for
want of food, but that the mournful voice of the Dumb Beast will strike
his heart, and move compassion: and shall not the heart of a righteous man
bleed? shall not his raines prick? shall it not kindle and burst out as a
fire in him, shall he not lament with pity, when he beholds the Lady and
mistress of the world, the Lambs wife, even the very dear spouse to him
that is Lord of Lords, deprived of her daily food? Can any true Christian
man, with dry eyes look upon the leanness and palenesse of her face, the
feebleness of her joints, and weakness of her body? Her beauty should
be so excellent, and her majesty so great, that she should be a terror to
those enemies which now despise and mock her. Let them keep silence that
can, all good men will speak and speak again in her behalf: yea, even
against those bishops which do her this great wrong, and seek to destroy her
children with famine. The blessed Apostle S. Paul, whose care was as tender
over the weak ones of the Church, as the care of any mother toward the babe
that sucketh upon her breasts, 2. Cor. 11.
says Who is offended and I burn not? If there be any sparckle of his
spirit in a man, how can he but burn, beholding at this day, so many weak
ones to stumble? both men and women, young and old, in many places, which had
received some taste of the word, and began as green plants to bud being
continually watered by Apollo: Now following the drought as it were of an whote
Summer, the silver dews being restrained from dropping upon them, and the
fountains of living waters shut up, do wither away: yea, many are made to
stagger, and doubt whether it were a true gospel that was preached unto them.
For say they, if it were good, how should any learned man go about to withhold
it, or to put those to silence that publish it? For the third point, is there
any man ignorant, how manifold treasons are practiced by the papists, eue^ like
greedy bloud-houndes of hell, which thirst for the very heart blood of our
souereign Queen? what continues the^ still in hope to bring their purpose to
pass after so many repulses? Is it the goodness of their cause: no, it is the
ignorance and blindness of the untaught multitude, in which their might is
reposed. These night birds, know right well, that where the Sun shines, there
is small place for the^. Let the people be taught to know wholesome doctrine,
and they will never abide the rotten drugges of these Romish Apothecaries. Let
them see the light, and be taught out of the blessed word, that it is
damnation to those that rebel against their Prince, yea, though it be but a
disloyal mind, and no outward thing practiced. Let them feel what blessing
is come unto them, by a Christian Mother in Israel, a nurse of Gods Church,
and that they are deeply bound, not only upon their knees to power out
plentiful prayers unto God for her: but also, that it is their duty to
adventure their lives for her defense: and you shall have them far from
giving ear unto traitorous persuasions of Jesuits, and seminary Priests.
Behold, for this cause, how those that are known favorers of the Romish
Religion, do now bestirre them, to throw down the Preachers, by procuring
matters of complaint against them unto the bishops. If this dishonor be not
done unto Christ, which I have mentioned, this iniurye to his poor Church,
and danger to our sovereign Queen, by heartning and strengthening the hands
of her enemies: let this my doing be counted sedicious, as I am out of doubt,
some will not stick very maliciously to term it. But if it be as I have
said, and as many thousands with grief do behold, and can witness (by
whom let me be tried, and accounted shameless if I lie) then I crave, that I
may not be blamed for speaking in so weighty causes, but even a little of
those things which all the Servants of God ought to cry out of: But to what
purpose, or where shall there be redress fought for? O ye Bishops, even in
this, repent, repent, repent in time that GOD may have mercy upon ye. Will
ye be offended with him that shall give ye wholesome counsel? or will ye
say that ye are wrongfully charged? good counsel ye will say is never to be
rejected, then may it easily be proved, that ye stand in need of it. To let
other things pass, ought not the ministers of the Gospel to be paterns and
examples unto the flock both in wholesome doctrine and godly conversation? ought
they not to be the lights of the world, and the salt of the earth, to season
the hearts of the people with spiritual graces, and to shine unto them as
stars, that they may see the paths of life? ought they not to feed the lords
flock with the bread of life, to lead the^ into the green pastures, and unto
the streams of living waters? ought they not to seek up that which goes
astray, to heal that which is diseased, and to carry the tender Lambs in
their bosom? are your ministers with who^ ye have filled the church such? or
will ye seek for excuses to make your fault light? surely if ye do not
repent, ye cannot be saved. God does not respect the persons of men. Will ye
repent at the last, and leave the thing vnrefourmed when ye dye? what
repentance will that be? will ye make your prayers unto God, and will he hear
them? your garments being full of blood, even the blood of many souls that
perish for want of food: ye would have those that be ignorant and wallowe in
their sins to be counted Christians, that it might not be known, that the
want of teaching destroys souls. But the word of the Lord will be too
strong for ye, which teaches manifestly the necessity thereof. Are ye
ashamed to be reproved by your inferiors, when your sin is manifest? It is
a shame to continue, but no shame at all for a man to amend his fault. Do ye
count it a discredit to yield any thing at all unto those which are your
inferiors, and have also their infirmities? count it no discredit to relent
and yield unto the word of God, which is free from all impurity. Look not
upon the offenses of any that reprove ye, neither be delighted to hear
slanderous things of them: For their sins shall be no help at all to cover
yours before God, howsoever ye may make them some pretense of your doings
before men. The Lord God of his mercy open your eyes, and take pity of his
desolate people. Amen.

A Dialogue concerning the strife of our Church.
The Speakers:
Orthodoxos, a Divine. Philodoxos, a Lawyer. Philochrematos, a Bishops
Chaplain. Philedonos, an Inne-holder.
Philedonos. GEntlemen, ye be all heartily welcome; I pray you be as merry
as though your cheer were greater. If we had better, ye should have better:
but I hope ye will be content with such as God sends.


Philochrematos. Our cheer does content us very well mine host, we do thank
ye for it.


Philedonos. I could teem it were better: but surely In-keeping is cold in
sundry places over it has bin, and that causes us to make slender provision.


Philoch. How should yt be, there be as many travelers as ever there were.


Philedonos. Oh sir, I grant ye: but our chief gain hereabout does not
stand in that, I have known when a dozen or sixteen Gentlemen and wealthy
yeomen have met together, and made merry four or five days, or a week, at
cards or Bowls, as the time did serve. Now all good fellowship is laid aside,
the world is waxen stark naught.


Philochrematos. In deed that was a good help to Inne-holders, and I think it
be much left in many places, men wax more covetous and worldly, they have
not the care they had to maintain love and friendship.


Philedonos. I cannot tell whether they be more covetous: but there be so
many newfangled Preachers, it is great pity that they be suffered: they
mar all, for they destroy all good housekeeping.


Philocrematos. It is very true: I have known as much meat spent in one house
at a Christmas, as is now spente in three, a lamentable thing, the poor do
rue it.


Philedonos. They keep small hospitality themselves, and not content with
that, they preach and cry out against it in other men, I am unlearned, but yet
I think a preacher should keep good hospitality, and commend it in others.


Philocrematos. Naie ye say true, for the apostle wills them to be
harberouse. 1. Tim. 3.


Orthodoxos. Ye do not well, to soothe and uphold mine host in his evil
speeches, for he does show him self to be a very gross and carnal man: he
is al for the lusts and pleasures of the flesh, void of the true knowledge of
God, not having any taste of spiritual things, one of those which (as the
Scripture says) make their belly their God.


Philodoxos. Ye mistake mine host, ye do him great wrong, to give such severe
and sharp sentence against him: I observed and weied all his speeches, so
far as I can conceive, he uttered nothing worthy rebuke: he complains,
and I warrant ye, not without cause, ye Inholders have small resort, ye good
houskeeping is decayed, and men be newfangled and over precise, do ye not
think they are to be blamed, as those which do more hurt then good? I suppose
ye are not of that mind, but yt ye do allow Innekeeping to be a lawful and
honest vocation, then ye must also allow them, to seek such gain as that they
may live. They pay great housrent, bedding and other furniture is very
costly. In a word, they buy all things dear. How shall they be able to keep
open there doors, if it be not lawful for men to meet together, to spend
their time in honest recreation? It does nourish friendship. I am bold to
speak in defense of mine Host: If he had any worse meaning, I am deceived.


Orthodox. I do not think yt his meaning was worse then yours: neither does
that color of words which you go about to color it with all, hide the
nakedness thereof: so far off is it, from proouing his meaning or yours to
be good, having scarce a show of reason.


Philodoxos. If there be scarce a show of reason in my speech, you may the
more easily confute it. But it will be harder for you to excuse your
uncharitable and severe damning of men, then for me to maintain my saying.


Orthodox. Because I said mine Host is a carnal man, without the knowledge of
God, one that is all for the lusts and pleasures of the flesh, one of those
which make their belly their God: Ye say I do uncharitably damn men, Ye did
not hear me pronounce a final sentence upon him: But if he continue in the
case he is now in, there is no doubt. Let his own words give evidence. He
said the world is waxed stark naught, because men do not meet together, to
drinck and play as they were wont. The Prophet says, Woe be unto those which
call good evil, Isay 5.5.
and evil good. The Lord condemns drunkenness, and gluttony, Idleness,
mispending the time, vain speeches, railing, fretting, quarrelling, swearing,
coveting other men's goods, undoing and beggering Wife and Children, by spending
their substance: all these things are rife, and ouerflow among those which do
meet together at play: When the Lord says these things be evil, and mine
Host says the world is naught for learning them: Is it not plain that he is
a carnal man, and knows not God. You color it, and say Inholders sit at a
great rent, and pay dear for all things, and they must live. If you did know
or consider, how cursed a thing it is to gather gooddes by such means, you
would confess it were a thousand fold better for to beg. He says the
Preachers which cry out against such things be newfangled, is he not thereby
apparantlie known to be a belly God. You would feign help him, and ye say,
if men be new fangled and over precise: are they not to be blamed? Yes no
doubt. But you must show that it is to be newfangled and over precise, for to
publishe the holy word of God, against such filthy vices. Ye say all of ye,
that good house keeping does decay, and the poor they rue it. The house keeping
which you mean, is that confused riot, where there is abundance of meat and
drink, spent even as well as if it were cast unto the Dogs. Some rich man does
keep open house for twelve days, there gather all the idle unthrifts, even
the scum and dregs of the people: There is such reuill night and day, that if a
man that has a godly mind come in, he does think he comes into a little
hell. The good creatures of God are wasted upon most filthy persons. Some
man does loose so much at Cards, that his wife and his children do fare hardly
a month after. The poor may rue that there is more cast away in one day,
then would serve them a whole week. The Preachers they keep not Hospitality
(says mine Host) because they do not follow this order: and because sundry
have not the wealth to do it. And thus mine Host and those which be iumpe of
his religion, do cry out still to have the paunch filled. If they may have one
which will make them good cheer, though he never minister unto them any
spiritual food, yet they are abundantly satisfied and contented. But if he
bring the food of the soul never so plentifully unto them, and not able to
do the other, they make no reckoning thereof: Which does most plainly show,
that they are such as Christ spoke unto, John. 6. which sought him because he
had fed their bellies. And as for the friendship which is gotten and
nourished by meeting at play: It is small friendship when they fall to it by
the ears. If they do agree, yet the love and friendship which is tied
together with such cords, is but in the flesh, and not that holy and
spiritual love which God requires of Christians.


Philodoxos. I did demand indeed, if they be not to be blamed, which are
new fangled, and over precise, as those which do more hurt then good? I would
it were not so easy to prove as it is, that they do more hurt then good, by
being not only over precize, and new fangled: but rash and indiscreet yea
(if ye will) ungodly. And why? Because they preach against such filthy vices
and publishe the holy word of God? No Sir, that is good. Ye may not put me
to prove them therefore to be in fault. No man will say they do hurt thereby.
But this is indiscreet, and worthy blame, that while they make sharp
inuectiues against the abuses, they utterly co^demn ye things themselves which
are indifferent and lawful. Because some when they play, do fret and swear,
they will allow no man to do it: Some do for covetousness, reprove those:
Others do it to pass away the time in honest recreation, not for any hurt,
Why should they be blamed, now while they thus condemn the things them
selves, and stay not in reproouing the abuses: it causes questions and
contentions, and breach of charity among the people. This is a sore wound in a
common wealth, Where the subjects are to be kept in unity one with an other.


Orthodoxos. The Jews took up stones to stone our savior Christ, and when
he answered and said, Many good works have I showed among ye from my
father, John. 10.
for which of the^ do ye stone me? They had their excuse ready, For thy good
works we stone thee not, but for thy blasphemy, that thou being a man, make
thy self God. Such is the excuse and pretense which you and others make
against the Preachers of the Gospel, let them preach the word in Gods name,
that is good: Let them also beat down vice, we can not blame them therefore:
But we blame them that they deal rashlye, in condemning things lawful. Well,
let it be granted, that to play at cards and dice, is a thing of it self
indifferent and lawful: Yet it must (before the use thereof can be free) be
demanded whether it be expedient, If there come much hurt by it many ways? Is
it meet that men for their pleasure should use it? Will it bear us out for a
carnal recreation, to destroy the glory of God, and the bodies and souls of
men? Shall men for that little good, which they imagine to reap thereby, sow
and plant a multitude of shameful vices? But you put a difference, though some
abuse play, yet other use it rightly: Who are they which use it rightly? Are
they not the Godly and the wisest? Shall not then their example harten and
harden the other in their wicked abuses? Is not this ye common defense, such a
man is a wise man, and a learned man, he plaieth, would he play if it were not
good? thus for their pleasure they throw down the honor of god, while they give
strength unto others. We ought to forgo a far greater matter then pleasure,
rather then vice should be encouraged, and men's souls destroyed by your
occasion. It is a foolish cavil which men use against this: Many say they are
drunkerdes and gluttons: many abuse their apparel: therefore we may not eat
nor drink, nor put on clothes, if it be so, least we do bolden them in their
sin. That is nothing like, for these things are such as can not be spared:
those other may be forborne yet no man the worse, there would be no questions
nor contentions, nor breach of charity among the people for this matter, if
the multitude were not more zealous in the defense of their carnal lusts and
pleasures, then they be for the honor of God: but when ye say the preachers,
which beat down such things are ungodly, ye do therein very grosely ouershoote
your self.


Philedonos. I marvel why they should make themselves more holy then others?
I know sundry grave Divines, other manner of men then any of them be, which
will take their recreation, when time serves among their honest neighbors. I
wisse they are more precise then wise.


Orthodoxos. Indeed mine host, there be too many of those grave deuines, which
bestow mo hours upon the ale-bench, at Mumchance or at Mawe, then they do in
catechizing their people. In deed such as these, are they, by whom you are
most edified: they are other manner of men for your turn, then such as both by
doctrine and conversation overthrow ungodly riot: but I will leave you in
your wise judgment, and hear what this Gentleman will answer.


Philodoxos. I did not grossly ouershoote my self, in terming them ungodly,
if there were any grosenes, it was in your understanding, and not in my words:
for it was not my meaning that they are wicked, only because they condemn
such things: they have other faults besides that, does not the Scripture
pronounce them wicked, which disobeye their Prince, do not these utterly
refuse to obey the princes Laws? shall we term them good, when the word of
God proves them to be evil.


Orthodoxos. The pharisees reason thus against Christ Jesus, this man is not
of God, because he keeps not the sabbath: this is a most sure principle,
that he which breaks the Sabbath is not of God: they thought themselves
cocksure, that he observed not the sabbath, because he healed upon it, but
therein they erred. The papists use this, which is an vnfalllble truth
against those which profess the Gospel: they be all heretics and Sismatiques
which separate themselves from the Church of Christ: but when they should
prove that those which forsake the Church of Rome, forsake the true Church,
therein they are grauelled: the same kind of reasoning, do you and such as
you are, use against the ministers of Christ: they be wicked say you, which
disobey Princes: who denies that? the authority and power of Princes is of
God. He that resists the power, Romans 13.
resists God: and so does procure to himself damnation: But now show your
cunning in this point, to prove yt those are disobedient unto Princes, against
whom you speak.


Philodoxos. There needs no great cunning for that matter, for the thing it
self is manifest, do not the Laws of this realm command diverse things,
and are there not sundry which refuse to do them? therefore they be disobedient
unto princes.


Orthodoxos. I cannot tell how great knowledge, ye have in the law: but your
skill in Logic is small, and less in divinity, if ye maintain and hold
this for a necessary consequence or conclusion, they be disobedient unto
Princes, because they refuse to do some things which are commanded by the
law. For put case a most Godly and Christian Prince, with grave and wise
Counselors do set forth and establishe some things which agree not with
Gods word, and yet they suppose that the same things are agreeable unto the
word. For what Princes or counselors are so wise, but that they may fail in
some points? Shall a man then which does see a thing commanded by the law, to
be against the word, and therefore does refuse to do it, be counted
disobedient to Princes? Do not you know that which the Apostle teaches. Acts.
4. We must obey God rather then men? Do not you know also, that although the
thing be lawful which is commanded, and a man through want of skill, or
weakness of conscience, does fear and doubt yt the same thing is evil, and yet
does it, that he condemns himself in his deed, according to the doctrine
which S, Paul teaches. Romans 14. ver. 23.


Philodoxos. You charge me with unskillfulness, because of that conclusion which
I made. But I doubt ye will not very easily disprooue the necessity of the
consequence: for if these be not coniugata, Disobedience and to disobey, I know
not what are. You color the matter with this, that we must obey only in
things which are not repugnaunt unto Gods word: who shall be judge in these
cases, or to which part shall men give credit? All the wisest in the land, and
chief in learning do assemble in parliament, and with all the care and advise
they can, make and establish laws. Now when they have done, a few other, and
far inferior unto them, shall mislike, and undo that which they have done:
These shall take upon them to controwle the Nobility, the Judges and Bishops of
the land, and to be wiser then all they: would so many Godly learned Fathers
set out any thing that is not sound? It is very absurd, if men had any
wisdom or discretion in them, for to discern. If we shall not trust those
other, shall we trust them? why should not they be satisfied? why should they
be more precise or scrupulous, then their betters? It is a wilfulness in them.
It is pity there is no sharper punishment to compel them.


Orthodoxos. I confess that disobedience, and to disobey be Coniugata: but yet
it is easy enough to disprooue the necessity of your argument. For there is no
disobedience, but where a man refuses to obey, in things that are good: Where
God enioineth no obedience, there can be no disobedience by refusing. As for
example, some prince does command his subjects to worship Idols, or some other
thing which God does forbid them: they refuse to do it, not of stubbernesse but
of conscience toward God: will ye say they be disobedient? but you see well
enough that this weapon will not serve, and therefore ye are content to cast it
down, and to retier your self into a strong hold, as you imagine. For who
shall judge of matters whether they be according to gods word (say you) which
part shall we believe? What are ye a Papist? Ye run into the same hold that
they do when they fight. They demand in like sort who shall judge, and which
part is worthier of credit? If we shall confess your argument to be good and
sound, how shall we deny it when it comes from them bumbasted and set forth
with greater might? For when you say, all the wisest and learnedest, of
Nobility, Judges, and bishops have done it, how shall a few inferior
persons control them or be wiser then they? Will they allow that which is not
agreeable unto Gods word? Then the Papists may say, when as their religion
has been established by all the wisest Princes, Bishops, and Counselors, with
so general consent of so many ages, not of one Realm, but assembled out of a
great sort of Countries and Provinces: How shall a few (for the Nobles,
Judges, Bishops, and others in a Parliament holden in one kingdom are but a
few unto their multitude) control them? If twenty or thirty learned bishops
in one Land assembled together, can not set forth or allow any thing but that
which is good, how shall four or five hundred choice Fathers out of all
countries be ouerseene? Oh sir, if this were a good reason, the Gospel might
lie in the dust: If it be good with us, why should it not be good when the
Papists do use it? Especially when they have more right unto it, because
their multitude has been far greater. How wise you and many other which
use this argument, do take your selves to be. I pray ye did ye not use it in
the days of Queen Marie? will you refuse to go unto the mass? will you be
wiser then the Queen and the Counsel, and all the learned Bishops? Doubtless
in this point ye are very wise, that ye have laid a foundation that will bear
any frame. Ye may go through all times, and chaunges of religion. For
whatsoever a Parliament does set up, ye will have it by and by no further
examined.


Philodoxos. The general counsels of the Papists are not like the Parliament:
neither do ye well to compare them so together. For they looked to man's
inventions, but our Bishops have regarded only ye word of God.


Orthodoxos. Let that be some difference, as in deed God be blessed there is
great difference, albeit the Popish Bishops professed to do all by the word.
Yet nevertheless you must prove that thirty or forty learned Bishops looking
only to ye word of God, can not swerue in any thing from truth, before this can
follow, that no part of their doings may be controwled.


Philodoxos. Ye do not here me say that no part of their doing may be
controwled: but I say this, when so many grave learned bishops have decreed it,
shall it be controwled by a few green and light heads? Can those which are
nothing so many nor so learned, nor in no respect to be esteemed so much, see
more then they? It is like as if all the judges in the Land had agreed upon a
case, and an utter barester or one which has studied the Laws, but two or
three years; should control them.


Orthodoxos. Ye liken it as if all the Judges in the Land had agreed upon a
Case, and then a very young Studente in the Law, should take upon him to
controwle them all: when a few (as you say) green heads, refuse to do
every thing that the Bishops conclude upon. I know it is a strange thing
and incredible, that all the Judges in the land should miss in a Case, and not
be able to see that which some one of small knoweledge should see: but yet ye
must know, that the Case is not altogether like in Heavenly matters, which
men can not reach unto by study and wit, as they do unto earthly, but where God
does inwardly lighten and teach by his spirit. Now God has not tied him self
unto multitude, nor unto years, but where it pleases him to reveal: and
therefore one poor man bringing reason and authority out of the holy
Scriptures, is more to be esteemed, then ten thousand great Bishops,
standing upon their consent without warraunt of the word. The Priests in the
law boldened them selves with the like reason, to consult to strike Ieremias:
Ierem. 18.
The law (say they) shall not perish from the Priest, and counsel from the
wise, and the word from the Prophet. In like manner worldly wise men do
securely blind them selves, hanging their faith upon probability, and not
searching deeply into the matter. Again ye do falslye and untruly in your
comparison, to liken the one part as it were to all the judges in the land, and
the other to a young stude^t in the law. For, set the Papists a side, and the
multitude of learned men against whom you speak, are more in number the^ all the bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons and bishops Chaplains in this land. For ye
must look upon the faithful servant of God in other Lands. If ye respect
learning, there are none in our Land (but such as are impudent) that will
compare with some of them.


Philodoxos. Why should not we think there be as many learned men of our
land, as in any other?


Orthodoxos. God be blessed there be great learned men in our land, but yet I
doubt not but they will confess, that the Lord raised up some in other Lands,
whom he made the chief and principal Instruments to restore his Gospel, the
fruit of whose labors, does spread so far, that in all Churches, they are
famous: yea there is no one man which is a true minister of Jesus Christ, but
he has just cause to bless and praise God for them: Such was M. Luther, M.
Calvin, M. Beza, M. Tremellius and others. I know in deed there be of our
men, whom the Church might spare well enough for any good they ever did unto it,
which will not stick to compare with the best of these, and to take themselves
rather to be their superiors. Other men will so esteem of them also, when they
have approved them selves to be such faithful servants of Christ, and have
done the like good to the Church, that those other did: in the mean time
every wise man will judge as he finds.


Philodoxos. I know these whom you name are famous men, but what have they to
do with our church?


Orthodoxos. Have you got that by the end also? surely I cannot tell what other
men may judge: but in my judgment, it is a very profane and a very wicked
saying. Is there any God but one? any faith but one? any Church but one? Is not
ye whole Church in all places in the world Gods family? Has he not given
one book of the holy and sacred scriptures to teach and govern the same, and
every part thereof? Were not those me^ principal Instruments of the Lord, to
expound and open the mysteries of God unto his church? did they not teach and
declare the counsels of God only out of his word? Is our church then the
Church of Christ, and has their doctrine nothing to do with it?


Philodoxos. I know right well, that their doctrine which they teach out of
Gods word, which is the doctrine of faith, does belong indifferently to the
whole Church. Because as you say, there is but one Church, and one faith. But
in some external matters one Church may differ from an other. And in that
respect, every Church is not tied to the outward form of the Church at
Geneua, in every particular. There be circumstaunces of persons, times and
places which may make some variaunce.


Orthodoxos. One Church may differ from an other in some external matter: let
that be granted, as I know not who does deny it. Is that a sufficient cause
for men to say, what has master Calvin or master Beza or others to do
with our Church? Have not the excellent servant of God, taught that point
also by the Scriptures, which you speak off, that churches may vary in some
external matters? How then can it be said that our Church has nothing to do
with their doctrine? I do not speak as though we were to depend upon men,
further then they prove their doctrine by the holy Scriptures. But when God
has raised up special instruments, and made them lights to his people, it
must needs proceed from a vile mind to say, what have they to do with our
Church? Such men's fingers are to be looked unto, as those which are not to be
put in trust with the Spouse of Christ. For this is out of all doubt, that as
those other are manifested unto the world to be rare and special servants
of God, for the service of his son, and salvation of his people: so these by
demanding so disdainfully what they have to do with our Church, give manifest
cause of suspicion, yt they be none of Gods household. For either they must
prove that those excellent men, did not deal faithfully in Gods matters
(which they shall never be able to do) or else confess themselves to be
untrusty. Who is so foolish, but yt he can see when such as with ye mighty
power of Gods spirit have spread the light of the Gospel, and thrown down the
Kingdom of Antichrist, are rejected or little set by, that there is no
faithful mind, especially when it is by those which them selves do hurt and no
good, to the furtheraunce of men's salvation.


Philochrematos. Gentleman, by your patience, may it please you to let me
answer, not that I think you unable to confute such frivolous speech, but
because I am pricked, and can hold no longer. I would feign know who they
are whom you mean, which do hurt, and no good, in our Church. If you mean
the chief of the clergy, God be thanked your slanderous tongue is not able to
discredit them: they are well known to be grave, wise, learned, and Godly,
and therefore of all others do the most good, and the least hurt in the Church.
If ye mean the Puritans or Precisians, all wise men will agree with you: for
in deed it can not be showed that they do any good, but I am able to prove,
that they do much hurt: for they be Scismatikes, and make division in the
Church, a thing much to be abhorred of al godly minds: they are the cause that
there be so many Papists, for what makes them to be offended, and to refuse
to come to the Church, but this that we do not agree among our selves, but
these are not those whom you mean.


Orthodoxos. I see you take it in great snuff, that I said, there are which
do hurt and no good in the Church. You would know whom I mean: But it
must needs be meant (as you take it) either of the chief of the Clergy, or
else of those whom you term Puritans and Precisians. For the first ye say
they be well known to be grave, wise, learned and Godly. I suppose by the
chief of the Clergy, you mean Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, and Bishops
Chaplaynes, And so you come in the number your self, being a Bishops
Chaplain. I do suppose that the greatest part of these are grave and learned,
and it were a very lamentable thing that none of them should be Godly. I do
verilye suppose, that among these there be some which are not so drowned with
covetousness and ambition, but that they have their special care for the
advancement of Gods Gospel, and the salvation of men's souls: But will ye
therefore clear and justify all? But as for the Puritanes and Precisians, ye
say they do no good, and you can prove they do much hurt. You do also show,
wherein they be Scismatikes, and make division in the Church. They give offense
to the Papists. No doubt these be abominable vices, and those that be guilty
of them, the woe and curse of God does hang over their heads. But your bare
affirmation may not carrye away the matter, you must prove those men to be
such, whom you call Puritans.


Philochrematos. It is a sore matter which ye put me unto. I pray ye what
need is there of any further proof, when the thing is evident to all the
world? Who does not see that there is a Scisme in our Church, both among
ministers and people? Who does not see who are the cause of it? When a Church
is established, and there does arise contention therein: are those the
Scismatikes which defend the state and would have it quiet: or those which
raise up unquietness? Do the chief Prelates make the Scisme in our Church, or
the Puritanes? It is well known that they labor to have it in peace, but
these other are the cause of unquietness.


Orthodoxos. You make very light of the matter, as a thing so evident, that
there needs no proof. And to make the euidencie appear, ye take this for
your ground, that where a Church is established, those which defend the state
thereof to hold it in quiet can not be Scismatikes. On the contrary part:
those which make any unquietness to the state thereof, can not but be
Scismatikes. If ye will have no further consideration but so, then surely
master Luther, master Calvin, and others, are justly charged by the Papists
to be Scismatikes. For there was a state established: the Pope and his Prelates
were desirous to hold it in quiet. The other part ye know did disquiet it.
Yet nevertheless every one which has any true knowledge of God will
confess, that the Pope and his Cardinals are the scismatikes, and that the
other were Gods true servants. And why? He is the Scismatike which does depart
from the truth and maintain corruption, although it be with never so great
pretense of peace and quietness. For shall there be peace against God? Shall
there be peace against the truth? Shall there be peace to the destruction of
men's souls, and laying wast of the church? On the other side, shall those be
called Scismatikes, which stand for the truth, which seek the salvation of men's
souls? Ye must bring better stuff, unless ye will fight as the Papists do.


Philochrematos. This comparison which you make, is very unequal: for the
state of our Church is not like the state of the Church of Rome? We have the
Gospel established and sincerely taught, there is Idolatry and all kind of
false doctrine set forth and maintained. The Pope with his Cardinals and
Bishops be the Scismatikes, because they maintain that which is ungodly, and
go against the truth. And therefore they do lewdly and unjustly charge master
Luther, master Calvin, and the rest to be Scismatikes, which in deed set
forth the truth. And therefore I say still, they be Scismatikes which trouble
and disturb the unity and peace of that Church, where the Gospel is purely
taught. It is you that must bring better stuff, such as you are, do rather
conspire with the Papists, to reason as they do: and to fight with such
weapons as they do.


Orthodoxos. Ye do me wrong, in saying that I compare the state of our
Church, with the Church of Rome. For they maintain Idolatry and false
doctrine, as you have truly said, and we have the Gospel established and
sincerely taught. A brought in the Church of Rome, but as an example, to show
that they are not always Scismatikes which go against the state of a Church:
neither are they always to be excused as free from Scisme, which maintain
unity and peace. For I pray ye tell me, if in a Church there be foul abuses,
and such as are intolerable, as bringing hazard both to the Church and common
wealth, one part cry out against them, an other part defend and cherishe them,
who are the Scismatikes? True it is, there would be no stir, if none did
find fault. But will ye say they be Scismatikes, which do publishe the
truth, to throw down falsehood? Or will ye say those are no Scismatikes
which do withstand and fight against the truth, because they would have an
unity and quiet estate?


Philochrematos. I do grant that where there are intolerable corruptions,
those are Scismatikes which do maintain the same. Because they make a rent
from God and from his truth, howsoever they be at unity amongst them selves.
I do also confess that it is the part of every Godly Preacher, in due time
and place, and in good sort to reprove such corruptions, and although there
should be a Scisme by that means, yet they are not to be accounted
Scismatikes, for they have done but their duty. But what is this to the
purpose? Does this discharge our Puritanes from Scisme? Our Church has no such
abuses. They be but toys and trifles which they strive about. It is a great
wickedness for men to make a broyle, and strive in the Church about matters of
no importance. It were much better for them to employ them selves to teach the
people to know their duty.


Orthodox. I am fully of your mind in this point, yt it is a great wickedness
for me^ to make any broyle in the Church for trifles and matters of no
importance, the peace of the Church ought to be dear unto men. And I do not
think there is any Church which is so pure in doctrine and government, but
it has some little spots. You do also grant as much as I do require, when
ye say those are Scismatikes which maintain intolerable corruptions: and
such as reprove them do but their duty. For it must follow that some of our
chief Prelates do bring in and maintain intolerable abuses, that they be
the Scismatikes and the cause of all mischief in our Church: and then the
Precisian as you term him, does but discharge his duty in finding fault.


Philochrematos. I told ye before, and I tell ye again, and again I do
affirm it, that they be trifles which our Puritans do strive about. If you
can show any intolerable corruption which our law does establish, ye say
somewhat For our chief Prelates mainetaine nothing but the laws.


Orthodoxos. You tell me they be trifles, when I know that your tongue can tell
nothing but truth. I will believe ye. Ye would have me show any such abuse
established by our law, as is intolerable. I tell ye flatly my judgment is
this, that the very ground and substance of our laws is the word of God.
And that the very mind and intent of the law is, that whatsoever is against
God and his word, should be thrown down. And I do not take that man to
judge so dutifully, as he ought to do of his Prince and noble Counselors,
which does not think that their whole purpose was to set up Gods truth, and to
throw down wickedness: and therefore made such laws as did tend to that effect.
And also I am persuaded, that the gross abuses in our Church, are either by
neglect of the laws, or else by perverting the true meaning of the laws, by
some of those which should put them in execution. Will not you affirm that
our laws have this mind and equity in them, that nothing should be which
is against the manifest word of God, and which destroys his Church, for the
maintenance whereof in deed, our laws were established?


Philochrematos. What if I affirm that our laws have this mind and equity
in them, that nothing should be, which is against the manifest word of God,
or which destroys his Church, as in deed I do affirm? What can ye gather
thereby, but only this which makes flatlye against ye: That look how much
more Godly the laws are, so much greater is their offense in disobeying them.


Orthodoxos. That which you say is true, the more Godly the laws are, the
more is the offense of those which disobeye them. But give me leave now, to
show wherein disobedience lies, and to gather that which I perceive you do not
yet see. The law of God is absolutely perfect, both in the purpose of requiring
that which is Godly, and also in expressing the same in most perfect form.
Hereupon it follows, yt so soon as ever a man swarueth from ye law of God, in
any (...). Now when me^ come to make laws, to establishe the laws and worship
of God in any kingdom? let them be the wisest, and the lernedest, and the most
Godly in the whole world: Let the multitude of them be very great: Let their
whole purpose and care be to set forth no law, but that which in every respect
is holy. Yet because God only has this glory to be absolutelye perfect in
wisdom and knowledge: it must needs be granted that some imperfection may
be in their laws, For it is incident unto men for to err. Put case then they
in some points swerve from the truth, and it be afterward made known unto
men whom God does further lighten: Shall their conscience be tied thereunto?
If they find Gods word to go one way, and the law in some thing an other,
which think you they ought to cleave unto? Shall they say thus, they were
wise that set forth the law, we will follow them? Is not God then dishonored
and denied, when men are preferred before him? Should they not rather obey God
then men? Is it then disobedience when they refuse a commandment of men,
because they dare not disobey God? It is not for any man rashely and stubbornly
to reject laws: nor in his own wilful conceit to deprave them: but if with
a sober mind, and good conscience grounded upon Gods word, which he knows
to be against any law, he do with an humble heart refuse to obey the same
law: though men call him rebel, yet before God he shall be cleared as an
obedient man.


Philochrematos. What is all this to the purpose? who does deny any part of
that which you say. You said that the very mind of our Laws is, that nothing
should be, which is against Gods word: thereuppon I did infer, that their
offense is the greater which disobey them. I thought ye would have confuted
that and have showed somewhat, as ye said, which I do not yet see.


Orthodoxos. You do interrupt me, I was coming unto that point, I am glad ye
grant that the wisest men may fail, and that it is no disobedience in a man
that refuses to do a thing enjoined by them, when he sees it is against
Gods word. Now to the other point, you say the more Godly the Laws are, the
greater is their offense that disobeye them: I say so also: but you gather this
out of my words, when I said, that the mind and intent of our Law is, that
whatsoever is against God and his word, should be thrown down. If men did
never err, then that should always follow which you would infer? But
seeing they fail often in some points, which only shoot at that in making
their laws, to have them agree with Gods word, it is but a foolish conclusion
which you make. Now mark what follows upon this, which you do not consider:
if it fall out that they establish something which is against the word, their
mind is that the same should be established, so soon as it is espied to be
so: the more godly they are, the more is their intent that way. Then to the
purpose, you say the laws of Godly men are disobeied. I say it is not their
mind if they be godly, that any thing by them set down should be obeyed, if it
be found to be against the word of God. For this were to deny the law makers
to be godly: to say, that what soever they have once decreed, they will have it
obeyed, be it found to be agreeable to the truth, or against the truth.


Philochrematos. This is a very unwise speech, and such as would breed al
confusion. For by this means every private man shall be a Judge and controwler
of the Law. Again, the Lawmakers cannot set down any penalty to be inflicted
upon the breakers of Laws. For if this be, that the law shall be challenged
to be against the word of GOD, and therefore to have no power, even by the
mind of those which made it: then how shall those which have execution of
laws discharge their (...)? they can not dispense with the penalty of the Law:
Laws cannot be dissolved, but by the same authority that they were confirmed.


Orthodoxos. Some men take nothing to be wiselye spoken, but that which comes
out of their own mouth, and their confused mind imagines confusion where none
is. Every private man, that will be a true Christian, ought to be so well
instructed, that he know the things he does, are commanded by God: and if any
thing be commanded him by man, which in his own Conscience, he knows to be
forbidden by the word of God, it is not the law that shall excuse him in his
deed. Do you think that this is a good excuse which Athiestes make, when they
have lived in two or three Princes days, and professed contrary religions, to
say we are private men, we may not judge of Laws? but we will demand, are
private men to be Judges and controwlers of Laws? surely in that sense which
you speak, they are not, for it is a very disordered thing, that every private
man should be an open reproouer and controwler of Laws, much less may
private men take upon them to be reformers. But thus far a private man may
go, for the keeping of his own Conscience pure, he is to judge of Laws, and
humbly to submit him self to the penalty, where he sees, he may not obey,
and for the other difficulty which you make, is not the penalty against such as
do contemptuously, maliciously, and wilfully, despise and break Laws. Do not
the wise Lawmakers presuppose such executors of Justice, as shall be able to
discern, whether it be wilfully and stubbornly that refusal is made, or upon
good ground of conscience? I would to God it were not, that some executors of
Justice, did rather come nigher the breaking of their oath, by turning the edge
of the Law against such as it meant most of all to favor and cherishe: and
the back toward those whom it purposed to cut down, and that grievous
corruptions were not cloked and covered with pretense of law.


Philochrematos. If ye can not prove this, ye are worthy to smart for it. I
do not think there be any such executors of Laws. The Judges in the
Commonwealth, they be learned and wise, and as for ecclesiastical governors,
they were never more grave and learned, they be far from cloking and
covering any corruptions, as you say, with the pretense of Law.


Orthodoxos. I will not meddle with the civil Magistrates, or with their
doings. But this I will say for Ecclesiastical Judges, that horrible
corruptions pass thoroughe their Hands: Yea, such and so many, that if it
please not GOD in his great mercy to look upon us, they will lay waste the
Church, and hazard the common wealth.


Philochrematos. Ye do but slander and accuse falsely: the Puritanes are they
which destroy the Church and Common wealth: they are the Vipers which gnawe
out the Bowelles of their own Mother.


Orthodoxos. It is an easy matter barelye to affirm or deny: the worst men
of all (as the scribes and Pharisees) did accuse our Savior Christ, and
said he was a naughty man, affirming that them selves were good men. The Pope
and his Shauelinges did cry out upon Luther, and all other true Servants of
GOD, calling them Heretics, using also that very speech which you do, that
they were Vypers, gnawing out their Mothers Bowelles: But were these things
proved? no more shall you ever be able to conuynce those whom ye accuse,
nor to iustifye those whom ye commend: the Gross abuses and abominations
are so many, and withal so manifest, that he needs an impudente Face,
that shall go about to hide them. Those that do with detestation abhor the
same, those are Puritans, and precise fools. I will not do as you do, barely
affirm or deny. But I will show from point to point, that which I affirm.


Philochrematos. I am as able to prove any thing that I have said, as you are
to prove yours, and more able, or else I would be sorry, show you what ye
can against your betters, power out all your poison, and give me leave to speak
but the truth of those whom you like so well: it were good, if men would put
on quiet minds, and not be given to contention.


Orthodoxos. As men are to be most studious of peace, and to put on quiet
minds: so ought they also to strive and contend for the maintainaunce of
Christ's kingdom, when they see it trodden down, unless they will show
themselves unfaithful to the Lord: but begin, and say what ye can against
these odious Puritans, and afterward give me leave also, to tell ye that
which I know will not please ye.


Philodoxos. I see your speech does tend to this issue, to prove who are the
Scismatikes, and who do the mischief in our Church, the chief Prelates or the
Precisia^s? I like well that there should be reasons and proofs, and not bare
affirming, and denying. I will sit and hear, I pray ye proceed as ye did.


Philochrematos. The Puritanes are the vilest men that be, not worthy to live
in a common wealth, because they are sedicious and troublesome, and make strife
among the people: yea they teach men to be disobedient. I think this is enough
against them, if they had no other faults.


Orthodoxos. For the term Puritan, I doubt not but you give it unto those,
whom it is commonly given unto every where. And that is, if a man have lived a
foul and dissolute life, and begin to look a little toward the fear and
service of god: By and by, O sir you are become a Puritan. If God have any
Church or people in the land, no doubt the title is given them. And therefore
no doubt, Satan taught this Rethorik to the first deviser thereof against men
in our time. But let the name go. In deed that which ye say is enough
against them, and a great deal to much if it were true. Let us have it
proved. What example can ye bring in any one place of this land where any
sedicion has been moved by these men? Show by the effect in some one place,
that which ye do so boldly charge them withal.


Philochrematos. What need I bring any particular, or name any one place,
when the thing is so general? Do not the people flock after them every
where, out of many Towns, sometimes seven miles off? If this be not disordered
and a sedicious thing, I know not what ye will take to be sedicious. Is it not
a factious thing, that the people are affectioned to some men, and care not for
hearing other? Is the word of God better out of one man's mouth, then of an
other? No, no, they make the people fantastical, it is but a vain humor in
them.


Orthodoxos. Ye say the thing is so general that ye need not stand upon
particulers. And for proof ye say, do not the people flock after them
every where? What do they flock after them to make a tumult, or to commit
any sedicious fact? your own wicked conscience does know, that it is to no
such purpose, but to be instructed in the word. But it is a disorder, that men
should come seven miles to a sermon. Are not these woeful days, wherein a
multitude have even as it were conspired together to famishe and sterue the
people of God. The most places have no teaching at home, and they will not
suffer them to seek abroad, but would keep them still in ignorance and
blindness: and under pretense of order, their souls must perish. Ye do
even as the Priests and Pharisees did against Christ and his Apostles. For
when he taught, the people were as sheep without a sheepeheard, and therefore
flocked out of all quarters to hear him. And when they delivered him unto
Pilate, they accuse him as a sedicious person, which moved or stirred up the
people, teaching through all Iurye, beginning at Galile, even unto that place.
Luke. 23. verse. 5. Thus Christ was sedicious, because the people flocked to
hear him. Me thinks you and such as you are, should blush when ye make the
same accusation that the Priests and Pharisees did against Christ. Came it
from the father of lies in them? Who comes it from in you? S. Paul carried
abroad the glorious Gospel: the people flocked to his preaching where he came,
and were instructed in the way of life. And what says the Orator Tertullus,
being the mouth of the high Priest and the Elders before Felix, against S.
Paul for this matter Act. 24. ver. 5. Certainly we have found this man a
pestilent fellow, and which moves sedicion among all the Jews thorough the
whole world. Men may see, that this is no new practice of Satan, to accuse the
Preachers of the Gospel to be sedicious. When Christ Jesus him self, and his
blessed Apostle Paul could not be free from this accusation, who shall look
to escape? But you color the matter and say, the people are fantastical and
factious, addicted to hear some, and not othersome, according to their vain
humor. With this accusation of the people, ye bear your self in hand ye
have won the field. But who does not see (that has any judgment) how the
people are so scanted of teaching, that if he be a man of good life, they will
go a great way to hear him, though he be but a mean Preacher. It is true
in deed which you say, they care not for hearing some. For why? they teach so
that a man can be never the better for them. Others are of such evil life,
that they esteem not their doctrine, for what power can it have? Some will
utter such lies and slanders against others even out of the pulpit, that every
man may see their falsehood. Call ye this a fantastical humor in the people,
when they care not for hearing such?


Philochrematos. Ye deal uncharitably and unchristianly, (I tell ye
plainly) in making any comparison between us, and the Priests and Pharisees
which went against Christ and his Apostles: these do profess Christ as well
as your self. And where as ye would excuse the people: I know they are
fantastical, and even to please their humor, they will hear but who^ they
like: such a man has the spirit, let us hear him: such a man has not ye
spirit we care not for him: such a man is a sound Preacher, where preaches
he? As for such and such there is no edifiyng in their sermons, they cannot
convert men,


Orthodoxos. I compare the facts and not the men, and if you can show such
difference therein, let it be seen. If a man reprove an open and manifest sin
in any of you, by and by it is uncharitably done. In the mean time in your
selves it is very good charity, to utter what ye lust against those whom ye
can not detect. And for the people in making choice of those which teach: for
those respects which you mention, are you a divine and not ashamed to open
your mouth against that? Have ye lost all sense of religion, or do your
corrupt affections carry ye against your conscience? I pray ye do not the
true Preachers preach by the power of Gods spirit? As Saint Paul speaks of
his own preaching 1. Cor. 2. ver. 4. Do ye imagine that every one which
preaches does come with this power? No, you know full well there be unmeet
preachers. Is not I pray ye, the use of preching to convert men's souls? Do ye
think God has not his messengers whom he sets about this business? Or do
ye think that all kind of preaching does convert souls? You know there are
some which have small skill, how to minister wholesome food unto men's souls,
which can occupy a pulpit an hour or two with fine tales and Fables, and
pretty iestes to make the people laugh: surely he bewraieth him self to be a
gross Dunce, which finds fault with the people in these things, it argues
that he never knew what it was to have his own soul converted.


Philochrematos. Naie, why do ye not speak of those that preach the Law, and
do nothing but thunder, and terrify men's Consciences, and bring them into
despair: they should preach Christ and bring the glad tidings of the Gospel
to comfort men: this makes strife among the people, and makes them factious:
for one is ready in every thing to controwl another, ye may not do this, ye
may not do that: this is against Gods commandments: in this ye sin: and
so where there was love and friendship, and good Neighberhood before, now there
is contention and part-taking, this is the Fruit of their preaching every
where, and yet forsooth these men are they, which do most good: these are
they which convert men's souls: this is a wicked preaching, and as I said
before, so I say still, they be seditious.


Orthodoxos. Our savior Christ did preach both the Law and the gospel, Math.
5. And ye may see his Apostles did every where: the Law is the rule of
righteousness, expressing the holy and pure will of God. When it is preached
and expounded, men by it come to the sight of themselves: and the more they
understand the depth and pureness of the Law: the more they espy their own
uncleanness, cursednesse, and miserye: and so are forced to renounce
themselves, and to cleave unto Jesus Christ. Before they come to this, they
can feel little sweetness in the Gospel, but are as men which are whole,
and therefore need not the Physician: and for this cause the Law is to be
preached strictly. And again, when men are brought to the knowledge of their
own nature, and also to the faith in Christ, then are they to walk in all
obedience unto God. They must renounce and forsake ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and live soberly, righteouslye, and Godly in this present world. Tit.
2.12. The law is the rule to show the evil which we must eschew, and the good
which we must follow. And in this respect also, the law is continually to be
urged. If men preach nothing but the law, to thunder and to terrify men's
consciences, and to bring them into dispaier, and show them not the comforts of
ye gospel, the^ they do evil. But you do falsely slander the Godly Preachers,
and maintain a very wicked and horrible opinion, which is, that the law should
not be preached. And therefore out of many pulpits, a man may hear these
voices: O these Precisians and Puritans they preach the law. The law is
abolished, and must not now be preched. And then some great Rabbi stands
glorying, as it were in contempt of ye law, I preach the Gospel, and this I do
every where. We come and entreat and beseech ye. These fellows that do so
tauntinglie reprove ye, are not sent of god: they be not white doves which
come from God, but black Ravens which come from Hell, good people do not hear
them, when they preach thus. Thus they flatter the people in their sins. This
is a most filthy seducing of men's souls unto destruction. For under the color
of preaching the Gospel, that all are sinners, and shall be saved by Christ,
they do utterly abolishe sanctification, so they say they believe in Christ,
it is enough, howsoever they live in blindness, and all kind of ungodliness,
their conscience must not be troubled: and I pray ye what is the cause that
they teach thus? they are of a loose and dissolute life them selves, and
therefore they bear with the wickedness of the people, that they may bear
with them. But you show a reason why the Law must not be preached: it causes
strife and dissension among the people, and why? forsoothe when the Law is
taught, then every man can espy when his neighbor does sin, and then will
admonish and reprove him, and when he can not abide it, there grows strife,
and part-taking. Are not men commanded to admonish and reprove one another
when they do amiss. Math. 18. verse 15? Are not those men to be counted very
ungodly, which refuse to be reproved? yea are they not become brutishe, which
when they are admonished for foul sins, they are at defiance with those that
admonish them, and then cry out, there is no love? men must flatter them, and
be partakers with them, in all their abominable vices, which we are commanded
to have no fellowshippe withal: but rather to reprove them. Ephe. 5. ver. 11.
or else all love is gone: and are not those very seducers, and false
Prophets, which nourishe ungodly men, and harden them in this evil? and like
deep Divines they cry out, where these Puritans are, there is contention. I
thank God all my Parishioners are at unity and love together, using good
Neighberhood one with another, except it be two or three precise fools, which
will not do as their honest Neighbors do: and let a man look upon their
Parishioners, and he shall find no knowledge of God among them, but all
wicked vices, in which they love and agree together: their lives and the lives
of their teachers are alike, and this is the thing they glory of: a cursed
unity and a wicked love, which is in the flesh, and yet those that seek to
bring men from these vices are seditious and do hurt, because ungodly men can
not abide the light, but do raise up contention.


Philochrematos. Ye show your self more and more to be uncharitable, even as
all the pack of ye are, to cry out against your brethren, and your betters,
that they destroy men's souls, that they be seducers, and false Prophets: how
will you be able to prove that they seduce, or that they be like the false
Prophets? this does show what spirit ye be of. Ye have taught your tongues to
slander. Such as you, do bewitch the people, and are false Prophets, a
company of Asses and dolts.


Orthodoxos. When other men speak the truth, they be uncharitable, but when
you do lie and slander, and rail, yea even in the pulpit, Asses, dolts,
cockescombes, cockadodles (for this is the Rethorike of diverse of ye) yet you
are still charitable, and grave wise fathers. I know it is necessary it
should be proved, who are seducers and false prophets. For this ye shall
find, that among the Jews, those that were false prophets, did call the true
Prophets seducers. This ye may see between Ieremias and the false Prophets.
Likewise Mychaiah 1. Kings. 22. is counted a false Prophet. We say the
Papists are seducers and false Prophets. They say the like of us. But the
trial is all. And how shall we try this matter? Surely even by the qualities.
Those are the false Prophets and seducers, which deal so with the people, as
the false Prophets did in the old time. The children of Israel were
marvelous wicked walking in all kind of vices, despising the holy word of
God: When the Lord sent his Prophets unto them, calling upon them to forsake
their wicked ways, and to turn unto the Lord, threatening the judgments
and vengeance of God unless they did return: The false Prophets labored
as fast on the other side, to flatter them, and to make them believe they were
in good case. The Lord complains of them Iere. 23.14. That they strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that they should not return every one from his
evil. And a little after in the same Chapter he shows how. They say unto
those that despise me, the Lord has said ye shall have peace: and to every
one that walks in the stubbernesse of his own heart, they say, there shall
no evil come upon ye. Mark well if it be not so at this day among us:
Wickedness abounds most horriblely. When the Godly Preachers do vehemently
threaten vengeance, unless they return: Are there not by and by others that
step up, and find fault that men should be threatened with Gods judgments? God
is merciful (say they) we must preach the Gospel. Ye be Christians, all men
are sinners. Yea, they tell those that are drowned in all wickedness, and
which despise the word of God: ye be Christians: ye be honest men, and good
subjects: Those that find fault with ye, do judge, and therefore are
deuilishe. Is not this to strengthen the hands of ye wicked, that they should
not return from their wickedness: to bear them in hand they be good
Christians, and shall do well enough? Look in Ezechiel chapter 13. ver. 22.
They make the heart of the righteous sad by lying, whom I would not make sad,
(says the Lord) and strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wickedness. Who does not see, that this kind of false
Prophet is among us every where, which does in Sermons seek to deface such,
as have care to embrace the holy word, in such sort that it can not, but make
sad the heart of every good man to hear it. And how much are the wicked
encouraged and strengthened by such Sermons? Ye shall see them even skippe for
joy. Here is one (say they) which does fetch up these Gospellers, these
gadders to Sermons: This is a grave man, this is a learned Doctor. Also look
in Micah Chapter 2. ver. 11. If a man or one that lies, prophecy unto thee,
of wine and strong drink, he shall be the Prophet to this people. The false
Prophets sought that way to please the wicked belly Gods of the world, which
were given to follow their lusts and pleasures. And what say our Prophets? Ye
may go to the Alehouse and drink and be merry together, ye may dance, ye
may play at Cards and bowls upon ye Sabbath day, ye may recreat your
selves, ye have freedo^ in Christ, they seduce and bewith men, that do
refrain them, as though men needed to be encouraged to such pleasures.


Philochrem. Nay those are false Prophets which teach the people disobedience,
and such are these Puritans: they will not obey laws, and by their example
they teach the people disobedience.


Orthodoxos. There is no doubt but those are false Prophets which teach the
people disobedience. And as for the Puritans, their doctrine and practice is
this: That men must obey ye higher powers under pain of damnation: but when
any thing is commanded which is against gods word, we must obey God rather then
men. This doctrine is to be taught and practiced in the days of most Godly and
most christian Princes. If this be to teach the people disobedience, I can not
tell what to say. I fear me, it will be found, that many of those which boaste
and brag of obedience, having in their mouth nothing but obedience, obedience,
even as if they were obedience it self, do break mo laws, and the same of
greater importance, the^ those who^ they charge so deeply: and ye by ye same
means, gods glory is trode^ down, the Church laid wast, and men's souls
destroyed, dangerous enemies to the Prince, and state of the common wealth,
bred and nourished.


Philochrematos. It is the property of ye all, to be full of accusations
against others, and especially against your betters, this is your deuilish
spirit, when ye are not able to prove that which ye say. It is greatly to be
wished, that there were severe punishment for such slanderous tongs, which are
so bold to find fault at their pleasure, and to control such as be in office
and authority. For, by this means the people and al are drawn on, to prattle
and talk of matters which belong not unto the^: A lamentable case, what
disorder is brought in by ye, whereby God is dishonored, his Church troubled,
and men's souls destroyed, and the Papists bred and nourished, and when all this
comes to pass, ye would shift it from your own shoulders, and lay it
upon others. But all wise men do see well enough where the blame is to be laid,
and do lament it. I am loath to spend many words, let us hear some of these
things proved.


Orthodoxos. The end will show who be slanderers, and who they are which are led
with a deuilish spirit. It greeueth ye sore that ye are spoken of, especially
by the people. Ye wish there were severe punishment for slaunderers. Why is
this, because ye hate slaundering? No but ye would not have any so much as
whisper of those gross things which are amiss in ye. The people must be like
dumb Asses, they must bear all at your hands, and say never a word: yea
even when it comes to the hazarding and loosing of their souls. Ye can in
no wise abide that the people should have any skill in the holy Scriptures,
for fear they should espy somewhat in such as you be. It is a pitiful case
(as you think) that the common sort should know, what manner of men Ministers
ought to be, and what they should do: For now ye cannot fail in your duty,
but every plain man is able to control ye by the word of God. If the common
people should be in danger of loosing their possessions, their goods or their
lives, ye would say it stood them in hand to speak and to plead hard for
themselves, and it were a great injury to deny them to speak: how much more
does it stand them in hand think ye, when their souls are in danger not to
hold their peace? You require to have some thing proved of that which I spoke.
Ye cannot deny, but that the feeding of the sheep of Christ, is one of the
waightiest matters under heaven, and which our savior requires at ye hands of
ye ministers, even as they love him: For so he says to Peter: Love thou me?
Love thou me? Love thou me more then these? Feed my lambs, feed my
sheep, feed my sheep. Ioh. 21. ver. 15. As if he should say, my sheep and
lambs, which I leave in the world, are so dear and prescious unto me, that of
all love, I request thee to feed the^. Now because the life of his sheep, and
tender lambs, even the life of those souls which he bought with his blood,
does depend upon the sincere food of the word, in which they are continually
to be fed: he has appointed shepherds, which shall always attend upon them,
to lead them into the green pastures of the word, and unto the lively springs
of water, and that shall defend them from wolves, and other cruel beasts which
would devour them: these must not be blind guides: these must not be hierlinges:
these must not be Idol sheepheards, dumb dogs, greedy dogs, ravening wolves,
nor unsavory salt: but faithful disposers of the mysteries of God: wise
embasadors of the great king, to open and declare his counsels unto men:
paternes and examples of al godliness for others to follow, for such the
scripture appoints. According unto this most holy ordinance of god, our law
does require they should be learned and godly. Is this ordinance of God, or
this law kept among us? Are there not a rablement of ungodly and unlearned me^
appointed to be guides over the flock of Christ? Is there not less account
made of the souls of gods people, then men make of their hogs? Are there not
in sundry places poor sely creatures which were Popish priests, that a man
shall hardly find any so simple in all their parish, such as could hardlye
live: as serving men, banckrupts, and unthrifts, have they not knocked at the
gate, and bin let in? Tailers, sadlers, shomakers, and other handycrafts men
that could scarce read english before, are they not consecrated, and become
masters in Israel? A multitude of such as are idle, and cannot endure to take
any pains, but love to play at bowls, cards and tables a great part of ye week,
and to be at the alehouse drinking among good fellows, have found the
ministry ye fittest place to serve their turn. For their chief work is
upon the Sunday to read an Homely, and then he has preached as well as he that
studied hardest all the week. Are there not drunkerds, adulterers, and men
spotted with many foul vices in this holy function? Who are to be blamed,
that Gods name is thus dishonored, the Church laid waste, and men's souls
destroyed?


Philochrematos. I confess there is some fault this way that you speak of: But
you and your fellows deal very lewdly and wickedly diverse ways as
concerning this matter. For first of al, ye blame those which are least to be
blamed, that is to say, the reverend Fathers the Bishops, they can not do
with all, the Patrons do present them with commendation, if they be not
admitted, they will have their quare impedit. Secondly, ye are like evil
birds which defile their own neast. If there be such faults in the ministers,
it were your part, even for the calling sake, to cover and hide them, and not
to blase them abroad as your manner is. Thirdly, your uncharitable dealing is
not to be borne when ye will rail against them, calling them dumb dogs;
hierlings, Idol sheepheardes and I know not what: they be men, they be
Christians, they be your brethren. If there were any Godliness in ye, ye
would not so handle them. They have Wives and Children, what, would ye have
them beg? Surely I think ye would. This is your pitiful mind toward
other men. We may see what it is when men will seem to be so zealous, and yet
have no love in them. Read the 13 chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinths, and ye shall see what account is to be made of men, though they
have great gifts, and can speak like Angels, and yet have not love. Love does
cover the multitude of sins: But such as you, are so far from covering,
that ye make things worse then they are.


Orthodoxos. It is well ye confess there is some fault that way. I never
spoke with any yet, that would not affirm the same. There be many yt are grown
to great impudency, but yet dare not for shame say otherwise then you do, ye
matter is so evident this pot has so wide a mouth, yt ye can find no potlid
good enough to cover it. But yet there want no shifts, and excuses in
readiness: those are wicked and lewd still, that find fault: First, because
they blame those, which are least of all to be blamed: for ye say they must
admit such as the Patronnes do present: do ye think all men are become
stark Fools, that ye may abuse them, and make them believe what ye lust? I
pray ye who made them ministers? Doubtless if the Patrons laid the Eggs, yet
it must be confessed, that the Bishops have hatched the whole brood of these
untimely Birds. If they at the first offended of ignorance, why have they
not lamented this horrible and dreadful sin, and sought redress? If the
Devil him self should be consulted withal, to know which were the
readiest way, to throw down ye gospel: I think he would say this if he should
choose: I suppose he would send a great number of those that are already
sent, they shall never be able to recompense this foul injury, done to Gods
people. Secondly, ye preachers are like birds as you say, that defile there
own nest, because they rebuke ye sins of the ministry. Ye know not how far
this reaches, and against who^ ye shoot this bowlt. Did not the prophets
reprove the wickedness of the priests? did not our savior Christ lay open ye
quailities of ye scribes and pharisees? Did not ye apostles paint out wicked
teachers in their colors. It is ye part of Gods servants to rebuke ungodliness,
in who^ soever they find it. The calling of ye ministry is an high calling:
for they are in Christ's stead to exercise that office, yt he him self did when
he lived upon earth. They are put in trust with the souls of men, which are the
price of his blood: but yet it does not follow, ye for this calling sake their
vices are to be covered It is a vile speech. For the more excellent and
prescious the calling is, the less are they to be borne withal, because they
dishonor and deface the same. Who will esteem the ministry of the Gospel to
be so high and excellent an office, or to be of any weight, when he shall see
the very riffraff of the people, worse then Ieroboams Priests taken in, and
admitted as meet men? Are such fit to succeed the Lord Jesus, and to have the
charge of souls? How fearful shall their reckoning be before the high Judge,
that have put them in, and maintain them? Do they not dishonor the Son of
God, and never repent for it? Are not their hearts hardened, and blinded in this
beastly sin? Ye say moreover, that it is uncharitable dealing to rail
upon them, and to call them dumb dogs, Idol sheepheardes, hierlinges, and
such like. Was the prophet Isay uncharitable, or did he rail, when he called
the idle unskillful Priests, dumb dogs? Or when he called the covetous
Priests that sought after their own gain, greedy Dogs, Chap. 56. ver. 10?
Is this unlawful now, which was lawful then? Our savior faith they be
thieves and murderers which were before him, because he is the door, John.
10. All that he sends come in at the door. Those whom he sends not (as in
deed he sends none but such as are fit) may well be called thieves and
murderers. For they take the hier and destroy the souls of men. When they
have showed repentance for these grievous sins, they may be esteemed as
brethren, and Christians. They have Wives and children, would ye have them
beg? A pitiful case. But I pray ye, is it not a thing much more miserable,
that so many thousands of souls should perish, because some may not beg.
Ye are even made for this life, and can see no further. But why need they beg,
let them to their occupation, if they be strong, if not, let them be relieved.
You that are so charitable and pitiful unto the Idol ministers, which have
done so much hurt, a man would think ye would have a singular care of such as
have painfully labored in ye gospel, yt their children beg not: still ye call
for love, that covers the multitude of sins. Love does cover sins where
repentance is, and does forget them, but our Savior wills to reprove him yt
offends, and if he repent not when it is showed to the church, he must chunt
him as an heathen man: but you would have ye love, which should shake hands
with all kind of ungodliness, and bear with it. yt which ye scripture speaks of
love, does nothing at all make for your turn, seeing it is to hate a man, when
one sees him walk in sin, Leuit. 19.17.
and does let him alone, and not reprove him.


Philochrematos. Ye say we have shifts in a readiness. We have them not so
ready as you have your wicked and diuilishe accusations. You might use better
and more seemelye speech; but yt your mouth does speak out of the abundance
of the heart. Such as ye are, such are your words You would make men believe
that the Devil him self could do little worse, for the choosing of ministers.
Let the world judge who have most to do with the devil, and who best serve his
turn: this does bewray what spirit ye are of. They be more learned; wise, and
Godly, against whom ye speak, the^ are meet to be judged, and co^trolled by
such as you. If there be so great offense committed in making ministers, as you
say there is: yet it is not the part of inferiors to meddle and to find fault
with their governors, it is a saucines in them, they are not to reform, the
redress must be public authority. When ye cry out against the poor ministers
calling the^ dumb dogs, and so deal unchristianly and unbrotherly, then ye
prophet Isay is your defense. Can ye tell what manner of men they were who^ he
called dumb dogs, and greedy dogs? ye will follow Isay ye prophet and be like
him, have you his spirit? Why do ye not admonish privately, and so ye should
do less hurt, and show your selves more charitable? Is not the calling
brought into contempt, when the ministers are openly defaced? Are not men's
infirmities therefore rather to be covered, and spared, then that should
happen? Ye do more hurt that way with one sermon, then ye are able to do good
with an hundredth: For ye do not only make the ministry to be despised,
but also make those to be evil thought of which made them, and bring the people
into unquietness. For how can they tell when they see the ministers strive,
what to believe, or what to follow? Again, when those are little esteemed,
which are in countenance and honor, how shall the rest of the ministry be
esteemed? yea, how shall the Gospel it self be esteemed? Thus do you mar al
under a pretense of zeal in reproouing sin. Ye are the most unprofitable of
al other in the Church: and therefore the first that are to be cut off.


Orthodoxos. If those accusations be wicked and deuilish, which are against
most foul and monstrous abuses, for the defense of the cause of Christ: then
are mine wicked and deuilish. But how wicked and deuilishe a thing is this,
that he which finds fault with that which God does manifestlye condemn in
his word, is counted wicked and deuilish: but he which is a false accuser, in
defense of any corruption, ye same man is allowed. Woe be to them that call good
evil, and evil good: darkness light, and light darkness. Ies. 5. Has not
God ordained, that faithful and wise sheepeheardes shall feed his flock, and
defend them from the wolf, and bring them to life everlasting? Does not the
word of God show, that where such are wanting the flock does perish, and go
to destruction? Do you think then, there can be any readier way for the devil
to throw down the Gospel, or to destroy the church, the^ to famish men's
souls? By what way are men led to Hell more readily, then to be left in their
blindness, and in their sins? Is not the readiest way unto this, to set blind
guides, and such as may lead the people unto all ungodliness? Can the Devil if
he did make, and send forth ministers, find worse upon the earth, then sundry
are? I think if he will have worse, he must bring them from hell. The world
sees this, and does wonder. The lord God open the eyes of those which made
them, that they may see, and be ashamed, and repent. But you say, if there be
such offense in making ministers, yet inferiors are not to meddle, it is a
sawcines in them, it is public authority, that must refourme. No deubt it is
public authority that must refourme. But what then? Are the ministers of
Gods word when they publishe his will, become saucy? Shall the great God,
whose messengers they are, be dishonored, his church laid waste, and his
people destroyed, because they must respect persons? Do not you know that God
sends his servants even unto high and low, to reprove them when they do
amiss? You show your self to be proud and saucy against God, that ye will
have his word give place unto mortal men. Were not the most of the Prophets
inferior persons, and yet they reproved openly the high Priests, when they
did degenerate, and spared not any of what degree soever? The Pope and his
Bishops can challenge no more, then to do what they lust, and that without
controlement, of any but them selves, which affirm that the power to redress
things is only in their hands. We may not give those titles unto evil
ministers that the Prophets in the scriptures do. And why? Because we have not
the spirit of the Prophets. This is as deep deuinitie as any that ye could
dig out of the bottom of a Dunghill. I pray ye what Spirit shall the
Preachers of the Gospel be furnished with all, if not with that holy Spirit
of God, which the Prophets spoke by? Is there an other holy Ghost? In deed
the Prophets had great and extraordinary gifts of the spirit to do that
which we cannot. But does it therefore follow that we may not reprove sin as
they did? It is one principal part of the duty of the Teachers, where in
they are to follow the steps of the Apostles and Prophets. The offense is
public and open every where, and yet men must be restrained from speaking
publicly against it. But you show diverse great hurtes that ensue by open
reproouing this matter. The ministry, ye say is brought into contempt by this
means, and it were much better men's infirmities were covered, then that should
happen. As though the true ministry could be brought into contempt, by
reproving that which is corrupt? It should rather be considered, that it
should bring them into contempt with god, and all Godly men, if they should
not reprove them. For then they might seem to shake hands with them, and to
allow their ungodliness, and not to care how this high calling be defiled by
laying it upon vile persons, they might also be thought not to pity ye souls
of men? do not you see, that if fools which are base, beggarly, and uncivil,
and of lewd conversation should be made Judges, it would be the greatest
disgrace to the office that might be? The hurt rests not you show, in
defacing the ministry, but reaches unto those that made them. In deed it is
their discredit which made them, And that is the cause why the true teachers
are hunted and tossed about. For if they preach against the insufficiency of
any of the ministry, or against their lewd life which all see? Then they post
up, and carry news. My lord, such and such preach against your Lordship. I
warrant ye those teachers shall have as much a do to defend them selves, as to
teach their people. But this is that which does mar all, when those that be
of honor, are by any means brought into contempt: For they do countenance
the Gospel and ye ministry, and were it not for them, the Gospel should be
little esteemed, nor the ministers thereof. Alas, is the glory of the Gospel
no greater, nor the dignity of the ministry no more, but that they must ebb
and flow, with the worldly honor and glory of some men. How unwise do ye
take our Savior Christ to be, that he laid his glory a side, and took upon
him the shape of a Servant, Phil. 2.6.
that he might be a minister of the Gospel? How unskillful was he in choosing
such simple men to be his Apostles, as had no glory to countenance the
matter? He might have come with greater pomp. But he says, My kingdom is
not of this world, John. 18. verse 36. Saint Paul says, The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty in God. 2. Corinthians. 10. If that were a
good reason which you make, then were it a special matter, that there should
be as great glory and pomp in the ministry as ever the Pope and his
Cardinals had. For the same reason set them up at the first. No, no, the
dignity and estimation of the ministerye does consist in the power of Gods
spirit in them. 1. Corinthians. 2. verse 4. This spirit does always cause those
ministers to be had in great reverence in whom he speaks, although they be
never so base in outward appearaunce, as Paul was. Contrariwise, let a
minister of the Gospel glister in Gold, and sit so high in glory and power,
that his feet be above the heads of Emperors and Kings, yet nevertheless
he shall be vile, and even stincke in the nostrels of men, being void of the
power of the spirit, which is the furniture of a right minister. For God
says, I will honor those that honor me, and they that despise me, shall be
despised. 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30. And what says the Lord by the Prophet Malachy
unto the Priests Chapi. 2. verse. 9? Does he not tell them, that because they
departed out of the way, he had made them despised, and abject unto all the
people. Then ye see it is God that brings such as be of great dignity into
contempt, because they degenerate: ye say the people are unquieted, because
they can not tell whom they may believe. It is a lamentable thing yt they have
in these days been kept in such blindness, that they can not try ye
Spirits, 1. John. 4.1. John. 10.
nor are not able to know the voice of Christ, or at the least can not see who
walk after the word of God, and who do not.


Philochrematos. I grant it is a ready way to destroy the Church, where men's
souls are famished. Who goes about any such matter? God be thanked, the word
was never more plentifully set forth. They need not famish, for where they
have not a Preacher, yet they have the Scriptures read unto them in their own
language: they have Prayers and Homelyes, as good as any can be made. There
be many good Books, they may read, or hear them read: but such as you,
that condemn reading, are those that famish men's souls, if any do. Ye are
ungodly, and utter enemies to men's souls, when ye will lead them from the
Scriptures unto your expositions: as though they could profit by hearing and
reading youres, and not by the reading of the Bible. Where there be blind
guides and hirelings, the people perish, no man does deny that: you say many of
the ministers be such, I say they be not: for they set out the word and
Sacraments, though not by their own learning. But let it be granted, that
some of them be blind guides, yet the people need not perish, for there be
others that watch over them, besides the ministers, the Bishops and
Archdeacons: these are not blind, but have their sight better then the
Puritans. O, but these can not suffice, with all their learning and Godliness
to guide the people, and to keep them in good order, but forsooth every
congregation must have one to preach unto them: this were good, but where will
ye have them? if ye can find men, where are the livings that shall maintain
them? will ye have Preachers to live with ten pound, or twenty pound a
year, surely ye are very Doltes, and would have ye know not what. I
would you could see your own folly, which very Children do see, that ye
might be ashamed, the people are well if ye could let them alone, and are
come from Popery. But if they be not Puritans, by and by ye enter into
judgment against them, and condemn them to be Athiests and wicked men, yea,
to be reprobates, and for this cause ye cry out, the people perish, men's
souls are famished and murdered for lack of preachers: are not the people
(which you say perish and go to destruction) Christians? do they not at their
end call upon God, confess their sins, and hope to be pardoned by the death
and bloudshedding of Christ? how then dare you be so wicked and
presumptuous, as to judge of them, that they be damned? Will you enter into
Gods secrets? I think better of such honest poor men, which are dutiful
subjects, and live quietly, though they have no teaching, then of such as you:
the state of our church would be better, if all were such, because there should
be more quietness, then there is now.


Orthodoxos. If ever there were any time, in which the words of our savior
Christ were verified, when he says, If it could be possible, the elect
should be deceived, it is now: there be such goodly shows and colors made
and set upon matters, to hold the people contented in their ignorance: for
what is proclaimed now? and under what do those that destroy the Church,
shrowde them selves, but the Gospel, the peace of the Church, obedience,
learning, gravity, and Godliness: All these are most excellent things, and
therefore when they come but for a cloak (as they do unto many which have not
the use and benefit of them) the danger is ye greater. Ye say the people
need not famish the gospel is so plentifully set forth? what preached? no
that is but here and there. How then? that which is as good as preaching: the
scriptures are read in their own tongue, with homilies and prayers, as good as
any can be made. There be also many good books: yea sir, but what says the
holy Apostle. 1. Cor. 1. ver. 21. he says, It is the pleasure of God to save
those which believe by foolish preaching. Will ye not give the Lord leave to
save that way which it pleases him? or will ye prescribe him an other, that
shall be a wiser way? Faith comes by hearing, and how shall they hear without
a Preacher? Rom 10. the Priests Lips must keep knowledge, and they must
seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.
Mala. 2. verse. 6. Those things which thou haste heard of me among many
witnesses (says the Apostle unto Timothy) the same commit unto faithful men,
which may be meet to teach others. 2. Tim. 2. verse. 2. You see then, Gods
pleasure is, to work faith and to save by preaching: his ordinance and
appointment is, that skillful, wise, and godly pastors shall feed his flock:
they must instruct and teach the^ in the mysteries of ye gospel, and lay open
unto them all the counsels of God, They must preach the word and be instant,
in season and out of season, they must convince, reprove, exhort, with all
long suffering and doctrine. 2. Timo. 4. verse. 2. They must watch over the
souls of men, as those that shall give account unto God for them. Heb. 13.
verse. 17. I pray ye tell me, can the dumb Idols, hirelings, and ungodly men
do this? God must needs take men to heaven that way which you devise, although
it be flat against his own ordinance. God has promised to give his Spirit,
with the true ministry which he sends to publish remission of sins in
his name, by which spirit he conuerteth men's souls: will ye therefore bind
him to do the same, to a false ministry? are ye not ashamed thus to mock
with GOD, and to abuse his people? the reproach and shame of this will never
be done away with any Sacrifice or burnt offering. Ye say we condemn
reading, and some of ye are not ashamed with Brazen faces to affirm it, even
out of the Pulpit. We exhort and stir up the people unto the diligent
reading of the Scriptures, and where shall a man find so many Bybles and
testamentes in the hands of the common sort, as where those Puritan Preachers
(as you term them) have any while continued? A man would thinck, considering
how manifest a lie it is, that the Devil himself would be ashamed to utter
it, as I have heard some of ye, because the ministers set forth the word
and Sacraments (though it be not by their own learning) you say they be no
blind guides nor hirelings, what manner of setting out is that when the people
do not receive instruction? they do as much as lies in them profane the
word and Sacraments. But what though there were blind guids and hirelinges,
yet the people are well enough, they depend upon the bishops and Archdeacons,
which can see better then Puritans. These I trow can suffice to keep the
people in order. I pray ye what can they see, or what do they see? to lead
the people to Heaven, or to build them up in good order in the faith? Noe, no,
they can see that they shall be kept in blindness, as they are, but what can
they do unto those whom they never saw nor knew? does there go such virtue
out of a Bishop or an Archdeacon, that it can spread it self over all the
Country, even to save their souls, that neither hear nor see them? shall the
blind be led by those that never come nigh them, or by those that are
present and take them by ye hand? for shame hold your peace. Ye confess it
were good, yt the people were taught every where, but where will ye have so
many teachers? and if there be men, ye demand where there will be liuinges for
them? To the first I answer, that the want of Godly and diligent preachers
is to be imputed to the Bishops: for even as if they had conspired the death
of the Church, they have labored to suppress and diminish them. To go about
to put out thirty or forty in a shire, and then to say, where shall we have
preachers, is an odd kind of question? To fill up the rooms so soon as they
be void, with Taylers, and seruingmen, or such like, so that the learned men
in the Universities not called forth, do hold still their fellowships in
Colleges: the young men thereby constrained for want of maintenance, depart
from thence before they be half ripe, some to teach scholars, some into
gentlemen's houses, and many to pop into the ministry before they be meet to
guide themselves, and then to demand where shall we have learned men, is also
very absurd? To the second I answer that if Bishops, Deanes, and, all the
fat ones of the Clergy did not love their own bellyes, more then the things
which are of the Lord Jesus: and if they did not esteem the pomp, pleasures,
and richesse of the world, more then men's souls, there would be such
sufficiency of maintenance, that if there were five Preachers where there is
but one, yet none of them should be so bare as to live with 20. pound by the
year. We read Acts. 4. that when the Church was in need, such as had
possessions, sold them to relieve the bodies of the brethren that wanted: How
much more then ought those, which have their thousands, to employ and bestow
the same to have the souls of men fed? Men's souls do famish you say; if it
be so, it is because in many places they have not maintenance for a Preacher.
I pray ye which of the fed men, have deminished their pomp, their richesse
and pleasures, which never did penyworth of good in the Church, to set up
faithful Teachers? What drop of zeal for Gods glory does appear in many of
the^? But if this seem hard, as it will to worldly minded me^: yet why have
they consented yt a number should do nothing but hunt after benefices and
prefermentes, and to heap up living upon living, so yt one man must have ye
portions of five or six? some which are past this, and have put all their
treasure in one bag, will confess this is abominable: but which of the^ does
seek redres. If ye people be in so good case as you say, the^ there needs no
redress: For you say they be well, and are come from popery. I marvel to what
they be come? they say in deed yt the pope is naught, but try the^, and ye shall
find, that they are stuffed full of popish and supersticious opinions which are
contrary to the wholesome doctrine of the gospel. The scriptures every where do
describe true Christians to be holy and pure, and full of the knowledge of
God. And as for those that walk in darkness, wallowing in all filthy vices,
the Lord denounces vengeance against them. When the true and faithful
Preachers do teach men that they can not be saved, unless they turn from
their evil ways, seeking after the true knowledge of God, and walk worthy
of the same: and that such as be supersticious, such as be swearers, such as
be covetous, such as be drunkards and Adulterers, such as be ignorant
despisers of the knowledge of the will of God: finally, such as live in any
abominable vices, are not true Christians: by and by like warriers for the
Devils kingdom, ye say we would have ye people become Puritans. A man can not
so soon mislike gross sins, but straightway: O sir, you like none but
Puritans. You judge and condemn men. How can you tell who have faith? Surely
if this be not to seduce, to harden, and strengthen men in their wickedness,
I know not what is. Might not all this be spoken to the Prophets of God in
old time by the false Prophets, which did flatter the wicked, even as such as
you be do now? It would make a man's heart bleed to see in what case
multitudes of people are for want of teaching, and yet you say they be well. The
greatest multitude by many parts do not understand the Lords prayer, the
ten Commandments, or the Articles of the faith, or the doctrine and use of
the Sacraments in any competent measure. There be thousands which be men
and women grown, which if a man ask them how they shall be saved they can
not tell. As for wickedness, in pride, envy, hatred, and al sins yt can be
named almost, it does ouerflowe, and yet you are not ashamed to say, are they
not christians? do they not call upon God at their end? This is ye deuinitie
of some of our great divines at this day. Let men live as they lust in
ignorance and all abominations, so they call at the last, and say Lord have
mercy upon me, we must judge their estate as good as the best. As though the
Lord had not said, Ye shall cry and not be heard. Proverb. 1. And as though
such as know not the faith, being brought up in blindness, could of a
soudden, even at their pleasure, pray in faith without doubting. For the
Scripture shows that he which does doubt in his prayer, shall obtain
nothing. James. 1. Our savior wills men to strive to enter in at the
straight gate, showing that few shall find it. If a man may follow his
lusts, and walk in the blindness of his heart all his life, and then a
little calling at the last would serve: What hardness were in it? When ye
tell men God is merciful, all men sin, what should ye make your self more
holy then other? Ye overthrow all the doctrine of regeneration, and all the
precepts which the Apostles do give for walking worthy the Gospel. You make
the good and the bad in one condition, as though there were no profit to serve
the Lord, as he complains Malachy. 3. But wherefore do great men now a days
take it so grievously, ye any difference of men should be made? Surely I will
tell ye the cause. They would not have their treason against the Church of
Christ espied, when they thrust upon them wicked and unlearned ministers: For
they would have men taught, and men untaught, men Godly and men wicked, all in
one account: that it might not appear how they murder men's souls. Nay ye
like best, as ye confess of those that be ignorant. And why? Because they
are quiet. In deed you are least troubled with those which be most ignorant,
for they can not epsy your dealing. Such as have knowledge in Gods word can
say, what a wolf is this? he has three benefices, and sets a Tailer in
one, a drunckard in an other, And how he flaunts it? He does visit them once
in a year, to see that they do him no wrong in his tithes.


Philochrem. If I had authority I would punish ye sharply, and make ye
carry a better tongue in your head. For if this may be suffered, we shall have
every man a controller shortly. Ye are the vilest men that live, and indeed
such as do most hurt of all others. Ye are a pestilent generation, in my
judgment worse then the Papists.


Orthodoxos. Who could imagine that in this great light of the Gospel it might
come to pass, that for speaking against such things as God does flatly
condemn in his word, men should be counted the vilest persons that live? A
pestilent generation. Worse then the Papists? For what is it which we condemn
in the ministry, but such things as the Lord him self has first
condemned? We cry out against ambition, covetousness, greedines in heaping
up livings, worldly pomp, idleness, and such like. We find fault, that unfit
men, both for learning and conversation, are set to be guides over the Lords
people. Does not the Lord by his Prophets and Apostles reprove the same? And
yet if you had authority we must be sharply punished. All men may see what
spirit does possess your heart, when you would sharply punish for
reproouing that, which the Lord him self reprooueth. If ye did punish me,
all the world should see that it were for speaking against vice. But I know
you will say it is not for speaking against vices, but for charging such men as
are free from the^. The world were wonderfully changed, if these vices were
not to be found: and whither they abound among us, let al men judge that be
indifferent. Then when they be spoken against, and no particular men named, but
among many, some are blamed: why should those which are not guilty take it
grievously? Let those wintch which have galled backs: for they say, rub the
galled horse and he will wintch, and some Horse is so pitiously galled, that if
a man come into the Stable, and do but point toward him, he will snib and
take on, for fear the finger should touch his back. Even so play you: for
if you had authority you would punish me sharply. We are charged to do the
most hurt of all others: surely then it is unto non-residents, double
beneficed men, idle and slow-bellies, unlearned Ministers, that this hurt is
done by us, for in truth it is the part which you defend, which does the hurt.
First unto the Lord God, then unto our soueraign Lady and gracious Queen, and
lastly unto her faithful subjects.


Philochrematos. This is a foul and a shameful slander, and in my mind you
would be driven and forced to make proof of your words, and be made to
recant them. I know your speech does tend even against some that are chief
Ministers in the Church. It is not meet that inferior persons should
speak of them and of their doings.


Orthodoxos. There shall need no great inforcement to make me prove that
which I have said. For if I can not show it to be true, let me loose my life.
My words tend against those that are guilty, and none else, whether they be
chief Ministers or otherwise: and whereas you say that it is not meet, that
inferior persons should speak of chief ministers and of their doings: the
Pope can challenge no more. The people spoke of our Savior Christ, and he
was content they should scan his doings. The people did speak of the blessed
Apostle S. Peter, and found fault that he had gone in unto men uncircumcised
and had eaten with them, because he had been with Cornelius. Peter does not
disdain, but satisfies them concerning his fact. Acts. 11. But the Pope and
his generation, are so high above CHRIST and his Apostles, that they may not
be spoken of. Well against whomsoever it be, I said that the part, which you
defend does the hurt, unto God, to our gracious Prince, and to her true
subjects. And now I will show ye how. First, by the corrupt ministry Gods
name is dishonored, because his holy ordinance is defiled and brought into
contempt: the dignity of his Son Jesus Christ is abased, when there are put
into that office which he had, and do represente his person, such as men
would scarce trust to keep their Swine. Notable injury is done by this
means also, unto our Queens most excellent Majesty, because it has long
time endangered her most royal person, by strengthening her enemies. For where
the people are kept in blindness, the Jesuits can easily work upon them,
there need no great persuasions, but to tell the poor ignoraunte creatures,
that this is a new religion, and will not you do as your Graundfather, and
your great Graundfather did? Will you be wiser then they? Do ye think they
be damned? they knew not this learning. You may see what manner of Gospel this
is, when they make such Ministers. Was not your Minister a Cobbler? Was not the
Minister of such a place an Innekeeper until he was bancrupt? And thus they
may lead them at their pleasure. Again, who is able to reckon up the
manifold disorders and abuses that spring from the Dumb and ungodly
Ministerye? and let a man speak against any of the same abuses and disorders:
Shall he not by and by hear this. O sir, you will be wiser then the Queen
and her Counsayl, they allow of these things, and will have it thus. Is not
this a shameful iniurye, done unto her Majesty, and her most Honorable
Counsel, when all such matters shall be cast upon their shoulders?
Furthermore, from whence does the great abundance of all kind of wickedness
and profaneness among the people spring, but from thence that they want
instruction? and does not this indaunger the state of the prince, and the whole
Land? does not the Lord grievously plague whole Kingdoms for sin? lastly
the injury done to the people is manifest. Solomon says, he that keeps back
his corn, the people do curse him. How much greater is the wrong, when the
bread of life, upon which their souls should feed is taken from them? Thus
have I showed by whom the hurt is done: It might be showed in an hundred
things, but these are manifest, and of great importance.


Philochrematos You and your fellows do the hurt (as I said before) and then
ye would lay it upon others. And after ye have uttered some imaginations, then
there be an hundred things in which it might be showed. Your tongue is not so
tied, but that it would be walking, if there were such matters. Look whatsoever
ye say, it must go for payment, after ye have made some show in that ye have
devised. Ye are eue^ conspired with the Papists: ye have the very properties of
the Annabaptistes, and he that shall mark the end, shall see what it will come
to, if ye be let alone. But I pray God ye may be cut short, and that we may
not any further feel the effect of your seditious doctrine. I hope ye will be
seen unto speedily.


Orthodoxos. Whether they be imaginations which I have uttered, I leave to the
judgment of such as be wise. I doubt not, but if they be thoroughly wayed,
they shall be found exceeding weighty. You gather by my silence that I have no
matters: Surely I dare affirm, that he which shall take upon him to utter al
particulers, in such abuses as are manifest, and do hurt in our Church, had
need to do nothing else for one whole day, and take the longest in the year.
Your accusations against us be stale, when ye charge us to have conspired with
the Papists, and to have the properties of the Annabaptists. Your own
consciences do witness that we are far from these sorts of men. The Papists
and Annabaptists know well enough, that of all other we do least serve their
turn. We love the Papists so well, that we wish there were not a shread of
their Kingdom left, nor so much as one relic of theirs, ever to be seen
among us. The end of all our trauail is, to build up the walls of Jerusalem,
and to set up the throne of Jesus Christ, our Heavenly King in the midst
thereof, and to bring the people in subjection unto him: how soever Sanballat
and Tobiah, do accuse us, that we mean to rebel. You pray that we may he
cut short, and that ye may not feel any further the effect of our seditious
Doctrine. It is the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and the effect of it which you
fear is, to cut down worldly pomp, Covetousness, and idleness in the
ministry. You fear that if it take place, that you must part with two of
your Benefices: Naie, you fear that you shall get no higher, there be many
of ye, which have laid a Platfourme how to come unto wealth and dignity.
Ye fear that the great rooms will be little worth before your turn come,
and that does cause you to frette and rage against the Preachinge of the
Gospel. Ye devise all the fleshly reasons which ye can, to maintain and
uphold Corruptions: Ye beat your Brains, and spend your Wits to deface
Gods Ordinances, and why do ye this? forsoothe even for the Churches sake,
for the peace of the Church, and for Obedience and good order: Yea, even as
much as Judas had a care for the Poor. It is well seen, that if there were
not great wealth and honors, for which ye contend, ye would scarce open
your mouth for such matters, as now ye defend as eagarlie as if it stood
upon your lives. The Ministers of the Gospel must always pass thorough
troubles, but the Lord Jesus will look unto them.


Philochrematos There are none so covetous and ambitious as your selves: And
that makes ye to grudge and repine at those which have wealth and honor,
because ye can not come by it. Ye are loath to be inferiors, your minds be
so proud and stately. I know if a man will hearken to all your slanders and
false accusations, you can hold him a whole day, yea three days, and let them
be the longest in the year: but tell but truth, and then a less time will
serve well enough. As I said before, if there were matter it should not be
covered.


Orthodoxos. Ye say we conspire with the Papists, but your manner of dealing
is so like theirs, yt a man would think ye were joined together in ye defense
of one cause. For when Luther dealt against the pope, by and by, they cried out
that it was, because he could not come to that preferment which he desired. So
play you against us, when we reprove those forenamed vices in the Clergy.
For ye say we do it because we can not abide to be inferiors, and because we
can not come to dignity and wealth, this wicked surmise of yours, has no
color or show of truth. It is well known, that there be not a few, which
could as easily come to their Benefices as you, if they would labor for them,
and that might attain unto great dignity, if they would set their mind that
way: but they have learned, that such as bend them selves to seek after
livings and promotions, do not serve the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. If
you could justly charge men, that they had sought and labored for dignity, and
yet missed, then were there some cause for ye to say so, but seeing it is
otherwise, me thinks, if there were but a drop of common honesty in ye, such
speech could not be uttered: Ye do also iump with the papists after this sort,
when the Servant of God reproved the pride of the Pope: then what was the
common voice, but that if these men be not looked unto, have at Kings next? So
now reprove Ambition and worldly pomp in the Clergy, and what follows? Let
princes and Noble men take heed: these men will have a fling at them shortly:
but blessed be GOD, it is well seen, that the casting down of the Pope, is
the exaltation of Princes. For while he stands like that proud Senacharib
King of Ashur: every Rabsaka, yea, every one of his Captains, will take
himself to be, as good as King Ezechias, Iesa. 36. ver. 9: But let this go.
You urge me to speak of abuses, and you say, that if I speak but the truth, a
short time will serve. But I say, he that will declare the corruptions, but of
your spiritual Courts, he may hold himself occupied a good piece of a day,
and yet speak but truth. I know not where a man should begin, or whom he
shall find to be the worst: the Judge himself or the Scribe, the Proctors or
the Summoners: This is sure, all of them regard nothing but Money. All the
whole Court is guided by one rule, but that is a Golden rule. The people may
not speak a word, for if they do, they be Rebels, Rebels, and speak
against the Queens authority: When as in deed the Queens Laws are broken,
and her Subjects greatly abused.


Philochrematos. Mark your doings who will, and he shall find this property
in ye, that all your drift is against authority. Now the spiritual Courts
come in, great corruptions are in them. If it be as you say, it is pity they
should stand. But it is well seen, how soever such as you bark against
them, that as they be appointed for correction of Vices, so they do much
good: none repine at them, but such as can not abide to be punished for their
disorders. If some officer do amiss at some time (as all can not be good)
what reason is it that ye should so lewdlie accuse the whole Court? you make
the Judges, the Scribes, the Proctors and Summoners, all alike. If I were an
Archdeacon, Official, or Commissarie, I would take the law against ye for a
slander. You say al is done for money, and the Laws are broken, and the
Queens subjects are abused. I doubt not, but if ye were put to your proof,
ye would eat your words.


Orthodoxos. He that will mark, shall find this quality in a number of ye?
that a man cannot so soon speak against corruptions and abuses, in such as
abuse their authority, but straightway ye accuse him, as one which can not
abide to be under any government, because he would not be corrected for his
disorders. You know well enough, that this is a shrewde accusation to bring
men into suspicion, cheefely among those whom GOD has set up in high
authority. This is the crafty wiliness of the Serpent, that men might be
terrified, and made to keep silence, what so ever enormities be committed. But
you shall not terrify me from speaking that of the Spiritual Courts, which
is open and apparent unto all men: Neither shall ye ever be able to make me
eat my word. I know such Courts were appointed for the correction of vices,
but now they cherish vice, and correct virtue.


Philochrematos. I see your malice does break out further and further: I will
take notice of your words, and desire those which are present to remember them.
You said all is done for money, the Laws are broken, and the Queens
subjects abused. You add further, that they cherish vice and correct virtue.
These I tell you plain, be foul accusations, and you accuse all in general,
none excepted.


Orthodoxos. I did speak generally, or rather indefinitely, but yet my meaning
is not to include every particular person. But my meaning is, that for the most
part the Courts be such: I do not say all are such, for I know not all. I
trust in God there be some few that either are, or have been judges in such
Courts, that do fear the Lord. My speech does not accuse them, he that is
clear, is not to be grieved: whereas you take such notice of my words, I
would I might before the chief in the land, under the pain of sharp
punishment if I failed, be driven to make proof against the spiritual
Courts, that all is done for Money, that the laws are broken, the Subjects
abused, vice cherished, and virtue punished.


Philochrematos. If you dare be so bold to take upon you, such a matter, you
may let us know somewhat now.


Orthodoxos. You seem to be such a Stranger unto the matter, that you know
nothing. I marvel how you should be ignorant in that which is so manifest
and apparantlie known, that the very Officers of such courts which have their
living that way, are afraid they should be accounted impudente, if they
should deny that money bears the swaie among them. Let ye churchwardens
tell what they pay for their quarter Bills, for Books of Articles: if the
Book be worth two pence, the price must be six pence. What say you to the
probates of Testamentes, what excessive extortion is committed that way? but
of all other things, the greatest gain comes in, when some welthy man is in
for adultry. For he will come off somewhat roundly, rather then stand in a white
sheet. If the matter be very plain and manifest: yet that the court may
seem to deal honestly, and hide the favor which is showed, he must have his
compingators: and then come in the vilest men that can be picked, such as be
the most notorious Drunkerds, and men past shame, and so he is quit by all his
peers. It has fallen out yt for ye better speed, some that have been
absolved (being presented for evil vices and excommunicate) have by and by like
good honest men been sworn to help out their neighbor. The Proctors for their
fees take part on every side, it is a very fowl clowt which they will not help
to wash. The summoners they rau^ge abroad to drive into ye net: but their
chief gain is out of the Court: It is better to take a cheeze or a bushel of
wheat, then 4. pence for ye citatio^, especially when their good masters will
continue ye fee. when any ministers are presented by churchwarde^s for any
gross vices, that bill is nipt in the head, and buried in the pocket of a
gown. Shall it be thought credible, that among all the Churchwardens and
sworn men in a shire, there be not a number of that honesty that they will
not be perjured? They must present such ministers as do not catechize, such as
be Carders, Dicers, Alehouse-hunters, such as live in suspicion for
incontinencie. What a rablement are there of these? And yet how many of them
have been punished? There is no Godly Preacher, but does loath this dealing,
and that sets these Courts at deadly war with him. They touze him, he is
a disobedient fellow, he is worse then dogs meat. The people which embrace
the Gospel are much suspected to bear small liking unto these Courts, And
therefore, many of them are cited, which have Idol ministers at hoame, and
go unto other Towns to hear the word preached. Syrah, you are a disordered
fellow, you break the Queens laws, you do not keep your parrish Church.
When answer is made, we have no teaching at home, we go to be taught. What is
replied, ye shall be made to tarry at home. But for this time, pay the Fees of
the Court, which is sixteen pence a man, and get ye hence. They answer, we
are poor men, we have wrong to be cited for this matter, we trust ye will
spare us. If any do not pay his sixteen pence, then there goes out an
excommunication from the Scribe, under the name of the judge. Lay these things
together, and tell me whether money do not bear the sway, the Queens subjects
be not abused, the laws broken, vice cherished, and virtue punished. I have
heard, that he which is presented unto a benefice, should have his institution
and induction, for xvi. shillinges or there about: And now it is grown to 3.
pound if it be not more, under some Bishops.


Philodoxos. I do not know for mine own part, whether it be so: but in deed
it is a general accusation among all men, that there is great corruption in
those Courts. It is great pity, if it be so. But there is no calling nor
office, in which there will not grow abuses. We may not reject a thing because
it is abused.


Philedon. How would ye have men live, if they may not take their Fees. They
yt take pains must be paid for it. The officers are at no small charges, for
their meat and for their Horses.


Philochrematos. No, no, these peeuishe waiwarde men do lie and slander, and
make things worse then they be. It is their manner to make great matters of
nothing.


Orthodoxos. If you count this to lie and slander, what would you say if all
should be told. I doubt not but as ye Lord says to Ezechiel, I will yet show
thee greater abominations: So he which knows the secreats and partilers, in
these Courts might make men wonder, considering that all goes under the name
and title of the Gospel. It can not be, but they will wax worse and worse,
because they bend the^ selves against those that be good, and are an arm unto
the wicked.


Philochrematos. They bend themselves against none but disordered persons, that
will not obey laws, those you count good, but they may be counted rebels.
Such as be honest and quiet subjects, and like not of your ways, those be the
wicked whom you speak of.


Orthodoxos. You speak much of disordered persons, that will not obey laws,
whom you term rebels. If you wait until such time as they make rebellion,
your eyes will sincke into your head. Where did you see that those men (whom
you term Puritanes) did ever give any suspicion of tumult or rebellion? they
have learned, that they ought to spend their lives in defense of their Prince,
and that it is damnation to resist the powers which God has set up. Romans 13.
You al say they be but trifles which men stick at. And in words you will seem
to wish yt they were in ye bottom of ye sea. Are those rebels which stagger at
some things which you confess be trifles and might be spared? The^ what will ye
account of Bishops and Archdeacons, which break godly laws, which be of
substance? they seem to be zealous for the defense and maintenance of laws,
but it is not so, for then would they not break the laws. They are afraid,
that every one which refuses to subscribe to all that they would have him,
does disalow of the Hierarchy. They be afraid that all Puritans do believe
that only our Lord Jesus, and no mortal man may have the honor, to be called
Archipoymen or Archiepiscopos prince of Pastors, and prince of Bishops, 1.
Pet. 5. ver. 4. They are afraid that these waiward Puritanes, take it unmeet,
that christ should be in the shape of a servant while he preached the Gospel,
and his ministers and officers should be as Dukes, and Earls, and Barons, and
the noble pieres of the world. Hinc illae lachrimae. This is the soar. From
hence arises all the war. The thing is so manifest, that shortly they must
lay aside all pretense of the Gospel, and of the peace of the Church, and say
plainly, we fight for our own estate. And I pray ye, let me go a little
further. Was it ever seen, that all the filthy men of the world, and such as
are rotten in their sins did take part with Christ, with his Apostles, or
with the Godly which succeeded them? Will the soldiers of Satan seek to
uphold the kingdom of Christ? Go through the land, take a view, if ye find
not this, let me loose my life. Namely, that all the rank adulterers, common
drunkards, unthrifts, ruffians, and horrible swearers, despisers of the word
of God, do take part with the Bishops, and cry down with these rebel
Puritans. Look further, and ye shall find that many Papists, which will be
loath to hear a Sermon, do now bestirre them, where there is any whom they
term a Puritan Preacher, to enquire what matter he uttered, that he may be
complained of and put down. Who carry the complaints, but such as have lost
all show of honesty? These (although they be never so full of all ungodliness)
are now become the good subjects. These be honest and quiet men: well, I trust
the Lord Jesus shall never need the service of such. Who rejoice so much now
as the Papists? They see the Preachers of the Gospel withstood, and defaced.
They see that such as have labored most diligently to instruct the people, and
to draw them from the errors of popery, are accounted the worst men, and
soonest put to silence. This makes them already very crancke and to set up
their bristles, and to speak boldly. It is a common thing now, not in corners,
but in the open streates, sounding in the ears of many, these Gospellers be
rebels, these professors be knaves, it were no matter if they were hanged.


Philochrem. The Papists have no cause to rejoice, nor to set up their
bristles, because the Puritans be defaced. They have strengthened the Papists.
You speak of the preachers, the Preachers, as though they were ye only
preachers. God be thanked, there be a number of learned Preachers besides them:
Other manner of men then they be. If they be as you say thirty or forty in a
shire, what is yt to the whole number of learned men? And for ye number you
speak of, I wisse, there be sundry which are no great learned men, which never
took degree in the schools. The rest might be better advised, and show them
selves more dutiful subjects. You complain of those which take part with the
Bishops and Archdeacons against the Puritans; as namely that all despisers of
Gods word, adulterers, drunckards, ruffians, and unthrifts, and other such
like: I pray ye are there not as great faults among the Puritans? Are not they
full of hatred and malice?


Orthodox. You seem to make very light that thirty or forty preathers
should be put to silence in a shire, because yt is but a small number compared
with the whole multitude of learned me^. I know the number is small in deed, in
respect of the whole ministry: but if you respect faithful and diligent
Teachers, it shall be found a great number. Set a side ye greatest part which be
unlearned, and come to such as be learned. First reckon up the number of non
residents and duble beneficed men, which in deed are very many. Some of the^
attending about the Court, some in Bishops houses, some lying at London, some
in the universities. look next upon those idle Preachers, which preach once in
a quarter, or once in two months, and are more in the bowling alley then in
their study. Lastly, consider what unskillful men do preach: yea, rather
profane the holy word of God: and what ungodly men there be of them: and in
how great number all these are, and you shall see a miserable, and lamentable
face of a Church, when thirty or forty, which taught diligently are taken away.
I grant there be some which never took degree in schools, but yet can so
handle the word, ye sundry which are Doctors, may be ashamed, that they be not
comparable to them. You know there be sundry, whom you reproach with
Puritanisme, which have taken the highest degree in the schools. Many others
also which have taken the other degrees, and do not go without the
Doctorshippe for want of learning. You would have those that profess the
Gospel to be accounted as evil as the Drunkardes and Adulterers. You charge
them with hatred and malice, no doubt it comes to pass, that among those
that profess ye gospel there be hipocrites. For want of plentiful
instruction, there be also sundry weak. But the hatred and malice which you
speak of, is, that they will not be partakers with ungodly men in their evil
ways, that causes them to speak so much of malice, and want of love. For it
seems the greatest hatred in the world unto carnal men, when any mislike
their ways. This is it which Saint Peter speaks of, in the fourth chapter
of his first Epistle, which I also cited before. Wherein (says he) it seems
to them strange, that ye run not with them unto the same excess of riote,
therefore speak they evil of you. He is blind yt sees not this plentifully
fulfilled in our time. You say, they might show them selves more dutiful
subjects. It falls out sometimes, that those which are the worst subjects,
and such as do Princes very great hurt, do accuse those to be evil
subjects, which of all other are the most faithful. Did not Abner and other
of King Saules Councellers, take them selves to be his best subjects? and yet
who led him from God unto his destruction but they, by stirring him up to
persecute David? Did they not accuse David to be a traitor, and yet who was so
faithful and true hearted unto his Lord as he? Wise men must not be carried away
with a blast of words, nor with some color of matter which ungodly men never
want against the good.


Philocrhematos. I perceive it is but in vain to spend the time in talking
with such as you, which are obstinately and wilfully bent. You will be
singular.


Orthodoxos. Obstinacy and wilfulnes can not be, but in an ungodly and
naughty matter. For a man can not be too steadfast in the truth. Let the cause
be good, and the more stiff and constant the mind is, so much the better. If
I have uttered or defend any falsehood, let me be convicted, and I will yield.
If I be not convicted, what reason is there that I should be charged with
wilfulnes or obstinacy? If Jesus Christ and his Apostles be of my side, what
wickedness is it to say I would be singular?


Philodox. It were well if ye would all agree, and teach us that be of the
laiety by your good example, for that ought to be in ye. And how shall it be
expected at our hands to live in unity, and to do well, when those are at
discord and variaunce which should instruct and guide us? Can ye exhort us unto
concord, and your selves at variance?


Orthodox. You speak of that which was never seen in this world, nor never
shall. For so long as God has faithful messengers, so long will also the
Devil have his ungodly instruments. These can never agree, ye one part
serving god, and the other living viciously. And I pray ye, how or wherein would
ye have them to agree? Which part shall condescend unto the other? Which part
shall yield? Shall those that hold the truth give over? That is abominable to
be spoken and shall never be. Will those that are ungodly yield and submit
them selves unto the truth? No, their stomach will not let them, though they be
convict in conscience. Moreover, this is to be noted, that such a man as is not
sanctified, but delights in worldly lusts, cannot abide the purity of ye
word, which does condemn him. Herein the world is injurious, that they cry
out for unity, unity, blaming always that part which holds the truth,
because they would have them yield unto their affections, seeing they cannot
abide to forsake their vild lusts. Again, a number of ye being overcome of
your carnal lusts, are glad to make this pretense and excuse. We cannot tell
what to do. The Preachers cannot agree, they be all naught, what should we give
heed to follow any thing which they teach? these be hellish and brutish
speeches. Ye must seek out which hold the truth, which call ye unto true
godliness, and amendment of life, and with them ye must be at unity. The true
Preachers are not to exhort men to be at such an unity as you imagine. But
they must teach them to fly the fellowship of the wicked. I would to God men
would consider this, and turn unto him, and not like Giants fight against
him.


Philodoxos. I do not think yt any do fight against God: You should not
utter any such speech unless ye did know it to be true: a man can not fight
against God, unless he hate God, and I dare not judge so evil of any man.


Orthodoxos. You think none fight against God, because whomsoever a man
fights against, him he hates and you dare not judge so evil of any man, to
be so fowlie given over, as to hate God. It is gross ignorance in ye, which
seems to be excellent modesty: For if you had eyes yt could discern, you
should see how horribly some men do hate the Lord God, and desperately fight
against him. Most true it is, ye wicked men are so blinded, by a just judgment
of God upon them, yt they think they love God, or at least yt they do not hate
him: But we may not judge according to the sense of flesh and blood, but
according to the sacred truth of holy scripture: by which I will make the
matter plain unto ye. The blessed Apostle Romans 8. does affirm yt such as
walk after the flesh shall dye. He renders a reason, which is, that the
wisdom of the flesh, is enimity against God? And why is it enimitie against
God? or why does the holy ghost charge it to leave hatred against him? because
(says the Apostle) It is not subject to the law of God: neither in deed can
be. Mark this well, for it is even as a thu^derbolt, whereby al ye wicked are
stricken down: they bear themselves in hand yt they love God, they make open
brags and vaunts, that they be his friends: but you may learn here from the
mouth of the Lord him self, that whosoever are not Subject to the obedience
of his law, they be his enemies and do hate him. Then does it follow, yt
whosoever do fight against his word, or any part thereof, they are his
enemies, they do hate him and fight against him. Then let us come to the
matter. Is there any reasonable man but will confess, that Gods word does
command learned and godly ministers, to teach and guide his people? Does not
ye scripture lay woes and curses upon those yt be contrary? Is it not his
holy ordinance yt every shepherd shall attend upon ye flock of which he has
taken the charge and oversight? Do not those then monstrouslie fight against
God, and hate him, which in sermons, in their books published abroad, do with
reasons drawn from the wisdom of the flesh, defend non residentes, double
beneficed men, and the unlearned ministry, with sundry abominations? The
dreadful vengeance of God does hang over the heads of such men, unless they
repent in time. They do against their Conscience, for they can not but know
such things as be evil. The love of ye world does carry the^ unto it. God
has also commanded that his messengers shall be well entertained, that his
Church may be built. Do they not then directly fight against him, which deface
and molest them, depriving multitudes of people of the food of their souls:
This is yet a more shameless matter, yt even such as be old turncoats, and it
is to be feared, ready to say Mass again, are great instruments. Such
being known athiests, are not ashamed to step into the Pulpit and to charge
the Godly and faithful messengers of the Lord, to be Atheists, rebels,
traitors, and I know not what. If the cause be good, let not such guilty
persons defend it, take such as be not spotted: Shall those stand as ye
champions in the Lords battle, which have embraced this present world, and
seek after gain? These fight for their belly, and not for the Lord. Those
whom the people calls greedy Dogs, could not be more greedy then these: for
they be never satisfied. The Lord give them repentance or else disburden his
church of them.


Philedonos. I am sorry there is any such task in my house: If you will go to
your chambers all things are ready, the Night is well spent.


FINIS.

