TO MASTER ANTHONY BACON.
An Apology of the Earl of Essex, against those which fasly and maliciously
tax him to be the only hinderer of the peace, and quiet of his country.

HE that eythet thinks he has, or wishes to have an excellent face, no
sooner is told of any spot or uncomeliness in his countenance, then he hieth
^o show himself too a glass, that the glass may ^w again his true
likeness unto him. The same cuti^ie mooues me that desires to have a fair
mind, to ^we a true face, and state of my mind, to my true friend, ^t he like
a true glass, without injury or flattery, may (...) me whether nature or
accident have set so foul a ble^h in it, as my accusers pretend.

I am charged that either in affection, or opinion, or ^th, I prefer war
before peace, and so consequently ^t all my counsels, actions, and endeavors,
d^e tend keep the state of England in continual war: espe^lly at this
time, when some say peace may be had, and ^ly impugn it. But both my heart
disclames so bar^ous an affection, and my judgment so absurd an opinion. And
that the reputation of a most faithful subject, (...) zealous patriot, which
with the hazard of my life and ^ay of my estate I have sought to purchase, must
not ^o ugly and odious aspersion, that mine actions have caused, maintained, or
increased the wars, or had ever any such scope or intent. First; for mine
affection in nature it was indifferent to books, or to arms: and was more
^n^^amed with the love of knowledge, then with the love (...) fame, witness your
rarely qualified brother, and that (...) learned and truly honest master
Sauill: yea, my contemplative retiredness in Wales, and my bookishnesse fr^^
my very childhoode. And now if time reason and experience, have taught me to
wish that to my self* which is be^^ for my self, what would I not wish rather
then martial imploime^ts: In which I have impaired my estate, lost my de^^ and
only brother, the half arch of mine house, buried many of my dearest and
nearest friends, and subjected my self to the rage of the seas, violence of
tempests, infections of general plagues, famines, and all kind of wantes,
coffeehouse of undisciplined and unruly multitudes, and acceptations of
euentes: while I did not only leave my known enemies elbow room to seek their
o^^ and their friends aduancemnts, but was feign sometimes, upon trust of their
protestations after new reconcilemen^^ to make them the receivers, censurers,
and answerers (...) all my dispatches. And as mine affection neither in tru^^
is (nor if I regard my self) in reason ought to be set upon those courses of
the wars: So (in my judgment) I have ever thought wars the diseases and
sicknesses, and pea^^ the true natural and healthful temper for all estates.
I have thought excellent minds should come to the wa^^ as surgions do to their
cures, when no easy or ordinary, y^^ no other remedy will serve. Or as men in
particular questions are allowed to challenge combat, when their is no way but
by the sword to prove the truth of their plea, and to obtain their detained
right, yea I will go one degre^ further: I think that Prince or state
offends, as much against justice, and against reason, that omitteth a fair
occasion of an Hon: and safe peace, as they which rashly and causelessly move an
unjust war. These principles s^^^ing made me conclude this general Thesis
common to all estates, that peace is to be preferred before war, I will come
to an Hipothesis proper to the state of England: where most part of the wealth
of the land, and revenues of the crown grow by traffic and intercourse,
and whereas almost all traffic is interrupted by the wars, where state in
largeness of territory and wealth which is the sinews of war, is inferior
to that of the enemy: where besides all foreign wars, there is yet besides
a great fire of rebellion unquenched, where associats in war give over the
quarrel, neigbours are suspected neutrals, and show ill affection, and the
people themselves grow weary of the chardge and misery of wars, there of
all places peace should be embraced, if it be offered and sought for by
honorable and fit means, if it may be accomplished, But though wars be
diseases, yet I think it better to suffer some sickness, then to venture
upon every medicine: But to trust an enemies faith, when his perfidie shall
undo, or extremely endanger us, and infinitely advantage himself, were
Medicum haeredem ^acere. It is no cure to bring a state from a doubtful war,
to an unsafe treaty: It is no more then to put a feuerous body, out of a
hot fit into a cold. To conclude, as an unskillful Physician may by
weakening a natural body, with his medicines bring it from tertian or quartan
fever into an hectique, so an improvident statesman may with conditions or
treaty, so disarme a state of the friends reputation, and the strength it
has, as the cure will prove far worse the^ the disease. Therefore it is not
the name of war or peace, but the circumstances or conditions of either of
them, that should make us flee the one, and embrace the other. Now what are the
circumstances of our war or peace with Spain it shall appear in his proper
place in the treatise following. But e^re I pass further, least this
profession of my disposition and affection too war or peace, be challenged to
be but a fair pretense, and these rules which I auowi to hold in judgment,
be compared to the doctrine of some divines of our time, farthest of all from
their practice: I have thought good to answer some objections of my
de^ractors: who will say mine entering into the action of the low countries,
ere I was out of pupil age, my putting myself into the journey of Portugal
without chardge or license, my procuring myself the conducting of her
Majesty's succors to the French king in the year 91. my Sea iourneies these
two last summers, wherein booth myself, and my friends, ventured deeply of
our own private means, my near friendship with the chief men of action,
and general affection to the men of war of our nation. And lastly my
opposing myself against the treaty of peace at this time when others persuade
unto it: That all these I say are arguments that I wish not peace, but delight
in war: But for my going into the low countries, if neither the company of
my father in law, the Honorable chardge of the general of the horse in a
fair army, when I was but 19. years old, then taking the start of those of
mine own ranckes, when I saw the state of England not only disposed to great
actions, but engaged in them. If these reasons were not sufficient to warrant
my course, yet consider what choice I had, or what else could I have done with
myself, In the court I had small grace and few friends: In mine own house in
the country I had not lived a year, till the opinion of the world obraided
me, with more retiredness then was fit for my years, or the present time:
And to have gone to travel, when my country sent out so great an army, had
bin as much as to have turned over books only to gaze at the babies and
pictures, whilst others were studying the sense.

For to justify my going into Portugal, I must plead these circumstances,
First, of the person, with whom I went: A poor distressed exiled king, whom I
had herd of tentimes repeat the story of his own oppressions.

Secondly, of the enemies against whom I went: An insolent, cruel, and
usurping nation, that disturb^d the common peace, aspired to the conquest of my
country, and was a general enemy to the liberty of Christendom.

Thirdly, of the cause in which I went: to deliver the oppressed out of the
hands of the oppressors, and by giving the Spaniard his handful at home, to
free both mine own country, and our confederats, from the fear and danger
of his attempts.

And lastly, of the time in which I went. A time when mine eyes full of
disdain, had so lately seen their falsely called invincible Armado sail by
our shores, when all the brave hearts of this kingdom boiled, till they saw
that insolent enemy taught both to know himself, and to value us. And when
my heart was persuaded by both these circumstances, I engaged my means,
kinsfolks, friends, and followers, else neither the adventure had been made
up, nor the journey performed, It being no allowed action of her Majesty's,
but a mere adventure of private men. And when I was so far in, I confess I
was not of their humor, that love to wager upon other men's hances, or sit at
home like merchants, whilst their hopes and goods are ventured abroad.

For my going without charge, or leave, I must auowe, the one, as out of
counsel and excuse, the other, as by necessity. I chose to go without charge,
that I might be free to execute the less: I commanded not, that I might not
be obnoxious to the success, and because I had overthrown the vioage, If I
had stood upon the commission. And I could take no second place, having before
the same time and in the same army had place above the general. But though I
had no chardge, yet I made my brother general of the horse, and my faithful
friend Sir Roger William*s colonel general of the infantry, 7. or 8 of my
fast friends colonels, and 20. at the least of my domestickes, captains, so
as I might have authority and party enough when I would. For my want of leave
I must plead necessity, her Majesty having resolved to send none of my
quality, and many at home showing envy enough to those poor gent* that were
named, which made me foresee with what success I should have sued for leave.

For my conducting her Majesty's forces to the French King in 92. I must
allege, that the sending of the succors was resolved on before my name was in
question. And if I had not offered myself to the journey, some other noble man
that never had place in the wars, might (as the phrase is in the common law)
have been promoted p^^ Salium: and so I that never had her Majesty's
commission to command in chief, should have seen my puis^^^ leap over my
head. Also I felt that my fortune had bred me envy, and that envy procured
me strong and dangerous opposition, and this opposition would not be
ouercaryed, but by her Majesty's great favor, and that the greatness of her
Majesty's favor, must grow out of the greatness of her servants merit: and
I saw no way of merit lie so open to me, as by my service in the wars, the
times themselves and my own beginning fitting unto it, and at that time none
of my country, of my rank disposing himself that way: If besides all this
it be con^idered that I went to a king, who for his admirable valor, and often
fighting with his own hands, was not only the most famous king, but also the
most redoubted Captain of all Christendom. That the intended service was to
free the maritine parts of Normandy, from the hands of the league or power of
the Spaniard: that thereby the common enemy should find less succor or
favor in these Seas If these things be well considered, I doubt not but my
French journey will be thought sufficiently justified.

But perhaps in these actions, wherein either I had no charge at all, or was
commanded by others, or offered myself to the service, when the imploiment
was before resolved on, I having no part or interest in that counsel, my
Apology will be the better allowed of, then in my two last Sea iourneyes,
wherein I am charged to be the author of the counsel, as well as the executor
of the service, wherefore first for the first.

For the counsel of going into Spain, I protest I had no more part in that,
then my L. Treasurer, my L. Admiral, and master Secretary, who were all privy
from the beginning, and did assent, and advice to the journey as much as I did,
her Majesty did first move for the defensive, upon intelligence that the king
of Spain did both purpose and prepare to assail her, finding that she did
strengthen the low countries, and fortisie against him, molested him in his
Indies, choked him by Sea: So that his counsel resolved that to be the
shortest and easiest way to all his ends, to begin with England. And when her
Majesty was armed, and able to take the starte, it was thought both a wise and
safe counsel, not to lease so great, and so fair an opportunity. For the
project of going to Cadz I have ever confessed it was my Lord Admirals my
colleagues. If any man will single me out to chardge me alone with any thing,
it must needs be that when all the charg of preparation was past the army
leauied and marching to the Randeuous, and the low country fleet that was to
join with us in the way, that then I was as constant in the journey, as I had
bin all the while before when I might have sold the honor of my Sovereign,
the security of my country, the contentment of our confederates, the hopes
and almost whole fortunes of hundreds of my friends that I had drawn into
that journey, for some private gain unto myself. If any man will use so base
a speech, as that we offended the king of Spain so deeply in that journey,
as that he is now implacable, and further from peace: I answer vana sine
viribus ira, we brought away and burnt his shipping, and destroyed his Sea
prouision^* yea, we put him to such chardge and loss, as he shorte^^ after
played banckrupte with all his creditours. Let me ever see his strength
decrease, though his malice increase ^ather then believe in his faith and good
nature, when his strength is great. If any man will on the other side object,
that though ^e had good hap, yet our designement was naught, for it drew the
war to no end, I must confess, I neither performed what I purposed, nor
thought that which was done sufficient: I purposed to dwell in a port of the
enemies, and so to make a continual diuersion of the wars: witness my
letters to the Lords of the counsel* dated from Plymouth the first of June 96
and delivered by my Secretory Rainolds at Greenewitch the 6. of the same
month. And when I was possessed of Cadz, I offered to stay with 3. or 4000.
men, if that whole fleet could have furnished us but with three months
victuals, witness the whole counsel of war. And by these means I doubted
not to have brought the wars in those parts to a short end, and also to
have made the king of Spain weary of seeking to dislodg me: But my letters was
neither answered nor liked here, nor I at Cadz able to feed my self, and the
men of war, till a supply might have come. So that except to be of that
mind my fellows were, that were called to council, or to have joined with my
Lord Admiral when he offered to take an equal commission of commandment
with me, both by Sea, and by land, to have sought ^s we could to weaken him,
that by all means he can, seeks to destroy and conquer us: And if to have
failed in doing that which I had no warrant nor means to ^^e, be a fault in*
my journey in 96. I committed no fault.

For my last journey in 97. let it be remembered how I was brought into it,
with what counsel and designs I went out, and what was the true causes of the
want of such success, as in our own hopes we promised to our selves, and
that If I undertook more then duty laid upon me, or advised any thing that
reason made not probable, or failed of any thing, that any possibility enabled
m^ unto, I will think the hardest censurer of me do^ me no wrong. But first it
is well known that her Majesty had armed and victualed 10. of her own
ships, and caused the states of the low countries to prepare the like
number, before ever I was spoken of to go to Sea. And when my Lord Thomas
Howard, and Sir Walter Raulegh, who should have been sent forth with this
fo^ce, thought their hopes of doing any great service weak and uncertain. And
the news of the Adelantadoes preparation at Farroll and the Groine were newly
confi^med: a new counsel was called, in which her Majesty resolved that this
force prepared, was to great for a discovery, and too little for an attempt.
That a fleet inferior to that the Adelantado commanded, might light upon some
merchants, o^ take fishermen to learn news, but should never be in
possibility to take any of the king of Spaine^ treasure, or should safely li^
on the coasts of Spain and Portugal, being able to command no port, nor
daring to fight with the enemies fleet, when it should come out. And lastly
that a fleet without an army to land, might ^ayle from Cape to Cape, and
return when their victuals were spent without doing other service: For the
Adilantado would not come forth, if he liked not his match, and the Indian
fleet might be stayed at the Islands, or by the aduise^s direction, so alter
their course as they should hardly be intercepted, then a new consideration
was had, what might be done by a sufficient force by Sea and land. It was
resolved that not only Farroll, where the Adelantado lay, but any port of
Spain might be entered, and the ^orces of the king, that should be found in it
beaten and destroyed: Or any Port or Island of the enemy taken and fortified,
besides the commanding of any fleet of war, or of treasure that should be
met with at Sea, if 6. ships of her Majesty's and 5000. land soldiers, with
500. Sayle^s to transporte them were added to the former preparation. All which
conditions being agreed unto, and my Lord Admiral ^^cusing himself from the
journey, by the indisposition of his body* I had warning to prepare my self to
take the charge. When I went ^oorth, my first design was upon Farroll, both
by her Majesty's commaundment, and mine own choice, for when I had defeated
that force, I might go^ after whether I listed, and do almost what I listed,
(I mean) upon any places upon that coast. And of doing what I would upon that
fleet and army at Farr^^* I had little cause to doubt, if God had given me a
fauo^rable passage and season, to land the army, and enter the Port, their
preparation to resist being all known, and little moving any distrust of the
possibility, or facility of this kind of enterprise. I think I have
satisfied you i^ some of my former papers, especially in my discourse, written
as I came home from Cadz, and I will satisfy ^n^ reasonable man, that will
speak with me of it. The aduan^^ges that would have grown by it are manifest:
H^^ Majesty's dominion for a long time, from any invasion from Spain had been
secured. The king of Spain hi^ fleet both going forth, and coming home,
utterly unguarded, the taking of the Spanish and Portugal Isles more easy, the
enterprise upon the East and West Indies warranted from two of the greatest
dangers, an encounter by Sea, and an invasion by land, whilst her Majesty's
forces were absent: To conclude her Majesty had been such an absolute Queen
of the Ocean, and her enemy so disarmed by Sea, as she might either enforce
him to any conditions of peac^ or make war to her infinite advantage, and his
utter ruin, I had also thought upon some places which I might have holden for
the diuersion of the wars, and if ever the taking of the Indian fleet were
likely, I know I should have been in a fair way for it: though I confess
these hopes were so uncertain, as I reckoned them but by chance. My first,
chiefest, and maine design being to assail the Adelantado in Farroll: Farroll
was the Randeuous I gave, to Farroll I directly shaped my course: and at
Farroll I had mastered the fleet, that lay there whole years threatening my
country, or driven that army into the hills, or sacrificed my self. The
causes frustrating this design, were first the violent long tempest, which
took us in the height of 46. scattered our fleet, disinabled and almost
drowned most of our principal ships, And when we could no longer beat it up
against the wind, drove us back upon our own coast: Next that unreasonable
stormy weather, which kept us a month after we were put back from attempting
to go forth again: and lastly our wantes, which forced us to discharge our
whole land army saving 1000. men, for mine own excuse how long I dured ere I
turned back, and to what desperate case I brought my ships, there be
witnesses enough. Also her Majesty and her counsel know, what proffer of
service I made her, when I came up post from Plymouth, accompanied with Sir
Walter Rawleigh, if she would but have let me gone, but with half the fleet,
and less then half the land army to such place as my self and the counsel
of war had chosen for to be. sure the enemy and not her Majesty should
feel the weight and charge of the journey. And when her Majesty accepted not
of that offer, even a little before my last going forth, I went to her
Majesty to offer the attempting of the fleet in Farroll, if she would give me
leave to hazard the 1000. land soldiers, with some number of the fly boats,
and merchantes ships, and the Saint Matthew and the Saint Andrew for my self,
and one other commander to go in, as a guard for the rest, as ^it ships to
bear the greatest of the Gallions, leaving all the queen^ ships and the other
principal commanders, without in the Bay, till we had tried our fortune. Of
this letter I received answer, tying me to hazard none but these, and yet with
some limitations: But I lost the Saint Matthew by breaking the fore mast, and I
lost company first of the S. Andrew ere I came to the opening of the Groine:
and then the same night while I was feign to lie by the lee, for stopping of a
desperate leeke, I lost the company of my Lord the vice admiral, by a
mischaunce that fell to his ship, and 30. sail amongst which were many of
the companies of the soldiers, so that in effect I wanted all those means
that were allotted for my attempt. And then I houered up and down those
coasts, in which I had directed such as should lose company to seek me in,
and sent out Pinnaces every way till the Admiral of the squadron that was
missing, sent me word, when I was in the height of 40 that the Adelantado was
gone forth with his fleet, and gone straight to the Terceras to wast home the
Indian fleet, then I resolved after I had called a counsel to go forth to
seek him, and though I failed of him, because he never offered to come forth,
till long after, yet I missed very narrowly and unfortunately, of the west
Indian fleet, if I had met them before they got to the Terceras, there could
none of them have escaped: And meet with them I had, if a false intelligence
had not made me stand one night a contrary way. But it was the will of God there
should be ino blow strooken at Sea that year, else when at the same time I
returned from the Islands, and the Adelantado bare for the coast of England, we
had not so narrowly missed the one the other as we did.

I have now showed you (worthy Master Bacon) with what mind I undertook
these foreign imploimens and actions of the war. A word for my friendship
to the chief men of action, and favor general to the men of war: and then
I come to the maine objection, which is the crossing of the treaty in hand.
For most of them which are accounted the chief men of action, I do entirely
love them: they have been my companions both abroad and at home: Some of them
began the wars with me, most of them have had place under me, and many of them
had me a witness of their rising, from Captains, Lieuetenants, and private
men, to these charges which since by their virtues they have obtained. Now I
know their virtue I would choose them for friends, if I had them not, but
before I had tried them, God in his providence chose them for me: I love them
for my own sake, for I find sweetness in their conversation, strong
assistance in their employment with me, and happiness in their friendship,
I love them for their virtues sake, for their greatness of mind: For little
minds though never so full of virtue, can be but a little virtuous. For their
understanding: For to understand little or things not in use, is little better
then to understand nothing at all. For their affection: For soft lo^ing men,
love ease pleasure and profit. But they that love pains, danger, and fame,
show they love the public profit more then themselves. I love them for my
countries sake, for they are Englands best armor of defense, and weapons of
offense. If we may have peace, they have purchased it, if we must have war,
they must manadge (...), yet whilst we are doubtful, and in treaty, we must
value our selves by what may be done, and our enemy will value us by what has
been done, by our chief men of action. That generally I am affected to the
men of war, it should not seem strange to any reasonable man: Every man
loves those of his own profession: the grave judge favors the student of the
law, the reverend Bishops the laborers of the ministry, And I, since her
Majesty has yearly used my service in her late actions, must reckon my self
to the number of her men of war. Before action, providence makes me cherish
them, for the service they can do, and after action, experience and
thankfulness makes me love them for the service they have done. I know great
scandal lies upon the profession of Arms, as if it were a schole of
dissoluteness: but that grows by commandment and charg given to dissolute
chiefs, and it is a fault of the professors not of the profession. For a camp
ought to be, (and if it be well go^^^ned) is the b^st school, to make religion
truly felt, and piety and honesty to be duly practiced. For my self I am
sure, they that love me least, (if thou know any thing of my government when I
am abroad) will tax me rather for being to be too severe, then charg me for
being to remiss and popular. But I long to leave these disputations, which are
but skirmishes, and will come to join with my aduers^^ies in that encounter,
wherein they labor both to overthrow my credit, with my Sovereign, and my
country. They say that England cannot stand without peace, peace cannot grow
but by treaty, treaty cannot be had, but when the enemy offers it, and now
when the enemy offers to treat, the doubts I cast, and arguments I frame,
do show I would not have her Majesty's commissione^ sent over. I answer in a
word: that if I saw them to build upon any true principle, I should not so much
dissent from them as I do: but if they will promise themselves, they may have
peace without ground, or think that peace may be good for us without reason,
or leap blind folded into a treaty, without due circumstances, I say then I
do^ not suspect too much, but rather they too little. For a ground that we may
have peace, it is alleged, that a commission is come to the Cardinal out of
Spain, and that by virtue of that commission he offers to send his deputy, to
meet with her Majesty's. What is the conclusion therefore? The enemy desires
and intends peace: Allow this for a good syllogism, and you may put to school
all the L^gicians in Christendom. It were well concluded, this shows that he
means to treat: But remember how heretofore the Spanish kings Lieuetenant,
and other ministers have pretended commission when they had none: yea have
drawn us to treaty, before they had there power from Spain: to conclude,
Remember also how that king has sent a commission from Spain, to be openly
showed that treaty might be entertained, when it is notorious to the world, he
never meant to conclude any peace, witness of all this the Duke of Parma, his
want of commission, when by his letters, he drew my Lord of Darbie, Cobham, and
other commissioners to the treaty of Berborch. And afterward that coming of
a commission, when their great Navy did presently appear upon our coasts,
for the conquest of England. But do they offer to treat, and mean no peace?
What is then their meaning? If you will have me to interpret, I will tell you*
Their first maine attempt against England, was in 88. from that time to this
present is full ten years, the just time of the siege of Troy, An^ now they
see open force cannot prevail, they in show retire and give over arms, but
they have prepared a Sinons horse, which cannot enter if we ^ast not down our
walls. But because we are thought more credulous then the Tro^an were, the
bare letter of a base beggarly traitorous fugitive, assuring us that good faith
is meant, is the uttermost stratagem they use to deceive us with: but though
some believe it, yet I say, Time^ Dan^^s and dona serentes, If they appeal
from my exposition, let their actions expound themselves: will they charge us
at Berborch with failing to agree to peace, or will they have us to allow that
the Duke of Medina came with that huge fleet and army only to be witness to
the contract: O^ if they had rather their own wo^ds should expound their
meaning, then their actions, Here Emanuell Jews the Portugal, that brought
Lopu^ and Stephano Ferrara assurance of the 50000. Crowns, to be paid so soon
as their devilish conspiracy, against the life of our precious sovereign,
should t^ke effect: hear him I say, who at his arraignement in Guild hall
London confessed at the bar, that in their Cipher and Targon when they wrote of
peace, they intended the murder and death of her Majesty. Or if the peace
must not be condemned to be insidious, but under two witnesses, here also
Anthony Rowles now prisoner in the tower of London who coming hither out of
Spain^ with a pretense of making a nouerture of peace, and for better color
bringing letters to her Majesty, to your self and me, from Teswell the
Jesuit, to that end confessed upon his examination taken by master
Secretary, and my self, that his true etrand given him by some of the king of
Spaines chiefest ministers, was, to discover the state of our preparations, to
assure the Papists of England, that they might shortly expect their
deliverance, to win some counselors about her Majesty, or noblemen in this
kingdom to favor their case, and to offer me from the Spanish king, what ever
portion or sum of money I would desire, so as I would be won to take their
part. Now judge (worthy master Bacon) out of the clearenesse of your own
judgment, how I should understand their offer and speech of peace: and think
^ut of the worthine^ of your own heart, what peace my heart could take with
them, that have attempted to conquer my country, practiced to murder my
Sovereign, and sought out me a^ a fit man to be tempted to betray both my
Queen and country. But if God had not put me back, and arrested by contrary
winds this last summer, I should have taught that proud king what effect his
offers had wrought in me: And that the longer the will of God, and my
Sovereign do restrain me, with the greater interest I hope to pay him in the
end. But our peacemakers may allege that times are changed, and with the
times the humors of princes and affairs do commonly change: So although
heretofore their were no trust to be given to the enemies word, or fair
shows; yet now his humor, or the consideration of his own affairs may
dispose him to make peace: For my part erel can believe that he is of a peace
able humor, I must know how his ambitious and reuengfull humors are
satisfied, and quenched. Satisfied they cannot be: for he has received
overthrow in encounters, ill success in all attemptes, and loss and scorn
in all the war h^ has had with our Majesty. Quenched they are not like to
be, for if apprehension of death would have quenched them, he would not the
last year, when he came newly out of that trance, which was thought would had
been his dead sound, had asked the first word that he spoke, whether the
Adelaniado were gone for England: Or if remorse of conscience would have
quenched them, he would not in his devotions being at mass, have vowed to be
revenged on England, though he sold all the candlestickes upon the altar
before him Of the first of these speeches, my self, and some of my fellow
commissioners have seen very credible advertisement out of Spain. And the
second was delivered both to you and to me by the mouth of a principal
Iesulte, newly come out of Spain. But we may well conclude that his humor is
not like to be changed, for he will never think he has sufficient part of
the earth, till his mouth ^e full of earth* And some of his ghostly fathers the
Jesuits, will as well persuade that the invasion of other princes kingdoms is
a work of piety: as they, do teach desperate conspirators, that to murder
princes is the way to heaven; And if he should die to morrow his sons blood
is hotter, and his humor of ambition is like to be greater, he has bin breed
in domo Regnatri^i, and his mind shows to be already swollen, veteri atque
insita Austriacae samiliae superbia. So as in their peaceable humors there
being no hope, let us see what is the present state of their affaites. Princes
and states when they do enter into consideration of their own affairs, may
dispose themselves to peace, for utility, conueniencie, or necessity. For
utility if they can get aduautage. For conueniencie. if peace be sit to
conserve them in the state they are. For necessity: when they have no longer
means to make war. That it is like the king of Spain will make peace with
us, because he shall get advantage, our peacemakers will not agree, and if they
do, it is their own fault: if we fall into the pit* which they show us so
plainly. That he should not be inclined to peace with England for
conueniencie, if neither advantage entice him, nor necessiue enforce him, I
reason thus: All states do stand as much by reputation, a^ by strength,
especially where there dominions are divided far, and where a few of one
nation give the law to great multitudes of many: Now let the Indies, the low
countries, Naples, Milla^ne, see that Spain that has so long tirannized over
them, is glad after so many overthrows, disgraces, and losses to make peace
with England, upon equal terms, and they will know that the Spanish are
Hombros common losotos, and that it has bin baseness in them all this while,
Seruitutem suam quotidie emere, quotidie pas^^^e: so as I conclude, by such a
peace, the Spanish should loose all reputation of his Arms, and honor of his
greatness, and his countries would not be kept from reuolting l^y any
possibility. And therefore conuenienty cannot move him to any peace with us.
That necessity or want of means should d^iue him to it, I think it, both
improbable, and impossible, improbable: that he that so lately assailed
England, France and the low countries at once, having now brooken the band
of league, and divided France from the other two, should think himself
unable to make war with us. Impossible: that he should l^cke means. Wants
he treasure* his Partido to pay his army, is made with the Genowaies for a
great time to come: And as his enterprises are his obtides, to make his
treasure tun low, so his Indian retou^nes are his floudes to fill the banks
again. Wantes he men? why besides all his new allies, he has those forces,
that were employed in France free to be used against us. Wantes he ships* he
buildes every day, and may embarge in Spain as many as he list, and is now
both combining himself with the Easterlinges, and conspiring with them against
us Wantes he victuals? besides the helps he was wont to have, he shall now by
the peace in France have as much as he list. So as I conclude, which way
soever I turn my self I see no likelihood of his disposing himself to peace
with us* and if no peace be to be had, the^ no treaty is to be entered into For
from him by intertayning treaty, we can draw nothing, nor succor any body,
and he may make us and our only confederats so jealous one of the other, as in
striuiug to take the start, we should strive who should lose them selves first.
But if I allow our peacemakers their assurance of peace, let me see what is
their purchase, if they can make any peace with Spain good for us, it must be
by including our confederates in the low countries, or excluding them, but I
suspect neither of these can be good or safe for us, therefore I judge they can
make no good peace at all. To include the low countries in our peace it is
impossible, except they acknowledge the king of Spain or him that shall claim
under him for their Sovereign, as the Duke of Burgu^die which if they do all
things else, which should give power to the enemy, and bringes slavery upon
the Netherlandes, and danger upon, will necessarily follow. The reason is
manifest, for when the authority of the general states, and the present form
of government, of the united provinces shall be broaken and diss^lued, a
monarchy set up and a prince acknowledged, there shall nothing limit the
princes absoluteness, but his own will The strength of a contract cannot
limit it, for neither will he keep faith with those whom he accounts
Heretics, and calls rebels, neither will they make any longer delay to
betray themselves, for province will strive with province, town with town,
and man with man who shall be obsequious, and show themselves most servile, all
care of defense neglected by minds bewitched with the name of peace, all
memory of former tirannie blotted out of their hearts, resolved to accept a
Sovereign. Some will seek for charge of soldiers, some for magistracy in
towns, some for gathering of custom, and handling of money, some for offices
of justice, some for benifices, and spiritual liuinges, all for trade into
Spain and into the Inides, every man for private gain, and no man for
pubelique safety. The magistrates and governors cannot limit it, for the
chief men which now bare rule in martial and civil government, will provide
by flight for their own safetiz, for if the brave Count Edmoundes bought his
trust and confidence in his Majesty with the price of his head, what shall any
low country subject hope in, when his many memorable services, especially
those two memorable battles of Graneline and S. Quintin^, and his putting
himself into the Spaniards hands, could not ouerweigh the suspicion of the
combining with the reuolters, what hope of future merit shall weigh down the
offense of those, which have by counsel or action, maintained the state of the
low countries against Spaines garrisons. Nor troops of soldiers cannot limit
it, for there will be nothing to pay them, when any thing above the kings
ordinary is demanded of the people, it will be answered, is not he our enemy?
Why do we acknowledge him as our prince? Is he our prince? Why do we stand
out against him as against an enemy? besides all low strangers besides, and
the enemy will oppress upon any sudden by force, for his means depend upon
himself, the others upon the will of a people that will be glad to spaie the
purse, when they see present wars, and the enemies number will be far greater
then the States, banish strangers on both sides, yet the enemy shall be
strengthened with espaniolized Netherlandes, and the states defended but by
such as shall take oathe to the enemy. Stipulation of other princes cannot
limit it, for the state will be oppressed on the sudden, when their helps will
come too late, and those princes that were glad to make peace, when the enemy
was weak themselves united, and the low countries flourishing, will not begin
a new quarrel, when the enemies strength is recovered, themselves divided, and
the low countries lost. Yet those that I have named are the least assurances,
that either our peace makers can pro pound, or the united provinces receive, I
will add further, that as it is certain, no peace is to be had with the united
provinces, except a Sovereign be acknowledged: so is it with out all doubt
that there can be no peace concluded, except popish religion, be either
universally established, or else freely exercised in the towns and provinces
where now it is banished, Allow the first, that they banish Gods true
service, to bring in idolatry, the leave truth to receive faslhood, they
refuse the protection of the most merciful god in heaven, to win the favor of
the most tirannical prince in the earth, Allow the second you bring in a
plurality of religions, which is no less crime, and which is against the
policy of all states, because where there is not unity in the Church, there
can be no unity nor order in the state, for as the mingling of poison with
wholesome liquor in one vessel, does not corrupt that which is Letheal, but
corrupts that which is wholesome, so the poisoned doctrine of these
espaniolized Jesuits once brought in, will quickly leave no one professor in all the united provinces. So that I conclude it were both folly and impiety,
for them to make any such peace, or for us to draw them to it, yea more folly
in us, then ever was committed in any state. For what will not the enemy be
able to do upon us, when besides the forces he now has, he shall have a
country in his hands able to find him 60000. or 80000. soldiers, 500.
ships of war, besides insinite numbers of transporting vessels, and
commodious Ports that are but a days sailing from the very heart of England.
But the low countries shall be given to the Infant, she married to the
Archduke Albert, and so that state divided from the crown of Spain in a farte
safer hand. For the disuniting of them, I answer, the Infant is (if the Prince
of Spain have no children) to be heir to her brother, and her brother in like
case to her, and then are the states united, the only likelihood of their
remaining severed is if they both have children, and yet since none of that
house do marry farther of then cosen Germans, I see not why we should not
suspect their conjunction by such a match. But allow them ^euered, is not
Albert son in law to the late king, and brother in law to the present^ is
he not to be backed by the force of Spain, and maintained by the purse of
Spaine^ will he not serve the Spanish kings turn as well to join in war
against England, as the Duke of Sauoy that married the other sister did in war
against France? Nay has he not a suspected streng^^ of his own, by being
brother to the present Emperor, and in no unlikely hope, to be Emperor
himself hereafter (...) Nay is not the Infant, the person whose title to the
cro^^ of England, Parsons so labored to prove? Is not the low countries the
rise by which he must leap into England Is not such a peace as this in hand,
the means to assure her of all the Iowe Countries, Is not the army which is
now under her new husband, the force on which the enemy for his enterprise
of England must set his rest? yes yes this cohaerence is manifest, and their
design clearly discovered. And it is too plain what is to be expected of our
peace if we include the low countries. Now let us consider how good it may be
if we abandon them, I have ever thought that such a peace might be good for
us, if they that persuade unto it, c^^ prove three things. First, that they
of the low Countries will have both will and strength to maintain the war,
though we make peace and forsake them. Secondly, so we leave them we may have
good conditions (...) our selves. And thirdly, that as our affairs now stand
a neutralitie can be possible kept by us, while the united provinces and the
enemy are in war. In the will of (...) Iowe Countries to continue war, and
to refuse all conditions that the enemy shall offer, I understand the
resolution and counsel of the governors of the state, (...) the conformity
of the people to such a resolution (In t^^ strength I mean as well the strength
of the governors to force the people if they be adverse, as the strength and
sufficiency of their means to endure so great and so sharp a war, as will
fall upon them.) Of the chief governors resolving there, may be these
doubts, that they shall be tempted by the enemies offers, who if he can will
purchase the severally, that he may reduce them universally. And that they
shall be terrified with the danger of counsel, for it soundes both harshly
aforehand, and is ^^e to fall out vnsuccessinely at the first, the enemy being
so much master of the fields as some place will be carried. I know they do
pretend to be resolute one way, and protest against giving ear to treaty, but
that may be either to move us by example or to make us to leave pressing of
them to a treaty, or to seem to hold out to the last that we may seem rather
to have undone them, then they to undo themselves. But if they upon mature
deliberation should choose the continuance of the wars as the less of the two
evils, yet that they people will be like affected it is not probable, for when
a people that has been long ^yted with the misery of the war, shall hear the
pleasing name of peace, when they that had two mighty Princes joined with them
in a straight defensive and offensive league, shall see themselves abandoned
first by France, and then by England, when one the one side for the
maintenance of the wars, they shall have new and great contributions
demanded of them, and one the other side they shall be offered all plausible
conditions of peace, nay when they shall see England by making peace, get the
trade of Spain from them, and they alone by standing out, shall be barred of
that Navigations which has made them so mighty in shipping, and so increased
in wealth and riches, what then the multitude is like to choose, is it not easy
to judge? And if the people be not conformable of themselves, how by the
authority of the governors of the state (which are called the general
states) they may be forced I do not see, First because it is not an absolute^
and necessary, but a limited and voluntary obedience which they yield.
Secondly because the state has not (as the state of Rome had, and the state of
Venice has) one place that as the head does command and direct all the parts
of the body, but is compounded of equal parts* Zealand is as absolute as
Holland, Friseland as either of them, yea not only the least province, but the
least town holds it self to have a kind of Sovereignty, and will have as
free a voice as the greatest. Thirdly because of the former manner of
proceedinges, which has not been to send commandments to bind, but deputies
to persuade: not to resolve and conclude in the greatest causes in any one
counsel, or assembly, but to sound and feel the disposition of every
province, and so to win them to like of that they have devised of. And l^stly
because that even amongst themselves, they are for the time general states,
there is not like to be unanimity in opinion, and then though they that
dissent (being sewe) will not bear the envy to stand in counsel against the
greater part, yet it is easy for them, when they come home to work in the
particular provinces and towns, such a distrust of that which shall be
generally propounded to all, as the resolution will stick, and the whole
business be overthrown, it being unsafe for them to deny liberty of voice
to any, such liberty being the true cause of their taking arms, and standing
out against the common enemy. But admit both by the governors of state and
people, it were resolved that the low Countries alone should remain in war,
how are their means, or is their strength like to maintain war. Of all
foreign help they are utterly destitute, France makes no diuersion, England
can yield no succors, and in all Christendom their is no other prince or
state likely or able to back them. Their own means and ability grow either
by the fruit of the earth, or by traffic and merchandise, for the fruits of
the earth, that means is like to be but small, for the enemy being master of
the fields, and able to divide his forces into diverse places, will every day
either win from them, part of that they hold, or at the least, so infecte
those parts that are already in the States obedience, as except it be in
Holland, or Zealand, which the enemy cannot yet come unto, the husbandry will
be ill followed, and yealde little profitte. And as for their means by
traffic, it is unlikely that merchauntes, that may remove their dwellinge, to
peaceable places nere hand, where they may have safe and free trade, will
remain in the Low Countreies, which only is in war, of all these parts of
Christendom: and if they keep their dwelling, yet will the Spaniarde without
doubt banish them the trade into Spain, when both France, and England, and
the Easterlinges shall supply him, and will seek both to banish and impeach
them of other trade, as much as he can, pretending that they are now the only
perturbe^s of the peace of Christendom. So as I conclude, when I think with
myself what the governors of the state of the united provinces are like to
resolve, what the people in general will be like to desire, how hardly the
multitude will be forced against their liking, or the means of the Low
Countries make them subsist to themselves, I see nothing but danger that the
enemy will shortly and suddely be master of all the country: which how it
imports us to prevent, it has bin before made plain. I will now consider
what conditions we are like to have for our selves, so we will forsake our
confederats, restitutio^ of places we can not demand, as France did, for the
enemy holds none of ours. Reparation of damage we can as little seek for, for
from him we have sustained no loss. And trade into the Indies our zealous
peacemakers will not stand for, least the enemy offended will grant no peace.
Traf^ique into Spain and Portugal we shall have, and that is the only
condition that carries any show of advantage to us. But if we consider how
greedy our merchantes will be of such a trade at first, and how easy it will
be for a faith breaking enemy to confiscate all our countrimens goods, and to
embarge and use English shipping against England, we would not brag to much
of this advantage. But on the other side he will require alteration in our
government, or in the execution of our laws for matters of religion,
delivering up the towns her Majesty has in the Love Countries, and
reparation of all the damages sustained in the wars. The first is a condition
only for a conqueror to impose, and unfit for a brave state (that in all the
wars heretofore has had the better) once to hear mentioned. The second should
never be asked of a Queen so just, as she will not yeald up the keys of a
country, delivered by her best confederates, into the hands of her greatest
enemies, nor of a prince so wise, as she will not add strength to him, whose
strength already she holds so much suspected, nor enable him to invade,
whose ambition and malice thirsts after invasion and conquest. The third
condition is impossible to be granted, for the loss the king of Spain has
received in these wars, amounts to a greater sum then the treasure of all the kings in Christendom. If It be asked how I know that these conditions
will be demanded, I answer, I learn Albertus mind of Albertus himself, and
the Spaniards conditions out of the instruction given to the Spanish
commissioners If it be said though in the intercepted letters and instructions,
such conditions were to be asked but never meant, they should be insisted
upon, I answer, that in the instruction to the Spanish commissioners, it is
expressly set down in the first and third condition: the lega^e shall be
pressed to urge the French king, to stand with them in obtaining them: and for
the second, if the English commissioners do cut of all hope of delivering the
towns, that then the treaty shall instantly break of, which is as much as if
he should say, except England will give us the keys of the Low Countries,
whereby we may reduce them, and let us have the Port of Flushing in which our
Galleys may winter, and from which we may set out our fleet for the conquest
of England whenever we will break, we will have no peace with England at
this time. But if it be granted that the Low Countries will maintain the wars
alone, and that Spain will grant us good conditions so we will abandon the
states, how will it appear that it is possible for us betwixt these two to hold
a neutralitie. If we do not the united provinces some favor underhand, at
least by letting them be served by such of our nation, as will voluntarily
offer themselves unto them, their state cannot be maintained, nor they kept our
friends whom we suffer to perish. On the other side, if we do them in this
kind or any other, any favor which shall keep them from perishing, we give
the Spaniard and the Archduke a new quarrel, and so make them of new become
our enemies. Besides her Majesty has bestowed in the action in the Low
Countries at the least 4 millions of crowns, and she has in pawn for the
debt which the states owe^ her, the towns of Flushing and the Brill: to
reimburse that which is due, and to maintain the wars the states are unable,
to deliver the towns without reimbursement were utterly to loose all the
treasure spent, and the authority and bridle which her Majesty has upon that
people, which is one of the greatest securities of her state: to keep them
(especially Flushing) and to remain in new treaty in my understanding seems
altogether impossible, for when the enemy shall see that neither by treaty,
nor offer of his large conditions, the states will be won, he will assail
them by force, yea he will take that way which will be shortest and easiest
for the reduction of the whole, which will be to bring his Galleys into the
rivers, and to transport men into the Islands, for so by peircing into zeland,
he shall make his way into Holland, and if he have once good sooting in these
2. provinces, he is straight master of the whole state, If Flushing which is
the only bulwark against the Islands and the Castle of Ramnekins, which
commands the river of Stoad shall notimpeach nor offend the enemy, he will
carry all the roast of the Island of ^aterezen, and so consequently all Zeland:
if after he is become her Majesty's friend, he be used as an enemy, by that
places she holds the peace is broaken, but though it were proved never so
fully, that the peace which we might have (if we may have any at all) is full
of dangers and inco^ueniences, yet some are so zealous of it that they will say
it is the misery of our state, that we neither have a good peace, nor a good
war, and of the two evils it is better to have a practiced peace, then an
insupportable war. But injurious are these to the men of war that fight for
them, and defend them, in thinking our Arms which have ever done honor to our
country, stricken terror to the hearts of our enemies, less able to defend
our country, then their treaties which have never been free from scorn and
disadvantage. Injurious are they to the country which bredde them, which being
one of the brauest, strongest, and happiest states of Christ endome, is judged
by these men as weak as their own weak hearts, Injurious they are to her
Majesty who has ruled them, who being so great, so glorious, so victorious a
Queen, shall be judged unable to maintain war, when she cannot have peace
but at the pleasure of her enemy. Injurious and most unthankful to God
himself are they that hitherto fought for them, in that for an vnsase peace
with an Idolatrous and irreligious nation they would leave an honorable and
just war: when they have done all that they can, it the enemy will not
conclude peace, we must have war. And shall not reasonable men then as well be
persuaded by necessity of reason, as by necessity of fortune. But wherein do
they find such insufficienci^ to maintain the wars? our Navy, as also that
of the confederats was never stronger: nor the enemy in shipping half so
weak: our nation generally was never so martial, nor never had so many able
leaders. Our confederates in the Low Counteies who being firmly knit unto us,
are of more use then all the friends in Christendom, (that ever we had or can
have) they I say were never more resolute, France has left us, we are cased
of many chardges, and shall make war in fewer places, Ireland is chargeable,
that charge may well be borne, when it is almost the sole burden that lies
upon us, yet if there be any weakness in our means to make war, it is in our
treasure. But if it be considered how for this present year Spain has no
ability to assail us, how the next year the yearly subsidies will begin
to be paid, how in France we have an end of all chardges, and are to receive
reinbursement of that is due, how in the Low Countries her Majesty's expense
may alsocease, and she receive some help toward her other chardges, yea,
though her Majesty's treasure be drawn deep into, and the poor husbandmen by
these late hard years, has now scant means to live, yet if our sumptuous
buildings, surfeiting diet, our prodigality in garments, our infinite plate,
and costly furniture of houses be considered, England cannot be thought to be
poor. Can we exceed all nations in Christendom in expencefull vanities? and
can we not arm our selves against one nation which we have always beaten for
our necessary defense? was Rome so brave a state as the very Ladies to supply
the common treasure to maintain the wars, spoiled themselves of their jewels
and rich ornaments? And is England so base a state, that the men in it will not
bestow some of their supersluous expenses, to keep themselves from conquest
and slavery? did the kings and religious people of the old Testament to
maintain the wars against the enemies of God, sell the ornaments of the
Temple, and things consecrated to holy uses? and shall not we which have as
holy a war, spare those things which we have dedicated to our idle and
sensual pleasures? and could our nation in those former g^llant ages, when our
country was far poorer, then it is now, leauie arms, make war, archieue
great conquests in France, and make our powerful arms known as far as the
holy land? and is this such a degenerate age, as we shall not be able to defend
England? no, no, there is some seed yet left of the ancient virtue. Remember
with what spirit and alacrity, the Gentlemen of England have put themselves
into our late actions, There will ever be found some Valerij that so the state
may stand and flourish, care not though they leave not where with all to bury
themselves, though other bury their money not caring what case they leave the
state. We have thanks be to God a Queen, who never has been wastfull in her
private expenses, yet will sell her plate and jewels in the tower, ere her
people shall be undefended. We are a people that will turn our silken coats
into iron iackets, and our silver plate to coats of plate, rather then our
Sovereign shall be unserved, but why should either prniceor people be put to
that extremity: If her Majesty will but bestow 60000, pound a year which the
Low Countries do cost her, and 20000. pound a year which the States do offer
her, and 20000 pound more which I doubt not may be drawn, by way of
reimbursement from the French king, this 100000. pound a year, with half as
much more bestowed by the States, who to engage her Majesty in mainteinance of
the war, will never shrink for their portion, this sum I say of a 100000.
pound put into the hands of an honest and sufficient treasurer for the wars,
and to be issued by warrant of a counsel of war, well chosen, will fully
and sufficiently maintain the war with Spain, yea, if this be doubted, it
shall be made plain that with 250000. such a force shall be maintained, that
her Majesty having a convenient number of her ships, and furnishing them as
she yearly does, the enemy shall bring no fleet into the Seas, for England,
Ireland, and the (...) Countries, but it shall be beaten, nor seek to gather
any in Spain, but the parts of it shall be defeated, before the whole be
assembled, yea, those services shall be done upon the enemy, that the poorest
Prince and state in Christendom shall have little cause to fear his malice.
But of this question, whether we should think the peace good for us, which the
peacemakers will procure I have stood long innough. I come now to the last
question of all, whether they do enter into the treaty of it with due
circumstances. My purpose is not to deal with complementall circumstances, or
the Pantilios of honor (though I judge them in their proper time and place
worthy of good consideration) but the material circumstances which any prince
or state should weigh before they enter into treaty, I judge to be these. The
time of treating, whether it yeald most advantage for peace or war. The
persons of the treators, whether or no the enemy with whom we treat may make
advantage by pretense, if nothing be concluded. The assurance of the treaty,
or strength of the knette which is tied, and the state and condition we are
like to be in, whenever it breaks and dis^^olues. The only reason which
they that would have peace do use to prove that this season is fittest, and
yealds most advantage for peace, is, that now the king of Spain is so weak
and poor, that he will be brought to that, which he neither would heretofore,
nor will hereafter ever agree unto. Therefore say they this is the only time
for peace, but sure except they were better Logicians or could frame better
arguments, I would scarce wish them to be trusted with arguing for a treaty.
The conclusion is directly contradictory to their own proposition: for is he
now vnablest of all times to encounter us in war? then is this of all times
the fittest season to make war. Is this the season he chooses to recover
himself by peace? then of all times peace now should least be granted. Now,
now is the fittest time to make war upon the Spaniard, his losses are not
recovered, his coffers are not filled, his fleet not made, his Sea provisions
not supplied, his Indies not quiet, his son in law in new Sovereignty not
settled. But her Majesty's late batteries have made way to her greater and
higher attemptes: Terror accompanies the powerfulness of her Armies, fear
possesses the hearts of her enemies, and God himself by the success has
judged her cause: All the world has seen what has happened, and the actions
past. The common conclusion is, Victrix causa, quia dijs placuit. So on the
other side, now of all times is the unfittest season to make peace, when the
state of our best confederates is so undetermined by practice, threatened by
force, and solicited to their own undoing by forrayne princes, as except^ we
both encourage them, and cleave fast to them, their ruin is at hand. Now it is
no time to make peace with the chief enemy of our religion, when a conspiracy
is in hand, against all the professors of it The news is too rise, and too
credible, that this undertaking Pope, after his victories so glorious in
Ferrara, and his powerful reconciling of two great kings, in the heat of so
great a war: that now he will not leave, till he make a general league
against all such, as do not, or will not acknowledge the omnipotency of his
Bulls. Now if we show our selves so weak, that we follow not the advantage
we have, we shall hereafter be thought so weak, as we may have any conditions
be enforced upon us Now if we refuse the conditions, which our friends will
offer to purchase in our constancy, we must resolve, hereafter to take such
condicious as the enemy will give, though it be to our loss. But if we will
needs slatter ourselves, that our agreeing to peace, when the enemy desires
it, can make any sound and durable league betwixt us: we shall undoubtedly
find when it is too late to say, Inter victos victoresque nunquam solida fides
coaliscit. And unto the circumstance of time the circumstance of persons, and
it will appear that the pretense and beginuing to treat of peace, without
concluding, is like to be very gainefull to the enemy, and prejudicial to us:
for if he, which now is not able to guard his Indian fleet, may but while we
are talking, have one or two returns in safety, if he which never feels the
strength of England and the Low Countries; as they are united, can for the
present sever them in counsel and affoction, as he may here after more easily
divide them in parts, If he that never wantes malice, but now wantes
strength, can sing us a s^eepe with the name of peace, till he may rouse us
from sleep by a thundering war, his gain, and our loss by this bare
pretense will quickly appear. Then for assuring, we give the enemy as good as
he can desire, in forbearing him when he is weakest, and letting go our
advantage, when it is greatest, we show, that nothing can draw us to war, if
we may have peace. On the other side, if a nation that yet never treated with
us, but to deceive us, and thinks our religion but heresy, our church
schismatic, our Queen excommunicated, so as by their own principles, they
are neither to keep faith with us, nor let us receive good by a contract with
them: what assurance, I say, can we have of such an enemy, and in such a
bargain? First to deceive us, and serve their own turn, by making peace and
then breaking of it, they hold it no fault. Next if they did purpose to keep
it, the Popes dispensation would take it away. And lastly if the Spaniard will
keep a show of good form, and not voluntarily break faith when his turn is
served: the Pope may to chardge him to break with us* as conscience and
obedience shall cover his malice and pe^fidiousnesse. Last of all let us
consider, what our state and condition is like to be, whenever that running,
knot, or unsure contract does break or dissolve. Are we the breakers? that
say that we discover how grossly we have been cosened, and how far the
enemies proud and mischievous designs are advanced: does the enemy break it?
then think that his injuries to our state are all made up. And when he makes
them play, he will quickly after give the assault: his fleet that now is
weak, shall be supplied but with those Gallions he buildes, and with all the
good ships of Christendom that will be bought or hired, his coffers that now
are emptyed, will be so full of treasure, as he will be ^ble not only to
trouble kingdoms by war, but also to purchase them with money, his ministers
and best instruments for practice, that dare not venture themselves to come
over, shall then have free access, and our hollow hearted malcontents, if we
have any that now want traffic, will be then ready and confident to
intertaine any practice, the Low Countries that now are his strong enemies,
either universally by treaty, or in part by conquest shall be reduced to be
his obedient subjects, our victories will be forgotten, these men of war we
have shall either be driven to seek new countries and new fortunes, or to be
consumed in a miserable beggarly Irish war, our nation generally grow
vnwarlicke, in love with the name, and bewitched with the delight of peace, and
the Spaniard courage will be recovered together with their strength, which is
the natural root of all confidence.

These, these (worthy Master Bacon) are my apprehensions and doubts, that
make me afraid to treat: Let this be answered, cleared, and resolved, or let
any man show me, how we shall have an honorable, safe, and stable peace, and i
will embrace both it and him, with both mine arms. But till then I say:
Iustissimum ij^ bellum, quibus necessarium, copia arma, quibus nulla, nifi in
armis, spes est.

FINIS.
La. Rich to her Majesty in the behalf of the Earl of Essex.
Early did I hope this morning, to have had mine eyes blessed with your
Majesty's beauties, but seeing the same depart into a cloud and meeting with
spi^^tes, that did presage by the wheels of their chariots, some thunder in
the air, I must complain and express my fears, to that high Majesty and
divine oracle, from whence I receive a doubtful answer: unto whose power I
must sacrifice again, tho tears and prayers of the afflicted, that must
despair in time, if it be too soon to importune heaven, when we feel the
miseries of hell: or that words directed to that sacred wisdom, should out
of season be delivered for my unfortunate brother, whom all men have liberty
to defame, as if his offenses were capital, and he so base dejected a
creature, that his love, his life, his service to your beauties, and the state
had deserved no absolution after so hard punishment, or so much as to answer
in your fair presence: who would vouchsafe more justice and favor, then he
can expect of partial judges. For those combined enemies, which lay open false
grounds to build his ruin, urging his fault as criminal to your divine
honor, thinking it heaven to blaspheme heaven, when their own particular
malice and counsels, have practiced only to glut themselves in their private
revenge, not regarding your service, or loss, so much as their ambitious end
to rise by his overthrow* And I have reason to apprehend that if your fair
hand do not check the course of their unbridled hate, that the last course will
be his last breath, since their cuill instruments that by their office and
cunning, provided for the feast, have sufficient poison in their hearts to
insert to the service, which they will serve, shall be death to digest, till it
be tasted, and then it will prove but preparation for greater mischiefs,
concealed among such crafty woorkemen, as would not only pull down all the
obstacles of their greatness, but when they are in their full strength like the
Giants make war against heaven. But your Majesty's gracious conclusion in
giving hope of the void, is all the comfort I have: which if you hasten not,
before he take full surfeit of disgraces, they will say, the spots they have
cast upon him are too foul to be washed away: And so his blemished reputation
must disable him, for ever serving again his Sacred Goddess, whose excellent
beauties and perfections will never suffer those fair eyes, to turn so far
from compassion, but at the least, if he may not return to the happiness of
his former service, to live at the feet^ of his admired Mistress, yet he may
sit down to a private life without the imputation of infamy: That his
posterity may not repent, their fathers were borns of so hard a desteny, two of
them porishing by being employed in one country, where they would have done you
loiall service, to the shedding of their last blood, if they had not been
wounded to the death by their faction, which care not on whose necks they
uniustly build the walls of their own fortune: Which I fear will grow more
daungerously high, then is yet discovered, if God do not hinder the work, as
the tower of Babell, and confound their tongues, that understand one another
too well. And lastly since out of your Majesty's own princely nature, and
unstained virtue there must needs appear, that mercy is not far off from such
beauty, I most humbly beseech you to make it your own work, and not to suffer
them to take advantage, that ly in ambush, thinking so soon as they recover a
relenting compassion in your worthy mind, to take the honor upon them, as
means of our salvation, not out of charity, but pride: But all must be
attributed to them, and your sacred clemency abused by forcing us to go
through Purgatory to Heaven. But let your Majesty's divine power be no more
eclipsed then your beauty, which has shined throughout the whole world, and
imitate the highest in not destroying those that trust only in your mercies.
Which with humble request, I presume to bless your sacred hands, vowing the
obedience and service of your Majesty.

Your most dutiful and loiall servant.


