A Goodly Dyalogue between Knowledge and Symplicitie.

IMPRINTED at London, by Anthony Scoloker And Willyam Seres. Dwelling without
Aldersgate.

Cum Bratia et priuilegio ad Imprimen^um s^lum^

Knoledge GOd save you my friend simplicity
I am glad of your good welfare
Ye are right welcome unto the City Symplicitie is a stranger in a city.

For here ye are a stranger very rare
^ know the cause of your hither repare
It draws now toward the term
Ye have some matters for to declare
And what they be feign would I learn.

Siplicite I thank you knowledge of your good will
And of your kyndnes without desert,
But I came hither for no such skyll, Siplicite is sorry yt ever he ca^ in ye
^^e, it is so full of noughtynes.

As y^ have uttered upon your part
But this I thought with all mine heart
When I same hither unto the term
(...) God I had suffered at home great smact^
Your facyons be so strange to learn.

Knoledge I pray you sir what is your grefe
Has any man here you offended? Knoledge desires to (...) owe his grefe and
promyseth to help him.

Show it shortly in words brefe
And if I cane I will see it amended
Your cause by me shall be defended
I will be with you all the term
(...) counsel toward you shall be bended
Your symp^enes to teach and learn.

Siplicite Mary Spr offended I am in deed
And that in conscience right grievously
I pray God it shortly be remedyed Siplicite thinks yt London will sink,
for sin

That London sink not much marvel I,
For here is naught it is but heresy
Blasphemy and slander all out of frame
That one man affirms an other does deny
Against the honor of Gods holy name.

Knoledge. Ah Sir I know the cause well enough then
Of your great grefe in your conscience
And I am right glad, for above all men
I have much desired to have your presence
Content you, and shortly ye shall have intelligence
Though as yet for a time, so^thing be out of frame
At length amongst us shall be no difference
Concerning the honor of Gods holy name.

Symplicitie. Friend Knowledge, that is a thing impossible The Bible is cause of
contr^uersy. Ofer custom is blamed.

That euerin one we should agree
So long as we have this beble bible
Nay Nay Knowledge, that will not be
Do ye not hear and dailys see
How men old custom despise and blame?
which thing is greatly as thinks me
Against the honor of Gods holy name.

Kg Though old custom has us long (...)
Against Gods Gospel manyf^stlye
Is it not niece that it should be forbedde (...) old custom be against ye
gospel it must give place.

And also despised utterly?
If truth and old custom dysagree
Shall not truth old custom despise and blame
And make him subject to Gods virtue
Yes, that is the honor of Gods holy name

siplicitie. Will ye (o knowledge) be of that mind?
Will ye be of that sort and gyse?
Will ye begin new ways to find The custom of our forfathers is to be
observed.

And old custom clean to despise?
How say ye, were not our fathers wise?
Where they not learned? ye be to blame
Let their example your mind sustyse
Concerning the honor of Gods holy name

Knoledg Unto our fathers God be merciful
They lived in darkness and we in light Our fathers as paul teaches were vnd a
cloud, and saw not ye truth.

A litney were under a cloud most wonderful
Of the truth, they had no parfect sight
But I say, through Gods power and might
That cloud is cleared and set in right frame
And all fained fantasies it shall put to flight
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name

siplicitie. Will ye give me leave to ask you a question
And with my boldness not to be angrye
I would be sorry in any condition, The (...) of siplicitie.

For to offend you, ye may believe me
And I desire you even hartelye
Show unto me your opinion again
For we two I think shall not agree
Concerning the honor of gods holy name.

Knoledg Ask what ye will, and by Gods grace
As well as my wits shall serve me
I shall make answer in little space the ge^tell answer of Knoledg

As I have learned in gods verity
Be not afraid, but speak at liberty
What so ever ye say, none shall ye blame
For su^ely I trust your mind to satysfye
Concerning the honor of Gods holy name

siplicitie. How say you (I pray the) to the holy mass
That long has been used of antiquity
An for many other things I let pass) The first question is of masses

As of mass of mass of requiem and scala rely
That delivered our fre^des souls from purgatory
With many mo masses then I can name
Of the v. wound^s, and of corpus Christi
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name

Knoledge Such masses I say, are but Idolatrye yt all masses satisfactory are
Idolatrye of ye bishop of Romes mue^ting.

Which the Romysh Antichryst did invent
To blind our eyes with feigned ypocrysy
And all to get money was his intent
What greater blasphemye was euerment?
If masses shall save us, Christ's death is invayn
That suffered for us his flesh to be torment
Honor therefore no mass, but Gods holy name

Siplicite How say ye then unto the Sacrament
Which all ye go about to deny Whether Christ's body be really present in the
sacrament.

In the host, to be bodily present
First as he was borne of mary
And upon the cross as he did dye
If ye speak against this ye are to blame
This out fathers believed, and so do I
To the honor and prasyse of Gods holy name.

Knoledge The sacrament is an holy thing
But the use thereof was far out of frame
And that self body on the cross hangyng yt Christ is not' odely ^^ent in
the sacran^^t.

And horn of mary that bl^ssed dame
In his corporal presens I say plain
Is not there present, surely I think the same
Who teaches contrary, his doctyne is vain
And great dishonor to Gods holy name.

siplicitie Ah Jesus mercy what do I here? God is present ^lwhere and therefore
his body is in the sacrament

Is not he present in the sacrament?
How say you? Is not God present alwhere?
Will ye deny the new Testament?
And if he be alwhere, I say verament
He is in the sacrament I abide by the same
Your deuelysh doctrine the deuell did invent
To the great dishonor of Gods holy name.

Knoledge Yis sir God is present in very deed
As well all where, as in the Sacrament
But that understand in his Godhead yt God is present all where and is not
see^, as ye soul of man is inuis^^ble and icorruptible

And for example terne this presydent
The soul and the body be things different
But the body destroyed, ye soul does yet remain
And ye se not the soul, nether yet in the sacrament
Ye se Gods body, but blaspheme his name.

Siplicite Mary sir that is abominable heresy
Is this your new leranyng and doctrine? That the pressed of^^ up Gods bo^y i the
sacrame^

What thing can be said that is mort blasphemy
Ye shall never persuade me brother mine
Does not the priest from time to time
lift up Gods body, and show us the same?
In form of bread, yea, we se it with our eyes
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name.

Knoledg Ye are deceived ^^o^rr symplicitie Christ offered ones ca^ not be
offered against, mass is ydolatrie and has no ground in scriptur.

For Christ being offered ones for all
Shall never be offered again, believe me.
Our masses therefore, are most Idolatry of all
Having no ground in scripture at all
If ye say, ye se Christ lift up in the same
You co^my^ most shameful ydolatry wythall
To the great dishonor of Gods holy name.

siplicitie. Our curates command us in pain of da^pnacio
To believe that Christ's blessed blood and body
In the sacrament is present, of the same facyon
As he suffered dyed, and was borne of mary Curates command to believe yt Gods
body is ye (...) ye sacrament.

And who soever does say the contrary
To the bishops, they do accuse the same
As one co^myttyng most shameful heresy
To the great dishonor of Gods holy name

Knoledg your caries Curats whom cu^stu^e has blinded
Do not wel^^n that thing know what they say
But look in the Gospel and y^ shall find it
The ^^^fe same Jesus bornt of a may Cur^t^s are b^^^^ Christ is on ye right
had of ye father.

That was Crucified, dyed, and rose the iii day
On his fathers right hand now sits plain
His body is only there present I say
Who says contrary, does blaspheme his name

Siplicite (...) ^rowe say you to fasting days?
Are they not mo^st shamefully abused? A question of ceremonies.

And what think you of our holy days
Which are not m^te to be refused
Both palms and ashes are clean confused
And offering of Candels organe with them
Are not all these still to be used
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name?

Knoledg. I say no day more one then other ye fastig and holidaus made by
man, are of n^^^ff^^t and all such like ceremonies.

By Gods word is commanded to fast
And kept well your Saboth day my Brother
All other holy days are in waste.
your palms and ashes clean out cast
if ye offer to stock and stone, ye are to blame
They are all but feigned like the wyndes blast
And against the honor of Gods holy name.

Siplicite Say ye, that feigned is the holy crucifix?
And despyte ye the holy priests absolution? A qu^stio^ of y ^^^d prufi^
absolecie^, of the god in ye ^o^e, and such other

Is Gods body a feigned God in the pyr?
Did not our beads s^^^e us to d^^^tion?
Do not the saints make insercessyen?
Does not our fastings our flesh tame?
Our holy bread and holy water give us mons^ion
To honor and praise Gods holy name.

Knoledge Of the crucifix an Idol ye made
And your pristes usurped Gods absolution
The bread in the box is no God I said In a^swere to the same.

And that your beads are very superstition
your saints can make no intercessyon
your feigned fasting can not your flesh tame
your water and bread, by coniuration
Are great dishonor to Gods holy name

Siplicitie And was it not well with us think ye
When we used our pilgrimage for devotion? if pilgrimage was not good and ye
saints wrought ^ntra^les.

To holy saints that wrought wonderfully
Great maruels passing man's expectation
And they helped us in our perturbation
Almost all thing that we asked we did obteynt
^ow say ye? Was not this a godly fation
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name.

Knoledge That fatron is deuelysh and clean contrary yt ^ylgry: ma^e was (...)
against god ^^s commandment.

To Gods commandment, as ye shall see
God said and commanded us very strayghtly
Thou shall have none other God but me
If ye worship ydols of stone or of tree
ye or think they can help you ye are to bla^^
For then ye depryue God of his glory
To the great dishonor of his holy name.

Siplicity Is fasting and prayer of no effect
Did not Christ to us make mention
In his gospel by words dyrect if fasting and prayer are of no^e effect

That well, uide use them for good intencyon?
Yet some men say ye despise the same
And amongst yourselues ye have great dissentio^
^o the great dishonor of Gods holy name,

Knoledge Yes, fasting and prayer are much requisite fastig and prayer are
necessary, but no special time is thereto appoited by scriptures.

As Christ him self did to us examplesye
But I say in scripture it is not recyte
To fast or pray any time propre^ye
But watch ye and pray ye continually
When the flesh does prycke, them make it tame
With fasting, but beware of ypocrysye
For that is dishonor to Gods holy name.

siplycitie. I pray God amend all that is amys
In the woride was never so much dyuysyon
One is of that sort, another is of this prays yt all abuses may be amended
me^ may agree in one.

And each one diverse in his opinyon
ye learned men first must agre^ in one
that after your example, our selves we may frame
Then shall we not swerve in any condition
But praise all together Gods holy name.

Knoledge And I pray God with you in that thy^
To set at one all our division
As to his glory shall be perteynyng Knoledge agrees to siplicities prayer.

That all we may agree in one
And no man styck to one opinion
But as Gods word shall teach him the sam^
Then shall we not swerve in any condition
But praise all together Gods holy name

Siplicite Syrin deed all theys are above my reason desyereth to be caught ye
right way to fast, pray and to rec^yue ye Lords supper.

And ye be a man well learned, men say
Will ye therefore take pain with me this season
My com^red conscience to quyte and stay?
ye say we should fast, ye say we should pray
And ye supper of the lord, ye praise much ye sam^
To teach me to use the same after the right wa^
To the honor and praise. etc.
yea, that I will with all my heart
That is the thing that I ever pretend*
If diligently ye will adu^r^e
My diligence toward you is bended the good will of knoledge toward
siplicitie.

your symp^^^^s has not me offended
Neither my boldenes you, I think the same
And I trust your grefe shortly to end it
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name.

Knoledg First to your question how ye should pray How (...) should pray.

In the.vi. of Math. learn Christ's doctrine
Pray not for praise, as I po^rites do I say
But in thy chamber, se thy self thou declyne
by thy chamber thy conscience thou must defyne
And if that be clean, believe well the same
God will reward the^by his power divine
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name.

Knoleg^ But in much babblyng esteem no felicicie we are not hear^ for our many
pr^^ers, but for the^ be said from t^ heart.

Like as did the Pharysees most blind
your Ladies psalter was mere ypocrysie
By this place of scripture, plainly we find
your beads brought prayer cleue out of kind
Christ taught a prayer, let us use the same
Devoutly to be said with heart and mind
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name.

Knoledg your mattens and euenso^g in a strange tongue
your patched masses full of papistry mates a^ ev^io^g (...) a strau^ to^g and
(...) ceremon^^ (...) vain.

your shameful sort of cerimones dome
As knillyng, kneling and other many
Do they any thing you teach to edify?
And to pray and think not, is but in vain
The Godly prophet herein agrees with me
All these are dishonor to Gods holy name.

Knoledge When thou fastest (says Christ) be not sorye
As the ypocrytes which pretending gravity.
Did dysfigure their faces supersticiously How we should fast

That to men's sight they might seem holy
But when thou fastest, do it secretly
Not for worlds glory, but thy flesh to tame
Than God shall reward the aboundauntlye
To the honor and praise of his holy name.

Knoledg But this is not meant by friday nor lent superstycious fasting is
against gods honor.

By the fast of Bernard / or yet of our lady
Neither yet of the clouted cloisters aduent
For scripture appoints no time properly
Neither yet of meats makes be dyuersitie
But byddeth thy fast, thy flesh for to tame
At all times when soever thy flesh prycketh the
Thus fasting, thou honor Gods holy name.

Knoledge And now for the holy supper of the lord How we should receive the
supper of ye lord.

Let pau^ be your teacher in each degree
Examen your conscience / let your faith, accord
Before ye presume of so high a mist tie
For in this point, faith only must be your eye
Faith must be your taste, and all your wits frame
It is in your faith, that ye see Gods body
To the honor and praise of his holy name.

Knoledge Think not yt ye do eat him with your teath we do not eat Christ's
body nor drike his blood but in spirit by faith.

Think not that ye se him with your bodily eye
But eat him and drink him in spyrite and faith
For he, yet ipuyng ^oyd give his body
Unto his ^iscyples, and said, eat ye
This is my body: yet his body plain
Before their eyes was present corporally
Their faith did iufiyse: their bodily brain

Knoledge Let faith therefore you gouuerne and led
And in your heart remember his passion That we should before all things believe
in his passion.

And that he dyed in very deed
Leuyng to us for a co^memoration
His blessed body, of such a ynd and facion
That in spyrite and faith we should receive ye same
Thus doing / you take it to your salvation
To the honor and praise of Gods holy name.

Siplicite I pray God thank you with all mine heart The thakes of siplyc^te for
the good ^^^^s ^^ll of knoledge.

In these things my consyenceis appeased
And in all other I trust sone afterward
My heart by you shall be well ^a^^d
The blyndenes that in me was, seized
Is almost clered and sit in fr^me
And you I do thank, whom it has pleased
To teach me to honor Gods holy name

Knoledge Give the laud to God, as most worthy is
And not unto man, but unto his name
And pray we for the Kings hyghnes not to man but to god be all glory

That Gods gospel has so in frame
That all we may see the truth from the vain
That all we all errors may worthily blame
That all we his kingdom at the last may attayn^
In bliss all toghther to praise his holy name.

Finis.

