A DESCRIPTION OF WHAT GOD has Predestined Concerning MAN, In his CREATION,
TRANSGRESSION, and REGENERATION.


As also an Answer to John Robinson, touching Baptism.

1. THESE. 5.21. Try all things, keep that which is good.

ACT. 17.11. These were more noble men, etc. which searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so.

Printed. 1620.

The Contents of the Book.
1. Of Predestination. 2. Of Election, and Reprobation. 3. Of Falling away. 4.
Of Free Will. 5. Of The Original estate of Man. 6. Of The beginnings of
CHRIST, or Foundation. 7. And lastly, An answ. to a little Printed writing of
John Robinsons, touching Baptism.
To every vnpar^ (...), Grace and Truth.
WE are not ignorant of the great oppositions that are in the world at this
day, about the most righteous Predestination of GOD, and the true consequences
thereof, and that among the Wise and Learned; of which number we account not
our selves, neither are accounted of others, but are willing to be accounted
of the lower sort, Even of the foolish, weak, vile, despised, and those that
are not: Yet having received something of the Lord in this thing, and
perceiving that many thousands are ignorant of the difference, and are
violently carried rather by tradition, then by sound knowledge, to detest the
Truth, and embrace the error, we among others hold our selves bound to make
known what we have received, to the end all may weigh it in the balance of
Gods Sanctuary, try it by the true touchstone, and measure it with the Golden
reed. It is a thing not carelessly to be minded, but seriously to be
considered of and searched into, If any will be ignorant, and go on in their
blind zeal according to tradition, let them be ignorant, and remember that If
the Truth be hid it is hid to them that perish 2 Cor. 4.
. There can be no hurt by trying our ways, for as true trial will burn up
the chafe of falsehood, so will it refine the way of Truth as Gold tried in the
fire seven times, in which we must take heed, We presume not above what is
written 1 Cor. 4.
, Neither add too, nor diminish the perfect Law of the Lord contained in the
Scriptures Revel. 2: 18.19.
, Secret things belong to the Lord our God, things revealed belong to us
Deuteronomy. ^.29.
.

But some man will say unto us, what shall we need trial of this thing
again? the Counsel of Dort has sufficiently tried it, and have passed their
sentence to establish Caluins Doctrine, and to reject the contrary, but to such
we will answer, by asking question, was not the Counsel of Dort subject to
err? If yea: Then is it safe for men to build their Faith upon their sentence?
their answer, is yea, for not only so they have Decreed, but also that
whosoever teaches contrary, shall be persecuted: Ah heavy case! will men teach
they are subject to err, and yet decree Persecution for them that cannot
believe their Decrees? Well, yet thus f^rre we are sure they will grant they
may err; and whether they have erred or no, let that be scanned by Gods
word, and judged by every man's Conscience. It is a maine controversy between
the Papists and Protestants, whether the Church and Counsels may err: the
Papists affirm they cannot, and so constrains all to believe as the Church
believes. The Protestants affirm the contrary, viz. That there is no Church,
no Counsel, no man, but they are subject to err, and therefore ought to be no
further believed, then every man's Conscience can judge them to accord with the
meaning of God in the Scriptures; which being true (as it is most true) then
why may not the Counsel of Dort have erred in its sentence in these things?

^sa 29.14. Math. 11.^5.26. Ioh. ^.48.49. ^ Cor. 1.19 ^6. etc.
If any say it was Learned, we answer. God usually hid^ his secrets from the
Learned, and reuealeth them to Babes. And destroys the wisdom of the wise,
and casts away the understanding of the prudent, and makes the wisdom of the
wise foolishnes.

If any say the assembly was great; we answer: greater Counsels by much, even
universal Counsels have grosely erred, who is ignorant of this? How did the
Counsels of Ephesus, Se^^sia, Trident, Lateren^ and others err, where the
universal Learned of the world were assembled? whose numbers, and errors were
too many to relate: but to be short in this thing, we may truly conclude with
the words of Nazianzen, who says*, ad pro^ 346
He never saw any Counsel have a good end; For what is the end of them but
cruelty and persecution? that when they have decreed what they think good,
then they procure the Magistrates sword to impose their Decrees upon men's
Consciencs: And why any Church should call Counsels to make Decrees in cause of
Conscience, but Rome it cannot be defended. The Counsel at Jerusalem will not
warrant them; that assembly could not err, who dare say so, besides that
Mother of whoredoms (Rome) of whom we may say with the Prophet, Thou had an
Whores forehead, thou would not be ashamed Ier. 3.3
.

Men are covered with the Spirit of slumber, that call Counsels to make Decrees
to be imposed upon men's Consciences, and yet hold that the Counsels may err.
And for the Armenians, (as they are called) we are not truly informed of
their opinions; but for their tumultuous courses we much detest, the ground of
their, and their adversaries proceeding, being that deuillish persuasion, that
it is lawful to persecute, yea to kill one another for difference in Religion:
the Lord give them to see their sin on both sides. Against which opinion and
practice, that Noble and worthy Prince the King of Bohemia has written in
these words: And not withstanding, the success of t^se latter times, wherein
sundry opinions, have been hatched, about the subject of Religion, may make
one clearly discern with his eye, and (as it were) touch with his finger,
that acc^rding to the verity of holy Scripture, and a Maxim heretofore held
and maintained by the ancient, Doctors of the Church, that men's Consciences
ought in no sort to be violated, urged, or constrained; and whenever men
have attempted any thing by this violent course, whether openly, or by secret
means, the issue has been pernicious, and the cause of great and wonderful
innouations, in the principallest and mightiest Kingdoms and Countries of all
Christendom, etc. And further his Majesty says: So that once more we d^
protest before God, and the whole world, that from this time forward, we are
firmly resolved, not to persec^te or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or
molested any person whosoever, for matter of Religion, no not they, which
^rofesse themselves to be of the Roman Church, neither to trouble or disturb
them in the exercise of their Religion, So they live conformably to the Laws
of the States, etc. Whose words and practice, the King of Kings grant, that
the Governors of the earth, and particularly our most dread Sovereign, who
has himself written much to the same effect, may consider of, and do
accordingly; as blessed be our God, all the Kingdoms that we know, or can
hear of, practices the same; except Spain and England.

In this writing we have observed this order, to set down such affirmations as
the contrary minded have written and spoken in these things. 1. Touching
Predestination, 2. Of Election, 3. Of Falling away, 4. Of Free Will, 5. Of
Original sin, and lastly, Of the entrance into Christ, one depending upon
another, and so have answered them from point to point, by way of Dialogue.
There affirmations thou may see to be most fearful; one, and that a
Principal one Knox in his printed Book aga. an adversary of Gods Pred. as he
calls him. page 255.
, says; Gods Predestination was the original or first cause of Adams fall,
yea of all the wickedness that ever has been, is, or shall be committed, yea
in plain words, that God is not only the principal cause of all things,
but also the very Author, appointing all things to the one part and to the
other by his Counsel; and That whatsoever the Ethnicks ascribed to Fortune;
the same we ought (says he) to ascribe to the Providence of God, which how
large a blasphemy it is, will appear to every tender Conscience.

Again they say, That God has Elected the lesser part of Mankind, even some
particular persons, without any Condition, who cannot but be saved by any
means; And again, That God has Reprobated the greater part of mankind
without all cause of desert, who cannot but be Damned by any manner of means,
Christ not dying for them: Which Doctrine, how it impeacheth not only the
Justice of God, mercy of God in Christ, and protestations of God to the
contrary in the Scriptures, but also the sufficiency, and meritoriousnes of
Christ's most precious Death and sufferings, and laying the imputation of Man's
damnation not on his own sin and unbelief, but on God and Christ, shall by
this that follows manifestly appear.

The chief maintayners of this Destination (as we see by experience) are the
Caluinists, or Puritanes as they are called, one of their chief Prophets
further affirming Knox the said Book page 317. with 312.
, That the wicked are not only left by Gods suffering, but compelled to sin
by power, etc, Wherein you plainly see their opinion, not only that men
cannot choose, but do what wickedness and mischief they do, but also they are
compelled with the power force and compulsion of Gods Predestination. to commit
all those wicked crimes, for which they are either executed with the Temporal
sword, or damned with everlasting torment.

Consider we beseech you not the persons of men be they never so high, never
so wise, never so many, but mark the opinion it self, even in thy Conscience
and in the sight of God whether any thing can be more repugnant to the Nature
of God, or more defacing his Justice, then to say, That God punishes Man with
the torments of Hell in everlasting Fire, for doing those things, which he
himself has Predestined, Ordained, Decreed, determined, appointed, willed
and compelled him to do, and that a man cannot choose, but of necessity m^st
do, by the force and compulsion of his Predestnation; Which being true, then
what is our Life but a mere Destiny, all our doings Gods ordinances, and all
our Imaginations branches of his Predestination.

Let no man deceive you with vain words, wherein they would seem to temper
the matter with more reverent speaking of it, (as they say) seeing they plainly
hold these principles, and when they see their time speak plainly thereof
themselves, as you may well perceive by that which has already, and shall yet
more largely in this writing following be rehearsed. If it be a truth, why
should it not plainly be spoken? If it be a truth that Traitors be
Predestined of God to conspire the destruction of their Princes, and Rebels
Predestined of God to rebel against their Sovereigns. If (we say) it be a
truth, that God has so Predestined them, and that they must of necessity,
and cannot choose but commit such wickedness; why should it not be plainly
spoken? Except men should be ashamed to speak the Truth. But in what Scripture
is it written?

The greatest show they have is collected from Romans 9. from whence they
conceive, That God hated Esau, and so all wicked men before they were borne,
and has Decreed all the^r actions which they do, whilst they live upon the
earth, for which cause, we have explained the whole Chap. Showing that they do
most woefully pervert it. For proof whereof we have the Apostle Peter's 2. Pet.
3.15. etc.
approbation of us against them, who writ after Paul's Epistles that speaks of
these things, which we desire may be carefully observed, and then a way most
easy will be made for Paul's meaning in all his Epistles concerning this thing.

That God hates wicked men, we confess the Scriptures plenteously witness, but
wheresoever it is said that God hated any, there will we manifestly prove, that
they hated God first, and that their wicked evil deserving went before his
hatred, Ro^. 5.10. 2 Chr. 36 15.16.
For he is so Gracious and merciful that he loves his en^mies. So slow to
wrath or hatred that he strives with them by his Word and Spirit, until
there be no remedy, When there is no remedy to reclaim them, but that in
Justice his wrath must needs break forth, Yet does he lament for th^^^, Math.
23.37.
in these words. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have gathered thy
Children, etc. And Oh that thou had known the Day of thy visitation; but now
it is hid from thine eyes. Psalm. 81.13. Verse. 15.
And Oh that my people had harkened to me, and Israel had walked in my ways,
etc. And the haters of the Lord should have been subject to him, and their time
should have (...) for ever. And many the like.

Thus have we given you a taste of that which follows, beseeching you: (...)
and Judge without partiality, and the God of Wisdom give you wisdom in all
things. Amen.

Yours, ready to do you any good, the servants of Christ, fals^y (...)
Ana-baptists.

Predestination.
The Speakers, Ereunetes a Searcher, Odegos a Guide.

FRiend Odegos, I have been of late much troubled about a weighty
controversy, which at this day there is much ado about, and that among the
learned; I will propound it unto you, and desire to know your judgment in the
thing, and how you answer such objections as are made: The thing is
Predestination, and the consequences of it, wherein the Caluinists hold.

First thus they write: Propos. disputed in the University of Geneua. Page, 25.
Predestination is that eternal and immovable decree of GOD, whereby as it
pleased his Majesty, he has decreed all things, both universally and
perticularly: and so does effect them by the causes created in like sort, and
appointed by him, as he thought good to the laying open of his own glory.

Calvin says: Abridgen. (...) Institutions, pa4g. 6.
Let us be assuredly persuaded, that all things come to pass by the
disposition of God, etc. Therefore let us always have an eye to him, as the
principal cause of all things, Page 4^.
and let us also behold the inferior causes in their places, etc. And
whatsoever is done it comes from God, etc.

In his printed book against an a^^ersary of Gods Pred. as (...) calls him.
p. 155. etc.
John Knox a most violent Caluinist, he speaks plainly: Therefore whatsoever
the Ethnickes and ignorant did attribute to Fortune we assign to the
providence of God: yea, if any man by chance and not of set purpose be slain,
be auoweth, himself to be the cause of his death, and that so he had appointed,
that we shall judge nothing to come of Fortune, but that all comes by the
determination of his Counsel. And further, it displeases him, when we esteem
any thing to proceed from any other, so that we do not only behold him, and
know him not only the principal cause of all things, but also as the
Author* appointing all things to the one part or to the other by his Counsel;
And he affirms that Calvin says the same.

Many other of their sayings might be alleged, but these few may suffice, to
show what they hold of this thing.

Odegos, I am most willing to satisfy you here in according to my best
ability, first to show you wherein I differ from the aforesaid blasphemies;
secondly I dout not but through the power of Christ enabling me, I shall
sufficiently answer what objections can be made. In the fear of the most high,
let us therefore proceed.

WE hold, that before the foundation of the World, the most holy God, of his
mere love, without any cause out of himself, Predestined to make the World;
and Man, and all good things that are made* Predestination what
to make man a reasonable soul; to give him a righteous Law; to give him
ability to keep it, or to break it; if he brake it to punish him, yet so as
not to forsake him; but provided the slain Lamb (the seed of the woman) to
send him into the world a Savior for all men; to purchase the very wicked that
deny him; yea, even his enemies: not to send him to condemn the world but to
save it; for so he loved it, that he would send his Son, with this
Proclamation, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; yea as he lives, not consulting that any man should perish,
but that all come to repentance.

Those that receive this his Grace by Faith in his Son, them, in this his
eternal Predestination, he elected; the rest that will not receive this his
Grace, but put his word from them, and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting
life, those in his said Predestination he rejected or reprobated. This Decree
of God being done at once: all which in time, he effected and manifested.

The difference is

They say all things; we say all good things: they say, whatsoever is done
(murder or the like) it comes from God: we say, whatsoever good is done
comes from the Father of light, but no evil things that are done, comes
from him but from the Devil, who is a murderer from the beginning: they say,
God is the principal cause, yea and the author of all things, appointing all
things to ye one part and to the other; damnation as salvation; vice as virtue,
etc. For this is the undeniable consequence of their words. We say, God is the
principal cause and author of all good, and consequently of salvation to all
men, not willing that any should perish, but that all men should repent and
live; but the devil is the author of all evil, and not God. For the fountain
and first root of evil, is* in transgression of Gods righteous law; of which
the devil was the first mouer.

But let us come to the particulars:

Ereu. First they affirm that God decreed, that Adam should fall, and that of
necessity, and consequently that all other wickednesses should in time, come
to pass, even as they do, and that also upon necessity.


Odeg. I will manifestly show you, that herein they do not only contradict the
evident truth, but also themselves in other their affirmations. We know they
hold and affirm, Proposit. a^ Geneua. page 26.
that Adam in innocence had free will or power from the creation of God not to
have sinned; according to which power, God commanded him not to sin, and
threatened that if he did sin he should dye; which being true, how are they
confounded in themselves to say that Adam had power from God not to have
sinned, and yet God decreed that he could not but sin; that God commanded him
not to sin, and yet decreed that he should sin: are not these as contrary
as light and darkness?


Ereu. For the first I do not see what can be answered: but for the second,
they say that although God commanded (by his revealed will) Adam not to sin,
yet in his secret will he decreed he should sin.


Odeg. First, if it be Gods secret will, how come they to know it? and for
Gods revealed will, was not that revealed will in God before it was revealed?
it cannot be denied, and it was then hidden, at which time there was two hidden
wills in God, contrary to each other, whereof the one willed Adam to sin,
yea decreed him to sin; and the other nilled him to sin; the one of them he
made known to Adam whereby he nilleth sin, the other he kept secret, whereby
he wills sin: and these two wills must both be good, for whatsoever is Gods
will is good, and good cannot be contrary to good, no more then right to right:
are not these two contrary to nill sin and to will sin; if to nill sin be
good, to will sin must needs be evil, and by that reason there is in God
both good and evil.


Ereu. I know not how these things can be avoided, nor how they can be
answered, but this they say, that God wills Justice for it self, and sin
not for sin, but that he might have praise either in pardoning, or punishing
the sin.


Odeg. But to pardon or punish sin being committed, is not to will sin, but
to will his own praise. But if God wills sin for any respect, why did and
does he punish Adam and all his posterity, for the thing he wills, yea
decrees unavoidably? can that be in God, that he abhors, and that is
contrary even to nature?

The Scriptures pronounces that man blessed, Psalm. 15.2
that speaks the truth from his heart: And Christ says, Luke 6.45
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; what then if a man
speak one thing and mean an other thing, is he not justly judged an
hypocrite? and dare any earthen Pitcher attribute this to God, that in word he
forbids Adam and all men to sin, and in very deed wills sin, and has
so decreed it that it cannot be avoided. Is not this high blasphemy to make
God an hypocrite, who so hates hypocrites?

Now to prove that God decreed not, nor laid an necessity that Adam should
fall, consider, God did not leave him unfurnished with any thing that might
support him in that estate, in which he created him; as first, that God
provided him a most delectable place (Paradise.) secondly, that he provided
all manner food sufficient for his conservation, besides the tree of knowledge,
so that he was no way forced to eat of that tree: thirdly, he had a most fit
help and comfort for him, his wife Heuah: fourthly, he had domination over ye
creatures: fifthly, God left him not idle, but appointed him work, least Satan
should thereby fill him with inventions for want of employment, Math. 13.24.
as he does at such times: sixthly he gave him a holy Law, the penalty for the
breach whereof was death: seauenthly, and lastly, he gave him will and power
not to have eaten, as the contrary minded confess: all which, manifestly
proves, against all gainesayers, that God did neither decree, or laid any
necessity upon Adam to transgress, and so fall from that estate. If any
object, that if God would not that Adam should fall, he would not have given
him a Law to ensnare him; I answer, that the giving of the Law was, that God
might retain his Sovereignty over man, and that man might testify his
dutiful subjection to his Lord and Creator, and also that God might be just in
punishing transgression, and merciful in forgiving, through repentance and
faith in Christ: and therefore I conclude with The Apostle, Romans 7.12. wherefore
every Law of God is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good, and
God does no more intend to ensnare any man by any of his righteous Laws, then
a just King, does intend to ensnare any, by making just Laws against
malefactors. Further I demand if Adam was not created the Son of God?


Ereu. Yea, for Luke says it plainly in reckoning the Genealogy of Jesus
Christ. Luke, 3.


Odeg. Christ argues thus, Mat. 7.11
If you which are evil do good unto your Children, how much more, shall your
heavenly Father: From whence I reason, If evil men have so much goodness, that
they would not beget Children to misery, what impiety is it to think such a
thing of God, as that he created Adam his own son, to sin, and so to
misery, and that of necessity: And besides Nature teaches in all the works
of God, that there is naturally in every creature Love toward those that are
begotten by them, which proceeds from their Creator, and therefore it must
needs follow that God is endued with the same good, if out of the fountain of
his own Love, he impart that quality unto other things.


Ereu. I think that cannot be denied:


Odeg But to create Adam unto misery and wretchedness, is no sign of love* but
of hatred. Moses writes thus, Let us make Man in our own Image, like unto us,
who may govern, etc. Tell me now, is sin the Image of God?


Ereu. No, but the defacing of the Image of God.


Odeg. Therefore if man were created unto the Image of God, surely he was
created unto righteousness, and not unto sin. Now concerning the Lordship that
God gives him over the Earth and living Creatures is that sin?


Ereu. No in no case, for by sin not only this Sovereign power is
abolished, but even the life of Man, Romans 6.23
for the reward of sin is death.


Odeg. You say very right; Now that saying, Let us make man in our Image, is
his Creation; and that saying, which may rule, is his Destination, or the thing
whereunto in creation he is appointed: now if both of them be unto righteousness
and not unto sin; surely it follows that sin has his beginning neither
from Creation nor Destination.

Moreover, God himself witnessing that all whatsoever he had made was very
good, does show also, that man was very good: also God placed him in Paradise 2
Cor. 12 4. Revel. 2.7.
a figure of that blessed life. Therefore it is manifest Adam was Created,
placed, and destined unto righteousness and happiness, and not to sin and
misery.


Ereu. How then came he to sin and misery?


Odeg. Not by Gods Creation or Destination, but by his own disobedience of the
most righteous Law of God. Thou shall not eat, etc.


Ereu. Could not God that made him unto righteousness and blessedness have made
him also that he could not be deprived of that estate? For this is it that
troubles all men, therefore they conclude that because he sinned, and God
hindered him not, it was Gods will, yea and decree that he should sin, for
nothing can be done against his will say they.


Odeg. Two things I must here manifest, 1. In what estate God made Adam,
which I desire may be well observed. 2. That many things be done against the
will of God. For the first I answer, it is an ignorant conceit of theirs; for
if God had made Adam that he could not but continue righteous, he must have
made him God like himself unchangeable, or if God had made him that he could
not but sin, what was he then but as the Devils now are unchangeable: But God
in making Man, made a very good creature, yet subject to change; by having his
will brought to submit unto evil through the Devils temptations: so that I may
conclude that God could not make Man otherwise then he made him a reasonable
creature, yet mutable, able to obey his righteous precepts which if he did he
would continue him in that blessed estate be created him in, if not, he would
bring upon him his judgments: God not forcing him either way. Further if God
had made Adam unchangeably good that he could not break his righteous Law,
then it had been to no purpose to set a penalty to that law, which could not
be transgressed. And then had those most holy attributes of God, his Justice
to punish sin, and his Mercy to pardon upon repentance, been utterly without
use toward man; but if any object God making man changeable, it proves that
God decreed he should fall that he might make way for these his attributes. I
answer, it is a false conclusion, for although God did know Adam would sin,
and provided means of mercy for his sin, yet he did not decree and force
him to sin, for the cause aforesaid, as also himself testifies. As he
lives he would have no man transgress, and so come under the execution of
his Justice Ezekiel. 18. and 33.
.

Secondly, Adam against the will of God eat of the Tree of knowledge. Pharaoh
against the will of God would not let the people go. The Isralites often and
many times rebelled against Gods will, yea they did things against Gods secret
and revealed will Ier. 32.35 and 19.5.
which he forbad them and it never came into his mind that they should do
such abominations; Math. 23.37.
afterward they would not be gathered which was against Christ's will; is not
all the wickedness that is ^o^mitted done, against the will of God; where is
Gods will known unto us, but in his word? this their imagination of Gods
secret will is i^ that blinds them; what secrets God hau^ not revealed in his
Word, we have nothing to do with; 1 Cor. 4.6
we may not presume about what is written; Further Gods will may be thus
manifested; either what he wills man should do, A short description of Gods
will.
or what he will do in himself what he will do in himself, men and Angels
cannot resist; but what he wills man t^ do may be resisted, as before has
been proved.


Ereu. You have very sufficiently answered (...) these, A^ the Calu. with one
consent, the action not the sin of the action.
one thing more concerning Adam, a^ then we will proceed to other of their
obiection^ they say that God decreed that act of Adam disobedience, and so of
all men, but not the sin of those act^ons. In these words though we be
compelled to say, that God is the Author of the fact, yet must we answer but
not of the crime.


Odeg. This is merely a fabulous riddle, A spade, a spade, what is the
difference; God is the author of the very fact and deed of Adams sin, yea of
Adultery, Theft, Murder, Treason, and yet he is not the author of the sin,
and why? the subtilty of the Riddle is this that sin is nothing; The thief
is not hanged for the deed that he has committed, for God is the author
thereof, but he is hanged for the sin, and that is for nothing; for when they
say, God is the Author of all things then nothing is excepted, but sin is
nothing, and therefore he is not the Au^hor of sin. The thief is hanged for
nothing, the murderer is put to death for nothing, the Traitor loses his
head for nothing, the wicked is punished in everlasting fire for nothing. A
maruailous Sophistica^ion. But to be short, though many ways his subtlety
might be answered; I will one^y take their definition of sin where they ^y
very truly,

* The nature of Sin is defined by the authority of Scripture to be a
thought, word, In a Fren^^ book long since, printed and translated into
English.
or deed, contrary to the will of God.

Now because they say, that he is the Author of all evil deeds though not of
the crimes, let us pass over the evil thoughts and evil words, and speak
only of the deed it self, which they themselves define to be sin, and
contrary to Gods will: If then God be the author of that fact, or deed, which
deed is sin, and contrary to Gods will, how can they then say, that God is
the author of the fact but not of the fault, seeing they themselves set forth
not only a thought and word, but also a deed to be sin; and if God be the
author of that same deed, Of this more hereafter.
as Adams eating the forbidden Fruit and the like, which deed was sin, is it
not most plain, they hold that God is the author of sin; and all this their
travail is to prove, that the ordinance and predestination of God, does so
carry men headlong to all actions be they never so mischievous, that of
necessity they cannot choose but commit the same.


Ereu. They are very straight in using the word Author; therefore I pray you
be respective, you lay nothing to their charge but what you are able to
prove.


Odeg. It is most meet so; therefore mark their own words, John Knox equal
with Calvin himself in the first inuenting and broaching of this Doctrine in
these parts of the world, In his printed Book, approved of all, against an
adversary of Gods Predestination as he calls him in Page 155. says thus:
Therefore whatsoever the Ethnicks and ignorant did attribute unto Fortune, we
assign unto the Providence of God; and presently after he says: We shall
judge nothing to come of Fortune, but all comes by the determination of his
Counsel; and further, It displeases him when we esteem any thing to proceed
from any other, so that we do not only behold him and know him, not only
the principal cause of all things, but also the (Author) appointing all
things to the one part and to the other by his Counsel.

Mark well his words, and the very sense thereof: all comes from God (says
he) God is the principal cause, and God is the Author of it, whatsoever it
be; God appoints all things both to the one part and to the other, both to
the wicked, and to the Godly, all things, nothing is excepted, as well
Damnation, as Salvation; as well Sin, as Virtue; as well wickedness, as Holiness.
As for Fortune, I know it to be a heathenish fable; but where he says that
God is not only the principal cause, but also the Author of all things
without exception, and that whatsoever the Ethnicks attributed unto Fortune,
the same we ought to ascribe unto the providence of God, it is such a wide
wandering, and large blasphemy, as has not lightly been heard of. For who
knows not that unto fortune the Ethnicks ascribed all perverse and pestilent
wickedness, and all abomination detesable: yet say these professors of desteny,
whatsoever the Ethnicks ascribed unto Fortune, the same we ought to attribute
unto the providence of God, y^a and God is the principal cause, and the author
thereof. Much more I might relat^ of their fearful sayings, but time would be
^oo short. I may truly again and again ^rye out, woe worth that sinful
generation, which has bred and brought forth such a noisome Novelty, to whom
the hands of Gods mercy, is stretched out all the day long, and yet they are
ever defying him to his face. Consider I beseech thee not the persons of them
that speak, but seriously mark the opinion it self, even in thy Conscience,
and in the sight of God, whether any thing may ^e spoken more repugnant to the
Nature of God, more contrary to the Word of God, or more defacing the Justice
and mercy of God; th^n to say, that God punishes man with the torments of
Hell, in everlasting fi^e for doing those things, which he himself has
Predestined, ordained, decreed, determined, appointed, willed, and compelled
him to do, and that which a man cannot choose but must needs do, by the force
and compulsion of his Predestination.

The Nature of God, Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 103. and psa. 145.8.9 Esa. 30.18. and
55.7.
by manifold Scriptures is declared to be Gracious and merciful, full of
compassion and mercy, flow to anger, and repents him of the evil,
proclaiming that as he lives he would not have the wicked dye, but return and
live, not 2 Pet. 3.9. (...).
Consulting that any man should perish, but that all men should come to
Repentance. And The Apostle says, Iam. 1.16.
Err not my dear brethren God moves no man to evil, etc. If not move man,
then not compel him, and that not to be avoided. Every good giving is from
above, even from the Father of Lights, but all that is in this world, as the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
is not of the Father, but is of this world. The like is affirmed in these
Scriptures following and almost innumerable, Psalm. 5.4.5. Ioh 34.10.11.12. Ier.
7.31. and 19.5. and 3.12. Lam. 3.33.38.39. Ier. 13.27. Ezekiel 18. cap. and cap.
33 11. Math. 23.37. Act. 17.30. 1. Tim. 2.4.


Ereu. But I pray you before you answer the Scriptures they object, that you
would answer to what they say concerning Gods presience or foreknowledge, In
which they say, Whatsoever God fore-seeth be wills, and it cannot but come to
pass.


Odeg. In answer to this I say; first, though God fore-seeth all things, yet
does he not will all things, for his foresight does extend both to good and
evil, but his will is only of things that be good, as God fore-seeth the
death of a sinner, and the cause thereof, namely his wickedness, but he wills
it not, as he says Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11
, As I live I will not the death of a sinner, but that he return and live.
Christ did foresee the destruction of Jerusalem, yet he willed it not, for he
wept, and bewailed it, Crying oh how would I have gathered thy children, etc.
Math. 23.37. God foreseeth all wickedness and destruction to man, and yet he
wills it not, a^ all the forenamed Scriptures do declare. Also of his
foreknowledge, from the beginning of the world the Lord knows all things,
yet all things come not to pass therefore of necessity, Math. 26.53.
Christ testifies himself, that he could have prayed and have obtained more
then 12. Acts. 5.
legions of Angels, and yet God did know that he should not obtain them.
Anaenias sold his possession, and yet he might not have sold it, yea he
might have retained it, as Peter witnesses it was in his own power. The Lord
knew what would befall in Paul's Journey to Rome, yet Paul testifies it might
have been prevented. Act. 27.21.
Many other examples we have in holy Scriptures, to prove, that although God
do foreknow things will come to pass, and also foretell them, yet they may
be prevented, a few among many I will relate, and so conclude this. We may
read 1. Sam. 23. David asked counsel of the Lord, If Saul would come down to
Keyla? and the Lord said he will come down. Then said David will the Lords of
Keyla deliver me into Saul's hands? and the Lord said, they will deliver thee.
Then David and his men departed from Keyla, which when Saul heard, he came not
to Keyla. Here we plainly see that neither Gods foreknowledge, which is also
conform to his saying* neither yet his Prophecy, did cause a necessity; for
neither came Saul down to Keyla, neither did the men of Keyla deliver David
into his hand. So that after God had spoken it should come to pass, yet
notwithstanding it did not come to pass. God knew and foretold that all these
would come to pass if they were not prevented.
The like of Nineveh and many others, Jonah 3. God did foreknow and declare
what would come to pass; which yet notwithstanding might be and was prevented.
So also of the wicked, he knows and pronounces they shall be damned, yet
there lies no necessity upon their damnation, for it may be prevented, by
repentance, the which he says as he lives he desires, as has been
proved. So that man's sin, and destruction arises neither from God, nor his
foreknowledge; but from his own persisting in wickedness, and will not return,
according to Osea, 13.9.

Again, as things be done against both Gods will, foreknowledge, and
foretelling; so also they be done against Gods counsel. It was Gods counsel
that the Pharisees and expounders of the Law should receive John's Doctrine and
Baptism, which counsel they did despise and did against Luke 7.30.
: much more might be said, but this is sufficient to every wise man. Christ
knew that those he admonished should perish, if they repented not, yet there
lay no necessity upon their perishing because Christ knew it, for as he
testifies Repentance might prevent it. Luk 13.2.


Ereu. What say you to that place, Pro. 16.4. God Created all things for his
own sake, ye^ the wicked for the day of destruction.


Odeg. I answer, First as we have proved before that all the works of Gods
Creation was very good, therefore that you may see what was Gods work in a
wicked man, and so discern the things that differ, I will a little question
with you. Will you say that God made the ungodly, if yea, then the ungodly is
very good. Secondly. seeing he hates the ungodly, if he made him a wicked
man, he should hate that which is very good even his own work. Thirdly, your
son being a tradesman, as a Smith or so, I demand who begat the Smith?


Ereu. His Father begat him, not a Smith, but he begat him, that is become a
Smith.


Odeg. You say true, so that his Father begat him, as he is a man, but not as
he is a Smith; that his Master begat, that taught him. In like manner it is
said Paul was the Father of the Corinthians, not as they were Corinthians, but
as they were Christians, 1 Cor. 4.1^
for in CHRIST JESUS he had begotten them through the Gospel. If any man
afterward had made one of them an Antichristian, you cannot say that an
Antichristian was begotten by Paul.


Ereu. No indeed, for that is Paul's son, which he begat, that is to say,
Christianity.


Odeg. The like we may say of God, he created Man good, but by the inticement
of the Devil man is made evil, of which evil the Devil is the Father that
begat it, So Christ plainly says, John 8.^.
You are of your Father the Devil, for you do his works, etc. seesing
therefore God in your place alleged, is called the Maker of the wicked, we
must understand it to be, in regard of his Creation, which was Gods work very
good: Act. 17.28.29.
so all men that dwell upon the earth are called the generation of God. And
also the Devil being called the Father of the wicked, we must understand it to
be in regard of his work in him, that is his wickedness; so that God made the
man which is his substance; the Devil made him wicked which is his quality.
God is said to have Created all things in Heaven and the Earth; yet are Images
of wood and stone the work of men's hands, not for their substance which is
Gods work; but for their shape form and use. Thus I hope I have truly and
sufficiently showed wherein wicked men are said to be made by God, and wherein
they are made by the Devil, whereunto accords Bastingius, page 11. Hitherto
belongs that of Ecclesiastes. This I know that God made Man good: whereto
accords Augustine. God created man good, being the author of Natures not of
vices. Now for the words, God has made the wicked for the day of destruction.
God has not made him evil, that is the Devils work, but becoming evil, God
has made the day of destruction for him, or him for the day of destruction, as
a just and most righteous recompense of reward, as Romans 2.5. etc. 2 These. 1.6.
etc.


Ereu. You have well answered me this, what say you to other places? though
there be many I will relate but the principal, the which you answering their
objections in, all the rest will be easy; and first they say, as God does
Decree the destruction of every one that shall be damned, so also he decrees
all their actions though they be wicked, as the action of Joseph's Brethren;
Genesis 45.4.5 2 Samuel 16.5 1 Kin. 22.22 23. Esa. 10.6.7. Act. 4.27.28
Shemei cursing David; of the Lord putting a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets; of the King of Ashurs going against the Isralites. Lastly, the wicked
act of those that had a hand in killing the Lord of life.


Odeg. In the order that you have placed them, I will speak last of the first
and last, and first of the other. For Shemei his cursing David, the Lord bid
Shemei curse. Verse. 10.11.
In this action we are to consider, first the parties. Secondly, the action or
thing. The parties Shemei, David, God; Shemei a wicked man, cursing, and
therein transgressing: David a good man, cursed; God suffering this for the
trial of his servant David. The like is to be seen of Job: The Devil Shemeis
father, desiring God (who had made a hedge about Job, as about all his servants
Psalm. 34.7
) that he would stretch out his hand upon all that he had, etc. unto which the
Lord answered. Lo all that he has is in thy hand, etc. where we see the
action of stretching out the hand is attributed to God and to the Devil; but
it is plain the Devil acted it, God suffered it Job. 1.12.
. Also God is said to move David to number Israel and Judah 2 Samuel 24 1.
, though it is said Satan provoked David to number Israel 1 Chr. 21 1.
, now seeing that which was the Devils work is attributed to God, we must
according to the proportion of Faith, and generality of the Scriptures, impute
wickedness to the Devil, which is proper to him; and good to the most holy God,
as only proper to him; now in that it is said he moved, he suffered Satan to
move, for God cannot move to Iam. 1.13. Psalm. 5.4.
evil, of which more hereafter, before I end my answers to these particulers.
Secondly, for that of Ahabs Prophets, the Prophet Michaiah declares a vision,
in the which Satan that lying Spirit came into the presence of God, as Job. 1.
and 2. chap. offering himself (if the Lord would permit him) to be a false
Spirit in the mouths of Ahabs false Prophets, he continually going about like
a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devout 1 Pet. 5.8.
, and does devour where God restrains him not; God willing to confound wicked
Ahab (in Justice) for his many wickednesses, says not only who shall entice
Ahab, verse. 20 but also thou shall entice him, go forth and do so, verse. 22.
Now in these several actions, we are to consider that there was evils, namely
Cursing, Envy, Pride in numbering the people and deceit, now the controversy
is who was the first cause of this cursmg, envy, pride, deceit, not to speak
of the means whereby they were acted, for we confess God made Shemei, David
and all men Act. 17.18
, yea God made them that are now Devils, and continues the life and being of
men and Devils, but in their Creation they were very good: now these hearts and
mouths of Gods creatures committed evil; the controversy I say now is, what
the Lord does in these actions. If you say Gods decree before the world, was
the first cause, and that he decreed vnavoidably this cursing, envy, pride and
deceit, all which are either actions of the mind or body, then can it not be
denied but God is the author of sin, his Decree being before there was either
Devil or man, and so is the first cause, and upon Gods decree Satan tempts
and Man consents, and acts as of necessity they must; for they cannot
avoid Gods decree; but this they stick not to affirm the chiefest of them as
before has been showed in Knox. So that Gods decree is the first cause, or
author, of all that Satan or wicked men effects; is not this good Doctrine?
So then as men are justly blamed for doing, and Satan for tempting to cursing,
envy, pride and deceit, so should God be most to be blamed (if this opinion, or
rather horrible blasphemy were true) for forcing of necessity by his Decree,
Satan to tempt, to it, and Man to consent unto and act it; Let none say that
decreeing cursing, envy, pride and deceit, can be good in God, and wicked in
the Devil and man, for no turning device can prove it, for although
instruments that act wickedness may be good (as they are from God) as Angels
and men, yet the actions of those instruments, the forenamed sins can not be
good from God, for he can tempt, decree, or appoint no man to evil, neither
can evil dwell with him as before is proved.

Next for that of Ashur, Esa. 10 5. etc. a wicked nation sent of God to punish
a wicked and dissembling Nation, which thing was good from God, namely to
punish the wickedness of some, by others that are wicked, this is Gods Justice,
though the actors thereof think not so, having no respect to Gods justice, but
satisfies their own lusts. Now for the word sending; it is written in other
places God shall send them strong delusions to believe lies; 2 These. 2.
dare any tongue say the delusion comes from God, otherwise then by suffering
the Devil to delude them, who need no sending further then to have leave
given him as of Job, etc. for he always seeks whom he may devour, so do
the wicked his children, it is their delight to hurt. So that in pride and
malice, Ashur went against the Isralites, the Lord suffering him as a
punishment for their sin (about whom he pitched his Tents whilst they feared
him, that none could hurt them nor make them afraid) as the Devil in hatred
to Mankind deludeth those that resist the truth, the Lord suffering him as a
punishment for their sin; and thus God sends and not otherwise, as before
is also proved. The Devil deludeth 2 Cor. 4.4
, God suffers 1 Cor. 10.13.
. Now if the word (suffering) were used in all places in stead of sending, they
would not thus pervert the Scriptures, laboring to make wickedness come from
Gods decree originally, for which cause let the holy Evangelists decide the
controversy. Matthew says, Math. 8.31.32.
And the Devils besought JESUS saying. If thou cast us out suffer us to go
into the heard of Swine. And Jesus said go, so they went, etc. Mark says,
Mark. 5.12.13.
the Devils said, Send us into the heard of Swine, etc. and Jesus gave them
leave. Luke says, Luke 8.32.
the Devils besought him that he would suffer them; so he suffered them. All
which proves plainly that the Devil can do nothing without Gods suffering,
as also that God or Christ's sending is nothing but suffering, in this case. And
so this sending of Ashur is suffering.

Now for that of Joseph's brethren, we dispute not about Gods decreeing he
should go into Egypt, for the preservation of their lives, etc. but whether
God decreed that their action in selling a man's Child from him against the
Law, yea their envy also in selling him Act. 7.9.
, for I say Joseph might have come into Egypt by good means, as well as his
Brethren did afterward, they thought evil and did evil, yet God turned it to
good Genesis 50.20.
, their thoughts and Gods thoughts were contrary: their thoughts were evil.
James says, no man is tempted of God, Iam. 1.
but to move with evil thoughts is to tempt. If all that come from the Father
of Lights be good, and this to move (by decreeing unavoidably) to these evil
thoughts came from God, then was it good and not evil; but if their whole
action was evil, as it was, then was it not of the Father, but of this world,
1 Ioh. 2.16.
though God brought out of it goodness, who can bring good out of evil.

Lastly, for that of our Saviors death, I acknowledge that God appointed him
and gave him to the Death for our sins Romans 5.25 and 8.32.
, and delivered him or suffered to be delivered into the hands of the wicked
by his determinate counsel and foreknowledge Act. 2.23. with Chap. 4.27.28.
, but I deny that God determined, appointed or decreed, that the wicked should
betray or murder him, otherwise then by suffering them, he knew what they
would do to him, and foretold it long before in the Scriptures, and decreed to
suffer them, who if he had pleased, he might have consumed before they did
it; but he decreed not that they should so do it; for in doing thereof they
were of their Father the Devil, who was the author of Murder from the
beginning, John 8.44. and not Gods decree. For might not God have appointed
some to sacrifice his Son CHRIST, as he did Abraham to sacrifice his son
Isaac, and Israel their sacrifices, which were types of him, which might have
been done without wickedness? But he could not appoint Judas to betray him,
nor the Scribes and Pharisees to murder him, this was wickedness, which God
cannot appoint, he cannot lie Heb. 6.18
, he cannot destroy the righteous with the wicked Ge^. 18.25
, he cannot condemn the heirs of Promise Heb. 6.17.
, and so cannot appoint Judas and the rest to commit such horrible wickedness as
they did: evil cannot come from God, every good giving comes from him, he
suffers wicked men to do those things which he cannot do himself, for
which cause men think God to be like themselves Psa. 50.2^
. Thus you may see that although God determined certainly that his Son should
be slain, yet he might have been slain without sin, and therefore the
betraying and murdering was not from God. We acknowledge that God is
omnipotent, but we say his omnipotency is guided by his Justice: Omnipotency
he can do only the things that pleases him, which is Justice and Equity.
It is no part of Gods Omnipotency to lie, to destroy the righteous with the
wicked, to appoint and by an unavoidable decree force men to betray and
Murder, etc. these are not any part of Gods Omnipotency, but rather
attributing that to the most holy and just God, which is proper to the Devil.
Gods holy will is the rule of his Power, and not his power the rule of his
will: he will not lie, therefore I say he cannot lie. Thus have I showed how
God is said to do a thing, when he only suffers it; wherein a principal
Calvin: agrees with me upon the Petition. Lead us not into Temptation:
Vrsinus, page 1041. that the wicked execute the Justice of God by sinning, that
comes not to pass, by any fault of God himself, but through the proper
corruption of the wicked, and such as themselves have purchased, God neither
willing nor allowing nor working nor furthering their sin, but in his most
just judgment only permitting it, etc. and Page 1042. The difference of the
works of God and the Devil, etc. is evidently confirmed by the Story of Job,
cap. 1. and 2. where God purposes to try Job, but the Devil to destroy him.
The same is likewise confirmed by the Story of Ahab, 1. King. 22. and by that
Prophecy of the Apostle concerning Antichrist, 2. These. 2. where the Devil
seduceth men to destroy them, and God will have them to be seduced thereby to
punish them, and suffers the Devil, etc. And again, Lead us not into
temptation, that is suffer us not to be tempted above our power, these are his
words.


Ereu. Well let us now proceed, what answer you to the place of Amos 3.6. or
shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it?


Odeg. I answer, First I demand what they mean by evil, if evil of
punishment for sin, as is apparent by the place and others Deuteronomy. 29.21.
then we agree; but if they understand evil of sin (else why bring they
this Scripture?) then I abhor their horrible blasphemy. If God do evil of
sin, then it first dwells with him, and it comes from him, as it does
with all that do it. And herein they speak no parable but plainly, that God
does all evil of sin in a City, oh the the patience of God to suffer such
monstrous blasphemers! who should attribute righteousness to their Maker Job.
36.3.
, in stead of which they do without all fear or shame, make God the Author
and doer of sin in a City, contrary to so many plain Scriptures. Job,
34.10.12. Psalm. 92.15 and Psalm. 5.4. Iam. 1.13.


Ereu. What say you to the place of John, 12.39 etc. Therefore could they not
believe, because that Isayas says, he has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with
their hearts, and should be converted that I should heal them.


Odeg. I say this: these words being collected from Esa. 6.9. and repeated in
many places Math. 13.14. etc. Act. 28.26. etc.
by which it is manifest, that the Lord sending unto this people the light of
his Truth, by the ministry of his servants, the places plainly affirms,
that they wincked with their eyes least they should see it. For which cause God
gave them up to this reprobate sense, as at large I have answered unto the
place in Romans 9. of Gods hardening Pharaohs heart, whether I refer you for
your full satisfaction, how God hardens men's hearts, and for what cause, and
not otherwise, not willing to relate the particulers here again, because I
would avoid tediousnes.


To conclude this of Predestination. This opinion of desteny was banished out
of Rome because it destroyed the state of a Commonwealth, Lib. quest. (...).
and nouo ^esta,
as August. declares in these words, by what reason (says Augustine) were
they borne which banished Mathematicos the setters forth of Desteny out of
Rome, which law was kept and they were but Heathen; how were those things done
by Desteny which makes against Desteny? But surely if there be a Desteny it
does nothing against it self, says Augustine, for so were Desteny no desteny,
or at least desteny fighting against it self. Or to speak the same in those
words, which the Caluinists by abuse take out of the Scriptures to maintain
the very same matter. If it be Gods Predestination, that men should write and
speak against his Predestination, as I and others do; then is Gods
Predestination a Kingdom not only divided, but a so fiercely fighting against
it self. O miserable absurdity! which any man may perceive must needs
follow: if all things what soever come to pass with absolute necessity by
Gods Predestination as they teach.

Of Election.
Ereunetes. FRiend Odegos, we reasoned before concerning Predestination, and I
must needs confess you satisfied me therein thoroughly. Now my hearty desire
is, that you will be pleased to reason of Election after the fall, and to
resolve me of the difficulties of the same, and of such Scriptures touching
the same, as in our present conference we shall meet withal.


Odeg. I will most willingly do it, as the Grace of GOD shall enable me. First
therefore tell me what these men's opinion is concerning Election?


Ereu. Sometimes they do say; that God before the foundation of the world, in
his Decree Elected some few of Mankind to salvation, who cannot but be saved:
the rest of Mankind he reprobated to be damned, and who by no means can be
saved. Sometimes they say, that all wen^ damned in Adam, and that some few of
those are Elected unto salvation, and that in Christ, who does cure them, and
this they call Election: and they say that the greatest number are left in
evil unto damnation, and this they call reiection or reprobation, and this
they teach by a similitude thus A certain Physician does enter into the house
of sick men, where he cures some and that freely for nothing, and those are
bound to give him thanks; others he cures not, yet can they not complain
against him, for he owes them nothing. In like manner they whom God chooses
to heal, are bound to give him thanks; and they whom he will not heal,
cannot justly complain, for God owes nothing to any man.


Odeg. You say true: one while they say one thing, and another while another
thing, to the first I shall answer presently, and to the second declared by a
similitude; I say it is a dissimilitude, for therein they do compare a
Physician, that has little mercy in him, with GOD and CHRIST, who are most
merciful that can be imagined, in healing but a few, and leaving infinite
numbers uncured: but Christ says, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me (all) that are laden and I will ease you, therefore if they will
use a similitude let them make choice of a true similitude thus: A good
Physician and one that is truly merciful, goes into the house of sick men,
there he proclaymeth, that he will cure all those that will take a medicine,
now some of them take the medicine and are cured, but others because the
medicine is bitter, will not take it, and therefore are not cured; and in this
case you may lawfully say, that this Physician has both power and will to cure
them all. But why then does he not cure them all? because all will not take the
medicine, without the which it is not possible they should be cured. And thus
we may speak of CHRIST, he came into the world, to cure all men of their
sins, and he is able to do it, but he offers a bitter medicine, Math.
16.24.
which is, That we must deny our selves, take up his cross, and follow him. So
many as refuse to take this medicine, cannot be cured; but such as receive it
are cured: and thu^ is Christ that blessed Physician to all sick sinner^, that
they may be cured, being most willing and able to cure them by the means that
they are curable,
but not by the means whereby they cannot be cured. For his power is herein
subject to his will, and his will is that they should take the medicine.
Wherefore to the intent that we may plainly perceive, what, and how Election
is, let us consider that similitude of CHRIST concerning those that are invited
to the marriage; wherein he speaks of the Elect: and thus it is.

Mat. 22. cap
A certain King married his Son, and s^nt forth his servants to call them
that were bidden to the wedding, but they would not come. Again he sent forth
other servants, saying tell them that are bidden, behold I have prepared my
dinner, my Oxen and my fa^lings are killed, and all things are ready, come
unto the marriage, but they made light of it, and went their ways one to his
Farm, another about his merchandise, and the remnant took his servants and
entreated them sharply and slew them. But when the King heard it he was wroth,
and sent forth his Warriers and destroyed those murderers and burnt up their
City; then said he to his servants, truly the wedding is prepared, but they
that were bidden were not worthy go ye therefore into the highwayes, and as
many as ye find, bid them to the marriage. So those servants went out into the
high ways and gathered together all that ever they found, both good and bad,
so the wedding was furnished with guests. Then the K ng came in to see the
guestes, and saw there a man which had not a wedding garment, and he said unto
him Friend, how came thou in hither, and have not on a wedding garment? and
he was speechless. Then said he King to his servants, bind him hand and
foot, take him away, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. This is the similitude, which so soon as Christ had
spoken he add^th this sentence. For many are called but few are chosen: here
you see the whole argument of Election or choice; for the better understanding
whereof, answer me to certain things. Was it not the Kings pleasure, that
all he invited should come unto ye Marriage? both the first and the last
called; and that they should bring wedding garments? or did but he dissemble
in these things? also was it his will they should kill his servants that
called them to the marriage?


Ereu. It was his will all should come, and bring wedding garments, for else he
would not have punished such as obeyed not his will in these things; but it
was not his will that they should kill his servants, for which cause he also
punished them.


Odeg. And what think you of this that the Lord adds, Many are called, but
few are Elect, whom does he call Elect?


Ereu. Surely those that came clothed in a wedding garment, Col. 3.10. Romans
13.14 Revel. 19.8 John. 3.36.
which is Christ's righteousness put upon us, making us new creatures by Faith
and Obedience.


Odeg. Now let us rehearse the whole matter according to the Spiritual sense
of this similitude. This King is GOD, who did first inuit the Jews to the
Kingdom of heaven* who refusing the same, and euilly entreating his servants,
he commanded his Apostles to Preach the Gospel to every creature, promising
salvation to all that would deny themselves by laying away the pleasures of the
Flesh, and through Faith and obedience to CHRIST; would take up his cross and
follow him, so putting on Christ as a wedding garment.


Ereu. I see that Election consists in this wedding garment, the righteousness
of Christ, which is Christ himself whom the faithful do put on by Faith and
obedience.


Odeg. Yes all may see that wink not with their eyes that they are Elected and
chosen, A true discr^^tion of Election.
who do thus put on Christ, and that our Election depends upon this
condition, according to the Scriptures the Lord chooses to himself a
righteous man Romans 9.2^ 26.30.
, and they that were not Gods people, shall be his people, and she that was
not beloved shall be beloved; if they seek righteousness by Faith, and Romans
1^.5.7.
these are the Elect according to the Election of Grace, and this 2 Pet. 1.10
Election must be made sure, for the household of Faith, the Church of God, are
the Elect of God, and as the 1 These. 1.^^ Col. 3.1^.
Elect of God must put on the fruits of Faith: Election is not of particular
person, but of quallitie: all persons are Gods generation Act. 1^.28 29.
; and those persons in whom he finds faith and obedience, of his mere
mercy, those persons he Electeth to salvation for the quality he finds in
them: which he himself has wrought by his word and Spirit, which they might
have resisted but did not, but submitted to the righteousness of God: and this
is Gods purpose of Election before the world was: Romans 8.^^.
And these are they whom God knew or acknowledged before, (for Gods knowing, is
usually taken for acknowledging, as Psalm. 1.6. Mat. 7.23.) and predestined to
be made like to the Image of his Son, and whom he called, justified, and
glorified, etc. This description of Election, not only the Scriptures of God
every where approue^^: but also the Note in our English new Testament upon
Ephesians I. confirms: in these words.

This is the true understanding of Predestination, that without any merits or
deseruings of ours, yea before the foundadation of the world was laid, God
decreed with himself, to save through Christ, all them that do believe.
Ereu. Surely, it seems to be as you say, but by that reason Election seems
not to be eternal but to follow vocation or calling. And yet it is written,
that we were Elected before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, Ephe. 1. Now in this similitude Math. 22. it seems God does not Elect
us to be holy, but because we are holy.


Odeg. This King, the God of heaven and of mercy, deliberated and decreed thus
before the foundation of the world, I will make man that he may dwell in
Paradise, and so be blessed; but if he fall from his estate, I will send upon
the earth the heavenly Doctrine, Genesis 3.
(The s^ede of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, etc.) whereby man may
learn again to be righteous, and recover again a more blessed life. And I
will declare that Doctrine more plainly in the time of Abraham, whom I will
choose out of the Caldeans, and from that time forward, I will teach him and his
posterity that Doctrine, beginning with rudiments and principles; but if they
will not le^^ne that Doctrine by t^ose rudim^nts, I will then send unto them my
Son, who by his Doctrine has more power and virtue to teach then those
rudiments of the Law; but if they refuse to obey him also, I will cause all
Nations to be taught, and so many of them (being all called) as do not behave
^hemselues as they ought, I will cause to be punished; the rest I will bless
and make happy, and keep for my guests. Tell me now, do you believe the
deliberation and decree of God was of this kind?


Ereu. I do think it so to have been.


Odeg. I his deliberation and decree of God was manifested in time, in types by
the rudiments of the Law, but with open face by the Doctrine of CHRIST the
Son, whom he sent in the Flesh; First to offer salvation to the Jews, by the
condition of the righteousness which is by Faith; who generally refusing it; and
so the partition wall being broken down, that is all the difference betwixt
Jews and Gentiles being taken away; God did choose all men Good and bad, upon
the condition aforesaid to the Kingdom of heaven, Christ declaring, Go Preach
the Gospel to every creature; Mark. 16.
yea even to all men that were fallen in Adam, for it must needs be that the
good work and Grace of Christ, extends it self as far, as the evil work
and sin of Adam, for otherwise he could in no sort be truly said to be the
Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin of the world: neither should that
saying be true; Where sin abounded, there Grace abou^ded much more; for the
Grace of CHRIST should be overcome and excelled by the sin of Adam, if CHRIST
could not save all, whom Adam destroyed. Therefore all men unto whom the
Gospel is Preached, were Elected unto salvation in Christ; not actually, for
they could not be actually chosen before they had actually any being, but in
the Eternal purpose of God upon the condition before spoken, For the Eternal
purpose and Decree of God may be called Eternal Election, whereupon chiefly
the salvation of all men does depend. Paul speaks of this Election when he
says. Ephesians. 1.
That we were Elected before the Creation of the world, and that it may
appear that they that are in Christ are not actually Elected before they be
instructed and taught. Consider what Paul says unto these Ephesians that were
thus Elected. Remember says he that ye being in times past Gentiles in the
flesh, were at that time without CHRIST, and were strangers from the common
wealth of Israel, and wanting the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
were without God in the world. Surely if they were without Christ, if they
wanted the covenants of Promise, if they were without God, they were not then
really and particulerly Elected: but when they had learned Christ, then were
they first really Elected, as the Apostle says verse. 13.14. After ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance for the redemption of that liberty purchased, etc. And
consider this place also Romans 9.2^
, I will call them my people which were not my people, and her beloved which
was not beloved. But if we were actually and particularly chosen, before the
Creation of the world, then were we also really the people of God, and could
not at any time be said not to be the people of God, and yet Paul does teach
that we were not the people of God, and are now become the people of God; so
does Peter also 1 Pet. 2.1^
, and that they y^ were not under mercy have now obtained mercy; wherein their
meaning is, that we are first particularly chosen, when we receive or put on
Christ; For GOD being no respecter of persons,
which is so often repeated in the Scriptures, he only chooses or Electeth,
where he finds Faith and obedience to the Gospel of his Son; and rejects
where these are wanting. This was Gods Election in purpose from eternity, and
in act upon Faith and obedience of the Ephesians, even as his Election is of
all men whatsoever, whose estates are as the Ephesians once were, without
CHRIST, without GOD, without Hope, without Promise, without Mercy, for 2 Cor.
5. ^ Ioh. 2.2.
God was in Christ and reconciled the whole world to himself, committing to
his Apostles the word of reconciliation: and that Grace of God that brings
salvation to all men has appeared, Tit. 2.11.
etc. proclayming that whosoever will receive that Grace of God, by Faith and
obedience, as the Ephesians did, shall have that actual Election, that they
had, which is also according to 2. Tim. 1 9 10.


Ereu. What say you further to prove that the very wicked that come to
damnation had by this purpose of God, means of salvation if they had not
refused it?


Odeg. As I showed you, that Gods purpose, and call, was and is unfeignedly unto
all without exception; so also I will show that Christ dyed unfeignedly for all
without exception, by whose Death all might be saved, if they did not reject
it. The Apostle says, CHRIST dyed for sinners Ro^. 5.6.8.
, even for the ungodly: even for all that were dead 2 Cor. 5.15.
, he gave himself a ransom for all men 1 Timothy 2.6
, a Savior of all men, especially of them that believe 1 Timothy 4.10.
, he is the reconc^liation for the sins of the whole world 1 Ioh. 2.2.
, and we know the whole world lies in wickedness 1 Ioh. 5.1^
, what, shall I need to allege more Scriptures? the Lord is most plentiful
in this thing, declaring that he would have no man perish, but that all men
should come to repentance 2. Pet. 3.9. not casting away any, until there be
no remedy 2 Chr. 3^ 16.
.


Ereu. This that you say cannot be denied.


Odeg. For your further satisfaction, observe; that Gods purpose was to save,
even those Christ's enemies that slew him, and hanged him on tree, as is
testified Act. 3.2^ 26.
. First unto you, has God raised up his Son JESUS, and him has he sent, to
bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities: also Act. 5.3^ 31.
although they blasphemously resisted, and put everlasting life from them, and
resisted the Spirit of Grace Act. 2.51. and 13.46. and 18.6.
: showing that Gods purpose was to save them, which they refused, and so their
blood was on their own heads, and their damnation of themselves: and they
refusing salvation, it was sent unto the Gentiles, even unto all the world, as
the Scripture testifies both by the similitude of the Marriage of the Kings
son; and of our Saviors Commandment formerly spoken of, as also of the
Apostle Mark. 16.15.
, their sounds went throughout all the earth, and their words unto the end of
the world. That Romans 10.18. and Cap. 16 25.26.
mystery (the Gospel) is now opened and published among all Nations, by the
Scriptures at the commandment of the everlasting God for the obedience of
Faith Col. 1.6.
. The Gospel of salvation is come unto all the world, even as it came unto the
Saints at Collossa: Verse. 23.
And it has been Preached to every creature under Heaven. Thus you see the
bounty of God toward all, and every man, even the whole world, he gives his
Son unto the Death for them, for so he loves the world, proclaiming to all,
and striving with them by his good Spirit, ^^ehem. 9 20.30.
even by ye Ministry of his word: that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Now let the Heaven and Earth, and all
impartial men judge whether in all these things, God deal not unfeignedly, and
in good earnest, desiring the salvation of all men, even Jews and Gentiles,
not leaving any one without means of salvation, contrary to that Doctrine
which you mentioned in the beginning. That God has left the greatest number in
sin, without any means of reconciliation, because he would have them damned,
which is most horrible blasphemy, in making God to dissemble in all these his
sayings.


Ereu. But seeing there be many never heard of Christ, how are those Scriptures
verified?


Odeg. This is something hard to many, yet God will reveal it to those that
fear him; Now that the truth of this may be the easier seen of all, let us
first consider, whether all men from the beginning, even at all times, had a
Law given from God, the breach of which deserved Gods wrath.


Ereu. Do you mean another Law, then that given to Israel by Moses?


Odeg. I mean, that all people has a Law to observe, and ever had, as well as
Israel. 1. It is confessed of all, that Adam had a Law. 2. His posterity as
they came to understanding had a Law; for some are said to do well, as
Habell, Henoch etc. some are said to call upon God, and are called the Sons
of God; and Noah a just man: all which testifies they had a Law to guide them
in the doing of that they did; and some are said to be evil doers, as Caine,
Lamech, and others, and at length the earth was so filled with cruelty, and all
flesh had so corrupted his way, that God destroyed it from of the face of ye
earth, which shows they sinned, but there can be no sin without a Law;
neither would God have destroyed the world, but for offending hi^ Majesty,
which offenses are breaking a just Law given them of God. Also all people after
beginning at Noah's sons, even till Moses, are said to do well or evil,
which actions must be so judged by some rule or Law. And the Law of Moses was
not given because there was no Law before, but to revive or bring into
remembrance those just and holy rules, which were almost forgotten and to make
sin out of measure sin^^ll by this Law; as also to keep a truer observation
of those things, which did type out CHRIST, and of what race he should come,
that when he came all might know, that it was he, that takes away the sins
of the world.


Ereu. Indeed it is said that all have sinned, both Jew and Gentile: and sin
is the transgression of a Law, so it plainly appears, as you said, that all
had a Law, or else they could not have sinned, for where there is no Law,
there is no transgression, but what is that Law, the Gentiles had, and that
before the Flood also?


Odeg. It is two fold: first it is written in the hearts of men even in
Nature, who has a conscience Romans 2.14 15.26.27.
to excuse them if they do the things of the Law, or to accuse them, if they
do that the Law forbids. Secondly, that which may be known of God, he has
showed it to all men, not only in the qualities of body, and mind, but also
by other his works.

For the invisible things of GOD, Romans 1.19 20. Deuteronomy. 4.19. Psalm. 19.1.6 Job.
12.7.8. Act. 14.17. and 17.24.29 Job. 38.39.40.41.
that is his eternal Power and Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the
world, being considered in his works, to the intent that all should be without
excuse, so that the works of God, which are seen of all men, are a Law to
teach them to fear and dread, and to seek after the work master to know his
will; so that it is most evident, all men have a Law, the breach of which
brings them under wrath.


Ereu. Two things let me demand of you more, one is: whether this Law of the
Gentiles, be different from that which the Jews had? the other, the time when
both is required to be observed of man.


Odeg. The Law given both to Jew and Gentile is one and the same, for as God is
but one, his Law is but one; for the Law that is written in the heart, is the
Ro^. 2.14, 15.
effect of that written in the letter. Besides the Gentiles in all their
actions, have been condemned or justified by the Law of Moses: and the Jews
have been condemned oftentimes by the actions of the Gentiles contained in the
Law, who wanted a Law of the letter. Also observe, that it is the Law of works
unto both, and both are bound to observe it, even of themselves with out an
helper, as they are the work of God by creation as was Adam; which, when by
reason of the weakness of their Flesh they cannot keep; CHRIST is provided to
relieve them. To the second part of your question, I answer; the Law is to be
observed, when it is given to a man, and that is when he comes to
understanding, and when his conscience gives him peace by keeping it, and war
for breaking it, and not till then; which qualities are not in Babes, for they
discern not earthly things, and Ioh. 3.12.
how then should they discern heavenly? but when they can discern things of
the earth that differ Luke 12.56.57.
, as times and seasons and the like, then are they justly taxed for not knowing
Gods matters; there must be a Conscience unto which a Law is given, which
Infants have not; for Conscience is, Of Infants estate hereafter at large.
a knowledge, to a man's self, of accusing or excusing, which who so has, are
breakers of the Law, for though the Law be holy and just, yet flesh is weak,
and the Tempter strong, that all, when they come to have the Law, do plunge
themselves into misery by breaking it, and must be saved by CHRIST'S
sufferings, and Faith in him. Now it remains to prove, how all may come to
the knowledge of CHRIST, for it is clear all have a Law, and all are sinners,
and no way of reconciliation but by CHRIST.


Ereu. Now if it can be showed that Christ has been, and still is, offered
to all that have sinned, and that they have put him away, and the fault is
their own, and condemnation from themselves, and God freed from partiality,
then I am satisfied.


Odeg. It cannot be denied, but Adam and Heuah, the first transgressors had
Christ offered, by the seed of the Woman promised, Genesis 3.
and so their generation, as they took notice of their sin, so they took
notice of Christ, by whom they must be freed from their sin. Habell and Caine
understood it, Genesis 4.
as appears by their Offerings; also Henoch the seventh from Adam remembered
it; those were called the Sons of GOD, which could not be, but by Grace, the
Law made them not so: Noah knew it well, for he found Grace in the sight of
God, which is through Christ, not by works; for that were not by favor but by
debt: he also preached CHRIST by the same Spirit, that Peter preached him, to
the old world, even to them that are now in prison. After the Flood Noah with
his little Family offered Sacrifice, which was a type of Christ, from which
action all his Sons could do no less but take notice of, as of the Deluge
it self, and so to convey it, by tradition to all their generations. In
Abraham's time it is apparent that Christ was remembered, till the Law: and under
the Law written, it is not doubted but he was known; For our Fathers did all
eat, ^ Cor. 10.
etc. and that Rock was Christ.

Also the Sacrifices of the Gentiles though in an Idolatrous manner does
plainly show, that the remembrance of Christ was among them, for they
offending, knew there was no way to make peace, but by a Sacrifice; they vpheld
Sacrifices, which either they had from their Ancestors, as one Generation took
it from another; or else something moved them to do it of themselves as a
troubled conscience which must be quieted by Sacrifice: so y^ we may see, among
all sorts of men, there was a kind of acknowledging CHRIST, though by most in
an evil manner, which augments their sin; even as now at this day there be
many that acknowledges him; falsely, which indeed is not him, but a false
Christ in stead of him; all which proves that ever there was the remembrance
of a pacifier, though the right one was missed, which was their own fault and
not Gods: for why might not every one have found the right, as well as some? God
would have all to be saved, and even from the beginning he has been liberal
unto all: In Paradise there was a tree of life, as well as of knowledge: ever
since, as there has been a Law, which is a good tree, if it be observed, and
an evil tree if it be broken, so there has been a tree of life provided,
that man might eat of it, and live for ever, which is that Lamb slain from
the beginning. A remembrance of which has ever been observed, either in a
true manner or a false, of all the world, for all the world ever have and do
worship either the true God or a false, and offer Sacrifice to that which they
took for their God to appease him.

Now since CHRIST came in the Flesh, it is apparent that he has been offered
to all Nations under Heaven. First he was Prophesied of long before he came,
that all flesh should see the salvation of God: Luke 3.6.
After he was come, by Doctrine and miracles both he, and all his Apostles,
did so powerfully work, that all observed him; The Jews to whom first he
offered himself, the Gentiles also, who put him to Death. The Apostles at ye
day of Penticost was fitted with all tongues that Christ by them might be
conveyed to all Nations, where were present men of every Nation under Heaven;
Act. 2.
and their sound went throughout all the earth, and their words unto the end of
the world; Romans 10.18 Psalm. 19.1. etc.
even as far as the Sun and the Moon does teach God; and though the Jew
will none of him, many of the Gentiles refuse him, and many of the Gentiles
confess him amiss, to their further woe, the fault is not because God has
not offered him, to help, even as largely as the Law did hurt; but because man
will not accept of this offer, some put him away quite, as the Jew, Turk, and
diverse others that hear of him, and in a manner look for him; some confess
him with their mouths, but will not suffer him to reign over them, but will
have other spiritual Lords in stead of him; yet no default on God, who herein
is rich to Jew and Gentile in the offer of his Son, but the fault is in
themselves, who will not accept of this gift of God: for even in this Nation
and others where Christ is confessed, are there not many millions of men, whose
knowledge of CHRIST is such, in truth and deed, that they cannot so much as
make a confession of him no more then any Pagan in the world? who knows not
this? and what is the cause but their own neglect and contempt of his Word and
cross?


Ereu. Indeed I see general Nations have, or might have had Christ if they
would, for he was ever offered to them as largely as the Law, and that the Law
and Christ went together, that as the one did kill, the other was offered to
make alive in a generality: but you must prove that this is, or might be
manifested to every particular person, that as every man particulerly whosoever
he be, Romans 2.
is culpable before God of Judgment; so every one likewise in mercy has
Christ offered to him for reconciliation.


Odeg. I have largely showed you before by the Scriptures, that as all and
every person are shut up in unbelief, so God has mercy on all, and his Grace
that bringe^h salvation unto all men has appeared, etc. which might satisfy
any reasonable man, for either every particular soul of reason and
understanding has had means offered, or else the Scriptures are not true,
which God forbid: and it will be easily granted that every such person, has a
Law written in his heart, and an accusing Conscience for breaking of it: and
every such person has the Heavens, the Firmament, the Sun, the Moon, and
all the wonders of the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and Fountains of waters:
all which sends them to seek out the worke-master, and he that seeks shall
find, but in stead of knowing God, by these his teachings, they become vain
in their thoughts, and their foolish heart is full of darkness; for some turn
the Glory of the incorruptible God, to real Idols, some to mental Idols, and
therefore as they regard not to know God aright, by seeking him aright, wherein
they are ignorant, but set up several Idols, by their own knowledge, which is
Beastly, so God delivers them up to a reprobate mind, that they never know
more, for what should he that is not faithful in a little, Luke 16.10. etc.
be trusted with much: This is the cause that the most blind Pagans in the
world know no more, because they use not that well they have:
why the Turks know no more, the Jews, the Papists, and others of all sorts,
because they have despised the first light of God offered them, and therein
continue Act. 28.27
, wincking with their eyes least they should see further: because the ways of
their own hearts best please them; For Psa. 81.12 Romans 1.21. etc.
this cause does God give them up to walk in their own Counsels. Is the fault
now for want of means on Gods part, to any particular person, or their own
neglect and contempt of the means offered them?


Ereu. Their own surely, else it had not been injustice in God to tell them
that which might be known of him is manifest in them, Romans 1.19.
and to blame them for not profiting, by that they had, as after in 9. verses
following is showed.


Odeg. In like manner, all that knows they have offended some infinite Power
by their accusing Conscience, are there by invited to seek who it is, and
finding it to be their Creator, they are then to seek by what way he shall be
pacified with them, for their accusing Conscience is a means to cause them to
seek with earnestnes; for then God call^ unto them, as he did unto Adam,
saying, where art thou? whose answer ought to be here Lord, what will thou? I
have sinned* and not to hide sin with the Fig-leaues of inventions, then if
there be no means in that Nation; yet there is to be picked out of the
consideration of the greatness of him offended, that his justice must be
satisfied; then must they, and may they consider whether themselves can
satisfy or some others for them; and thus if they examine all things rightly,
God will reveal CHRIST unto them by one means or other; so as in seeking,
nothing satisfy them but ye which is of God, in which they must cast away not
only their own inventions; but also they must not be servants of men; which
if they do not, but satisfy themselves in either of these, it is just with
God to give them up to their own hearts lusts; and so they become past
feeling. And for conclusion, all Nations, Cities, houses, fields, highways,
hedges, have had the mercy of God in the offer of CHRIST affoorded them, all
were bidden, so that this is not now dark, but clear and evident, that all
have ever had, or might have had, if they had would, Christ, as well as the Law
given unto them.


Ereu. Now indeed, these things seem to be very true, but I must entreat you
to make plain unto me, that which Paul has written to the Romans, concerning
Election, that there remain no scruple nor doubt in my mind: that disputation
of Paul, troubles many, by reason it is handled so darkly: surely I am of
opinion, that that place is one of those whereof Peter wrote, that there were
certain dark things in Paul's Epistles, ^ Pet. 3.
which the unlearned and weak do wrest to their own destruction, as they do
also other places of Scriptures.


Odeg. Surely, you have good reason so to think, now therefore let The Apostle
Peter show who those are, that wrest the Scriptures of them or us: We say with
Peter, that the long suffering of God is salvation, in that God would have no
man perish, but would have all come to repentance: and this is that (says
Peter verse. 15. etc.) which our beloved brother Paul in all his Epistles
speaks of, among the which, some things are hard to be understood, which
some pervert to their destruction. They say, God has reprobated, some and the
greatest number, and that before they were borne, and had done evil; for whom
there was never means of salvation, because God would have them perish, for y^
was his good pleasure. Now these words of Peter, as they judge our adversaries
to be peruerters of the Scriptures, so may they satisfy every Godly minded
man, that Paul's meaning was not contrary to Peter's, they writing both by one
Spirit, nay then Paul's own meaning was else where in the same Epistle, R
that the long suffering of God was salvation, even to those that hardened
their own hearts, and heaped up wrath against the day of wrath; This therefore
may be an entrance, but let us come to the words of Paul, Romans 9.

In this 9th Chapter, and so in most of this Epistle the maine subject that the
Apostle Paul handles, is: That not the Law, A short expos^on Ro^. ^.
but the Gospel, is the Power of GOD to salvation; not to him that is a Jew
outward, or that has Circumcision of the Flesh, or is an obseruer of the Law,
which was all the Jews had to boast of and which they did boast of; Ioh.
8.33.39. and 9.28.29. Cap. 4.1.2. Cap. 2.28. etc. Cap. 4.12.13.14.16.
for Abraham himself found nothing concerning the Flesh, neither was he
justified by works; but salvation appertains to him that is a Jew within:
that has Circumcision of the heart: that is of the Faith of Abraham; whether
he be Jew or Gentile in the Flesh; this I say is the whole drift of the
Apostle, as in the whole, so in this 9. Chap.

In ye 1.2.3.4.5. Verse. The Apostle shows his upright and unfeigned desire of
the salvation of the Isralites according to the flesh, who were his fleshly
brethren; who had all those Oracles of GOD committed to them; of whom were the
Fathers, and of whom concerning the Flesh CHRIST came, GOD over all blessed for
ever, Amen. Yet notwithstanding his desire and all these their privileges,
Verse. 6.7.
the word of God cannot be made void, which says, All are not Israel that
are of Israel, neither are they all Children, because they are the seed of
Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, which Paul expounds, Verse.
8. That is, they which are the children of the Flesh are not the children of
GOD, or not, those that shall be saved, but the Children of the promise, are
counted for the seed. So that thus far there is no difficulty, but that the
Apostle plainly means in all these Verses; John. 8.33.39. Ioh. 9.28.29.
that not all the children of Abraham's flesh, (who so much boasted of their
being Abraham's seed; and of being Moses Disciples in the observation of the
Law,) were therefore in the estate of salvation: and this he desires to
acquaint ye Jews with, that they might cast off their rejoicing in their
Fleshly descent; and seek true rejoicing in another way. The Apostle having
propounded this as an infallible truth; he goes about to prove it by the
Scriptures: First alleging, the promise made, that Sara shall have a Son
Genesis 18.10.
, which Abraham believed, not considering his own, and Sara's body, which were
dead, neither did he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strengthened in the Faith Ro^. 4.18. etc.
and it was imputed to him for righteousness; so that this promised Son of
Sara, was borne not after Flesh, but after the Faith; which is most largely
declared in Gal. 4.22. where is declared, that Abraham had two Sons, one by
the servant, Hagar (namely Ishmaell) who was borne after the Flesh, and one by
the freewoman Sara, (namely Isaac) who was borne by Promise, and so by Faith;
by the which (says The Apostle) another thing is meant: these two Mothers, are
the two Testaments, in type: the two Children, are ye types of the children of
the two Testaments, the Child of the Flesh, Ishmaell son of Hagar, typed out
the fleshly Isralites, which were in bondage under the rudiments of the Law;
the Child of the Promise, Isaac, son of Sara typed out the Children of the
Faith of Abraham; and as the child of the Flesh persecuted the child of the
Faith by his mockings, for which cause he must be put out and must not be heir
with Isaac; so (says The Apostle) do all that seek acceptance with God through
the Flesh, persecute them that seek it by the Promise through Faith; and
therefore all the children of the Flesh of Abraham, that have no other
privilege to justification, must be put out, and shall not be heir with the
children of the Promise. This is so plain in Gal. 4. that he that reads the
Scripture with an indifferent heart void of malice cannot be able to
contradict, being also confirmed in the 3. Cap. verse 16. where the Apostle
treating of the promise of Salvation, says: Now to Abraham and his seed were
the Promises made: he says not, and to the seeds as speaking of many, but,
and to thy seed as of one which is CHRIST, which being well observed, that
Abraham had two Sons or seeds by two Women, as before Gal. 4. and that the
Promise of salvation is made but unto the one seed Gal. 3.16 Verse. 29. Verse.
^.9.
, even they that are CHRIST'S, that are of the Faith of Abraham, and so after
the manner of Isaac Gal. 4.28
the son of Sara, and that this Promise is not made unto both the seeds,
namely unto the Children after the Flesh of Abraham, for they are not the
children of God Romans 9.8. but they must be put out, and must not be heir with
the other Gal. 4.30
. This is this sure word of Promise, Sara shall have a Son, thus applied by the
Apostle, to prove the thing he has in hand, that all the fleshly Israelites
were not therefore in the estate of justification to Salvation; in that God did
in this type declare the contrary: For further probation, he brings another
Scripture to prove, Genesis ^5.21 Verse. 10.11
that unto Rebecca this same thing was declared before ye Children were borne,
and when they had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might
remain, according to Election not by works, but by him that calls, It was
said unto her, The Elder shall serve the Younger. In which words The Apostle
plainly proves, that neither birth, nor works did prefer with God, for
this is the purpose of God, to prefer and make superior, even the youngest
by birth, or those that challenge nothing by birth, or by works, but seek it
by Gods free Election, through faith in CHRIST JESUS: also to reject and make
inferior all that seek salvation by flesh, birth, or by works; even as he did
in these two types, the Elder was the heir by the Flesh; and the younger was
not of that Land of Promise, a type of the estate of salvation; and God
foreseing, what would come to pass, that these two twins should be the
Fathers of two great Nations; and that the Younger would get the privilege
from the Elder; and so the Elder should serve the younger, or be inferior to
the younger, even in this Covenant or Promise, a type of that which was to
come; which type being so fit as it was for the Apostles purpose, he brings
to prove, that Fleshly birth or descent even from Abraham was interrupted of
old in those typical Promises to Abrah: First, not Ishmaell the Eldest, but
Isaac the Youngest I will make my Covenant with; 2. To Isaac, not Esau the
eldest, but Jacob the youngest, shall be Lord or superior and have that
Covenant; according to which types the truth is, says the Apostle, that the
Jews the Elder brother Luke 15.25.
, Who seek salvation by the Flesh or works, shall not have it; for that is
against the word and promise of God: but the Gentiles, the younger Verse. 12.
, in the offer of the Gospel, that seeks salvation only by the free
undeserved Promise of God; through faith in JESUS CHRIST, these only shall
have it, for this is according to the purpose of Gods Election.

Now for the Scripture which follows, from Mal. 1.2.3. mentioned in the 13.
Verse. As it is written, I have loved Jacob and have hated Esau; the peruerters
of these words of Paul, will needs have to be before Esau and Jacob were borne;
and this we must believe because they say so; but the Apostle has no such
meaning; as shall both appear by the Scripture it self, and also from many
other Scriptures. Paul still follows, the confirmation of his Doctrine, which
is, that the Children of the Flesh or Law, have not therefore their only
privilege with God, which he has proved by the Promise of Sara's Son also by
the Promise of Rebecca's younges^ son, which were preferred before their
Elder brethren unto that typical covenant, and as in Verse. 12. The Apostle
declared, what the Lord said should come to pass; concerning Esau and Jacob,
and their Posterities, before they were borne, so proves The Apostle, from Mal.
1.1. etc. that the same did come to pass concerning them and their
posterities, many years after Esau and Jacob were dead and gone; in the 12.
Verse. declaring what should come to pass, in the 13. ver. declaring what has
come to pass, both proving his Doctrine; not when, nor for what cause, God
loved Jacob and his Nation, and hated Esau and his Nation, but proving that God
did it, which was sufficient for his purpose in h^nd, to show the error of the
Jews (whose salvation he so much sought) who were persuaded that their
acceptance with God stood in their being Abraham's seed, and observing the Law
of Moses, as before has been proved, the times of shall, and have, do much
differ.

Further God hated not Esau before he was borne, seeing there is not any
Scripture to prove that God hates any man before he has first hated God, as
before in our conference of Predestination has been proved. Esau hated God in
contemning his Birthright Ge^. 25.3^ Heb. 12.16.
long before Gods hatred of him and his posterity spoken of, Mal. 1. God
loves and saves freely without desert, but hates and destroys not without
desert.


Ereu. I bless God, you have to my great consolation and satisfaction made
manifest the Verses of this Scriptures thus far, that there remains no
scruple in me. Now therefore I pray you proceed, What is Paul's meaning in Verse.
14. what shall we say then? Is there Injustice with God? God forbid.


Odeg. This is The Apostles meaning, that as God rejected Esau for contemning
his birthright, Ver^. 14.
which God had given to him, so the fleshly Isralites were of God rejected,
because they contemned their salvation offered them, (by faith in CHRIST JESUS)
and in this, GOD is not unjust; this is the Apostles meaning, and not as the
adversary affirms, that God is not unjust, though he hate without cause; he
neither hated Esau nor any man without cause. For Esau and his posterity he
hated for his wickedness as these Scriptures teach, Amos 1.11 Obediah 10. etc,
Further, Paul himself besides many other places of Scripture, in this very
Epistle to the Romans, Romans 2.4.5.
has a very excellent description of the Justice of God speaking thus: Or
dispisest thou the riches of his Bountifulnes, Patience* and long sufferance,
not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to Repentance? But thou
after thine hardness and heart that refuses to repent, heapest unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just Judgment of
God, who will reward every man according to his deeds. What does Paul call
here the just Judgment of GOD?


Ereu. To pay every man the desert of his works.


Odeg. But if he hated Esau before he was borne, he paid him not the reward
of his works, forasmuch as Esau had done nothing before that hatred, and so it
comes to pass that this hatred of Esau agrees not with Paul's rule of the
just judgment of God. But The Apostle following still the thing he had in hand,
to prove that the Jews could not have salvation therefore, because they were
the children of the Flesh, answers all objections that could be made from his
former Doctrine, that God rejected all the Children of Abraham's flesh, except
such as sought it by Faith, and such only were the Children of the Promise, in
which there is no unrighteousness with God; For further proof whereof, he
brings Moses for example, Verse. 15.
who when the seed of Abraham, had provoked him by their wickedness to cast them
away, Moses found Grace for himself and his people, and provoked God to show
mercy on them, for he has mercy on whom he will; namely on them that seek
him* by the means that he himself appoints; such find Grace and mercy as
Moses, and not by our own willing, nor running, Exodus 33.
nor working as the Jews.


Ereu. What is the meaning of the hardening of Pharaoh? Verse. 17.


Odeg. This; Pharaoh being a wicked man, and hardening his heart against Gods
Commandments and judgments, Exodus 9 34. 1 Samuel 6. (even as these Jews Paul
speaks of did against CHRIST and his Gospel) yea making his heart as an
Adamant stone as others did, Verse. 17.
Zach. 7.12. so that he would not let the people go; for his cruelty against
Gods people in killing their Children, and ouertasking them, and in not letting
them go; for these causes, God hardened his heart, that is as the holy Ghost
explaines it, gave him up to the hardness of his own heart, as Psalm. 81.11 12.
even to Satan, who works hardness of heart against God, and his truth in all
the Children of disobedience, who when the word and Judgments of God as to
Pharaoh and these unbelieving Jews is manifest to them and they despise them;
that which was ordained a means of humiliation and softening the heart,
becomes a means of hardening; that which is of it self, and to the belieuers
the sweet savor of Life, becomes to them the savor of Death, 2. Cor.
2.15.16. Romans 7.13. and thus does God harden the hearts of the wicked by giving
them up to Satan, and to their own hearts lusts, to vile affections, and to
reprobate minds, Ro^. 1.24.26.28. Thus he has mercy on whom he will, Verse. 18.
and whom he will he hardens; his will being to show mercy, on such as Moses,
that seek his favor by his appointed way; and hardens such as Phoraoh, who
hardneth their hearts against the same way, as those Jews did, of whom Paul
speaks.


Ereu. How answer you these words, who has resisted his will? Verse. 19.


Odeg. I answer them thus: Verse. 19.
Paul in these words speaks as in the person of one of these Jews, or
declares what these Jews will answer to this Doctrine; who has resisted his
will, and why does he complain? For this was his will that we should obey
these his precepts of the Law, which who so does should live in them, and in
sticking to the Law, we have not resisted his will; unto which The Apostle
gives the answer, that man must not plead against God; to say why have thou
made me thus, that is, that I cannot obtain salvation by the works of the
Law; for God seeing the weakness of the Flesh to observe the Law Romans 8.3.
, sent his Son in the flesh; for justification to every one that believes;
proving plainly to all, that both Jews and Gentiles were under sin, and
that there was not one righteous by the Law, Romans 3.
and therefore their cavil was vain: For Gods will was to save all, that
seek it by the Faith of JESUS, and not by the works of the Law; which they
did resist, and so were justly convicted. Now the adversaries exposition of
this verse is, that God hated Esau and so Pharaoh, and all the reprobate before
they were borne, from which hatred, he Decreed their damnation; and because the
will of God is declared to be contrary in the Scriptures, therefore they call
this his secret will, against which will (say they) no man can resist; but the
most holy GOD declares the contrary. It is not my will that any man sin,
they have done that which I command them not, neither came it in my mind,
etc. Ier. 32.35
neither is it my will that any sinner dye but that he amend and live, and
this I testify as I live ^aith the Lord Ezekiel. 18. and 33. Chap
: But if he will not amend but continue in sin as Pharaoh, these Jews, and
others, him will I punish, in my just Judgment* wherefore if any suffer justly
for his trespass, he ought not to accuse GOD (as our adversaries do, saying
that God decreed him, ye^ by power compelled him to trespass and so to suffer,
^ and say who can resist his Will* Gods will is, that all repent and believe
the Gospel* which may be, and is resisted: and also his will is, that they who
will not repent and believe ^e damned, which cannot be resisted. This his will
is just and full of mercy, and thus I have sufficiently answered these words.


Ereu. What say you to these words, Has not the Potter power of the Clay to
make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor. Verse. 21.


Odeg. For the better understanding of these words, let us read the 18 Cha^.
Verse. 21.
of the Prophet Jeremy, from whence The Apostle has these words, And we shall
see through the Grace of GOD, that, that making of the clay in the Potters
hand, is not in creation, but in vocation; the words are these: O House of
Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter, says the Lord? Behold as the
clay is in the Potters hand, so are you in my hand O house of Israel, GOD is
this Potter, the House of Israel is the Clay. And Verse. 7. I will speak
against a Nation, or against a Kingdom, to pluck it up, to root it out, and
to destroy it; That is to make it a vessel of dishonor. But Verse. 8. If this
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will
repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them; Again Verse. 9. And I
will speak concerning a Kingdom and concerning a Nation to build it, and to
plant it; and so make them vessels of Honor. But Verse. 10. If it do evil in
my sight, and hear not my voice, I will repent of the good that I thought to
do for them. Therefore Verse. 11. Thus says the Lord unto the men of Judah and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Behold I prepare a plague for you, and purpose a
thing against you, return you therefore every one from his evil way, etc.
This does the Ap stle apply to the thing in hand, proclayming from this
glorious Potter, that all that seeks salvation by Faith and obedience to the
Gospel; as the Gentiles did, he will make them vessels of mercy prepared for
Glory; but those that seek it, by the Flesh or by works of the Law as the
Jews did, he will make them vessels of dishonor, prepared for destruction.
Thus does God make v^se^s of Honor and Dishonor, and not otherwise, for in
Creation he made Man good, and in vocation he says, As he lives he would
have him good; by turning unto him, from his wicked way, which if he will not,
then he makes him a vessel of dishonor, by b^inging upon him as a just
recompense of reward, dishonor and confusion: and thus the Apostle alludeth to
this Scripture in this place, for he wished the salvation of the Isralites,
whom God had planted a noble vine, with the best plants, Esa. 5.
doing unto it, what he could do unto it, tying to him the whole house of
Israel and Judah, Ier. 13.11.
as a man tyeth his girdle to his loins, that they might be his people* and
that they might have a name and p^aise, and Glory, but they would not hear.
Yea crying out unto them, what shall I do unto thee, how shall I entreat thee,
Hosea. 6.4.
yea sending his own Son unto them, to turn them away from their
iniquities, and by faith in him to give them salvation; so many of the
Isralites, yea of the Gentiles as submitted unto this his calling of Grace, by
Faith, not by Works, they should be saved, the rest should be vessels of
destruction: this he plainly affirms, in Verse. 23.24. Ask the Potter and he
will answer thee, that he would be loath to break any vessel, but if it
prove n^ught, then he will break it; The Husbandman planteth no Tree to be
barren; The Magistrate would not have any of his Subjects to be Rebels but if
they be, he will show his wrath and make his power known in executing them: If
these things be good in men, how much more are they good in God, who says, I
will not the death of a sinner, but that he convert and live, and I will not
that any man be evil, and therefore I forbid all evil; but if any contrary to
my will and commandment refuse the good which he might have accepted, and d^
the evil which he might have left undone, then do I show my power over him
in that I cast him away ^s ye sh ards of a naughty pot: and so I have according
to the proportion of all the Scriptures expounded these hard Verses of this 9
Chapter; showing how the potter makes vessels of dishonor and wrath* and how
they are prepared to destruction; and how he makes vessels of mercy prepared
to Glory, which in the 24. Verse. he plainly declares, Verse. 24.
that the vessels of mercy, are even us, Verse. 25.
Whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, as is
written, in Osea. I will call them my people which were not my people, and her
beloved which was not beloved; Verse. 26.
and where it was said unto them, ye are not my people, there they shall be
called the Children of the living God: And of Israel he declares otherwise,
Verse 27.28.29. And for conclusion, Paul declares that the Gentiles the younger
which followed not righteousness, Verse. 30.
have attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is of Faith.
Verse. 31.
But Israel the Elder which followed the Law of righteousness could not attain
unto the Law of righteousness, wherefore? Verse. 32.
says The Apostle, (not because they were so decreed of God as the Caluinists
teach, but) Mark these words.
because they sought it not, by Faith, but by the works of the Law, etc.
confirmed also in Chap. 11. Verse. 67 wherein he says, It is the Election of
Grace not of works: and that Israel obtained not that he sought, the reason
is rendered, because they sought it not by Faith; but the Election has obtained
it, that is, the Gentiles, seeking it by Faith. What can be more plain then
this? If any will be still perverse or ignorant let them be ignorant.


Ereu. You have very sufficiently explained this 9th. Chapter to the Romans,
and to my full satisfaction have resolved me in every difficult place thereof,
but now remains an objection from Act. 13. So many as were ordained unto
eternal Life believed.


Odeg. This is my answer: That as the ungodly; that turn the Grace of God into
wantonness, are said to be ordained to death or damnation Jude 4.
; So they that receive the love of the truth, and are obedient thereunto, when
they hear it, are said to be ordained unto eternal life Mark. 15* 16.
, they that are willing to walk in the way to life, are ordained to life; and
such do believe, yet are they not ordained only for walking in the way of
life: the First cause of ordination to life, is Gods free gift, decreed before
the foundation of the world; manifested in time through CHRIST, whom he sent
into the world to save all men, yet with this condition; that every one that
will have this salvation must believe and obey the Gospel; as is before at
large declared; as for example; A merciful rich man, proclaims in the time
of dearth, that whosoever standing in need, will come to his house, they shall
have 10 shillings a piece to relieve their want, so many as come have the 10.
s. yet their coming is not the first cause of their receiving it, but the
mercy of the giver; but if they had not come to his house, they should not have
had it, because the giver will fre^ly give it, to them that come to the place
where he will give it: So that all that had it, were ordained to have it,
before they came, but others were ordained to have it as well as they if they
had come, but they proudly rejected his bounty, and would not come for it: so
are the Scriptures plentiful in teaching* that God out of his free bounty
before the world ordained to send his Son, not to condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be sa^ed, and proclaimed in time, this his bounty
unto every creature under Heaven, that whosoever would receive this his Grace,
through believing in, and obaying his Son, should have it, those that would
not receive it thus, but would have it by the Flesh or works, (as did the
Jews) should not have it; so that to conclude all that believed were before
ordained to Eternal life, they seeking it by Faith; the unbelieving were as
much ordained, if they had sought it by the same way; but seeking it by another
way, unto the which God had not promised it, they were rejected, and ordained
to eternal death, as elsewhere I have largely showed, that all were ordained to
the Marriage, as well those that came not, as those that came: also in this
place Act. 13.
at this time, and in this company; those that judged themselves unworthy of
Eternal life, were ordained to it, as well as the other, if they had received
it, as the other did, as is testified, Verse. 46. *


Thus much of Election.
Of falling away.
Ereunetes. I Now see clearly, how all other places may easily be answered
concerning Election, and I will trouble you no further in that: The next thing
I will question with you, is, whether a man may fall from this his Election,
there be many Scriptures seem to make against it.


Odegos. I hold, that as the Promise of Gods Election is Free, without any
desert in us originally, yet upon condition of Faith and obedience to CHRIST'S
Gospel; so the same free promise of Gods Election, is continued unto us, upon
continuance in the same condition, from the which men may fall away, as I will
prove manifestly by Scriptures, and then answer what objections can be made.

First the Scriptures teaches, that Godly men, that are in the true and saving
Grace of God may fall away. Secondly, the Lord uses therefore so many
exhortations, admonitions and the like, to keep them from falling away, for
where there is cause of danger, there is great need of warning, as the
wisdom of God (using so many) sees: now as the Lord says not in vain unto
his people, Seek ye me, in that he speaks righteousness and declares
righteous things Esa. 45.19
, so says he not in vain unto his servants, take heed, beware, and the like,
where there is no danger.

1. A man having true Grace may fall away, Heb. 12.15.
even as Esau lost his earthly inheritance which he had right unto; Verse. 1^.
so may the Saints loose their heavenly inheritance which they have right unto
Mat. 5.13
. Salt may loose his savor, they that are washed, and are clean escaped from
the filthiness of the world, may return with the Sow to wallow in the mire,
and their latter end be worse then their beginning 2 Pet* 2.20. etc.
; yea those that CHRIST has bought with his precious blood may be damned
Verse. ^.
: and that some may tread under foot the blood of CHRIST, wherewith they were
sanctified, and dispite the Spirit of Grace Heb. 10.29.
: They that have Faith, and a good Co s^ienc^ may put it away, and make
shipwreck of it 1 Timothy 2.19.
: that some may leave their first Faith, and be damned 1 Timothy 5.12.
: that some written in the Book of life may be put out Exodus 32.32.33. Psalm.
69.25.28. Re^el. 3.5.
: the talent may be taken from him that uses it not well Math. 25.29.
: Further Paul affirms of the Saints at Rome, that they were justified by
Faith, and thereby had access unto that Grace wherein they stood Ro^. 5.5.2.
. Yet Chap. 11.22. If they continued not in that bounty of God, they should be
cut off, from that ingrafting wherein they were. Al^o how many examples have we
of men that ^ere in Gods favor, and afterward rejected? had not God said,
that the house of Eli the Priest, should walk before him for ever? yet
afterward, for his honoring his Sons more then God, the Lord said, it
shall not be so 1 S^. 2.30.
: Of Saul also, the Lord said, I had now establ shed the Kingdom upon Israel
for e^ 1 Sa^* 13 ^3.14.
y^ for his wickedness in meddling with the Priests office, the Lord said, Now
thy Kingdom shall not continue^ God brought the Israelits out of Egypt,
promising them the Land of C^raan Number. 14.38.
, yet for their rebellion, they were deprived of the possession of it: was not
the forgiven debt recalled Math. 18.32* etc.
? These, and many others, we may read in the holy Scriptu^s.

2 If the Elect cannot fall out of Gods favor, then did not all fall in Adam,
and then some were never dead in sins and trespasses, and so need not Christ's
redemption from sin, forasmuch as they fell not out of Gods favor; for their
Election (as they say) being before the foundation of the world they were
always in it; so by their saying Christ redeemed not the reprobates; and the
Elect fell not from their Election, neither can they, and so need no redemption
for they have no debt; hence it follows CHRIST redeemed none, oh fearful
Doctrine!

3 If the Elect cannot fall from their Election, then have not all sinned and
been deprived of the glory of God, and then have not all been shut up in
unbelief, and then were not all the Children of wrath, without God, without
Promise, without CHRIST, and so without Hope, and then were the Elect never
from being the people of God, and from under mercy: these and Innumerable
Scriptures are written to this purpose; all w ^ch shows, that all without
exception, as well Elect as reprobate, have once been in this estate. T^erefore
their doctrine that none of the Elect can by any means fall away is most
impious.

4 The holy G^ost affirms, that the Ephesians were Elected before the
foundation of the woe ld, Ephesians. 1.
and yet having forsaken their first love, the Lord tells them. If they do
not repent, and do their first works, he will remove the Candlestick, telling
them and other Churches, that he that overcomes and keeps his works unto
the end he shall enjoy the Promise. Revel. 2. and 3. Chap.
As our Savior himself said, he that endures to the end he shall be saved,
Math. 10.22. saying further, to those he had Elected John 15.
. If any abide not in me he is cast forth as a branch and withers to be
gathered, cast into the fire, and burned; but if ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you ask what ye will etc. and therefore exhorts them to continue,
telling them, that if they keep his Commandments they shall abide in his
love. But whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of CHRIST,
has not God 2 Ioh. 9.
; whereby all may see, that as the promise of Election is given upon condition
of our looking up unto CHRIST JESUS, and not otherwise, so it is continued unto
us, upon our abiding in him, and not otherwise.

5 If a man b^ing in the savor of God, and so is chosen, cannot fall out of it
by any means, then a man need not fear (being thoroughly possessed with this
Doctrine) that although he commit Incest as Judah; or Adultery and murder as
David; or forswear his master with cursing as Peter; or fall into any other
notorious sin, I say he need not fea^e falling into Damnation; Forasmuch as
according to this Doctrine, he can no more possibly be damned by any manner
means, then the Devil can be saved.

6 If no man Elect can fall from his Election, by the committing of any of
these sins, then to what end is Repentance taught? the Apostle affirms of
the Elect Corinths, that they repented unto salvation, 2 Cor. 7.
which in vain had they done, if they had not been neither could be in
condemnation; Let no man deceive you with vain words; for the true
consequence of this Doctrine teaches this, that as formerly I have showed of
CHRIST'S redemption, so I may say of repentance it is altogether in vain; For
the Elect (say they) never were, nor can ^all out of their Election, and so as
they need no redemption, so they need no repentance, forasmuch as their estate
is always good; and for the reprobates repentance can no more bring them to
salvation, then the Devils.

7 The same I may say of holy exhortations, admonitions, etc. which are
innumerable in the Scriptures, to what end are men admonished, or exhorted not
to receive the Grace of God in vain 2 Cor. 6.1
, and not to fall from their stedfastnes 2 Pet. 3.17.
, and not to withdraw themselves to perdition Heb. 10.38.39.
, and not to loose that they have done 2 Ioh. 8.
; and to let no man take away their Crown Revel. 3.11.
, and a thousand such, to what end are these, if they cannot fall into them;
does the Lord use words in vain? and concerning the reprobate (say they) they
have no profit to salvation neither by these nor the whole Scriptures. If any
answer, the whole Scriptures are given to keep both the Elect and reprobate
from falling into gross sins, yet that neither the Elect can be damned by
transgressing them, nor the reprobate saved by observing them, how Atheistical
and damnable is this opinion, for it is the same that the Atheists teach, the
one, that there is no God, and that therefore all things are written but in
p^llicie to keep people in awe, the other that there is no hurt to damnation to
the Elect, by disobeying the commands of this God nor any profit ^o salvation
to the reprobate by obeying the commands of this God. The Lord deliver all men
from such damnable Doctrine.


Ereu. You having spoken, that which satisfies me, in proof of what you hold
in this thing, now let me in reat you, to answer such objections as they make,
and first we will begin with our Saviors words. Math 24.24 If it were p
ssible they should deceive the very Elect, so that hence they conclude, it is
not possible the Elect should perish.


Odeg. I have showed you before, who are the Elect of God, namely those, that
receive and obey the truth JESUS CHRIST and abide in him unto the Death; these
I grant cannot perish through being deceived; that this i^ the meaning of our
Savior it appears; for having showed with what signs and lying wonders, and
in all deceiuablenes of vn^ighteousnes the f^lse Prophets would come* and
deceive many, he adds these words* ^o that if it were possible they should
deceive the very El^ct. Now our controversy is, whether those that are Elect,
may fall out of it, and not whether those that abide in it can perish; For in
this we agree; but for the former I affirm and have proved plentifully, that
many that are in the Election, and favor of God, yea in the estate of
salvation, may fall away and perish; And by this very place of our Savior this
appears, in Exhorting his Elect Apostles, Verse. 4. to take h^^d that no man
deceive you; also the Elect Ephesians, are exhorted ^o^ to be deceived with
vain words Ephesians. 5.6.
, also the Elect, 1. Th^s. 1.4* are exhorted: Let no man deceive you by any
meane^ 2 These. 2.3
and^. All which hand much more, shows that the Elect may fall from their
Elect on, if they take not heed. But ye words are written for the great comfort
of those that abide in their Election, that they shall be delivered from those
deceiuings wherewith others are deluded to destruction.

Further, many there be which fall from their Election, not by being deceived,
but willingly forsake the truth, against, or after their enlightening, as these
Scriptures show, Heb. 6.4 etc H^b. 10 26. etc. So that many that are Elect, may
be deceived, and so fall from their Election* again many may fall from their
Election, willingly not being deceived* but those that abide cannot be
deceived. He that does these things shall never fall, Psalm. 15.5. But be as
mount Sion that cannot be removed, Psalm. 125.1. he does not say, he that has
done these things, but he that does these things, in the present time.


Ereu. What say you to our Saviors words, Ioh. 10.27 etc. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my
hand. My Father that gave them me, is greater then all, and none is able to
take them out of my Fathers hand.


O^eg. These words of our Savior as many other in the holy Scriptures to this
same purpose, teaches, unto Ch ists sheep unspeakable consolation; that so
long as they continue his sheep, hear his voice, and follow him, so long they
are so sure, and have such spiritual peace, and sa^ety in Gods acceptance, as
the whole world can neither give them nor take from them; but if those to whom
Christ has promised these gracious protections do evil in his sight, and will
not hea^e his voice, then he will repent of the good that he promised Ier.
18.10
: yea in this case he has forsaken his house and heritage, and has given the
dearly beloved of his soul, into ye hands of her enemies, For it cried out
against him* therefore he hated it Ier. 12.7.8.
: And the Lord is with his, 2. Chr. 15 ^.
whilst they are with him; but if they forsake him, he will also forsake them;
For it may come to pass Mal. 2.
, that they that were yesterday my people, or sheep of my pasture, may rise up
on the other side as against an enemy. They that follow CHRIST are his sheep,
and those shall never perish, but those that run from him, in not hearing his
voice and following him, are not his sheep, and to such this promise belongs
not.


Ereu. What say you to Ioh. 13.1. These who^ he loves he loves to the end;
For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Ro^. 11.29.


Odeg. The first place proves; that while JESUS was in the Flesh among his
Disciples which were his own, he always loving them; was desirous to take
all occasions to testify the same unto them, even unto the end of his life,
which is the meaning of the place: among other things, he testified his love
by this action of humility to wash their feet, and to teach them thereby,
what they ought to do one to another; Nay I say, he loves his even without
end, for ever, but still you must observe, our question is not of Gods or
Christ's love unto his, for of that there is no controversy, but of the
continuance of their love unto him* For although he love al men first, yet
after they must love him and continue in his love, by keeping his
Commandments Ioh. 15.9.10.
; which if they do not, they are cast out as a withered branch* into the fire
and burned. Verse. 6.
If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, If we deny him, he will also
deny us. If we forsake our belief, yet abides he faithful, he cannot deny
himself, 2. Tim. 2.12 etc The meaning of which is, that Christ without respect
of persons loves in every Nation him that fears him and works
righteousness: Act. 10.34.35.
But if any cast off his fear, him God accepts not, ^et he breaks not
promise with that person, for his promise is to them that fear him, which a
person that has cast him away does not; so that Christ loves always his; but
he that forsakes him is not his; neither breaks God promise with him, but
still abides faithful.

For the second, being from Romans 11. let us see what The Apostle speaks of,
upon the which he concludes with these words; ^e shows that the Jews were
broken off from the prom ses of the Gospel, which was first offered unto them;
because they would not seek it by Faith in CHRIST, but sought it by the work s
of the Law; and the Gentiles were ingrafted into the same promises, in that
they sought it only by Faith; yet teaches the Gentiles, that although they
stood by Faith, they should not be high minded but fear, and continue in Gods
bounty; for if for unbelief the natu^a^ branches ye Jews, were broken off,
they shoul also be cut off, if they fell to unbelief; and also for the
bringing in of the I^wes he writes, that they al^o if they abide not still in
unbelief shall be grafted in again, this is the som^e; and of this the gifts
and callings of God ^re without repentance: For God has justly shut up all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy on all, only by that one way which he hat^
appointed; for there is but one entrance unto the Father by one Spirit for both
Jews and Gentiles: Ephe. 2.18*
So that God will not rep nt, neit er can he, of saving all pers ns at all
times, in all places, that seek salvation by Faith in CHRIST, and con^i^ue
therein; otherwise God is said to repent in many Sc^i^* never concerning the
condition of Faith and continuance, unto the which he has always respect: but
concerning the pe son* which casts away the same cond tion; Therefore Gods
love is stable (without any shadow of turning) to righteousness by Faith, in
whom soever it is: but if any p son in whom righteousness is, forsake
righteousness, then Gods promise is changed to that person; and he repents of
the good th t he promised him, as these Scriptures reach 1 Samuel 2 30. and 1.
Sam. 15.11. and Ier. 18.8.10. and many others.


Ereu. 1. Ioh. 2.18.
What say you to that of John, They went out from us, but they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us, etc. Hence they
conclude, that what person goes from the Church and truth, were never truly
of it.


Odeg. The mystery of this well discovered, would make an end of all the
controversies that depend of Predestination; for, as they affirm, that God
has predestined some persons to salvation, and some persons to damnation,
without any condition; so also they affirm that these persons the Elect,
making never so great show of wickedness, and walking in the ways of Beliall,
are still Elect, and can by no means fall out of their Election; and the other
persons, having never so many testimonies of Godliness, and walking in the
Church of Christ; yet can never but be reprobates: and if ever they fall away
from the Church or truth, they conclude, they were never truly of it, for which
cause they pervert this Scripture and others; therefore I will something show
their deceiuings. All men's estates are one by creation; they are one by
transgression; all have sinned, and are dead in sins: and as all are shut up
in unbelief, so God has mercy on all, there is no respect of persons with
God, so often repeated in the Scriptures: God sent his Son to save all, and
the Son sows the seed of salvation upon all; some receive the good seed;
and they are called children of the kingdom Math. 13.
, others receive it not, because it crosses their fleshly hearts in pleasure,
and the like; but in stead thereof, receive the tares, the false doctrines of
the enemy, and therefore are called the children of the wicked: now it is most
plai^e, the persons of them who receive the good seed, were no better then the
other, neither were the persons of them who receive the tares any worse then
the other: the former persons receive the good seed, because the goodness of
the sower first sowed it; and therefore has cause to praise him only, for
what he has: the latter persons refuse the good seed offered them as freely
as the other, and receive the tares, and therefore has only cause to blame
themselves: The former are children of the kingdom, by reason of the quality
wrought in them by the goodness of the sower Jesus Christ, The latter are
children of the wicked, by reason of that quality wrought in them, by the
enemy the devil, and themselves; so that their difference is not in respect
of their persons; but of their qualities, for God loves all persons they being
his generation, Act. 17.27, etc. but hates wicked qualities in the persons,
where they are; and also because of the wicked quality, he hates the persons
as weapons or instruments of those wicked qualities; so that the most holy God
hates nothing but wickedness. I desire this description of person and quality
may be well observed, for it is the most blessed truth of God, and w ll teach
us truly in the exp^sition of all Scriptures, to attribute righteousness to
God in all his judgments; and wickedness to wicked men, and to the devil
their Father. Now for the words, the Apostle shows, verse. 19. that as they
had heard that Antichrist should come, even then there were many Antichrists,
and verse. 21. he says, I have not written unto you because you know not the
truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth, who is a
liar, but he that denies ^h^t Jesus is Christ, the same is the Antichrist,
etc. and chap. 4.1. he exhorts them to try the Spirits, and teaches that
every Spirit which confesses not Jesus Christ is come, etc. is the Spirit of
Antichrist, etc. Now these lying Spirits, these Antichrists, in these persons
who once had the Spirit of truth in them; these (says he) went out from us,
as elsewhere Paul says, Act. 22.30.
from among your selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, etc. for
there must be heresies even among you, etc. But says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
11.19.
They were never of us; for verse. 21. no lie is of the truth; for if these
lying Spirits had been of the t^ueth, they would have continued with it; but
they are not of it; As for example, the Spirit o^ Hymeneus together with his
person, was in Spiritual fellowship with Paul and other Saints, so long as he
retained faith and a good conscience 1 Timothy 8.19.20.
, but having put away the Spirit of truth, and received a lying Spirit 2 Timothy
1.17.18.
, he went out from them, in that his Spirit, for or because, it was never of
them* even as John says these Antichrists or lying Spirit did, so that his
person was of the truth, so long as the Spirit of truth remained in him; but
when he received the lying Spirit, which was never of the truth, it carried his
person from the truth: faithful Hymeneus was of the truth: erroneous Hymeneus
was never of it. Again, will any say that the Pope himself is an Antichrist
in respect of his person? or rather in regard of his Spirit or Spiritual power
he has. Therefore all that this place proves is, that lying Spirits or
Antichrists in men's persons, went out from the truth; and were never of he
truth, and therefore serves nothing to prove, That the Elect can never fall
away.


Of Free Will.
Ereunetes. I Confess you have plentifully proved, that the Elect may fall out
of their Election, and have sufficiently to every reasonable man's satisfaction
answered their objections, and I see it behooves all men to make their calling
and election sure by obedience, as Peter teaches: and to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. The next thing I desire to be
satisfied in, is, what power there is in man, to do, what God requires? In
plain terms what you hold of that which men call Free Will.


Odegos. First, I will relate what the Caluinists hold as the undeniable
consequences of their Predestination. Also I will show you what I hold, and
give you my proofs and reasons from the Scriptures, and then answer their
objections.

As I have formerly showed from their own plain words in Print. They affirm,
that God is not only the principal cause of all things, but also the Author,
Knox.
appointing all things to the one part, and to the other, by his Counsel. And
that, the wicked are not only left by Gods suffering, but compelled to sin
by power; which being so, all may plainly see what follows; that it is not
in man to choose or refuse wickedness, for they are compelled by the power,
force, and compulsion of Gods predestination, to commit all those wicked and
cruel crimes, for the which they are either punished by the Magistrate, or
tormented in hell; and if Gods predestination work all in wickedness, and
that by force and compulsion, and that there be in man no choice; then much
more does it in goodness as violently work all; so that the Godly can neither
choose nor refuse goodness, as the wicked can neither choose nor refuse
wickedness. Some of them indeed do hold that Adam and so his posterity lost
not will by transgression, but that there yet remains freedom of will, in
all good Natural, civil, moral and Judicial things, but not in Spiritual:
and also they hold that Man still retains the Freedom of his will to evil*
as much as before the fall, if not more. Bastingius page 18. alleging Ambrose.
Propos. disp^. in Geneu^, page 18.
Man by evil was spoiled not of his will but of the soundnes of his will,
therefore yt which in Nature was good in quality became evil: and Barnard
teaches there is in us all power to will, but to will well, we had need to
profit better, to will evil we are able already by reason of our fall. The
which if they would stand unto, I would require no more.

In answer to the former I hold, that the^e is yet left in man, the faculty
of will* to choose or refuse, as I will make most plain. 1 By many Scriptures.
2. By many undeniable reasons.

1. It is a thing will be granted of all that have common sense, that Election
and choice cannot but be in liberty; and we find written in the Scriptures,
that even in the works of godliness c^o^se is ascribed to men Moses says Deuteronomy.
30.19. I have set before you L^e and Death therefore choose, etc. And Joshua
says Joshua* 24.15.
, Choose you whom you will serve; and he says Verse. 22.
, You are witnesses against your selves that you have chosen the Lord, etc. but
after when they forsook the Lord again, he said unto them Judge. 10.14.
, Go and cry unto the Gods whom ye have chosen. Again the Lord willed
Salom^n 1 Kin. 3.5
, to ask what he should give him, now Solomon wa^ p^t to ^is c^oise, he might
have asked Wealth Riches, long life, etc. yet be preferred Wisdom before them
all, and this choice so pleased Go^* that he would not demand these, altho^gh
he might, for so the Lord said, Verse. 11.
Because thou have asked this thing and have not aske^ and^* that with wisdom
he gave him all. Dau d says, I have chosen the way of truth: Psa. 119.30
and I have chosen thy Commandments. And the Lord by the Prophet Esa, Esa.
65.12.
They did wickedness before mine eyes, and chose the thing that pleased me not;
Esa. 66.3.
And they have chosen their own ways: CHRIST says, Luke 10.4^.
Mary has chosen the best part. Thus it is plain, that as choose and cannot
choose, agree together, so do these men's opinion agree with the Scriptures, for
such direct contrariety is betwixt choice, and mere necessity, between
violent compulsion, and liberty, that black and white may more fitly be
coupled together in a subject.

2 In worldly things we declare liberty by saying, if thou will obey thy
Superiors, thou shall be rewarded; if thou commit Treason, thou shall be
hanged: these are set before or declared to men to enduce liberty, to embrace
the good, and eschew the evil. In like manner in matters of God, in very many
places we find the same courses used. If you walk in my ordinances, Le^ir.
26.^ etc. ^sa. ^.1^
etc. ye shall eat the Fruits of the earth: If ye consent and obey ye shall
eat the good things of the Land* If thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments: And he that shall believe and be Baptized shall be saved, he
that will not believe shall be damned; and many the like. Man. 19.1^. Mark. ^.


3 Those that have liberty to choose or refuse, in civil things we use to
threaten with punishments, if they omit that we would have them do, or do
that, we forbid them: a^ for example, the gallows for Thieves, etc. because
they may live truly if they will. So God threatens eternal Death to those
that do not observe his sayings. Luke 13.3.
If ye do not repent ye shall perish: If one be not regenerate by water and
Spirit, Ioh. 3.5.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: He that obeys not the Son shall
not see life, Verse. 36.
but the wrath of God abides on him: If some cannot repent, and others cannot
choose but repent, to what end are these threatenings? were it not madness for 4.
men in the top of a tree, having a man tied hand and foot in a cord at the
root of the tree, to threaten him with death and all terrors, if he came not
up, if they intended afterward by maine force to hail him up. This is the
opinion of the Caluinists, that man lies so bound in the cords of sin, that
he can do nothing, without the compelling Grace of God; God must draw him up
without Free Will and liberty, and he cannot resist that drawing of God, and
yet God stands threatening Hell, to all those that will not ascend up; Which
opinion is so vain, that a man would not threaten a horse, fallen into a
ditch, to rowse himself, unless he intended that the horse moved with the
imagination of terror, should help himself, and concur with his master to
get forth; for if the owner would wholly hoyse him out by maine strength, he
would never threaten him.

4 Those that be endued with liberty to choose, or refuse, we persuade and
exhort to that part we desire they should follow, because persuasions bend the
will of man, and induces him to change opinion, and leave his former
determinations: hence it is that Christian Preachers, use no less diligence,
to find out such reasons as may remove men from vice, and incline them to
Virtue. The like persuasions God uses in the Scriptures to incline our wills to
observe his Law. Come unto me all that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you Math. 11.28.
: Convert to me, and I will turn unto you Zach. 1.3.
: Return unto me and I will not let my wrath fall upon you Ier. 3.12.
: To what other end, tend these inducements, but to bend our wills to the one
side?

5 When men possess liberty, we blame them for their offenses* or we relate
unto them their misdemeanors, because they have done evil, and might have done
well, as if an unthrift spend his money riotously, and after be cast into
Prison, or fall into some incurable disease by his evil carriage, we may
justly say, surely he deserved it, who might have carried himself better and
would not. The same course we find in the Scriptures, used by God, concerning
men after their sins. Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, etc.
how often would I have gathered thy Children, as a Hen gathers her Chickins
under her wings and thou would not Math. 23.37. Ezekiel. 18. and 33. Chap.
Psalm. 81.13.^5
: And why will ye dye in your sins: Oh that my people had hearkened unto me,
and Israel had walked in my ways. The haters of the Lord should have been
subject to him and their time should have endured for ever. What should I have
done to my vineyard that I have not done? I expected sweet Grapes, and it
yielded sower: the Ca^uinists answer is, you should have given s^ Grace unto
them, that your vineyard (that is the Jews) could not but bring forth sweet
grapes; for they hold, without it, they could bring forth no other then they
did: And thus they condemn you in their judgment not to have performed all
things necessary, to cause your vineyard to bring forth fruit according to
your expectation. Again they accuse you most blasphemously of dissembling, in
saying you expect sweet grapes of that Vine, when you had decreed that it
should bring forth such sower grapes as it did, and that by compulsion of your
Predestination. Our Savior cries Math. 11. and Luke 10.
: Woe be to thee Coraz^n, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the works that has
been done in thee had bent done in Tyrus and Sydon they had repented long agone
in sackcloth and ashes. CHRIST lamenteth that the inhabitants of these Cities
were not converted, and to show that the fault was their own obstinacy, not
the defect of his Grace, he affirms that with the helps they had, others
would have converted.

6 Another inuinsible argument, that there is yet in men Free choice, may be
collected from this, that sometimes those good works wrought in us by God, are
also attributed to us, in such manner, that the same clensing of our souls,
the self same new heart, the same justification, the same preparation whereof
in one place holy writ acknowledges GOD the author, in another place it
confesses that Man works them.

What better reconcilement can be hereof made* then that of Paul 1 Cor. 15.10.
; Not I, but the Grace of God with me: God knocks, and we let him in Revel.
3.20.
: God inuiteth us to the Marriage, and we come and bring our wedding garments
Math. 22.
: God teaches and we accept his Doctrine: God illuminateth and we open the
window of our hearts. God sows his seed, and we receive it, and bring
forth fruit Math. 13.
.

1 What is more proper to God then to wash our souls? and therefore David
says, Thou shall wash me, and ^ shall be whiter then snow: Psalm. 50.
yet this same, God commands the Children of Israel to do. O Jerusalem wash
malice from thy heart, that thou may be saved.

2 What wonder works God above us more admirable, then in changing our hearts
in giving us hearts of Flesh, pliable to be wrought upon* and in taking away
hearts of flint, not able to be pierced, and so by creating in us a new heart
Ezekiel. 11.19.
, this same is ascribed to man Ezekiel. 18.31.
: Make you a new heart and a new Spirit, why will ye dye oh house of Israel?
the meaning is, in that man does not hinder, nor resist God, in his new making
it, as God says, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
Heb. 4.7.
David says, incline my heart to thy Commandments, and not to covetousness
Psalm. 119.36.
: yet the same says: I have inclined my heart to observe thy Command-ments
always. Verse. 112.


3 In one place a sinner cries to God, Convert us O God our Savior; In another
place God cries to them; Convert unto me and I will convert unto you.

4 God iustifies a sinner, and as a proper title he takes it to himself: yet
David says, If the wicked prosper and the just be afflicted to what end have I
justified my heart? Again God says: Psalm. 73.12.13.
I will cause you to keep my Commandments. Yet says CHRIST, If thou will
enter into life keep the Commandments.

5 We may gather from holy Scriptures, that men are said to prepare their
hearts to God, and are reprehended for not doing the same. The wiseman says
Pro. 16.1.
, The preparations of the heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue is of
the Lord, that is, Although man through Gods Grace prepare his soul, yet he
needs particular succor to utter his conceits. Samuel willed the Isralites
if they had determined to abolish all profane Gods, that they should prepare
their hearts to God. Prepare your hearts to God, and serve him alone. 1 Kin. 7.
2. Chro. 12.
Rehoboam is reprehended, because he did not prepare his heart to serve the
Lord. And all the Evangelists except John allege the words of Esa, as from
John Baptist, Prepare ye the way of the Lord make his paths straight. These
preparations affected by man, ascribed to man, and man reprehended for not
making them, do sufficiently prove, the concourse of man's Free choice with
Gods Grace, for otherwise God should be said to do all, and man nothing.

6 Holy men cry unto God to help them Psalm. 108.12. Psa. 118.13 Mark. 9.24
O Lord give us help against trouble, etc. And the Lord has helped me; and
Lord help my unbelief, and many the like: Yet also God requires men should
work out their own salvation, etc Phil. 2.12
. To open the door, etc Revel. 3 20. and Came 5.2.
. All which shows, that man works with Gods Grace: Also it is proved that
man may resist that Grace of God, wrought by his word and Spirit Act. 7.5. and
Act. 13.46.
. Ye have always resisted the holy Ghost; and you have put the word of God
from you, and judged your selves unworthy of everlasting life; what can be more
plain then, that man has Free choice to work with God, or against God, in
the work of his Grace?

Having thus by the evidence of Scriptures proved, that man has free choice,
to choose, or refuse, in matters of God, I will now speak something to common
experience.

1. First remorse of Conscience in this life, and in Hell, do sufficiently
prove this thing: for if men had not liberty, remorse would not trouble any,
for whatsoever evil we do of necessity, presently we excuse it justly, and
acquit our Consciences by impossibility; as if a man should drink poison not
knowing of it, he never would have any scruple of conscience, because it was
unavoidable, he could not prevent it; but if he procured it himself, or
might have prevented it, and would not, then the torture of conscience will
possess him.

Again, that worm of Conscience that sticks so deep in the souls of all
damned creatures, should never appear in hell, if men were deprived of
liberty, for their torment consists in this, that for their own demerits,
being treated of God in such sort, that if they would, Heaven laid open for
them, by accepting Gods Grace through Faith and obedience to the Gospel, and
yet they cast themselves into Hell, of their own accord, through unbelief and
rebellion.

2 No humane Law, can with justice be enacted, but such as may be observed,
because the end of every just Law is, to make good subjects, and therefore it
were most absurd, that all men were not able to keep that Law; which was
ordained for all, and by which all shall be judged to be punished that break
it. Moreover the very state of man (who is in this world fighting) requires
liberty, for standing between Heaven and Hell. God and the Devil, to
overcome or be overcome, all reason requires that he might be pliable both
ways, either to accept God, or reject him, follow Satan or resist him.

3 If men want free choice, what judgment shall that be in the Scriptures so
often repeated, that every man shall receive according to his works? What
justice will appear to torment men for sin and wickedness, to whom it was
impossible to do otherwise?

4 All the Thieves and wicked persons* that either are punished with the
Magistrates sword, or with everlasting torments, shall give witness against the
Caluinists in this thing; For if they could not choose at that time they
committed such evils, but do the same by the force of Gods Predestination,
then what Law will punish a man with death for doing a thing unavoidable, for
it lay not in their power to avoid; The Law of God never inflicted it upon
any, and the Law of the Princes of the earth does not inflict it; For if a man
kill another against his will; or when by no means he could avoid it, death is
not inflicted. But if he might have avoided it and did not, then had he
liberty to avoid evil and did it not, and so justly deserves punishment.

Finally this error is the root of all licentiousnes, for thus may men truly
reason according to this Doctrine either we are decreed to do well or evil.
If to do well, then it is impossible to do evil, If to do evil, then it is
impossible to do well, For all goodness proceeds of Grace compelling our
wills, and all evil comes of Gods decree which we have not power to resist,
neither can we choose but do it, for they say as before, we are compelled to
sin by power which how wicked it is, has sufficiently I hope been showed by
holy writ.


Ereu. You have very largely and undeniably proved, that there is yet left in
man free choice to will or nill in matters of God, yet you confess all is
through Gods Grace not otherwise.


Odeg. Yes, I say what is in man, whether by creation, or regeneration, he has
it only by God, and therefore to God only is all the glory to be attributed,
for whatsoever is wrought in man or by man that good is, and I say, that what
Adam had in creation, and lost by transgression, for himself and his
posterity, that is restored through Christ, yea and more too: for although of
our selves we can do nothing as of our selves that good is, 2. Cor. 3.^
yet through the strength of Christ we shall be able to do all things. Phil.
4.13.
This the Apostle also affirms in Romans 8. that what was impossible to the
law, in that it was weak because of the flesh, God sent his Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: So that
although the flesh of it self cannot perceive the things of God, nor fulfill
the law; yet through Christ it is able to perform the same.


Ereu. I think your opposites will not deny, but that unregenerate men may
do moral duties of the law: and also that the regenerate may do Spiritual
duties of the Gospel. But the greatest difficulty is, whether a man can do
any thing in the work of his regeneration; either choose life being offered by
Christ; or refuse it: for they say as before, the Elect cannot choose but be
regenerate; and the reprobate cannot be regenerate.


Odeg. I have showed sufficiently before, that Gods Grace that brings
salvation (through regeneration, Tit. 2.11. Math. 22. Ezekiel. 18.
not otherwise) appears to all: that all are called to this Grace; and that
unfeignedly GOD would have all, even all sinners come, that they might live, and
not dye. I have showed also, that men may resist the holy Ghost in the offer of
this Grace, Act. 7.51. Act. 13.46.
and put this word of Grace from them, and judge themselves unworthy of
everlasting life: that although Christ Jesus would gather men to salvation as a
Hen her Chickens, Mat. 23.37.
yet they can refuse it. And although the Lord calls men to hear the voice
of the Gospel, Heb. 4.7.
yet may they harden their hearts against it: by all which, and much more
formerly related, it is most apparent, that although the Lord stretch out his
hand all the day long, Romans 10.21
yet men may gainsay him: Verse 3.
and also they may submit themselves unto this righteousness of God, the
promise of salvation, through faith and obedience, which is regeneration; So
that it is most plain, that even in the work of regeneration, man may submit
to it, or hinder it; God conuerteth no man against his will; neither does God
force the will; he only bends the will by persuasions, of promises, and
threatenings; which man may submit unto, or despise, as before.


Ereu. What say you to that place of Math. 22. Compel them to come in.


Odeg. I say, that power of compulsion was given to the servants of the King,
and that was no other, then by using strong arguments and persuasions, through
the power of the Spirit in them, whereby they compelled or constrained the
Gentiles, to come unto the marriage, not by any violent working upon their
wills, but persuading their wills by force of reason. Thus is Lidia said to
compel or constrain Paul to her house, Act* 16.^5.
not by using any thing else, but strong persuasions and earnest entreaties.


Ereu. What say you to Ioh. 6. No man can come unto me except the Father draw
him.


Odeg. Read the place and you shall see, how the Father draws us unto him,
not by any violent compulsion, but by teaching, for it is written in verse. 45.
Ioh. 6.4^
And they shall be all taught of God: every man therefore that has heard, and
has learned of the Father* comes to me. Thus God draws, not otherwise, If
he should not send his heavenly doctrine thus to draw men, they could never
come to Christ, and therefore that any come to Christ, it is by the Fathers
drawing, which drawing, men have power to put from them, and resist, as before
has been proved.


Ereu. What say you to that place, Phil. 2.13. For it is God that works in
you both the will and the deed.


Odeg. God works all, both in willing and doing, wheresoever it is, only by
his Word and Spirit, perticularly the work of regeneration he works in man
to will it and to do it, at which time man may submit unto this work of God,
and so be a co-worker with him; Romans 10.3. 2. Cor. 6.1.
or else he may resist this work of God, and put it from him, as before has
been largely proved. And I desire it be observed, that some of the Caluinists,
granting that the unregenerate has power and will to resist, having free will
to all evil as they say, they grant the thing that we maintain, which is,
that God sending his Word and Spirit, to work our regeneration, we may resist
it, or not resist it. If they affirm, as some of them do (for they are
divided) that the Elect, though unregenerate (for so they imagine) cannot
resist, then they hold the unregenerate has no more free will to evil then to
good, contrary to their former opinion, and to all the holy Scriptures, and
then is man deprived of all power to evil as well as to good, and God only
works both, and that by compulsion, wherein man has no power to resist,
neither the good nor the evil.

Further, it is confessed, and it has sufficiently been proved, that Adam in
innocence had not only free will; but ability also, to work righteousness
in the fight of his Creator: but having sinned, he lost (not all will and
power; as is confessed, and has been proved; but) will and power to work
righteousness in the sight of God, that he lost, and in stead thereof, had a
will, and power to fly, and hide himself from Gods presence: but receiving a
proclamation from the Lord, that his good pleasure was to show him mercy in the
promised seed; and that he so loved him, that he would not have him perish,
but be saved; here by is his will affected again to seek him, even by the
love and mercy of this good God; who destroyed him not for his sin, but
called him to his Grace; and seeing his flesh unable to please him, sends him
his Son, whom if he will believe, and obey; he shall be made just and
righteous: also the Lord setting before him life and death, salvation through
faith in Christ, and condemnation through not believing: and using many reasons
to the understanding of man to choose life, and to avoid death, Man's will is
hereby persuaded to come again to him, from whom he run away, and to cry, I
have sinned against heaven and against thee, etc. and so to submit to this
Grace of God; thus did God work in Adam both the will and the deed; not
creating in him another will; but changing his will from evil to good; by
reasons and persuasions: this same did God in these Philippians, and does in
all, who have no will nor power to come unto him; but God by the power of his
Word and Spirit, showing him the benefit of life, and the torment of eternal
death; and also that although of himself he cannot work righteousness; yet
if he will believe in, and obey Christ his Son, he will in him, accept his
imperfect obedience, and account him just: by this means and not otherwise is
the will, and deed wrought by God.

Thus much of man's will.


Of the Original estate of Mankind.
Ereu. THis being the estate of men of understanding, which formerly you have
declared. I now desire to be satisfied, what is the estate of all Infants by
generation, that have no understanding: whether they are in the estate of
salvation or condemnation?


Odeg. I answer you that no Infant whatsoever, is in the estate of condemnation
of Hell with the wicked: which I prove thus, 1. Without sin there is no
condemnation, Ro^ 6.23. Ezekiel. 18.4 20. 2. Without transgression of the Law
there is no sin, 1. John 3.4. Ro^. 5.13. It follows then, if Infants have
transgressed no Law, there is no condemnation to them.


Ereu. I grant that, without sin there is no condemnation, also without
transgression of a law there is no sin: But had not Infants a Law given them
in Adam. Thou shall not eat, etc and so Adam sinning they sinned in him to
condemnation in hell.


Odeg. The Law given to Adam was; Thou shall not eat, etc In which is to be
considered. Adam had a life and being when that Law was given; but Infants had
no life nor being as that time, Romans 7.^.
And the Law is given to them that knows it, and it has dominion over a man
as long as he lives; Therefore Infants having no being, and so no knowledge,
nor being then living, that Law had no dominion over them.


Ereu. But were not all men in Adams loins, and so he sinning, we sinned.
Rom 5. Chap.


Odeg. True it is, we were in Adam, but how? not to bring any soul to Hell for
the breach of that commandment, Thou sh lt not eat, for so the Lord has
said, whose ways are most equal; All souls are mine both the soul of the
Father and the soul of the Son; that soul that sins, it shall dye: Yet as
then that wicked Proverb was used; The Fathers have eaten sour grages and the
Childrens teeth are set on edge; and wherefore shall not the children be
condemned, for the sin of their Father? even so is it now, most strongly
urged, although God has not only forbidden it, but plainly said, the soul
yt sins shall dye: the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, but
the wickedness of ye wicked shall be upon himself.

Further, I desire it may well be observed, that Mankind was only in Adam in
their bodily substance;
for of one blood God made all mankind to dwell on the face of the earth; and
even as Adam had his body from the earth, yet without form; for God gave him a
form, and a soul, by breathing into him the breath of life Genesis 2.7.
even so have we all, our earthly being from Adam, he is the Father of our
bodies, in respect of matter, but our form, and souls come from God, he is
the Father of our Spirits Heb. 12.9 Eccles. 12.7 and 8.8.
: that earthly matter was in Adam of which our bodies are made, as Adam was in
the earth, before his body was made. Thus and no otherwise were we in Adam: but
as Adam was not in the earth in form and soul, no more were we in Adam in
form and soul. And as God gave no Law to Adam, before he gave him a soul of
reason and understanding, no more does he give to any of Adams posterity any
law, till he give them souls of reason and understanding, as we plainly see
by Moses: Deuteronomy. 11.2.
I speak not to your ^hildren which have neither known nor seen, etc. They
must be taught it when they can understand it; Verse. 19.
The Gospel also speaks to them that have ears to hear Mat. 13.9 1 Cor.
10.15.
: To them that have understanding that can judge what is said.

Further I say, it was never Gods purpose to execute upon Adam for that
transgressio^, condemnation to hell, in yt he purposed to send Christ betwixt,
in whom Adam believing, he should be saved. If Adam himself, for his own sin
was not condemned to hell without remedy, shall any of his posterity be sent
to hell without remedy and that for his sin? seeing they fell no deeper in
the transgression then he, if so deep: Is this equal and right for the Judge
of all the earth to do? The Scriptures says, Genesis 18.25
This is condemnation, Ioh. 9.
that light (or Christ that true light) is come into the world, and men love
darkness better: Ioh. 3.19. Ioh. 16.9. Mark. 16.16. Romans 11.21.
and Christ will condemn the world of sin because they believe not in him,
condemnation consists in refusing Christ, he that will not believe shall be
damned, and not else; for God has shut up all in unbelief.

Adam by that transgression, deprived himself of Gods favor in that estate
wherein he was in Paradise; and notwithstanding the promise of Christ, has by
this his sin, procured this judgment: cursed is the earth for thy sake, in
sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life, and in the sweat of thy
face thou shall eat thy bread, till thou return to the earth, for out of it
wast thou taken because thou art dust, Genesis 3.17. etc.
and to dust shall thou return. Thus Adam brought himself and all his
posterity, the earth and every creature in it, Romans 8.20. etc.
to vanity and into the bondage of corruption. And in this estate are all Adams
sons begotten and borne: so that by Adams sin, vanity, corruption, and
death went over all; not only over the generation of Adam, but over all Flesh,
and the curse extended to the earth and every creature in it. And so Infants
have original (as they call it) corruption, as all other creatures have, yet
you may see that those that dye, and have corruption in or by Adams sin, if
all not be cast into hell fire, which is prepared only for the Devil, his
Angels, and the wicked.

Now for the place by you alleged: by the offense of one the fault came on all
men to condemnation, Romans 5.18.
and Verse 19. For by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners yt is all,
etc. You see I have proved before, that none of Adams posterity, shall be
damned for his sin, but for their own, when they have a soul of reason and
understanding; and a righteous law is given them, for sin is not imputed
while there is no law: I have also showed that neither Adam nor any shall go
to hell for that sin, but for refusing Christ: but this is the meaning of the
holy Ghost, that by Adams sin, all his posterity have weak Romans 8 3
natures, by the which, when the commandment comes Cha. 7.10
, they cannot obey and live, but sin, and so dye; till when, they are alive
without the law, so says the Apostle Verse 9.
; and thus is verified, that all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin; Romans
3.
there is none righteous, no not one, there is none that seeks God; they have
all gone out of the way, etc. Read on the Scripture, and you may evidently see,
that neither this, nor any part of Gods word, is spoken to, or of Infants; the
Apostle says, verse 9. Now we know that whatsoever the law says, it says it
to them that are under the law; Infants are under no law, therefore
transgression cannot be imputed to them, for where no law is, there is no
transgression Romans 4.15
. Thus by Adams falling from this estate he was in, and in him all mankind,
God giving man his precepts, which man in himself (by reason of weak flesh)
cannot obey, all men fall under the wrath of God; and thus they are said by
nature to be the children of wrath Ephesians. 2.3.
, for the law causes wrath. Romans 4.15. And this is the Apostles meaning: yet
as God left not Adam in his sin, but provided him means of reconciliation;
so has he for all, for both the places prove, that as the fault came by one
unto condemnation; so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward
all men, to the justification of life, for Grace by Christ, abounded much above
Adams sin Verse. 20.
, not only of many sins in a few persons, (as is commonly supposed) but even
as universally as Adams sin extended; for if all be dead, 2. Cor. 5.14.15.
then Christ died for all; and the reason that many have no benefit by it, is
not because it abounds not, but because they put the word of Grace from them,
Act. 13.44. Act. 7.51.
and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life: and resist the holy Ghost.

And thus far Infants, that know not their right hand from their left Jonah.
4.11.
, that are as destitute of understanding as of malice 1. Cor. 14.20.
, that have no knowledge between good and evil Deu. 1.39.
: that Christ so often accounts Innocents Math. 18.3.4. and ^9.14. etc.
, are freed from the law, and so sin is dead in them; but when the
commandment comes Romans 7.8.
, cursed is every one that continues not, in all things that are written in
the book of the law to do them Gal. 3.10.
; then they die in sins and trespasses Ephe. 2.1. Verse 8.
, and must be saved only, by Grace in Christ through faith, not of themselves,
it is the gift of God.

Again: none shall appear before Christ to receive judgment, but those that
have done works, either good or evil, and that in the flesh 2. Cor. 5.10.
Revel. 20.12.13.
Infants dying, have done neither good, nor evil in the flesh. Therefore
Infants shall receive no judgment.


Ereu. You have very satisfactorily answered me in this: one thing more that
much troubles all men; which is, Psalm. 51 5. In which, if you give a plain
answer, all else, they can object, is nothing worth.


Odeg. The words are. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin, has my
mother conceived me. The question now is, whether he confesses his own
estate, or his mothers: If his own then thus: he confesses to God, and
desires him in mercy, to consider and behold him, whereof he was made, as
Psalm. 103 14. of dust, weak flesh, unable to resist the Tempter, when the law
came unto h m, through which weakness, he was thus overcome in these
horrible sins; and thus weak flesh is called, sinful fl sh (in which Christ
came Romans 8.1
) in that it is impossible for flesh to keep the law, when it comes. Christ is
said to be made sin 2. Cor. 5.21.
; not that he was a sinner; no more, David confessing he was conceived in
sin, does prove that by conception and birth, he was a transgressour. If his
mothers; then thus: either his mother Heuahs, or else his mother that bare him,
and brought him forth, whether it mattereth not much, the chief thing being,
what this sin of his mothers is; I say, it is that curse or punishment for
sin laid upon her Genesis 3.16
, where the very words agree with these of David's, I will greatly increase thy
sorrows and thy conception; in sorrow shall thou bring forth, etc. so that
David does not confess his mother-sinne, in this place, but the punishment
that was laid for sin, upon the mother of all living, and so upon David's
mother; and it is frequent with the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, to call
punishment for sin, by the name of sin; as Christ bare our sins 1. Pet.
2.^4.
, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself: Ezekiel. 18.^0.
and they shall bear their iniquities and the like: and it is neither David's
sin, nor his mothers, he here confesses to speak properly, but his mothers
punishment for the fall, and his weakness, through the fall.

And David did not sin in being conceived and borne; the soul is the subject
of sin as before; and as Christ teaches; from the soul or heart comes
wickedness: The body is but the instrument thereof, Mat. 15.19.
the soul comes from God, the matter of the body from the parents; the soul
is very good coming from God, the body has not sinned till it be infected
with the soul by transgressio^ of a law: and seeing they affirm, that the
very matter or substance, whereof David was made, was sin, and that this is it,
he confess th in this 51. Psalm. Observe what will follow of this their dream.

The matter whereof all the sons of Adam is made, is sin, but Christ, one
of the sons of Adam (after the flesh) was made of that matter, therefore the
matter or substance of Christ's body was sin. It will not avail to say, he
was conceived by the power of the holy Ghost, that is true, but what tho? yet
also Mary the virgin conceived him of her matter or substance: and if that be
good to say, that David was a sinner, because he was conceived of his mothers
substance, and so borne; why is it not also good, to say, that Christ was a
sinner, because he was conceived of his mothers substance (whose flesh and
blood was no other then David's mothers) and so borne? but if it be wicked to
say, Christ was a sinner, because he was conceived of his mothers substance, as
it is: so is it no less wicked to say, David was a sinner, because he was
conceived of his mother substance: seeing the substance of both the mothers was
one and the same: 1. Cor. 15.39.
And though the holy Ghost did wonderfully cause Mary to conceive without the
help of man, yet did he not alter, nor change Mary's substance, for then would
it follow, as some wickedly affirm, that Christ was not made of the same
matter and substance whereof we be made. And it is most apparent, that wicked
harlot Rome to advance, the high estimation they have of Mary; and because also
they had invented original sin to be in all Infants, which was only their
wicked invention Orig. sin. dec. in Council. Carthag.
: therefore in the Counsel of Trent Ses. 5. cap. 1 de pec. orig.
, exempted her from sin, to establish both their wicked opinions therein. Thus
I trust, all yt shut not their eyes, may see, the difference of the truth, and
error in this thing, and be so satisfied in the truth, that no turning device
shall cause them to stumble again.

But if any notwithstanding what is said, will not yet believe the truth in
this, I require them, to show by the Scriptures; better reasons, then they have
yet objected, to prove Infants to be in sin, unto condemnation in hell; and
when they have done that, let them also show how they that have sinned, and are
under condemnation of hell, can be reconciled to God, but only by faith in
Christ Jesus. And if they have sinned, and can be reconciled to God by no other
means, but by repentance and faith in Christ Jesus, then are they all left
under condemnation, not for any law that they have broken, for they could not
break the law before they were in form and soul as before; but for their
Father Adams eating of the forbidden tree, and so are damned for their Fathers
sin, contrary to all these Scriptures.

Let not any think, that this makes any thing for them, that because Infants
have died many times, bodily death for the sins of their parents, as the old
world, Sodom and Gomorrah, Corah, etc. that therefore they perish with the
wicked in hell, for of this, other unreasonable creatures, as well as Infants,
have always had their portions: all flesh must dye, and death is loss to none
but to the wicked; for whom is prepared the torments of hell, but unto the
godly, and innocent, death, and all the afflictions of this life, are not
worthy of the glory that shall be showed.

If any ask, that if Infants be not under condemnation, what need they have
of Christ? I answer; unspeakable benefits they have by him; for besides
through his redemption they live, and move, and have their being, and enjoy ll
other earthly blessings; they have by Christ, their resurrection from the dead,
for as in Adam they die, so in Christ they shall be made alive: 1. Cor. 15.22.
and not so only, but their glorification they have by Christ; so that all
(the wicked that reject Christ excepted) have inestimable benefit by him; for
by Adams fall mankind and all other creatures, are brought into vanity,
corruption and misery. By Christ, mankind (they that will not believe
excepted, Mark 16.16.) the earth, and all other creatures, shall be delivered
from vanity, corruption, and misery, into everlasting glory. Man at the first,
Romans 8. 2. Pet. 3.
and all creatures were created of God very good, yet subject to change by
Adams transgression, but being delivered from the bondage of corruption,
where-into man's sin has brought them, they shall be glorified with that
glory, that shall have no end. And thus Grace by Christ has abounded much above
Adams sin.


Ereunetes. A short rehearsal of Predestination.
YOu have showed, what is the most righteous, and merciful Predestination of
God touching man; to make man good, yet changeable, to place him in a good
estate; to command him to continue in that good estate, by keeping his
righteous Law; which if he did not he would curse him; Yet so, as that he
would not forsake him, but provide him a Savior to redeem him out of that
cursed estate wh n he had fallen, to promise his Son to Man for his comfort:
and in the fulness of time, to manifest him in the Flesh; commanding him to
proclaim, that he so loved Man, even the whole world, that he had sent his
Son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, those he Elected or chose to be his; Of Election. Reprobation.
but those that would not believe those should be damned; those he reprobated.
This I verily believe to be Gods Predestination of Election, and Reprobation,
from the beginning: and herein I evidently see the Mercy and Justice of God
clearly to shine; his Mercy through Faith in his Son toward all without
respect of persons; all being his generation: his Justice in that he
reprobateth none, but such as rejects his Grace offered in his Son; so that
I clearly see by this light of Truth, wherein formerly I have been blind;
that man's Damnation is of himself, even of his own wicked resisting will, and
not that God has decreed him, either to the end, which is damnation, or to the
means, which is wickedness; neither has left him in an estate to perish, but
that he has sent his Son, to save him, and that as effectually as to the
Elect; Of Freewill to evil.
and that the cause of his not being saved is in himself, who has yet
freedom of will to evil, as much as ever; by which will, he has resisted the
Holy Ghost; and put the word of Grace from him. This is his just Damnation. Of
The Original estate of Man.
You have also showed what the estate of Infants are: Not that they are in
damnation before they have understanding and so have a Law given them, and they
have transgressed the Law: also then the Lord offers them the same mean, he
did to their Father Adam, namely his Son, in whom they believing, their
sins shall be put away, and they shall have life in him; you have also
showed, that man by reason of the weak es of his Flesh, when the C mmandement
comes, he cannot keep it, and live, but breaks it and so dies; and so all
are dead in sins and trespasses, that there is none righteous no not one; as
well Paul and the Elect Ephesians, as others: and that thus all men are brought
by transgession through weak Flesh to be the Children of wrath. All which you
having showed me, that all men are ^^^e in this estate; I pray you show me
now clearly the way out of it, that all that have any care to escape the
Damnation of Hell, and to obtain the Salvation of Glory, may walk in the way,
and continue in that way, that we may through Grace and strength in Christ
come to our iourneyes end.


Odeg. We must be in Christ (the promised seed, as before) who is the only way,
the truth, and the life Ioh. 14.6
, without him we can do nothing Ioh. 15.5.
. For he that has the Son has the Father. 1 Ioh. 2.23. 1 Ioh. 5.12.
But he yt has not the Son has not ye Father, nor eternal life.


Ereu. But how must we have the Son?


Odeg. By keeping his Commandments: which Commandments are life everlasting
Ioh. 12.50
, he that keeps his Commandments dwells in him and he in him Ioh. 3.24.
; he that says he remains in him ought to walk even as he has walked 1.
Ioh. 2.6
, and he that keeps his word in him is the love of God perfect in deed,
thereby we know that we are in him Verse 5.
, and hereby we are sure we know him, if we keep his Commandments Verse 3.
. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, is he that loves me Ioh.
14.21
, etc. If any man love me, he will keep my word and my Father will love him
and we will come unto him and will dwell with him Verse 23.
. If ye shall keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love Ioh. 15.10
etc. He that continues in the Doctrine of Christ, 2 Ioh. 9.
he has both the Father and the Son etc.


Ereu. The Commandments of Christ are many, which of them therefore must we
observe, or we cannot be in him?


Odeg. First, the beginnings or foundation, for so it is written, we are made
partakers of Christ if we keep sure the beginning, wherewith we are vpholden
Heb. 3.14
, and afterward we must observe all that CHRIST commands Math. 28.20.
.


Ereu. Which are the beginnings?


Odeg. Repentance from dead works, Faith toward God, ye Doctrine of Baptismes,
laying on of hands, Resurrection from the dead, and eternal Judgment. These
are the foundation or beginning Heb. 6.1. etc.
, other foundation then this, can no man lay 1 Cor. 3.11.
.


Ereu. I understand; and I think it will be granted of all, that in
Repentance, there must be sight of sin by the Law, sorrow for sin,
confession, and promise, and endeavor of amendment, but this is my question,
of what sins we must repent?


Odeg. Of all sin; for every sin is a dead work, and he that keeps the
whole Law, and fails in one point is guilty of all Iam. 2.10 Deu. 28.14
. And he that does any one of these, though he do not all these things, he
shall dye, seeing he has done all these things Ezekiel. 18.10. etc.
: For says The Apostle 1 Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.5.
, be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor
Wantons, nor Buggerers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Raylers,
nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. From hence it is most
plain; that a man that lives in any one of these sins, and hates to be
reformed, he shall never enter into the Kingdom of God, except he repent of
that his wickedness.


Ereu. The Scriptures are so plain, they cannot be denied, only I would of
all the rest, have this sin of Idolatry thoroughly discovered, for many are
exceedingly deceived therein; seeing themselves blameles in the other sins
(of which many indeed cannot be taxed) although they be gross Idolaters, yet
they bless themselves in this their wickedness, crying Peace, when there is no
peace. Therefore show I pray you what Idolatry is, that all s eing it, may
avoid it, if they will not wilfully perish: also, that I may be the better
able to convince others of it.


Odeg. Idolo-latria, is a word compounded of Idolon, signifying an Image,
shape, form, likeness, Idolatry (...) ^ar
or representation; and Latria, which signify service, worship, obedience, or
reverence: so that Idolatry in short, is, a service, of likeness either of false
Gods in stead of the true: or else, of false worships, in stead of the true:
hence is plain, that he that worshipeth a false God; or pretends to worship
the true God, in a false manner (which indeed is not the worship of the true
God; for God cannot be worshipped after a false manner.) He is an Idolater, and
shall never enter into Gods favor without repentance; for as the sin of speaking
in ye name of a false God, and speaking falsehood in the name of the true God,
is all one; so shall the punishment be Deuteronomy. 18.20.
.


Ereu. You having now spoken something of Repentance in general, and
particularly of Idolatry, of which, every soul that therein has
transgressed, must repent, or he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, as I
see. I pray you proceed to the next, which is Faith.


Odeg. Faith toward God, is diversely taken in the Scriptures, as 1. For a
confident believing that God is: 2. What God through Christ has done. 3. Of
what God through Christ has promised. 4. Of what God through Christ has
commanded: All which a man has in a measure before he repents, for his Faith
of these, provoke him to repent; but Faith in this place, is taken for a
confident assurance, of the pardon of his sins, repented of* unto
justification before God, through Christ, which no man can have until he have
repented.


Ereu. The next in order is Baptismes: above which, is much controversy;
therefore I desire to hear what you can say in it.


Odeg. There are in the new Testament diverse Baptismes mentioned, which I shall
speak of hereafter, in their due places; but now I am to speak of that which
was called John's Baptism, as Paul calls the Gospel his Romans 26.
, in that they were the teachers thereof, not otherwise: which Baptism, is:
Repentance for the remission of sins, and washing with water, into the Name
of the Father, etc. In which, it shall appear, who are to have it, who not.

Baptism, or washing with water, appertains only to them that declares
their repentance, and Faith, unto those Disciples of Christ, that Baptize them:
This appears by John Baptist doctrine and practice, he Preached the Baptism
of repentance, for the remission of sins Math. 1.^.
, and they were Baptized of him in Jorden confessing their sins Math. 3.6
: confirmed by the practice of JESUS and his Disciples, in the Cities of
Israel: they made and Baptized Disciples Ioh. 4.1 and 3.22.
. Afterward in his commission for all Nations. Go therefore make Disciples
all Nations Baptising them Mat. 28.19
etc. He that shall believe and be Baptized shall be saved Mark. 16.16.
etc. According to which commission; they continually taught and practiced
Amend and be Baptized every one Act. 2.38. Verse 4^.
etc. And they that gladly received the word were Baptized Act. 2.38. Verse 4^.
: As Soon as they believed, both men and women were Baptized Act. 8.12.
: The Eunuch also, when he believed was Baptized Act. 10.47
: Verse. 36. etc
Cornelius likewise, when he had received the holy Ghost Act. 10.47
was Baptized: Paul after his Conversion was Baptized Act. 9.18.
. Lydia, and her household; the Iaylor and his household when the word was
Preached, and they believed Act. 16.15 and 32.33.34
. Crispus and his household, when they believed Act. 18.8.
. The Ephesians after they believed Act. 19.5.
. These and all the Churches of the new Testament, were Baptized after they
believed, as afterward, I shall have occasion to make further probation of.


Ereu. This indeed was the practice of the Primitive Churches, it cannot be
denied; but they object: 1. That was in the Churches infancy: 2. They bid you
prove this perpetual.


Odeg. First, when JESUS and his Apostles first planted those Churches, they
were at as perfect age, and in as excellent estate, as ever Churches can be, at
their first plantation: but of this at large hereafter: 2. All the
Commandments of Christ are perpetual and remain until his coming again.
The last speaking of the Father is by the Son CHRIST Heb. 1.2.
: his Commandments are to be kept, without spot until his appearing 1 Timothy
6.13.14.
, we must earnestly contend for ye maintenance of the faith, once given to
the Saints Jude 3. 1. Pet. 2.2^.
. This Doctrine that Peter preached; amend and be Baptized, endures for ever;
For the Lord has established his word for ever Psalm. 119.152.
: And if an Angel from heaven Preach, or command otherwise; let them be
accursed Gal. 1.8.9
, and he yt takes away this word of God, God shall take his name, out of the
book of life Revel. 22.18.19.
. Who so changes the Laws of God is Antachrist: that exalts himself above
God Dan. 7.25
. 2 These. 2.4.



Ereu. Why may not Infants be Baptized?


Odeg. Because there is, neither commandment, example, nor true consequence
for it, in all Christ's perfect Testament; who was faithful as Moses in all his
house Heb. 3.2. etc.
, and threatens most dreadful Judgments against all such as either add too
or take from, that his perfect Testament Revel. 22.18.10.
, and the Son is worthy of more honor then the servant. Moses sends us to him
Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Father sends us to him, Mat. 17.5. There is now but one
Lawgiver, Iam. 4.12. That there is neither Commandment, nor example, in
Christ's Testament, our adversaries usually grant; and that there is no true
consequence, I shall manifestly prove, taking away clearly all their
objections, to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

First let it be observed what Baptism is, I say; a washing away the filth of
the Flesh, is not Baptism; that is the least part of Baptism; where the
greater is: and where the greater is wanting, it is no part of Baptism at all,
the which not only the Scriptures teach, but our adversaries confess as
shall be showed.

First the Scriptures teach, that the Baptism that saves us, is not the
putting away the filth of the Flesh; but in that a good Conscience makes
request unto God 1. Pet. 3.21
, etc. It is the Baptism of repentance for remission of sins Mark. 1.4
. The Sprinkling of the heart from an evil conscience, and washing the body
with pure water, is that whereby we come to God Heb. 10.22
. It is the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost Tit. 3.5.
. For we must be borne of the Spirit, or we cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God Ioh. 3.5.
, for nothing avails in CHRIST but a new creature 2. Cor. 5. Gal. 6.
.

2. The Cathechisme set forth by authority, says: That a Sacrament as
Baptism, etc. has two parts: the outward visible sign, and the inward
Spiritual Grace; the outward visible sign is Water etc. the inward Spiritual
Grace, is a death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, The English
Primmer.
for being by Nature borne in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby
made the children of Grace: And further they confess, that Repentance, and
Faith, is required of every person to be Baptized. Repentance, whereby they
forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the Promise of God,
made to them in that Sacrament.

And Vrsinus says thus: Cathechism page 723.
He that shall believe, etc. In these words is noted briefly, the right use
of Baptism, in which right use, the Sacraments are ratefied: but in whatsoever
corrupt and unlawful use, and administration, the Sacraments are no
Sacraments, but are Sacraments to them only, who receive them with a true
Faith, etc.

All which being considered, If they cannot prove, and that by the Scriptures;
that Infants have their hearts Sprinkled from an evil conscience; and so have
a good Conscience; that they have Repentance; that they have the washing of the
new birth; which is to be born again, even of the Spirit, and that they have
Faith; I say all these or any one of them, let them prove by Scripture, Infants
have, or else their consequence vanishes; and it is no Sacrament by their own
confession; The blasphemous invention of Pope Iginius, will nothing avail
them, which is, that they have or do perform them by their Godfathers and
Godmothers, for the which, there is not the least show in all the Scriptures of
God; For the just shall live by his own Faith Heb. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11.
Heb. 10.38
; the righteousness of the righteous shall Ezekiel. 18. and 14.
be upon himself. Just Job, Noah, and Daniell, shall deliver neither Son nor
Daughter, but only themselves by their righteousness. Ezekiel. 14. Chap.


They affirm indeed, that Infants be regenerate, but let us agree what
Regeneration is; and so Repentance and Faith, by Gods Scriptures, and then it
will appear plainly, Infants have them not.

Regeneration is a turning from sin, to God. Romans 6.11 1 These. 1.9. Tit. 3.5.


Repentance is, a sight and knowing of sin, by the Law; a confessing of
sin, a sorrowing for sin, and a promise and endeavor to forsake sin, as
before.

Heb. 11.1.
Faith is, the ground or assurance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen, and it is accompanied with obedience, Iam. 2.17.26.
For Faith without works is dead. Our adversaries say, Repentance is a
forsaking of sin: and Faith is a steadfast believing of the Promises of God,
made to them, that are Baptized.

Let them either now prove, that Infants are turned from sin, to God in
righteousness, that they see, and know sin, by the Law; that they confess
sin, sorrow for it, and promise, and endeavor to forsake it, that they have
steadfast belief of the promises of God,

Let them prove these, or they say nothing, and we may truly conclude, they
are neither Regenerate, neither have they Repentance nor Faith, and so may by
no consequence be Baptized.


Ereu. They allege Act. 2. as a place much making for them; Amend your lives
and be Baptized, every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; for
the Promise is made to you, and to your Children, and to all that are a far
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.


Odeg. The place truly considered, makes against themselves, for these to
whom the Apostle speaks, being pricked in their hearts, by the call of God,
in Peter's Preaching, and crying out, men and brethren what shall we do? Peter
answers them, Amend your lives and be Baptized every one; not only be
Baptized; but also amend your lives, and such as gladly received his word were
Baptized: So that Fathers of the Jews, and their Children: and Fathers of the
Gentiles, and their Children, must all amend their lives, and be Baptized; and
gladly receive the word; or else this Promise, here made, appertains not to
them: for the Promise is to all, that the Lord our God shall call, Fathers and
Children: Children must amend their lives and gladly receive the word, or else
their sins cannot be put away, neither can their Fathers repentance save
them from damnation. Again let it be well observed, that this Covenant or
Promise Act. 1.
is the covenant of salvation, by Christ made unto the Children of Abraham,
upon the same Condition, that it is made to Abraham himself; namely, upon
repentance and Faith in Christ, as is most plain in these words: Act. 13.31
etc.
And we declare unto you that touching the Promise, made unto the Fathers, God
has fulfilled it unto us their Children, in that he raised up JESUS from the
dead, Verse 38.
etc. And be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this
man is Preached unto you remission of sins, and from all things from the
which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses: by him, every one that
believes is justified. In these words we see the Promise made unto the
Fathers is thus fulfilled to their Children, that Christ is raised from the
dead, and that through him, they might have remission of sins, even every one
that believes might be justified, Fathers and Children. And whereas many
stumble at the word (Children) conceiving that it is meant of Infants, it is
here and elsewhere used often in the Scriptures for men of understanding Act.
3.25. Gal. 4.19. 1 Cor. 14.20 Heb. 2.10.14. 1 Ioh. 12 28. and ^.21. and 3.18.
.


Ereu. They object 1. Cor. 7.14. the Children of believing Parents are holy,
and being holy, they may be Baptized say they.


Odeg. This place indeed is much alleged for infants Baptism; but what truth
there is in it, will easily appear. The force of The Apostles argument is, to
the belieuers in Corinthus. If your Children (in your own judgment) be holy,
and you do not put them away, when you are converted to the Faith, but use
them still as your children, to all those uses whereto children are appointed,
then may you keep your Wives (being holy) they being of a nearer natural bond
then your Children, and use them still as your Wives, to all those uses whereto
they are appointed, This appears in Verse. 14 in these words, Else were your
Children unclean, but now they are holy, as if he should say: If your
unbelieving Wives were not holy, then your children were not holy, but you make
no question of your children, and therefore your wives are holy much more, for
so these words show, Else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy.

Holiness in Scripture is taken two ways, 1. Either when a person or thing is
sanctified, or set apart from the Common or profane use, unto the service of
God, Exodus 35.2 and 16.23.
as was the Saboth day sanctified to the Lord: and as was Israel Leuit. 20 26.
and Exodus 13.2.
. or 2. When a person or thing is set apart or sanctified to the believer 1 Timothy 4.5 Tit. 1.15.
. Thus is the unbelieving Wife holy, and thus are the Children holy, and not
otherwise, There is now no sanctification to God, of a person, but such as
whose hearts are purified by Faith in CHRIST JESUS Act. 15.9. 1. Cor. 12. 1 Pet.
1.16.2^. etc.
. Now the Apostle says, The believing man is holy, and the unbelieving wife is
holy, or sanctified; now the question is, whether the Children are holy as the
believer, or as the unbeliever? If as the believer, (as they say) then are they
separated from common uses, in which they were used, and are set now apart to
Gods use: and can testify that their hearts are purified by Faith. But if
their holiness be as the unbelievers, (as we say) the^ are they clean to the use
of the believer, as his unbelieving Wife is, not otherwise.

Further, The Apostle does not say, Else were your Infants unclean, etc. but
else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy; so that all the
Children of believers, though of age, and unbelievers, are as holy by this
place as Infants, and then we would know how unbelieving Children, can be holy,
if not as the unbelieving Wife is holy, that is to the use of their Parents in
the duties of relation; Therefore to conclude, If their argument be good, they
that are holy must be Baptized, then unbelievers whether Wives or Children
(as well as Infants) must be Baptized, for the Apostle affirms they are holy.


Ereu. Another objection they have: the Scriptures of the new Testament makes
mention of two Baptismes, one is called John's Baptism, or the Baptism with
Water, of which all were partakers that came for it, even Infants; and none
were rejected: the other is called Christ's Baptism, which is peculier to the
Elect only.


Odeg. We read in the Scripture of more Baptismes then 2. as the Baptism of
affliction Mat. 20.22
, and so there are.3. Baptismes, and all are Christ's; but we will speak of the
two former, and first of John's. Some pretend John's Baptism, was only washing
with water the filth of the Flesh, and altogether without the Spirit which is
vain to imagine; For it is most apparent that the Apostles had the Spirit of
God, before they had Christ's Baptism, Act. 2. As Math. 16. proves it double;
for none can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost 1 Cor. 12.3
, But Peter in the name of them all, confessed JESUS to be the Lord: And Christ
says, Not Flesh and blood, but the Father revealed it to him; Ioh. 16.30
Also it is said, they all believed: also on them all he breathed and said,
Receive the holy Ghost Ioh. 20.22
. All which, was before the Baptism, Act. 2. Again, Faith is the gift of the
1 Cor. 12.9
Spirit, which the Samaritanes and Ephesians had, before they received that
Baptism of Christ, the holy Ghost and Fire Act. 8. and 19. chap.
. In short we read, that Appollos had the Spirit of God plenteously; and yet
knew but the Baptism of John only Act. 18.25
; And again Christ sent forth the 12. to Preach the Gospel, to heal the
Sick, to cleanse the Leapers, to cast out Devils, and said freely ye have
received, freely give: Math. 10.
After the 70. were sent, and subdued Devils, Luke 10.
etc. All which, they could not do, without Gods Spirit. If any object, that
the holy Ghost was not given, because Jesus was not yet glorified Ioh. 7.39.
: we answer; this is the Baptism, the holy Ghost and Fire, we are in the
second place to speak of.

Secondly, Christ's Baptism, the holy Ghost and Fire, was prophesied of by John
Math. 3.
, promised by Christ Ioh. 14.16 Act. 1.5.
, and performed first upon the Apostles, 2. Upon the Samaritanes, by the hands
of the Apostles, Act. 2. Act. 8.
3. Upon Cornelius and his household as upon the Apostles at the first. If any
ask what this Baptism was? Act. 10.44. and 11.15.16
Peter answers them, It was the fulfilling of Ioels Prophecy, to confirm the
ministry of the Gospel, at the beginning Heb. 2.3.
: Again this Baptism, was not so common, no not, in the Primitive Church as
John's Baptism, and the Baptism of afflictions, for imediatly to speak with
tongues, etc. was peculiar unto some then 1. Cor. 12.30.
, and is not now to be expected of any; but to show repentance of sin, Math.
3.6. Act. 2.41. Act. 8.12.13 and 37.
and Faith in Christ, was required of every one coming for Baptism with water
to John: to Peter: to Phillip, and others; so also the other Baptism of
afflictions. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must be Baptized with
Mark. 10.39. 2 Timothy ^ 12.
: Two of these 3. is common to all the Saints, the third now not to be
expected of any; and therefore if that were only Christ's Baptism, Act. 2. no
man now can receive it. I have the largelier spoken of this, because they are
usually so confounded together.


Ereu. Another place they allege, which is 1. Cor. 10.1. etc. The Israelites
were Baptized unto Moses, etc. where were many Infants with their Parents.


Odeg. This place is exceedingly misconceiued, being brought to prove Infants
baptism, I will take a little pains therefore to open and explain the place.
In the calling of this Baptism, all may see the drift and meaning of the holy
Ghost, not that Moses did at all wash them with water in the Cloud and Sea;
but The Apostle writing to the Saints at Corinth, exhorted them among other
things, to take heed of Presumption, they thinking themselves sure and safe
because they had put on CHRIST by Baptism, and were Christians: and first he
shows them a similie of two runners, and applied it to them; saying, so run
that ye may obtain: And further urges it by himself, saying, I beat down
my body, and bring it in subjection, least when I have Preached unto others, my
self should become a cast away: After he has done with the similie he
passes to an example, as if he should say, besides this I would have you
understand, how God dealt with our Fathers when he brought them out of Egypt,
with signs and wonders, and gave them manifest tokens of his love, in giving
them a Cloud to cover and defend them by Day and night, and caused the Sea, to
divide it self for them to pass over, and fed them 40 years with Bread from
Heaven, and caused the hard Rocks to yield them drink, by the which
testimonies of his favor he offered them Christ, and did confirm unto them by
these extraordinary wonders, that he was their God; yet for all this, when they
sinned, he was displeased with them, and destroyed them diverse times: even so
you Corinthians, notwithstanding you are Christians, and have Christ's
ordinances among you, the pledges of Gods favor, as these Israelites had in
their time, yet if you sin (without repentance) you shall perish as they did,
for their example is written for our learning. And thus, this of Moses is
called Baptism by comparison, as Noah's Arc is called the figure of the
Baptism that saves: For as Noah's Arc saved them that were in it, from
drowning in the water, yet afterward some of them perished; so our Fathers
were all under the cloud and in the Sea, and were all therein Baptized or safe
guarded from destruction of their enemies, yet afterward many of them
perished: Even so true Baptism, saves them that are in it, or put on Christ
by it, from the destruction of Hell, though afterward many may perish that
hold not fast that profession unto the end; and hereupon The Apostle concludes;
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. And this is the
meaning of this Scripture, and cannot with any show of truth be produced for
Infants Baptism: If any further ask why it is said they were Baptized in the
Sea and cloud; I answer, it pleased the holy Ghost so to speak, for the
reasons which I have showed: the Cloud and Sea was their safety, as Noah's Arc
was, and as true Baptism is; and as Christ says, They are Baptized that
suffer for his sake: So there is as much warrant to enjoin Infants to suffer
persecution, because it is called by the name of Baptism, as to Baptize them,
from this place because the cloud and Sea is called Baptism.


Ereu. Another objection they have, which is: whole Households were Baptized,
Act. 16.15.33. 1. Cor. 1.16
and Infants are a part of the household, therefore Infants were Baptized.


Odeg. True it is, whole households were Baptized, but it is also most true,
that there are many households in which there are no Infants: Therefore they that
practice Infants Baptism, must prove (not imagine) that there were Infants in
those houses, and that they were Baptized, or else they say nothing. It is most
sure, as the Apostles practiced in one household so they practiced in all, but
in the Iaylors house, they Baptized, such as they Preached the word unto, and
such as believed Act. 16.32 34.
, and this is most plain, that Infants cannot hear, nor believe. For they
know not God Deu. 1.39 Esa. 7.16. 1 Cor. 14 20. Jonah. 4.1^
, and then how can they believe, seeing Faith comes by hearing Rom ^^ 17.
and is grounded upon Knowledge Heb. 11.1.
.


Ereu. An objection they make, thus: Infants are said to be of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and Christ commands they should be brought to him, and he laid his
hands upon them and Blessed them, therefore they may be Baptized.


Odeg. It is not said, Infants are of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is obeyers
of the Gospel Luke 4.43.
, but that they that enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, must become as little
Children, for of such like is the Kingdom of God Mat. 18.3.
. This is Christ's meaning; men must be converted, and receive the Kingdom of
God, as a Child, weyned from all evil ways, and willing to submit unto CHRIST
in every thing Ephesians. 5.24.
. Thus was David humbled under Gods hand, even as one weyned from his Mothers
breast Psa. 131.2
, not personally a Child, but in Condition, as 1. Cor. 14.20. Gal 4 19. 1.
Pet. 2.2 etc. as before is related. And for taking them in his arms and
Blessing them, he Baptized them not Ioh. 4.2.
, but took occasion, to teach his Disciples, and the multitude, that all that
would be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven, must become like them Luke
18.16.17. and Mark. 10.14.15.
. And for his blessing them, Christ's blessings are manifold, he healed the
Sick, cleansed the Leapers, made the Dumb to speak, the Blind to see, cast
out Devils, fed many thousands with Bread, and gave Life to them that were
dead: all which and many more were temporal blessings: It is a blessing to
Infants to be created, to live, to grow in stature and comelines, in wisdom,
in towardnes, to have their sight, their limbs, and all their senses, and to
be preserved from dangers; so that Christ's blessings extends as well to this
life, as that which is to come, and because CHRIST prayed for them, it is no
safe conclusion that any may Baptize them; his main end being herein, to
declare their Innocent estate, and to teach all to be like them therein, by
conversion: And therefore let them build no longer on sandy foundations, least
the wrath of God break forth and destroy their buildings; for what is not of
God shall come to naught.


Ereu. They demand, why Infants of believers may not now as well be baptized, as
Abraham's Infants were circumcised?


Odeg. I answer, 1. there was a Commandment for circumcision. Gen 17. there is
none for baptism of Infants. 2. that Commandment included Males only,
Children or servants though unbelievers; and excluded all Females though
believers: so does not baptism, for males (if unbelievers) must not be
baptized; but females, if believers, must be baptized. 3. That Law required
circumcision to be performed on the 8. day; so does not the Law of baptism;
but when Faith is manifested, then is baptism to be performed: so that all may
see, there is no proportion between circumcision, and baptism.


Ereu. These indeed, do not well agree, but they say, that as Abraham took
his Infants with him into the Covenant of life and salvation, so do the
faithful now, and being within the Covenant, they may have the seal of the
Covenant, as they circumcision, so we baptism.


Odeg. First I say and prove: neither circumcision nor baptism, are seals of
the Covenant of life and salvation; that which is now the seal of life and
salvation was ever the same, which is the holy Spirit of promise 2 Cor. 1.2^.
Ephesians. 1.13 and 4.3^.
, which was yesterday, to day, and the same for evermore. 2. Although the
Scriptures speak of diverse Covenants; yet there is but two Covenants that
concerns us in our present controversy the covenant of Works and the
covenant of Grace, the Law and the Gospel, the Old and the New: The
difference of them is largely set down by the Apostle, in Gal 4. where he
declares that Abraham had two Sons, one by a servant borne after the Flesh,
one by a free woman borne by Promise, by the which, another thing is meant
(says The Apostle;) For th^se mothers, are the two Covenants, the one
signifying Jerusalem material, which is in bondage with her Children: the other
Jerusalem spiritual, which is free, and is the mother of us all: so that these
two Covenants belonged to these 2. seeds or Children: The old covenant, the
Law, was made with the children of Abraham after the Flesh, and had
circumcision in their flesh for a sign thereof. The new covenant the Gospel,
is not made with both these seeds; but with the one seed, so says the Apostle
Gal. 3.16
, even they that are of the Faith of Abraham. Verse. 29. The children of the
Flesh are not they to whom this covenant is made Romans 9.8.
the children of the flesh must be put out, and must not be heirs with the
faithful Gal. 4.30
: So that the covenant that God made with Abraham, and his children after the
Flesh was not the covenant of Life and salvation; it was the covenant of
works, of the Law, the old covenant which is done away: because of the
weakness and unprofitableness Heb. 7.18 19.
; for it made nothing perfect: the Covenant, the Seed, the Sign, were all but
shadows of good things to come they were types of Heavenly things not the
heavenly things themselves Heb. 9.1^ 23.
.


Ereu. They say, the Covenant made, Genesis 17. whereof Circumcision was a sign,
was the same Covenant which we have now in the Gospel.


Odeg. If all were true that they say; the^ their sayings ought to be
regarded: but as their are sayings in other things, so are they in this. The
Lord says, it is not the same Ier. 31.31 Heb. 8.6.
, It is a new Covenant (that we have under the Gospel) a better Covenant,
established upon better Promises, not like the old; which old is abrogated by
reason of the weakness and unprofitableness: If a new, a better, not like the
old, then not the same: and the Lord shows wherein it was not like the old;
the old Covenant, as it taught that Christ was not come in the flesh, so also
it taught, that he was not yet come into their hearts at their Circumcision,
but thereby as also by the whole Law, they were to learn Christ, as to come in
the Flesh, so to come into their hearts by Faith: and therefore says the
Apostle Gal. 3.8. etc.
, They were kept under the Law, and shut up unto the Faith that should after be
revealed: But the new Covenant is not like this; it is made only with all that
are the sons of God by Faith: Heb. 8.10.11.
which have his Laws put in their minds, and written in their hearts; all of
them knowing God from the least to the greatest: Again, I say though Abraham
himself had the Covenant of Grace promised him; by which promise he had
salvation in the Messiah to come: yet had he not the Ordinances of the new
Covenant, which we have, and therefore none of his seed in the Flesh could be
partakers of that, which he had not himself; in which regard it is said, of
John Baptist, who was greater then all the Prophets, that the least in the
Kingdom of God, as greater then he Mat. 11.11
: all the faithful that obtained good report, received not the Promise Heb.
11.39 etc.
, that CHRIST brought in this time of reformation; therefore they only shall
be partakers of the ordinances of this new Covenant, whom, he that confirmed
it with his blood, has appointed to receive them, as before.


Ereu. John Rob. page 77.
They say, that the Covenant which this new is not like; is that Law given upon
Mount Sinai Exodus 19. not that Genesis 17.


Odeg. They speak untruly, Mark ye words, Ier. 31. Heb. 3.
Not like the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I took them by the
hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which is mentioned Exodus 3. not
Exo. 19. Then did God appear to Moses, and commanded him to take them by the
hand, and lead them out of the land of Egypt: where the Covenant is mentioned,
in Verse. 6. etc. I am the God of thy Fathers Abraham, etc. I am come to deliver
them, out of the Land of the Egiptians, to bring them into a good Land, into
the place of the Cananites, etc. which promise was made unto their Father
Abraham, in Genesis 17. That God would be their God, and give them all the land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession

And for the word everlasting; it signifies in Scripture diverse things, As
the time of 50. years Exodus 21.^
, the time till CHRIST'S coming Exodus 12.14.17.
the Prisoner was ordained: so was the throne of David for ever 1. Chr. 17 12.
. Namely till Christ's coming; the Land of Canaan is promised for ever, and so
Circumcision; everlasting: all which by Christ are taken away: So that although
the covenant of Circumcision, be said to be everlasting; it does no more prove
it to be that covenant which we have under the Gospel; or now any more
direction for us, then the Law of the Passover which was also a Law for ever.

Again, (it is granted by the adversary Io. Rob- page 71.
, and it is a truth, that) the Covenant in Ier. 31. and other places, in the
Hebrew signifies a compact or agreement, upon a difference between two or
more; which in the new Testament, is turned into a word signifying a will or
Testament: So that this is agreed upon on all sides, two parties must be in
this Covenant, agreeing and promising by mutual accord for the things to be
done. Hence it follows, that if the Covenant Genesis 17. (I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee: and thou also shall
keep my Covenant, thou and thy seed after thee, etc. Let every Man child be
circumcised, etc.) be one and the same with this in Jeremy; then is it made
only. with Abraham and such his seed, as could make this Covenant, namely
agree with God; to Circumcise their males on the 8. day and know God; and not
with the males of 8. days old, who could make no agreement; nor perform the
same: For although God required of all Abra: seed to Circumcise their males,
which was ye performance of their part of the Covenant, Genesis 17. Yet he
required no more of the male of 8. days old, neither could it promise nor
perform any more, then the Female. And God was as much the God of the female
Infants of Abra: concerning whom nothing was required, as he was the God of
the male Infants, of whom nothing was required; only their Parents required to
Circumcise them; in obedience to God, and to teach them the circumcision of the
heart, which by that type they were to learn: and that the word Seed, or
Children, is not meant Infants, but men of understanding, I have showed
formerly in Page 136.

Further, this Covenant, Genesis 17. is made with Abraham and his seed, not with
every faithful man and his seed: is every faithful man Abraham? what proof
for that? It is well if we be Abraham's seed, let us be content to have Abra:
for our Father; whose Children if these men were, they would teach their
children to seek salvation and all their privileges Spiritual with God, by
Faith only, and not by their Fleshly descent as they do Thus all may see all
these their devices are as the Potters clay; their dawbing will not hold,
their wall and they shall be destroyed together, if they repent not.


Ereu. It is objected that circumcision was a seal of Faith to Abraham Romans 4.
.


Odeg. It is said, Abraham received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had when he was uncircumcised, that he
should be the Father of the faithful, whether circumcised or uncircumcised:
This place proves, Verse. 11.
that Abraham received circumcision to seal up his Fatherhood of the
faithful; not that he received it to seal up his Faith in the Messiah, which
he had Genesis 12 with 17.
, 24. years before he was circumcised: but that it was a seal of his Faith in
believing God, that he should be the Father of many Nations Genesis 12 Romans 4.^
, and this was imputed to him for righteousness Verse. 2^
. The intendment of the Apostle in this place, being to prove (that whereas the
Jews sought righteousness by beiag Abraham's fleshly children Ioh. 8.39.53.
as these obiecters do, by supposing they are ye children of the faithful
successively, through by the flesh, or by works, for he found nothing thereby
Romans 4.1.
; but his justification was by Faith, long before he was circumcised: and God
finding him so faithful continually, would make him the Father of all the
faithful, and so he received circumcision, a seal of his Faith, that he
should be the Father of the faithful: and therefore taught, that all that will
be Abraham's Children indeed, must not regard to be the Children of the Law or
flesh, but of his Faith: for if Abraham himself found nothing by the flesh for
justification, what can any fleshly Children find by the same? And besides, it
is a very far set thing to say, Abraham received circumcision, a seal of the
Faith which he had before, therefore all that received circumcision, it was
unto them a seal of faith, and consequently Infants may be baptized: I have
showed, Abraham received circumcision as none received it also that faith was
required of none to circumcision; but Faith is required to baptism; and
therefore these be but men's dreams, and chafe in stead of wheat. All may see,
they have nothing to say for Infants baptism, Christ's perfect Testament
affoording them no tittle of proof, only they go about to establish the
Covenant of ye Gospel (which is salvation by Christ to every sinner through
Faith) unto the Children of the Law, or flesh, contrary to the express words
of the holy Ghost: For if they that are of the Law, be heirs, Faith is made
void, and the promise is made of none effect, but it is by Faith, that it
might come by Grace unto all the seed of the faith of Abraham In Romans ^ 14.16.
. As also see Gal. 3.22. Romans 9.8.

(...) are they compelled to run to the old Testament, though it and not
serve them, and f o^ thence to fetch the chief corner Stone of their building,
viz. from circumcision, and wholly forsake the new Testament and practice of
the Apostles, (...) Moses disciples; as if Christ were not (...) teach them his
new Testament but (...) the new of the old; (...) of the Law, the(...) the
(...) beheld (...) and what is the issue of all this? truth and experience
teaches, a accessi^^ of maintayning that harlot and strumpet Rome, to be Gods
Church and people, as that apostate Fran^^ (...) and others have done; as
indeed it cannot be avoided, for if Infants be to be baptized, by the rule of
circumcision according to their own ground, their estate is such, If they deny
Romes estate to be such in their outward standing, they baptising Infants from
generation to generation as they have done, let them show when and how they
became no people of God, nor is Church.


Ereu. It is sufficient that you have cleared all objections: and proved, that
the baptising of Infants is not warranted by Gods word; besides all which I
have not long since, seen a Book translated out of Duch and Printed in
English, proouing that this invention of Infants baptism, was brought in, and
Decreed by diverse Emperors, Popes, and Counsels; so that I am every way
satisfied in this; only John Robinson Preacher to the English at Leyden, has
Printed half a sheet of paper; who labors to prove, that none may baptize
but Pastors or Elders of a Church (for other Officers to baptize I conceive not
that he means) and consequently, that you and all your companies in England,
wanting Pastors, are unbaptized.


To John Robinson.
Odeg. In this thing we are justly called upon, and therefore I shall manifest,
that any Disciple of CHRIST, that has received power and commaundment from God
to Preach and convert, though no Pastor, may also by the same power and
commaundment baptize, which I will first prove by the Scriptures, and then
answer this objections perticularly.

But first I will lay down a maine foundation, which being sufficiently proved,
the evident truth shall plainly appear: and this it is; That the members and
Churches of Christ, are so made; both by Faith and Baptism, and not by the one
only, which being true; it will follow that neither the Church and members of
Rome are members and Church of Christ, because Faith is neither required nor
performed thereto; nor yet any profession of people, that separate from Rome as
from no Church of Christ, retayning Romes Baptism, and building new Churches
without Baptism.

That the members and Churches of Christ, are so made by Faith and Baptism,
even by both, it is proved in Romans 11.20. etc. where The Apostle shows, That
the Church at Rome, the Gentiles, were grafted into Christ, the head of the
body by Faith. And Romans 6.3. etc. they were grafted into Christ and his death
by Baptism, according to Christ's commandment in his Commission. Go make to
Disciples all Nations, baptising them into the name of the Father, etc Mark.
28.19.
. And Christ promises his presence unto two or 3. so gathered into his name
Mat. 18.20.
: so that to be gathered into the name of CHRIST, by being made Disciples and
baptized, is, to be made members of his body (which is his Church) of his
Flesh, and of his bone: plainly confirmed 1. Cor. 12.13.
, we are all by one Spirit, baptized into one body: as also, except a man be
borne of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God Ioh.
3.5.
. Thus Christ made Disciples Ioh. 4.1. etc.
, we must be the sons of God by Faith, and put on Christ by Baptism Gal.
3.26.37.
. Our entrance into the holy place is, to draw near with a true heart in
assurance of Faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and
washed in our bodies with pure water, etc. and we are made partakers of
Christ, by having the beginnings Heb. 10.22.
, which beginnings are Repentance, Faith, and Baptism Heb. 3.14
, other beginnings, or foundation can no man lay Heb. 6.1. etc.
.

1 Cor. 3.11
Thus was the members and Church of Jerusalem made, which was ye first Church of
Christ 1. The 120. even by John's Doctrine, which was Faith, and Baptism into
the name of JESUS Act. 19.4.
, and thus were the 3000. added, by gladly receiving the Word and being
Baptized Act. 2.41.
. Thus were the Churches of Samaria made Act. 8.12. Act. 16. Act. 18.8.
, the Church at Phillippi, at Corinth, in Galatia Gal. 3.26.27. Col. 2.12.
, Collossa, and as the Gospel came to these Churches, so came it unto all the
world, Col. 1.6. The manifestation of Faith and Baptism, has Christ joined
together, and what is mortal man that he should separate them Mat. 19.6
? This is the door into his Kingdom, by which if any man enter, Ioh. 10.
he shall go in and out and find pasture, and whosoever climbeth up another
way, they are Thieves and robbers. This is the word of the Lord, and it
endures for ever 1. Pet. 1.25
; and it must be kept without spot until Christ's appearing 1 Timothy 6.
, and cursed are they that teach otherwise Gal. 1.8.9
.

This being thus declared, it follows that the Church of Rome at this day,
and for diverse hundred years, not being made by Baptising believers, but by
washing fleshly Infants upon confession of suerties for them; therefore they
have not Christ, but are in Gods account, as the worst Pagans, Egiptians,
Sodomites: Babilonians, Gentiles, a habitation of Devils Revel. 18.^.
, a hold of all soul Spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird,
as also all that separate from her do confess.


From whence I reason.
If such as came from Gods own people, the Jews, must enter into the Church by
manifestation of Repentance, Faith, and Baptism, as well as the Gentiles, for
there was but one entrance for them both Ephesians. 2.18.
, then much more such as come from Egiptians, Sodomites, Babilonians, yea from
a habitation of Devils, etc. must manifest Repentance, belief, and be
Baptized, and so enter into Christ's Church; but the former is true, as all the
before named Scriptures prove; therefore the latter much more must follow; in
that if any should have had privilege this way, Gods people the Jews, should.

That such is and was the estate of Rome and England when John Robinson and his
company left it, old Brownisme freely confesses, yea he himself
acknowledges Justific. of super. pa.
, that the Lord never made Covenant with Rome nor England, and not only
Brownists, but Caluinists, Church of England and others, apply all these
things before named against Rome; yet being loath to cast her down to the
ground, even all of them retain and maintain the Babilonish, Egiptian and
Sodomitish washing of this habitation of Devils, for the outward badge of their
Christianity, wherein they take the chief Corner Stone of Babylon for
foundation, contrary to the express command of the Lord Ier. 51.26
; and besides, they take an other course in the building of their Spiritual
Temple, Ezra. 3.
then Gods people took in the rebuilding of the material Temple, who made all
things according to the first pattern; and so take counsel (in their new
buildings) but not of the Lord, therefore shall they be destroyed, and are in
Gods account, so far from being true Churches, that they are Synagogues of
Satan.

But Christ's sheep will hear his voice, and follow him, calling them Go out
of her, Go out of her Revel. 18.4.
and harken to the Angel flying through the midst of Heaven Chap. 14.
, having an everlasting Gospel, not a new Gospel, they that bring: new
Gospel, are to be held accursed Gal. 1.8.9
; the old Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, is to save, all such as believe and are
Baptized Mark. 16.16.
. Thus do Christ's follow him in what he has commanded, and so become a
habitation of God by the Spirit Ephesians. 2.22.
, and water, which Church Christ sanctifies by the washing of water through
the Word Ephesians. 5.26.
.

All which I have showed to this end, to make plain, that if John Rob: and
others did walk in the path of the Lord, as they follow the vision of their
own hearts, they should be constrained, to practice that in the building of
the Church of Christ, which they disaproue in us, that is: That when they
separated from that habitation of Devils, (Rome) and were to combine themselves
together to be a Church, some one must Baptize, not being yet Pastor or Elder;
For there must be a Flock, before a Shepherd, as were all the Churches of the
Primitive time, and as was Io. Rob. flock before they made him their shepherd.

And one thing more I would demand of him, seeing he has cast away his Popish
Priesthood, and yet retains his Popish washing for his Christianity, (for
other christianity has be none, in that by Baptism, men put on either a true,
or false Christ.) Why he could not as well have repented of the evils of his
Ordination, and yet retain that ordination still, as repent of his Baptism,
and yet keep it? In his Baptism, he confesses there was neither fit party
to be Baptized, right party to Baptize, Page 136.
nor true fellowship to be Baptized into; but only washing with water with
the words used in Christ's Baptism: So I say was therein his ordination,
imposition of hands, with fasting and Prayer; If he say there was no right
party to be ordained, true parties to ordain, nor true communion to be
ordained in; (which is all he can say) so much says himself of his Baptism:
and therefore his own words Man^^^st. page ^.
, are a sword to kill and confound himself, where he says of his ministry
and all that receive it from Rome and England, thus: And for the Minister
repenting of what he has done at his admission, it may well be called a
supposition of an impossibility and contradiction, he cannot repent of his
sin, which is his receiving authority from the B. to Preach, but he must
forsake and renounce the same authority as he received it, which if he do in
deed and truth, he cease to be a Minister, etc. these are his words. Now
who (being free from prejudice) does not see, that these words may be taken
up against his Baptism: He cannot repent of his sin which is his retained
Baptism received from a habitation of Devils, but he must forsake and
renounce the same Baptism, as he received it; which if he do in deed and
truth, he cease to be baptized, as he cease to be ordained. Further he
says Man. pa. 4
the very obtaining and receiving of the Bishops licensce, is a real a
knowledgement, that the Bishops has a lawful power to grant it, etc So say I
his very obtaining, retaining and justifying of that Idol Baptism of Rome, is
a real acknowledgement, that the Church of Rome has a lawful power to
Baptize; which having, then how can it be denied, but that Rome and England is
Gods Church and people, which John Rob: and all his followers deny And further
he says Page 13.
. Take away the Bishops authority, and how can the Ministers remain? take away
the Co-relatiue, and the relation cease: So say I, seeing he takes away from
Rome and England, power to be either true Church, or to have true Ministers,
how can the Baptism remain? seeing he takes away the Co-relatiue why does
not the relation cease? I may say of his Popish Baptism, as he says Man. pa.
16.
of the Popish Jurisdiction. In vain does he apply his industry and Art in
the washing of this Blackmoore.

But now I prove, that a servant of Christ, not being yet in the office of
Pastor or Elder, may baptize, thus: Whatsoever is written aforetime is written
for our teaching Romans 15.4
: but it is written aforetime that Disciples of Christ, though yet no Pastors,
did Baptize: therefore we are taught being Disciples of Christ, although yet no
Pastors, to Baptize when just occasion is given.

1. To prove that Disciples of Christ not being Pastors did Baptize, I produce
John Baptist example, who was no Pastor and yet Baptized such as entertained
his counsel; If any object he was a Prophet and more then a Prophet, let such
know, that the least in the Kingdom of God is greater then he: which being
true, it follows; that he which has John's Doctrine, by the power whereof he
conuerteth, and also is greater then John, he may Baptize by John's example
which is written for his instruction; but every Saint of God now having John's
doctrine, by the power of which he conuerteth is greater then John: and so may
Baptize, by his example which is written for his instruction.

2. The Disciples of Christ, though no Pastors did Baptize, which is written
for our instruction Ioh. 3.26. and 4.1.2.
: So did Ananias a Disciple, not a Pastor Act. 9.11.
.

Mat. 28.19. etc.
3. Christ commands every Disciple to the end of the world; to go teach, make
Disciples (according to his best ability) and such as are made Disciples to
Baptize them, and he will always be with them; who soever therefore may make a
Disciple, he may Baptize by Christ's commandment, he has coupled them
together, and let no man separate them from the beginning it was so; till
Antechrist forbad it, Rome and England forbidding all that have not their
Ordination from them, either to Preach, to convert or to Baptize: and some of
the Brownists acknowledging it lawful for any Disciple, to Preach and convert,
but not Baptize: though others of them Io. Wilk. and his followers.
hold; that Disciples of Christ though not in office of Pastor or Elder may
convert and Baptize also, upon which they have been at deadly jarres these many
years.

If any object; this Commission and commandment, was given to the persons of
the Apostles only; I answer: It is not true, as appears by the words: The
commission is given to such as whose persons remain unto the end of the world
Verse. 20.
, namely the succeeders of the Apostles in their Doctrine from time to time,
with whom Christ promises to be present always, even to the end. The Apostles
have left their power and Doctrine wholly behind them, nothing is dead but
their persons; and therefore the Doctrine of Paul, being now in the person of a
believer; the Commandment is written for his instruction, bidding him go
Preach the Gospels to every creature, and to all Nations (according as God
enableth him, for he requires not what we have not) Baptising them: this
commandment is now as powerful in the person of a believer as ever it was. If
it be affirmed that the Pastors or Elders now be the only successors of the
Apostles for the performing of this Commandment, Go Preach and Baptize. I say
it is a mere fixion, there is not the least show in all the Testament of Jesus
Christ, that Baptising is peculiar only to Pastors, which might satisfy any
man of reason; neither can it be proved that ever ordinary Pastor did Baptize.
And it is most plain, converting and Baptising is no part of the Pastors
office: his office is, to feed, to watch, to ouersee, the flock of Christ
already the Church: his charge is to take heed to the flock, and to feed the
Church Act. 20.2
, and to defend them in the truth against all gainsayers Tit. 1.8.
: further then which, no charge is laid upon him by virtue of his office: That
he may Preach, convert and Baptize, I deny: not, as another disciple may; but
not that either it is required, or he does perform it by virtue of his office;
no proof for that imagination can be showed: and therefore it remains firm
and stable; every Disciple that has ability is authorized, yea commanded to
Preach, convert and Baptize, as well, and as much (if not more) then a Pastor.

4. As Christ says, They have Moses and the Prophets Luke 16.9.
; so every believer has Christ and his Apostles, commanding him to covet to
Preach 1 Cor. 14.1
, and to call all to come Revel. 22.7.
, and when they come to Baptize them: Hear is the King and Lawgiuer; the City
Jerusalem, the new Testament; with her gates open; and the Spirit of God
bidding all come freely, and all the Faithful made Kings and Priests unto God
1. Pet. 2.5. Revel. 1.6.
, what should let that they may not Baptize till they have Officers, or when
their officers are sick, dye, are in Prison or the like? Does their power then
cease to Baptize any? and so to receive them into the Church: The primitive
Churches never knew this, who all were gathered by Faith and Baptism, and who
were without Pastors a good while Act. 14.21 23.
(for a young Disciple may not be a Pastor 1 Timothy 3.6
) and they increased and grew, being left of the Apostles tor a season, who
after their long Iourneys to other places came to them again, and taught them
the order of having Pastors in every Church.

Now I come to Io. Rob. grounds and proofs as he calls them whereby he
laboreth to prove that all ye have been Baptized by any but a Pastor are
unbaptized; And this he says, he can do by our own grounds compared with our
practice.

1 We say Baptism unlawfully administered is no Bapt. of Christ. 2. We also
affirm that he who by administering his gift conuerts another, may also Baptize
him, and that without any other special calling thereto.

Against which, John Rob. lays down as a foundation of his proofs 2
special rules: viz.

1 (...) there is no lawful Baptism, but by him that has a lawful calling
to Baptize, his warrant he seems to have 1 These. 11. Heb. 5.4.
. 2. His second rule is; that only he has an ordinary lawful calling to
Baptize, who is called thereto by the Church, to which he sets no Scripture.

His inference is: That all those, and consequently we, not being Baptized by
any so called, but by those they conceive converted them, by their gift, are
unlawfully Baptized, and so unbaptized persons.

Now to answer both these, the first needs little; for we affirm with him, that
there is no lawful baptism, but by him that has a lawful calling to
Baptize, etc. From whence mark what follows against himself: that is
unlawful Baptism, that is adminstred by him that is not lawfully called to
Baptize: But Io. Rob. was baptized by one not lawfully called thereto as
himself confessetth Justific. sc per. pa. 285 etc.
Therefore that baptism he retains and pleades for, by his own ground is
unlawful Baptism. Thus in smiting us he wounds himself.

To the 2. Rule he has annexed 6. proofs: but first to answer the rule, and
after the proofs in particular. The rule together with his inference is also
fully against himself; for if only he that has an ordinary lawful calling
from a Church must Baptize, and they that are baptized by any not so called are
unbaptized persons, then himself and his followers being Baptized by those
that both wanted a true Church to call them, and also an ordinary lawful
calling to baptize, as himself confesses, is both unlawfully baptized, and so
unbaptized persons by his own ground; thus is the wise catched in his own
craftines.

Again in all his 6 proofs, there is not one Scripture confirms his rule;
his rule is: That only he has an ordinary lawful calling to Baptize, who is
called thereto by the Church, but none of those produced by him, were called
thereto by any Church to baptize, therefore serves not his purpose. Besides,
they were none of them Pastors of any particular Flock, which is the thing he
must prove or nothing. And for us who he intends his rule and inference against
we have and shall through the strength of Christ clearly show to every
reasonable man, either his gross ignorance, or his willing subtilty, and our
own innocence that we all are both lawfully Baptized and baptized persons
according to the will of God. And for an extraordinary calling we challenge
none, but content our selves with what the Word affoords unto us, and that
which it warrants not, is extraordinary; which is doctrines of Io. Rob. of
private communion with the public members of the Devil and such other his
extraordinary stuff.

These 2. rules he calls his Foundation. And for his proofs: He first laboreth
to make John Baptist, Christ's Disciples, Phillip, Ananias, and Peter's example
extraordinary, and therefore serves not now for any man's practice; the which I
have formerly answered: unto which I will a ^^e, that if these seruauts of Gods
example in Baptising, be not written for our instruction, no more is their
example for teaching; but the latter he grants to be written for
instruction; for he confesses a man may Preach and convert, though not in
office, and therefore the latter, the holy Scriptures concludes, In that Christ
has coupled them together Mat. 28.1
. But here I will ask him one question. If because the Apostles were
extraordinary men; Therefore there practices are no directions to us, being not
in office of Pastor, etc. By what authority he Baptiseth his companies Infants?
and who gave him that authority? He will tell me, he baptiseth by virtue of
his Pastorship; but still I ask him who ordained him into that Office? His
company, not being Officers, where is his warrant for that? I am sure he can
show none in Christ's Testament: If he bring Act. 6. or Act. 14.23. or Tit. 1.
or the like. I will answer him, these that, ordained were Apostles,
Evangelists: If he say, these are written for the instruction of Disciples not
in Office; so I say is Baptism, Therefore let him either confess, that he
Apostles practice are written for the example of Disciples not in Office, to
Baptize as well as to ordain; or else let him cast off his Pastorship received
of his company not being in Office, and take unto him again his old Popish
Priesthood, received by ordination through Rome, as well as his Popish Baptism;
otherwise the Godly wise, will judge him a blind wilful man.

His 2. proof is little material, it was The action that Christ calls the
fulfilling of righteousness, which is still the same, when any Disciple of
Christ is baptized by a Disciple, who (as has been showed) is called
thereunto: and John's meaning was not, that he had need to be baptized with
water, but with that other baptism the holy Ghost and Fire, which he had
formerly declared to the people Christ should Baptize with.

His 3. proof makes against himself, for though the ignorant and blind
Pharisees, asked John, why he Baptized, as Io. Rob. now asks us. John proves
his authority to Baptize, by proving his authority to Preach; even as we do:
that this is most plain John says, I am the voice of him that cries in the
wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, etc. Mark. 3.^^ ^^k. 3.
So that John takes it for granted he had sufficiently answered them, and
proved his Baptising lawful (though he speaks not one word of that) because
he proved his power to teach: and so do we proving our authority to Preach and
convert; therein sufficiently prove our authority to Baptize.

His 4. is most vain; for is not preaching an ordinance, as well as baptism?
also is not preaching an action of the mouth, as washing or baptising is an
action of the hand? what is the difference? If either be more honorable it is
preaching, and seeing here he confesses, Every one to whom God has dealt a
gift, is to administer it, in teaching; so say I much more in baptising; for
every Saint is able to baptize, but every Saint is not able to preach.

To his 5. I answer, the Eunuch was a member of Christ Jesus, by faith and
baptism, and by virtue of the same might remain in any particular Church of
Christ where he would, for in communion all must live; it is not sufficient to
believe and be baptized, but we must also continue in the Apostles doctrine,
Act. 2.
fellowship, breaking of bread and prayers, and that without delay; only the
Lord permitted the Eunuch to go and dispatch his weighty affairs with his
Queen and Mistress, and so to live in communion some-where; and therefore if
he, or any other fall into sin, they living in a communion where they are
watched over, (as all must do) Christ's censures are upon them. And whereas he
says, that if by Baptism one becomes a member of a Church, then he that
conuerts and baptiseth the converted, receives in, and so by just consequence
may cast out; Is this so strange to John Robinson? do we not know the
beginnings of his Church? that there was first one stood up and made a
covenant, and then another, and these two joined together, and so a third, and
these became a Church say they, which we deny, except a Synagogue of Satan;
for was ever Church of the new Testament made by a covenant without baptism?
there is not the least show for it. In this they run to Isreal's renewed
covenant, Nehem. 9
wherein again they acknowledge Rome and England true Churches in their
foundation: and when they joined to them, they joined into Gods covenant; and
having broken it, they renew it again: this they cannot avoid. Now as these
two, the one receiving the other, became a Church as they say, if one of these
had sinned, I would ask Ioh. Rob. if the other had not been bound to cast him
out, or to separate from him which is all one. This was their own grounds of
old and that from Math. 18. but they have turned their old profession vpside
down, Francis Johnson in one manner, and John Rob. in another, that a man
cannot now tell what are their grounds

To his sixth that this brings all confusion, in that if none be present but the
persons, baptising and baptized, how shall the truth of this be confirmed? I
answer who was by, but Philip and the Eunuch, that could give testimony to
any Church? who but Paul and Ananias? and who gave testimony to the Church of
Jerusalem concerning Paul's conversion save Barnabas and Paul himself? And for
his question, if two or three be instruments in converting one, who shall
baptize them? I answer, even any one of whom they shall agree or any other
Disciple present, that was no instrument in his conversion: for we dow not say,
that he that conuerts must baptize, but may baptize. Christ converted many,
yet baptized none, but left that to his followers: Paul converted all the
Corinths, yet baptized few, other Disciples baptized: his chief work was
conversion. And whereas he says by this ground a woman may baptize: we say,
women may neither teach nor baptize in the Church, though it consist but of two
or three, as Christ says sometimes it does. But out of the Church, where men
Disciples are wanting, we do affirm that women have been and may be worthy
instruments for conversion of others but where men Disciples are present, the
woman must not usurp authority over the man, but must, but learn in silence.
And I desire it may be observed, that this which Ioh. Rob. so much
contradicts in us, he has labored much in himself formerly, (...)
using many reasons and persuasions, to prove, (...) they that have the word,
(...) power also, to use (...) and brings (...) accord with (...) writing
(...) may ordain (...) is (which John Rob. gives much probation of) Where God
gives the word, there he gives the power also: Also he brings Peter Martyr,
to prove, that at the first plantation of Churches, where men want, women may
Baptize. His words are, Touching the Ecclesiastical Ministry we have
signified before, that it may not be committed to Women, and they are not fit
for it. But now we add, that, in the planting of Churches a new, when Men want
which should Preach the Gospel, a Woman may perform that, at the first; but
so as when she has taught any company, that some one man of the Faithful be
ordained, which may afterward minister the Sacraments, teach, etc. This Io.
Rob. approves of; and yet for want of other matter makes objections now,
against Peter Martyr, himself, and us.

Thus his 6. which he calls proofs, but may fitlyer be called Cauillations,
are answered. Now he pretends to answer, one of our objections, as he says:
And this it is; He that may do the greater may do the less; but men by
virtue of their gift, without other calling may Teach which is the greater,
therefore and Baptize also which is the less.

But here I must say, he wrongeth us, we do not say, having no calling, but
we say, a Disciple having a gift, and not being in the Office of a Pastor,
etc. may teach, by virtue of Christ's commandment, and the Disciples example
which is calling sufficient; and so doing the greater which is to Preach, he
may do the less which is to Baptize; by the gift and commandment, which is
as well for the one as the other: that he may do both, I have showed; that
Baptism is inferior to teaching, Christ's example and Paul's formerly spoken of
declares: That he that does the greater may do the less, I prove thus. Our
Lord Christ rebuking the hypocrisy of the Jews Math. 25.
, Who thought it lawful to swear by the Temple, but not by the gold on the
Temple: to swear by the Altar, but not by the offering on the Altar, says
Hypocrites, Whether is greater the Gold, or the Temple that sanctifies the
gold? the Offering or the Altar that sanctifies the offering? Wherein he
plainly proves, that either, it was not lawful for them to swear by the
Gold, and the offering, or else it was lawful for them to swear by the Temple
and the Altar; for if it were lawful to swear by the greater, much more was
it lawful to swear by ye lesser: And hereby he proved them dissemblers, in
making a show of a reverent respect of some of Gods ordinances and that the
lesser, and not of others. and that the greater. That this is our Saviors
meaning I think none will deny.

So may I justly rebuke (by this example) the hypocrisy of such, as say it is
lawful for Disciples though not in Office, to Preach and convert, but not to
baptize: unto whom I may say, Hypocrites, whether it greater the Water and
washing, or the Word that sanctifies it? If it be lawful to meddle with the
greater much more is it lawful to meddle with the less: and hereby you do
but dissemble, in making a show of more respect of Baptising which is the
lesser: the^ you do of Preaching which is the greater. You must either with
Rome and England forbid all, (not in office) to Preach which is the greater, or
else yield to the truth, and confess that one not in Office may baptize which
is ye less: for Christ has coupled them together and let none dis-ioyne them.
I will now add for conclusion of this, what John Rob. has himself formerly
written, First Iustific. sc. pa. 430.
thus. If the Church without Officers may Elect, it may also ordain. If it
have the power of the one, and that the greater, it has also for the other
which is the less. And again thus His appe^d. to P^rk. ^. pr^^.
, Every Church has right to the Word, Sacraments and prayer within it self
which are greater, and therefore to Excommunication which is lesser then they;
in which himself affirms; that they who may do the greater, may do the less.

But now for answer to himself and us, he has only produced, First, a
collection from the Scripture. 2. A simily of his own devising: his collection
is, He that may do the greater may not do the less. For (says he)
Preaching in the old Testament some might do, yet those persons might not
carry the Dung of the Sacrifices out of the Temple, nor the ashes from under
the Altar, but quoteth no Scripture: his meaning I take it is this: That
although the Prophets might Preach, being not of the Tribe of Leui the Priest,
yet none might meddle with the meanest service of the Tabernacle but the
Priests and Levites; which being true; what does this make against what I
herein affirm? even nothing; because, 1. The Priests were appointed only to
this service: and all others expressly forbidden, but no such thing is in this:
for neither is Baptising appointed to the Pastors only; neither are any other
Disciples in any measure forbidden it, but the contrary as before has been
proved. 2. If the Priests might meddle with all the services of that old
Tabernacle, then may all the Saints (only Women that are in some things
forbidden) meddle with all the services of the new Temple and Tabernacle,
forasmuch as they are all Priests unto God 1. Pet. 2.5. Revel. 1.6.
. 3. Converting and baptising cannot be called a service of ye Temple, but
rather a hewing of stones in the mountain, and laying them into the Temple, or
adding them to the Temple, the which every Israelite might do Ezra. ^^. etc.
, and that was not tied to the Priests only: Even so every believer who is a
Jew within may not only hew spiritual stones in the world; but may also lay
them in the Temple, that being no part of the Pastors office, which again and
again I confidently affirm, there being not the least show for the same in
the Testament of Jesus Christ, where only the Pastors Office and service is
declared.

Again, for his simily there is nothing in it for 1. They to whom the King
has given Commission, to declare his gracious pardon to the rebels, to them
has he given power also to baptize them as before. 2. I deny Baptism with
water to be the seal of this pardon, John Rob. has often been willed to prove
it a seal: which yet he never has done, The seal of this pardon is the holy
Spirit of Promise Ephesians. 1.13 and 5.30. 2. Cor. 1.22
, which is, the work of God Ioh. 6.27.
, It is neither in the power of the Pastor, nor any Disciple to set this too:
they are but Ministers or instruments, whereby God does convey it into the
hearts of the faithful.

And thus I have answered every particular, ha^ing that every child of wisdom
will Judge the Adversary fully confuted, and the truth confirmed.

The rest of the Principles, there is not much controversy about, especially
of the Resurrection of the Dead and Eternal Judgment; and therefore will we
here cease at this time, praying that for this our travel, we may gain but
this; A serious consideration of what is written: and If any defects be either
in Printing or binding, (both which unto us are difficult) we pray the one may
be passed over; and the other may be amended.


