A TRVE report of all the doings at the assembly concerning matters of
Religion, lately holden at Poyssy in France.

Written in Latin by Master Nicholas Gallasius, minister of the French
Church in London, and then present, and one of the disputers in the same,
translated into English, by. I. D. ^

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed by the Queens Majesty's
injunctions.

To the right honorable, the Lord Frauncis Russel, Earl of Bedford, and one
of the Queens Majesty's priuye council, Nicholas Gallasius.
Immediately after my return into this Realm, (right honorable) I thought
nothing more requisite, than to show the cause of my long pilgrimage. That
both all men may understand, why I have been so long absente from my
church: and also what was the end of that assemblye, where I was, and eke
what fruit, I reaped of my travail therein. For I understand, that sondrye
rumors have been spread thereof, and that many have easilye persuaded
themselves, that which they most desired.

So that in these our times I find it most true, which long since was spoken.
Namely, that the people judges, and now measure most things according to there
own opynion, and very few according to the truth. Which foolyshe judgments
to withstand, I counted it pain well spence, not only by word of mouth, to
certify my fre^des and familyers, but also to put in writting, to the sight
and reading of al me^, the late doings betwixt us, and ye prelates at Poyssye.
Which as symply and playnelye: so I protest to do truly and faythfullye. As
they themselves, which were prese^te at the doing thereof, can witness. Great,
sure was the expectacion of this assemblye and conference. And not with out
cause. For never hereto fore in France were we quyetlye heard, or admitted to
the defense of our cause: but rather without cause, condemned, banyshed and
imprisoned. Now therefore it was no marvel, if with this strange and sodayn
chance, men's minds were in great expectacion, and had conceived good hope.
Especially, forasmuch as the truth shyneth of itself, and waxes so much y^
more mighty, as men with great force and suttelty, assay to suppress it. But
they must not think, that we were heard of them, which were driven thereto for
ye most part against there wills, and altogether enforced thereto, by the
necessirye of common commandment. For they would always, either have us
put to silence, our mouths stopped, or else referred to there great God at
Trent: only necessitye therefore made us audience. Because no otherwise, the
fear of imminent peryls could be repressed, nor they themselves which hate us
most, have provided for their own quietness. Wherefore, al be it they feigned,
that they were wiling to come to conference, yet they continued with us only so
long, as they hoped in the mean time, they might well content the King and
the nobles, and appease the commons. For to leave of the several discourse, al
their doings generally, but chiefly their departure, whereby they brake the
conference, sufficiently disclosed, what their purpose was. Which if we
consider, certainly we shall marvel that we did so often come to talk, and
were suffered so long to plead our cause. But without respecting the councels or
judgments of men, we must weye the providence of God, whereby he preuenteth al
perilles, and gives a happy and lucky end, to doubtful beginninges. For god
which never fails those that are his, has far exceded our hope and
expectation. For who thought yt albeit we were sent for, yet many being
unwilling, and some striving against it, we should, be heard at all, who saw
not a thousand wyles prepared for us, whereby we might either be put to death
or silence? After yt we weronce heard with ye great grudge of all ye bishops,
who wuld have hoped, for the second, or third meetyng? Who thought not, that,
we were led, as prisoners to plead our cause? And where as most unjust
condityons were offered us whereby the Bishops minded to shame us, and win
themselves a glorious victory: who thought not that we would straight have
broken of, and having so good occasyon offered unto us, would forthwith
reasse from conference.

Yet we chose rather to abide al perilles, yea, and to much wrong, rather than
we would give any occasyon to break of y^ conference. We gave up a confession
of our faith, that is to say, of all the churches in France that profess the
gospel. To maintain and defends the same, we were always ready. Or if the
bishops would have showed forth any of theirs, we promised often to confer
thereof: and to confute it, if there were in it any thing, not agreeable to the
word of God. But we could never get them together without great entreatye,
or continual calling on them. At the last, when they neither could nor
durst, openly to break of the conference, once begone by the Kings
commandment, they thought good by little and little, to loose, and break of.
For first from the great audyence, in the which we were first heard with
great company, restrained in a more narowe place, we were admitted only to
the number of.xii. where they had a great company of their monks and
doctors. Neither yet did this order please them long.

For at the last, the matter was referred to five on either part, and yet
afterward, those that were chosen for them because they were grave and quiet
men, they said, were never appointed thereto, by their consent. For they thought
the^ to much bent to peace and concord, which they hate. All these policies,
attempted (as it seemed in vayn) without any answer giving us, or any part of
their minds signified unto us, they departed. But although this labor may seem
employed in vain, whereof their apeares either no end, or else no certain
conclusion: yet nevertheless herby is made manifest to al men, how great is ye
power of truth, which can be suppressed by no might of me^, by no wile, nor
guile. For she fears her adversaries, she constrains her defe^ders and
patrones and makes the^ to be feared, albeit they are few and small of force:
she vanquisheth and rooteth out all error, be it never so deep rooted: she
detecteth and chaseth deceites and lies, even as the light with her beams does
the darkness: to conclude, although many years, she has lien hydden and
suppressed, yet at ye last she becomes vanquisher of all her foes. Which
forasmuch as the lord dailye proves before our eyes, truly we are unkind,
and unthankful, unless we mindefully weye it. Least therefore the fame of
these doings should dye, least they should be falsified with lies, or blotted
with false tales, immediately after my return, I wrote the note thereof, and
described all things even as they were done. But whiles I doubted, under whose
name I might best publishe the same, your honor came forthwith to my mind, to
whom for great favor and gentleness I am much bounden, and not I only, but
as many else, as being true worshippers of god, are fled hither for religion. To
your highness therefore, I have dedicated the same, yt forasmuch as you are much
enflamed with the desire of godliness and religion, and wish the banishment of
error and deceit, you may hereby plainly se, how ye lord works in our realm
of France, how ye gospel increases there, with what patience and modesty, we
suffered our adversaries and also what hope we may conceue, of things to come.
Neither can I with silence ouerpasse, how much the example of the happy and
quiet government of this flourishing realm, and the authority of all the
nobles of this realm that favor the gospel, and chiefly of the most noble
and gracious Queen Elizabeth, has aided us to stop the mouths of our
adversaries, which are always wont to object, that with the change of
religion, the change and disorder of the realm will likewise ensue. For both
hye and low would lay unto them the example of this floryshing realm, whose
state has never ben more quiet, than since the times that the most noble
Queen Elizabeth, restored religion defaced by her sister to the ancient
purity and sincerity. For, what may more win the favor of ye people to the
Prince, than pure religion and zele of truth. Then at the last do men
perfectly know their duetyes to their Princes, when first they know their
duetye to God, by whom Princes are appointed as vicars or lieuetena^ts And
those things which your honor yet said and reasoned, touching this
argument, and the mayntaynyng of true religion, when you were sent into
France to congratulate our King, yet stick imprinted in the minds of many.
Neither have ye left any subtle spurs or prouokementes to virtue, in the
minds of such as are Godly, with the president of your vpryght living,
gentleness, liberality, and your true and sincere Zele, whereby when I
perceived, that they provoked and encouraged, wished so well to your honor as
they ought. I thought I should pleasure them also, if to you, whom I know to
embrace and defend al godliness, I should present these news, which both
to all men, but chiefly to such as are patrones and defenders of y^ truth,
ought well to be known.

The proclamacion of summons and save conduit, to the general consultation of
the clergy in France. Translated out of French into English.
CHARLES, by the grace of God king of France,
to al our Baylis, Stewards, Prouostes, Judges or their Lieutenauntes and other
our Justices and officers, to who^ it shall apertaine, Greting.
Forasmuch as in ye general assembly, which we presentely cause to be made,
of the Prelates of our Realm, for the causes contained in the Letters which we
have heretofore written unto them, it has seemed to us right requisite yt al
our subjects which concerning ye same causes shall have any thing to say, or
that will be heard in ye same asse^blie, may there be and appear in all
safetye, for ye hope that we have by this mean to receive a good and holy
resolution: For this cause we by ye advise of our most honored Lady and mother
the Queen, of our most dear and most beloved uncle the king of Navarre, of
the princes of our blood, and other Lords of our Counsel, have permitted and
do permit by these presents, to all our said subjects, of what estate
quality or condition soever they be, which shall have, as is abouesaid, any
thing to show, may safely, freely, and without any fear, come, appear and be
heard in ye said assembly, which we make to be holde^ here nere unto us in our
town of Poyssy, and there to tarry and soiourne so long as ye same shall endure,
and afterward to return and depart in like safety and liberty, where and as
to the^ shall seem good. And to this end we have by these presents given and
do give to them good and lawful surety, most expressly co^maundyng all
persons whatsoever they be, our subjects or other, not to misdo or missay in
deed nor in word, in any sort whatsoever it be, to them that shall come, as is
aforesaid, to the said assemble, upon peine of ye * with. Enioyning likewise to
those our said subjects which shall come for this entente, that upon like
pains, they behave and order themselves mildely and modestly, and without
stirring up any troubles or seditions. And to ye end that this our prese^te
permissio^, will, and intent may be open and manifest to all men, we will and
command you by these prese^tes, that upon receite thereof, ye cause ye same to
be red and published in all places of your assemblies accustomed to make cries
and proclamacions, to the end that no man pretend excuse of ignorance, and that
they which shall have cause to be at ye said asse^bly may be and appear there in
time.

Given at Saint Germans in Lay ye.xxv. day of July in the year of grace M.
D. Lx. I. and of our reign the first. By the King.
Roberte^.

A brief rehearsal of the doings at Poyssye, betwixt the Lords of the
spiritualty, and the Ministers of the Gospel. Set forth by M. Gallasius.
WHereas there has bin in France these many years, great strife and
contention for religion, ye which has caused much cruelty to be exercised
toward many: at the last, when the authors thereof perceived, that their
punishments little profited, and that thintentes of such as were Godly, were
thereby neither altered nor diminished, they were compelled to assaye more gentle
means, far unlike the first. Therefore in the year of our Lord God. 1561.
Charles, the ninth of that name, a Prince of synguler towardlynesse, and of
great hope, then reigning, the peers of the realm minded tymely to withstand
the peril likely to ensue in so great a discord. For now, their number
increasing which professed the gospel, many ill disposed persons began new
tumultes, and to move sedition. Yea and many openly put themselves in armor.
Some of y^ realm would have the gospel openly preached. Some other, would have
that doctrine as new, and hurtful, to be condemned and abolished.

The first sort, desirous of freedom, and quietness, complained of their
so^dry banishments, murders, imprisonments, and their most miserable estate:
wishing the shame and reproach, wherewith there by they were stained at last to
be purged. The others co^trarywise, wish their punishments double, the
sharpness of the same increased, and all their goods committed to fire and
sweard. And, to prove their good will by their deeds, they brake into their
co^gregatio^s when they could, they robbed their howsen, and finally exercised
all kind of cruelty toward the^. Which unlawful and unbridled lust, when
those that professed the Ghospel, perceiued^ they did more strongly prepare to
withstand them. And many times, with armed force resisted their inuasyons. And
you greater deceites they understood were laid for them, the greater troubles,
and persecutions that they felt: the greater always grew their courages,
thinking that they ought to withstand the furious rage of their enemies, with
patience, and stout sufferaunce. They all agreed it best, to abstain from
force. But neuetthelesse, they meant to provide, that their fear and patience,
should not increase the furye and insolence of their foes. First of al
therefore, whereas, their number was so great, that the congregation could not
assemble within their private howsen: they determined to come together openly,
and to have their sermons and readinges in the open congregations. Partly,
because necessity enforced them thereto, and partly to clear themselves of
such slanderous reports as already, their impudent adversaries had raised of
them. For it was openly bruted, that most heinous and detestable crimes, were
committed in their assemblies. Therefore, they came into the yardes and open
places: some in their private howsen, and some in the open cities. Few took ye
churches. For, least any thing should be rashly or unadvisedly done, or leasr
their adversaries might have any couloure, to accuse them of rebellion: the
ministers and pastors of every Church (as much as they might) kept the
multitude in awe and order yet nevertheless, hereof rose sundry tumultes, and
facrions of their adversaries. Which notwithstanding could not stay or hinder
their open metinges. Hereof rose sundry troubles and great suspicion, and fear
of rebellion. And, this caused at the last, that by the commandment of the
king and his council, it was openly proclaimed that none should injury or
molest other, for any matter of religion. After this also was published an
other, whereby, as well the Bishops, as other nobles of the realm, were
commanded to repair to Poyssye, to deliberate, both for the leauyeng of a
tribute, to discharge the kings dettes to foren Princes, but chefely for ye
reforming of the estate of religion. Thereby also, the kings peace and
safecondwite was granted to all such as would come thither, freely to
propose, whatsoever perteined to true religion; and the establishing of
concord. And it was commanded under pain of death, that no man should trouble
the^ coming together, assembled, or departing but that quietly, and freely,
they might mete together, without trouble or veracion. Shortly after, by an Act
of parliament, in yt which the Bishops and other nobles of the realm, were not
only parties, but rulers: it was decreed under pain of death, that hereafter,
none should make any assemblies, either for preaching, or for ministering of the
Sacraments, or for marriage: other where, than in the Churches, or after any
other sort, than the old and accustomed manner. And furthermore, that within a
certain space, the mynisters that professed the Gospel, should depart the
realm of France. Hereof rose great trouble. Because now their liberty of
coming together taken away, it was likely, to be greatly prejudicial to the
trial of the whole matter. After this the nobles met at Poyssye. Shortly
after, the ministers of the Gospel, came to the court to the king, which then
lay at Saint Germans, nigh to Poyssye. Thither somewhat before; were come certain
chosen men, sent by the reformed churches, out of the.xii. provinces, to
advance religion. These deliberating with the others, determined to offer up
to the king, a book, in manner of a supplication, whereby they would uponsome
means, to disputation and conference. Therewithal also, was given up, the
confession of that faith, which they professed themselves ready to maintain,
and defend. Of that book, the thief points were four.

First, that no Bishops, nor others of the ecclesiastical orders, should
usurp the authoriti of Judges over us. Forasmuch as it behooves rather, that
they themselves should plead their own cause, and stand in trial of
reformation.

Secondly, that the king, Queen, and nobility, should rule the whole doings:
least any trouble might arsie. So that, without contention and strif, all
matters might be handeled and decreed.

Thirdly, that al controversies might be tried by the word of god: whereupon
only, all our faith and religion ought to be grounded.

Fourthly, that certain notaryes and Scribes, should be chose^ of either part
which might faithfully register, whatsoever were done or decreed. Whose notes
should be of no credit, unless they were allowed, and confessed of either
part. These requests no man misliked And the king answered, that he would take
thaduise of his council, and by his Chauncelour shortly make them an answer:
yet the same was long deferred. Because the matter was communicated with the
Bishops, without whose council, or knowledge to do any thing, it seemed not
mete. For, not only for this matter of religion, had the king assembled them,
but also, for the leauyeng of money, to discharge his dettes. They waxing proud
with this confydence, that the king seemed to need their aid: assured
themselves, of the obtaining of any thing against us, nothing doutyng the
assured conquest of Lady money. Furthermore, they tryfled and prolonged the
time, seeking al occasions, to avoid our conference and disputation. For they
said we were already condemned and that they might not dispute with heretykes.
These, and such other like, their accustomed stays, they began to blase,
which nevertheless, afterward they denied. Boasting, that they were ready to
he are us. For they were ashamed openly to refuse our conference, since by their
own consent, we were sent for thither. But they fully persuaded themselves,
that our courage, or constancy would not be such, as to hasard our lives, for
yt speech of our words. During this time our number increased. For out of
every province, not in France only, but also, from all the realms adjoining,
as many, as might, without the hynderaunce of their churches, drew thither.
Wherefore at ye last we chose certain to ye number of.xii. whose names were
these. Augustine Malorat, Frau^ces of Paulon, John Remonde Merlin, John Mallet,
Frau^ces Morel, Nicolas Tolye, Theodore Beza, Claudius Bessierus, John Bodwine,
John Virell. John a Tures. Nicolas Gallasius. To these, John Soma adjoined
himself, which openly renounced papacy, and subscribed to the doctrine and
Discipline of our Churches. Afterward came also, the reverend father in God,
Peter Martyr, sent for from Tigur. Whose coming was scarsely acceptable to our
adversaries, as well for his singular learning, as also for the majesty, and
authority, which both his Godliness, and reverend age have gotten him.

What in this mean time, was don of the Bishops, which were assembled at
Poyssye, I think not good to ouerpasse. For, least any man should think they
were idle, I will show with what grauer matters they were let, so yt they
could not presently hear us. These questions they disputed among themselves.

What ought to be prescribed unto Bishops. Of ye dignities of cathedral
churches. Of the Canonicalls, and their exemptions. Of Curates, and their
institution, either by presentation, or ordinary collatie^. Of assigning them a
Canonical portion. Of ye lesser (that is to wit) the ignorant chaplens, and
their unreasonable number. Of the reformation of monasteryes. What should be
done of co^mendes. Of the number of benefices, and their incompatibility. What
way hereafter they might provide, for churches and Monasteryes in time of
vacation. Whether, there might be any remedy found, for so great co^tronersies
as daily rise of benefyces? Of the excommunicatyo^ and censure of ye Church
and such like. With ye which hard and weighty questions, ye Bishops occupied,
had so little leisure, ye they could scarce findeany time, to employ in the
hearing of us. What means they sought in ye mean time to prejudice our
matter, it is not to the purpose here to tell, I will show only this one. Which
some thought in manner ye prologe, or preamble, of the conference yt should
ensue: yt hereby me^ may know, what credit they ought to give to such rumors
as our aduersariesfalsely spread upon us. For, immediately upon the departure of
Theodore Beza, a rumoure ran, that he being conuycted by the Cardinal of
Lorayne, was turned to the Catholics (as they call themselves) and agreed with
them, as coucerning the Sacrament (as they term it) of ye altar. Of this
tale, what was ye couloure and occasion? I will shortly show. When Beza, the
day after his coming, came to the Queens presence, in the palayce of the king
of Navarre, by whom he was sent for, there being present, the Prince of Conde,
the Cardinal of Borbon and diverse other, the Cardinal of Lorayne emonges
others being there, began to entreat and exhort him, to incline to peace and
concord, saying, that as being abse^t he had troubled the kingdom, so now
being present he might well appease it. Hereto, Beza, first showing, what good
will he had always borne, to the king and his native country: answered, that
he was not of power, to trouble so great a kingdom but much less of purpose
to do it, which might well appear by his wrytinges, hopyng also, that they
should perceive greater proof thereof, in his talk. Then the Queen demanded
of his wrytynges. Wheruppon, the Cardenall taking occasyon, said that he had
a book, publyshed in the name of Beza, in the which he red one horrible
inco^uense^ce, Namely, that Christ, is now so to be lought in his Supper, as
before he took upon him our flesh, and was borne of ye virgin. I have heard
also, (quoth he) that you wrote in a certain book, that Christ, is in such
sort in his Supper, as he is in a dunghill. With these sayings, al those that
were present were greatly offended. But Beza said. As for the books, if they
were present, I might more certainly answer, whether they were mine or no.
But as to the first sentence it may well seem unreasonable as it is rehearsed
of my Lord Cardinal. But well understood, and those things considered, which
go before it, and follow it, we shall find it most true. But ye last is not
only shameful, but wicked also, and blasphemous. And (I am well assured) can
neither be found in my wrytings, nor any others of our part. Over passing
therefore this last, (in the which, whosoever was the author of it, he uttered
to plain and manifest a lie,) the Cardinal returned to the first. It were
very hard (quod he) that we should have no more than those old fathers.
Furthermore, how could Christ's flesh be given, before it was? Then Beza asked
of the Cardinal, whether from the beginning of the world, there had been any
Church? he granted. Also, was not ye same Church, a Church by him, which is
the Mediator betwixt God and man? There to he agreed also. Is not Christ, the
true God and man, the same Mediator? He confessed that also. Then (quod Beza)
the communicating of the faithful with Christ, is not to be limited to y^ time,
in the which in deed, he joined his divinity to our nature. For, that which was
not as yet, by ye course of nature, was always by power and effect present to
the eyes of our faith. Is it not said, that Abraham saw the day of Christ, and
rejoiced? Also Paul says, yt our fathers, did eat the self same spiritual
food, and drunk the self same spiritual drink, out of the spiritual rock
which followed them, which rock was Christ. Hereunto the Cardinal agreed also
and adjoined here to that which is written in the Apocalips, that the lamb was
slain from the beginning of the world. Then Beza entreated somewhat of the
difference of the old and new Testament. From this question (as it haps many
times) they fell into the reasoning, of the presence of the body of Christ in
his supper. We do not agree (quoth the Cardinal) in the exposition of these
words of our Lord. This is my body. I grant (quoth Beza) and I am sorry, yt we
agree no better. But I had rather plainly to grant it, than to dissemble it. I
(quoth the Cardinal) do teach the children of my diocese, when they are
asked, what is the bread of the body of our Lord, to answer that it is the
body of Christ. Do ye disalow that? No (quoth Beza). For it is the saying of
Christ. But, ye question is, after what sort, the bread is called ye body of
Christ. For, of those things, which are said to be, all are not said to be
after one self same sort. And there with, he touched somewhat of the
Sacramental manners of speaking. Wherein the Cardinal did not much repugne
against the sayings of Beza, only against that place (but the rock is Christ)
which Beza cyted, he set this. The word was made flesh. But he was sone made
to leave yt hold. For y^ which is spoken, of a natural and essential communion,
far differs from the Sacramental speech. At ye last this question (quoth
Beza) consists in four points. The first, is of ye signs. The other, of ye
thing signified. The third, of y^ co^ioyning of ye signs with ye thing
signified. The fourth, of the participation of the signs, and y^ things
signified by the^. As to ye first (quoth he) we do not agree, that in ye lords
Supper, you do appoint only accidents instead of the signs. Whereas we
continue there, ye nature of bread and wine as both the nature of Sacraments
requires, and also ye holy Scripture teaches. Here, the Cardinal interrupting
him. Truly (quoth he) I think my self able enough, to defend
transubstantiation. But, I thynk, ye deuines might well enough have left out y^
doctrine. Neither would I, y^ upon yt point, should rest any diursio^ of our
churches. As to ye second point, (quoth Beza), we do not only say, y^ ye merit
of Christ's death and passion is signified unto us, by ye signs of bread and
wine. But also, the true body, that was crucified for us, and the true blood
which was shed for us and to be short, that Christ himself, true God and man,
is signified unto us, by these visible signs, that our minds and
understanding may by faith spiritually behold him in heaven, where he now
ascended, rests. And so, have ye fruition of all his goods and gifts to life
everlasting. And that, as soon, and as surely, as we see, take, eat and drink,
those corporal and visible signs. The Cardinal agreed hereto, signifying yt
he was glad to understand it. For that he had heard before that we taught other
wise. As to the third (quoth Beza) we grant, that there is great difference
betwixt common water; and it wherewith we are washed in Baptism, betwixt bread
and wine which we use commonly, and those which we receive in the Lords
Supper. For the water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords Supper, be
Sacraments: that is to wit, visible signs and testimonies of the body and
blood of our Lord. But this change, we do not admit, in the nature of the
elements. But in this, that they are severed to an other use, far distant
from it, whereto naturally they be appointed. For whereas naturally, they
serve, to the nourishment of the body, when they become Sacraments, they
represent that, which spiritually fedeth and refreshes our souls.
Furthermore, this sacramental change, we attrybute, neither to the Virtue of
the word, which any man pronounces, neither, to his purpose and intention
(as they term it) but to the power and virtue of god. Whose will and ordinance,
is declared to us by his word. In that respect therefore, that the thing
signified, is offered and given unto us of the lord, and that, as truly, as
the signs thereof are given unto us, in that respect, and no other, we
acknowledge the conjunction of the signs, which y^ thing signified. And so
also we say, that ye body and blood of Jesus Christ, in that they are truly
given us, and communicated unto us, to be truly present also, in the use of
his supper, neither yet is it therefore to be said, that that body, is either
under the bread, or in the bread, or with the bread, or in any other place,
than in heaven, to the which Christ ascended. Where according to his humane
nature he remains till he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Then the
Cardinal, once again affirmynge, that he forced not Transubstanciatio^,
said: that Christ in deed, was to be sought in heaven. Nevertheless he mixed
therewith, somewhat of the local presence of Christ and the opinyon of certain
Germans thereof. And so confounded these matters together, that it well
appeared, he had not bin much occupied in that article. Which, he him self
witnessed also, saying that he had spente the most part of his time, in other
business. I grant ye (quoth Beza) that we agree not with certain of the
Germans, in this third article. But in this one thing, the grace of god is
favorable to us al a like, that with on consent, we condemn. Transubstanciation,
and whatsoever depends thereupon. And all alyke grant and confess, the
lively communicating, of the body and blood of Christ. Grant ye then (quoth
the Cardinal) that we in ye supper, do truly, and substanciallye Communicate,
with the body and blood of Jesus Christ? yt remainth (quoth Beza) For the
fourth point: We do say in effect. That the visible signs, which naturally
are eaten and dronken, are touched with our senses, but the thing signified,
namely, the body and blood of Christ, truly, and without any color or deceit,
is offered to al men, but can not otherwise be received but spiritually, and by
faith. For, they be not received, with one hand or mouth. Yet nevertheless,
this communicating is so certain, that it, which we see with our eyes, and
touch with our hands, ca^ be no surer. Although the misery of this communion,
and of the virtue of the holy ghost, nether ca^ by sense be perceived, nor by
the compass of our wit comprehended. The Cardinal affirmed that he was
satysfied with these reasons. And that openly testified to the Queen. Giving
good hope that there should ensue some happy end of this conference. He
entreated also, and desired Beza, that he would oftener talk and confer with
him, of these matters, that so at last, they might make some way to peace and
concord. So, those that heard thereof, were in great hope, of better
success. But therewithal, some came to the Cardinal, willing him to continue
in his first purpose, easily suspecting yt which afterward happened. For, the
next day, there was a rumor spread, not only in the court, but also in Poyssye,
yea and afterward, carried into far countries, that at the first meting,
Beza was overcome, and converted by the Cardinals labor. And to conclude, that
we had now taken the foil. These, and diverse such other tales, (as custom
is,) were forged and spread abroad, which, although they might be confuted with
the witness of many credible persons, yet now at last, in time proving
themselves lies, to their great shame, y^ first feigned them, are vanished
away. When as the time was thus prolonged and no answer made unto us, we came
to the nobles of the realm, and earnestly desired the^, that we might be heard:
Least in ouerpasting so mete an occasion, those, by who^ we were sent, might
seem to sustain any shame or reproach. But chiefly we required, that those
conditions, which we first proposed, might be observed, and that we might not
otherwise couple with our adversaries. But chefely, yt they might not be their
own judges in the matter. And yt whatsoever should happen, might hereafter
appear more certain, we required an answer in writing. Which when it was
denied unto us, we came to ye Queen, desiring and beseching her, to grant to
our requests. There were present, the king of Navarre, ye prince of Conde, ye
admiral, the Chancelour. The Queen answered, yt ye Bishops should in no wise be
our judges. And yt, such thigs as were done, one of the kings secretaries,
should register (which was one of the^, who^, we call secrytaryes of
commandments.) And if we would our selves pen our disputatio^s, we might
lawfully do it. And whereas in decreeing of doctrines we would ground only
upon ye authority of ye Scriptures, yt we might openly proteste. And yt the
king, which had taken us into his tuycyo^, would be present at it, with the
rest of ye nobility. But she commanded us, to do al things moderatly and
wisely, respecting only the glory of God, of the advancement whereof, she
thought us desirous. But that these things should be given unto us in
writing, she thougth it was not expediente for many causes. Nevertheless, she
promised we should have it, if we had need thereof. Willing us to credit no
less her word tha^ her writing. Forasmuch as, if she meante to deceive us,
her writing could not let her. Immediately after our departure, came the
doctors of the Sorbonistes, desiring the Queen, that she would not vouchsafe
to hear us. But if she were determined to hear us, at the least, that she
should not suffer the king to be present thereat. For that, it was great peril
(as they said) least the king in this his tender age, should be seasoned with
unsound doctrine, from the which afterward he should hardly be withdrawn.
And that we, forasmuchas we were already condemned of heresye, were not to be
heard at all. Then the Queen answered, that she would do nothing without
her council. Whereby they well perceived, that the matter was not likely to
pass, as they wished.

Wherefore, though all our demaundes were not granted, yet nevertheless,
because the answer of the Queen, was tolerable, we thought it good, to
take the occasion, least we might seem to detracte the conference. The next
day therefore which was the nynth of September, we came to Poyssye, to the
cloister of Nuns, where the king was, with his brother the Duke of Orleaunce,
the Queen, the king and Queen of Navarre, and the rest of the nobles, with the
whole council, there were present also, the Cardinals, and Bishops,
accompaynyed with a great number of ecclesiast call persons. We ministers, to
the number of xii. and.xx. of those, whom other churches had sent, came in
before them. But, least the people of the town should make any riot upon us,
the kings guard brought us from our lodginges to the Nunnery. As Soon as we
came to the kings presence, and were commanded to speak, Theodore Beza,
(which by ye universal consent was appointed thereto) made an oratyon: in the
which, thankyng God and the King, that now at the last, our cause should he
heard, he showed the causes for the which, we had bin long before expelled, and
unjustly condemned. Furthermore, in what articles, we agreed with our
adversaries, in what others, and how we did differ. And what was the mean, to
appease all troubles and reform religion. Then in few words, he showed the
doctrine of our faith and Sacraments, and bryefelye touched the chief
errors, that have crept into religion, which whiles he handeled gravely
moderatly, and with synguler eloquence, he was heard very diligently of al men,
except when, he treated of the presence of the body of Christ in his supper.
For, when he showed, how, we are made partakers of him in his Supper, and
taught the same to be done, by the power of the holy ghost, which conioyneth and
knitteth, things most far distance in nature: and that Christ, could no
otherwise be received, than by faith: and that he needs not to descend from
heaven, that we may communicate of his body: and that he is not enclosed in the
bread, but remains in heaven, till he shall come to judge the world: or
rather that, as to that corporal presence, he is as far absent from the bread,
as the highest heaven, is distant from the lowest earth: these things I say.
Whiles he handeled, suddenly, ye Bishops began openly to grudge and murmr.
Crying that he spoke shameful blasphemy. Some hissed, some rose, as though they
would depart. And the Cardinal of Turon openly desired, that either he might
be licenced to depart, or we put to silence. They were sorry that before they
could get no occasion, to interrupte our oration. And therefore, it pricked them
at the hearts, yt we were so attentively heard. Neither is it to be doubted,
but either they would have departed, or else violently have runn upon us, unless
the very presence, and authority of the king, had represt their fury. Silence
commanded a new, Beza, gently desired them, that they would quietly hear
what remained. So it might happen, that the matter ended, they themselves
might be satisfied. So he had license to conclude. And not only to declare
the resydue of those things, that pertayne to the fuller declaratyon of
Christ's presence in his supper: but also all such things, as concern the
Ecclesiastical disciplyne, and the duty and authority of officers. This
oratyon ended, the Cardinal of Turon perced with anger, tremblyng, and
freating, counsayled the king to give no credit to our words, nor swerve from
the religion of his auncesters. Wherein that he might obtain his desire, he
prayed the glorious virgin Marye, and the blessed Saints. Then he desired, to
have a copy of our oration, and a day appointed to answer it. Saying, that
he hoped, that our arguments, and reasons should be so fully satisfied,
that if any part thereof stuck in the kings mind, it should thereby,
easily be rooted out. The Bishops took aduysemente with the deuines and
Canonistes, how they might answer our oration. But then the Cardinal of
Lorayne, braste out into these words. Would to God, that either he had been
dumme, or we deaffe.

The matter long weyed emo^ges them, they concluded, not to answer all the
points of our oration, (either because they would not, or could not) but.ii.
only. First, that which we said of the Church and then that which was spoken
of the Lords Supper. Afterward they desired, that they might give up a common
confession, in writing, subscribed by every of them. Which if the ministers
would not allow, they might then proceed with a solemn decree, against them.
And so take away the disputation. From the which polecy, the wysest, and
grauest men abhorring, sharply withstode their purpose. In the mean time, we
determined, to make supplication to the king, that he would not suffer the
conference thus to be broken of, nor the Bishops to be judges in their own
cause. Saying, that we had not yet showed, the proofs of our opynion, but
only symplye and plainly, had drawn the articles of our faith which
afterward, might be more largely handeled, and proved with the testimonies
of the Scripture, if he did suffer the Bishops, to proocede so at their own
will and decree their own cause, it would come to pass, that both he should
be deceived, of his good expectation, and also no remedy hereafter found for
such troubles as do daily grow. This supplication was given to the Chancellor,
who by his prudence, provided, that the conference was not broken of, and that
the Bishops kept, far more moderate and quiet order than they had done before.

The eight day after, which was the xvi. of the same month, the Cardinal of
Loraine answered our oration, and protesting before, that he, and his, would
always submit themselves, to ye kings rule, and would be ready, to obey his
commandment in all points: yet nevertheless, reserved place, for their
wonted immunitie and fredom, whereby, they are wont to quite themselves from all
subjection, and challenge the chief authority. And that he did so suttelly,
that he scarcely seemed, to touch that sore. And pretending a color of
concord, he protested, yt he would gladly receive us, which had swarued from
him, if we would return, and humble our selves to them. To conclude that they
would be, as fathers toward us. If we would show our selves, as children
toward them. These, and such other like, before promised, he said he would
answer only to the Articles of our oration. Whereof the one concerned the
Church, the other the Lords Supper. He ymagined, that we had so defyned y^
Church, as though, the name thereof, had extended no farther, tha^ to the
elect: and therefore largely reasoned against it, showing out of the common
similitudes of the gospel, (in the which, it is compared, to a plat of
ground, and to a fyshers net,) that the name thereof, extended even to ill and
reprobate persons. But he gave it a meruaylous definition: Saying, that the
Catholic Church is it, which is every where known, and of all me^. To the
authority of y^ church, he said, al interpretation of Scriptures and making of
traditions ought to be referred. Saying that the succession, as well of that
Church, as of the pastors thereof, was perpetual but of the Lords Supper, he
so entreated, ye touching nothing at al, of ye change of ye natures of the
elements, he came very nigh to their opinion, which join the body and blood of
Christ, with the elements. And say, that they be both under them, and in them.
Which afterward, we understood, was done for a polecy, partly, to procure
their favor, whom he had so kindly clawed, and partly, to make us the more
hateful to them. Neither yet did he plainly agree with them, but showed that
in this respect, he did willingly join with them, that they might jointly
war against us. The end of his oration, was to this effect. That the king
and his counsel, leaving our opinion, should follow the steps of their for
fathers, and not leave their accustomed usage. When he had ended, we desired
that presently, whiles the memory thereof was yet fresh, we might satisfye his
objections, and refute his arguments. For we feared, least after this the
Cardinals answer, we should scarcely have leisure or liberty afterward to
speak. Because ye day before, many bragged, yt we should look for nothing else,
tha^ condemnation, and the thu^derbolt of excomunication. Neither were we
ignorant thereof. The Queen, taking the advice of her counsel, commanded us to
depart, saying: yt we should answer it an other time, and that she would
appoint us a day when we should be present again. And surely, marvel had it
ben, if the bishops, which were of yt counsel, would have given any other
council. The next day again we desired yt we might be presently heard and ye
time no longer prolo^ged. But we could obtain nothing, neither were we heard,
before the eight day. In ye mean time, false rumors were spread abroad, yt we
were overcome, and put to silence, and had nothing to say. Whereas we were ready
to have answered their oration presently. And how false such tales be, here by
men may sufficiently guess, that the Bishops did what they could, to break of
the conference, so yt at the last, by their importunity they obtained of ye
Queen that the matter should not be openly heard before ye king, but in a more
secret place, before few. Therefore, it was deferred, til the.xxiiii. day of yt
month at the which commanded to return to Poyssye, we came before ye Queen,
ye king and Queen of Navarre, and the rest of ye Lords and counsallours, there
were present also ^. Cardinals, and many Bishops, and diuynes of al sorts:
we the mynisters, were admitted only to the number of xij. Those being severed
which were sent from other Churches, which before were joined with us. For now the
matter was heard, both in narower place, and in less company than before, the
Cardynals of lorayne showed in few words, that this assemblye was to this end,
yt if we would obiecte any thing, against that which he had said eight days
before, we might freely speak, and should be herd. Then Beza, in the name of us
al, said: That he would have wished yt immediatlye he might have answered ye
Cardynalls oration, whiles the same was fresh in memory or at the least, that
he might have had some copye thereof, yt he might, answer certainly and
perfectly to every point, but, forasmuch as he could not obtain that, he
would answer so much as he could call to mind. First there fore, as
concerning the article of the Church, which the Cardinal first handled, he
divided it into three parts.

First, what it is. Then, what are the marks thereof. Thirdly, what and how
great is the authority thereof. It is well known (quoth he) yt this name
Ecclesia. (which signifies the church) is derived from the Greek (...) which
signifies to call from on place to another. Of calling, we find.ii. sorts in
ye scriptures, the one co^ioyned with the working of ye holy ghost: whereof Paul
to the Romans writes, whom he called, them he justified. Romans viii c. xxviii.
The other, although in outward show. It be al one with the first: yet is
altogether unprofitable to salvation. And yt only through the fault of man,
being deaffe at the calling of God. Of this calling, spoke the Lord, when he
said. That many were called but few chose^. Mat. xxii. b. xiiii.
Hereof it happens, yt the name of the church (which signifies the
congregation of those, that are assembled by the word of god) is taken.ii.
ways. For, generally it contains al those, which outwardly profess to
follow the calling of god. Neither is it to be doubted, but many hypocrites,
and reprobate persons are within this number. Neither we thanks be to god
therefore) have at any time, Either written or taught otherwise, for as much as,
both the scripture, and also common experience does plainly prove the same,
but, taking this name of the church proprely, and streyghtlye, (as, many
times we do) we then say, yt it comprehends only the elect and chosen of
god. And, that al men may know, that we be not the authors of this manner of
speech, or of this doctrine, when it is written, that ye church is ye body of
Christ, bones of his bones, flesh of his flesh, yea, when ye name of Christ
it self is given unto it, Ephesians. ii g. xxx.
(as Paul writing to the Corinthians, joining the members with the head,
calls her Christ) i. Cor. xii. b. xii. xvii.
how could in ye number be contained the reprobate, in as much as, they are
the members of the devil? For it cannot be, yt we should be members both of
Christ and of the devil, which Austine writing against Cresconius, well notes
in his second book, and xxiiii. Chapter. He also writing on the.lxiiii.
psalm, used this distinction of the church, saying: y^ that church which is
signified by Jerusalem took her beginning of Abel, and Babylon, of Eain. And
afterward in his first book of baptysme, against ye Donatistes, the second
Chapter, whereas he takes, the name of the church more largely, he says, that
he, that begot Abell, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and the rest of the Prophets,
begot also Cayn, Ismaell, Dathan, and such like. Therefore to conclude, we
must take that which Austine himself wrote in the seventh book of the same
book, the. 51. chapter, which is also rehearsed.xxiiii. ix. i. a. ca. All
things consydred it is said that there are two kind of men in the church.

Some of them (says he) be the members of Christ, and of the house of God,
yea the house of GOD it self. Other some be in the house, but not of the
house. For they be as chafe with the corn, till such time as they be
severed. Hereof ryseth a questyon whether the Church be invisible? Which I
think good to affirm, and to conclude, that only God knows his elect and
chose^. Yet nevertheless we believe yt there is a holy church, which is
conceived, imagined and believed, not seen. For if we should otherwise say,
thereof would ensue yt which is most repugnaunt to reason. For if the church
be unknown unto us, to what flock shall we stickto be pertakers of salvation,
when to the Church only Christ extends his power and salvation? we say
therefore, that although that Church can not be discerned by sight, yet when
we seek to what flock and company we ought to assocyate our selves, there be
certain notes, whereby we may know and discern yesame, namely, the pure word
of god, and the sincere administration of the sacraments. These be the clear
and evident marks thereof, neither is there any doubt, but whatsoever these be,
there is also ye true Church of god. Furthermore, we say: That al those, that
profess true religion, are charitablye to be counted among the number of the
faithful, unless, the lord do plainly detest their hipocrisy and
dessemblynge. Whereof, Paul gives us a manifest president calling the
Corinthians and Galathians faithful, i. Cor. ii. a
and applying to them, the general name of the church, albeit in the^ there
was great imperfection, as well of learning, as life, which in diverse places he
himself complains. For, all those that have any foundation, do not always
build on the same, gold, silver, and precious stones only: but also
oftentimes, hey, chafe, and sedge. i. Cor. ii. c xii.
In this manner and sort therefore, we use to speak of the church, least we
should seem to appoint any fantastical thing or that should consiste in
imaginations only, or least we might give any color, to ill disposed
persons, to deem us such, as were in times past y^ Canthares and Donatistes,
and in this our age are the Anabaptists, against who^, we have often reasoned
about this question. Now let us come to the marks and signs of the true
church, which is necessary to be discerned and known, since out of her is no
salvation. And for that cause Satan, that old enemy of man, has attempted
by all means possible, to disguise and counterfayte her, to change her
ancient signs, and feign new in their places. Her uncertain and undoubted
marks, we have said to be two, that is to went, the pure preaching of the
word and administration of the sacraments. Hereto, do some adioyne
ecclesiastical discipline, and fruits of faith. And truly, it is necessary,
that every flock should have some head and guide who^ they ought to obey, if
they mind to live in safetye: but forasmuch as our own iniquities, often
times are the cause, that we want ye two last marks, let us content our selves
with the first.

Therefore, that the word of god is the certain sign of the church, herby
it appears, that both Christ and Peter compare the same to seed. Mat.
xiii. a. iii iiii. xi. i. Pet. i. d.
For the which cause also, Paul says, that he begat the Corinthians in
Christ, by preaching the word. i. Cor. iiii c. xv.
Therefore in diverse places, it is called one food and nouryshemente: this
also Christ himself witnesses to pertayn to his sheep, saying: that they
hear his voice and no others. John. x.


We adioyne hereto the Sacraments also, for that Christ would not only, to
our ears, but also to our eyes, and the rest of our bodylyesenses witness
his grace. And therefore, he ordained the Sacraments, to be certain and
visible signs, both of our union with him, and also of charity and love
among our selves. For that cause, during the old Testament it was said, that
they should be banyshed the company of the faithful, which had not the
sign of cyrcumcision. And furthermore decreed, that all householders should
thrice in the year, appear before the Lord, at Jerusalem, by common
sacrifyce, to testifye the unity of faith and religion. Exodus xxxiiii. d.
xxiii.
Afterward, the Vyneyarde being spoiled, the Gentyles grew in one body with
the Jews, not only by preaching the word, but also, by the Sacraments of
Baptysme, and of the body and blood of our Lord. Yea, and Christ commanded
his Apostles so to do, saying: go ye, and teach all nations: Mat. xx. ^ xix.
This is the doctrine of the word, to the which he forthwith adioyneth the
Sacraments, saying: Baptysing, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy ghost.

For, to baptism also, must we apply that, which Paul writes of the supper,
saying: that what he received of the Lord, he delivered to us. i. Cor. xi. c
xxxii.
And the same he testifies in an other place also. Namely, that the Church is
founded upon the foundation of the prophets and the Apostles: Ephe. ii. d xx.
that is to wete, upon Jesus Christ, who is the sum and substance of all the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets. So also must we understand another
text of the same Apostle. Where he says, that the Church is a pillar of the
living God, a bolster of truth. i. Timo. iii. d. xv.
Which means, that the word of God, which is the truth it self, does
stay and uphold the church, or else is placed in ye church, as in an open and
sure fortress, for y^ in her god extends his power and health to all
beleuers, Romans i
these are the true and visible signs of the church. Which therefore is
called the mother of the faithful, for that they were begotten in her, by
incorruptible seed, and nouryshed, and fed with the same fode. If the
preaching of the word, and the true administration of the sacraments, be
necessarily required in the church, the^ must there needs be pastors and
teachers to execute the same. As the holy scriptures sufficientely witness,
but chieflye Paul writing to the Corinthians and Ephesians, this was the
cause, that this third mark was adjoined hereto. i. Cor. xii. d. xxviii.
Ephe. iiii vi. xi. i. Timo. iii. a Ti^. i. a vi.
Namely, ordinary succession, from the time of the Apostles. Hereto we answer,
that such succession is much to be esteemed, if it be well considered, and
applied after the example of the ancient fathers, who grounded thereon against
heretics, and there new opinions. As Tertulian, Ireneus and Austine against
the Maniches and Donatistes, but because many lay the same against us, as
though we had conveyed into the churches new scismes and heresies, it is
necessary, that we should show our mind herein. We say therefore, that there
is one succession of doctrine, an other of persons. Doctrine we grant to be
the true and undoubted mark of the church as it has been already said. For,
although the doctrine of the Gospel, be not therefore the more to be
credited, for that it is the auncientest of all other (though it happen many
times for our sins, that the same seem so new and strange to men, as it
ought to be familiar and usual) yet nevertheless, the witness of the
continual succession thereof, is of no small force, to win it authority
among men. As to the succession of persons, we admit it, but so that it
be conjoined with the succession of the Prophetical and Apostolyke doctrine,
in substance and the chief points and grounds atleaste. But, we speak of
the doctrine it self, not of their manners. For, albeit, it be required, of
true and faithful pastors, that in doctrine and life they be sound and pure,
yet for the ignorance of some things, or for the diversity of opinions in
doctrine, so that it stretch not to the substance of our salvation, or though
there life be not of the perfectest, yet for these things we do not reject
them, but bear them. So they keep the ground and foundation. And that we
ought so to do, Christ teaches us, saying: that when the Scribes and Pharisees
sitting in Moses chair teach us, we ought to follow their doctrine, and not
their deeds. Mat. xxiii a. ii. iii.
Which place, Austine writing upon John, says: ought to be understand of
such hyerlyng pastors as keep the sound doctrine, but not of false
Prophets, of whom Christ contrarywyse said. August. tracta. xlvi
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. Mat. xvi. a. vi. vi. xi
While they sit (says Austine) in the chair of Moses, they teach the
law of God, and so god teaches by them. But if they teach their own
doctrine, neither hear their words, neither follow their deeds. That also
the same author expresses more at large, in his xlix. Sermon, of the words
of the Lord. Forasmuch as therefore, false Prophets and wolves may succeed
to true and faithful pastors, we do not only, not admit personal
succession, but even condemn it, unless the succession of doctrine be joined
with all, because it is a meet cloak for any lie or error. Furthermore if
personal succession of it self should be taken for a certain mark of ye
church, there ought to have been some promis of god showed whereby he has limited
his grace to any certain sea or country. Which in the new Testament, we shall
not find. In deed he promised, that the church should be Catholic, that is
to were, universal, which is so called, for that the particular members
thereof, are here and there, dispersed throughoute the whole world. Whersoeuer
it pleases god to show his judgments, either upon those, who^ he utterly
cutteth of, or whom he chasteneth for a time, or in showing mercy to them, who^
he furthereth better and better, or whom he calls to his knowledge and
salvation. For in some places, the Lord justly revenging himself so destroys
the church, that he seems even to root it out, and not to leave so much
as any sign thereof, as it happened among the barbarous nations and in the most
part of all the East. Otherwhere, as in Greece, and other realms more nie to
us, he has left some tokens of the church. Again, sometime the Lord does
cut and break of, only the personal succession of pastors: as it happened at
Antioche, in the time of Samosatenus, and at Alexandria after the banishment of
Athanasius, and in many other churches. And, that we need to seek no further:
the personal succession, then at the least failed in the Roman church, when
Honorius being bishop, was condemned for the detestable heresy of the
Eutichians. And so likewise in the time of John, the. xxii of that name, who
was also condemned for heresy. Unless perhaps some man will maintain, that
those that are manifestly condemned of heresye, be pastors. Furthermore in
what case this succession stood under John the she Pope, through the scismes
and co^tentions of diverse, striuyng for the Popes sea, the histories
sufficientlye witness. Wherefore we conclude, that not respectyng the personal
succession of pastors, we must always have regard to the pureness of
doctrine, and the sincere administration of sacraments so that they only be to
be counted successors of the Apostles, which being lawfully called, do
build upon their foundation. Whether they derive their succession from them,
or whether the same have failed. And contrarywyse, they that neither build nor
teach, or preach their own doctrine instead of the Apostles, although they
were able to show never so many and continual presidentes of their
predecessors, are not to be taken for pastors, but to be shu^ned as wolves, as
Christ and his Apostles teach. Some manne parhappes will obiecte. Is it
therefore lawful for any man to teach, and mynyster the Sacraments? no. For
it behooves (as the Apostle says) yt al things be done in the house of God,
ryghtly, and orderly. i. Corint. xiiii. g. xi.
Who then shall be taken for true pastors? they which are lawfully called.
It remains then, that we understand, what is a lawful calling And here I
must crave attention. For we say that some calling is ordynarye, and some
extraordinarye. Ordinarye is it, in the which is observed the order appointed
by GOD in his church. In that order these three things are chiefly required.

First the examination of his doctrine and life that shall be ordained, the^ a
lawful choice and election. And lastly the laying of hands. And these we all
gathered out of diverse places of the scripture. As out of the Acts of the
Apostles, and the writings of Paul to Timothe and Titus. Ac. i. d. xii Ioh.
vi. a. vi. i. Tim. ii. a. ii. et. iii. d. xxii. Titus. i. a. vi
This therefore is the ordinarye calling. Whereby we may well discern which
is it, that we call extraordinarye. Namely it, that wa^teth some one, or other,
or al these conditions, and yet the same grounded upon the authority of God,
and lawful. That god used such extraordinary callyngs, it plainly appears
throughout the whole scripture. For who laid hands upon Moses, that he might
consecrate Aaron? Who gave the gift of Prophecye, to Esaias, Danyeil, Amos, and
the rest? Exodus. xxviii. Esa. vi. b. xciii. Dani. i. c. ^vii. Amos. vii xiiii
Yea, was not this given them, when they, that ordinarilye had the charge
thereof, abused it? For then it was necessary, that god should put to his
hand extraordinarilye: not to trouble or confound the order of his church,
but to correct them, which under the pretense of ordinary succession,
dissordred all. This well prove the writyngs of the Prophets, which most of al
pertain to y^ orders of the priests. Ps. xxviii vi. vii. Iere. vii. a. iiii
et. xxiii. a. xi. Ezec. xxii e. xxvi. Soph. iii. a. iiii.
But if it be objected, yt such men gave some certayntye, of their vocation,
as either some miracle, or some heavenly sign: I grant the same to be true in
some, but not in all. Neither can any man say otherwise, unless he will plainly
deny ye truth. Neither do Iwel know, whether we shall find many prophets of
the stock of Aaron, or upon whom, after the ordinary manner, hands were laid.
But if any man will take this exception, that those prophets used only to
rebuke vice and went no farther, but abstained from sacrifice: I au^swer yt
that is not true in all. For Samuel, which was not of the stock of Aaron,
sacrificed in Mispa: And Elias of Galaad, in y^ mount Carmelus. i. Samu. vii.
c. ix i. Regum xviii. f. xxvi.
Then is it not to be marvelled, yt the prophets of that time would extend
their office so far, as to circumcise and sacrifice, whereas that by
enheritaunce appertayned only to the tribe of Leuy? But such enheritaunce at
this day has no place: thus you see, what we call the church, what we think
of her marks: and of the calling of pastors in her. Which if you please to
apply, to our Churches, or to our selves we hope, that by the help of god,
we shall show such proof, and witness thereof, out of the holy scriptures, as
no man shall have any occasion to doubt thereof. And that, both according to ye
word of god, and also to the writings of that godly man Austyne, at the least
in that treatise, which is reckned among his works, and entitled of. 65.
question the last question. Now let us speak of the authority of the church.
By that, which we have already spoken, it appears, that we derogate from her
none of those hye and precious titles, yt the holy ghost does give her, but say
that she is the body of our lord, obtaining the same here only in part, til
such time, as joined to her head, she shall fullye and perfectly enjoy the
same. Heb. xi. c. xv i. Co. i. a. vii. i Cor. xiiii vi. v. Ep. iiii. c. xv.
She is the house of god, but such as is daily put of and increased. She is
ruled by ye spirit of god, but as yet she stri^eth against ye flesh. Gala. v.
c. xvii.
She is cleansed and washed but so, that by little, and little, she shall be brought
to that perfect beautye, in the which there shall be no spott, no wrinkle. Ep. v.
f. 25 i Co. 3. c. 4
She knows god but only in part. And in these our manners of speech, we wish
the Apostles words to be weighed, to conclude, we grant, that there is no
salvation without the church. For there is no salvation but in Christ Jesus. i.
Ihon. v. c. xi. John. iii. c. xviii.
And Christ does no where extend his salvation, but in those members, whose
congregation, and communion is called the church, but it is doubted, whether
she may err in this world, whether we be subject to the scripture, or else
her authority excede the same. We answer, that her several members may
err, and daily fall and fail, as well in doctrine, as in life, according to
the saying of Paul. In part we know. i. Cor. xiii c. ix.
Also John says: If we say yt we have no sin, we deceue our selves and
there is no truth in us. i. John. i. d. viii.
Wherefore if any man will go about, to except the doctors from this number,
let him pardon us, that we believe him not. For we could easily show many
authorityes, wherein do appear ye manifest errors of the best learned, and
most ancient doctors. Be it spoken with their leave and favor, whom as well
for their singular learning, as also for their passing pity, we do much
reverence. Neither truly, my L. Cardinal, (if I well understood him) does
admy^ the^ without judgment. This therefore is our opinion of y^ members of y^
church severally, whose inperfection is not so material, but yt the church may
consist of the^. For, by little and little, they daily profit and increase, as well
in amending of their lives, as encreasi^g their learning. But now considering
y^ parts of the Church more generally, as dividing it into several diocesses,
and provinces, shall we say yt they may err? That they both may err, and also
have erred, my L. Cardinal (if Iwel remember) has already granted. And ye same
is also confirmed with so great and long experience, yt no wise man may well
doubt thereof. It remains therefore to consider the whole and universal
church. But first we must see in what sort. For if we consider it, as it is
represented by some general counsel, assuredly we must not think, yt the whole
power, yt ye holy ghost exte^deth to yt church, is restrained to any certain
number of bishops, which oftentimes, are neither the best learned, nor best
livers. For how often happens it, y^ some one private man, passes ye best
learned, yea and sometimes ye whole counsel in wit and knowledge? For this cause,
long since it has bine written, yt better credyte is to be given, to any
pryuate man grou^ding a better reason, tha^ either to any cou^celor or pope.
glo. in. ca. significasti de.elect. i ibi. pauo
And hereof their is a notable example in the council of nyce. For what
stayed, that ye prohibition of marriage. Which has bred so much filthynes in yt
church, had not then bine stablished and decreed? only paphumtius as the
history records with stood it. Or what convocation of any general council
hitherto has been so larg, but that a great number of holy and learned men,
yea and of the worthyest bishops, has been ouerpassed therein? And who will
affirm yt nothing more is reveled to those yt are absente, than to those that
are present at the counsel? Furthermore you are not ignorante, what horrible
confusion there has been, and is at this present in the church, and chiefly
among those that sit in highest comes. So that ye Church of god, even there
where it should be most pure and perfect, does appear most confuse and
desolate. And long time has this wretched case continued, there yet remain so
many grievous and leude complaints of good bishops, on ye same: yt the sou^de
of the^, seems eue^ now prese^tli to pea^re ^yne ears. What in his time, Be^a
had wrote in his books, de consideratione et sermon, 33 ch* upon the Lan^a
Lan^corum* also in his sermon of ye co^uersio^ of Paul, it is no less common,
than true. Alas, alas, o lord god, they are chief in perse^i^g yt* which seem
to be chefest in thy church, and to bear ye greatest rule therein. They have
take ye castle of Sion: they have won y^ m^nicions, and now freely, and by
commandment, they ^o^sume with fire the whole city* These things we speak
not in reproach of any ^a^, but to show, yt for as much as yt chef calli^g in ye
church are confounded, and gone astray, it can not be proved, that ^ vn^uersal
counsels, (which have bin assembled many times, of a multitude of me^ most
unfit therefore,) are so guided with y^ grace of y^ holy ghost, yt they may not
err. The old priest (of whom I would make no mention, but y^ his example is
commonly aledged for yt proof hereof) although he were vicious and wicked, did
prophe^cye, ^ ^r^tel, yt it was necessari yt on man should die for y^ people,
least the whole nation should perish. But nevertheless, his decres, or counsel
is not therefore allowed, as though he had rightfullye condemned Christ. For the
holy ghost prophesied it, and not he, which understood not what he spoke. For he
was styrred with a contrary spirit, and altogether deuillishe For he gave
judgment against the innocent Christ, y^ son of god. Furthermore, if this
privilege be given to general councels, yt they cannot err, either in y^ rule
of doctrine, or form of life, we would fain know, at what time this was done
For there was always one faith, and one church. Ephe. iiii a. v
In the old church and under the old testamont the histories and prophets
witness, y^ errors were commonly taught and received. All their spies (says
Esaias) be blind, their dogs be du^me, not able to bark. Psa. lvi. d x.
Also Jeremy: Both prophet and priest, do all forge lies Iere. vi. ^ xv.
And least you should think yesame to be referred to ye lives of private
persons it in written in yesame prophet: the prophets prophecy falsely in my
name. Ier. xiiii. c. xiiii.
For I sent the^ not, neither did I command them to speak, neither did I speak
unto the^, but lying visio^s, diuinations, yea nothing, or y^ dece^s of their
own heart, they prophecy unto you. Also Esai: ye wisdom of y^ wise shall perish,
and the wit of ye witty shall hide it self. Ps. xxiiii. c. xiiii.
Also Ezechiell: The law shall perish from ye priest, and council from ye
elders. Ezec. vii. g. xcvi.
Furthermore, who condemned ye prophets, as Jeremy, Michae, yea and the son of
god himself, and his Apostles, but y^ councels of ye priests of Israel? If any
man answer, yt these things happened under y^ old testament, we will reply,
that he does not satisfy our reason, nor speak any thing to y^ purpose. For
not with ^ding y^, his conclusion remains That y^ cau^s^ls of ye prelates,
albeit they were universal, were oftentimes ruled rather with y^ spirit of error
tha^ of god. But that we may com to the new testament, did not Paul specially
warn yt church, writi^g to ye Ephesia^s, y^ wolves should com from among
the^, Act. xx. ^. xix.
and that ye son of perdition should sit in y^ temple of god? ii. Thessa ii. a.
iiii.
And truly if we weigh ye counsels seuerallye, we shall find so much repugnant
and co^trariety in the^, yt we must needs confess yt the holy ghost ruled the^
not, but Satan, which long since knows how to tra^sform himself into an
Angel of light. There is a place very manifest in Austine, as concerning this,
in his second book of Baptism against the Donatistes, the third Chapter,
wherein he plainly shows, that the writings of several Bishops, are amended
by particular councels. And prouiniciall Synodes by universal. And universal
counsels reformed by others after, when by experience that is detected, which
before was hidden, or that disclosed, which before was covered. Where Austyne
does not entreat of the outward form, but of the doctrine, and of the
Aphricane council, wherein they did deliberate, whether they ought to be
Baptized again, that had bin Baptized of hereti^es. There will perhaps be
objected an other reason, common enough, namely, that Christ did promise, as
often as.ii. or three are gathered together in his name, to be himself in the
midst of the^. Math. vi, viii. c. xx.
And therefore much more he would be present at a general council. We grant
ye, that may well be presumed, but far differs a presumption from a necessary
conclusion. For, such is the naughtiness of men, yt they abuse the name of
God, to the decreeing of their own lies. And they often times have the name of
God most in their mouths, whose hearts ar enemies and haters of God. i. Cor.
xv. c. ix.
And whereas the weakness of man's wit is such, as daily experience
proves, and many are blinded with noughty affections: We say that those that
ground on no other foundation, than the judgment of men, and color of a
council, are in great peril. How then? Thynk we that the doctrine of the
Church is vncertam for yt she may err? No. For we grant, that although we
know God only in part as Paul says, and in that respect, error is mingled
with the truth, yet God did never permit, that ye chief, and substantial
points were wholye overthrown and buried. For alway^s he has reserved to
himself a flock, some times greater, and sometimes lesser, to speak and
understand those things, which it behooves, both to understand and speak.
As in Elias time in Israel. Also in the captivity of Babilo^, and about the
coming of Christ. At which time, scarce Zacharias only, Elizabeth, Joseph,
the virgin Marye, Simon, and Anne the Prophetess^ remained, that knew God: and
among^ so great corruption of the Scribes and Pharisees, did truly understand
ye fulfilling of the Prophecies. Suthe breaches which happen in the church of
God for our sins, be as it were tempests, which afterward the Lord
calmes, and like clouds, which vanish away at the rising of the son. Do
we then condemn the old councels? God forbid. For if by their decrees
things should be reformed, you know that you should be compelled to
change more than we. Only this we desire, that the scripture may be to us as
a touchestone, whereby all things ought to be allowed, that are done or
spoken in the church. Which if any man think unreasonable, let him read
that famous saying of Austine, writing to Maximinus the Arian in his second
book and.xiiii. chapter, where he entreats of the counsel of Nice and
Ariminum. For I think there is no council, that may rather be called
universal, than the first council of Nyce. And contrariwyse, all men
confess, that the council of Ariminum, ought worthily to be rejected and
condened. Upon what occasion does Austine talk of those two councels? About
the controversy of an article of our faith, now confirmed and established.
Namely, the consubstantialitie of the son of god. And yet nevertheless,
Austine professes, that he would neither ground^ on the council of Nyce nor
yet of Ariminum, But would be tried by ye scriptures, which ought to be the
proves on either part. If any man object the darkness of the scripture, we
will grant that, which Paul says, that the natural man, does not
perceive those things which proceed from the spirit of god. i. Cor. ii. d
xiiii.
Also we with Peter say, that the scripture is not of private interpretation.
ii. Pet. i. d xx.
But if y^ darkness of it be such, yt it cannot light our minds, why does
Christ refer us only to these scriptures, to take counsel of the^? Search ye
ye scripture, says he* Ioh. f. xxix.
Also when Abraham was desired of yt rich and unhappy man, y^ was tormented in
hell, that he would send some manne to warn his brethren: he answered, they
have Moses and the Prophets. If they believe not them, neither if any manne
should rise from death, would they believe him. Or how did they, which had the
writings of the Apostles only, when neither books, nor commentaries were
written of the same. But whereas my Lord Cardinal would have that taken for an
Apostolic tradition, which has been received of the church at al times, in
all places, and of al men. I see not, how these. iii. points may be proved.
For how great diversity shall we find, in the books of ancient fathers, yea,
and even in the very articles of our faith? If these words should be weyed
(at all times, and of all men) where shall we beginn, but at ye Apostolic
church? Who shall be first in order, but only the Apostles? Whose lives and
doings, are partly, faithfully written by Luke, and partly, gathered out of
their own writings.

To be short, we return at the last, to the first foundation of the
scriptures, since all truth came from god, who commanded the prophets and
Apostles to be interpreters and messengers of our salvation. In the mean
time we do not reiecte the councels of the fathers, as far as they be
confirmed with the testimonies of the holy scripture. For them, as Austine
says, the holy^ ghost has so tempered, that it which in some place is
obscurely spoken, in some other is expressed more plainlye, and more at large.
And that rule chiefly among others he gives, whereb^ we may understand the
scriptures, i^ that book which he wrote of christian doctrine, yet there
remains some doubt in this question. Some me^ hau^ thought, that the will of
God in these things which pertain to our salvation, is not fullye declared
in those writings, which the Prophets and Apostles have left unto us.
Which doubt if it should take any place, what a gap were there opened to all
mischefe? And certes, this was ye breach, by the which, Satan first pierced
into ye vine yard of the lord, to destroy it. God truly before the tune of
Moses, with visio^s and reuelatio^s, directed his church: and in like manner
yeapostles before they put their doctrine in writi^g, taught yesame by word of
mouth. But because ye number of men increasing, their noughtynesse increased
also, the lord would, y^ this doctrine should be contained in writings and
monumentes. Which might be understood and perceived of al men, why so? that
he might confou^d the impudence and rashness of such, as will set forth and
cloak their dreams, with the name of tradition, revelation, and custom. But
if the doctrine of god be written only in some part, to what purpose is this
remedy? Truly it can not be so. John spoke of the scriptures, when he says,
that those things which are written, are written to that end, yt we believing
them, may have life everlasting, John. xx. ^. ^xi.
which he had falslye said, if they themselves had concealed any doctrine
necessary to life and salvation. But Paul, when he declares the use of
scripture, and under the person of Tymothe teaches all ministers, if any
thing should have been added to ye scriptures, wuld not have affirmed, that by
them, the man of god is made perfect. i. Timo. ii. d. xvi.
Neither do we deny, but y^ at all times there have been somtraditions of the
apostles, which be not written. But those were such, as pertained to the civil
order of the church. But forasmuch as, many men have abused this name this
great while, I think good to show, what traditions ought to be counted
Apostolic. Which shall not be hard, if in iudgyng and discernyng them, we use
the marks. For, first we must consider, whether they do agree with the
doctrine of the word, and then, whether they be apt and meet to edify^.
For it is certain, that the Apostles did never institute any rites and
ordinances, which either directly, or else in any part, were contrary to
their own doctrine: or might withdraw men from spiritual worshippyng,
whereof their own wrytynges bear sufficient record. If this rule be
observed, both doctrine shall easilye be discerned from traditions, and also
false traditions, from ye true. Neither are you ignorant how foolish
Tertullian judges their opinions, which think, yt ye apostles have ouerpassed
an^thi^g, necessary to salvation, which either by word of mouth or writi^gs they
have not taught. but we will add more hereto. Namely yt those things, which
herein ye Apostles decreed, were not continual. Truly their instytutions
pass all exception, yet nevertheless, by ye rule of charity, they yielded
somewhat to ye weakness of men. As when the eating of suffocatoru^ and blood,
was forbid the Jews. Also, those things, which Paul himself taught, and
observed in Timothe, and his own person. Ac. 15. f. 25. Act. 16. a. ^ i Co. 16.
d. xxix. i Co. 11. a 7
Which now truly should have no place, but by the general rule of charity,
whereby, we are willed, in things indifferent, to apply our selves to our
neighbors. Other such like, may be gathered of their rytes, as of kissing
uncovering the head, which was the sign of authority, and other such like,
which at this day are contrary to y^ customs of many nations, among who^,
it would seem most folish, ye men should kiss, ye one the other: and to talk
with ye head uncovered, is commonly a sign of y^ lowest state and condition.
These things therefore ought to be considered, before any custom be thought
Apostolyke.

Also no man must ground upon the authority of the Apostles, to trouble the
church: As it happened in the co^trouersye of ye day, in ye which Easter should
be kept, which bred miserable division, and eue^ in the Apostles time, by
those yt did abuse ye authority of the church at Jerusalem, to myngle
Iewishnesse with Christian religion. Of whom it is written in ye Acts of the
Apostles, where it was decreed by a council, that no man should lay yt yoke on
men's co^scie^ces. Whereby, it may easily be perceived, yt the Apostles could
not be the authoures of so many ceremonies, to the which afterward:
Satisfaction, merits, and remission of sins were attributed. For they taught
far otherwise. And so much they dissented from making new ceremonies, that
they gave no place to those of Moses law, of the which God was the author. Of
this yoke of traditions and obseruances. Austine long since writing to
Ianuarius, much complained, if he had lived in our time, how would he have
lamented the^? Wherefore to be short, we desire, that the Scripture, which
herein is plain, may judge good traditions from evil, holy from profane,
profitable from hurtful, and necessary from superfluous. When of these
articles we are once agreed, this question shall easily be dissolved, whether
the authority of the church be greater, tha^ of the word of god, which
certes is no less fond, than if a man should doubt whether the so^n ought to
be above his father, the wife above her husband, or man above god. And sure,
never ye true church, or any godly man, would move such a doubt, but will
willingly submyt himself to her judgment. Nether does it make against us, yt
the church was before ye word. For it is most certain, that the word which
afterward was put in writing, is much more ancient. For by it was ye church
co^ceued, born and bred. But this saying of Austine, is not to be ob^ected, yt
he wuld not believe ye scripture, unless ye authority of ye scripture moved him
thereto. But we must understand, y^ in yt place, Austine spoke of himself, as of
a Maniche, we whose error he was once seduced. I pray you, if there rise any
doubt of ye truth of any writing, to who^ go we to try it, but to y^ common
notary, to whose custody, al writi^gs and momuments are committed. Neither
therefore does it follow, yt the authority of the writing depends on the witness
of ye notarye. For of it self it is true though no mortal man bear witness
hereof. So truly must we answer the^, which thynk, y^ the authority of ye
holy scripture, depends upon ye co^stitutio^s, and decrees of ye church. The
decrees of of yt councils are many times contrary in this question. But all
these things shall be more fullye opened in disputation and consere^ce. I will
show only reason, confirmed with ye authority of certain ancient and allowed
fathers. Christ himself, gave so much authority to the doctrine of ye prophets,
whom he had sent before, that by their witness he would confirm his doctrine.
Paul also, suffered ye Thessalonia^s so to do, and willed the^ to search ye
scriptures, to know whether he had taught the^ truly. Ac. xvii. c. xi.
Peter allowed that selfsame reason. ii. Peter. ii. d. xix.
They therefore, which boast the^selnes to be ye vicars of Christ, and the
successors of Peter and Paul, ought not to refuse yesame co^ditio^. Ca. ix.
li. ii.
Truly Jerome upon Hieremy, says: yt nether ye error of ye fathers nor of our
auncesters, by ye authority of the Scriptures is to be followed. Chrisofto^ upon
the.xxiiii. Chapter of Matthew the 49. Homelye, erpounding this place. Those
that be in Jury, let them fly to the mountains, says: that is, those yt be
Christians, let the^ fly to the Scriptures. And again. Wherefore does he in
this time, will al Christians to fly to the Scriptures? Because in this time,
since heresy invaded the church, there can be no other proof of true
Christendom, neither any other refuge for Christians minding to know the true
faith, but ye divine Scriptures. For before, it appeared by many signs, which
was the church of Christ, and which it of ye Gentiles. But now whosoever will
seek it, can by no other means discern which is the true church of Christ,
but only by the Scriptures. Also he says further. If a man therefore be
wylling to know the true church of Christ, how should he know it in so great
co^fusyon, but only by ye Scriptures? Yet further therefore ye lord knowi^g yt
there should be so great co^fusio^ in ye latter days, therefore does Christ
co^mau^d ye those yt be in christianitye and such as be willing to stre^gthe^
themselves in (...) faith, (...) (...) ^o other thing but the Scriptures.
Otherwise if they ^p^e any other changes, they shall likely ^ (...), and ^sh,
not understanding, which is the true church and so shall they fa^ (...) (...)
(...) of defolatio^, which (...) y^ holy places of the church. (...) in his
moralls writes thus. If, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, (as the Apostle
^ayth) and faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God:
whatsoever is besides Scripture inspired of God, is ^n. Also, in the Sermon of
the confession of faith. If God be faithful in all his words and his
commandments ^me and stable, for ever, done in truth and justice, to reject
any thing that is written, or to bring in any thing not written, is a sweruing
from faith and manifest pride. Thus much was spoken of the church, her signs,
authority and succession before the Lords, and Bishops, and diverse other,
which heard the same very attentively. But because his oration had bin already
somewhat long, it seemed good then to entreat nothing of the supper. Wherefore
Beza medestly excusing himself, and declaryng also, that we were ready to show a
reason of yt article, and as much as lay in us to satisfy the^, if they would
command us forthwith to do it. When Beza had ended, ye Cardynal beckned to
Spensa to speak, and to answer our reasons. He protestyng with many words,
that he had long wyshed for this conference, and disputation, and yt he never
lyked always contrary to those cruel punishments, which had long times been
used toward them, answered that those things were true, which we had said of
the church, her signs and succession. If we had so taught, and spoken at ye
first, we should never have neded to have come to this controversy. But whereas
we spoke of ye calling into the church, he much marvelled, by whose
authority, or by what calling we entered into the church, and took upon us to
teach. Forasmuch as we were not instituted by any ordinaryes, neither they at
any time had laid their hands upon us. And hereof he gathered, y^ we were no
good pastors For by ordinary means (quoth he) you were not called, and much
less by extraordinary. For extraordinarye vocation, must be proved either by
miracles, as the calling of Moses was, who was raised up of God, to deliver his
people: or else by the witness of the scripture, as ye calling of John, whose
vocation is plainlye proved by a terte of Malachye, you want both. Whereof it
follows, that your ministerye is unlawful. But as concerning tradytions, and
the interpretyng of ye scryptures, if there rise any controuersye, we ought to
refer it (quothe he) to the ordinary successors: as those, to who^ the holy
ghost is promised, and are appointed of God for the same cause.

He brought forth the exaumples of the old Priests and Levites, which in
times paste, in doubtful matters gave ye people counsel, and to whose
judgment, the people were so bound to stand, that from their decree, it was
not lawful for them to swerve, neither on the right hand, neither yet on the
left. And that we had many things by tradition, which no man doubts of,
no, not we our selves. As y^ the father is without beginning, ye son equal in
substance to him, also yt young children ought to be Baptized, that Mary was a
virgin after her deliverance, and such like. So he affirmed, that those
things, which are descended unto us from the ancient fathers, albeit they be
not written, yet are certainelye to be believed, and no less to be allowed,
than if they were confirmed by the authority of the Scriptures. That whatsoever
is decreed by general councels is certain, and that they can not err in
doctrine. But as to that, which is cyted out of Austine, that the first
counsels ar amended by the later, that he said never was in doctrine. That
there were only three kept before Austines time* The Nicene council against
the Arrians, ye council of Constantinople against the Macedonia^s, the first
counsel of Ephesus against Nestorius, none of ye which was afterward amended.
He denied the history of Paphuntius, as a thing doubtful to be credited and
further said that it perteined not to the purpose. At ye last to give the
Cardinal occasion, which seking by all means to break of the conference,
willed him to entreat of the supper: he came to that question, and with few
words entreated, of the presence of the body of Christ in ye bred. And he red
to us, certain places out of the books of Calvin, ^aling nevertheless the
name of the ^tour, saying that he ^erua^led, if we would swerve from him, to
whom we give most authority above the rest, and about ye end of his tale, he
gave us those places to read.

Before we answered Spensa, a Monk of that order, yt are clothed all in white,
whose name they say was Xantus, stepped forth, enflamed with desire of
conte^tion. And as though he were aggrieued that Spe^sa had talked somewhat
gravely, and modestly, began to power out his stomach and not able to stay any
longer, wuld not let us answer, til we had first heard him. Then, he began to
repeat those things, which Spe^sa had already spoken at large sawcig yesame we
scoffs and tauntes, which he seemed to esteem, as yt greatest ornaments, and
grace of his talk. For us he compared, both to other ancient hereti^es, and
also to the Anabaptists, but at the last he became so mad, yt abusing ye
authority of ye au^cie^t fathers, he affirmed, yt the fou^dati^ of y^
traditions is more sure, than of the scripture. For ye scriptures (quoth he)
may by diverse interpretations be wried sundry ways. And yt Ciprian, with the
rest of the Aphricans, was deceived in this, yt they said. Christ says not, I
am yt custom. But, I am the way, truth and life. And that this his saying,
heretics did afterward commonly abuse. He alleged the authority of
Tertullian, of the prescriptions of heretics, imperyously, and even like a
master of yt scooles. (I will not say foolyshly) willing Beza, to read the
place by him alleged, twice or thrice, Tertullians words be these. They
allege the scriptures, and with these their impudence, at the first move
away. Also that the disputation with scriptures, nothing avails, unless a
man do altogether, either turn his stomach, or his brain. And again. Therefore
we must not appeal to the scriptures, neither contend with them, by whom there
is either no victory to be achieved, or if there be any, it is very
uncertain. Furthermore Xa^tus said, ye god, otherwise tha^ he intended (for
that was his term) delivered his doctrine in writing, abusig the authority of
Chrisostom, or of the author of the imperfecte work written upon Matthew. And
falslye touching ye proeme of yt work, where there is no such thing red. For
these be the words of ye author. After yt all the people of ye Jews, was
fallen into ye depth of sin, it was necessary yt then a law should be written,
and the tables given, and warning and threats by the^. And this we see,
happened, not only to the holy me^ of the old testament, but eue^ of the new
also. For Christ left nothing in writing to his apostles, but instead of
writing, promised to give the^ the grace of ye holy ghost He (quoth he) will
teach you al things. Then he added also, yt not only ye word (...) but also
(...) was given of god whereof came al traditions. Also for the rule to discern
traditions, yt not only the word, but also the nature and custom is to be
considred. According to the saying of Paul the.i. Corint. xi. Nature it self
teaches you. And again, neither, let us not have such a custom neither the
exaumples of the church of god, to be short, he rehearsed the same that Spensa
had afo^e spoken.

Hereto Beza answered modestly at large, that to have one self same tale
doubled of diverse, is not mete for that conference or disputation, wherein any
good end or concord should be sought For that of much matter heaped
together, the wits of man are confounded, so as thereof, no good thing may
arise but confusion. That even by their own judgments, if they had at any
time used disputation, this order could not be allowed. Nevertheless he hoped,
that so far as his memory would serve him, to rehearse their reasons, he would
lightly satisfy them. And therwithal, he desired the Queen and the rest of ye
nobles, hereafter to take some better order for their conference.

First therefore, whereas Spensa had said, that he much meruayled, that we took
upon us to teach, forasmucheas the ordinary successors had never laid hands
upon us: he answered, that this is not the chief sign of lawful calling For
the chief and substantial parts be, the inquisition of learning and life,
and choice and election. These be the ordinary means. To ye which although the
outward ceremonies of laying on hands, be not adjoined, yet the ministry is
lawful notwithstanding. And that we, which were there present to defend our
doctrine, and the rest of our fellows, wa^ted not also the third mark. And
neded not to stay on that point, forasmuch as we were both chosen and
confirmed. For hands were laid upon us, and we lawfully presented to our
churches, which accepted our ministry if it be objected, that those of whom we
were instituted and which laid their hands on us, had no authority of the
ordinary successors, neither were chosen of the people: the answer is ready,
that things being in such confusion, and the ecclesiastical order disordred,
we did not stay for ye layeng on of their hands whose vicious life,
superstition, and false doctrine, we have always reprehe^ded. For in vain
should we have sought, to have bin allowed of them, which with deadly hate
pursued yt truth, and the defe^ders thereof. And yt we wanted not the
preside^tes of ye Prophets, to who^ none were more deadly enemies, than the
Priests, forasmuch as they themselves were turned out of kind and no longer
respected their office therefore, forasmuch as against the^ chiefly, the lord
had styrred up the prophets, they ought not to seek for, at their hands the
confirmation of yt authority, which they had received of god. Nether did they
intrude themselves into the ministry but when they had once the co^mau^deme^ts
of god, they were compelled eue^ with the peril of their lives, to execute
the same. And yt the same, we in these our times, ought to do also. Furthermore,
y^ extraordinary calling, is not always proved by miracles. For yt which we
read of Moses, and the signs showed by him, happened not so, in all the rest.
For by what miracles did Esaias Daniel, Amos, and Zachary prove their calling? Or
Paulus before he did execute his charge. Did he stay for the layi^g on of hands?
but to prove himself an apostle he did not so much cite his miracles, of the
which he had great store, as y^ fruit of his preaching, and the co^uersio^ of
those people who^ ye lord had turned at his calling. For writing to the
Corinthia^s he says: You are ye seal of my apostleship in yt lord. Cor. ix.
The Same truly say, of so great a number, as by our preching have, receued ye
gospel, against all the power of man nether seek we any other co^firmatio^ of
our calling and ministry. For the power and virtue of god has sufficiently
showed it self, forasmuch, as nether pryso^, fire, banishment nor death could
stay yesame. But quoth Spe^sa, show me but eue^ one example wtin these.xv. C.
years, like to your case. Although (quoth Beza) al hystories are not written,
yet I donbie not but there may be found some. But if there be none, it is no
inconvenience to say, yt god in our days has done y^, which he never did
before. Afterward we came to traditions, which Spe^sa made equal with yt
scripture, and ^a^tus preferred above it, as more certain tha^ it. But to ye
place of Paul, which reuoketh us to y^ scripturs Spe^sa a^swerd, yt Paul
speaks generally of doctrine. Which forth we was a^swered not of us only, but
of an other singularly well learned man, which was there present, that it is
written, there (...) Moreover we said, it was new and strange yt Xa^tus would have
ye traditions more certain tha^ ye scripture, for y^ by reason of many
interpretatio^s, may be uncertain. For, what fou^datio^ shall our faith have,
if we doubt of it? neither is it therefore uncertain because many times me^
misapply it, mangle it, and abuse it. For the truth abides always one, which
though it be somtymes darkened, yet continues her force even to ye last.
Neither, because heretics abuse it, ought we therefore, the less to fly to
it. What wrong he does us, in co^paring of Anabaptists and other devilish
sects, our writings well testify. They admit only some part of ye Scriptures.
We accept and allow ye whole: they credit new revelations. We say yt such
things are out of place, sith Christ has manifested al things fully unto
us. As to ye place of Tertullia^, whereof ^antus warned Beza, twice or thrice to
read it: I (quoth Beza) have read it more than xx. times, and am so well
assured, that you shall find it as I say, as I perfectly know, yt you shall
never find in Chrisostom, that which you in his name have falsely alleged: But
do not deny, yt Tertullian did many times pass his bonds. Nevertheless, if
we consider towhat end he spoke it, you shall perceive, how lightly, this which
you think to make so much with you, shall be answered. For this was his purpose,
yt we should not in vain reason with heretics. As Paul cou^saileth us, after
ye first or second admonition to leave them. But what manner of heretics were
those? Such as beig convicted of their heresy by the word of god, tryfled in
vain. What were the traditions, which he laid against them? Such as are
contained in the writings of the Apostles, and pertayn to the chief articles
of our faith, and which the whole church professed. First therefore, we should
have been co^uicted by the same word, that if we be in any error, we might
thereby be withdrawn from it. But to be confuted by tradition which is
neither Apostolical, nor yet grounded on their writings, yt truly is as much,
as to open the gate to all deceit and utterly to ouerturne the certaintye of
our faith. But why does Tertullian himself vpbrayde the heretics? saying: Let
them believe the scriptures, if they can do it beleuig against the scriptures:
except we ought to fly to them, and by them confute all errors? If these rytes
which at this day our adversaries have brought in, were Apostolic, the
church would always have used them. Neither should they have had so late
beginning. Now, forasmuch as the authors of them are well known, and described
in histories, certainly, it cannot be said, that they came first from the
Apostles. Falsely also is the name of traditions refrained to those things,
which are delivered from hand to hand, in as much as this word (...) is
referred, eue^ to those things yt are written. Tertullia^ refuteth those that
taught, yt the apostles had not sufficiently instructed us in all things, yt
they might leave a place for new traditions, as things revealed by ye holy
ghost. They are wo^t to say (quoth he) yt the apostles knew al, but nevertheless,
put not al in writing. In both points blaming christ, as though he had either
insufficie^tly instructed his apostles, or else had chose^ such simple me^, as
were not able to utter their minds in writing. For what sober man would believe
yt the apostles were ignorant in any thing who^ the lord appointed as masters*
etc. To ye Apostles therefore we must fly, who^ christ sent to preach. But how
shall we be assured of their doctrine, but by their wrytings? Was not vnctio^
given unto the^, for this cause? yt they might deliver and write unto us, al
things necessary for our salvation, not to leave us douting, or uncertain. And
herby is, yt place of Chrisostom easily discussed, which was erst aleged,
where he says, yt Christ left nothing in writing to his apostles. Wuld he
therefore, yt they should write nothing? No sure. But therefore he taught them,
therefore he reveled it unto them by his spirit, yt the same doctrine once
written might remain for ever. But they taught som^things which are not
contained in their writings. Neither yt truly do we deny. But we say, yt
there is nothing pertaining to our salvation. Which they have not left in
writing, other thiges which concern rites, and civil dyscypline, they might
easily teach by word of mouth. But because yesame change, according to time
and place, they would not bu^ then our consciences therewith. As to the
objection of the names of unbegotten, consubsta^tiality, trinity, baptism of
children, although the plain names and words be not in ye scriptures, yet the
things themselves, that is to wit, the sense and ground. Whereof the names
are gathered, is playnelye expressed and showed in the scripture. These things
were long debated, and sometimes the talk interrupted, Xantus spoke much, and
affirmed a great while, that the virginity of Mary after her deliverance,
could not be proved by the scriptures. Neither yet yt young children ought to
be baptized. Nevertheless, both were proved by the authority of the
scripture. But he ceased not to babble after the manner of ye Sorbonistes, as
though he should win the victory, with triflyng and talking. His talk
little liked so honorable anaudience, as it, that was full of bitterness,
sharpness and stomach. Our men in the mean tune, modestly stayed themselves.
And albeit many of our adversaries spoke at once confusedly, yet we counted it
better to for bear than to be counted like to such trouble some talkers. At
this alteration the Cardynall stepped in, and as though this question had been
sufficiently debated, made an end thereof. Or rather, when he could no longer
bear, ye proud and insole^t talk of Xa^tus he brake of his talk. Hereof,
nevertheless ye Sorhonists, as if ye matter had been concluded, or sentence
given on their side, we vain arroga^ce, pe^waded themselves yt they had won the
victory. Neither is it any marueyle, for neither could we answer many of their
reasons, which they spoke all at once, so that we could not understand the^
nether would we interrupt the Cardinal in his talk. But he, taking on him ye
part of a judge did closelye conclude, yt whatsoever is written, ought to be
referred to the authority of the charch: and that her tradytions were in all
points to be observed. Afterward, he turned his talk to the Lords supper,
affirming and protestyng that he would go no farther, till we agreed of that
article. For this (said he) is the controuersye that troubles most men. And
said further, yt we had necessarily compelled him to talk thereof. For y^ in
our first metyng, we had plainlye fhewed our mind thereof, which now filled al
France with diverse and dangerous rumor, and farther was imprinted, and set
abroad. He objected unto us, the confession of Awgspurge, and asked, whether we
would subscribe there to. We asked again, whether they would be content to
allow it in all points, then they began to trifle.

Furthermore, they objected other opinions of certain ministers of the Germans,
which they said were sent unto the^ neither were they ashamed, to desire and
entreat us, to subscribe unto the^. But yt was done for a policy, to
thintente, yt if we denied so to do, he might set us at strife with the
Germans, and make us to be hated of them. And if we did agree, then they as
conquerours should triumph over us: and make a common jest of us, as of light
and indiscreet persons, and so condemn our opinion. To avoid this doubt, we
answered that we came thither, to defend ye confession of our faith and had
no other commau^deme^t or authority of our churches* Therefore we required that
we might follow the order of our confession: and that every article, might be
severally and distinctly weyed, so that it might plainlye appear, wherein we
agree, and wherein we disagree. For both the order of nature, and also the
way to concord requires, that those things, which be playnest and easiest,
should first be handled* Furthermore, forasmuch as the sacraments depend upon
ye doctrine: It is most necessary, first to reason of it. With all this we
nothing prevailed. For the Cardinal continued in his purpose. We saw also yt he
attempted this, yt we with inequall hand, might depart the confer, that
yesame might seem to be broken of, by our stubbornness. Which we thought good
by all means to prevent. Therefore, we desired to have their writing to the
which they would have us subscribe, that we might deliberate thereof. There with
all they brought forth a copy of the article of ye lords supper, taken (as
they said) out of the confession, of Awgspurge. But differing neuerthe less:
much therfrom, as it may well appear by the reading thereof. For this it was,
with a steadfast faith we confess, that in the most reverend sacrament of the
Lords body and blood, truly, really, and sacramentally, the true body and
blood of Christ is offered, to the co^municantes, and received by them. Herto
they added, the confession of certain ministers of Wittenberge, set forth
(...) the year of our of our lord god. 1559. So we departed for that day, and
the matter was deferred till the morrow. Wherefore when we perceived, that by
this request they minded, to drive us to this inconuentence, that either we
should deny our own confession, or else break of the conference, returnyng at
the last, and calling on the name of god we determined rather to take the most
unequal and bniust conditions yt could be offered, than to give any occasyon,
whereby it might seem, that we fled the conference. Therefore, the next day we
prepared our selves to answer, waytyng always, when we should be commanded
to come, when it was sygnyfyed to us from the Queen, yt the same was deferred
for two days. In the mean time, diverse tales were spread of us, as that we
were overcome, and could not prove our ministry lawfully, and our adversaries
rejoiced as conquerors, as though our hearts fainted, to be short, they
criu^phed before ye victory But this their mirth continued not long. For ii
days after, at our return we brought forth an answer, more at large, and
more perfect, to those things which before were over passed, and used such means
as we could, to avoid the policy of our adversaries. It Beza rehearsed in
wrytig. The effect of it was this: That we greatly marvelled, y^ whereas of late
we had so abundantly showed, what is the church, what be her marks and how
great her authority, yt any reasonable manne might be satisfied there with. Yet
never the less, nothing was said against it, but only demanded of us, by
what power we do administer the word of GOD and sacraments. And yet nothing
ouerpassed y^ might make our cause odious and hateful. For to what purpose it
was spoken we could not as yet well perceue because we came not thither to
administer the word or sacraments. But if an account shall be demanded of us of
those things which her to fore we have don, they must understa^d, ye emo^ges
us, there are two sorts of ministers. One of those yt teach in foren countries,
in ye which their calling is allowed. And of those it cannot justly be
demanded here, wherefore they be ministers. Another sort is of the^ which
teach ye gospel in this realm: whom we thought not to be sent for hither, to
give an account of their callig, but only to co^fer and dispute of doctrine.
Otherwise they might seem to be sent for to plead their cause, as for some
crime. Which we cannot think yt the Queen or nobles in any wise minded. And if
ye same be required, under ye color of conference and reasoning, it is very
far from the means of concord, and reconcilement. For we cannot enter into
such questions and demaundes, with out the great offense of ye bishops, and
other the Lords of spirituality. But none of us all at any time minded it, but
purposed only to prosecute this holy purpose. I pray you if two parties agree
to confer, and afterward the one demand of the other. By what nower do
you this? must it not needs ensue, that by such questions they shall fall at
bariance. As for example, setting a part the bishops, and other the
spirituality of this realm, who^ we are loathe to offend, let us admytte that
some strange bishop enquireth of us, by what authority, we minister the
word and Sacraments? And we again ask of him, by whom he was chosen and
institute? Whether by the voices of the elders of his church, whether he were
desired of the people, whether there were any inquisitio^ made of his life and
doctrine? He would soon say yea. But he wuld soon be proved alter. Whereof
we desire no other witness, tha^ their own co^sciece which hear us, and know yt
whole matter perfectly. If he would obsect against us, that we are no
ministers, because we want the laying on of hands: we would reply again, yt he
is no bishop, because in institutions of him, those things were not observed,
which are appointed, for the chief and substantial poyutes, by the law of god.
And when our talk were more, whether perhaps we would go farther, and say in
this sort. You boaste of the laying on of hands, which whosoever lacks, you
thynk no perfect minister: what if you want the two other points which are the
chiefest? Namely, inquisition of life and learning, and the election of ye
elders of your church? may ye not then, much less tha^ we, brag of the name
of a pastor? It was decreed by ye council of Chalcedon, yt the ordynation of ye
bishop, or prtest, should be frustrate, and of no force, which is not
specially appointed to some one church. And forasmuch as they would have it
doyde to the injury of him yt ordayneth it, much more may we object the same,
against the bishop, yt thus reasons with us, inasmuch he is destitute of the
two chiefest conditions, prescribed by the apostle. i. Tim. iii a. Titus. i
Another thing also, may be added hereto, which we speak unwilling,
nevertheless we are enforced thereto, ye every man may perceive, yt this
disputation of our vocation may not be touched with out great peril. If we should
ask of that same bishop, who laid their hands on him, or whether he bought it
not with money, what would he answer? He would deny yt he bought it, and he
would say that those bishops laid hands on him which had authority thereto of the
church. Again, if we should enquire how much his authority cost him, he would
say he bought it not, but yet he would confess, yt he gave some thousands of
crowns. As though he should say, I boughte not the bread, but the corn,
where with the bread was made. This reasonyng, if it should be parted by the
authority of the councils and canons of the churches, would shame a great many
bishops and pastors.

And sure we would not enter therein, least any man should be offended thereby.
Neither will we yet touch it, or sek^ to revenge our selves, only we mind to
show, y^ we did of late purposely answer shortly and briefly, to those things,
y^ were laid against us, for yt we would have all gently and myldly handled.
But as for the Lords supper, we spoke more sparely thereof, bearyng with the
infirmitte of some, which not accustomed to yt doctrine, are wont to be
offended, as soon as they hear any thing, y^ is strange, or vnwo^ted to the^.
And truly, we had rather, yt they themselves should learn the same, out of the
ancient writings of the Doctors of the church, the by us, which we hoped
should have com to pass, if my lord Cardinal had kept his promise. For he
promised openly, to instruct us chiefly in this article of the lords supper,
out of their writings which wrote thereof, with in.v. C. years after Christ: so
yt we would now agree to receive the light, if it appeared, yt the same was
hitherto hidden from us. To satisfye this our expectation, or rather the
expectation of an infinite number of me^, he separated this article, from
others very necessary, and gave it to us alone. And required us to subscribe
to it: saying y^ otherwise the conference would be broken of, if we should
plead our cause in prison, you would scarce use such talk toward us, as to
say subscribe hereto, or else we condemn you. Certainly, this is no part of
your charge. For that office, which ye now profess, requires y^ if we walk in
error, you should reduce us, being once co^uict thereof, into ye way and exhort
us with wholesome doctrine. And chiefly those, which offer themselves to yield
an account of their faith, (by the scriptures.) And truly, if this kind of
condemnation be strange, certainly much more strange is the way and means,
whereby you proceed to yesame. We came together here chieflye for.ii. causes.
First, to render an account to god, to you, and to ye whole world of our
faith. Not to travel for gods cause, the kings, and the whole kingdom, and to
find some way and means, whereby ye troubles late stirred in religion may be
appeased. Now if we be rejected, or dysmissed, without leave or liberty to
dispute whatsoever shall be done unto us, shall be declared to all Christendom:
and the old tumultes shall be nothing appeased, as they know right well, which go
about to prevent it. If ye matter did only belong to us yt are here present,
truly at your pleasure, and with out peril, as far (as man may judge) you might
daily with us. But you must consider yt we stand here, in ye name of al those, yt
profess ye gospel, not only in this realm, but even in Swicerla^d, Poole,
Germany, England and Scotland, which all look for some certain and happy end
of this asse^bly. What may they think, when instead of disputation and
conference, which was promised us, they shall understand that ye tenth part of
one article was offered to us, with this addition? Subscribe to this, or else go
no further. And if we do subscrybe what shall you be the better? They that
sent us, will desire to know whether we were compelled thereto by force, or
else convict, by good and sure argument. So what else shall happen of this
order, which you now begin to take, tha^ great offense and grudge? we beseech
the Queen therefore, yt she will not suffer this holy purpose, to be broken of,
but command yt certain learned mete men, be chosen out, yt will wyllynglye
conferrs with us. Nevertheless, least we should seem to answer nothing, to
those things, that have been objected against us, whatsoever M. Spe^sa gave us
written, out of Caluins book, we receive and allow. But as to the article,
which my Lord Cardinal offered us, take or rather gelded out of the confession
of Awgspurge: we say, there are many things therein to be considred. First, yt
the whole confession should have been offered unto us. For it is against reason,
to proffer us one article without the rest. Then we would know whether of
their own heads privately (which we are loathe to think, nevertheless we
would gladlye know the truth thereof) or else in the name of all the Lords,
they offer us the confusion of Augspurge: that al doutes taken away, we may
more freely confer. For so it would come to pass, ye thanks should generally
be given to god, for y^ my L. Cardinal, and ye rest of ye lords, reject
tra^substa^tiatio^, which now, by y^ common consent of al churches, as well in
Germany, as in other realms is condemned. If we be required to subscribe to
any writing, it is mete also, that the Cardinal of Loraine, in the name of al
his, should subscribe the same also. That the churches by whom we were sent,
may perceive, that we met not altogether unprofitably about these matters. If
my Lord Cardinal, will constantlye persevere in that mind, that he will admit
the whole confession of the Germans, we hope yt we shall come nier, and at
the last to that point, that we shall easily satisfy you: And show a ready way
to peace and concord. In the mean time, we affirm, that Christ is present
in the use of his Supper, and there does after, give, and exhibit unto us, his
body and blood, by the power and operation of the holy ghost. And if we do
receive, eat and drink spiritually and by faith, the self same body that
dyed for us, and the self same blood, y^ was shed for our salvation. That we
may be bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh. And that we may be quickened
thereby, and receive, whatsoever is necessary to our salvation. We desired also
of the Queen, if this satisfied her not, because it is hard, to entreat of so
great a mystery with few words, that we might speak thereof, in more large and
ample sort. And that we were ready, to do it, whenever the Cardinal of
Loraine, would show his authorities out of the old doctors. Moreover, we
earnestly desired, that there might be some equal, and tolerable order of
conference or disputation, taken, such as we desired, even from the beginning.
And we protest that thereby it should appear to all men, that we came not
thither, to stir contention, but rather, to find means of concord, in
sou^de doctriue. For we desired nothing else, but that those things restored to
y^ Lords Supper, which were taken from it, and taking away those things that
were il added, it might be restored to the old perfection. Which to compass,
we decreed not to spare our lives, but in so good a cause, to yield and render
our lives and hearts, to God, the king, the nobles, and the common
quietness, as well of this realm, as of all Christendom. With this oration
our adversaries were greatly amassed, but chiefly, with the first part
thereof, whereby they saw the glory of their succession and callig stained. For
they could have heard nothing, more grievous or unwelcome to them. Therefore the
Cardinal freatting, and much disquieted, said: we were now come to a good
point, y^ we were not content to invade the dignine of Priests. But we must
also touch the kings majesty. For he priuyly wroughte to bring us in hate, as
though we had accused the king, for taking away the elections of Bishops and
Abbates, as though the fault were in y^ king that none of them were chosen, but
as for themselves, they said, they were ordained and instituted, by the king,
to whom the people had given al their right and power therein. Wherefore, if we
would disprove that, we must speak to the king, to whom it belonged, to
maintain his laws and ordinances. And that we were ignoraunte how they were
ordained, when all the people were came together by the knolling of bells, and
therefore gessed, of things that we knew not.

To conclude all his talk was full of tauntes, whereby he thought to kyndle
the Queens wrath toward us, as though, we accused the king of Tyranny. But
that slander was easily avoided. For it was forthwith showed, that thereby is
the confusion, of the true ecclesiastical order and state, made much more
manifest. For that kings were fame to set to their hands, to reform that
horrible disorder, which ambition, envy, contention and such like, had lo^gtyme
bredde among the Canonical Priests, Monks, and all the rest of y^
ecclesiastical order. And could by no other means remedy that sore, than by
taking from them the liberty of choice which so long time, they had shamefully,
and beastly abused. And as to their common form of ordaining Bishops, and
pastors, it is right well known, what a jest it is, and therefore we will
waste no time in speaking of it. For we entered not into that matter, to handle
it at large, but only to show that our mynistery, which in this ruin, and so
great confusion, of the church, the Lord has raised, is lawful, and unworthily
mocked at. You your selves began first to talk thereof, (quoth the Cardinal)
you first invaded our flock. We came not into your garrisons, but you into
ours, Neither would I wish you should think your selves as good as we, nor
talk as ye would to your fellows. Our estate is somewhat higher than yours.
When we saw him speak cruelly in this sort, we thought good to provoke him no
longer, least we might seem our selves to have hindered the disputation. Then
he began again to be earnest on us, to know some reason why we would not
subscribe to the confession of Augspurge. We answered him again, y^ it was
unreasonable, to require y^ of us, which do not allow it in all points. But, if
they themselves would first subscribe, it would be ye easier way to reconcile
us to the^. And y^ we know not, whether he of his own head, or else by the
co^sente of all the rest, did put in that bill, which he would have subscribed.
I (quoth the Cardinal) am sworn to no man. And therefore, will I neither
subscribe to the confession of Awgspurge, neither yet to you.

And yet I will be ready to subscribe both to them and you, if you think
truly. And y^ I offer nothing to you of mine own head, these my brethren that
be present, can witness. Which when he said he turned his body, toward the
rest of the Cardinals and Bishops. Which neither granted to his saying by
word or gesture, nor greatly withstode it. Therefore, for as much as they would
not subscribe, we said, they could not require it of us. This done and
appeased, the Cardinal entered into talk of ye Lords Supper, and set his
common doctors to us. Master Spensa, began to urge the presence of the body of
Christ in his Supper, so that he enclosed the body within the bread. And said,
it culd no otherwise be imagined, but the body must needs be joined with ye
bread, and reproved us, as though we swarued from our master Calvin, whose
book he had alleged. We said, we differred from him in nothing, and that we
were ready to subscribe to all the contents of that book. Then he urged the
name of substance which Calvin ^seth. We answered, that we wont ^o use that
term, least men should think, that we fain either some new or ymaginary body,
or some fantastical receiving thereof, but nevertheless, that we are no
otherwise made partakers, of y^ body, than by says, and power of the holy
ghost. Hereto the right reverend master Peter Marti^, added many things, and
according to his singular learning, besides many other things, which perteine
to the order of ye church he handled this question also, shortly, plainly, and
eloquently. He answered also diverse things which both the Cardinal, and Spe^sa
had objected in their orations in the first meting, and chiefly those things,
which concern the authority, and amendmente of counsels. Which so pricked the
Cardinal, that he would no more reply unto him. And whiles he was handling and
declaring diverse matters more plainly, because he spoke somewhat after y^
Italia^ manner, the Cardinal rose, and said in a great chafe, that he would
talk with his own country me^. And yet marti^ spoke so plainly and
distinctly, y^ not only y^ Cardinal being skilful in y^ Italia^ to^g, but also
every ignorant man, might well perceive him. Spensa somewhat talked to him,
herefore commending him above the rest, that no man this day lived, that had
written more largely or copiously of this question than he. Before Spensa was
answered: a Spanyarde, one of those, that call themselves Ieswites, desired
that he might have leave to speak. His talk was sharp, and bitter and nothing
pleased the audience. He assayed to turn al men's minds. From hearing this
cause, as it which was already sufficiently known. The suttel^ies and crafts
where with heretykes are wont to creep into men's hearts, he applied to us.
Calling us foxes, and dogs. And at the last concluded that we ought to be
rejected, and referred, to the counsel of Trent, which the Pope of Rome had
proclaimed, saying that we should have free coming thither, and the Popes
safeconduyte, that there the controversies of faith and religion ought to be
judged, of ye which, weme^, soldiers or other not exercised in divine matters,
were not mete to be judges. Thus as it were, persuading the Queen, he willed
her to send us to Trent. Hitherto his talk, although it favored bitter hate,
and malice, yet to some seemed grave and severe. But at y^ last, he played the
fool so kindly, as if it had been in a stage. For when he entreated of ye
Lords Supper, and promised by a plain similitude to prove the presence
therein, he said it was even like, as if any Prince, when he has achieved
victory on his enemies, to celebrate the remembrance thereof, would institute
yearly plays, whereby both his war, and victory might be represented to al
men's eyes. And if any man in those plays should represente the person of
the Prince, That would so much the more move ye minds of y^ beholders, to
remember it, but if y^ king himself would be present, and show himself there,
then the same would be most noble and excellent. Even so said he, that Christ
himself, when he instituted the remembrance of his passion would also be
present, and in the same. About the end of his oration he assaied to inflame
the Queen against us, and made many mournful co^plaintes faining himself to
weep, after the manner of those iesters, which are commonly apt to counterfayte
any gesture. Hereto Beza answered, that the Spaniard talked, as though we were
already convict of heresy. But for asmuchas no man hitherto, has showed us
our error, he might have done much better, if he had reserved, the scoffs
which he bestowed on us, to himself and his fellows. Because we can not se how
they touch us. And as to his council, that yt Queens majesty was not so bare
of counsel, that she neded it. But that she and her council saw well enough,
what is best to be done, and by what means, they may provide for common
quietness. But that which he said of ye Lords supper, that he made nothing
else of, than a play of y^ history of Christ (because it was to blasphemous and
beastly) being ouerpassed, he turned toward master Spensa. He urged the plain
words of the Lord. This is my body, and the consent of the Eua^gelistes,
which nothing differ therein. We answered that the same Evangelists said,
this is my blood of the new testament. And an other. This cup is the new
Testament, in my blood. Which without a figure can not be understood. And
hereby it appears, that it is a Sacramental manner of speech. Which Austine
teaches most plainly in his.xxiii. Epistle to Boniface. If the Sacraments
(quoth he) had not a certain likeness, of those things, whereof they are
Sacraments, they were no Sacraments at al. Of this likeness most commonly,
they take the names of those things, whereof they are Sacraments. Like as
therefore, after a certain manner, y^ Sacrament of the body of Christ is the
body of Christ, and ye Sacrame^te of ye blood of Christ, is ye blood of christ,
so is also the Sacrament of faith, faith it self. But Spensa said that y^
let not, but yt we ought simply, and without figure to credit the words of
ye Lord. We said: that a Sacramental manner of speech, could not be without
figure. But if there be a figure in our Sacraments (quoth Spensa) they shall
not then much differ, from the Sacraments of the old Testament, which are
altogether figuratine. And we say, that they were a figure and shadow of that
truth, which was fulfilled to us in Christ. Otherwise, we must needs confess,
that they were figures of a figure. Which is most unreasonable, we denied that
consequence, because y^ figures, appointed by God in the old Testament, are
referred to the truth it self, whereof ye fathers were partakers, but a far
of, before the coming of Christ. But we are nigh at hand. After he was offered
for us. Neither do we say that we are as yet under figures, but y^ we need yet,
as long as we live in this body, visible signs and Sacraments, and in them we
say there are figurative or Sacramental manners of speech, which nevertheless
proves not, but y^ we have the truth, notwithstanding, these signs. To
conclude we agree with Bernarde saying. Bernard. sermon.xxxiii. super ^antica,
The truth is set before me: but in a Sacrament. The Angel is fed with the
meal of the corn, or the perfect grain. But I must be content, with the
bark of the Sacraments, with the brau^e of his flesh, with the chafe of the
letter, and the cloak of faith.

But sure, howsoever these be tempered and swetened, with the aboundasice of
spirit and faith, certainly the bark of the Sacrament, and the fine boulted
meal of the corn, faith and hope, remembrance, and presence, eternity and
present time, the countenance and the glass, the image of God, and ye form
of a servant, are not like pleasant in cast. Whereby it is well proved, that
we truly are made partakers of y^ truth, but do not yet fully enjoy the same,
because our weakness requires the Sacrament, the bark and the cloak.
After this communication with Spe^sa was ended, there stepte up an other
doctoure, one of ye Sorbonistes, urging again. By a suttel and crafty means
as he thought himself the exposition of these the Lords words. This is my
body, and when he asked what we thought was meant by this pronou^e, (hoc) we
answered that bread was meant thereby, and that the body was speken thereof, so
y^ thereby we might well perceine y^ the bread is a sign of the body. They on
the contrary side: Said y^ this pronou^e. (Hoc) is of ye neutre gender, and can
not by the rules of Grammar, be referred to the bread, but was induuduum vagum.
And only to note the body, as if a man should say. This is oil. This is
honey. This is a building. And such like. Therein imitating Durand. Whom
Gardyner also an open enemy of the Gospel, and alleged by them, did follow.
We showed, that that repugned with the nature of a Sacrament, forasmuch as,
if it lack a sign, if it be brought to nothing, or made as nothing, it
ceasseth to be a Sacrament. And it is a great marvel that none of the old
fathers could see this fiction of induuduum vagum. But this satisfied them not.
And therefore repeating the same continually, with great cries, they ceased not
after the manner of the Sorbonistes, to babble til night. Yea and one of them,
foolishlye and impudently threatened Beza. Saying: Oh, I would we had thee
within our college. We in the mean time either held our peace, or modestly
objected certain arguments, til the noise were whusshed, but because they wuld
needs either win, or seem to win, with trifeling or loud crying, we
prevailed nothing. Wherefore to be short, we said, that all the ancient
fathers made with us, and we would be judged by them. Neither did we depart,
till the Cardinal pronused us, to send unto us the authority of Austene, and
other ancient fathers, whereby our opinion is condemned. But we could never
have them. He meant hereafter to confer by writing, because he saw that by
our talk, God opened the ears of many, but chiefly of the nobles.
Afterward the order of our disputation was altered. For there were five
chosen to confer with us, and those such as passed all the rest, in
learning, wit, and modestye. Monluke the Bishop of Vale^tyne, Calius Sigensis
an other Bishop, the Abbot of Saligne, the Abbot of Botillery, and doctor
Spensa. Against those were chosen on our part, doctor Peter Martyr, Theodore
Beza. Augustine Harlorate, John Spina. Nicholas Gallasius We agreed of ye
order, place, time, and secretaryes, which should regyster the questions
proposed, and the reasons on either part.

And then the self same day, which was the last of September, we began to
deliberate with what order we should begin the disputation. We wished and
desired, that we might orderly prosecute every article of our confession.
Which request to be reasonable they themselves confessed, saying that they
could not allow that prosperous order, that began at the last, yet because we
were already entered into that article, they thought it good to finish it,
before we came to the rest.

Therefore the next day at our return, we entreated of the presence of ye
body of Christ in his Supper. The Abbote of Saluine, brought forth a place out
of an ancient Greek copy of Cirilus a Bishop of Jerusalem, whereof there was no
long reasoning, because it made much with us. At the last, after much
alteration we concluded thus. That in that respect, that faith makes those
things present, that are promised, and that same faith, does most truly
receive the body and blood, of our Lord Jesus christ, by ye virtue of ye holy
ghost, in that respect, we confess the presence of his body and blood in his
holy supper, in the which he offers, gives, and exhibyteth, truly the
Substauce of his body, and blood, by the operacion of his holy Spirit. And
we do receive and eat, spyritually and by says that very body, which dyed
for us, y^ we may be bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, yt thereby we
may be quickened and receive whatsoever is necessary to our salvation. A copye
of this conclusion those that co^serred with us, gave to the rest of the
bishops and doctors y^ were at Poyssye. But they allowed it not, wherefore, the
next day, another was proposed us, wherein there was somewhat changed. For
that which we attribute to faith, it attributed to ye word. That when we
perceived was done of purpose, y^ it being left doubtful, every man might
interpret the sense thereof at his pleasure, least any man should thereby be
deceived, we would by no means admit for, forasmuch as we came together
there, to provide for the quietness of our conscience, we endeavored, as much
as lay in us to withstand all error and doubt. Nevertheless, least we should
seem to stick upon words, we were contented, yt they should change the
form of the writing, so they altered nothing of ye sense. This form therefore
that folowes they thought better, and promised to move all the bishops to agree
there to. We do confess, that Christ in his holy supper, does truly offer,
give, and exhibit, the substance of his body and blood, by ye operacion of the
holy ghost: and that we receive, and eat, sacramentallye, spirytually, and by
faith, his body that died for us, that we may be bones of his bones, and
flesh of his flesh. That there by we may receive life, and whatsoever
pertayneth to our salvation. But forasmuch as faith grounded upon the word of
god, does make those things present, which are promised: by this faith we
acknowledge, that we truly, and verelye, receive the true and natural body
of our lord Jesus Christ, by the virtue of the holy ghost. In this respect,
we confess ye presence, of ye body and blood, of our lord, and savior
Jesus Christ, in his supper.

All though this form little differed from the other, yet they hoped that it
would be better allowed of the lords. And therefore they took it with them, to
communicate unto them. We said yt we would in like manner, communicate it with
our brethren, and reserve our selves liberty, either to add or expound any
thing therein, as we should think good.

When the Cardinals had seen this form, some of the^ allowe^d it very well
and rejoiced, as though we were turned to them. And diverse tales were
therevppon sprede of us. But when it was perused by the doctors as well
Sorbonists, as others, they lightly changed their opinion. They added thereto
therefore, (as we here say) their opynion, whereby they showed, what they
thought wanted in it, or wherefore they thought it was not to be allowed. Also,
they made almost a Tragedy, betwixt ye bishops, and those which had conferred
with us, and had put in y^ form of this agremente of this article, among the^*
as though they did either agree with us, or mock with them. But because it is
no part of my purpose, to writ their co^tentions. I will willingly leave it.
And now I come to the declaration of our opynion, as concerning the presence
of ye body of Christ in his supper, which we reserved, free to our selves,
least any doubtfulnes, because of ye shortness of our first writing, might breed
any doubt or error.

We affirm, that no distance of place may let our conjunction with the body
and blood of Christ, because ye Lords supper, is a heavenly thing. And
althought in the earth, we receive with the mouth of our body, the bread
and wine, the true Sacraments, and signs, of the body and blood of Christ: yet
by faith, and the help of the holy ghost, our minds to whom this food does
chiefly belong, carried up to heaven, feed on the present body and blood. And
in this respect we say also, that the body is joined with the bread, and the
blood with the wine. But no other wise tha^ sacramentally, yt is to say, not
according to place or situatio^, but because they do effectuously signify, y^
God gives it to those that faythfullye communicate and they truly receive it
by faith.

Hereby it appears in what sort we think, of the presence of the body of
Christ, in the Use and Ministration of his Supper. For we admytte, neither
Transubstantiation nor Consubstantiation. Yea we refuse all manner presence,
whereby Christ's body is thought to be in the earth, without quantity: or is
affirmed to be any otherwher than in heaven. We use the name of substance to
signifye, that we meante not our faith, of any feigned body or phantasme,
neither of the virtue only of Christ's passion, or his merits only (which
nevertheless, we confess to be the spiritual catyng of Christ's flesh) but
even of the true and natural body of the son of God, which he took of yt
virgin Mary, and afterward was crucified, and raised again for us, and now
rests in heaven, till such time as yt shall com to judge the quick and the
dead.

And this was the end of the Conference. For they that conferred with us being
ill entreated of their fellows, came not again. Neither were any other
chosen in their rooms. Neither since that time, did the Bishops signefy any
thing unto us, but though we oftentimes desired, that we might go forwards,
and handle ye rest, that were yet untouched, we could understand nothing of
their minds therein, but yt they minded to depart, and were desirous to refer
all things, to the council of Trente. Therefore, order being taken for the
leauiyng of a subsedy (whereof perhaps they were more careful, than of any
thing else,) and delivering up to the King the articles, whereof they had agreed
among themselves, not making any account of us, but leaving us in the court,
they al repaired to their homes.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, by Luke Harryson.


