THE Mirror of Mirth, and pleasant Conceits: CONTAINING, Many proper and
pleasant inventions, for the recreation and delight of many, and to the hurt
and hinderance of none.

Framed in French by that Worshipful and learned Gentleman Bonaduenture de
Periers, Groom to the right excellent and virtuous Princess, the Queen of
Nauara: And Englished by R. D.

At London, Printed by Roger Ward: dwelling a little above Holburne Conduit, at
the Sign of the Talbot. 1583.

To the courteous and gentle Readers.
IT was the custom of a certain Philosopher (right gentle and courteous
Readers) when he perceived the people to wax weary by his long and tedious
orations, and to drop out of doors ere he had done, to take his harp in
hand, which he so finely fingered, that the sweet and pleasant sound thereof
procured the people to come running in faster then before they went forth,
whose dulled spirits being revived with that pleasant melody, and their minds
before cloyed with over many circumstances of gravity, being by this means
marueilously delighted, did the better and with greater ease continue the time
of his conclusion: whose excellent policy in this point, has attained so
great commendation, that it is set forth for an example to all posterities. If
then you find your selves ouerladen, either by the means of worldly cares, or
with the intolerable burden of over great studies (if the deeds of this
Philosoper were to be followed) I would wish you no greater or better
pleasure then he showed to his people: considering that Mirth and Melodye
cutteth off care, vnburdeneth the mind of sorrow, heals the grieved heart,
and fills both soul and body with inestimable comfort. And therefore many
mighty and excellent Princes, whose heads are troubled with diverse and sundry
enormities, do for this cause entertain and accept of such persons, whose
pleasant nature and disposition may move them to delight. Since then moderate
pleasure is not only convenient, but also profitable and necessary for us, I
have presumed here upon your courtesy, for the recreation of your minds, to
sent unto your sight this simpel and rude work, the grace and beauty whereof
being strypped from his Country guise, and now newly wrapped in this strange
attire, is not only blemished by means of the translators vnskillfulnesse,
but as it were spoiled both of favor and fashion. Yet if it please you to
pardon his imperfection, and to accept his good will, he shall not only be
encouraged to mend his amiss, but also hereafter present you with such as may
better counteruaile your courtesy, and save his own credit. Thus loath to be
over tedious, in so mean a manner, I commend you to the protection of the
celestial powers, and this to your freendly consideration.

Yours in all humility, T. D.

Here begins the mirror of Mirth, and pleasant conceits.
Of a Querister that sange the Countertennor in the Church of S. Hyllaris at
Poytiers, that compared the Chanons to their pottages.
IN the Church of S. Hyllaris at Poytiers, sometimes there was a singing man,
that sang ye Cou^tertennor, who, for that he was a very good fellow, and
would drink hard, as commonly such men will do, was well-beloved amongst the
Chanons, and they called him oftentimes to dinner and to supper. And because of
the familiar acquaintance that he had with them, it seemed to him, that there
was none of them all, but that sought and desired his furtherance. By reason
whereof, he would say first to one, and then to an other: Sir, you know how
long time it is since I first served in this Church, it is now high time that
I might hereafter be provided for, I pray you speak for me when you are
together in your Chapel Court, I require no great thing, although you my
masters have great liuinges, I would be content with one of the least. His
request was well taken and allowed of them all, being several, which gave him a
good answer, saying, that it was reason he should be remembered: and although
the Chapel Court will not consider of thee, rather then thou should want,
we will give thee part of ours: this this said they to him, when they were
alone. Well, at all their going in, and coming out of the Chapel Court, he
gave attendaunce, desiring them to remember him: and they did answer him with
one voice, saying: stay a while, and thou shall not be forgotten, but shalt
have the first place that is vacant. But when yt came to the pinch, there was
always some excuse; either that the benefice was too great, and therefore one
of the Masters had it: or that it was too little, and therefore he should have a
better: or that they were constrained to give it to one of their brethrens
kinsmen, but without fail he should the next that did fall. And with these
words they kept off this singing man, so that the time went away, and he
served still without any reward. And in the mean while he gave always some
present (according to his slender ability) to them whom he knew might give
their voices in the Chapel Court, as the first new fruits he could buy:
sometimes Chickens, sometimes Pigeons, Rabbets, Partridges, and such like,
according to the season: which the poor singing man bought, either at the
market, or at the Poulters, making them believe, that they cost him nothing,
and they took always that which was given them. In the end, this Querister
perceiving himself never the nearer, nor one whit the better, but that he
lost his time, his money, and his pains, determined to make no longer suite,
but studied to show them what opinion he had of them. And to bring this to
pass, he found the means to gather five or six Crowns together: and during
the time that he was providing them (for it required time) he began to make
more account of my masters the Channons then before, and to use himself more
soberlie. And when he espied time convenient, he came to the cheifest amongst
them, and prayed them one after an other, to dine with him the next Sunday
following at his house, saying unto them, that in 9. or 10. years that he had
been in their service, he could do no less, then to bestow one dinner of
them, and he would entertayne them, though not so well as they were worthy,
yet according to his power, in the best manner that he might, or could devise.
They promised him one after an other to come together. But they were not so
negligent, but that every one of them made their provision at home again the
day appointed, fearing to have a slender Dinner of this singing man's provision,
giving better credit to his words, then to his kitchen. At the hour and
time set down, each of them sent their own ordinary provision to his house,
and he said unto them: My friends, my masters and yours does me great wrong,
are they afraid they shall not be well used? they need not send their dinner
hither, for I have provided meat for them, I thank God: but he took all that
came, and put all together in a great Pot, that he had provided of purpose in a
corner of the kitchen. At the last came the Channons to Dinner, and sat down
in order, according to their dignities. This singing man, at ye first let
before them their pottage, that he had put together in the great Pot, but God
knows in what order: for one had sent a Capon in stued broth, another Saffro^
broth, another Chickins in white broth, an other powderd beef and turnips, an
other a leg of mutton in herb pottage, some sent their meat sodden, and
some roasted. When the Channons saw this kind of service, they had no
stomachs to eat, but tarried each man to see when their own provision would
come in, not thinking that it was on the Table before them. The Querister or
singing man, went to and fro very busy, as one that was careful to see them
well served, beholding always their countenaunces that sat at the table. The
first service being somewhat too long, they could forbear no longer, but
said unto him: I pray thee take away these pottages, and give us those that we
sent hither. These are yours said he. Ours said they? that they are not. Yes
truly quoth he, they are: saying to one here is your turnups, to an other,
here is your stued broth, to an other, here is your herb pottage, to an other,
here is your white broth, and to an other, these are your Saffro^ pottage: then
they began each man to know his own pottage, and to behold one an other Now
truly, said they, we were never thus used, but is this the order to feast ye
Channons? now the Devil take all, I thought this fool would mock us. Then
spoke an other saying, I had the best pottage that was eat of this seven
years: And I said an other, had well provided for my dinner: And my heart gave
me said the fourth, that it had been better to have dined at home. When the
singing man had given ear a while unto their talk, he said: My masters, if
all your pottages were so good as ye feign they were, how can it be possible,
that they should become naught in so short a time? I have kept them by the fire
close covered, what could I have done better to them? Yea mary, said they, but
where did thou learn to put them thus together? thou mighst well know,
that they would not be good being thus mixed. Well then said he, I perceive
that which is good by it self alone, is naught being mixed with other things.
Now truly said he, I must needs believe you, if it be but by your selves my
Masters: for when ye be each one alone by your selves, there is nothing better
then ye are, you promise then mountains, but when you are together in your
Chapel Court, then are ye like to your pottages. The^ they understood well what
he meant. Ha well said they, we perceive now to what end this thy doing was,
thou have good cause to be considered: but in the mean time, shall we not dine?
Yes that you shall said he, better then you are worthy. Then he brought them
other meat that he had prepared, and set yt before them, where with they were
pleased. When they had well dyned, they went away, and concluded from that time
forth that he should be provided for, the which was done. And thus his
invention and devise of pottages, did prevail more, then all his requests and
importunate suites before time.

Of one that sang the Countertennor at Reymes, who was a singing man, a
Pickard, and a Master of Art.
THere was a singing man that did belong to our Ladies Church at Reymes, which
is the Country of Champeny, who had a singular good voice to singe the
Countertennor, but he was a man given very much to vice, for there escaped no
day wherein he did not commit some folly: with one he would fight, with an
other quarrel, a common gamester at Cards and Dice, always at the Tavern
with his pretty wenches, of whom complaints came daily to the Chapel Court,
before the Channons and masters, and they would often times warn him of his
faults, reproouing and threatening him, sometimes openly, sometimes secretly,
and he would promise every time to amend, and to become an honest man: but
when they were turned, and g^ne out of sight, and that the wine had gotten Sir
John by ye brain, then began he his old pranks. Now the Channons were
constrained to bear with him for two causes: the one was, because he sange
passing well: the other because he was put to them by an Archdeacon of the
Church, unto whom they bare such reverence, that they would not open the man's
faults unto him, thinking belike that he had known them as well as they, and
that he did reprove him for them (as in deed he did, when he knew thereof) but
he knew not the one half of this faults. It came to pass upon a time,
that this singing man committed an offense so haineus, that the Channons were
constrained of force to declare it to the Archdeacon, showing him that for his
sake they had put up many grievous offenses at his hands: but now, seeing he
used himself worse and worse, being in a manner past remedy, they could no
longer forbear to hold their peace. He has (said they) this night so beaten
a Priest, that he shall not be able to singe Mass again this two Months: if
it had not been for the love of you, we would have forbidden him our church
long ago, but for that we see in him no remedy, we pray you not to be
offended with us for that we do inform you thereof. The Archdeacon answered
them that they had done well, and that he himself would take order therein. And
incontinently he sent for the singing man, who feared that there was some
matter against him, for he knew well it was not to give him a Benefice,
nevertheless he went, and was no sooner gone in, but Master Archdeacon began
to sing to him an other manner of lesson then Mattins. Come hither said he,
thou know, how often those of this Church have borne with thy insolency and
naughty life, therefore avoid, and get the hence, and see that thou see my
face no more: I will not hereafter be reproved for such a leude Iauell as
thou art, for there is no amendment in thee: but if I should serve thee
according to thy deserts, I should make thee fast bread and water, this twelve
months. Ye need not ask if the singing man was cut on the head: not
withstanding, he was not so calmed, but that he made his answer directly, and
said: Sir, do you that are so well seen in men, marvel though I am not
wise: you know Sir, that I am a singing man, a Packard, and a Master of Art.
The Archdeacon at this sudden answer, could not tell whether to laughe, or to
be angry, notwithstanding he turned it to the best. For he assuaged by little
and little his anger, being provoked to do, as the Bishop of Courtisan did,
who forgave a Priest that had gotten five Nuns with child, to whom he was
ghostly Father. For being called before the Bishop, and very straightly
examined thereof, jesting out the matter, answered thus: Demine, quinque
tal^ntae tradists mihi, ecee alia quinque superlucratus sum: which is as much
as to say: Lord, thou gave me five tallentes, behold now I have gained
other five. A Pickard has always his head near his cappe: A singing man has
always some mynimes in his brain: A Master of Art is so full of Ergos, that
it forces not to talk with him. And truly, when these three good quallities
take hold of any man, it is no marvel though he have a light head, but rather
to wonder at the contrary.

Of three Sisters newly married, that did each of of them make a good answer
to their husbands the first night of their wedding.
IN the Country of Aniou there was in times past a Gentleman, that was rich,
and of a good stock, but he was somewhat subject to his pleasure. This
Gentleman had three Daughters, that were fair and well nurtured, and of such
age and years, that the youngest might well enough resist the violence of a
man. It happened so, that they were without a Mother: and because their Father
was yet of lusty years, he used still his old customs, which were, to keep
a good house, and to entertain and receive merry and pleasant company, where
the order was, to play, to dance, to revel, and to make good cheer. And for
that he was negligent, and not careful in the ordering of his house, and
ouerseeing of his household, his Daughters had opportunity, leisure, and
liberty enough, to talk and laugh with young Gentlemen: whose talk I warrant
you, was not how to make cheap corn, neither concerning the governance of
the public wealth, as the sequel shows. Also their father on his part,
played the Lover as well as others, which made the young Gentlewomen the more
boulder to love and to be beloved, for as the old Cocks crow, the yongones
learn. And they having gentle hearts, knowing that they were Gentlewomen of a
good house, thought it a thing very ungrateful, and full of reproach, to be
belooued, and not to love again. These reasons therefore considered, being
all thrae of them prayed, entertained, looued, and followed every day, and
hour, at length they suffered themselves to be taken and snared in love,
taking such compassion on their paramours, that they spared not so pleasure
them, in whatsoever they did demand. At which play and sport they sped so well,
that the marks and signs began to appear: for the eldest daughter (being
somewhat more forward then the rest) was greatly abashed, because there was no
way to keep it secret: for in a house where the mother is missing, there is
small regard of the daughters doings: or at the least, if there happen a
mischaunce, they know ways and remedies to prevent it. But the Maiden knowing
no way to hide this from her Father, determined to make him privy to her
secret practices: which, when he understood, he was at the first very sorry
and greatly displeased, but he dispaired not, for that he was of that stamp
of men, that took not things to the heart. And to say the truth, what need a
man torment and vex himself for a thing, when it is done? it is but rather to
make it worse. Well, he sent his Daughter into the Country, three or four
miles off, to an Aunt that she had, under color of sickness, because that by
the counsel of the Physicians, the change of the air was very good for her,
tarrying there until she was dliuered with child But as it is commo^lie seen,
one misfortune falls upon an others neck: for as his eldest Daughter had in
a manner dispatched her business, and emptied her belly, the second Sister was
also sped. The Father perceiving this, said: I see that my Daughters would not
that the world should be left desolate. And upon this event (doubting belike
the worst) he came to his youngest daughter, who was not yet with child, but
she had done her good will in the matter to her power: Well Daughter said he,
he to do and thou? have not thou followed thy e^der afters steps? The young
Damsel began to changed color, and to blush, which the Father took for open
confession. Very well said he, God send us good luck, and keep us from
evil: yet nevertheless, he thought it his time to provide for his affairs,
and therefore he determined to marry his three Daughters. But here was the
mischief, he knew not to whom: for, to offer them to his neighbors it was in
vain, because their doings in his house was known, or at the least
suspected. On the other side, to marry them to those that had abused his
Daughters, was a thing that could not well be done, for it may be each of them
had more then one. And if peradventure there was but one man that had done the
deed, ye know few men will put their trust in one that will so willingly lay
her legs open, before she know who shall be her husband. And for these
considerations, the Father thought it more expedient and necessary, to seek
his sons in Law further from home. And as those men which of nature are
pleasant and marie, and love to frequent company, are happy and fortunate in
their doings: even so, this gentleman failed not of his purpose, to find out
that which he sought for, which was in the Country of Bryttaine, where he was
well known, as well for the name of his house, as for the lands and gooddes he
had in that country, not far from the Town of Nantes: by means whereof, he
had good occasion to make his journey thither. To conclude, when he was in the
said country, as well by friends that he made, as through himself, he preferred
the marriage of his three Daughters: to which the Bryttaines gave some ear, so
that there was choice enough. But amongst all the rest, there was one Gentleman
of Bryttaine who was rich, and of a good stock, the which had three sons of
good years, and well made like men, good dauncers, clean legged, well footed,
and excellent at all games, whose like was not to be sad in all the whose
Country, whereof this Gentleman was very glad. And becaue the prolonging of
the time was not best, he concluded the match with ye Father of these
youngmen, that his three Sons should marry his three Daughters, and that one
Bridal should serve for all: that is, they should all three be married on one
day. And to bring this to pass, the three brethren prepared them selves with
all speed to depart into Aniou, with the Gentleman father of three daughters.
Now you must note, that although they were Bryttaines, there was not one of the
three but knew fashions: for they had played youthful prankes with the
Brittanish Maids, which are of a good inclination that way, as the talk
goes. But to our matter. When they were come to the Gentleman's house, they
beheld the countenances of the three Gentlewomen, every one his, and found
them all fresh, fair and pleasant, and also wise and well spoken. Well, the
marriage was concluded, and al things prepared: But she night before the wedding
should be, the Father called his three Daughters aside into a chamber, and said
unto them these words: Ye know what fault you have al three committed, and
what pain you have put me unto: if I had been of the nature of these rigorous
cruel and heard hearted fathers, I had cast you off, and you should never
have enioied any of my goods: but for my part you see, I had rather redress
things that are amiss, then to put you to shame, and my self in perpetual
trouble through your follies. I have here brought for each of you a husband,
therefore prepare your selves to make much of them and cherishe them, and
pluck up good hearts, you shall have no harm: If they happen to perceive or
spy any thing by any of you, to your own peril be it, nevertheless you
have as yet done the^ no offense. And therefore henceforth take heed to your
selves, and govern your selves so, that there may be found no fault in your
doings, and I promise you for my part, that I will both forget and forgive all
faults past. And besides all this, I assure you, she that can give unto her
Husband the best answer to please him the first night, being in bed
together, should have for her part two hundredth Crowns more then the others:
now therefore go your ways, and remember my words. After these wholesome
admonitions, he went to bed, and his Daughters also, being nothing obliuious
in this matter. The Brydal day was the next morrow, they went to the Church,
and were married early in the Morning. There was great cheer, with dancing
and leaping about the house: which being paste, the heddes were made, wherein
the Brides were bravely laid, unto whom their husbands shortly after came, what
time the eldest sporting with his new bedfellow, and feeling her belly very
lancke, merely put forth these speeches: I doubt my beloved, the birds be fled
and gone: unto whom she presently replied, keep you then in the nest. The
second sisters husband handling her, feeling her belly hard and round, began
thus: how now Wise, the barn is already full: beat then at the gate quoth
thee. The third sisters husband in sporting himself in like sort, and finding
his wife skillful in ye game, presently spoke in this manner: I perceive the way
was beaten before: the damsel answered, you may the better find the path.
The night being past, and the day come, they came all three before their
father, and declared unto him, what had chanced, and what was their aunswers:
now, would I know to which of the three he ought to give the CC. Crowns: If
therefore your skill be so good, declare the truth of this difficult matter.

Of a certain man in Pickardy, that withdrew his wife from her disordinate
love, through the admonition that he gave her in the presence of her parents.
THere was in times past a King in France, whose name we do not well know,
and although we did, yet should it be secret, because of this matter whereof
we mean to speak. Nevertheless it is said that he was a good King, and
worthy of the Crown, he would bend his ear to hear the talk as well of
the poor as of the rich, for thereby he understood the truth of things, which
cannot be so well when one goes by hear say: but to the purpose. This good
king, would walk through the countries of his kingdom, and many times would
go into the Cities and Towns in a disguised garment, to understand the
truth and order of things. Upon a day he thought to visit the country of
Pickardy in his royal person: notwithstanding, using many times his accustomed
priuatnes, being at Soyssons, he sent for the cheifest of the town, and
caused them to sit down with him at his Table, in token of great courtesy,
requesting them very gently, to rehearse and tell some stories, either merry
tales, or such as were grave and sad. Amongst others, there was one that began
to declare to the King this story following. And it like your grace said he,
it came to pass not long since in one of the towns of Pickardy, y^ a
certain Justice, who lives yet, buried his wife, after they had lived
together a good season. And because he lyked so well the first, he had a desire
to marble the second time, and took to wife a Maiden fresh and fair, and come
of a good kindred yet notwithstanding, she was not equal to him either in
goods, or in quallities: for he was of good years, and half spent, and she in
the flower of her youth wanton, and full of pleasure, so that he was not able
to satisfy her youth according to her desire: for when she began to have a
little taste of the joys and pleasures of this world, she felt quickly, that her
husband did but set her a longing. And although he gave her good entertainment
as well in her apparel, in fair words, and showing to her a merry
countenance, nevertheless, all this served but to set fire in the ^ow, so
that at the last it flamed out in such sort, that she determined with her
self, to borrow of some other that which her Husband wanted to perform. At
the last, she found out a new Lover, with whom she used her pleasure for a
time: but not content with him, she got an other, and then an other, so that
in short time she had such a company, that they hindered one an other, coming
in unto her both at lawful and unlawful hours, to take their pleasure on
her: by which means, she had laid aside the remembrance of her honor,
giving her self wholly to her lust and pleasure. In the mean time her husband
knew nothing, or at the least if he did, he armed himself with patience, being
content to bear the penance of his own folly, because that his years being
more then half spent, he had so unadvisedly taken to wife a maid of so young
and tender years. Well, this train continued so long, till it was commonly
talke^d on in the town, and in every man's mouth: wherewith his friends were
grieved so sore, that one of them could not refrain, but came and told him
thereof, declaring unto him the rumor and noise that was spread abroad, so that
if he did not provide a remedy, he would give occasion unto all the world to
think that he was content withal: and in the end all his friends would
despise and forsake his company, and he should be abhorred of all honest men.
When he understood the talk of his friend, he made a sign of great displeasure
and sorrow, as one that knew nothing thereof, and promised to see a remedy
therein with as much speed as was possible: but when he was alone by him self,
he thought it was a thing out of his power to remedy, but that the shame
would continue and remain still: and he thought his wife should of her self
in respect of him, and of her honor, call back her folly and beware:
otherwise, all the strong walls, boltes, and locks, would not hold her in,
nor stay her disordinate affection. Furthermore, he reasoned with himself,
that he being a man sober and wise, ought not to set his care toward the
bridling of a vain and evil given woman, the which thing kept him from
searching out the truth, of the matter too rashly. Notwithstanding, for that
he would not seem as one not careful of his domestical affairs, the which
was esteemed of all men must dishonest and wicked, he bethought him on a
remedy, which he thought above all others was most expedient and necessary.
The remedy was this: he determined to buy a house which joined to his
backeside, and of two he purposed to make one, saying, that he would have a
going in and out at his backside, as well as at the street side. Which devise
was sp^edilie finished, and a door was made in the secretest place that might
be: unto which he caused to be made half a dossen of keys, and he forgot not
to make a gallerie very proper for the goers and comers. These thing being
thus prepared, he appointed a day to have all his Wives principal and chief
parents and kindred to dinner, and not one of his own kindred at that time: he
gave them good entertainment, and made them great cheer. After Dinner was
done, before any of them did rise from the Table, he began to speak unto them
these words following in the presence of his Wife: My masters and Gentlewomen
all, that are here present, you know how long it is since I married your
kinswoman, that sits here by me, I have had now time and leisure to
consider, yt it was not to me she ought to have been married, because ye match
between her and me was not equal: but when a thing is done, that may not be
undone, we must be content to tarry the end. Then turning himself toward his
wife, he said unto her: wife, I have not long since suffered rebukes, through
your naughty and evil government, the which has grieved me at the heart. It
has been showed me, that there comes hither youngmen at all hours of the
day to keep you company, truly, it is a thing greatly to your dishonor and
mine, which if I had perceived before now, I would have provided a remedy for:
but yet it is better late the^ never. I pray you speak unto those that
frequent your company, that here after they may come to you in more secret
manner, which they may the better do, because of a door on the backside, which
I caused to be made for them, of which door here are half a dossen keys for
you, to give to each of your lovers one, and if there be not keys enough, I
will cause more to be made, for the Smith is at our commandment: and bid
them so to part the time of their meeting, as may be most profitable both for
them and you: for if you will not abstain from sin and evil doing, at the
least do it so secretly, that the world have no occasion to speak of the
same, to your shame and mine. When the young Wife had heard the talk that her
Husband had made unto her in the presence of her parents and friends, she
began to be ashamed of her doings, and remembered with her self the wrong and
injury that she had done to her Husband, to the dishonor of him, her self,
and her kindred: so that that then she had such remorse of conscience, that
from that time forward, she shut the gate against all her Lovers, and forsook
all her disordinate affections, and unlawful pleasures, and afterward lived
with her husband like an honest and virtuous Wife, in all honor, and
contentation of them both. When the King had heard this story, he was desirous
to know who was the party, saying: now by the faith of a Gentleman, he is one
of the pacientst men in my kingdom, he would sure do some virtuous act, seeing
he is endued with such patience. And at the very same time the King made him
his general Attorney in Pickardy. As for me, if I knew the name of this honest
man, I would give him immortal praise: but time has done great wrong to hide
his name, that deserved well to be placed in the Chronicles, yea, to have been
canonized. For he was a very Martyr in this world, and I believe he is happy
in the world to come.

Of a Norman that went to Rome, who provided Lattin to carry to the Pope, and
how he helped himself therewith.
THere was upon a time a Norman, who perceiving that Priests lived the best
and easiest life in the world, after his wife was dead, had a desire to
become one of the Church, but he could write and read very little.
Nevertheless, having heard say that money made all, and esteeming him self to
be as like a man, as many of the priests of his parish, he came to one of his
familiar friends, and brake his mind unto him, asking his counsel how to use
and govern, him self in this matter. Who, after much talk had between them,
did comfort him, and said, that if he would have his matters well brought to
pass, it were best for him to go to Rome, for he should have some what to
do to be made Priest at the Bishops hand, that was his ordinary, who was
very circumspect in admitting Priests, and giving them their Significauit: But
the Pope, that was troubled with many other things, would make no regard of
his ignorance, but would admit him with all speed. More over, in so doing he
should see the Country, and at his return, being known to be priested at ye
Popes hands, there were none, but would do him honor and woorship, and that
in a short time he should get a great Benefice, and become a very rich man.
The Norman found this talk good, and agreeable to his mind, but he had this
blot of conscience, that he could speak no Latin, and declared it unto his
counselor, saying: Yea mary, but when that I shall come before the Pope, what
language shall I speak? he does not understand the Norman speech, nor I can
speak no Lattin, how shall I do then? As for that said his friend, thou need
not to stay: for when thou art a Priest, it is enough for thee to know a Mass
of Requiem, our Ladies Mass, and a Mass of the holy Ghost, the which thou
may learn quickly after thy return. But for to speak unto the Pope, I will
teach the three Latin words, so well placed, that when thou have said them
before him, he shall think thee to be a profounde and learned Clarke. The
Norman was very glad to hear these tidinges, so that he would in all have
know what were these three words. Friend, said his Counselor so soon as
thou art come before the Pope, thou shall fall down on thy knees saying: Salve
sancte pater: then he will ask thee in Lattin, Vnde es tu? that is to say, Of
whence art thou? Thou shall answer him, De Normania: then he will ask
thee, Vbi sunt literae tuae? thou shalt say to him, In manica mea: and
presently without any delay, he will command thou shall be dispatched, and
then shall thou come thy ways. This Norman was never so iocund and merry as
now, so that he remained fifteen or twenty days with his friend, to learn
those three Lattin words: and when he thought he had learned them well, he
prepared himself to take his journey to Rome. And by the way he did nothing
but repeat his Lattin: Salve sancte pater: De Normania: In mansca, meo: but I
think verily he said it so often, and with such great affection, that he
forgot the first word, Salve sancte pater: and to see the luck of it, he was
well forward on his way. If the Norman was troubled, truly it was no marvel:
for he knew not to what Saint to make his vow, to recover again his words:
and he thought with himself, to come before ye Pope without them was in vain:
and also he thought, that it was not possible for him to find a man, that
could so faith fully instruct and teach him, on the friend of his own parish
from whence he came. Never was man so sorry, as this poor man was, until it
chanced upon a Saturday in the morning, that he went into a Church to pray,
whereas he understood they began to sing a Mass of our Lady in note, Salve
sancta parens, whereunto the Norman gave ear: now God be praised and our
blessed Lady, said he, here are good tidinges. Never was man so glad as he,
and he caused the words to be repeated by a clarke that was there, keeping
them so well in memory, that he forgot them no more, and thus set forward on
his way with his Lattin, Salve sancta parens: thinking himself the better yt
ever he was borne. At length he iourneyed so far, that he came to Rome. And you
must note, that in those days it was not so dangerous to speak with the
Pope, as it is now. Well, when he was come thither, he was had in before the
Pope, where he forgot not his reverence upon his knees, saying unto him, Salve
sancta parens. The Pope said unto him, Ego non sum matter Christ's: the Norman
answered, De Normacia. The Pope behold him, and said: Demonium habes? In
manicae meo, answered the Norman: and with that he put his hand into his
sleeue to pull out his letters. The Pope began to be afraid, thinking he
would have pulled the Devil out of his sleeue: but when he perceived that they
were letters, he asked him again, Quid petis? But the Norman could go no
further, for he was at the end of his lesson, so that he answered nothing at
all to the Pope. In the end, when that certain of his own nation perceived
what Country man he was, they began to question with him in his own
language: whom he gave to understand and know, that he had learned but a little
Lattin in his country for his own provision, and that he knew much good, but
he understood not the way how to use it.

Of Fowlke, that made his Master believe, that a poor man which came to him
was deaf, and also made the man believe that his Master was deaf, and how
his Master was revenged of him for it.
A Certain Attorney in the Law, kept under him two or three Clerks, among
the which there was one a wealthy man's son in Paris, that was his
Apprentise, which put his son to the said Attorney to learn the skill of the
Law. This young man's name was Fowlke, about the age of sixteen or seventeen
years very unhappy, wild, and full of play. Now (according to the custom
of such houses) Fowlke did always the arrants and business: amongst which one
was, that he went always to the gate when any body knocked, for to know the
parties that did wait for his master, and to know their request, to make
report thereof to his Master. There was a certain man that had a suite at
Chastelet, and had taken Fowlkes Master for his Attorney, and came oftentimes
to visit him: and also because he would have the more friendship showed him, he
brought with him sometimes Capons, Conies, and Chickons: and his use was, to come
always a little before noone, at such time as the Clerks were at Dinner, to
whom Fowlke must open the gate, and then carry his Master word, and then
to the gate again to carry him an answer, that before Fowlke could go in
and out and dispatch the matter, his Dinner was very light: and on the other
side, his Master had no great respect of him, for he would send him abroad
into the City at all hours of the day, at which Fowlke was sore grieved.
Upon a time this honest man came again to the gate at the hour accustomed,
whom Fowlke knew by his knocking: when he had knocked three or four times,
he went and opened him the gate, and in going he thought to play him a cast of
legerdemain, because he came always at dinner time, and he thought his Master
should have part. Having opened the gate, how now good man said he, what say
you? I would speak with your master quoth he, concerning my suite. Well said
Fowlke, tell me yoor mind, and I will certefie him. No said the good man, I
must speak with him my self: well then said Fowlke, I will go tell him that
you are here. In he goes to his Master, and told him that such a man would
speak with him: bid him come in then said the Attorney. Sir said Fowlke, he
is become deaf, or at the least he cannot well hear, you must speak loud
enough, if you will have him to understand. Well said his master, I will
speak loud enough. Fowlke goes then to the man, and said unto him: come in
good man and speak unto my master: but wot you what? there is fallen a
disease into my masters ears, so that he is become almost deaf, when you
speak to him, you must speak to him aloude, or else he can not hear you.
This being done, Fowlke goes to make an end of his Dinner, and in his going
said to himself, our master and yonder man will not now I trow talk in
counsel. The good man comes into the chamber whereas the Attorney was, and
saluted him, saying: God give you good morrow sir, so loud, that a man might
have heard him all the house over. The Attorney said unto him as loud,
welcome friend, what news with thee? Then they entered into talk concerning
the man's matter, but they talked out so loud one against an other, as if they
had lost one another in a wood. When they had well debated the matter on both
sides, the good man takes her leave of the Attorney, and goes his way.
Within certain days after, this good man came again, but it was at such
time as Fowlke was abroad in the City, about business that his Master had
sent him. The honest man went in, and did his duty to his Attorney,
demanding of him how he did? He answered that he was in health. Ha Sir, said
this good man, God be praised, yt you are no more deaf, the last time that I
was here, we were feign to speak aloude, but now I perceive that you can
hear well, thanked be God. The Attorney was abashed at his saying: nay quoth
he, have you recovered your hearing? It is you that was deaf. The man
answered unto him, that he was never deaf, but that he heard always very
well: then the Attorneye perceived well that it was one of Fowlkes knauish
devises: but he found ye means to recompense it again. For upon a day when
that he had sent him into the City, Fowlke forgate not to take the Tennys
Court in his way, the which was not far from his Masters house, as he was
accustomed most times to do when he was sent abroad, the which his May. knew
full well, and also had found him there many times as he went by: knowing well
yt he should find him there, he went to a Barbar, that dwelled hard by,
praying him to provide him a good new Rod ready, and told him for what purpose
he would have it. When he thought his man Fowlke had played so long that he did
sweat, and was in a great heat: he came into the Tennys Court, and called
Fowlke that had banded all ready his part of two dosen of bauls, and was
playing at double or quit, when his Master saw him so red, and in such a
heat, well ye knave said he, leave of, thou spoylest thy self, if thou
chance to be sick, thy Father will lay ye blame in me: and there upon,
coming out of the Tennys, he caused him to go into the Barbars, to whom he
said: Gossep, I pray you lend me a shirt for this young man, yt is alone a
sweat, and cause him to be rubbed. Good God, said the Barber, marry Sir he
had need, otherwise he should be in a danger of a pleuresie. They caused
Fowlke to go into a back shop, and made him to put of his clothes before a
fire, that was kindled to cloak the matter, and in ye mean time, the rods
were prepared for poor Fowlke, that would have bin contented to have escaped
without a clean shirt, When his clothes were of, these cursed rods were
brought, wherewith he was well whypped, both back and bellye and al about. And
in yerking of him, his M. said, how now Fowlke? how likest thou this pastime? I
was the other day deaf, but I shall make you daunse after a new fashion, how
say ye, is it good playing ye fool with your Master: But GOD knows Fowlke
was blancke, and learned by this that it was not good mocking his Master any
more.

Of a Doctor of degree, that was so sore hurt with an Ox, that he could not
tell in which leg it was.
THere was upon a time a certain Doctor, ryding through the streets toward
the Schools, who met in the way by chance a Company of Oxen, yt a Butchers
Boy did drive: one of yt which Oxen came so near to M. Doctor that he touched
his gown as he passed upon his Mule: wherwithall, he being sore afraid, cried
out a loud, help my Masters, help this Ox has killed me, I am dead: at
this cry, ye People came running together thinking by his cry yt he was
grievously hurt, one kept him upon the one side, another on the other side upon
his Mule: and amongst his great cries, he called his servant who was named
Cornellius: come hither said he, go thy ways to the Schools, and tell them
yt I am dead, an Ox has killed me, and yt I cannot come to make my lecture.
The Students were sore troubled to hear these news, and so were the other
Doctors: whereupon they appointed some to go see him, which found him laid a
long upon a bed, and the Surgeon by him that had his rolling bands, his ayle,
his ointements his whiles of eggs, and all his ymplements, necessary in such a
chance. M. Doctor complained on his right leg so sore, yt he could not endure
to have his hose pulled of, but that it must needs be ripped. When ye Surgeon
had seen his bare leg, he found no skin broken nor bruised, nor no appearance of
hurt, although that M. Doctor cried still, I am dead my friend: and when ye
Surgeon did touch it with his hand, he cried the louder, thou killest me, thou
killest me. And where is it yt it greeneth you most said the Surgeon? do thou
not see said he, how an Ox has killed me, and ask thou me where my pain
lies? then the Surgeon asked him, is it here Sir? no quoth he: nor here? no
neither: to be short it could not be found. Oh good God, said the Doctor, what
a pain is this, yt these Folks cannot find where my pain lies? is it not
swollen said he to the Barber? no Sir said he. It must needs be the^ said the
Doctor, yt it is in the other leg, for I know well enough that ye Ox did strike
me on one of my legs. There was no remedy but ye other hose must be pulled of,
and ye leg serched, but there was as much harm as in ye first leg. Good Lord
quoth the Doctor, this Surgeo^ has no skill, go fetch me another. When he was
come and could find nothing, the Doctor began to wonder, saying: this is a
straung matter, yt such a great Ox should strike me, and do me no harm: the^
calling his man, he said: come hither, Cornelius? when the ox did hurt me, in
which leg was it? was it not in this next the wall? Ita Domine, said his
Servant: then quoth he, it must needs be in this leg, and so I said at the
first, but they thought I mocked the^. The Surgeon perceiving yt M. Doctor had
no harm, but only was afraid: for to content his mind, he gave it a little
ointme^t, and bound his leg with a cloth, saying unto him, that ye dressing
would serve at that time, and afterward, said he Master Doctor, when you can
tell me in which leg it is, another salve shall be laid unto it.

A comparison of South-sayers, and Tellers of fortune, to the good wife, that
carried a pale of milcke to the Market.
THe common talk of Southsayers and tellers of fortune is to promise great
riches, saying they know the secrets of nature, which the wisest men never
knew: their doings, is like smoke in the Sun, so yt their Southsaying may
rather be termed false saying, and we cannot compare it better, then to a good
wife yt sometime carried a pale of milk to the market, thinking to sell it, as
pleased her, making her reckoning thus. First she would sell her milk for ij.d.
and with this ij.d. buy xij. eggs, which she would set to brood under a hen, and
she would have 12. Chickons, these chykons being grown up, she would kerue
them, and by that means, they should be capons: these capons would be worth,
(being young) five pence a piece: that is, just a crown: with the which she
would buy two pigs, a Sow and a Boar, and they growing great, would bring
forth twelve others, the which she would sell (after she had keept them a
while) for five grotes a piece: that is, just twenty shillings. The^ she would
buie a Mare, that would bring forth a fair Foale, the which would grow up,
and be so gentill and fair, yt he would play skip, leap and fling, and cry
we he he he after every beast that should pass by, and for the joy she
conceived of her suppossed coult, in her iollitie counterfeiting to show his
lustynesse, her pale of milcke fell down of her head, and was all spilt: there
lay her eggs, her chikons, her capons her pigs, her mare, her coulte, and al
upon the ground. Even so these Southsaiers, after yt they have furnished,
burnished, blotted, and spotted, loutted and floutted, putrefied and corrupted,
promised and not performed, their best box being broken, they may go count
with this good Wife.

Of King Solomon, that made the Philosophical stone, and the cause why these
Southsayers cannot prevail in their doings.
THE cause why South-sayers, Witches and Wissardes, cannot bring all there
matters to pass as they would, all the world does not know: but Marie the
Prophetisse, shows the cause why, in a Book that she has made of the great
excellency and knowledge of the art, exhorting the Philosophers, and giving
them courage not to despair, and she says, that the Philosophers stone, is so
worthy and so precious, that amongst other her wonderful virtues and
excellences, she has power to commau^d Sprites, and whosoever has it, he may
bind, loose, warrant, torment, martyr, help out of prison, go through boltes
and locks: to be short, he may iuggle, play with both hands, and do what
he list, if he know how to use his fortune. It is so (says she) that Solomon
had the perfection of this stone, and knew by divine inspiration, the great and
woonderful property of the same, which was, to constrain the Devils as we
have said. And therefore, so soon as he had made it, he concluded to make all
the spirits come and appear before him: but first he caused to be made a
Caldron of Brass, of a wonderful and huge greatness; for it was nothing less
then all the whole circuit of the Forest of Sherborn, but that it wanted
half a foot, or there about: it is all a matter, we will not strive for a
little: mary ye must note, that it must be somewhat rounder, and it was needful
to be so great, for to serve that turn that he minded. And after the same
manner he caused to be made a cover, so closse and just, as was possible. And
also in like manner, he caused a hole to be made, and cast in the ground, large
and deep enough, for to bury his Caldron. When he had prepared all these
things, he made to come before him by virtue of the stone, all the Spirits,
that were dispersed in this world, little and great, beginning with the
Emperoures of the four corners of the earth: then he made the Kings to come,
Dukes, Earls, Barrons, Lords, Knights, Esquires, Captains, heads of Bands,
petty Captains, Soldiers a foot, and on horseback, to great numbers. When
they were all come, Solomon commanded them, by the virtue aforesaid, yt they
should all go into that said pan that was buried in the ground. The Spirits
could not gainesay, but were feign to go in, but ye may well think that it was
with great grief. So soon as they were all in, Solomon caused the cover to be
set on, and glued fast with the glue of Sapience, and therein leaving the
Devils, caused it also to be covered with earth, until the hole was filled
up, with whom his mind and purpose was, that the world should be no more
infected, and that men might afterward live in peace and tranquillity, and
that all virtue and godliness might reign upon the earth. And it came to
pass presently after that, that men began to be merry and glad, content,
lively, gallant frollirke, gentle, amiable and pleasant: O how all things
went forward. The earth brought forth all manner of fruit without man's
labor, the Wolves did not devour the Cattle, the Lions, Tigers, and wild
Boares, were as tame as other Beasts: to be short, all the earth seemed a
Paradise, whilst these Runnigate Devils were enclosed in this deep Dongeon:
But what happened after a long time? as Kingdoms chance to change, the
Towns and Cities decay, and new are builded: so, there was a King, who had a
great desire to build a City: and Fortune would, that it came into his head,
to raise it in the proper place whereas these Devils were enclosed. This King
set people on work for to make this City, the which he would have mighty,
strong, and invincible, and therefore it required a terrible and deep
foundations to make the walls: hereupon the Pyonners dug so low, that one
amongst the rest discovered the Caldron wherein these spirits were, who after
yt he had stricken upon it, and that his companions did perceive it, thought
they should have been made rich for ever, and yt there was hidden some
inestimable Riches. But it was not in their power to break it open of a
sudden: for besides ye greatness, it was out of measure thick, and therefore
it was necessary that the King should know thereof. Who when he had seen it,
thought even as the Pyoners did: for who would ever have thought that devils
were therein, when it was thought that there was none in the world? for in long
time before there was no talk of them. This King did well remember, that the
Kings his predecessors had infinite riches, so as he could not judge but that
they had buried and hid therein some great treasure, and that it was appointed
him of destenie to find it out and to enjoy that wealth, that he might be the
richest King in the world. To conclude, he set as many men of work, as there
was about the Caldro^ at the first, and whilst they were battering and beating
upon it, to get it open, the Devils were at their watch, listening and giving
care what it should be, so yt they could not tell what to think whether they
should be had out to hanging, or that their Judgment had been made since they
weere put there. Now these brasiers and batterers had beaten upon it so long,
that they beat out a great piece of the cover, and made a way to go in: but
it was no sooner open, then ye Devils you may be sure, striued to get out by
heaps, making such a noise and cry, that the King and all his people was so
amassed with fear, that they fell down as dead: and these Spirits got them to
their feet, and away they go, every one to his old corner, but that perhaps
some of them were amassed, to see the Countries and Kingdoms altered and
changed since their imprisonment: by means whereof, they were feign for a
time to straye as vacabonds, not knowing of what country they were because
they heard not their parish bell. But all the way as they went, they did so
many mischiefs, that it was horrible to declare: for in steed of one mischief
that they did in times past to vex the world, they invented a thousand: they
killed, they overthrew, they cast down, spoiled and overwhelmed all things,
all went to shiuers, for the Devils were loose. In those days there were many
Philosophers, for the South-sayers and Augurers, were called Philosophers by
excellency, because that Solomon had left them by writing the manner and form
to make the holy Stone, the which they brought to an art, and kept schools of
Philosophy, as we do of Grammar, in such sort, that many attained to the
knowledge, considering also, that these cursed Spirits did not trouble their
brain whilst they were enclosed. But so soon as they were at liberty,
remembering how Solomon had misused them by virtue of this stone, the first
thing they did, was to go to the Philosophers Forges, and to cast them down:
and also they found the means to deface, scrape out, break, and falsefie,
all the Books that they could find out, of the said Science, so that they
left them so obscure and hard, that men know not what they seek. And they
were minded altogether to abolishe and root it out, but that God would not
suffer them: yet this permission they had, to go and come, for to hinder the
best learned in their business, in such sort, that when any one takes
pains to attain the perfection thereof, and has in a manner brought it to
pass, then comes the Devil, and he breaks a box which is full of this
precious matter, and in less then half an hour, makes the poor Philosopher
loose all the pains that he has taken in ten or twelve years, so that he is
to begin again, not because Hogs have rooted it up and spoiled it, but the
Devils which are worse. And this is the cause why so few Southsayers attain
to their enterprises, not for that the Science is not so true as it was at the
first, but because the wicked Spirits are enemies of this gift, and seek
utterly to overthrow it: and because it may be one day, that one may have the
grace to do as well, as Solomon ever did: if by good luck he happen in our
days, I pray him by these presents, that he forget not to conjure, adjure,
excommunicate, root out, destroy, exterminate, confound, and utterly abolish
these wicked spirits, enemies to nature, and all good things, that thus hinder
not only the poor Southsayers, but also all men and women: for they put into
their heads a thousand wrongs, and a thousand fantasies, yea, and they
themselves enter into these old Witches, making them very Devils. And hereof
comes these words, that are spoken of a wicked woman, She has a Deuelish
head.

Of the Cardinal of Luxenburg, and of the good Wife that would make her Son
a Priest, and how the said Cardinal named himself Philpot.
DVring the Reign of Lewys French King, the twelueth of that name, there was a
Cardinal of the house of Luxe^burg, who was Bishop of Man's, and kept commonly
at his manor at Man's, being a man of great magnificence and loved and honored
of his Diocessers, like a Prince, more like then a Prelate. And with his honor
he used a certain familiarity, that made him the better beloved of ye People,
and also he was full of his flouts in time and place, and he loved to Jest, and
would take it in good part to be iested withal. Upon a day, there came before
him a good Wife of the Country (as he was bent to give ear to all comers,)
the which wife, after that she had kneeled down before him, and received his
blessing (as they used very devoutly in those days) she began to say unto him:
my Lord, and it like your grace, with all reverence be it spoken, I have a son
that is twenty year old and better, and is Clarke good enough, for he has
gone a year to School in our parish, I would feign have him made a Priest, if
it were your pleasure to accept him. In faith said ye Cardinal, it should well
done good wife, let him be made one: yea Sir (said the simple wife) but there
is a thing I fear me will let him: yet it was told me that you can
recompense him, she would have said, dispe^ce with him. The Cardinal taking
great pleasure in the Woman's simplicity, said to her, what is it good wife?
Sir, so it is, that he has not: what is that he has not said be? ha my Lord
said she, he has not, I dare not tell it: for ye know well enough what men
carry. The Cardinal that understood her well, said to her, and what is that
which men carry? has he no long hose? no, no (quoth she) it is not that I
would speak: Dyr, he has nothing. The Cardinal, was long questioning with
her, to see whether he could have made her speak it out, but it was not
possible, for she said unto him: ha my Lord, you understand me well enough,
to what end do ye reason so long with me? notwithstanding, in the end she said
unto him: you shall understand my Lord, when he was a little boy, he fell of a
ladder, and so brake the^, that he was feign to be gelded, and had it not been
for that mischaunce, I would have married him, because he is the tallest of all
my Children. In faith said the Cardinal, he shall not let to be a Priest for
all that, being once dispensed, for that must ye note by the way: and I would
to God yt all the priests in my diocese were in his case, and had no more then
he. Ha my Lord said she, I thank your grace, he shall be bound to pray to God
for you, and for all your good Friends that are dead. But my Lord, there is yet
another thing, that I would tell your Lordship, so that it do not displease
you. What is that good woman, said he? it is told me (quoth she) that Bishops
may change Men's names: I have another boy, that does nothing but mock him,
because he is named Phillip, and it like your grace, I think if that he had an
other name, it should be better for him, for they cry after him Philpot,
Philpot: and you know Sir what a grief it is unto one when he is scorned and
mocked: I would desire you, and it were your pleasure, to give him another
name. Now, ye shall note, that the Cardinal himself was named Phillip. Truly
good wife said he, it is evil done of them to call your Son Philpot, we must
see a remedy for it, but you shall understand said he, I would not take the
name of Phillip from him, but I will have him to keep the name for my sake,
because I am of that name. And therefore I will give him my name, and I will
take his, so that hereafter I will be called Philpot. And whosoever miscalleth
thy Son otherwise the^ Phillip, come and tell me, and I will give thee leave to
take an action against them: how say you? are you not so content? thou will not
be offended that thy Son be called after my name? In good faith my Lord
(quoth she) you do for us more, then we shall be ever able to deserve, and
therefore I pray God of his grace to send you long life, and Heaven for your
meede. The good wife went her way very well pleased and content, to have had so
good an answer of the Bishop, and told all her Neighbors what my Lord had
done for her. After this, the said Cardinal that had a delight to repeat such
stories, would name himself Philpot for pleasure, and said that his name was no
more Phillip, so that often times he was called Philpot, whereat he would laugh,
after the manner of Augustus Caesar, who loved to Jest many times, and be
content to be iested withal, as appears by this common talk of him, and of
a young man that came to Rome, who was in face so like The Emperor, that there
was no difference to discern between them, and was looked at and vewed of all
the People of the City. Whereof Augustus, having knowledge, said unto him
upon a time: tell me young man, has your Mother been at any time in the City
of Rome. The yongma^ that understood well the Emperors meaning, answered: and
it like your majesty, my Mother came never yet to this City as I have hard
her say, but my Father has bin here diverse and sundry times, so yt by this
answer, he gave unto Augustus that, which Augustus thought to have laid upon
him. For it was no more impossible that the yongmans Father, might have known
Augustus Mother, then the Emperor to have been acquainted with the youngmans
mother: neither did the same Emperor take it in anger when Virgill called him
a Bakers Son, because ye first time that he knew him, he would distribute
loaffes of bread for gifts and presents, but afterward, he gave him many
other rich and good gifts.

Of a young man of Paris newely married, and how that Beaufort fownd a crafty
means to take his pleasure of his wife, notwithstanding the diligent and
careful watch and keeping of Dame Parnet.
A Certain Man of Paris, after that he had frequented the University to small
profit, gave over his study, and went and dwelled in the City, where he
remained for a certain time without a Wife, being content so to live, wanting
no kind of pleasure that he could wish or desire, and also women (although
there be no such at Paris to be had) of which he having known the crafts and
subteltyes in many Cuntreyes, and having himself used them to his own use, he
did not greatly force to marry a Wife, fearing this cursed and common
mischief, to be made a Coockolde: and had it not been for the desire he had
to see him self a Father, and to have an heir of his own body, he could have
been contented, to have kept him self a Bacheller still. But he being a man
subject to the flesh, thought it best notwithstanding to marry and take a
wife, and that rather betyme then to late, and partly because he thought he
knew how to use her as well as the most me^, and also he did remember again,
that nothing causes a man so soon to be made a Coockolde, as the imperfection
and unableness that the woman finds in her Husband. Moreover, he did keep in
memory, and also in writing, the deceites, frauds, and guiles, that woman
daily use, for to have and enjoy their pleasure: he knew the goinges and
commings, that these old wives make from house to house, under the coulor to
bring, shread, linne^, wrought works, dainties, littell dogs, and such knackes:
he knew how women do conterfeit sickness, make their walkings to Orchards,
and gardins, how they speak to their lovers that come in maskes, and how
they get them selves favor, under the shadow of kindred, and acquaintance:
also he h^^ed Boccas and Celestinus. And of all these things (...) thought to
take heed and beware, thinking this in him self, I would do the best that I
can to keep me from horns, and as for other chances let them hap as they
may. So then among the Damsells and Virgins of Paris where he did remain, he
did choose one to his mind, that was well nurtered, sober, wise, and handsome,
wherein he failed not of his purpose, for he married one, that was fair, rich,
and of a good kindred, whom he brought home to his own inheritance. Now, he
kept in his house a woman of good years, that had been his Nurse, and that had
always dwelled in y^ house, named Dame Parnet, being one that was subtle and
wary in all affairs: which Woman he did present unto his Wife, at her coming
to the house, saying unto her: loving wife, I am greatly behoulding to this
Woman that you see here, she was my Nurse, and has done good service to my
Father and mother, and to me after them, I give her therefore unto you, to keep
you Company, she has been very well brought up, I doubt not, but she will
please you well. And then secretly, he charged Dame Parnet, to give attendaunce
upon his Wife at all times, and for nothing to forsake her Company upon his
displeasure, whither so ever she went: the which she promised faithfully to do.
But this much may I say by the way, that there is an unhappy proverb, I cannot
tell who did invent it, but it is very common, ( casta quam nemo rogauit:) I
will not say that it is true, but leave it as it is, yet I dare say that there
is no fair woman but has been or shall be assalted. Well, I am not fair will
some say, nor I neither will another say: I am content it be so, because I
love no strife, but this be sure, a Woman that is wise and wily, will take
heed to tell that she has been sued unto by any, specially to her Husband:
for if he be wise, he will think of his wife, that if she had given no
occasion she should not have bin required: but to come to my tale. It came to
pass amongst other Company, that did frequent and haunt this married man's
house (whom I mean not to name) was a young Advocate, who was called the Lord
of Beaufort, being of the cuntry of Berry, who came many times to the Bar, to
plead the law: to which Gentleman, this married man bare great favor and love,
and made good cheer, because they had been familliar at ye. Universities, and
Companions together in many places. This Beaufort, had not his name in vain,
for he was fair, and of a good behavior, and therefore the young married
Gentlewoman, gave him a loving look, and he likewise to her: in so much, that
in short time by their often regards, they gave a token of their secret love
and good wills. Now, the Husband knowing fashio^s, showed himself very willing
to please his wife, specially when things were new, not greatly mistrusting his
wives youth, neither doubting his friends honesly, contenting himself with the
diligent care and attendance of Dame Parnet. Beaufort in like manner for his
part, could tell how to behave himself, perceiving the great familiarity, that
his friend her Husband showed him, and the gentle gracious intertainement,
that ye young wife made him with an outward affection, which he thought was
more manifest to him, then to another, as indeed it was true: and therefore he
found easily an occasion in talking with her, to declare the sorrow he
conceived through her love, and because she was brought up and nourished in a
house of fame, she could yt better use her self, and answer unto all questions
and demands. To whom Beaufort being pricked forward with a goodwil, said in
this manner: Gentelwoman, it is easy enough to a Gentlewoman of a good mind,
to know the goodwill of a servant, for they always bring in subjection and
thraldom, the hearts of men, whither they will or no: therefore it shall not
need further to express and declare unto you, ye great affection and honor
that I bear to an infinite number of your virtues, which are indeed, with such
gentlen^^ of the mind, that the man can not otherwise judge (...) think, but
that he was borne happy and fortunate to ha^^ his heart fixed in so good a
place: for those things that are most precious, are not desired, but of gentle
and noble minds; which therefore to me is a great occasion to praise fortune,
that has been so favorable, as to present and offer me, so vertuo^s and
worthy a subject, that thereby I might have the mean, to put in evidence, the
desire I have to things precious, and of a great value. And although I be one
of the least of those whose service you meryt and deserve, yet nevertheless I
am thus persuaded, that the great perfections that are in you (whereat I do
wonder) will give occasion to increase in me those things yt are required to
true service. For, as touching my heart* it is so faithfully affectioned toward
you, that it is impossible any thing ca^ be more, which I hope and trust, so to
give you to understand, that you shall never be displeased in that you have
given me occasion to remain for ever your faithful and trusty servant. The
young gentle woman, yt was well taught and sober, hearing his pretense, would as
gladly have fulfilled his request, as it was required: who with a feminine
voice, being somewhat bold according to her age* (to the which commonly Women
have respect) being coupled with an honest and modest shamfastnesse, answered
him in this manner: Gentleman, although I should have a will and a desire to
love, yet will I not so ouershoot my self, as to make another Lover the^ he to
whom I am coupled and joined in mariadge and wedlock, who loves me so well,
and does so gently entertain me, that he keeps me from thinking on any other
the^ on him. Furthermore, if it should fortune unto me, to set my heart in two
places, I esteem and judge your virtue and good heart to be such, yt you would
not wish me to do any thing yt shall redound to my dishonor. As touching the
virtues and graces that on attribute unto me, I will let the^ pass, ^nowing no
such thing in my self, and therefore, I restore ^^m to the place from where they
came, which is to you. ^or now, to defend my self otherwise, would you presume
to do that injury and wrong to him, that puts so much confidence and trust
in you? it seems to me, that such a noble mind as yours is, would by no
means give place to such a fact as this. And then you see besides, the
inconveniences so greatly to let such an enterprise, that if you should obtain
your request, there is not opportunity to fulfill the same: For I have always
in my Company a Keeper, so that if you would consent to do evil, she has
always her eye upon me, that I cannot steal from her by no means. Beaufort
was very glad when he understood this answer, and specially when he felt that
the Gentlewoman stayed her self upon reasone, whereof the first were some what
to hard, but before the last, ye young wife did mellify their herself: to the
which M. Beaufort made answer in this order. The three poincts that you do
allege (Gentlewoman) I have well wayed and considered: but you know y^ two of
them depend and consist of your goodwill, and the third lyesh in diligence and
good advise. For as touching the first, seeing that love is a virtue, that
searches out and seeks the hearts and minds after a gentle nature, you must
well think, that one day you shall live first or last, the which thing before
it be, it were better you should receive the service of him, who loves you as
his proper life in due hour, then to stay any longer to yield and obey to ye
Lord, that has power to make you pay ye interest of the time yt by you has
been let slyp, and to put you into ye hands of some dissembling man, yt would
not take such regard of your honor as it deserves. As touching y^ second, it
is a case that has been long void, to the^ that find me what love is: for
you shall understand, for the affection that I bear unto you, (so far am I
from doing injury to your Husband) that rather I do him honor, what I love
with a good heart that which he loves: and there is no greater show ye two
hearts are at accord, but when they both love one thing. You know well if he
and I were ennemies, or if we had not acquaintance one with an other, I should
not have opportunity to see you, neither to speak to you so often as I do. So
then, the good will that I bear toward him, being the cause of the great
love that I bear toward you, ought not to be the cause that you should let
me die for loving you. Now then, as concerning the third, you know fair
Lady, that to a willing and noble heart nothing is impossible, judge then, what
it is that can escape from two hearts, that are subject to love, which of
himself is such a Lord, that he makes his subjects attain to the thing
which they most desire. Well to be short, Beaufort did so wisely tell his
tale, that with courtesy she could not well refuse him. And their affairs
remained in such case, that the young Gentlewoman was overcome with a
voluntary mind: so that there remained no more, but to find opportunity and
means to bring their matters to pass. They invented many ways and devises to
attain their purpose, but when it came to the pinche, Dame Parnet spoiled al:
for she had two eyes, that were better then all the eyes that Argos had, which
kept Iunos Cow. And for to use those sleightes that Beaufort had used before
time, was al in vain: for the young woman's Husband knew them all.
Nevertheless, he studied so long, that in the end he found one devise,
that would serve his turn: which was (that knowing well that to two willing
minds nothing might seem impossible) he disclosed it to a friend of his, that
was a young Merchant, of cloth, and not yet married, dwelling in a house which
his Father had left him not long before, being at the'nd of our Ladies Bridge,
whom he had so won to his will that he refused not to give his consent in any
thing that Beaufort requested: And because the Gentlewoma^s husband was
familiarly acquainted with this young Merchaunt, it was the easier to bring
this matter to pass. These things falling so fit to their purpose, they gave
knowledge to the Gentlewoman of their determination and devise, whereunto she
willingly consented, and promised that the next time she went to the Market,
she would pass by that place, at what time they might put their devise in
practice. And as the Gentlewoman was coming by the house where Master Henry
dwelled, (for so was the Merchant named) behold there was cast out (as the
matter was determined before) a pale of water, that fell upon the Gentlewoman:
and it was cast in such manner, that all that saw it thought it had come by
some inconvenience and misfortune. Alas said she dame Parnet, help, what shall
I do? I am ashamed for ever. The best for her was, to step into M. Henry's
house, being her Husbands friend, therefore she said unto Dame Parnet: for
Gods sake run home quickly, and fetch me my gown furred with white Lamb,
and bring hither, I will tarry for you at M. Henry's. The old Woman went her
way, and the young Gentlewoman went up into a Chamber, where she found a good
fire, that her lover Beaufort had provided for her, who deferred not the time,
but took the occasion offered, in the pleasure of his long looked for
delight, whose matters were dispatched before the old woman could bring her
Gown, French hood, partlet, and al other things that did belong to her. The
married man being at home, and understanding ye Dame Parnet was above in the
chamber, who was getting together her trinkets, without saying any thing to
him, for fear he should be angry, came and found her above, asking her what
she made there, and where she had left his Wife. Dame Parnet declared to him
what had happened, and that she was come home for other clothes. Yea with a
vengeance said he (suspecting some deceit) here is a crafty devise indeed, yt
is not yet in my Book, I think I knew all saving this, I am now well served,
one unhappy hour is enough to make one a Cuckolde: get you hence away, run
with that you have, I will send the rest by the boy: Dame Parnet trotted as fast
as ever she could, but all too late: for M. Beaufort had dispatched and done:
and when dame Parnet came, she perceived nothing: for although the Gentlewoman
had a good color, she thought it was through the heat of the fire: and so it
was, but it was with such a fire that no water is able to quench.

Of Gyles the Ioyner, how he did revenge himself of a Greyhound, that came
always and beguiled him of his Dinner.
THere was on a time at Poytiers, a Ioyner named Gyles, that labored to get
his living so well as he could, having lost his Wife, who had left him a
Daughter of the age of nine or ten years, being cont^t with her service, and
had no other boy nor maid. He made his provision on the Saturday, to serve
him all the week after, and in the morning he would get his little Pot on the
fire, that his Daughter made to boil, and found himself as well content with
his ordinary provision, as a richer man would be with his. Now it is commonly
said, it is good to have a neighbor, neither too poor, nor too rich: for if
he be poor, he will always be craving, being not able to help thee at
need: and if he be rich, he will keep thee under subjection, and thou must
be feign to suffer him, and art afraid to borrow of him. This Ioiner had to his
neighbor a Gentleman, who was somewhat too great a Sir for his poor estate,
and looued hunting very well. And he did usually keep a great company of
Hounds in his house, to hunt the Hare, the which pastime was to be had not
far without the Town. Amongst all his hounds, he had a very fair Greyhound,
that did many shreude turns in that Town: for he would come into every man's
house, and the victualles be found, he would devour: there was nothing for him
neither too hot, nor too heavy, were it bread, beeffe, cheese, or any thing
else, all was one: and chiefly he did most harm to the poor Ioyner, for there
was but a wall between the Gentleman and him. By the means whereof, this
Greyhound was smelling and seeking about his house, at all hours of the day,
and look what he found he carried it quite away. And also the hound had this
subtletie, that with his paw he would cast down the Pot that boiled upon
the fire, and would take up the meat, and run his way: so that oftentimes the
poor Ioyner had but a slender and cold Dinner. Which thing grieved him sore:
for after his labor and pains taken in his work, he was beguiled of his
Dinner, before he could sit down at Table. And (which was worst of all) he
durst not co^plain, but he meaned to be revenged whatsoever should happen.
Upon a day when he spied the Greyhound going to get his pray, he follows
after him with a great square troncheon in his hand, and he found him busy
about his Pot to get out the meat, he made no more ado, but shut the gate, and
got hold on the Greyhound, to who^ in short time he gave five or six dry
stripes with his square upon the back, and spared him not at al, and then cast
away his square troncheon, and took up a small hasell wand in his hand, an ell
long, or there about, wherewithal he followed the Greyhound out of the
poores, that cried as though he had been killed (as indeed he was little
better) and laid on him in the street, saying: Hahoreson Curre, get thee
hence with a mischief and come no more here to eat up my Dinner, making a
shows, as though he had stricken with nothing but that small rod: but it was
with a rod so soft as a footestoole, wherewith he had so blessed the greyhound,
that the Gentleman never ease Hare after of his taking.

Of Blondeaw the merry Cobbler, that was neneuer sad or heavy in his life time
but twice, and how he provided remedy for it, and of his Epitaphe.
THere was sometimes dwelling in Paris a Cobbler, named Blondeaw, that had a
little shop in a corner, where he mended shoes, getting his living thereby
merrily, and above all he loved good wine, and could tell them that went unto
it, where the best was, for he would be sure to spy out the best, and take his
part. All the day long he would sing as he sat at his work, and make the
neighbors merry, he was never seen all the days of his life heavy and sad,
but twice. The one time was, after yt he had found an old naule in an iron
pot, in which was store of old money, some of silver, and some of brass,
whereof he knew not the value. Then he began to he heavy and sad, and would
sing no more, his mind ran all on his pot of trash that he had found: he
thought to himself that the money was not current, I cannot said he, get
neither bread nor Wine for it, and if I show it to the Goldsmiths, they will
bewray me, or have their part of my finding, and yet they will not give me half
of that it is worth. Then another time he was afraid that he had not hidden
his pot well, and that some one or other came to steal it away, there was
almost no hour, but he would go from his shop to remove his pot, he was in
the greatest trouble and pain that could be. But at the last he be thought
himself saying: how the Devil comes it, that I am so troubled with my pot,
every man perceives by me, that I have some thing in my head, I would the
Devil had it, so I had never seen it: which said, on a sudden he took the
pot, with the money, and cast it into the river, and there drowned all his
care: this being done, he was the merriest man alive, and began in his
accustomed manner, to singe as ioifully as ever he did, neither was his mind
any more grieved or molested. And other time, he was offended with a
Gentleman, that dwelled right over against his shop, who had an Ape, that did a
thousand shreud turns to Blondeaw. For he being in a window, watched the
Cobbler when he cut out pieces of lether for his shoes, and behold how he
did, and so soon as poor Blondeaw was gone to Dinner, or to any other place
about his business, the same Ape would come down to go into the Cobblers
shop, and take his cutting knife, and cut out the leather, as he had seen
Blondeaw do, and this was his custom and use at all times that Blondeaw was
gone out: so that the poor man was feign to eat and drink a great while in
his shop, and durst not go abroad unless he had locked up his lether: and if he
had forgotten at any time to shut it up, then ye Ape would not forget to cut
out pieces. Which thing did trouble him very much, and also he durst do no
harm to the Ape, for fear of his master. When he was so weary of this
displeasure, that he could forbear no longer, he thought he would be revenged,
and perceiving it was the Apes property to counterfeyt him in all things: (for
if Blondeaw had whette his knife, so would this Ape do, if he had thrust with
his naule, this Ape would do so after him, and if that he had pulled out his
threedes at length, the Ape would pull out, as he had seen him do) upon a
time he did whet his cutting knife, and made it as sharp as a razour, and at
that time when he espied the Ape to look earnestly upon him, he began to put
his cutting knife against his throat, and to go with it to and fro, as though
he would have cut his own throat: and when he had done this twice or thrice,
that the Ape might learn it, he laid down his knife, and shut his shop
door, and went home to Dinner. This Ape by and by comes down, and enters
his shop, thinking to try this new game and pastime, that he had never seen
before: And he takes up the paring knife, and straightwayes put it to his
throat, going with it to and fro, as he had seen Blondeaw the Cobbler do: but
he put it too near his throat, and taking no regard, cut his own throat,
whereof he died within an hour after. And thus Blondeaw was revenged of the
Ape, without any danger of his Master: and then he framed himself to his old
custom again, in singing, and making good cheer, and so he continued even
unto the end of his life. And in remembrance of his merry life amongst them,
they made an Epitaph, and set the same over his grave, for all passers by to
peruse at their pleasure.

HEre underneath this ground does lie a Cobbler, Blondeaw was his name:
Who in his life lived merrily, to his great praise, and endless fame.
Whose death his neighbors did lament, they did so much in him delight:
Whom they did love, till life was spent, and death did come to claim his
right.
Of three Brethren that thought they should have been hanged for their Lattin.
THere was upon a time three Brethren, come of a good house, that had been
kept at Paris a long time: but their time being spent in play and idleness,
it came to pass that their Father sent for them home, for the which they were
very sorry, because they could not speak one word of Lattin: therefore they
did agree together to learn each one a word for their provision. So that the
eldest did learn to say, Nos tres clerici. The second took his theme of
money, and he learned, pro Bursa and pecunia. The third passing by a Church,
hard the priest say, Dignum and iustum est, and that kept he for his store. And
here upon they departed from Paris, being provided to go to their Father, and
they concluded and agreed together, that wheresoever they came, and to all
people that they met, they would speak no other thing but the Latin that they
had learned: because they would be esteemed to be the greatest Clerks in the
Country. Now as they were going through a Wood, it was found that Thieves had
cut a man's throat about that time: Wherefore ye Provost Martial coming thither
with his men, and finding these three brethren hard by where the fact was
committed, demanding of them who had killed this man, by and by the eldest (to
whom it belonged first to speak) answered, Nos tres clerics. Yea said the
Provost, for what intent have you done it? The second Brother, (whose turn was
to speak next) said, pro Bursa and pecuniae. Well said the Provost Martial,
you must therefore be hanged. The third Brother answered, Dignum and instum
est. So that the three Clerks had like have been hanged by their own
confession, if it had not been, that when they perceived it was in good
earnest, they began to speak their mothers Latin, and to declare what they
were. The Provost that saw they were young and simple witted, knew that it was
not they, and so let them go, following with hue and cry the murderers, not
forgetting the learned fellows he met withal.

Of a young Scholar, that made that Lattin prevail to some effect, which
the Curate of their parish had taught him.
A Certain rich Husbandman of the Country, kept his son certain years at
Paris, who (by ye counsel of the parish Priest, sent for him home. When he
was come, the old man greatly reioiced to see his son, and out of hand sent for
the Priest to dinner, who came, and taking ye yongman by the hand, bid him
welcome home, I am glad said he to see you well: let us go to dinner, and then I
will talk with you. After diner was done, the Father said to the Priest: Sir,
see here my Son, that I have sent for from Paris, as you gave me counsel, it
shall be three year come this Candelmas, since he went thither, I would gladly
know whether he have profited any thing there or no, but I fear me he loses
his time, and yet I would feign make him a Priest: I pray you M. Vicar,
examine him, to see how he has profited. Yea marie Gossep said the Vicar, I
will for your sake take a little pains with him. And at that time in the
presence of the good man, he called for his son: come hither said the Priest,
I know your tutors at Paris are great Latinistes, let me hear how they have
taught you, seeing your father does mean to make you a Priest, I am very glad
thereof: and therefore first of all tell me, what is latin for a Priest? the
young man answered him, Sacerdos: well said the Priest, that is not a miss, for
it is written, ecce Sacerdos magnus. But Pristulus is a great deal more
eloquenter, and more proper: for you know very well, that a Priest wears a
stoule about his neck. Now the^ tell me, what is latin for a Cat? for the
Priest espied the Cat by the fire? The Lad answered, Catus, felis, murilegus:
the Priest because he would make the good man believe that he knew more then
all the Doctors in Paris, said to the young man: I think your Cutors at Paris
have so taught you, but there is yet a better word, and that is Mitis: for
you know there is nothing more familiar then a Cat, and also her tail (that is
so smooth and soft when ye ha^dell it is called Suauis. Now then, what call ye
in latin fire? the boy answered Ignis. No said the Priest, it is Gaudium: for
ye know, it comfort and rejoices us: do you not see that we are here by the
fire at our ease? Well, what call ye water in latin? the Lad answered Aqua. It
is a great deal better said ye Priest to call it Abundantin: for you know,
that there is nothing so plentiful as water. Now, wat is a bed in lattin? the
Boy said Lectus. The Curat said, ye speak none but common lattin, there is no
Child but can tell this, know ye no other words? the Boy said again Cubile:
yet that is not it. At the last when he had no more lattin words for a bed:
John (said the Priest) I will tell thee, it is called Requies, because that
thereon we sleep, and take our rest. Whilst the Priest was questioning in this
order, with his nouice, the old man was not well pleased, but could have found
in his heart to have beaten his Son, for he had thought he had lost his time,
and spent his money in vain. But the Priest seeing him angry, said unto him:
Gossip, I pray you content your self, your Son has profited well enough, I know
yt he has been thus taught, and his answers are good. But there is latin, and
latin again: for I know such words, that they never hard no such at Paris, not
the best Doctors of them all, therefore send him to me, and I will teach him
things that he does not yet know: and you shall see, that before three months
are past, I will instruct him otherwise then he is yet. The yongman all this
while durst not reply, because he was fearful, and shamfast: but his thought
was free nevertheless. Within certain days after, the Priest did kill a fat
hog, and sent for this Husband-ma^ to dinner, to make merry with hogs
puddinges, and willed him to bring his Son with him: which came, dined
together, and made good cheer. The young man that kept well in remembrance the
Lattin that the Curat had taught him, and that studied, and practiced the way
and mean to exercise the same, did rise from the table are they had done, and
after he had done his duty, he goes to the fire side, where he espying the
Cat, took her, and tied a wispe of dry straw at her tail, and set fire
thereto with a match, and so let her go: and she feeling the fire flame at her
tail, began to run about, and at the last under the Priests had where he
lay, the which was set on fire with the Cats tail, and began to flame. And
when the young man saw that, it was hye time to make his latin to works some
effect, he came in all the haste running to the Vicar, and said unto him.
Pristole, Mitis habet gandium in suani, quod si abundantia non est, tu amittis
tuam requiem. It was no boot to bid the Priest run, perceiving the fire to
wax great. And by this means the young man did show how he had profited in
the Latin, that Master Vicar had taught him, for to teach him, not to defame
him any more before his Father.

Of a Priest that could not say one word almost in his Gospel, but Jesus.
IN a certain parish in the Diocese of Man's, which was named Saint Georges,
there was a Priest, that before time had been married, but after that his Wife
was dead, (to do his endeavor the better to pray to GOd for her Soul, and for
to get the saying of a mass, that she had appointed to be said every day for
her in the Parish Church) he would needs be made a Priest. And although he
could speak no lattin but for his own provision, and scant that: yet
notwithstanding he did as others do. and would make an end of it as well as
he could. Upon a time there came to Saint Georges a Gentleman, upon certain
business that he had: and because he had no leisure to tarry the hye mass,
he minded to have a low mass said: so he sent his man to seek a Priest to
say it, who met with this Priest that we speak of here, that was as diligent
as might be. And although he knew but his mass of Requiem, of our Lady,
and of the Holy Ghost, yet he made no show of any thing, for fear to lose
his Mass great, but seemed to have as much skill as another. Well, he put on
his masking roabe, and begins his mass, he dispatched his introite with
much a do, and the Epistle with much more. But the Gentleman took no great
regard, being occupied in his Prayers, until it came to the Gospel that was
too hard for the Priest, for he did never read it before, above three or four
times: by the means whereof, he was merueilously troubled, knowing well, that
the Gentleman, and they that stood by, gave ear unto him, which gave ocasion
to make his tongue to trip the more. He said this Gospel so heavily, and found
in it so many new and strange words, and so hard to spell, that he was
constrained to cut off the one half, and at every second or third word he
said Jesus, (although it was not in his Gospel) at the last he got out of it
with great pain, and made an end of his mass, as well as he could. The
Gentleman noting the ignorance of this Priest, paid him for his mass, and
willed his man to bid him home to dinner, which proffer the Priest willingly
accepted. Being together at dinner, the Gentleman said unto him: Sir John, the
Gospel that ye read to day, was very devout, there was Jesus repeated very
often. The^ Sir John, that was somewhat merry because of his good cheer,
perceiving the Gentleman pleasantly disposed, began to say. Sir, I perceive
well what you mean, but I will tell you Sir: indeed I am not so well seen,
as those that have been Priests twenty or thirty years, whereas I have not
been passing two or three year at the most, the gospel that was read this day
(for to tell you truth) I never read it before, above three or four times, as
there are many other in my book that are very hard. But I will tell you what
Sir, when I say mass before honest Folk, and that there is in the gospel
hard words that I cannot read, I skip them over for fear to make the matter
too long: but in steed of them I says Jesus, which is a great deal better.
Now, truly Sir John said the Gentleman, you do very well, always when I come
this way I will hear your mass: I drink to you Sir John. I thank you Gentleman
said the Priest, when you stand need of me Sir, I will serve you as well as any
Priest in the Parish, and so he took his leave as merry as might be.

Of M. Peter Faeifew, that had Boots, which cost him nothing, and of the
Scorners of a Town called Arrow, in Aniou.
NOT long time since, there kept in the Town of Angiers a jolly shifting
Gentleman, named Master Peter Faifew, a man full of inventions, using many
times unlawful shifts, to take other men's goods for his own: Master Peter
could do such things well enough. And this proverb seemed to him very good, Al
things are common, there wantes but the way to get them. True it is, that he
would make such cleanly shifts and conueiances, that me^ could not greatly
blame him, but laugh and jest at his doings, notwithstanding they took as
great heed of him as they could. It were too long to tell the shifts that he
has made in his life time, but by this one judge of the rest. Upon a time, he
found himself so hard beset in going out of the Town of Angiers, that he had
no leisure to take his boots, no, he had not leisure to saddell his Horse, he
was followed so near. But he made such shifte, that when he was a two or
three forlongs out of the Town, he found the means to get a mars of a poor
man yt went homeward to the Town, saying unto him, that he went that same
way, and was in great haste, but he would leave the Mare with his Wife. And
because it was foul weather, he went into a barn, and in great have made him
a pair of boots of hay, and got upon his mare, and at the last he came to
Arrow all wette, and in ill plight, which caused his countenance to be very
sad. And yet to mende the matter, in ryding through the Town, whereas he was
sufficently known, the Scorners (for so were they called because of their
scoffing and mocking) began to rate him, saying: M. Peter, it were good talking
with you now in this case, another said M. Peter, take up your sword: another,
he is mounted upon his Mare like saint Georg on his Horseback: but among the
rest, the Shoomakers mocked him most with his boots. Surely said they, this a
good World for Shoomakers, for the Horses will eat up their Masters boots.
Master Peter was so moved, that a little thing would have made him lighted of
his Mate: but so much the more willinger were they to flout him, because he was
one that mocked others: yet he took yt patiently, and saved him self so
soon as he could in (...) Inn. When he was a little come to him self by the
fire, he began to study how he might be revenged of these Scorners, that had
so given him his welcome in: at last he remembered and bethought him of a mean
and way to be reue^ged of the Shoomakers, according as the time and necessity
required. His devise was (wanting boots) to find the means to be booted of
free cost of the Shoomakers, and sending a Boy of the In for a Shoemaker, there
came one, which by chance was of them that flouted him at his coming in.
Friend said he, cast thou make me a pair of good boots against too morrow in
the morning? Yea Sir said the Shoemaker: but I would have them an hour before
day quoth he. Sir you shall have them said he, at that hour, or as early as
you will. Then I pray the dispatch them, and I will pay thee thy own price:
the shoemaker took measure of his leg and went his way. He was no sooner gone,
but M. Peter called an other Boy, and willed him to fetch him an other
shoemaker, saying, that the first man and he could not agree. The Shoemaker
came, to whom he said as much as he did to the first, that he should make him a
pair of boots against the next morrow an hour before day, and he would not
rare what he paid for them, so that he made them well, and of good neats
lether. The two Shoomakers labored al night about these boots, ye one not
knowing of the other. The next day in the morning at the hour expressed, M.
Peter sent for the first Shoemaker, that brought his boots. So he caused him to
pull on the right foot boot, which was made very well, but when he came to pull
on the left leg boot, he made as though his leg was sore, saying to the
shoemaker: friend, thou do hurt me, I have a swelling fallen into this leg,
and I had forgot to tell the of it, ye boot is too straight, but there may be a
remedy: I pray thee go and set it on the last, I had rather tarry an hour
longer. When the shoemaker was gone. M. Peter pulled off the boot, and the^ sent
for the other shoemaker, and in the mean time caused his mare to be sadled,
and reckoned and paid for all his charges, and by and by came ye second
Shoemaker with his boots. M. Peter caused him to pull on ye left boot, which
was meruelously well made, but as for the right leg boot, he made such an
excuse as he did to the first, and sent him with it again to have it made
wider. And when he was gone, he took the right leg boot that he had of the
first shoemaker, and pulled it on, and got upon his mare, and rode away as fast
as he could. And he had well nigh rydden three mile when the two Shoomakers
came and met together at the Inn with each of them a boot in their hand,
that asked one another for whom his boot was: it is said the one for Master
Peter Faifew, that willed me make it wider, because it hurt his leg. How so
said the other, I have made this boot wyder for him, thou deceauest thy self,
it is not for him that thou have wrought. No is said he, have not I spoken
with him? do not I know him? and whilst they were so debating the matter, the
Host of the house came, and asked them for whom they tar^^^. For M. Peter
Faifewe, said the one, and the other say^ as much. If you stay to speak with
him, you must then tarry until he come this way agine said the Host, for by
this time he is four or five mile on his way, and rydeth still on. God knows,
the two Shoomakers combs were cut, what shall we then do with our boots said
the one to the other? they determined to play a mum-chaunce who should enjoy
them, because they were both of one fashion. And Master Peter sped even as he
did wish, who was in better order then he was the day before.

Of a Counselor and his Horse-keeper, that sold him his old Mule again in
steed of a young one.
THere was a Counselor of the Palice, that had kept a Mule twenty five years
or there about, and had amongst the rest before time an Horse-keeper, named
Dedyer, that keept this Mule ten or twelve year, who after he was werie of his
service asked leave of his Master, and with his good will became a Breaker of
Horses, notwithstanding, he frequented daily his Masters house, in offering
his service as duetifully, as if he had been his household Servant. After
certain years, the Counselor perceiving his Mule to be very old, said unto
Dedyer: come hither, thou know well enough my Mule, she has borne me
merueilously well, I am sorry that she is so old, for I fear me I shall not get
again her like, but I pray thee look abroad, and see if thou can espy out
one for my turn. Dedier said unto him: Sir: I have one in my stable I think
will prove well, you shall have her a while, and if you find her to your
mind, we shall agree for her well enough, and if she do not like you, I will
take her again. Thou say well said the Cou^sellor, go thy ways and bring her
to me, and so he did, In the mean time, he gave Dedyer his old Mule to put
away, who began to use her teeth with a file, and dress and rubd her, and
quickened her up with a stick, and so cunningly used her, that he made her
quick and lively, that if she had seen but a stick, she would have stirred.
In the mean time, his Master rode upon that Mule, yt the Horsekeeper had lent
him, but he found her not for his turn, and said unto Dedyer: the Mule that
thou gave me will not serve my turn, she is too full of quallities, can
thou not get me an other? Sir (said this Horsebreaker) it comes well to pass,
for within this two or three days I have found one, that I have known of a
long time, which will serve your turn very well, and when you have tried her,
and find her not as good as my word, then blame me. Dedyer brought out this
fine mule, as smooth as a penny, with a gilded bridle, foming at the mouth, and
playing with her head, that it would have done a man good at the heart to
have seen her. This Counselor takes her, gets on her back, and found
her very gentle, and ambled finely, he praised her very well, musing how she
could be so well made to his hand, she would stand as meek to get up as might
be: to conclude, he found her in all points as good as the old one that he
had first, and also of the same color and scantling. He called this Horse
breaker, and demanded of him where he had this Mule, she seems (quoth he)
much like to the old one that I gave thee, and has the same quallities. I
promise you Sir saw Dedyer, when I saw her first on the color of your old
Mule, I thought she would have her conditions, or else that she might be
brought to them, and therefore I boughte her, being in good hope, that she
would serve you^ turn. Now truly said ye Cou^sellour, I con thee thank: but
what shall I pay for her? Sir said he, you know y^ I am at your
commandment, and all that I have, if it were to ^^other, I would not sell
her one pennye better cheap then forty Crowns, nevertheless, you shall have
her for thirty. The Counselor was agr^^ and gave him thirty Crowns for his
old Mule again, supposing he sped very well.

Of the Scorners of Arrow in Anion, how they were beguyled of one Pyquet, by
the means of a Lampron.
We have here before spoken of the Scorners of Arrow, of whom it is said, that
never man passed through the Town, which was not mocked: I do not know
whether they use it still or no, but I heard say, that upon a time a great Lord
took upon him to pass through the Town, and not to be scorned. And to bring
this matter to pass, he determined to go to the Town very late in the
Evening, and to depart in the Morning so early, that no body should be stirring
to mock him. And indeed he so measured his way, that he came in very late:
therefore, all the people being gone to bed, he found neither man nor woman,
that said worse to him then his name. And when he came to his Inn, he made
show that he was not well at ease, and so withdrew him into his Chamber, and
was served by his own men so well, that the night passed without any danger:
but he commanded over night the Master of his house, that al his train
might be ready in the morning two hours before Sun rising: the which was
done, and he himself was first up, for he had no desire to sleep, he had so
great care to pass without a mock. He went to horse so soon as the day
began to appear, no body being up, nor stirring in the Town, and rode till
he came at the Town end, thinking then he had been out of all danger, whereof
he began to be glad and rejoice: but harken what happened. There was an old
w^^ther beaten Witch, that stood up against the end of a wall, which gave him
his pasport, saying to him in her own language: Rose you so soon for fear of
flies. Never was men so ashamed as he, to be so vnluckil^ flowted, and
specially of such an old hag. And if it had been a King, as some say it was,
I think he would have made gunpouder of the old witch: But the most part
believe it was no King, although they of the Town of Arrow make their vaunt
that it was. Well, whosoever it was, he had his part as well as others. But as
the Proverb says, Que mockat, mockabitur: Even so those of Arrow had
sometimes the like as they proffered, which appeared by M. Peter Fa^sew. And
there was given them an other pretty mock by one named Pyquet, which had
bought a Lampron at Duxtall, and put it in a Linen wallet that he carried behind
him, which Lampron he tied very fast by one of the holes in her head with a
point, and made her fast within the wallet, so that she could not get out by
any means, and having a little hole in the end of his wallet, he put out her
tail, that she might be seen. When he came near to ye Town of Arrow, this
Lampron that was very quick, writhed always her tail more and more, so that in
passing through the Town the Scorners spyed her, and how in writhing of her
self she appeared by little and little more and more out of the wallet, and
they were at hand watching when she would fall out of the wallet. But Piquet he
rode easily through the Town, as one that had no great have on his way,
because he should gather together more company, that came out of their houses
and followed him, to catch the Lampron when it fell, of the which there was
four or five that watched as decently for it, as a Cat does for a Mouse,
thinking they should have it to dinner. All this while Pyquet made as though
he had not seen them, but that at sometimes he would look first of the one
side, and next of the other, as if his Horse had not been well gyrded, which
he did to see his lackeyes that followed him. When he was out of the Town, he
began to ride faster, and these Scorners after, thinking yt it would not
continue long, but it would fall, for the Lampron appeared almost all but of ye
wallet: they run half a mile after this Lampron, but there was two of them
weary with trotting, that gave over, and the other two held out sides still,
being glad that all the rest were gone, saying one to another: hold thy peace,
we shall have the better part. When Pyquet perceived he had but two lackeyes
following him, he began to ride faster and faster, and the Scorners followed
after more then a long mile from the Town, thinking at length to have the
Lampron for their labor: but Pyquet rode on still a good pace, and the Lampron
would not fall, which provoked them to great anger, whereat Pyquet had good
sport, and began to laugh out so loud, that at the last they perceived and
saw well enough that they were mocked. Nevertheless, one of their to make the
matter good, said a far off to Pyquet: how Sirrah, you on Horseback, take up
your Lampron that is ready to fall. Pyquet staid his horse, and turned about
saying unto him: Come and fetch it if it fall, for you are worthy to have
it, up else run a little further, and it will fall by an by. But they went
their ways with their combs cut, and bid the devil and a vengeance take the
Lampron. But when they were come back again into the Town, God knows how
they were flouted and mocked: for they knew well the craft, asking them what
sauce they would have to their Lampron. And thus the mockinges and scornings
does oftentimes return upon the mockers and scorners themselves.

Of a Provost named Cocklyer, that had a pain in his eyes: whom the Physicians
made to believe that he did see.
IN the Country of Main, there was not long ago a Lieutenaunt of the Provost
Martial, who was named Cocklier, a man that could give a sentence, and that
knew the policies of the Lieutenant Maylard, who upon a day having under his
hands a man that had committed and done many fellonies, notwithstanding he did
allege for his life that he was a graduate, but he let him cool in prison,
yet afterward he sent for him, and began to use him very gently, saying:
Truly, it were reason that you should be sent to your Bishop, calling him by
his name. I will not deprive you of your privilege, but put you in
remembrance when you do not think thereon: yet I counsel you, that
hereafter you withdraw your self from places of dishonor, being a man
sufficient to serve the King: by which means you should be known, and so
come to take a charge, and to be esteemed: And not to lie lurking in Towns,
and watching of high ways, to put your self in danger of life, to your
continual fame and infamy. By and by the man (that felt himself praised)
said: Sir, I am not now to learn what it is to serve the King, I was before
the Town of Pauia, when it was taken under the charge of Captain Lorge, and
since I was with my Lord Lautrick at Myllayne, and in the kingdom of Naples.
But for all that the Provost red his sentence, and made him stretch a Rope,
although he was a graduate, and by the means taught him how to serve the
King. Thus Cocklyer could do these things, and such like, and could see
clear with the eyes of his wit, but with the eyes in his head he could not see
the length of three fingers: and he needed not to have been asked, whether he
had rather have his nose as long as his sight, or his sight as long as his
nose, for there was not much between them both. It chanced upon a time, the
Bishop of Man's going of visitation through his Diocese, would see how he did
in going by, because he knew him to be a good Justice, whom he found in his
Bed being sick of a Rume, that was fallen into his poor eyes. Well Master
Provost (said the Bishop) how do you? My Lord (said he) I have kept my bed
this Month and more. Your eyes are never well (said the Bishop) but how do
you feel them now? My Lord (said Cocklyer) I hope in God they shall do well:
for the Physician has told me that I can see. Think you that he was not a
wise man, to know of the Physician whether he did see or no. But he would not
trust a Prisoner in his saying, as he put confidence in the Physician for his
own.

Of the feats and memorial acts of a Fox, that belonged to the Baily of
Main la Inhes, and how he was taken and put to death.
IN the Town of Main la Inhes, in the low country of Main, which is
situate in the borders of the barren Country, there was sometimes a Baily,
that was a good companion, according to the order of the Country, who
delighted in many things, and had in his house many tame beasts, among the
which he had a Fox, that he brought up and kept of a young one, whose tail was
cut off, and therefore was called the Curtall Fox. This Fox was crafty of
nature, but yet he degenerated from his kind, in being conversant with men,
and had so good a wit for a Fox, that if he could have spoken, he would have
showed to many men that they were but Beasts. He knew when the Bailey of the
house did make a feast, seeing the folks in the house busy, especially the
Cook. He would go to the Pouiters, and bring home Conies, Capons, Pigeons,
Chykons, and wild Foul, according to the season, and would steal them so
cunningly, that he was never taken doing the deed, and thus he furnished his
masters kitchen meruelously well. Nevertheless he went to and fro so often,
that he began to be suspected of the poulters, and others: for he always found
new crafts, stealing still more and more, At ye last, they conspired to kill
him, which they durst not do openly for fear of his master, yt was chief Lord
of the town: but each one determined to trap him in the night. Now this Fox,
when he went about to seek his pray, would come in at the Seller window, or by
a low light, or else watch whilst they had come to the door without a candle,
and then did he steal in like a Ratte. And as he had inventions and ways to
come in, so had he in like manner policies to get out with his pray. Many
times the Poulterers determined his death, with a Crosbow bent watching for
him: but the Fox would prevent them for all their policy, and did never come
there so long as they watched. But a man could not have his eyes any sooner
closed, but the Fox would be presently provided. If there were any snares or
gyns laid for him, he knew as well how to escape the danger, as if he himself
had laid the^, so that they could never be so circumspect as to take him,
although he never came away empty: yet being many times prevented of his
purpose, he was sore displeased, because he could not do such service to the
Cook, as he was used to do. And therefore being of good years, he began
to take heed: and also he thought, that they made no account of him as they
did asore time, because he did them small service in his age: and chiefly for
this, he began to be mischievous crafty, and to eat and kill up his Masters
Foul. So that every body being in bed, he would step to the perch, and
now take a Capon, another time a Hen, and they did not mistrust him, thinking
that it had been the Weesell, or the Polcat. But in the end, (as all
mischiefs come to light) he went and came so often, that a little wench lying
in the stable for Gods sake, perceived him, and bewrayed all: and from thence
forth the great blame was laid on the Fox: for it was reported to Master
Bailey, that Curtall his Fox did eat up and devour his Fowls. This Fox would
be in every corner to listen and hear what was spoken against him, and he
used commonly to be under the Table when his Master was at dinner and supper.
But after his M. hard of his fashions, he so hated him, that upon a time
being at Dinner, and the Fox being behind the folks, Master Bailey began to
say: what say you to my Fox that eats up all my Hens and Capons? I will be
revenged of him within these three days. The Fox understanding this, knew it
was no more good tarrying in the Town, and he tarried not until the three
days were past, but he banished himself, and fled into the fields, amongst
ye wild Foxes: you may be sure his farewell was not without making spoil of
somewhat: but being now amongst his kind, he had some thing ado to acquainte
himself with them, for during the time that he remained in the town, he had
learned to speak good yealpishe of the Dogs, and their manner also, and went
with them on hunting, and under the color of freendship, would deceive the
wild Foxes, and put them into the hands of the Dogs: this the foxes
remembering, refused both the receiving of him into their company, and to put
their confidence in him any more. But he used Rhetoric, and made partly his
excuse, and partly asked forgiveness. And then he made them believe, that he
knew the means to make the^ live at ease like Kings, because he knew all the
poultry in the Country, and the hours and times fit to seek their pray: and
thus in the end they believed him through his fair words, and made him their
Captain. Wherwithall they found them selves content for a time: for their
Captain Curtall brought them to such places, as they had enough But the
mischief was, that they would use themselves too much to the civil life not
fit for them. For the people of the Country, seeing them thus in bands and
companies, set Dogs after them, and made always some of them to come short
home. But in the mean time Captain Curtall that crafty Fox, saved himself at
al times: for he kept the backward, to that end, that when the Dogs were busy
and occupied with the first Band, he might have leisure to save himself, and
escape from the view of them. And also he would never go into the hoale, but
amongst the Company of other Foxes, and when the hounds were ready to
thrust in, he would so bite and fight with his fellows, that he should
co^straine them to go forth, to the end that whilst the dogs were occupied
in running after them, he might save him self. But the poor Curtall Fox
could not so well shift for him self, but in the end he was caught: Forasmuch
as the Clounes of the Countreye, knew well enough that he was the cause of all
mischief and shreud turns that were done there about, so that they swear his
death, and dispatched each of them a Messenger to all the Gentlemen of the
Country, requesting their help, and desiring them for the profit of the
Country, to lend the^ their dogs, to dispatch the Country of that mischievous
Fo^e. To the which the Gentlemen did willingly agree, and gave a good answer
to the messengers, and also the most part of them had of a long time sought
their pastime, and could not find any thing. In the end they brought out so
many dogs, that there were enough both for the Curtall Fox, and his Fellows,
so that he might well byte and drive out the rest, but it would not prevail:
for at the last when there was no more left, his turn must needs follow next:
he was taken quick, and haled out of a Corner of his hoale, with digging him
out, for the dogs could not come at him, nor make him to come forth of his
hoale, Well, at the last poor Curtall was taken, and led alive into the
Town of Maine, whereas his Judgment was given, and was sacrificed in the open
market place, for the thesis, robberyes, pylferies, crafts, fraud, deceits,
injuries, wrongs, conspiracies, treasons, murders, and other grievous faults
and injuries by him committed and done, and was executed before a great
multitude standing by to see the execution. The People came flocking thither on
heaps. For he was known well twenty mile compass, to be the most ungratious
Fox that ever the earth bare. Some say, for all that, many honest Folks
bewailed his death, because he had done so many proper fears, and therefore
they said it was pity that he should be put to death, being a Fox of in
good understanding: but in the end they could not have the maistery, although
they had layke hands on their weapons, to have saved his life: for he was
hanged and strangled for a notable thief at the Castle of Maine. And thus may
you see that there is no mischief nor wickedness, but is punished at the last.

Of Master Pontalais, how featly he played his (...) against a Barber, that
did counterfeite (...)
THere are few Folks, but have hard speaking of Master John Pontalais, the
memory of whom is yet fresh in mind also his Iells, sportes, pastymes, and
merry prankes, and his fair plays, that he played, and hos^ he put his
shoulder against a Cardinals, showing him that (...) mountains might meet
together in dispight of the old proverb: But what need I rehearse this, when
he did a thousand other seats, among ye which we will speak of one or two. There
was a barber y^ would counterfeit the brave Fellow: for he thought there was
not a man in all Paris, that ha^ the like wit that he had, no^ the like grace,
specially when he was in his hot house stark naked (like to Friar Croiset, that
said mass in his dublet) having but his rasor in his hand, he would say to
those whom he did rub and shave: see you not Sir, what comes of a good wit?
what think you by me? such cuning as you see me have, I learned of my own
mind, and all that ever I have, came by my own getting, there was never kindred
nor friend that I have, that ever helped me with any thing: if that I had been a
fool, I should not have had ye knowledge that I have: and as he thought of
himself, so would he that all the world should think of him. The which being
known by M. John Pontalais, he used him for his purpose, being sure of him
always to make one in his plays and enterluds: for he said unto him, that
there was never a man in all Paris, that could play his part better then he:
and I never have praise (said Pontalais) but when that I have you for one of my
Company, for then they ask me, who was he that played such a part, it was
excelently well handled of him, and then I declare your name, because I would
have you known. You would muse to hear tell that the King would see you
play, we tarry but the time: you need not ask if the Barber was proud to
hear such words, so that he became so stout yt who but he: and also he said
upon a day to M. John Pontalais: know you what ( Pontalais?) I would not that
you should hereafter make me common for every day, nor I will play no more,
unless it be some morral or stage matter, wherein are noble men, as Kings,
Princes, and Lords, and I will always have the best part and oftenest in
sight. Now truly, said M. John Pontalais you say well, and you are worthy.
But why did you not tell me of it sooner? I was far ouerseene that I did no
remember it my self: But I know how to make you amends hereafter, for I have
better matters to play the^ ever were played, wherein you shall have the best
part, and keep longest upon the scaffold* And first of al I pray you fail me
not upon Sun^^^e next: for, I mean to play a notable matter, in the which
speaks ye great King of India, will not you play yt part how say you? ^ea,
yea (said ye Barber) who should else play it, and I should not? give me my
scroule. Pontalais gave it him the next morning. When the day came, that ye
play should be, the barber showed him self in his throne with his scepter,
keeping as good and royal a majesty as ever did Barber. In the mean time, M.
John Pontalais prepared his things in a readiness to flout she Barber: and
because commonly he made the first show upon the scafold, playing ye prologue
in his plays, ye rest having played their parts he comes in at the last, and
spoke thus.

I am but little, as all men may see,
Having neither spear nor shield to defend me:
But yet nevertheless it has so come to pass,
That the great King of India has shaued my Arse.
And he speak this with such a grace as it required, because he would give the
People to understand of the brauerys of the Barber: and also he had made his
play in such order, 'hat the King of India should speak very little, but only
keep a countenance, to the end that if the Barbar should have been offended,
the play notwithstanding should have gone forward. But God knows how
Master Barbar was flouted for playing the King, for he wished he had been
warming his not house. There is yet another tale told of the same Pontalais,
that others do attribute to another: but who soever is the Author, it is very
pleasant. It is of a Friar, which upon a holiday went up into the pulpit to
preach, where he was very busy in talking little good: for when he strayed out
of his Text (as he did very often) he made the goodlyest digressions in the
World: and thus he would say. There are few found worthy to come into a
Pulpit: for although they be skillful, yet have they not the gift to preach.
But unto me, God has given the grace both of knowledge and preaching, and also
I know what all sciences are, and in pointing his finger to his head, he would
say: my Friend, if thou will have any Gra^mer it is here within? if thou will
have any Rethorick, it is here also? if thou will have Philosophy it is here
likewise? for Logic, I fear not a Doctor in all the University, and yet
with in these three years I knew nothing: notwithstanding, you hear and see
how I do preach. But God gives his graces to whom it pleases him. Now, so
it was that Master John Pontalais, had somewhat to play there that day in the
after noone, who knew what manner of man the Friar was. He made his shows
through the Town: and it fell so out, that he must needs pass by the Church
where this Friar was preaching. M. John Pontalais according to his custom,
sounded up his Drom at the end of the street, that was right over against the
Church, and caused it so sound very long and loud, of purpose to make this
Friar hold his peace, to the end that the people should come forth for to
hear his play. But it would not serve: for the more he made his Drum to
sound, the louder was the Friar, and so they striued who should have the
maistery. The Friar was in a pelting chafe, and spoke by the authority of a
bald pate aloude saying: go some, and cause the drum to cease: but for all that
no body went, unless it were to look upon him, that made his Drum sound
more and more. When the Friar perceived he would not leave off drumming, and
that no body came back again to bring an answer: truly said he, I will go
my self, and so he came down from the Pulpit, desiring the people to stay
until he came again. When he was in the street, in a great chafe he began
to say to Pontalais: who made thee so bold to sound thy Drum before the Church
door whilst I am preaching? Pontalais beheld him and said: And who made thee
so bold to preach whilst I am playing on my Drum? The Friar being offended
here with, took his servants knife that stood by him, and thrust into the
Drum, making a great slitte in it, and so went back aagaine to the Church, to
make an end of his Sermon. Pontalais took his drum, and running after him,
whelmed it on his head, like a high Almaines hat, but that yt was somewhat
greater, wherwithall the Friar, even in that case he was, would needs go up
into the Pulpit, to show the injury and wrong done to him, and how ye word of
God was disdained. But the people laughed so heartily seeing him covered with
the Drum, that he could have no audience, but was constrained to hold his
peace: for they said it was no wise part to contend against a fool, that did
not ear what mischief he did him.

Of Mistress Furrier, that lodged a Gentleman at large.
IT is not long time since there was a Gentlewoman of a good desire, that was
named Mistress Furrier, who sometimes followed the Court, which she did when her
Husband was in some quarter. But for the most part she kept at Paris, and there
found she customers for her turn: for Paris is a paradise for women, a hell for
men's Horses, and a Purgatory for those that follow suits of Law. Upon a day
when she was in the same City, before the door of her lodging, there passed
by a gentleman with a friend of his, to whom he said alone as he came by
Mistrisse Furrier, because he would be heard: by God if I had such a beast to
ride on this night, I think I should by tomorrowe morning be well forward on my
journey. Mistress Furrier hearing the Gentleman say so, whom she found to her
mind (for he was lusty) called a little halfepennie boy that was by her: go
thy wairs said she, and follow yonder same Gentleman that thou see, and lose
him not until thou see where he goes in, and then do so much that thou
may speak with him, and say unto him, that the Gentlewoman that he saw at
such a lodging even now as he came by, has her commended to him, and if that
he will take the pains to come unto her this evening, she will prepare him a
ba^quet, between eight and nine of the clock. The Gentleman did accept the
message, and sent back word that he would come at y^ hour appointed. Ye must
note, that their two lodgings was not far the one from the other. The gentleman
came at his time, and found Mistress Furrier tarrying for him: she bid him
welcome, and made him a banquet, they talked together, and the mean while the
bed was made, in which the Gentleman laid him down, according to the agreement
made between them, and Mistress. Furryer came to bed to him: the Gentleman
seeing his horse ready, failed not to do his diligence for the speedy
attaining of his journey: but notwithstanding his great courage, he was tired
in short time before his hackney was any thing hot, in so much, he was
constrained to leave his steed in the stable, and go his way. The next day, or
certain day after, Mistress Furrier (that had always some errantes in the
City) met the Gentleman, whom she saluted, saying unto him: God morrow Sir
with deux and ace. The Ge^tleman being abashed said unto her: Mistress
Furrier, if the Tables had been good, I had made two trayes: Nevertheless you
lodged me yesternight at large. It is true Sir said she, but I did not know
that you had so small a train.

Of a Gentleman that had ridden post, and of a Cock that could not tread the
Hens.
THere was sometime a certain Gentleman, which had been absent from his house
a long season, at the last finding opportunity he came home to see his Wife,
who was young, fair, and pleasant: he took post a two days journey from his
place, where he arrived very late, when his Wife was in bed, he laid him
down by her, who incontinently awaked, being very glad of company, hoping
verily to have had some good turn yt night. But her joy was soon turned: for
her Husband self him self so weary with riding Post, that for all the joy
and pleasure she made him, he continued still drowsy, without proffering her
any pleasure, whereof he did excuse him saying: Lady, ye great love that I had
toward you, has caused me to hasten to see you, and I have ridden post all
the way long, therefore considering I am weary, and sore beaten with riding,
I pray you excuse me for this time. The Gentlewoman sound not this to her
mind: for some that have experience say, there is nothing greeueth a Woman
more, then to be deprived of such pastime. Nevertheless, the Lady took
patience perforce, and had no other thing for that night, but rising up early
in ye morning from her Lord, let him take his rest. With in an hour or two
after, he rose, and in making him ready came and looked out at a Window, which
opened toward a back yard, and my Lady his wife was by him, he spied a Cock
that would have trodden a Hen, and made his friskes about her many times, but at
the last did nothing. My Lord that beheld his doings, was angry and said:
see this scuruie Cock, he has been this hour about yonder Hen, and can do
nothing: he is naught, and therefore let him be taken a way, and another put in
his steed. The Lady answered him tha my Lord, I pray you pardon him, it may
be that he has ridden Post all the night long. With that my Lord held his
peace, and spoke no more, having his comb cut with that answer.

Of the Vicar of Brow, and of the good pranks that he did in his life time.
THe Vicar of Brow, who in many places has been called the Vicar of Byon,
has done so many memorial acts in his life time, that whosoever would put
them in print, should make a legend more great, the^ Lancelot du lake or sir
Tristram. And such fame had he, that when an other Priest has done any notable
thing, it is said to the Vicar of Brow* The Lymosines would have usurped this
honor to their Vicar, but it fell to ye Vicar of Brow by all men's consent, of
whom I will here recite certain frates, and the rest I will leave for others to
describe. This Vicar did all things by a particular judgment of his own, and
to his mind he found all things not good, that had been set forth by his
predecessors: as y^ Anthemes, the Anwers, the Kirieli^on, the Sanctus, the
Agnus Dei, and such like, but he would say and sing them after his manner. And
above all the rest he could not abide the order of the passion, as it is
commonly said in the Churches, but he would read it clean contrary: for when
Christ Jesus spoke any thing to the Jews, or to Pilate, then would he speak
it out a loud, ye every one might hear and understand, and if it were the
Jews that spoke or any other, he would read it so softly, and with such a low
voice, that with great pain might the people hear him. It happened that a
Lady of fame and authority, taking her way toward the Castle of Dun, there to
keep her Easter, passed by Brow upon a Good-fryday, about ten of the clock
before noone, and minding to hear the service, she came into the Church, where
was the Vicar saying Service. When he came to the passion, he read it after his
manner: and when he said, whom seek ye, he made all the Church to ryng with
his voice, but when he said Jesus of Nazareth, he spoke so softly that no body
could hear him, and in this order went forward with his passion. This Lady,
who was very devout, and for a Woman had good knowledge in the Scripture, noted
well these Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and was greatly grieved at this order of
reading, and wished that she had not come to the Church: but she determined to
speak to the Vicar, and to fell him her mind. After the Service was done, she
sent for him to come, and speak with her. When he was come, she said unto him:
Master Vicar I cannot tell where you have learned to behave your self so
irreverently such a day as this is, wherein the People ought to be in
humilitye, but to hear you say your Service, there is no devotion at al. And
why so my Lady said he? why so said the Lady? you have read the passion to day
like a mad man: for when Christ speaks, then you speak like the common
Crier: and if Cayphas, Pylate, or any of the Jews speak, then you speak
(...) to your self. Is it well done of you? are you worthy to have a cure?
they yt do you right, should take away your Benefice, and make you acknowledge
your fault. When the Vicar had long given ear unto her, he answered, is this
all you have to say unto me? Now by my soul it is true that is commonly said,
there are many Folks that speak of that wherein they have no skill. My Lady I
think I know what belonges to my office, as well as another, and I would that
all the world should know, that God is as well served in my Parish according to
my degree, as in any place within this hundred mile. I know that other Curates
and Priests read the Passion after another manner, the which I can do I thank
God, as well as they if I would, but it should appear that they understand not
what they read. For does it become the Knave Jews, to speak as loud as Jesus
no, no, my Lady: Be you sure that in my Parish, God shall be Master, so long as
I do live, and let others do in their Parish according to their knowledge. When
ye Lady hard this proper reply, she said: now truly Master Vicar you are a
man of a good Spirit, it was so told me before, but I would never have believed
it, if I had not seen it.

Of the same Vicar and his Maid, and of his clothes that he did wish, and how
he entertained his Bishop, his great Horses, and the rest of his train.
THE said Vicar had a Maid of twenty five years of age, or there about, which
was feign to do him service day and night. And therefore he was many times put
into the Comissaries Court, where he made amends by the purse. But for all
this, the Bishop could not prevail, and therefore upon a time forbad him the
keeping of any maid, under fifty year old at the last: therefore he keeps one
of twenty year old, and another of thirty. The Bishop perceiving this error
worse then the first, charged him to keep none at all: to the which the Vicar
was forced to obey, or at ye least he made semblaunce of so doing. And because
he was a good Fellow, and would make good cheer, he found means enough to
appease his bishop, and to get his favor, who also passed often times by where
he kept: for he would always have a cup of good wine for him, and now the^ a
pretty wenche to pleasure him also. Upon a time the Bishop sent him word, that
he would come next day to supper to him, but he would have him provide nothing
but light meats, because he found him self not well at ease, and the
physicians had appointed him a diet for his stomach. The Vicar sent him word,
that he should be welcome, and by and by he provided good store of calves skins
and sheeps skins, and put them all to boil in a great pan, minding therewith to
feast the Bishop. Now, he had the^ no Maid, because he was forbidden to keep
any. And about the time that he thought the Bishop would come, he pulled of his
h^s^ and shoes, and went and carried a pan full of linen clothes, to a brook
that was in the way, where the Bishop should pass, and went into the water up
to ye knees with a washing stool before him, holding a bettel in his hands,
wherwithall he beat his clothes. At the lost the Bishop came, and they of his
train that ryd before spying the Vicar in the water beating of his cloths,
showed him to my Lord saying: I pray you my Lord foe yonder the Vicar of
Brow, how he stands in the water washing of cloths. The Bishop seeing him in
that sort, was wonderfully amazed, and could not tell whether he should laugh
or be angry, but coming near the Vicar, that was very busy, making
countenance as though he had not seen my Lord, said unto him: I pray thee
what do thou here? the Vicar starting up as one taken, said unto him: my
Lord, I am washing my linen. Art thou washing of thy linen said the Bishop?
art thou become a Launder? is this a seemly order for a Priest? well, make thy
account for this thy knavery to be deprived of thy benefice beside further
punishment. And why so my Lord said the Vicar? you have forbidden me to keep a
maid, and therefore I must be feign to be maid my self, for I have no more
clean linen. Well, thou ungracious Vicar, go thy ways (quoth he) I will
remember thee, but wherewithal shall we sup? My Lord quoth he, you shall have
a good supper God willing: take no thought for that, I have provided light
meats. When supper time was come, the Vicar served the Bishop, and at the first
mease set before him these sodde^ calves skins, to whom the Bishop said: what
meat is this thou bring me? do thou mean thus to mock me? My Lord said
the Vicar you sent me word yesterdaye, that I should prepare for your Lordship
light meats, I have tried al kind of meats, but when it came to the dressing,
they went all to the bottom of the pan, until at the last I found these
skins, that swam above the water, they are therefore the lightest meats that I
could find. Thou was never good in all thy life said the Bishop, nor never
wilt be, thou know what wickedness thou haste done me: well, I will teach
thee to know with whom thou have too do. The Vicar notwithstanding, had very
well provided for supper meats of another kind of digestion, the which he
caused to be brought forth, and did so well use the Bishop, that therwithal he
was pleased. After supper was done, the Bishop withdrew himself to rest: but
the Vicar that knew my Lords complexio^, provided him a pretty tender pidgeon
to lie with him all night, and also for each of my Lords men a Gossip: for it
was their ordinary and custom always when they came to him. The Bishop going
too bed, did the Vicar go his ways, for said he, I am now well pleased with
thee, because thou know my diet. But I pray thee let my Horses be no worse
used then my self, for I put my trust in thee. The Vicar forgot not these
words, but took his leave of the Bishop till the next morning. And straight
ways sent into the town to borrow good store of Mares, and within a short
time he found enough to serve his turn: the which Mares he put amongst my
Lords great Horses, which began to fling, kick, and keep a foul stir, in
so much that the Horsekeeper was feign to forsake his sweet heart, to appease
the broile between the Horses and Mares. The next day in the morning, the
Bishop would needs know what ayled his Horses to keep such a coile in the
night. The Horse-keeper thought to have excused the matter, but he could not.
My Lord said the Horsekeeper, the occasion was, because the Vicar had put Mares
to your stone horses. The Bishop mistrusting such a matter, sent by and by for
him, to whom my Lord laid a thousand injuries and reproaches, wretch that thou
art said he, will thou always play the Iauell with me in this manner? Thou
have spoiled my Horses, and yet thou carest not. The Vicar answered: My Lord,
said you not to me yesternight, that your Horses should be as well used as your
self? I have done to my power the best that I could do to them, they have had
hay and otes their belly full, and they have had straw up to the hard belly,
so that they wa^ted but each of them their female, which you had, and therefore I
sought them the like in the Town. A vengeance on thee thou ungracious Vicar
(said the bishop) do thou tell me of such things? hold thy peace, we will
reckon together, and then I will reward thee according to thy doings, and so
went his way for that time.

Of the same Vicar, and of the Carpe which he bought for his Dinner.
NOw to come again to our Vicar of Brow. Upon a Sunday in the morning, as he
was walking about the Parish, he espied a man come walking toward him, that
brought in his hand a fair great Carp: he remembered that the next day was fish
day, and it might possible be the Gange week, he bought this Carp and paid
for it. And because he was alone, he took the Carpe, and tied it to his
codpeece point, and so covered it with his Gown, and in that order went to
Church, where the Parish tarried for him to hear Mass. When it came to the
Offering, the Vicar turned his face toward the people, with the basen in his
hand to receive the Offeringes, and the Carpe that was quick, did oftentimes
wag the tail, and made Master Vicars white surplice to stir, whereof the
Vicar perceived nothing: But the Wives that were beneath in the Church,
perceived it well enough, and they looked one upon an other hiding their eyes,
and laughing, with a thousand other gestures. And in the mean time, the Vicar
stood still tarrying for them, but not one of them durst go: for they supposed
the Carp hanging so nere his codpeece, to be some other kind of thing. The
Vicar and those that were with him, stood crying and calling, come to the
Offering Wives, you yt have any devotion: but yet they came not. When he
perceived that they would not come, but were laughing one at an other, he knew
well enough that there was somewhat in the way, in so much that at the last he
remembered his Carpe, that wagged his tail to and fro under his surplice. Well
my Parishioners said he, I perceive what it is that made you so to laughe. No
no, it is not it that you do think, but it is a Carpe that I bought for my
dinner tomorrow: and in saying so, he pulled up his vestement, and showed them
the Carpe, otherwise they would never have come to the Offering. The good man
took care for tomorrow, notwithstanding the words in the Scripture, Be not
careful for tomorrow: which for all that he did interpret for his own
advantage: for when any man said unto him, Sir, God has forbidden you to be
careful for tomorrow, and yet for all that you have bought a Carpe for your
dinner. It is said he, to fulfill the precept of the Scripture: for when I am
already provided, what need I then care for tomorrowe? Some say, that it was
a Friar that did hide a Pudding in his Gown sleeue, that he stole at a
certain banquet: but all comes to one matter. There is yet many pretty tales
of this Vicar of Brow, that are very pleasant, which I will leave for others to
set forth.

Of a pretty little man named Terry, who being upon his Mule, could not be seen
above the pommell of his saddle.
IN the Town of Montpellier, there was a young man called the Prior Terry, who
was of a good stock, and well learned, but that he was unable of his body: for
he had a botch on his back, and an other on his stomach, yt did let him to
grow, so yt he was not above a cubit hie. Upon a day he chanced to ride from
Montpellier unto Toulouse, in company of certain his friends of Montpellier,
they came to Thuberys to dinner: and because yt was in Summer, and that the
days were long, his company after dinner made no great have to depart, but
tarried until the heat of the day was past, and also some of them laid them
down to sleep: Wherewith Terrye was displeased, and therefore he caused his
Mule to be brideled in an anger, and got upon his back, saying: Now sleep
your fill, for I will be gone: So he rode his way as fast as he could. When
his company knew he was gone, not minding to let him go alone, they
dispatched as fast as they could after him: but Terrye by this time was ridden
most part of his journey. Now you shall understand, that he carried one of the
great Spanish felts to keep him from the Sun, being so broad that it covered
almost both ye Mule and the man, rebating nevertheless somewhat as much as is
reason. They that followed after him, spying a fellow of the Country in a field
not far from the high way, demanded if he saw a man on a mule riding toward
Narbona. The fellow answered thent saying: No, I saw no man, but I saw a gray
Mule, that had a great felt Hat upon his saddle, and he ran a great pace.
These men began to laugh: for they knew well it was Terrye, whose stature was
so tall, that he could not be seen over the saddle.

Of a Doctor that blamed Dancing, and of a Gentlewoman that defended the same,
with the reasons alleged on either part.
IN the town of Mauns there was in times past a Doctor of Divinity, a man of
great knowledge and singlenes of life. And although he was a Divine, yet was
he acquainted with civil orders, and therein he wuld behave himself very
modestly and well: for which cause he was desired into good and honest company
often times. Upon a day, in an assembly of the chiefest and principal of the
Town (he being of the number) there was as it chanced dancing after Supper,
the which he beheld for a time: during which dancing, he took occasion to talk
with a Gentlewoma^ called ye Bayliuisse of Silla, a woman, who for her virtue,
modesty, and honest behavior, was well esteemed in worshipful and honorable
company, very forward in all things that she did, and specially in dancing,
wherein she took more delighte then in any thing else, and having spent much
time in civil communication, at the last they began to talk of dancing:
whereof the Doctor said, that there is nothing wherein men and women were so
much ouerseene as in it. The Bayliuisse replied to the contrary saying, that
no thing did revive the mind more then it, and that the measure in dancing
would never enter into the mind of a dull man, which does declare ye party to
be nimble, feate of actiuitie, and to have measure in his doings: there are
also said she, young folks, that are of so heavy a moolde, that you shall
sooner learn an Ox to amble, then them to dance: and also you may see what
minds they have. Of dancing there comes pleasure both to them that dance,
and to them that look on. And I am of this opinion, that if you durst tell the
truth, you your self take great pleasure to behold them, for there is none
be they never so melancholy, and heavy, but will rejoice to see them foot it
so finely with the gesture of their body. The Doctor understanding what she
had said, left the terms of dancing for a time, holding this Gentlewoman
nevertheless with other talk: yet not so far from the purpose, but that he
might fall in hand with the former when he thought good. Within a quarter of an
hour after, as he saw occasion offered, he demanded of Mistress Baliuisse, if
she were standing at a window, or upon a gallerie, and should see from whence
she was in some great and broad place a dossen or sixteen Persons, together
hand in hand, that did leap, and skip, and turn about, going forward and
backwarde, whether she would not judge them very Fools. Indeed said she, if
they kept no measure I say quoth he, although they kept measure, and had
neither drum, flute, taber, nor minstrell. I confess (said the Gentlewoman)
the sight would be very unseemly. Why then (said the Doctor) can a hollow piece
of wood, or a paile that is stopped at both ends with parchment, have such
power to delight your cares, which of it self seems folly? and why not, said
the Gentlewoman? know you not of what power music is? the melody and
pleasant sound of the instrument, enters into the parties mind, and then the
mind commands the body, which is for no other thing, but to show by signs
and mouings the disposition of the soul, in joy and gladness: for such men
as are sad and sorrowful, show a contrary countenance. Furthermore in all
places the circumstance and meaning of things are to be considered, as you
your self daily preach. A minstrell that should play to himself alone, were
to be esteemed as a Preacher that should go into the pulpit to preach without
audience: the dauncers that are without an instrument, are as People in a place
of audience without talking: wherefore in vain blame you dancings, unless our
feet and ears were taken away. And I ensure you said she, if I were dead, and
could hear a minstrell, I would rise again and dau^ce. They that play at
tennys, take a great deal more pains to run after a little baule of leather
stuffed with hair, and they follow it with such a desire, that it seems
sometimes they would kill themselves, they are so eager, and yet have they no
Instruments of music as the Dauncers have. Nevertheless they find therein
great pleasure, and merueilous recreation: and therefore Master Doctor, in my
opinion moderat mirth discretly used, and dau^cing indifferently practiced, is
rather profitable, then otherwise hurtful. The Doctor would have replied, but
he was compassed about with Women, that made him hold his peace, fearing they
would have taken him to have daunced, and God knows how well it would have
become him.

Of a Priest, and of a Mason that confessed him self unto him.
THere was in the Country a Priest, that was not little proud for that he had
read his Cato, and somewhat more, for he had read also Sintaxis, and his Fauste
precor gellida, and therefore he would be known, and spoke with a great
bravery, using words that filled ye mouth, because he would be esteemed a
great Doctor: and also in his confession he had such terms, that he made the
poor People amazed. Upon a time he had under his confession a poor man that
was a Mason, to whom he said: how say thou Friend, art thou not ambitious?
the poor Man answered, no: for he thought that was a word that belonged to
great Lords, and noble Men, and in a manner did repent himself that he was come
to be confessed of this Priest, of whom he heard much talking, that he was a
great Clarke, and spoke so hyghlye that few could understand him, the which
he knew by the same word ambitious: for possible though he heard the word
before, yet he knew not well what it meant. The Priest again began to ask
him, art thou not a Fornicator? art thou not a Glutton? art thou not
superbious? he said still no. Art thou not Iracondious? no neither. The
Priest perceiving that he said still no, began to wonder, asking again, art
thou not concupiscent? no Sir said he. What art thou then said the Priest? I am
said he a poor Mason, behold here my truell. There was also another that
answered in like manner to his confessor, the which is somewhat in better
order. It was a Shepherd, whom ye Priest did ask, how say thou? have thou
kept the Commandments of God with all thy heart? no said the Shepherd. Have
thou kept the Commandments of the Church? no neither. Then said the Priest
unto him, what have thou the^ kept? I never kept nothing but sheep, said the
Shepherd. Yet there is another of one, who after he had declared all his
faults unto the Priest, the Priest asked him again, well Freende, what have
you else on your conscience? any thing? he answered nothing, but that he
remembered upon a time he had stolen a halter: well said the Priest, to steal a
halter is no great matter, you may easily enough make restitution. Yea but
said the man, there was a Horse tied at the end. Ha Sirrah said the Priest
that is another manner of matter, there is difference between a Horse and a
halter. You must therefore restore the Horse, and the first time that you come
again to me to be confessed, I will absolve you for the halter.

Of a Gentleman that in the night time cried after his hawks, and of the
Carter that wipped his horses.
THere is a kind of people yt have choleric humors, or melancholy, or
phlegmatic, it must needs be one of ye three: for the Sanguine complexion is
always good (so they say) whereof the vapor forgeth into the brain, that
makes them become fantastical, lunaticke, erraticke, scismatick, and all the
acticks that may be spoken, for the which there is found no remedy by any
purgagation, that may be given. Therefore having a desire to help such
afflicted People, and to pleasure their wives, Friends, parents, and kindred,
and al those that shall have to do, I will here in few words, breefly
declare an example that came to pass and happened, how they shall do, when
they have any body so taken, chiefly with night dreams, for it is a great
pain to rest neither day nor night. There was a Gentleman in the Country and
Land of Province, a man of reasonable good years, and rich, which greatly loved
hunting, and took there in so great delight and pleasure in the day time,
that in the night he would rise up in his sleep, and begin to cry, to halow,
and whup after his hounds, as if he had been abroad in the day time.
Wherewith he was sore displeased, and so were his Friends: for there could not
sleep one body that was in the house for him. And also many times he wakened
and diseased the Neighbors, he would cry out so loud and so long time after
his birds. But for other quallities he was reasonable, and also he was well
known as well for his honestye and gentleness, as for this his imperfection,
which was so troublesome, that by reason thereof, all the World called him the
Faulconer. Upon a day in following his hawks, he was far from home, and
strayed so far that the night ouertooke him, so that he knew not whither to go.
But he turned so long through Mountains and woods, that at the last being
very late, he came to a house that was upon the hye way alone, whereas the
goodman did sometimes lodge foot Folks that were belated in the night,
because there was no other lodging near hand. When he came thither, the good
man of the house was in bed, and his household, whom he caused for to rise,
desiring him yt he might have lodging for that night, because it was both
cold and foul weather. The goodman opened the door, and let him in, and put
his Horse in the stable amongst the neat, and showed him a bed on the ground,
for there was no chamber above. There was at that time in the house a Carter,
new come from the fair of Pesenest, which was laid in another bed hard by,
who awaked at the Gentleman's coming, wherewith he was angry, for he was
weary with travail, and was but new fallen a sleep: and such People of their
nature are not very courteous. At his soddaine waking he said to the Gentleman,
who the Devil brought you hither so late? This Gentleman being alone, and in
a place unknown, spoke as he could, saying: my Friend, the occasion is in
following my Hawks. Suffer me I pray thee to tarry here until the morning,
and then I will away. This Carter being better awaked, and looking earnestlye
upon the Gentleman, began straight way to know him, for he had seen him
often times a Aix in Province, and had oftentimes hard tell, what a Sleeper he
was. The Gentleman knew not him, but in pulling of his clothes he said:
Friend, I pray thee be not offended with me for this one night, for I have an
impediment, which is to cry in the night after my Hawks, for I love hawking
so that me think every night I am at the game. O ho, said the Carter, it
takes me after the same manner, for I think I am always whipping of my
Horses and dryuing my Cart, and I can by no means leave it. Well said the
Gentleman, one night will soon be passed over, we will therefore bear one
with another. He goes to bed, but he was very little entered into his first
sleep, but that he started out of his bed, and went crying about the house, sa
haw, sa haw, sa haw, whup whup whup. At this cry the Carter awaked, and takes
his whip that stood by him, and yerked the Gentleman to and fro about the
house, crying ha, ree, brown, bayard, dun, go, what brown, hob, hob, why, hay,
ho, ree: he so yerked the poor Gentleman ye need not to ask how, who waked
with the yerkes of the whip, and insteede of cryinge after his Hawks he
changed his tune, and cried out for help, saying I am slain: but the Carter
fetched him to and fro still about the house, until at the last the poor
Gentleman was feign to get him under the table and there couch and speak not a
word, tarring there until the Carter had passed his rage over, who when he
perceived yt the Gentleman had hidden himself, set down his whip, went to bed,
and began to snort like one that had been in his dead sleep. The goodman of
the house rose, lighted a candell, and found the Gentleman hidden underneath
the boorde^, in such a little corner, as would scant serve a cat to go in, and
all his body and legs were so painted with lashes, as if it had been the
picture of Christ: the which surely was a great miracle: for never after that
did he once rise up to cry after his Hawks, as before he was wont to do in
his sleep, whereat his Friends and kindred did much merueile that knew his
quallitie: but he told the^, what had happened. Never one man was more bound
for another, then was the Gentleman to the Carter, who had healed him of such
an infirmity as that was.

Of the good widow woman that had a supplication to present, and she gave it
to the Counselor Foul.
THere was a certain Wydowe Woman that had a matter in law at Paris, and
thither she went to see how it went forward, wherein she made great labor and
diligence, although she did not well know how to do her business, but she put
her trust yt the Lords of ye Parliament would have respect to her age,
wydowhod, and the right of of her cause. Upon a morning very early, sooner
then she was wont, she did not enter into her garden to gether violets, but she
took her supplication in her hand, the which declared of certain injuries, and
wrongs that were done to her late Husband, she goes withal to ye pallaice,
against the Cou^sellors should come in, and went to the first that came in, to
whom she presented her supplication, and he took it, and in taking of it, the
good Wife made to him her complaints, because he should understand the matter
better. When ye Counselor who was for spiritual matters, saw and understood
by the Wife that they were temporal crimes and faults he said to the Wydow:
good Woman, it is not to me that you should give your supplication, it must be
unto Master Counselor Foul. The good Wife not knowing what he meant by
Consellour Foul, thought that it should be delivered to the fowlest and
blackest Counselor, because peradventure she saw that the first Counselor
was a fair man and well made. She began to look upon the Counselors one after
another, to see which was fair, and who was foul, wherein she was very busy:
at ye last comes one, that was none of the fairest men in the world, at the
least in the wydows sight, because he had a long beard and was shaven. The good
wife thought she had found her man, to whom she gave her supplication, and
said. Sir it was told me, yt it must be a foul Counselor that must deal with
my supplication. I have viewed al those yt are gone in, but me think there is
none so foul as you: therefore I pray you declare it. The Counselor that
understood very well wat she meant, thought no ill of the woman's simplicity,
but took her supplication, and in declaring it to ye chamber, failed not but
got the Wydows matter dispatched and ended according to her request.

Of the Bastard Son of a noble man, that would have suffered him self to have
been hanged, in hope to be revenged, and how he was angry with him that saved
his life.
THere was upon a time a noble man's bastard, whose wisdom was but after a
manner: for he thought that every body should have done him honor as to a
Prince, because he ws Bastard to such a noble house. And besides this he
thought that all the world did know his quallity, his birth and his name: for
oftentimes he went straying about the Countreye with a Company of no great
valewe, and he would be in all Companies good and bad, al was one to him, he
played away his Horses, at all times when he had new given him, and his
apparel by yt way where he went, and many times for want of a Horse he was
feign to go on foot. Upon a time being left but in all ill plight, he passed by
the Country of Rouergie, coming toward France, to get him a new Horse, and he
passed by wood, where certain Thieves had newly slain a man. The Provost
Martial that followed upon the thieves, met by chance this Bastard clad like a
Soldiour: of whom he asked from whence he came. The Bastard answered him
nothing, but stubbornly asked what he had to do from whence he came: yes said
ye Provost I have to do, and to know: art not thou one of those that has
killed yonder man? what man said the bastard? thou need not ask what man
said the Provost, I will make thee tell me others news or ever thou go. Why
what will thou do said ye bastard? The Provost made no more to do, but caused
him to be apprehended, and that was worse led him away by force, and going by
the way the Bastard said, is it to me that thou have a quarrel, and I have
suffered thee all this while? the Provost thinking that he did threaten him
with his fellows, kept his men about him, and led him straight to the next
Town, and there condemned him to be hanged. But in asking him what he was,
and what was his name, he answered no other thing, but I will teach you to
know what I am, and what is my name: thou art a hanger of men, art thou? no
force. Upon these threatening words the Provost condemned him, and carried him
out to be hanged, and made him go up the Ladder, which provoked the Bastard to
great anger, saying his death should be the dearest to him, of all that ever he
hanged in his life. When he was a high upon the ladder, there was by fortune
amongst the rest to see the Execution a man of that Country, which before time
had been at the Court, that knew this bastard, and because he would be sure,
he came nearer to the Ladder, so that he knew verily that it was he. This man
called to M. Provost, saying: what will ye do M. Provost? stay your hands, it
is such a noble man's son, take heed what you do, as you mean to answer it.
The Bastard hearing this man declare what he was, willed him to hold his peace
with a mischief, let the Provost alone said he, for to teach him to hang
folks. When the Provost hard him named, he caused him to come down, and to be
loosed, to whom the bastard said moreover: Well, you would have hanged me, it
should have been the dearest hanging M. Provost, that ever thou hanged in thy
life. But why did not thou let him alone (speaking to the man that did save
him very angerlie?) Judge now I pray you what will this man had, that would have
suffered him self to be hanged, and would have been revenged afterward: but
who would once think that he was a Noble man's son, and also a Gentleman. The
poor man was not of his mind that the French King would have sent to the
King of England, who then had war against France, for many injuries and
wrongs that France had offered, the which Gentleman said unto the French
King: Sir, and it like your grace, I am yours body life and gooddes, the which
I will endeavor with all my power to bestow in your Graces service like an
obedient Subject: but if you send me into England in these troubles. I shall
never return again, which is for a matter of no such great weight, but that it
may be deferred until the King of England have pacified his anger: for now
that he is thus bent against you and your kingdom, he will not stick to cut
off my head. By the faith of a Gentleman said the French king, if he do so I
will be revenged, or it shall cost me forty thousand men's lives. Yea mary Sir
said the Gentleman, but of all those heads there will not be one that will
serve my turn, it is a small comfort to a man that his death shall be revenged.
Indeed, a man for the respect of his honor, and for the common wealth, will
be the more willing to offer his head to be stricken off, for that it is a
virtuous act, and a honorable execution.

Of a Tailor that would steal from himself, and of the graye cloth that he
restored again to his Gossip the Hosyer.
A Tailor of the Town of Poytiers named Lion, was a good workman of his
occupation, and could as well make a garment for a woman as for a man, but
sometimes he would cut out three quarters behind in steed of two, or three
sleeves in a cloak, and sow on but two: and he had so practiced this
legerdemaine, that he could not refrain it in nothing that he did cut out. If
he had cut out a garment for himself, he would have thought his cloth had
deceived him, if he cut not something beside the garment to cast into the chest.
As in like manner an other, who was so great a thief, that when he found
nothing to steal, he would rise from his bed, and steal money out of his own
purse. I will not say that Tailors be Thieves, for they take no more then
only that which is brought them, no more then the Ioyners: and as the Maid
said to her Mistrisse that hired her: wot ye what Dame? I will serve you well,
but look you? what meanest thou by that said the woman? My feet are swift to
seek a new service if I like not, and this all the fault I have: for in all
other things you shall find me as diligent as is possible. Also our Tailor could
very well his occupation but that he had his fault. It chanced so that he made
a cloak of Roan russet for a Gossip of his that was a Hosier, who had occasion
to ride abroad, whereof he had stolen a good quarter. The Hosier perceived it
well enough, but said nothing, knowing by his own occupation that every man
must seek to live by theirs. One day in ye morning, the Hosier passing by the
Tailors door with his cloak on, the Tailor asked him how he did, and willed
him to take a Hering with him to breakfast, for it was in Lent. He was content,
so they went up together to roste this Hering: the Tailor called to his
apprentice that was in the shop saying, bring me the gridyron that is below:
the boy thought that he had called for the gray russet cloth y^ was left of
the cloak, and that he would have restored it again to his Gossip the Hosier:
he took the cloth, and carried it up to his Master. When the Hosier saw this
great piece of cloth, why said he, is this of my cloth? and will no less serve
thy turn then this? Now surely I see there is small honesty in thee. The
Tailor perceiving that he was bewraied, said unto him: why do thou thinks
that I would have kept it from thee that art my Gossip: Do thou no^ see that
I have called for it to give it thee again? I spare thy cloth, and thou say
I steal it from thee. The Hosier was well pleased with this answered: so he
brake his fast, and took hence his remnant of cloth. But the Tailor gave his
prentise a lesson, to make him wiser: an other time.

Of Chykouan the Taborer, that caused his Father in Law, to appear before the
Judge because he did not dye, and the sentence that the Judge gave.
IT is not very long since that in the Town of Amboyse there was taborer,
that every man called Chykouan, a man merry and full of pleasant words, for
the which he was welcome in every place. He took to Wife an old man's Daughter
in the Town of Amboyse, a man that meaned good faith, and had passed his time
having no child but one only Daughter. And because that Chykouan had no other
means to sine but his Tabor, he requested of this good man some money with the
marriage of his Daughter, that he might buy some Implementes toward household.
But this old man would give him none, saying for his excuse to Chykouan: My
son, ask me no money, for I can give you none at this time: but you see well
that I am at the end of my days ready to go to the grave, I have no heir but
my Daughter, you shall have my house, and all my moouables when I am gone, for
I cannot live above a year or two at the most. The good man told him so many
reasons, that he was content to take his Daughter without money, but he said
unto him: you shall understand that I do upon your word, that which I would
not do to another: but will you fulfill that truly which you have promised?
What else said the old man? I never yet deceived any man in all my life, and
therefore God defend that I should begin now. Well then said Chykouan, I will
have no other contract but your promise. The day of marriage was come, Chykouan
goes from his house to fetch his Wife at her Fathers, and he himself brought
her to the Church with his Tabor and pipe: when he had brought her to Church,
yet all is not done said said he, Chykou^n has fetched his Wife is Church, and
now he must go fetch himself. He goes back again to his house, and then
he brought himself to to the Church with his tabor and pipe, where he married
his Wife, and then brought her home, so that he was himself both Bridegroom
and mynstrell, and gained his own money, he played the good husband with her,
and they lived always together joyfully. At the end of two years, perceiving
that his father in law did not die, he tarried yet two months, yea three
months, but he lived still. He bethought him for his pleasure and to make sport,
to sommon his Father in law, and for that purpose sent to him a sergeant, to
warn him to the Court. This good old man, that never before had to do in the
Court, and that knew not what such adiornementes meant, was the heauiest man
in the world to see himself adiorned, and also at the request of his son in
law, whom he had seen the day before, and had said nothing to him of it. He
went out of hand to Chykouan, and made his complaint, showing him that he had
done him great wrong thus to adiorne him, and he not knowing wherefore it was.
No said Chykouan, I will tell you tomorrow at the Court, and so could get no
other thing of him, but must needs come to the Court. When as they came
before the Judge, Chykouan began to declare his matter himself saying My Lord
Judge. I have married this man's daughter here as all men know, I never had one
penny with her, as he himself can tell, but he promised me when I did marry
her, that I should have his house and all his goods, and that he would not live
above one year, or two at the most, I have tarryed this two year and three
months longer, and yet I have neither his home nor any other thing, I
require that he die, or else to give me his house and mouables according to
promis. The good man defended his cause by his Attorney, that answered briefly
what he had to say. The Judge having heard the debates on both sides with their
reasons alleged, and knowing the (...) intent of Chykouan, and his foolish
demand upon the old man's unsure promis, for his foolish adiornment did
condemn Chykouan to pay all his Fathers costs and charges, and besides that
twenty frankes turnoys to the King. Yet said the Judge perceiving thou art a
poor man. I will moderate the sentence, it shall be but a Capon, and the charge
that the goodman has been at, and you shall go together like friends, and eat
your part, and after his death you shall have his house, if it be not sold
before, or morgaged, or fallen by casualtie of fire. And thus the Judges
appointment was according to Chykouans demand, whom he made affrayde with
his first sentence, but at the last did moderate the same, as a Judge may do
in such a case.

Of two points to make a woman hold her tongue.
A Certain young man being in talk with a Woman of Paris, who made her vaunt
that she was Master, said unto her: If I were your Husband, I would break
you well enough from your will. You said she? why what can you do more then
other men? you would be made to come under as well as others I warrant you. No
no said he, I know two points to have the upper hand of a Woman, Say you so
said she? and what be the points I pray you? The young man in shutting his
hand showed her his fit, saying that was one, and then in closing the other
hand said that was the other, whereat there was good laughing. For the Woman
thought yt he would have showed some reason by learning, to have the upper hand
of a Woman: but trust me, I think there is neither these points nor any other,
that can persuade a Woman, if once she have gotten the head to raunge at her
own pleasure.

Of the Lord of Vauldry, and the pranks that he played.
IT is not long since was living the Lord of Vauldry, whose doings made him
known of Princes, and almost of all the world, the Acts that he did in his
life time with such a terrible and fearful desperatenes, and the good fortune
that he had withal, that no man but only he durst presume to do the like.
And as it is commonly said, that a wise man should have died thereof a hundred
times. As when he strangled a Cat with his teeth, having both his hands bound
behind him. And an other time when he would try the goodness of a buffe leather
Ierkin, or a Jack of mayle, I know not whether, but to try it he pithed a
naked sword against a wall, with the point toward him, and ran against the sword
with such might, that he ran himself through the body: and yet nevertheless
he dyed not, he may say he had good luck. Amongst other of his desperate
follyes, there is yet one that deserves well to have the hearing. He passed on
Horseback upon a time over Seye bridges, not far from Angyers, which for
bridges of wood are very high from the water, and he bare behind him on his
Horse an other Gentleman, who jesting with M. Vauldry, said unto him: tell me
now M. Vauldry, thou that art so full of inventions, and that can play so
many prankes, if thou saw now thy enemies at both ends of the bridge, that
waited for thy coming to slay thee, and thou had no shift but to go
forward or backward, what would thou do? Then said Vauldry unto him, do
thou ask me what I would do? thou shall see what. And without any more adoo
set spurs to his horse, and leapte with him clean over the bridge into the
river of Loyre, and kept his horse back so well, that he escaped with his
horse, but if the gentleman that was behind him escaped as well as he, truly
he was more happy at the least then wise. For it is great foolishnes of him to
put himself behind a desperate fool, and to move such words unto him
knowing when a man is in such a place, he is not sure from danger.

Of a Mooncke, that answered altogether by Syllables.
A Certain Mooncke travailing the Country, aryued in an Inn at supper time:
the host willed him to sit down among others, that had already begun supper:
but the Mooncke to over take them, began to lay on load with his teeth, and
with such an appetite as though he had eat no meat in three or four days
before. The old Lad had put himself in his dublet, the better to fill his
paunche: the which being perceived, be one that sat at the table. He began to
ask ye Mooncke many questions; that were not greatly to his mind, for he was
busy filling of his belly, because he would not lose much time, he answered
the party that spoke to him altogether in sillables: and I think he was
practiced with this language long before, for he was very expert in it. The
questions, and the answers were these: what garment do you were? strong: what
wine do ye drink? red: what flesh do ye eat? beef: How many Moonks are ye?
nine: how like you this wine? good: you drink no such at home? no. What eat ye
upon frydaies? eggs: how many have each of you? two. And this while, he lost not
one mouthful of meat, for his teeth were still going, and yet answered well and
readily to all his demaundes. If he said his mattins so short, but of doubt he
was a notable Pillar of the Church.

Of a certain Studient in the law, and of the Poticarie, that taught him
physic.
THere was upon a time a certain Scholar, that had dwelled at Tholowse a
certain time, passing by a little town not far from Cahors in Quercy, named
saint Antonies, there for to practice his texts of law, not that he had
greatly therein profited, for he had most studied human letters, wherein he
had very good knowledge. But he thought, seeing he began to profess the
law, not to straye or wander from the same, until he could answer therein
as well as another. So soon as he was come to saint Antonies (as in such little
Towns a man is quickly spyed and marked) there came a Potticarie to be
acquainted with him, saying: Sir, you are welcome to the town, and so began to
fall in talk with him: who amongst other talk, spoke certain words as
touching Physic. When the Potticarie had hard him speak, he said unto him:
Sir, so far as I can perceive you are a Physician. No that I am not said he,
but I have read somewhat of Physic. I know well enough Sir, that you will not
declare what you are, because you mean not to tarrye long in this Town. But
truly Sir, if you would, you should not find it least for your profit. We
have at this present never a Physician in these quarters, he that we had, is
lately dead, and dyed worth three or four thousand pound. If that you will
remain and dwell here (for here is god being) I will lodge you in my house, and
so you and I shall live well, when ye are once known. Sir said he Poticarie, I
pray you take the pains to come and dine with me. The Scholar understanding
the Poticaries words, that was no fool, for he had travailed into many places,
to see and know fashions, was content to go with him to dinner, and thought
this to himself: I will try the chance, and if this man will do as he says,
I shall make good shifte, for this is a rude Country, and there is not one
body that knows me, and therefore we will see what will come to pass. The
Potticarie, brought him to his house to diner. After diner, having always this
talk in their mouths, they agreed together to be Coosins. And for to make our
tale short, the Poticarie made the Scholar believe that he was a Physician.
And then yt Schooler said unto him first of all, you shall understand that I
never had great practice in our art as you do think. But my mind was, to have
gone to Paris, to have studied another year, and then to have fallen to the
practice at the Town from whence I came. But seeing I have found you, and that
I know you are a man that can show me pleasure, and I in like manner unto you,
let us look about to do our business, for I am content at your request to
tarry. Sir said the Potticarie, take no care, I will teach you all the practice
of physic in less then fifteen days. I have of a long time used ye company
of physicians, both in Praunce and in other places, I know their fashions, and
their receipts all by heart. Moreover in this Country, ye need but set a good
countenance on it, and go by guess, and you shall be counted the best Physician
in all the World: and then the Poticarie began to teach him, how he should
write an ounce, half ounce, a quarter of an ounce, a dram, a handful, a
quantity. And another day, he taught him the names of drugs that were most
common, and to mix, to strain, to still, to make compounds, and simples, and
such like things. This continued ten or twelve days, during the which time he
kept his chamber, causing the Poticarie to say that he was not well. The which
Poticarie blazed abroad that this phisitio^ was the best learned man, that
ever came to that town. Whereof they of the Town were very glad, and began
to entertain him, and to make much of him so soon as he came abroad, they
stryuing who should make him the best cheer. And you would have said that
already they longed to be sick, to try this new physician, and to set him a
work to the end he might have a better will and desire to tarry there. But M.
Doctor made himself to be sought for, and entered not haunting the Company of
many Folks, but kept a great countenance and set a good face on the matter,
and above other things he did not depart from the Potticarie, that had taught
him his running: in short time there came vryns to him from all parts. Now in
those places they must judge by the vrynes, whether the patient be a man, or a
woman, and in what part their pain and sickness lay, and of what age they were.
But this Physician could do more then that, for he could tell the^ who was their
father and mother, and whether they were married, or no, and how many Children
they had, to conclude he could tell all even from the old to the new, and all
by the help of his M. the Poticarie. For when he saw any body brought a water,
the Poticarie would question with them whilst the physician was above, and
would ask them, from end to end all these former things. And then he caused
them stay* until he was gone up and declared to M. Doctor all yt he had
learned of them that brought the vrins. The physician, taking their waters,
would hold them up and look on them, putting his hand between the brinall
and the light, and would shake it, and turn it with all the gestures in such
cases required. The^ he would say, it is a womans water, yea truly Sir it is
so, she had a great pain in her left side under the breast, or pain in the
head (as the Potticarie had given him instructions) it is not three months
since she was delivered of a Daughter. The bringer of this urine did begin
greatly to marvel at his great knowledge, and would go away, and declare
unto every body what the phisitio^ had said, So yt from mouth to mouth the
report went, that there to the town was come such an od Fellow, that there
was not his like to be found. And if by fortune his Poticarie was not by, or at
hand, the^ would he draw the worm out of their nose himself, in saying very
sick, to which the bringer of the urine would say he or she, by the means
whereof he would say after a little pawsing, is not this a man's water? Yea
truly Sir, it is a man's water would the Bringer say, I spyed that by and by,
would the Physician say, but when he came to minister and give physic unto
any one, then would he have always his Poticarie, who spoke one unto another
physic lattin, which was in those days fine stuff. And under this lattin, the
Potticarie would name him the whole receipt, making a show as though they
spoke of other things. In the which, I leave you to consider whether it were
not a good sight to see a Physician write under a Potticarie. In effect whether
it was because of the good opinion the People had on him, or by any other
chance, those that were sick, felt themselves well by his ordinances and
appointements, they thought not themselves well that came not to this
Physician, and they were persuaded, that it was good being sick whilst he was
there: for they thought if he went once his way, they should never recover
again the like, and happy was he yt could present him with the greatest gifts.
So that in six or seven months, he had gotten good store of crowns, and also
his Potticarie by means one of another: and therefore he prepared him self to
depart from saint Antonies, saying that he had received letters from his
Country, by the which he hard news that he must needs depart for a time,
but he would not fail to return again shortly. It was to Paris that he
came, where afterward he fell to study physic. And it may be afterward for
all his further knowledge, he was not so good a Physician, as when he was
prentis: I mean, his doings came not so prosperously to pass: and many times
fortune helps more those that are ignorant, the^ those that have knowledge
and skill: for a man of knowledge, uses too much discretion in his doings, he
thinks of the circumstance, and has a fear, and a doubt, which gives unto
men a mistrust in themselves, that does discourage them to deal in many
things. And as it is commonly said, better it is to fall into the hands of a
lucky physician, then to him that is learned, and has good skill. The
Physician of Italy knew this well enough, who when he had nothing to do, did
write two or three hundred kind of receiptes, for diverse sicknesses and
diseases, of the which he took a great number, and put them in the pocket of
his coat, or into his bosom: so that when any body came unto him with vrines,
he drew out one of the receipts by chance (as the lottes are drawn at the
Lottary) and gave it to the bringer of the vryne, saying unto him or her, Dio
te la dagae buonae: and if it sped well so it was, and if it sped ill, Suo
damuo: for thus goes the world.

FINIS.

