XXVII. LECTVRES, or readings, upon part of the Epistle written to the Hebrews.

Made by Master Edward Deering, Bachelour of Divinity.

Imprinted by Lucas Harison.

ANNO. 1577.

To the Christian Reader increase of faith and knowledge, with an earnest Zeal
of Christ Jesus the Lord.
THE Epistle to the Hebrews conteyneth such doctrine as the holy apostle knew
most necessary for the Jew, who (a few excepted) in the blindness of their
hearts, acknowledged not Christ Jesus for the Messiah: albeit all things
long before prophesied of the Messiah, by the holy Patriarchs and Prophets,
were in him clearly and fully accomplished, and that in the eyes and ears of
all Israel. This their great blindness, caused the excellent light of this
Epistle to be set forth to the whole world: for as their other wantes and
falling off from the faith, and natural Olive tree, caused the fulness and
grassing in of the Gentiles: so their doubtfulnes, as the doubtfulnesse of
Thomas, occasioned such clear doctrine, that we which come afterward, cannot
now without singular impiety, make any doubt in the doctrine and gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the which long ago has not been both made, and fully
aunsweared.

Whereupon, all men ought to be armed with this persuasion, that whosoever
again doubts, where the doubt is already taken away: and whosoever sins
the sin that has been heretofore punished, is a double offender: for he
is not guilty of the infidelity alone, or of the sin, but also of the
despising the example set down for us, that we trembling at the just
judgments of God against others, should avoid the the sin in our selves:
knowing that if we communicate with the wicked in their blindness, we must
also communicate with them in the danger: is in the provocation, then in the
punishment. Wherefore, concerning my first words, the Jews acknowledged not
Jesus Christ for the Messiah and redeemer of the world: but we must acknowledge
it, and the rather having amongst the unspeakable treasures of the word of God
this precious epistle, wherein the doctrine of the person, and offices of
Christ are most substantially proved, and witnessed by the holy Ghost.

For therein the Apostle chiefly proves Christ to be the anointed of God,
anointed not with common Oil, but with the Oil of gladness, that is, with all
fullness of the spirit, into a prophet that teaches us the wisdom and love
of the father: he alone the priest that washes away sin, and makes peace
with his sacrifice, even a high Priest after the order of Melchisedech, al
other priests, after the order of Levy being for the time, but shadows and
figures of the light and life in Christ: he alone the King of Salem, whose
kingdom is without unrighteousness, and everlasting: not as other kingdoms,
which are outward and bodily, but his kingdom frames and rules the heart, by
the spirit of God and the scepter of his lips: the throne thereof being
established in truth and majesty for ever and ever. Besides these chief
parts, being the body of the Epistle, there be other branches, containing
both vehement exhortations to the worthy receiving of the word, and this
present doctrine in faith, and also to the bringing forth of the plentiful
fruit thereof in patience.

This excellent epistle, about four years past, was expounded in the city of
London by two learned and godly men, who made, I suppose, their choice of that
Epistle, as containing very necessary doctrine for our times, wherein the
enemies of the Gospel are to to many, and prevail too too much against the
peace of the Church: for they seek righteousness in their own works and
sacrifices, which is not found otherwise in heaven or earth, the^ in the
righteousness and alone sacrifice of our lord Jesus Christ: who not by the
sacrifice of stau^ge blood, but by the offering up of his own blood, being
himself the sacrifice, and sacrificer, made an end of all sacrifices and
oblations going before, and left no place for any new sacrifice or oblation to
be used afterward. Neither was this all, that the Apostle overthrows all
other sacrifices, establishing that as all sufficient which was at the fullnes
of them, according to the eternal decree of God the father made upon the altar
of the cross once for ever, and so consequently confuteth the Papists,
mainteyning, even with bloody sacrifices of men, their unbloody sacrifice of
the Mass: but moreover, the doctrine is ve ry profitable, and necessary to
stir up the minds, and furnish the hearts of professors of the Gospel, (...)
knowledge concerning the person and offices of Christ Jesus the Lord.

For to leave the Catholics (as they untruly call themselves) either to the
grace of God to be converted (which God grant us heartily to pray for) or to
the blindness of their heart, to worship they know not what, concerning the
professors of the truth, I beseech the^ in the mercies of Jesus Christ to
know the height, the depth, the length and breadth, and all the mesures of
Christ preached in the Gospel, that as the foundation is most certain, so it
may be also certeinely known, and bring forth certain fruits to the glory
of God and their own assured salvation in him. Otherwise, if the know ledge of
our lord Jesus Christ be weak, our faith cannot be strong: if the faith be not
strong, the^ our hope is small, and the afflictions of the spirit many. But on
the other side, daily and effectual exercises of the word bring increase of
knowledge, increase of knowledge brings increase of faith, increase of faith
brings increase of hope, hope brings patience, and in patience we hold
the possession of our souls til the day of our full redemption.

But, to return to the two Interpreters of this Epistle, the one lives, and
may do well (if the Lord so dispose of his heart) to publishe in Printe his
Readinges made to his great praise upon the whole: the other is laid up in
peace with the righteous: but before his death he painfully gathered together
the greatest part of his lectures, leaving the^ in writing, that thereby he
might again profit the Church after his death: and now they are published to
the benefit of the Church, the zeal whereof greatly exercised his godly mind,
and many times brought his watchful head and weak body near to the grave. Of
whom I might truly speak much to his great praise, and yet nothing unknown:
but let God have the praise: nevertheless, as I will say no more* in
persuading men, so I can say no less in duty then this: his goodness was,
by the grace of God, very much, and his harmelessnes more: his gifts notable,
and his spirit more notable: accompanying him for the measure of his bodily
strength, with daily increase, til the last day and hour, wherein, for our
punishment the Lord translated him from mortality to immortality.

Touching these his Praelections, a goodly pattern of his sweet spirit, thou
have them (gentle Reader) in thy hands, and I leave them to thy judgment, they
need not my commendation. But be not thou deceived in iudgeing good things by
the first taste: for they delight more the second time, then at the first: and
more at the third time, then at the second. Try my commendation, and give thy
sentence.

But of all other readers of these M. Ed. Deerings expositions, I have namely
to exhort and beseech the Citizens of London, and others, sometime his diligent
auditors, that they would now repair their understanding, and re^site their
consolations reaped at the first f^utes of this present doctrine: that they
would also examine, and take an account of their memory, to see what is now
set down in writing here, that they have utterly forgotten long ago. So they
shall behold how easily good things, and comfortable things, even things of
eternal life, how soon they perish, and for want of true reverence to the
word, or diligent regard to our salvation, are by Satan made fruitelesse:
whereas in small matters old men have fresh memories, as to remember where
their gold lies, and how many obligations they have, and of what conditions.
And what is it (I pray you) that in them causes so good momorie? even the heart
set thereon with diligent care: which heart more set upon that that is more
precious infinitely, what judgment, what comfort, what stedfastnes would it
cause in the word of life? But how comes so small heed in so mighty
matters? Certainly hereupon, that the worldly man is of a worldly mind: and a
man without the spirit (as the Apostle Jude speaks) has no taste of the
spirit no delight in spritual riches, they are to him foolishnes. But of
memory thus much may suffice: I would have thought it too much, were it not
that to learning and knowledge in man, I know nothing better. For thy memory,
though the voice be taken away and the spirit with the Lord, yet the doctrine
remains to thee in letters: remain thou mindful now to make that hereafter
fruitful to thee by diligence, which hitherto has by negligence lain barren.

Let us account it a blessing from God, that we have thus many of M. Deerings
readings, the rest, which were to the x. Chapter or there about (...) the
other three Chapter's wait for, and desire some other (...) faithful labor.
If any man having small hope to make the remainder like to that which w^e have,
refuse therefore to attempt the matter, let him, otherwise abou^ding with gif^
and (...), and having exercises in the Church, humble himself to be in the
second or third place, to finishe the work, and benefit the Church, whereunto
al men are ins^tely ^ndebted, and almost no man careful to come out of debt.

But most of all, let us continually pray, that our good God would, in these
perilous ends of the world put on us al his whole complet armor to stand
against the power and malice of Satan: that he would also illuminate our
hearts, with the bright beams of his wisdom and holy word, that we may be
freed from the darkness of ignorance and error: that the mouths of the wicked
may be stopped, and the lips of the children of God opened, and fulfilled
with the (...) of God.

Moreover, seeing the Lord has laid sharp rods, and long time executed
great judgments upon our neighbors round about: giving us now, all these 18.
years of our gracious Sovereign, the Gospel in great peace: it is our duty,
to consider our duty in this behalf: first, that we in brotherly compassion,
and in an inward fellowfeeling lament, and to our power redress their
calamities: secondarily, that we be thankful to God, for our peace, and
careful to yield our selves in all singlenes and truth, every way obedient to
the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, the king of peace, in as large and the
same manner, that is to us offered in the word of life: in the third place, that
all diligence be used that the word may have his free passage, and main course
to the overthrow of all adversary power, especially, of the open enemies,
Papists and Atheistes, and to the discovery of other sects springing up of
their own accord, where the word is not planted: finally, to the cutting off
of profane and loose life, which now aduaunceth it self against heaven, and
provoke the Almighty, except by discipline it be broken down, that the
kingdom of Jesus Christ may be most glorious on earth, and that the sons
of men may be safe, and rejoice under the shadow of his wings. For a further
understanding hereof, and of many other like exercises in the knowledge and
practice of Christianity, I refer thee (gentle Reader) to these Lectures,
beseeching God to make thy labors fruitful with his continual blessings,
especially in thy prayers: wherein as careful for the whole Church also, pray
that the Lord in mercy would make the Churches beyond the seas, rather
partakers of our peace, with fullness thereof, then in justice to make us
companions of their punishment in the last place, and greatest measure.

Amen.
The xxiiii. of November. 1576
The Praelections of Edward Deering upon certain of the first Chapters of the
Epistle to the Hebrews.
The first Lecture upon the first verse of the first Chapter.
1 AT sundry times, and in diverse manners, God spoke in the old time to our
fathers by the prophets: in these last days he has spoken unto us by his
son.
AT sundry times and in diverse manners. etc. Why this Epistle was written.
Before we begin the exposition of this Epistle, I will briefly speak somewhat
of these three points. Why this Epistle was written, by whom, and at what
time. And first touching the cause of the writing, though we know assuredly,
it was cause sufficient to leave so excellent doctrine unto the church of God:
yet a special occasion then given, was undoubtedly this. The Jews were
stubbernly set to the maintenance and defense of the law of Moses, holding fast
all the ceremonies of it, as things necessary, never to be abrogate, but
perpetually to be used in the worshipp of God. Among ye residue they did
especially strive for Circumcision, next unto it, for the observation of
meats, and drinks, and times, and feasts, and sundry purifyings, as these
things are namely mentioned Gal. 4. 10. Col. (...). (...). Act. ^1. 14.
in the scripture: Besides these, other ceremonies: they embraced them and
loved them. And though many thousands (as it is in the xxi. of the Acts) did
believe: yet were they still zealous for the law, nor could possibly hear of
the abrogation of it. In so much that they and their forefathers had made this
an article of their faith, and it is the ninth article of their Creed, and
they hold it to this day: God gave his law to his faithful servant Moses, and
he will never alter it, nor change it for any other. And this their opinion, as
it was rooted in the^, so they had very many, and plausible persuasions for it:
they strove not for the inventions of man, but for the law of God: not holden
by traditions, but written by Moses: not in doubtful testimony, but in
manifest show of the glory of God. And this their opinion they did not think
was any coniectural exposition, but the manifest word, as it was often repeated,
that this should be an ordinance to them for over. For this cause the Apostle
having compassion upon Cap. 5. 12. and. 6. 1. and Cap. 12.
his weak brethren, who believed in Christ (but were also thus addicted to the
law) he writes unto them this Epistle, by all means persuading them, never to
join together our savior Christ with the Ceremonies of the law, whose glory
is perfect in him self alone, and all height must be abased before him. He
created alone, and he will redeem alone: He made alone, and he will save alone:
and to be set in comparison with him, all the gold, silver, precious stones,
and all the ornaments of the temple, they are but Beggarly Elements. Nothing
else in earth, nothing vikler earth, nothing in heaven, nor in the Galat. 4.
verse 9.
heaven of heavens, no virtue, no power, no strength no name else that is
named, in which, or by which, we can be saved, but only the name of Jesus
Christ. And for this cause this epistle was written. Wherein it shall be good for
us to mark, how from the beginning, satan has striuen to obscure and darken
the glory of Christ: and how he has holden still the same purpose
vnchaungeably, even to our days. First he changed him self into an Angel of
light, with glorious names of Moses, Moses, under pretense of holiness
striving against truth: a marvelous practice, and in those days enough to
have subverted the faith of many. For who would have thought that such men, so
great lovers of the law, of the Temple, of Moses, should be enemies of the
true Mellias? or be ignorant of the salvation and spiritual worship which he
should teach them? But here we learn, not to ground our faith, neither upon
the glorious words, nor upon the glorious hames of mortal men. For this
deceived from the beginning: but the word it self must be graffed in us, if
we will not err. So now in these our last times, in which the devil strives
as at the first, we see how many say unto us, The church, the church, The
pope, the pope, The fathers, the fathers, and many thousands are led with this
sound of words: yet in these words is no wisdom: only they renew the old
deceit in which the devil first troubled the church of God: For what is the
Church they speak of? who is the pope? who are their fathers? are they
greater then the Temple? then the law, then Moses? if not, then their names
may be used for a cloak of falsehood as y^ others were. Then we must try them
and examine them, whether it be a true church, or true fathers they speak of.
To follow a church you know not what, is to trust to the Temple you know not
how. And know it well, such words are but mockeries, and such spirits are of
error and darkness. The effect is proof enough. For the end of their religion
is, that ignorance is the mother of devotion.

Now touching the author of this Epistle, who The Author.
it was, it skilleth not. For if the name had been here, what had it showed but
that God used the ministry of such a man? And now the time is not known, it
teaches expressly, the doctrine is of God. And for this cause to the books
of holy scripture, names are sometime added, sometime not, that the doctrine
of the Lord might be unto us, without respect of person. And for my part, who
wrote this Epistle, I can not tell, nor I see no cause why I should seek it.
For when the spirit of God has lest it out, can I think it the better if I
should add it? I remember, Athanasius says: that since the In Dialog. de S.
Trin. fo. 11.
Gospel was first preached, this Epistle was ever thought to be Paul's. But
Eusebius, as boldly on the other side, says that he dares constantly affirm
as the sense is the Apostles, so the phrase and pe^ning is some other man's, but
whose God knows: and lib. 6. cap. 19.
thus much of the author, whom we will leave as we find him, a faithful
witness of Jesus Christ, even to the ends of the world, but whose name we
know not.

Now for the time in which it was written, it is certain it was in y^ apostles
days. For if it had been after the destruction of Jerusalem, threatening so often
the anger of God to those who would despise his What time this Epistle was
written.
son, no doubt he would have mentioned so singular an example. Besides this
he makes mention of Timothy as his companion and fellow, who was famous
among the Apostles. And it is like, that this Epistle was written about the
later end of the Apostles age, because he says that this doctrine first
preached by the Lord, has now been confirmed unto us by them that heard it.
And noting the time how long the Gospel had been preached before, he says,
that time required that now they should be able to be teachers of it. Again,
in the x. chapter he puts them in remembrance, that in times past they had
suffered great and manifold afflictions for the Gospels sake. So that we
easily see this Epistle, as it is holy and Apostolical in the truth of
doctrine, so it has also the honor of their time. And thus far of the
occasion, author, and time of this Epistle.

Now, as briefly as I can, I will show you the The Argument of this Epistle.
argument of the whole Epistle, and that is this: that only in Jesus Christ is
the forgiveness of our sins. Which argument he handles thus. First setting
out our savior Christ, who he is, in the ten first chapiters: Then how
salvation is thorough him, in the residue of the Epistle. In setting forth our
savior Christ who he is, he shows first the nature of his person, in the
two first chapters: then what is his office, in the next eight. Touching his
person, he teaches first that he is perfect God in the first chapter: then,
that he is perfect man, in the second Chap. of which we will speak more
particularly in expou^ding of the text. Of his office whereof we said he
entreats in the viii. next chapters, he teaches this first, that he is our
Prophet, from the beginning of the iii. chapter, to the xiiii. verse of the
fourth: then that he is our priest, from thence to the xix. verse of the x.
chapter. And though the Apostle of purpose and with great care, do plainly
teach that Christ is our king: yet because this necessarily follows of the
other, and there was no doubt but that Messiah, their priest and prophet,
should be also their prince and king, therefore, he seems not to make any
particular entreaty of this, as of the other offices: but as he was a kingly
prophet, a kingly priest, and the son of God, so in proof of all these he
makes with them, manifest proofs of his kingdom; at in the text more
plainly. (God willing) I will show, when I shall more particularly speak of
them. Now of his prophecy in the iii. and Christ's prophecy.
iiii. chapters he teaches this, that he is our only prophet, proving it
first, because the son of God took upon him our nature, the excellency of
his person is warrant enough, that God ordained him our only prophet.
Seco^darily, he was faithful in his ministry, neither needs any to be
joined with him. Thirdly, he was more honorable then Moses himself, and
therefore much more should rule in the house of God alone. Fourthly, the
Prophet says: To day if you will hear his voice etc. Therefore by the Prophet
commended to us as our only prophet. Last of all, the nature of the word,
agreeable only to his person, makes that he is our prophet alone: and thus he
ends this treaty. Of his priesthood Christ's priesthood
he speaks more at large, showing first in the end of the fourth chapter,
what manner of Priest he is, even such a one as by his own virtue has entered
into the heavens, and made a way for us, that we might boldly through him come
unto God. After this he begins a comparison of y^ priesthood of Christ with
Aaron, and so more clearly shows, both his priesthood and the excellency of
it. This comparison he makes in these points. First, that the priest of the
law was a natural man, like unto his brethren. Secondarily, that he has not
a private work, but does all the peoples service in things apperteyning to
God. Thirdly, that he appeared not before God in his own virtue and
righteousness, but with offerings and sacrifices for sin. Fourthly, that he
was full of compassion toward his brethren, to pity them in their weakness.
Fifthly, that he had his calling of God: in all which things, Christ exceeded
all that were before him, and this he teaches in the ten first verses of the
fifte Chapter. Then begins (by occasion) an exhortation which continues to
the vij. chapter. After that, he sets out at large the example of
Melchisedech, and the comparison of the first covenant, with the tabernacle and
sacrifices apperteyning unto it, so teaching at the last our savior Christ to
be our only priest. The second part of the Epistle, which is, how this
salvation of Christ is given unto us, in the 11. 12. and 13. chapters the sum
of it, is, that we have this salvation through faith, which faith is tried in
many afflictions, and still brings forth fruit in good works.

Now let us come to the text. I told you first the Apostle proves the
excellency of the person of Christ, God and man. In this first Chapter he
proves his Godhead, and begins thus. Many times etc. In this first verse,
setting down the general proposition of the whole Epistle, that God has now
made known unto us all our salvation in his son Christ, naming him, Son,
that these titles after attributed unto him, might appear more to Son.
be according to the prophesies of him. Then straight he describes him,
making it manifest that he is God. First, by the glory which his father has
given him. Secondarily, by the excellency of his person. Thirdely, by the
greatness of his power. Fourthly, by the benefits purchased to us. Fifthly, by
the dignity which to him self he has obtained: all this is in the third
verse. Lastly, by comparison with Angels, which comparison he makes in many
points, alleging scripture, according to the titles before given unto him, and
so ends this first chapter. Many times, and after diverse sorts etc.

Out of this verse, first let us note and consider well, touching this doctrine
which we are taught by Christ, the certeintie of it, which is first in the
author, who is God himself, even the same God of our fathers, which so many
times and ways spoke ever by his Prophets: even he in an assured truth, has
also spoken by his son. Thus giving the authority of the word of Christ to
God the father, that it might be confessed true, and to take away al vain
quareling of contentious men, who under pretense of the name of God, would
easily have disputed against our savior Christ, and said: We know God is
true, and he spoke to Moses, he spoke to the Prophets, this man speaks of
himself, and we will not hear him. To stop this offense, though the Apostle
might have given the authority of his word, even to the person of Christ
himself, yet he would not, but said thus: God spoke by him. Another proof for
the certeintie of his word, is, that he spoke by his son: in which name God
sealed it unto him, to be his sufficient witness in the world even as him self
had spoken with a voice of glory: This is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased, he are Matthew. 3. 17
him. And this was a sure and known truth unto the^, that no man had seen God
at any time, but the only begotten son, who is in the bosom of his father,
he reuealeth him. He is the personal word, and makes known all the mysteries
of God, even as he has been present with him in all his ways.

Now as our savior Christ is our certain teacher of undoubted truth: so how
far this truth is taught by him, appears also in the words: Many times,
many ways, by many Prophets, of old, to our forefathers. Of all these we must
set the contrariotie in our savior Christ, that God spoke by him, not many
times revealing his will by measure, now some, then more: but once he has
sent him filled with all measure of wisdom and understanding. And before, God
spoke many ways, either by Angels, or by the cloud, or between the
Cherubims, or by Vrim, or by visions, or by dreams: but now he has spoken one
way, even by Christ made our brother, with the voice of a man, in the mids of
the Congregation plain and evident in all men's hearing: and all variety shall
cease for evermore.

Likewise, before God spoke by many prophets, now he does not so, but has sent
his son alone in sted of all, that all his people should hear him, Likewise
those times they are old and past, but the time of Christ's teaching passes
not, but is for ever. And that was to y^ fathers, men of diverse calling, but
this is to us al of one condition. So this the Apostle teaches, that Christ
alone, once even in the days of his life, after one manner and form has
preached unto us all that Gospel, which eternally shall be the power of his
heavenly father, to save all which do believe. Now let us mark first the
agreement, and then these differences, manifestly to be seen between Only God
must speak in the mouth of all Ministers.
Christ and the Prophets. First, they agree all in this, that God spoke by all,
and this only they have a like from the first to the last. Adam, Seth, Enoch,
Noe, Abraham, Moses, David, Esaie, Christ, not one of them spoke one word of
a natural man in all their ministry, but only the words of him that sent
them: that is, they spoke not themselves, but God spoke within them. When
soever were the time, whatsoever were the means, whosoever were the man,
wheresoever were the place, whatsoever were the people, yet the words were the
Lords. And whosoever he be in the church of God from the beginning to the
ending, to whom this ministry shall be committed, if he will be numbered with
Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostles 1. Pet. 4. 10.
and Pastors, and with our Savior Christ himself, whatsoever he speak Let
him speak as the word of God. For this covenant God has made with all his
servants, even as the Prophet Esaie says: My spirit which is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in Esai
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth* even for
ever. And in deed, whose words else should divide between the marrowe and the
bones, but his only, who alone searches the Hebr. 4. 11. (...)
hearts and the reins? Or whose words should kill our earthly affections, but
his alone, who gives the sword of the spirit? And we, whose messingers are
we? Or of whom are we sent? Is not God our Master, and shall we not make our
account to him according to that which we have received of him? We must look
unto our own charge, and for all other men, though they seem to be pillars,
what they are it skilleth nothing to us, we are not accountable by their
gifts. Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Gregory, or any else, they had their own
charge of God, and we have ours by warrant from God: they did speak, and so
must we. If I speak out of the fathers of the Church, and know it to be the
word of God, why do I attribute it to man, rather then to God, whose truth it
is? Or if I speak of the Fathers, and know it not to be the word of God, be it
never so true in the doctors mouth, in mine it is sin, because I speak not
as I am taught of God. This I speak not so much for the papists, whose hearts
and souls the decrees, and decretalles have stolen away, and left them without
understanding: But I speak it, because of brethren, who know not their
calling, but fill the pulpites with doctors and counsels, and many vanities,
where they should only speak the word of God, that our agreement may be with
the Apostles and Prophets, and with our savior Christ.

Now let us see the differences here spoken of between our Savior Christ and
all other prophets, The first difference.
what we may learn of them. The first is, the doctrine taught by them, was at
diverse times revealed, but that which Christ teaches, is revealed but once.

And this is twice after expressly noted by the Apostle himself, as in the
ninth chapter, Now at the latter Cap. 9. 26.
end, Christ has been once revealed. And in the xii. chapter, Yet once will I
strike, not only the earth, but the Cap. 12. 26.
heavens also. And this it is which saint Jude says of the christian faith,
that once it was given to the saints, which, once, does mean the time of Christ
in earth, for so he says, it was by his son. For though the Apostle yet
understood not all, and the spirit was after given them, yet the same Spirit
did but more lighten them in such things as Christ had also taught them. By
this we learn boldly to refuse it, and account it as bastard doctrine,
whatsoever is sprung up since, and comes under the warrant of a mortal man,
as namely the idolatries of that mighty king and priest, Prete Giam, of the
Abizannes in Africa: and the idolatry of the great Came, king and priest of the
Tartarians in Asia: and the idolatries of Ismael, king and priest of the
Persians: and the idolatries of Mahomet, king and priest of the Sarasins: and
the idolatries of the Pope and Papal men, this day kings and priests, as
proud as the other. And of these what sects soever have sprung of Homares or
Halys, Cuselbasoe or Casaboe, of decrees and decretalls, Thomists or Scotists,
white friars or black, that eternal Gospel, as they called it, more then 300.
years since devised at Paris: the revelations of S. Brigitt: all other
doctrines and expositions, we must cast them away, so many as came not in the
warrant of our Savior Christ once preaching upon earth, which because it was
once, it co^futeth all after it, and abrogateth all before it, which had
diversity of time, as the Apostle himself gathers. ca. 12. 27.

The second difference, that the doctrine of Christ The second difference
is taught after one sort. For though first were miracles, and now none:
first Apostles, now none: these were but means to confirm the preaching,
the word only was the power of salvation, which is the same it was then.
Which because it is but one, therefore it is perfect. For if any way before
had been absolute in itself, there should none other have come after it, but it
pleased not God to give the glory unto all those manner of revelations, but
reserved it to the preaching of the gospel, which he has made his own power
to save all that do believe, and given it so great grace, that it works more
mightily then all miracles, and pearceth deeper into the heart of man, then any
manner persuasio^, yea, though one should arise from the dead to speak unto us.
And therefore we may condemn that, which before us was done, in building
monasteries, vowing of pilgrimages, praying for the dead, their masses and
diriges, honoring of saints, setting up of Crosses, and such like. For how
were these things taught unto men? Not by preaching the Gospel, but for the
most part, men were driven unto it by fear and terror of the night, as we may
see in their own books and legendes: But as it was, so it is come unto it, and
the darkness has covered it, out of which it sprang.

The third difference here, is, that that was old, and therefore abolished: for
it cannot be but that which The third difference
waxes elder and elder, must at last vanish: but the testament of Christ, it
is still new, yea though it were from the beginning, yet it is still the same,
and the day passes not, in which it was given, but it endures with the age
of man. And therefore it is no sacrifice of the new testament, to have a mass
which waxes old, and when it is done, is not: but you must have a new, and
so fill your number. Neither yet is it possible that works should justify,
which also wax old and are forgotten, so that the righteous man of an hundred
year old, if he leave then his righteousness, it has none account. The
salvation of y^ world, it is not thus, but always new, if once I be in this
covenant, it is an everlasting covenant, I was not taken under condition of
time, nor no time shall preuail against me. The salvation it self, it is not
changeable as Ad^s was in Paradise, but it is made sure in the body of Christ
united with the person of his Godhead, so the ways in which we are led unto it,
they are imutable, our faith is not quenched, our love not extinguished, our
hope fails not, nor the holy spirit can ever be taken from us, but still they
are new even to eternal life.

The fourth difference, is, in the fathers with who^ The. ii^. difference
the first covenant was made, who though they were al called in Jesus Christ,
yet was there a difference of their honor, and every one more exalted, as God
approached more near unto them. So Abraham and his posterity were a more
honorable people then the other before him. So the Israelites, that had
received the law, and dwelt in the land of promise, had greater blessing then
their fathers in Egypt. So John Baptist more then all Israel. But now they that
are called of Jesus Christ, by his own voice, and in him crucified before their
eyes, have a^eined a singular honor, and the least of them touching their
calling, are greater then al Patriarchs and Prophets. And these al in like
precious faith, like spirit, like promises, like couena^ts like accepted of
god, every man in his own measure of grace. No difference of Jew or Gentile,
learned or unlearned, but al have through faith one entrance un to the throne of
grace: that I need not say now, O Lord remember David, nor the covenant made
with Abraham: But, O Lord remember me, and the covenant which thou have made
with my fathers house. For unto all, both those that are nigh, and those that
are far off, there is but one covenant in Jesus Christ, whom now we know not
according to the flesh. And this excellent glory of Christian men (dearly
beloved) as often as I remember it, it grieueth me to think upon the madness of
some, who call them selves spiritual, and other temporal, themselves clergy,
and other layitie, them selves regular and other secular, themselves, they
should say strangers from the Lord Jesus, and other the lively members of his
body. For what is it else to make this difference, but to deny the brotherhode
in the calling of Christ?

The fifte difference is, that God then spoke by his Prophets, now by his
son, by Prophets meaning The fifth difference.
the continual succession, of Prophets in all ages. For as they were men taken
away by death, so it was necessary other to come in their places. And because
no Prophet was able to give his grace to other, or of his fulness, make other
learned in the mysteries of God, but they were al taught of the Lord: therefore
they had the credit of their word every one in himself, and none judged by
another gifts. But so it is not with the Son of God, for both he lives to
appoint us teachers still, and of his fullness he gives all other their
continual increase of grace. For which cause now, the warrant of all depends
upon him alone. And the greatest Apostle that ever was, has no other glory,
but only to be his servant and messinger, for he is that redeemer, whose word
must be in the mouth of his seed, and in the mouth of his seeds seed, after
him, for evermore. So that it must needs be the pride of very antichrist, for
a mortal man to exalt him self, and give the warrant of truth unto his own
word: that he cannot err: that all knowledge is in the closet of his breast:
that we must believe it as the Gospel what soever he decrees. A vile servant
so to swell in pride, and set him self in the seat of the son of God, why
do we not abhor it? and rather kiss the ground under the feet of the
Savior of the world, to be slow to speak out of our own heart, and quick to
hear what he has commanded? And these be the differences which I thought
good to note unto you, as the Apostles words plainly teach them. Now where it
is said, In these last times, meaning the days in which this gospel is
preached, which also the Apostles and Prophets call the end of the world, and
last days: It has this name, both for because in comparison of the age of
the world, these days shall be but few: and also for that the will of God is
finally revealed in his son Christ, who shall inherit the glory, to be our
Prophet from the day, in which first his father sealed him to that office, even
to the latter end. And thus much of this first verse.

Now let us pray to almighty God our heavenly father, who has so loved us,
that he gave his only begotten son, to lead us in the way of truth, to save
us from the bondage of death, and to sacrifice his own body for the ransom
of our sins, that for his sake we may be strengthened with the grace of his
holy spirit, to hear his word and keep it, that we may in a good time and
happy issue of our ways be blessed by him, who is our only Savior, to whom
with the father and the holy Ghost be honor and glory for ever.

The second Lecture upon the second and third verses.
2 Whom he has made heir of all things by whom also he made the worlds.

3 Who being the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of hi^
person, and bearing up all things by his mighty word, ba^ by him self
purged our sins, and sits at the right hand of the majesty in the highest
places.


WE have heard how the Apostle has taught, that our Savior Christ the son
of God has been once sent unto us an eternal Prophet, to teach us all
things which GOD has done for our salvation, and through the preaching of the
gospel to sanctify us all unto him: that him alone we should acknowledge to be
our leader unto eternal life. Now the Apostle begins to prove this singular
glory to belong only to Christ, which he does by setting out a full and
large description of him* in which, as I said, he proves him to be eternal
God.

First, by his rule over all creatures, verse. 2. Then by the glory of his
own person. Thirdly, by his great power. Fourthly, by his benefit bestowed
upon us. Fiftely, by his glory purchased to him self, verse. 3. Sixthly, by
comparison with Angels, verse 4: which comparison he makes in many points,
as shall appear in the residue of the chapter. The rule of Christ over all
creatures, he shows in this, That he is heir of all, and created all. By
heir of all: meaning, how in the person of a mediator he has restored all,
as in the person of the son, he was the wisdom of God to make all. And
therefore called the heir, because he restored not the world, but by
redeeming it, and purchasing it unto himself, according as God the Father had
given it to be a recompense of his work, in which respect it is said, that
God appointed him heir of all things. This our Savior taught us, when he say
de: Mat. 2^. (...). John. 16. 15.
All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth. And all things the father
has are mine: Not only earthly things, but also heavenly: For of the graces
of the spirit he says also, He shall glorify me, and take of mine, and give
it unto you. The Apostle adds the second note of this authority. That by
him the world was made. Maker of the world.
by the world meaning all things in heaven, earth, and under the earth. For
so Saint John adds to this testimony, And without him nothing was made,
what so ever was made: Then if all creatures were by him, himself was
uncreate, and only creator of all that is, that we might boldly give him the
glory of the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

And this is notably set out by S. Paul in the first chap ter to the
Colossians, where he says: He created all Col. 1 ^5.
things, in heaven and earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones,
dominions, principalities, or powers, all things were made by him: of which, it
must needs follow, even as S. Paul also concludes, that he is God above all.

The second thing wherein Christ is here exalted, is the glory of his person.
First, that he is the brightness of his fathers glory, which title is
absolutely given him, as essential unto the son of God, not Brightness of
glory in respect of his father
only before us, but even before his Father, that as all the properties of the
Godhead have their being in the person of the father, so the brightness and
beauty of them is in the person of the son, and so this name was proper to
him before the world was made, noting, that eternally he was of the father. In
which sense Saint John calls him The word, not according to the time, in
which creatures have been, but an essential word before all creatures. In the
beginning says he, was the word, and the word was with God. But of this
mystery I cease to speak. For we cannot know it, our tongues cannot speak
it. And these very words which I now use, or any man can use of Gods
majesty, think not that their sense and meaning is according to Gods nature,
they are only helps of our weakness, that by them our faith might be
quickened in a spiritual understanding, otherwise all the words in the
world, cannot express the least part of the living God. Touching us, he is
called the brightness of his fathers glori^, many ways, as, because in our
nature he showed forth the lively countenance of his father, in all fullness
of grace and truth, and because in the power of his word, he wrought
mightily in all creatures, and again expressly Saint Paul calls him The
image (which is the shining brightness) of God, in John. 1. 14. John 5. 36. 2.
Cor. 3. 18
respect of the clear manifestation of the Gospel, in which he has set out so
glorious a light of the power of GOD to save his elect. So he is to us the
brightness of glory, because many ways he showed forth the glory of his
father unto us. Even as John. 1. ^8.
Saint John says: No man has seen GOD at any time: that only begotten
son, who is in the bosom of his father, he has revealed him.

The second thing here attributed to him, is, that Engraven form. Col. 1. 15.
he is the engraven form of the person of his father, noting hereby the
unity of substance, as in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily.
Even as Saint Paul does also call him, the image of God: distinguishing him
by this name from all shadows and figures, like as this Apostle uses the
word in the tenth chap. And here expressly he adds engraven, above all the
figures in the law, the Ephod, the Vrim, or the Arc it self, showing the
excellency that is in Christ.

The third title of honor here given unto Christ Susteiner of al things.
is, of the greatness of his power, and that is, that he hears up all things
with his mighty word. In the metaphore of bearing, after the manner of the
Prophets, no doubt he means, the nourishment and preservation of all things
in the state that God has given them, which is the providence watching over al
his works. Now this being known to be the work of the living God, That in
him we live, we move, we are, Acts. 17. 28.
and this manifestly agreeing to Christ, by clear proof of all his works
here in flesh, in which he revealed the image of God in him. In this also it
is assured that he is very God, the stay and strength of the world, without
whose hand all things would fall into confusion.

Forthly, he extolleth the person of Christ by the greatness of his benefits
bestowed upon man, in Purger of our sins.
these words, By him self having purged our sins, put in here as a
Parenthesis, because it shows the way how Christ purchased that excellent
dignity, to sit at the right hand of his father, whereof after he speaks. In
that he says: purged our sins: expressly he warranteth his Godhead. For what
creature could have done so excellent a work? The Jews could not be ignorant,
but though a man were as great as Adam: yet Adam, when sin rested on him, it
drove him out of Paradise, yea, though a man could be as pure as an Angel, yet
the Angels, when they sinned, and kept not their first order, their sin weyed
them into Jude. 6.
the condemnation of hell, so y^ our Savior Christ taking our sin upon him, and
being able to purge it, which no saint or angel could ever do, it
necessarily followed, that he is the eternal God, even according to the known
prophecies of the Messiah, that they should call him the Lord God our
righteousness.

The fifte thing wherein Christ is here extolled, Iere. 23. 5.
is the high dignity which he has gotten, in these words, he sits on the
right hand of high majesty: Noting hereby, that God the father has taken him
up into his glory, so that he sits in power and majesty, equal with his
father, and this is plain in that he calls it the right hand of highest
majesty. And the scripture shows this end of it, till I make thine enemies
Psalm. ^10. 4
thy footestoole: showing that this is the power of God in him, to sit at the
right hand of God. And thus much of the words of the Apostle, in this,
magnifying the person of our Savior Christ.

Now a little further we will examine the words and apply them more
particularly to our instruction. In that it is said first, God made him heir
of all. So that we see, how these words of the Apostle Heir of all.
have every way their weight, to prove that Christ is the son of God, the
king of his people, God and man, mediator between God and us.

We must learn, of our selves we have nothing: but being ingraffed in him, we
are owners of all things. In mine own right I am naked and void of all, I
have no meat to feed my hungry body, no drink to comfort my faint and
thirsty spirit, no clothes to keep me warm, no house to harbor me, I am
to take no profit of any creature, nor no pleasure in the sight of the Sun.
For the earth is the Lord Jesus Christ's, and all that is in it. I may have from
man my warrant here in earth, that my house is mine, and my land is mine, and
he is a thief and a robber that takes it from me. But all the men in the
world cannot give me my possession before the living God, but only his Son
Christ, who is Heir of all. And I am a thief and a robber, if before God I
claim any other right in it. Then, that our hands may be our own: our goods
our own: our servants, our wives, our children, ours: Let us be Christ's, that
in him we may have the good assurance of all our substance. Take not thy meat,
but as the gift of Christ, who has sanctified it unto thee, nor any thing thou
have but with thanksgiving to Christ that has sanctified it for thee: if
thou do, thou art an intrudour, into the right, not of a mortal man, but of
the fonne of God: and thou shall be sure the recompense of the injuries that
thou have done, will fall upon thee: and thou shall know what it is, so to
dishonor thy God. But contrariwise, if I know my self by faith made a member of
Christ, and his right is mine in the creatures of the world, and in his name,
and to his glory I use them, whatsoever God has given me in the days of my
pilgrimage, the profit of it is mine, I may use it to my necessity, and the
pleasure of it is mine, I may use it to my delight. If my garments be silk, I
may put them on. If my table be furnished with sorts of meat, I may eat what
my stomach craves. If I have fields pleasant and delectable, I may walkein
them. If I have orchards of great delight, I may eat the fruit of them. Nay, I
will say more, that their condemnation may be just which love not the Lord
Jesus. If thy dogs will hunt the beasts of the field: or thy hawk will
kill the birds of the air, thou may use the delight of Gods creatures. I
mean so far as the state of Gods people, in common wealths, which he has
ordained, does permit to every one, for his holy recreation and pleasure, who
walks faithfully in his calling, to the glory of God, and profit of his
people. I do not justify the shameful abuse of the world, which has carried
away the christian liberty into carnal wantonness. I allow them not, which
will needs wear silk, and are not able to buy cloth: or those, which so give
over themselves to vanity, that the day is to short to make the^ pastime,
except they watch the night at cards and dice, and riotous dancing, with
such men I meddle not, but in their sin in which I find them, in it I leave
them. I speak only of the goodness of God unto his Saints, what recreation
God has given in their weary life.

And where it is further said, All things were made Al things made by him.
by Christ, we may boldly conclude, that no man has power over his creatures,
but they must serve their creator. What have I to do with another man's
work? God has appointed his creatures a use, in it they are holy. If thou will set them another law, thou prophanest thy self in them. When S. Paul had
said that to forbid meats was the doctrine of devils, he proves it by this
reason: because God created them to be received with thanksgiving. If God
created them, who will exalt him self to be Lord over them? If God appointed
them to be received, who shall say 1. Tim. 4. 3.
unto me, they are unclean to use? Surely (dearly beloved) and before the
Lord, who has made all, and will judge all, that proud and arrogant man of
sin, who has left all the ordinances of God, to fill the world with his
decrees, and decretalles, he has taught us the doctrine of devils, and let us
cast it from us. We are Christ's, and he has made all, in his holy
appointments let us ever live. For other laws of meats, drinks, days,
apparel, etc. as then they may stand, when they are profitable to any country,
and made only for policy: so they are to be despised, when they are thrust
upon the church, and made matters of faith and religion.

Further, in that, that it is said in the third verse, That Christ is the
brightness of glory, and engraven form of the substance of his father. Let us
mark well why the the bright nesse of glory.
Apostle thus magnifieth the person of Christ. For no other cause, but to
warrant unto us the truth of his word, that he is our Prophet, and we must
believe him. And so S. Peter in the Acts, teaching Christ to be the only
warrant of faith and salvation, he says: God approved him thereunto by many
signs and miracles, and Act. 2. 22.
mighty works. And in deed the father himself with a voice of excellent
glory, approved him out of the clowd, and his voice was heard, This is my
beloved son hear him. And all this was, that Christ alone might Matthew. 3.
17.
be before us, the only warrant of truth. Now he that shall take upon him
this honor, and bid y^ world believe because he has spoken, what does he
but boast himself as if he were the brightness of Gods glory, or that God
had approved him by signs and miracles? and who would do this, that feared
either to be, or to be called the very Antichrist, that should come? Again,
it is said: he bears up al things with his mighty word. Where we must mark,
it is attributed Vpholdeth all things.
to Gods mighty power, the governance of all things in our sight either great
or small, that we should learn not to measure the power of God by our weak
senses. It is his mighty power y^ vpholdeth the earth, that stretches out y^
heavens, that se^deth forth the winds, that raises on high the great waves of
the sea, and these things we confess are great and mighty, but as it is here,
so every where, ye mighty power of God makes the fether to move, and his
strong arm leads the fly in her way, and the same force which now shakes a
lease, if he had sent it against a monteine, it would have turned it up from
the foundations: and the same strength that blows up the dust, if it came
against the earth, it would shake the bottoms of it. And this should make us
fear before him, y^ what soever he has done, whether it seem great or
little, we should confess his handie work, and according to his greatness,
so we should honor him, that whatsoever he has commanded, whether it seem
weighty or light, al our obedience should be straight unto it. It follows, by
him self he has purged our sins. I do not doubt but you know how Christ
has purged our sins, and the more you know it, I am sure you are the more
glad to hear it, and for this comfort that we have all in it, I thought eue^
my duty to make some rehearsal of it. Thus therefore we are taught, and thus
we do believe. Our Savior Christ being y^ eternal son of God, through the
work of the holy ghost was made man of the virgin Marie, and borne without
original sin, and by the same spirit filled still his manhood more and more
with grace, till the fullness of all righteousness was within him, that so his
manhood might inherit salvation, according to the promise: Do this, and thou
shall live. But hitherto, as he is Luke. 10.
righteous, so he is righteous for him self, and only that man is yet blessed,
which was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the virgin Marie. Our
sins do yet remain, and we abide holden under the death of them, and
therefore, as his first work sanctified him self, so yet there remained more,
that he might sanctify us, For when he comes to us, he finds us in sin,
and through sin in death, and in the condemnation of the devil, who had the
power of death. So that he had now another work, then in his first
righteousness to sanctify his own body. He must also abolish sin and
death, and hell in which we were holden, if he will be a savior unto us. And
here he must multiply all his former righteousness, and make it infinite,
for a greater work is behind, and a new law is given unto him, a law never
given to all flesh, a singular law, out of the depth of Gods wisdom and
goodness, which without the fall of Adam, had never been seen neither of
man, nor Angel: a law of a redeemer, that is, a law, by which he might bring
man from death to life, from hell to heaven, from hatred to love, and from the
devil to God: a work far greater then to make the world of nothing. This
law was to love God, and his brother, not in usual things of life, whereunto al
we were appointed, but in taking upon him sin and death, and treading the
winepresse of the anger of almighty God.

And this thing he has also done. For being righteous, pure, holy, and
without spot, the sin that abounded, he took it all upon him, and death
that reigned, he submitted him self unto it, and went as despised among men,
in shame, in ignominy, in affliction of the flesh, for the sin of our
bodies: and in anguishe of spirit, in mourning and in sorrow, to bear the
sins of our souls: before GOD, feeling the heaviness of his wrath, which
was the sting of death and condemnation: and before man, showing the signs of
it upon a cursed cross, in agonies, bloody sweates, and in woeful crying
according to the sense and feeling of sorrow that was upon him. And all this
he endured, not unwillingly, for then he had done nothing, but with exceeding
joy of heart, that he had found out the misery, in which he might seal it,
how much he loved his father, and make it manifest, how he loved us. So went
he willingly unto death: and that he might satisfy the justice of his father,
and purge the sins of his people, with all his heart he gave his body unto
the cross, and his soul a sacrifice for our sin, which obedience was
accepted of his father the just punishment of all sin, and full redemption of
all his elect. And this the Apostle here means, when he says, that by
himself he purged our sins.

And because he says, by himself he purged our sins, in this we see a
clear discharge given to the Tabernacle, and all the sacrifices at the door
of it: not one of them purged sin. And though some we called sin
offeringes, and the sins of the people in such sacrifices were said to be
forgiven: yet they had that name and calling, not according to the merit of
the work, but according to the virtue of the thing they signified, even as
the Lords supper is called the communion of the body of Christ, and baptism
is said to be the washing away of our sins, not in truth of the thing, but
in mystery of the sign. The phrase being so used for more assurance and
warrant of the promise: not to carry the grace of God from our savior Christ
and his spirit, to the dumb elements of bread or water. And if the Jews are
here instructed, to leave their vain trust and confidence in the law, and to
know that the forgiveness of their sins was not in meats and drinks, and
diverse washings and carnal rites of the temple, nor in the blood of Goats
and Calves, or in the ashes of an heifer, sprinckling the^ which are unclean,
but only in the precious blood shed and the body crucified of Jesus Christ:
notwithstanding all these ordinances were given them of God, what could our
fathers say, who saw the Law abrogate, the temple pulled down, the land
profaned, the Jews scattered, the words of faith preached, and that they
should glory in nothing, but in the Cross of Jesus Christ? what could they
say, either Tertullian Ter. de ieiunio de Cor. Mil. Cypr. de ^psis. Theo. li.
8. de Mattir. Cyril. li. 10. c^. 18. in Ios. In E^he ridio^. c^. 10.
for fasting, crossing, oyling, which he learned and had of Montanus the
heretic? Or Cyprian, for satisfaction: or Theodoretus, for martyrs merits: or
Cyrill for justification of works: or Augustine, for prayer for the dead: or
Jerome for so many superstitions of lights, garments, vessels etc. Nay, what
can we say, who have seen all that the old fathers have seen, why at this
day we should love their errors? nay, why we should devise new of our own,
which the oldefathers knew not? why have we loved the popes woeful Iubileis, or
his damned pardons? why do we yet think that the mass is a sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick and dead? why was purgatory first drempt on, as
much hotter the^ our fire, as ours is hotter then a painted fire? or why was
the building of chapels, chauntries, or religious houses, thought to be a
means to deliver us from such burning? A thousand such things why we have
loved them, what cause can we allege before the Lord? The law of God given
by Moses his faithful servant, a law which had been a scholemaister to lead
many thousands unto Christ, could it not stand with Christ, without darkening
of his glory? and can the law of the pope given by Summists and Canonists, a
people not known in y^ house of God, which law only leads to the obedience
of the church of Rome, can it be that it should bring any light to the gospel
of Christ? I need not stand in ma ny words to confute so great folly, I leave
it to the conscience of all that be wise hearted, whether God abrogating his
ownelaw, meant that the pope should institute a new: or whether he meant to take
away all earnall ordinances, that he might make it plain which the Apostle
here teaches, that by Christ alone all our sins are purged?

But here, some man by a subtle enemy may be easily deceived, who will
say: All this need not, they attribute not the forgiveness of sins to the
popes pardons, or to any masses, but to Christ alone. The Pope and masses are
only the applying of the fruit of Christ's death unto us. If it were thus, yet
what is become of building religious houses, of pilgrimage, of numbering many
prayers, of their holy orders, their garments, their fasting, etc? All these
they let sink in their own shame with out defense, for these applied not the
death of Christ unto us, but in the merit of the work they were commended.
But as these have no color of good defense, so the excuse of the other is very
vain: for how say they that the pope or priests apply the me rites of Christ,
seeing this application cannot stand, by their own confession, without a real
sacrificing of Christ? For says not y^ Apostle here, that Christ did it by him
self? not only making Christ the work but also the woorkman, the price and
the chapman, the sacrifice and sacrificer, not all the world can give any other
recompense for sin but him: nor all the world can give him but him self, as
both more plainly we shall hear afterward. And here is expressly said, that
he did it by him self, with as great warrant giving unto him y^ doing as the
thing done. As well and with as little sin we may choose another sacrifice as
another sacrificer. For by the same word of God both are given to him a like.
And as there is not mentioned any other thing that ever could be offered, so
there is not named any other person that ever could offer this. But as he is
alone our king, and alone spoiled principalities and powers upon his cross: so
he is alone our priest, and alone he sacrificed up his body once for all.

Now where it follows in the Apostles words: That he sits at the right
hand of high majesty: we must first mark the change of words, where it is
usually said: he sits on the right hand of God. Here The right hand of
majesty.
he says, on the right hand of the highest majesty, which is as it were an
interpretation of the right hand of God, signifying nothing else, but the power
and glory of God, given unto the person of the mediator, according to that
saying of Paul: God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above all
names. Phil. 2. 9.
Beside this, seeing the right hand of God does signify his power: we must
learn to be wise hearted, and not make unto God a right hand or a left, like
unto ours. We know the commandment: Thou shall make unto thy self no graven
image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in earth
beneath, or in the water under the earth. Let us give our obedience, and
confess that God is incomprehensible, not like to any thing which possibly our
bodily eyes can see. And let us not seek vain pretenses, that we might
commit sin and see it not: to say, I will make it for a remembrance, or
the more to stir up our minds: make it how thou will, the precept is
broken, which says: thou shall not make it. And be thou well assured, as long
as S. Paul's words shall betruer then thine, so long it shall stand, that if
thou do make any similitude in the world, to represent God: Thou have now
turned the truth of God into a lie, and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God, to the likeness of Romans 1. 23.
the image of a corruptible creature: and if accordingly God give thee up to a
reprobate sense for this pride in thine own wisdom, he does with thee but as
he did with thy forefathers: and therefore take heed. The cause why the
Scripture attributes unto God ears, and eyes, and hands, and feet: it is
because we are not able yet to comprehend any thing of Gods majesty, and
therefore the holy Ghost applies speech to our infirmity, that we might by
these words: the Lord sees, hears, keeps, and rules al things, that in
him we might boldly trust. Let not us carry away this great goodness of God
into rebellion, to leave his glory which we see only by faith, and make him
hands and feet and gray hair, like unto a wretched body that is consumed
with years. But the time is past. Let us pray that it would please God our
heavenly father, to humble our hearts under the mighty power of his son
Christ, that we may fear, love, and obey him: rejoicing in the excellency of
glory that he has given unto us, who is the son of God: and the Lord
increase in us our faith and hope, that in the assurance of Gods love, our
consciences may be at peace, and in the revelation of Gods glory our hearts
may be filled with joy in the Lord: which we be seech God to grant unto us,
even for his sons sake our only mediator and advocate.

Amen.
The third Lecture upon the 4. 5. 6. and 7. verses.
4 And is made so much more excellent then the Angels, in as much as he has
obtained a more excellent name then they.

5 For unto which of the Angels said he at any time? Thou art my son, this
day begat I thee. And again: I will be his father, and he shall be my son.

6 And again: when he brings in his first begotten son into the world, he
says: And let all the Angels of GOD worship him.

7 And of the Angels, he says: He makes his spirits his messingers, and his
ministers a flame of fire.


IN these words (as I told you) the Apostle begins to set out the person
of our savior Christ, by comparison with Angels, and this comparison he makes
in many points, as we shall hear: that the more clear we see it, tho more
effectually we might confess his high Godhead, and therefore above all
things, to set him alone: called in the new testament, the high Priest, and
Prophet, and King of his people.

And the first comparison here made, is of the first title before given him:
that he is the natural son of God, begotten of the substance of his father,
whereby he must needs be one and equal with his father: which name, as no
Angel has it, so no Angel is to be compared to him. That thus the Apostle
takes the name of Son, according to the dignity of nature, it is plain in
his own words, saying: And is made so much more excellent etc. verse. 4.
making his excellency according to his name, and his name according to his
excellency. For otherwise, the name of the son of God, may be given to every
one of us: as God calls Israel his first borne, and all the elect the sons
of God: So the magistrates are sons of God: and the Angels also the sons of
God, but we by adoption and grace: the magistrate, because he executes ye
judgment of the Lord: the Angels, by creation: none of us according to the
worthiness of our own nature. But by nature, substance, eternity, as the
Apostle here means, there is none the son of God, but Christ alone. And
that thus Christ is the son of God, he proves it, first out of the second
psalm, where it is said: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee:
Where the Prophet showing causes, why the whole world should not prevail
against Christ he says: because God had decreed it in his eternal counsel,
and proclaimed it with this sentence: Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee. That is: this day have I declared that thou art my natural
son, meaning especially the time in which he made him known in the world,
by his wonderful works, as S. Paul meant when he said: God was made manifest
in fleash: noting the power of the spirit working in him, in his birthe, life,
death, resurrection, and ascension: So (this day) notes not any particular
time, but all times in general, wherein God has showed his power in Christ,
as especially in the time he lived among us. And it see meth that the Apostle
makes manifest this sense of his words, in that he adds to the text
alleged in the vi. verse, the time when it was fulfilled, leaving this without
any distinct time, as that which apperteined to all times, in which Christ
should be showed to be the son of God: especially as I said, in his life,
and before, or since, as God shows his glory in him: So this sentence was
true when he appeared to Abraham, Jacob, Moses, to any of the patriarchs or
prophets, or after his ascension, when he appeared to Stephan, to Paul, or any
other, or whenever he shows his power to defend his church unto the end,
according to his own promise: I am with you to the latter end of the world.
And thus this word, (to day) is taken in that which is after alleged: To day
if ye will hear are his voice, harden not your hearts. And again, In the day
of health I have heard thee. And, in the day of salvation I have succored
thee: meaning no particular day, but all the time that the word is preached unto
us.

It follows: I will be his father, and (...) ^y son. This is another text,
to prove Christ the natural son of God. It is written in the second of
Samuel the seventh chapter: and they are the words of God unto David, by the
Prophet Nathan, to give him a promise of the blessing of his seed after him,
which was begone in Solomon, who built the temple, and whom God so highly
advanced in all wisdom, richesse, and honor, that the Fatherly providence
of God appeared over him, as over an especial chosen son. All which, as it
was promised to David: so David looked for the perfourmance of it in Christ,
and to be figured in Solomon his son after him: whose temple was a figure of
the Church of Christ: his riches a figure of the great graces of the spirit
of Christ, given to his Church: his honor above all kings a figure how
kings should submitt them selves to Christ, and be nurlefathers, and Queens
nurses to the Church of Christ: his wisdom a figure that in Christ should
be hid all treasures of wisdom and knowledge: and finally, he called by name,
the son of God, in respect of his blessings, as a figure of Christ who is the
eternal son of his father, in nature of his person.

And so the Apostle here alleges this place, without any such long
exposition, how the place is meant, because we should see in it, that the
people of Israel were not so ignorant of the Scriptures as we be: but brought
up in the knowledge of the law, and taught the understanding of it, even from
their ^dell as we should be. And thus have we heard this argument of the
Apostle. Christ has a more honorable name then the Angels: therefore he is
more excellent then they.

Now also let us see the manner of proofs here used.

He proves Christ to be the natural son of God, by textes of Scripture
witnessing (...) he don^eth that Angels are so, because God in his scriptures
never spoke it, for so he begins: Unto which of the Angels said he at any
time etc.

The self same manner of proof again he uses in the 13. verse following.
Because the scripture said it not, therefore he proves it is not so: making
his An argument negatiuely from the authority of the scripture is sound and
good.
argument negatiuely from authority of Scripture: which in all things, what
soever man is required to do or know in matters of religion, is ever a most
certain conclusion: God spoke it, therefore we must do it: God spoke it not:
therefore we have nothing to do with it. And this argument must needs be
good, so long as this word of the Lordo does endure: What I command thee, do
that only. And so long as this is a just condemnation of all our own devises:
who required these things at your hands? And so long Deu. 12. 32.
as this shall be true, that our wisdom is folishnesse, and Esaias. 1. 11.
we cannot do well, but when we bearken to the word of God that shines in
our hearts, as in a dark place. True it is, and if we had but the wisdom of
children, 2. Pet. 1. (...).
we must needs see it, that all particular laws and orders, with which we may
be bound, they are not set down in precise words of Scripture: but it is as
true that the nature and property of every law or order is so described, that
the word of God, as clearly is followed in it, as if the words of the law
were set down in it.

For of all decrees to be made in his church, has not God said? It must be
without offense: it must edify: it must be comely, and according to order:
and it must serve to the glory of God. Now God having given grace into our
hearts, to judge what soever we decree by these rules, is not the word of God
the warrant of it? By such manifest proof ofscripture, the church of Christ
does justify all that she does. Thus the Apostle proves here his doctrine.
Thus we must do, if we will be the Apostles scholars. Mark well this reason,
for it is worthy. God said to Christ: thou art my son, therefore he is his
son. God said not so to any Angel: therefore no Angel can take the name unto
him. In like manner we will dispute with them. God said: The true worshippers
should not go to mount Sion, nor to Jerusalem, but worship God in spirit and
truth. Where said he, go a pilgrimage, or go visit Ioh. 4. 2^.
the holy sepulcher? God said: Do not observe days, and months, and times,
and years. Where said he, Call. 4. 10.
keep unto me, Lent or Aduent, imber weeks, or Saints Eeues? God said unto
us: It is the doctrine of devils to forbid marriage, or to command to abstain
from (...). Tim. 42.
meats. Where said he, eat now no fleash, now no white meat: let not the
minister marry? God said, Let every soul be subject to kings and princes: and
the autho Rom 13. 1. Luc. 22. 26.
ritie of such men, let it not be in his Apostles. Where said he: let the pope
have the gift of kingdoms, be exempt from authority of man, wear a triple
crown, and have Lords and noble men under him? God said: Cursed (...) he that
adds ought to his law, or takes Apo. 22. 1^.
from it. Where said he: the pope shall dispense against my apostles and
prophets? God said: It is better to speak five words which we understood,
then (...). thousand in an unknown tongue. Where said God: the ignorant 1. Cor.
14. 19
men should pray in latin? With this very argument are overthrown all
doctrines of men, all traditions, alpoperie. And if this argument were good in
the Apostle, why is it not good in us? Nay, if this be usual in y^ scripture,
why are we so dull that we will never learn it? Does not God condemn the
idolatry of the people of Israel by this reason: They built high places, which
I commanded not? Does he not Ier. 7. (...)
condemn all their superstition and vain worshipping with y^ same argument?
Who required these things at your hands? When David's purpose was stopped Esa.
1. 12.
from buylding the house of God, was not this the word of the Lord that came
unto him? Where socuer 1. Chro. 17. 6
I have walked with all Israel, spoke I one word to any of their Judges,
saying: why have you not builte me a house of Cedretrees? But why seek we
further, when the law is plain? What I command thee do that only. And true
it Deu. 4. 6.
is, y^ it is our wisdom, and the Light that shines in our 2. Pet. 1. 20.
hearts as in a dark place. If once we go from it, as y^ prophet says: There is
no wisdom at all within us. And this I say, because of some which would not
have arguments Ier. 8. 9
made negatiuely of scripture, I think because it is against Aristotle's
doctrine. But let us now go forward. It follows in thevi. verse: Again, when
he brings etc. This is the second comparison between Christ and the Angels.
That it is said plainly of Christ, who is the son: Let all Angels worship
him, a thing determined by y^ scripture it self that Christ is not only
greater then Angels: but God to be honored of all Angels. And he alleges to
this purpose the manifest prophecy, that when God brought his son into the
world, he proclaimed before him this honor: Let all the Angels worship him.

First, touching the alleging of this text out of the Psalm, we need not
doubt, this doing of the Apostle is proof enough, that that Psalm is a
prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, of which the psalm says, that God with
great power and glory would establish it in earth^ showing miracles in his
creatures, fear and confusion in his enemies, joy and gladness in the hearts of
his children, righteousness and holiness in their lives: and not only this, but
all Angels should worship before him.

Now as he has taught this, by the testimony of the prophets given to Christ,
so after in the 7. verse Angels are ministering spirits.
he shows the same on the other side, by the testimonies which y^ scripture
gives to angels: of who^ says he, it is said: he makes his Angels spirits,
and his ministers a flaming fire. The absolute mening of which words, we must
learn of the Apostle him self in the 14. verse following: where according to
this testimony he has defined their nature, and called them ministering
spirits. Then in these words he makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers
a flaming fire, he names them a flaming fire, according to y^ similitude in
which their glory has been seen: as the angels that were with Elizeus, his
servant saw them as chariots of fire: the similitude of the beasts which
Ezechiel saw, were as coals of burning (...). Reg. 6. 17 Ezech. 1. 13. Esaias. 6.
2.
fire: and the Seraphims have their names, because they are of a fiery color:
and these words* spirits and ministers we must resolve thus, ministering
spirits. So out of this text, his argument stands thus* Christ is called
the son, the first begotten son, whom the Angels worship: but the Angels
are his ministering spirits: therefore Christ is greater then the Angels. Now
for the allegation of this text, the Apostle is a sufficient witness to me,
that this verse of the 104. Psalm, is meant of the Angels of God, and not of
the winds: and I see no reason to the contrary. For first he mentions the
winds before, where he says: He walks upon the wings of the wind: and
therefore a repetition of the same in other words was not necessary* Again,
seeing ministers here signify those which execute Gods power to save his
people, I see no cause to attribute it to the winds: for though God even by
the elements help his people many times, yet that praise is not given as a
name to the element, which is done in the Angels. Now, where it is objected,
that the Prophet there sets out the majesty of God, according to his
government in things of the world, I grant it, and so the ministry of
Angels was then open and known in the world. And therefore of Angels also the
Prophet speaks, as of them in whom the glory of God shined, even as in the
heavens, the clouds, the lightnings etc. beside this, in these words the
apostle will prove what is the nature of angels, which requires that he should
speak in the natural sense of the prophets words. And the preposition,
(...), used of the Apostle, seems not to be without cause: for though it be
the Hobrue phrase* as it is said, yet it may well have just cause, why the
Apostle uses it in Greek, and it signifies as much, as if he said thus: Unto
all Angels, we may say: you be but ministering spirits. And so it is like unto
the text next alleged of Christ. To the son he says, etc. And thus the
preposition is very conveniently used, and makes the Prophets words a
natural description of the Angels. Therefore for my part thus I say, and thus
I am persuaded, that as it is here alleged: so the words were meant, of the
angels of God which are his ministers to execute his will, for safety of his
people. And thus much of the Apostles argument here made.

Now, where our Savior Christ is here called, the first begotten son of
God: both Saint John sufficiently shows the meaning of it in the beginning
of his gospel, and S. Paul does plainly expound the word. John says of our
savior Christ: that he was in the beginning, with God: that al things were
made by him, and without him nothing was made at al: which is as if he had
added, he was his first begotten son. Saint Paul expressly adds the
comparison of creatures, naming him, the first begotten, before al creatures,
because says he: all things were created by him, in heaven, in earth, visible
or invisible, angels or powers, by him, and for him, all were made: so this is
the first begotten, the maker and creator of all things. And he is called the
first begotten, not the first creature, that in this name we might see the
blasphemy of Arrius, who says: there was a time, when the son of God was
not: when this name first begotten, is not in respect of nature, as one in time
begotten before other, but in respect of his work: as one by who^ al other
things were begotten. And again, being the first begotten of all creatures, in
this name he condemns the blasphemy of Seruetus, which denied him to be the
son of God, but only in respect of his coming in fleash. And that y^
apostle speaks here of bringing into the world. he means not barely his
nativity: but as God gave unto Christ all the ends of the earth for his
possession, so the honorable setting of him in this authority, he calls it
his bringing in into the world: as appears, because this is the glory of
this bringing, that the Angels shall worship him. And again, when he says,
the world, he means not this age of man, but as he expounds it in the
second chapter, the world to come: even also as the Prophet Esaie called it,
that is: the kingdom of Christ in the world through the preaching of the
gospel. And the worship with which the Angels shall worship him, is, that they
shall have from henceforth, no such rule as before, authorized in their own
persons from God, but now they shall give all glory to Christ. Even as we see
in his nativity, a great multitude of Angels sang: Glory be to GOD on high,
and in earth peace good will toward men, because Christ was borne in the City
of David, a savior unto all people: So in all his life, in his death, in his
resurrection, ascension, and since his ascension, there never appeared angel
unto man, but to the praise of Christ, and to ratify all honor and worship
due unto him: which ministry of Angels, because now so clearly it serves
Christ, the Scripture is fulfilled: Let all his Angels worship him.

And now that we have seen the sense and meaning of this Scripture, in some
points, I will more particularly apply it to our instruction. It is said
first When he bring^ is his first begotten into the world: which words mean
as (I said) when in glorious triumph, God l^deth him into the possession of his
kingdom. And as the prophet says: when God gives him his d^n from sea to
sea, and from the river unto the ends of the land, that ^ll that dwell in the
wilderness Psalm. 71. 8.
may kneel besore him, and his enemies may lick the dust.

Here we must mark how this has been accomplished, and when we know it,
if we love Christ, let us set forth his excellent glory. This was
especially done (no doubt) in the cross of Christ him self, according as
him self prays, when he enters unto it: Father glorisi^ thy son. And
Saint Paul says, in it he has spoiled principait^es and John. 17. 1.
powers, and has made open show of them, and triumphed Co^. 2. 9.
over them upon his cross.

A proof of this we saw with our eyes, when Christ upon the cross so
wrought in the heart of the Roman cap^eine, that he cried aloude: Truly,
this man was the son of GOD. When all the people beheld it that was done,
and smo^e their breasts Man. 15. 39. Luc. 23. 47.
and went back: when many Saints roase out of their Matthew. 27. 51
graves, and went into the holy City. And not only this work was in men,
but that we might know the virtue of his deathpearced even into hell, to bind
judgment to the devil and his Angels, with eternal desperation, and to
witness it unto his Church, that the gates of hell should not prevail against
it. To this end we saw the earth did quake, the stones were (...), the Son
was darkened, the graves did open: and this was the beginning of this kingdom.

The increasing and amplifying of this, is the preaching of the same cross,
that is, of Christ crucified, that it might be seen and heard in all the
world, which had also a glorious beginning in the Apostles of Christ, whom
God sanctified to that work with excellent power, and graces of the holy
Ghost: so that notwithstanding the weakness of their persons, yet their
voice went into all lands, and their words unto the ends of the earth.

And boldly Saint Paul witnessed of themselves, that God had given them
glorious weapons to fight withal, weapons not carnal, neither swoordes, nor
prisons, as earthly princes have to keep their subjects in fear: but other
weapons, in deed more contemned of the world, but yet made by God more
mighty then al other weapons or engines to cast down holds.

For by our weapons says Saint Paul: we cast down man's imaginations, and
querie ^ighe thing, that is 2 Cor. 10. 4.
exalted against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ.

And this not only was for that age, but as GOD is unchangeable in all his
ways: so this is made his everlasting ordinance, that the preaching of the
Gospel should be his might^e power Romans 1. 16.
to save all that do believe. And accordingly this commission is given to all
that are sent out in the name of Christ, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body
of Ephesians. 4. 12.
Christ, t^l we meet all together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ.

Since this then is that spiritual pomp, and those victorious chariots, by
which the Son of God is carried in triumph into the inheritance of ye world:
they that have ears to hear, let them hear what it is to preach the Gospel
of Christ: and they that be called unto it, let them know what work they
have in hand: and they that resist it, shall at the last be consumed: as they
that be enemies to the glory of Christ, must needs be made his footestoole.
So that every one in the regard of so glorious a work, should humble himself
to become a labourer in it: yea, the greater dignity, the more travel it
should bring unto it. So that princes them selves have no greater honor, if
we will believe the Prophet Esaie, then to lick the dust under the Churches
feet. By which speech, the Prophet means, that the faithful and zealous
kings which reign upon earth, should with the peril of their crowns, not
fear to set out, and give all their strength to the Gospel of Christ, by
which the Lord of Lords is to be settled in his throne, and he that rules
for ever in the house of Jacob, is to be crowned king.

The preaching of the Gospel is the preparation of his way, and the obedience
unto it, is the honor of his reign, and what king has too good a hand to
join in this? nay, what king whose spirit is in his nostrels, and all his
glory is but a vading flower, what king (I say) is worthy to be a doer in
this work, but that it pleases this immortal and heavenly king of his free
grace to accept his labor? so that justly they are judged, that are despisers
of GOD, and know not the Lord of hosts, against whom they are proud. Shall
God proclaim it with so loud a voice, that when he begins this work, of
his eternal decree, to bring his son into his kingdom, all the Angels of
heaven shall worship before him: and shall a mortal man so far exalt himself,
in his wisdom, in his richesse, in his honor, in his nobility, in his
crown, in his kingdom, that he shall think it a disgrace to give all his
life to the Gospel? Can flesh puff it self up so far above the Angels? O
(dearly beloved) if we be happy, let us learn this, and let us further the
work of the Lord: the Angels work with us. If we will not, we shall pine
away in our own envious idleness, and without us the Saints and Angels
shall give Christ his glory.

Another thing here we may mark, how it is attributed to God the Father, this
glorifying of Christ, for so he says: when he brings his first begotten
son into the world: Whereby we learn that it is the work of God, and let
not us boast: for though he vouchsafe to set our hand to his business: yet
our hand that is but vanity, does wither away in the work, except God give
it virtue that it should have fruit. We cannot so much as speak, except he
put his spirit into our mouth: and when we do speak with a good measure of
grace, yet the ignorant do not hear us except he prepare their hearts, and
still our work is nothing worth, but he alone works al in all. And for this
purpose that we should give him the glory of his own work, and not seek
our own praise, therefore he has chosen his workmen as you see, Not many
wisemen of the world, not many mighty, not many noble: but commonly men of
small account, and a few in number, he gives them tongs to speak and they
carry his Gospel over mighty kingdoms, and make it flourish, when all the
powers of the realm have armed them selves against it. And all this that we
should confess, as here the Apostle says, it is he, it is not we, that give
this kingdom unto Christ. And seeing it is his work, who is able to bring all
his purposes to pass: it shall be our wisdom to further that, which God
himself will make to flourish and prosper, whether we will or no.

And where it is here said: Let all the Angels worship him: he gives our
Savior Christ a clear testimony, Christ is God.
so to be the son of God in petson, that he is also in nature one and the
same God with his father. For, whom should the angels worship, but God alone?
who in themselves have such power given them of God, that one is able to
destroy whole kingdoms, and such glory, that our eyes cannot behold them.

And seeing God has made this law: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him alone shall thou serve: and yet the Angels worship Christ, how clear a
proof is it, that Christ is God? for we know their perfect and willing
obedience, and therefore we pray: Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
Heaven. So that the Jews might thoroughly know, that seeing the Angels did
worship him, and had so their charge from God: therefore Christ was one God in
the majesty of the father. And most true it is, our savior Christ without
that nature had never taken that honor upon him. The Apostles of Christ,
Paul, Peter, Barnabas, and other men of excellent gifts and singular Act.
(...). Act. 10. Act 4.
power, to work mightily sighs and miracles: yet would they never hear the
name of worship. Peter utterly refuses: Paul and Barnabas, they rent their
clothes, being ravished with zeal of gods glory, when it is once offered
them. Nay, the Angels them selves, which are greater then all kings, they
cannot abide it: as manifestly we see in the Angel which appeared unto John,
when John would have fallen down at his feet to worship him, the Angel gave
him straight charge: Take heed Apo. 19 1^. Apo. 22. 8.
thou do it not, for I am but a fellow-seruant with thee, and then teaches him
that which here we learn, that worship only apperteineth to God: so that this
text serves the Apostles purpose very fitly, both to the confession of the
godhead of Christ, and in his preferring so far above Angels, that the
Israelites might more equally bear it, that he should be preferred before
Moses. In the 7. verse where he says, he makes his Angels ministering spirits:
we must note that this name the Apostle gives them as that wherein is their
greatest honor.

For otherwise, if he named in the Angels things of least account, it had been
no proof of the glory of Christ: but naming that by which they most excelled,
and yet exalting Christ so far above them, it is clear proof of his
excellent glory above all creatures. So I say here we must note that yt holy
ghost attributes this to the Angels, as their high honor, that they are
ministering spirits, wherein let us well consider what it is to serve the living
God, and how truly it is said his service is perfect freedom. If he be an
Angel, he has no greater glory: and who are we, and what are our fathers
houses, that can fancy unto our selves more honor, then to fear before God,
and walk obediently in his commandments? How many times do Abraham, Isaak,
Jacob, Iosue, Moses, David, and all the good kings of Judah, how many times do
they entitle them selves the son of GOD? how many times does God show forth
his great love and favor unto diverse men under this name, to call them his
servants? Or who was ever heard of except Senacharib, or Pharaoh, or men like
unto them, that would boast otherwise and say: Who is the Lord that I should
hear his voice, I know not the Lord, neither will I let his people go.

Pray (dearly beloved) that we may have eyes to see, and cares to hear, and
hearts to understand, unto what honor in this day we be called: for most
assuredly true it is, and all the Angels of heaven bear wittnes unto it, that
in the world there is no greater glory, then to serve the Lord. If thou were
as high as the Prophet David, yet David had no greater glory to boast of then
this, Behold Lord for Psalm. 116. 16.
I am thy servant, I am thy seruat, and the son of thine hand maid. Or if
thou were a king above all kings, full of wisdom, riches, honor, as Solomon
king of Israel: yet to be the servant of the Lord were thy greatest dignity,
and above titles of kingdoms and Eccle. 11.
countries, this were most honorable: Solomon the preacher, the son of David.

Yea the Angels of whom we speak, they have al their glorious names, of
Thrones, Powers, Rules, Principalities, Dominions, in this respect, that they
be the servants of the Lord, to execute these his mighty workinges: and take
away from them this service of God, you take away the honor of their high
calling. So assuredly we may believe and confess it boldly, that among men
there is no other honor but this. If God have made my life to abound in
worldly peace, the crown and beauty of mine honor is to serve the Lord. If
God have given me trouble in the days of my vanity, this is comfort enough,
that I am the servant of the Lord. Be our life as it will, either high or
low, the only fruit of it is the service of God: and the only hurt that can
approach unto us, is to forget the Lord, whose servants we should have been: and
let us so much more constantly dwell in this persuasion of heart, because we
have heard that the Lord has spoken it, there is no greater glory, no not in
his Angels, then to serve before him.

Of the nature of angels as they are here described, by the grace of God I
shall say more in the latter end of this Chap. Now let us pray, that as we have
learned, so we may follow, acknowledging the glory of our Savior Christ, and
what the honor of his kingdom is: and desire grace that we may be found
worthy to be laborers in that excellent work, in which God has appointed
to glorify his son, and that we may serve him in holiness and righteousness
all the days of our life, who is only all the hope we have, and shall in his
good time fill our life with his own presence, and satisfy our eyes with the
sight of his majesty. And the same only and living God give us his holy
spirit in which we may be comforted, to live in his love, to walk in his
ways, and to account all the world but vanity, in respect of the inheritance
purchased unto us in the Lord Jesus, the only forgiuer of al our sins: to
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be honor and glory world without
end,

Amen.
The fourth Lecture, upon the 8. and 9. verses.
8 But unto the son he says, O God, thy throue is for ever and ever: the
scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness.

9 Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity. Wherefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.


NOw the Apostle begins the third comparison, according to the title before.
Bearing up all things with his mighty power: which sets out the kingdom of
Christ, so that the comparison is: Christ is an eternal king, so is no Angel:
therefore he is to be honored above them. Thus having made mention of his
kingdom, then he describes it more at large, both to show what his kingdom
is, and to make it more plain, that though we could imagine easily, that
Angels in honor deserved the name of Kings: yet such a kingdom no Angel could
ever have. An everlasting throne, a righteous scepter, exalting truth, beating
down iniquity: in worthiness whereof, GOD has anointed this King with
gladness above all other, and has called him by the name of GOD himself.

Here the Jews, whom God has shut up in a heavy judgment, and for the
first centempt of his Gospel, keeps them still in blindness until this
day, they as they seek busily all ways of error to deceive them selves: so
they have blinded their eyes, that they should not understand this prophecy.
And first, where it is said: Thy throne O God: They say, the name, GOD, is
likewise attributed to men, as they occupy any rome appointed them of God, as
where this same prophet says: I have said, you be Gods: which means, that
they have commandment Psalm. 82. 6.
from God to execute his judgment. But the Jew, if he had not changed his
heart, and turned it away from wisdom to folly, he might have known, that
though this name be also given to Angels or judges, yet it is given, not to one
but to many: so that in their number it is manifest, that it is a figurative
speech. Or if it be given to one, it has some addition, as where it is said
to Moses: I have made thee Pharaoes God: limiting the name to a certain sense,
but thus attributed to one, without any correction of speech, it was never but
to God alone. Again, they say all this Psalm is of Solomon: and therefore
being true in him, it cannot prove any divinity in Christ: but this error is
eue^ as gross as the other. For how so ever this is true, that the Psalm was
written as a wedding song of joy, at the marriage of Solomon with Pharaoes
daughter: yet this is known and manifest, that in the stories of those men
which were figures of Christ, something is ever spoken not agreeing to the
figure, but to Christ alone, that we might be bold to apply it unto him.
Neither yet can this Psalm possibly be written of that marriage of Solomon,
simply in it self. For when the Prophet begins: my heart breaks out into a
good matter: how can this praise, or this earnest desire of the Prophet agree
to it, which was contrary to the law of God, and of it self could never be
good? What had the Kings of Israel to do with Idolaters, and blasphemers, to
marry their daughters? and no doubt as Solomon was a most famous prince: so
the glory of the world did here lead him. For Egypt was the greatest
Monarchy in the world, and Pharaoh the mightiest King: so that his daughter
given to king Solomon, was the princeliest marriage that could be made, but
that it displesed God, it is clear: for both his general law is against it,
and this is particularly alleged in the causes of Solomon's ruin. Exo. ^4. 16.
Deu. 7. 3. 1. Reg. 1. 1.
And though this Psalm were now to wish prosperity and peace unto it, what
then? who will dispute with the Lord for turning all things to the best to
those that love him? so when Solomon's hautinesse had done this, what though God
would except her after the renouncing of all her idolatries, when as the law
says, she had shaven her head, and Deu. (...). 1. 2.
pared her nails, and forgot her fathers house? what though he would have her
a figure of the honorable calling of the Gentiles, and show then in her, that
though he gave his laws to Jacob, yet he was a God in all the earth, all that
proves nothing, but Solomon might do ill still: and this wedding song was
made, not for him, but for another whom he figured. But let these Jewish
quarrels against the truth alone, and let us examine the text here as it is,
what honor it gives to Christ, and how by no means it can agree to Solomon.

In this scripture there are four special things spoken. First, he is called
God alone, as I said, and without addition: even as the prophet Esai also
calls him the mighty God. By which warrant of ^sa. 9. 6.
the Prophets, being a most sure word, the Apostles are bold to give to our
Savior Christ, the name and power of the living God, as John says, the word
was God. And Thomas with these words confesses his former unbelief: My Lord
and my God. John. 1. (...).
And S. John in his Epistle says: Jesus Christ, this John. ^0 1. Ioh. 5. 20.
Romans 9. 4.
is the true God. And Saint Paul calls him the God which is for ever to be
praised. And in the Epistle to the Colossians: The fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily in him. And many other places plain as these, Col. (...). 6.
grounded upon this, and such other places of the Prophets before them. And
therefore our savior Christ him self, said unto these Jews which yet
believe not: Search the Scriptures, for they bear witness of me.

The second thing here attributed to Christ is, That his kingdom is
everlasting. So the Prophet Esaie had said: The increase of his government
and peace shall have no end. He shall sit upon the throne of David and upon
Esa. 9. 7.
his kingdom to order it, and to stablish it with judgment, and with justice
from henceforth even for ever.

The same testimony the Angel gave of his kingdom, when he came to the
virgin Marie. The Lord God (says he) shall give unto him the throne of Luke.
1. (...).
David his father: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and
his kingdom shall have no end.

And how can this be possibly applied unto Solomon, so directly against the
Scripture, that the Genesis 49.
scepter should be taken once away, not only from the house of Solomon, but
from all tho tribe of Judah? And how could they not see with their eyes the
ruin of that kingdom, and the throne of Solomon quite forgotten.

The third thing attributed here to Christ is, y^ the scepter of righteousness
is the scepter of his kingdome^ according as the Prophet David says in an
other place: that righteousness and judgment are the foundations Psalm. 97.
(...)
of his throne,

And the meaning of these words, is after expressly added: Thou have loved
(says the Apostle) righteousness, and hated iniquity. This is the scepter of
righteousness which he speaks of, that is: that his government shall be
without all respect of pensons, a ministry of justice, and true judgment,
even according to the will of God his father, with whom there is no
acceptance of the person of a man.

And how can they attribute this to Solomon? They know how Solomon did fall
away so far from righteousness, and hated iniquity so little ere he died,
that he became a notable idolater.

And how was his government in such justice, when the whole people came
after to Rehoboam his son, and say:

Thy father did make our yoke grievous, now therefore make thou the grievous
servitude of thy Father lighter, and we will Reg. 1^. 4.
fear thee.

The fourth thing he^e spoken of our Savior Christ is, y^ for this cause God
had anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows. For this cause
says the scripture, because thou louedst so much justice, what mean they
still to think here upon Solomon, and of such reward of his righteous rule,
except they would have the Scriptures false, that bear witness of him. He had
turned (as the Prophet says) judgment into wormewoode. And how stands it
that he was anointed with the oil of gladness: that is, with gifts of the
holy Ghost, above his fellows? when many kings of Judah have greater praise
of God then he: and scarce any did fall from God so grievously as he. Now one
refuge behind, which they think they have, is nothing at all: they will say,
that all this was spoken in respect of his beginning, in which he was famous,
with this oil of gladness above his fellows, and above all the world. True
it is, in respect of his government at the first, I grant this might be
spoken of him: but are not the words plain, that they are not meant of any
that should begin well, and then fall back? For says not the text, that
this scepter of justice shall be in his kingdom for ever? Therefore how so ever
Solomon was once honored above all kings: yet this praise was not his, but
another, who should for ever abide in his justice and righteousness. So
these four things here witnessed of the Prophet: that he is called God, that
his kingdom is everlasting, that his government shall be ever righteous, that he
is anointed with oil of gladness above al his fellows. All the Jews in the
world cannot see Solomon, nor any mortal man in this glass: but must needs
acknowledge our savior Christ, the son of God, God and man, the savior of
the world, the King and Priest of his people for ever.

Now further to examine this scripture for our own Which Christ was figured in
sinful me^.
edifying, let us mark first how Solomon is set out a figure of Christ, and so
singular tokens and shows of Gods love and mercy upon him, that he should
resemble his only begoten son: notwithstanding a man laden with sins and
iniquities: so as few have appeared more unrighteous or more unthankful to God.
Such an other example almost we have in Samson, a man full of infirmities, yet
exceedingly beeloued of God, and a lively figure of his son Christ. We
learn in this, both to know our selves and to know God. In our selves to
trust to nothing, not riches, honor, friends, strength, authority, no not
learning, wisdom, government, or any knowledge: for in these both Samson and
Solomon have fallen down before us. And if ever man had been borne yt could
have his happiness in him self, that man was Solomon, strong in power, rich in
treasure, wise in rule, healthful in body, sober in affection, abounding in
pleasure, what so ever his eyes or ears could desire. No gift wanting in
mind, in body, in outward life, yea more then this, a heart that could
measure all the delights of the world to use them as they are, and se the
vanity that is in them, and confess that life in immortality is above all:
yet from all this he falls when God leaves him in his own power, to make
trial of his own strength: for how could fleash and blood prevail against
principalities and the power of darkness? And how could Solomon stand upright,
though his strength had been double, when Adam him self could fall from
Paradise. Then let not us pore creatures boast our selves, in whom there is no
wisdom. Come not into this fight in thine own armor: for where Solomon has
fallen, who soever thou art, thou will be crushed in pecees: and if in him
there was so little help, confess thou with all humblenes of mind, y^ in thy
flesh there is no goodness, but put thy trust in the living God, by whom thou
shall be able to do all things. And on the other side, seeing the great
fallings of Solomon, did not let the good work of the Lord, but that he made
a man so full of infirmities, so clear an image of his son Christ, and
powered all his benefits so plentifully upon him. Let us here see the goodness
of God, who has found a way to bury for ever the sins of all his people,
and so to forgett them, that they have none account: the figure of Christ was
therefore in Solomon, that we should see how grace abounds above sin, and
how mercy is exalted above judgment. In the nature and body of Solomon, we
see the spirit quenched, grace despised, and iniquity to have the upper hand:
in the figure that he bears wese the spirit to conquer, righteousness to be
exalted, and a Kingdom of glory to be set up for ever, that if we should
find in our selves the sins of Solomon, yet we might assuredly know, they
cannot drive away the image of Christ, but he is ready to justify all that do
believe, for it is no dout but he in whose person was such an image of Christ,
Christ offered to him again an image of righteousness, in which he should be
presented faultelesse to eternal life.

Now, where Christ is set out thus a King for ever, Christ is our lawegiuer,
and his govern meant is for ever and ever.
we are taught not by days and times to measure his commandments, but to
hold them without change, as the government for ever of his eternal
kingdom: for it is to to gross folly for us to say, he is still our King, if
we dare abrogate his laws: for he is our ruler for ever, and yet without him
we will make laws continually. Was it ever heard, among earthly kings, that
subjects could either repeal or change their princes laws? or make laws
without them in their own kingdom? Or can there be greater treason then to
conspire for such a lewd liberty? Even so it is with all men and princes in
the Church of Christ. He is our King, he must be our Lawe-giuer, he is King
for ever, and his laws must never be changed, he is our king alone, and
without him all the world can make no law. In no common wealth, there was ever
law proclaimed but in the name of the King: In the Church of Christ, who shall
proclaim decrees but in the name of Christ? and therefore expressly Christ
takes upon him to be our only Lawe-giuer.

And all princes, the more godly they be, the more carefully will take heed
to be no lawgiuers in his church, for matters concerning faith: for that were
to give a law unto him, which none will do but antichriste himself.

The Pope stirred up Charles the fifte and King Henry the eight, and gave them
for their hire this title, to be called defenders of the faith: a proud
beequest: and how humbly it was possessed, God does know. After that king
Henry taking unto him the courage of a true and natural king drove out that
spiritual tyrante out of all his Realm, and by grant of the clergy and
consent of the parleament took upon him the name of supreme head of the church
of England, which the pope had before usurped over al nations. But seeing now it
is so, that these names are taken up and made hereditarie to our Kings and
Queens, we will not reason of the titles, rather let us do the duty of
loving subjects, and pray that they may find grace, by their names to be
provoked more to godliness: that in true joy of heart, they may have the
honor of their calling, and hold fast a good conscience against the day of
Christ. This only we testify to all potentates and princes, that what
honorable titles so ever they have: yet they must be subject in the Church,
and have Christ alone to be king over it. Let them make no laws, appoint no
orders, ordeine no government, but such as are agreeable with his laws,
orders, and government. For that were sacrilege, and it is the presumption of
the man of Rome: but let them exsecute the laws of Christ, see his orders
kept, establishe the government which he has ordained, and hold men of al
degrees in obedience unto God: for this is the true honor of the Lords chosen
Princes, and the glory of their calling, which shall not wither.

And now to the end we may the more willingly do this, both we and our kings,
whom God has set over us: let us mark this further which the Apostle adds
of our Savior Christ, that His scepter is a scepter of righteousness:
meaning (as I said) that his government is all in truth and righteousness.
A good reason, and a great persuasion to all that are of God, why we should
let Christ alone with the ordering of his Church. His scepter is a scepter of
righteousness, not only a righteous scepter, that is, that whatsoever he
ordeineth it is righteous, but the scepter of righteousness, that is,
whatsoever is righteous, is ordained of him: and all spiritual scepters of all
kings, which are not directed by him, they are crooked and broken, scepters of
superstition, and scepters of idolatry, there is none of righteousness but
only the scepter of Jesus Christ. The scepter is a little wand which Princes
have accustomed to bear in their left hand, and it is a sign of their
government, and by a Metonymie it signifies here the government it self. Now
the scepter of Christ is as his kingdom is, not a scepter of wood or metal
like other kings, for his kingdom is not of this world as theirs is: but his
scepter the Prophet Esaie in plain words describes it. He shall smite the
earth (says he) with the scepter of his mouth and with the breath of his lips
shall he kill the ungodly. In which words of ye Prophet we see, both what is
this scepter, and why it has the name of righteousness: the scepter is the
word of his mouth, that is, the preaching of the Gospel, not decrees, nor
decretalls, nor traditions of men, nor unwritten verities: by none of al these
we have received the spirit of God: but only by hearing faith preached, it
therefore alone is the scepter. Here tell me (dearly beloved) I will ask no
hard question, but a thing which your eyes have seen, and your bands have
handled. Tell me what kingdom is the Popes? Or whence is it? Is it Christ's?
Then the preching of the Gospel is the scepter of it, and the scepter bearers
are in every congregation the pastors and teachers: by the Gospel preached it
binds and loses, by the Gospel preached it rules over us, by the Gospel
preached it teaches faith, it ordeineth religion, it ministers Sacraments: by
the Gospel it begets us, by the Gospel it nourishes us, and in the hope of
the Gospel it lays us down in peace. If it have another scepter then this,
then it is an other kingdom then that of Christ. If the scepter be the Canon
law, and the scepter bearers their Cardinals and clergy lords, their
chauncellers, and commissaries, and other men that we know not. If they bind
and loose by pardons and bulls. If they teach a faith solded up (as they term
it) in an idle fancy, that we must believe as the Church does believe, and
the Church believes as we do believe, when neither our Church nor we can tell
what we believe. If they teach us to worship after the traditions of men. If it
feed us up in the hope of the Church of Rome. If it lay us down at last in an
unknown purgatory, whether this be the scepter, judge you: and if it be, I
assure you in the word of truth, the Apostle and Prophet both witnessing
with me, this kingdom is a kingdom of darkness: a kingdom of sin, and it
shall return to the shape of his first beginning. The kingdom of Christ
shall be ever known, by the scepter of the only Gospel preached and practiced
in it.

Now, why is this called the scepter of righteousness? Because says the
prophet it kills the ungodly, the same exposition the Apostle immediately
adds. Thou haste loved righteousness, and hatediniqui^ie: therefore it is
called a scepter of righteousness, because it makes the faithful righteous,
and destroys the sinners from the face of the earth. In this sense Saint
Peter calls it the seed of regeneration, because 1. Pet. 1. 25.
by it we be begotten anew, into the image of God, which is in righteousness.
So that here we know whether we be of the Kingdom of Christ, even by the
scepter by which we be ruled. If the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ have
reformed us into a new image, to be holy, as our Savior Christ is holy,
that by his spirit the world be crucified unto us, and we unto the world,
then have we our enfranchisement in this kingdom: if not, though we dwell in
the mids of the Sanctuary, yet were we strangers from the law that came out
of mount Sion.

And though we were baptized with all the water in the sea, or as the Prophet
says, though we wash our selves with Nitre and take much Soap, yet our
iniquities are marked before the Lord: except we feel the forgiveness of our
sins, in the righteousness and holiness of this kingdom of Christ. And
what madness can be like unto it, to flatter my self, as if I had my portion
among the elect of God, and yet dwell in tabernacles of the Children of the
devil, that is I mean, and yet walk in all the sins of a corruptible man?
Are not Gods children his Saints? be they not brought unto him with the
scepter of righteousness? does he not keep them with the seal of his holy
spirit? If I see no good works in my hands, if I know never that the
preaching of the gospel killed concupiscence in me, and made me hunger and
thirst after righteousness, if I feel not the spirit of God to sanctify
more and more my heart and al mine affections, how can I say I am the child of
God? No, no, talk while thou will, use thy liberty, say thou art a
Protestant, renounce the Pope, except thou love righteousness even as thou
love thy soul, and reioycest in weldoing as in thy life, thou have been but
an idle hearer of the word of truth. Godliness is not made of words, as a
wood is made of trees, but it is an earnest love, proceeding from a pure heart,
and a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith, in which we may glorify God,
and do good to his people. Paul was godly, when he gloried in nothing but in
the cross of Jesus Christ, by which the world wascrucified Gal. 6. 14.
unto him, and he unto the world. They are godless Hypocrites, which in word
confess they know God, but in deeds deny him. They Tit. 1. ^6.
are Christ's which have crucified the flesh with the affections and
concupisce^ce of it, they are of their father Galat. 5. 24
the devil, that in wickedness do the desires of the devil. Let us then
learn (dearly beloved) in John. 8. 44
good time to be wise: when we were in ignorance, then we walked in the works
of darkness, now we have understanding, let us walk as the children of the
light, and if we take the gospel into our mouth: let us know, it is a scepter
of righteousness to reform our life: and whosoever he be that has chosen
Galat. 6. 15.
this portion, peace be upon him and upon the Israel of God: and he that
withdraws himself from this purpose, even as the Apostle after says: Let
our Hebr. 10. 3^.
souls have no pleasure in him.

And here let us also mark how the Apostle sets out this righteousness of
Christ. Thou have (says he) loved righteousness and hated iniquity. This is
general in all duty which we do unto God, to love the obedience with all our
heart and soul, and to detest and hate all the transgression and sin. So the
Prophet David says: I hate vain inventions, but thy law I love: and again:
thy law I love, but I hate falshod Psalm. 119. 1^* and 163.
and abhor it. Eue^ so must we hate iniquity if we love righteousness, and
abhor falshod if we love the truth: and this is that eternal law which
God gave from the beginning. I will, says he, set enimitie between thee and
the woman and between thy seed and her seed. But O Lord, what a rebellious
people are we? where God has commanded all concord, and bound us together in
all bonds of unity, One body, one spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord,
one faith, one Baptism, one God the father of us all: yet al these bonds we
break in sunder: and anger, hatred, reprochful words, quarrels, wounds,
murders, every cursed thing, but we reach our hands un to it: to make strife
one with another, and disanull the agreement which God has made: on the other
side, touching the works of darkness, we will walk in them: and though God
has separated them from us, as heaven from hell, or Christ from Belial, and
has made the hatred of them perpetual to us and our posterity, yet we think
as the Prophet says: to make a league with death, and to beat agreement with
hell, we will follow our fleshly concupiscence, as though there were no lord to
control us, and we will not hate sin at all. A corrupt nature, to love that
which we are bid hate, and hate that which we are bid love, but a more corrupt
affection, if we give place to these desires, and are well pleased to love them
still.

It follows in the end of this seventh verse, thy God has anointed thee
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. In this we may learn an other
notable cause why we should acknowledge Christ our only King and Lawgiver:
Because he is thus anointed, that is, in him dwells all fullness of grace,
and the treasures of all wisdom and knowledge are hid in him: so that leave
him, leave his laws, leave his scepter, we leave instruction, we leave
righteousness, we leave eternal life. And here note that the oil of
gladness is the gifts of the spirit of God: gladness to our selves, because
it fills us with joy in the Lord: and gladness to other, because it powers
grace into our lips, to comfort the weak hearted, and to make us a sweet savor
of life unto life, to all that hearken unto us. The heart of earth y^ is dry
and baren, and bears no joyful fruit of the Lord God, this oil of gladness
has not yet softened it to make it a fertile soil for the seed of the word
of God. And the careless man, of a dull spirit, that is not touched with his
brothers sinning, but lets him alone in his uncleanness, to sinck or swim,
to stand or fall, to live or die: and all that use company only for worldly
pleasure, without regard of swearing, lying, backbiting, idle talk,
wantonness, or what soever: what gladness receive other by their admonitions
and exhortations? Or how can they say this sweet oil is in their hearts? Let
no man deceive him self, God is not mocked. He that is of Christ has a care
to bring other unto Christ, he hates the iniquity of all men, and gives
comfort to many with the oil of gladness, of which he has received. And
thus far of these verses. Now let us pray to god our heavenly father, that we
may be taught of his spirit, that like as he in his unspeakable wisdom and
mercy, has given unto us his own son to be a Savior, to establish unto
him a perpetual Kingdom, that our liberty might be defended with his strong
hand, and to make us partakers of all his benefits, by rulinge us with his
scepter of righteousness, that is, filling us with a holy knowledge of his
Gospel to love righteousness, to hate iniquity: and by giving us of his
fullness, that we should receive grace for grace, and have a hapie measure of
the oil of gladness, with which he was anointed: so according to these his
great mercies toward us, let us pray: and the Lord grant us, that we may
find favor in his sight, to embrace his son alone, to follow his ways, to
love his truth, to set out his honor, and to finishe our weary pilgrimage in
his service, to the profit of our brethren, and strengthening of our faith,
through Jesus Christ our only Savior, to whom, with the father etc.

The fifth Lecture, upon the 10. 11. and 12. verses.
10 And thou, Lord, in the beginning haste established the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thine hands.

11 They shall perish, but thou do remain: and they all shall wax old as
does a garment.

12 And as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.


THE Apostle goes forward as before, and here adds the fourth comparison,
in exalting Christ above Angels. And he makes this comparison according to
the title before given him, that by him the world was made, and it is this.
The son of God, our Messiah, of whom we speak: he made the world, and
rules it as he will, and will abolish it in the time appointed, him self being
unchangeable in all his ways: which is a glory far above all that the
scripture attributes unto angels. Touching this scripture here alleged, how
it may be applied to Christ: it is certain, that the Psalm according as the
title is, was a prayer of the afflicted Church, most like when it was in the
captivity of Babylon, both because of the great complaint of the singular
misery which they suffered, and because they in their prayer allege the
appointed time of deliverance to Iere. 29. (...)
be come upon them, which was only of the captivity of Babylon: to which God
had appointed by his prophet Jeremy 70. years. Now that captivity being a
figure of our captivity under satan: ye Prophets fortelling that delivery,
saw also in spirit the delivery which we should al have under Christ. And
accordingly the spirit so spoke in the Prophets, that something was so proper
to Christ figured, as it must needs be referred to him, and not applied to any
figure. And this is general in all the express figures of our Savior
Christ, who so ever were the men, or what soever were the blessings that GOD
brought upon his people, because in Jesus Christ, all his promises had their
truth and accomplishement: therefore he is some way so described, that the
people must needs be lead to acknowledge still the covenant which they had in
him. So in this captivity of Babylon, the Prophet Jeremy foretells their
delivery thus: that they shall return to serve God and David their King: David
being Ier. 30. 9. Iere. 23. 6. Eze. 37. 14.
before dead. And again: He would raise up to David a righteous branch, whom
they should call, the Lord our righteousness: which must needs be meant of
the Messiah, whom they looked for to be the son of David: and expressly he
notes their return into the favor of GOD, with the same words, with which
God makes with us his new testament, in Jesus Christ, that God will be our God,
and we shall be his people. He will forgive their sins and iniquities, they
shall be all taught of God. Even so here in this Psalm the prophet sore telling
their return from Babylon, fore-seeth the redemption that is in Christ, and
breaks out in complaint of his short life: because he should not tarry to
see the day: and to comfort him self again, speaks out in spirit what joy
and gladness he saw in Christ, and how glorious a God he is, and so utters
the words here alleged: And thou in the beginning, O Lord, did lay the
foundations of the earth, and the works of thy hands are the heavens etc. And
here these words: He laid the foundations of the earth, and the Heavens are
the work of his hands: are spoken according to our infirmity, which know no
buildings but by foundations, nor can make any great works without our hands:
otherwise it is certain, the earth has no foundations, nor no hands could
make y^ heavens, but al was made and consists by the power of God. Thus we
have heard, what argument the Apostle here uses and how this text is applied
unto Christ.

Now, touching the words, where the Prophet says: And thou Lord, the Apostle
is a good expositor that this is spoken to the Son of God, to whom he
attributes the original and cause of making the world. A place most worthy
to be diligently marked: for it gives clearly unto Christ the fulness of ye
godhead, according to the article of our creed, I believe in God the father
almighty maker of heaven and earth. And all Arrians, old and new, which so
long have blasphemed the Son of God, and made him but a servant in the
creation of the world, because many times the Scripture says: By him God made
the world: if they hear this spoken to that son: And thou Lord in the
beginning did lay the foundations of the earth: they will cease to
blaspheme, and confess he is God to be blessed for ever. And where it is
said: that God the Father, by him made the world: that phrase of speech
diminishes not his glory, but rather testifies it more clearly. For we have
said before: that Christ is the s^ning brightness of the glory of his
father, that is: the person in ye Deity, by whom only the eternal wisdom
of GOD could make his majesty shine upon any creature: neither was it ever
possible, that any creature shonlde show forth the goodness of God, but only
by the person of the son. And therefore, when the name of God, or creation of
the world, is given unto the Son, as here we see: we do humbly confess and
adore the unity of the Godhead that is really in him. When it is attributed to
the father, as he that by his Son has made all these things, we acknowledge
the properties of y^ persons, the father dwelling in light which none ca^
approach unto, a founteine and head-spring of immortal glory. And the son,
the shining brightness of that glory, by whom it is made known of men and
Angels: so, when we say: we believe in God the Father Almighty, who made the
world: we acknowledge the goodness and mercy, by which the world was made,
originaly to dwell in the person of the Father: when we say the world was made
by the Son, we acknowledge the wisdom of God, by which the thing was
wrought, and the glory of it imparted unto us, to be in the person of the
son: as likewise, wheresoever the holy Ghost is mentioned in Esa. 40. 13.
Psalm. 33. 6.
this work: we acknowledge the virtue and power given to all creatures, both
for their continuance, and for the efficacy, to be of the person of the holy
Ghost: and where the creation is attributed to all, Father, Son and holy
Ghost, we confess the unity of the Godhead, in the distinction of persons,
which now we see in faith, and wherein we rejoice in hope, which shall never be
confounded, but shall be made perfect, when this mortality shall put on
immortality, and we shall see God as he is.

Where it is said further: God laid the foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of his hands. We must consider, the creation of the
world is thus attributed to God, not only because all things were made by him:
but because he has so made them, that they carry a mark imprinted in them,
of the power and Godhead of the Creator. Thus he means, when he says: the
Heavens are the works of thy hands. Even as the Prophet says: The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament Psalm. 19. 1.
shows his hand^e work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night
opens knowledge. And here we We must acknowledge the glory of God in his
works.
must learn according as the works of God are thus before us, so to behold
them and take the pleasure of the^, that we give glory to God in all that he
has done. When I see the heavens: I must see his greatness, who was able to
set such a covering over the earth. When I behold the earth: I must behold his
providence, who has ordained such a place of nourishment for all creatures.
When I look upon the unchangeable course in which all things are established:
I must look upon his constant wisdo^e and goodness: who in a steadfast purpose
has extended his mercies over all his works. In the least of all the
creatures of GOD, when I see wisdom, power, glory, more then all the world
can reach their hands unto: let me humble my self under his high majesty,
before whom no King, no Prince, no power of the world has any account: but
all nations before him are as nothing, and they are accounted Esa. 40. 17.
unto him less then nothing, and lighter then vanity it self. Thus God has
showed him self in his creatures, and even as S. Paul says: his invisible
things he has made manifest in them, both his eternal power and his Godhead,
that they might be without excuse, all that will not honor him. Let us
therefore (dearly beloved) forget now the times of ignorance, and at last be
wise hearted, to read the books which GOD has written in great letters, and
laid open before us, in all his works: let us see his glory. Thus did the
Prophet Esaie before us, as in the 40. chapter of his prophecy, we read: Who
has measured the waters with his fist: and compassed heaven with his spanne:
who is he has comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the
mounteines in a weight, and the hills in a balance? Nothing in the world, no
not the very dust of the earth, could come in the prophets eyes, but he could
see in it a great work of the Lord. Saint Paul says: God left not him self
without witness among men, even when the times were most blind. For Act. 14.
as much as he gave unto them from heaven rain and fruiteful times: for who
is he that makes the rain to fall, and the Sun to have his course of
shining? Who hides the treasures of the snow, and brin geth forth the hoare
frostes? Who covers the Heaven with clouds, and brings forth the winds
out of their places? Who makes the sea to roar with the great noise of the
waves, and makes it calm again, as if it had not been moved? What Princes,
what hosts of men, though all the world would join their strength together,
can do the least of these things? Nay, if all nations should bend them selves
together, they can not hurt sea, land, air, clouds, elements, day, night,
summer, winter, nor any thing that God has established for ever: but in every
one of these is the strength which cannot be resisted. The air can infect all
fleash: the earth swallowe it up: the Sun burn it with heat: the frost kill
it with cold: the thunder and lightning do make affraide all the tyrants
amoung men. Nay, we may learn in the plagues of Egypt, how the most vile
things can make ashamed all the children of pride. And why then do we not
learn in all that we see, to confess y^ greatness of the Lord? Why does not
the strength of his works make us confess his power: and all the delight that
we have in them, why does it not make us acknowledge all his goodness to the
children of men? The prophet David says: When I behold the Heavens which are
the works of thy hands: the Moon and the stars, which thou have ordained:
what is man, say I, that thou art mindeful of him: or the son of man, that
thou so regardest him? Our Savior Christ says: when we see how God feeds
the sparowes, and cloatheth the Lilies: we are a faithless people, except we
see his providence over us, to feed us, and to cloth us in all our
necessities. And sure the truth is, except I see with such eyes the creatures
of God, I am become a creature degenerate from that image, in which I was
first fourmed. If I see nothing in the heavens, but that they are light, and
above my reach: the horse and mule see this as well as I. If I see nothing in
the earth, but a place to walk in, or to take my rest upon it: the beasts and
fowls see this as well as I. If I see nothing in my gorgeous apparel, but
pride of a goodly color: the Peacock sees that in her feathers. And if in
all my meat and drink, I know nothing but the pleasure and sweetness of
the taste: the hog and swyne have here as great a portion as we.

To be short, if hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, feeling, be all the
delight we can find in the works of God: we have given our preeminence to the
dumb creatures, which have these senses more exqisite then we: and we have
turned the hearts of men into the hearts of beasts, who with wisdom,
prudence, understanding, knowledge, and reason can do nothing. And the words
of the prophet are fulfilled in us: Man, when he was in honor had no
understanding, he was compared to the brute beasts, and was made like unto
them. I speak this with the more words, and the more earnestly, that you
might see and detest the shame of some, who do not only, not see in the
creatures of God, the glory of God to fear before him, and to give him
honor: but quite contrary in all his creatures, they profane his name, which
eat till they surfeit, and drink till they be drunken: who put on pride with
all their apparel, and make their lands and houses privileged places for
much iniquity, which fill their mouths with cursed swearing, even in the
sight of the Sun, and commit their whoredoms, and fear not at the
darkness of the night. Flee (dearly beloved) far from such: hate them (as
the prophet says) with perfect hatred al their assemblies. The earth that
mourns under the burden of them, one day will spue them out, and the
creatures which they hold in this miserable bondage of sin, one day God will
hear their sighs, and they shall give a speedy witness against their
oppressers.

And thus much of the creatures of God, which here are said to be made by the
son of God, and to be the works of his hands.

An other thing here we have to consider, that the Apostle teaches the
excellency of Christ in respect of his continuance, before whom, the heaven
and earth are but a moment: for so in this comparison, he speaks of their
age, as a thing of nothing, They shall perish, they shall wax old as a garment,
they shall be folded up as a vesture: making all the continuance of the heaven to
be vanity, and of none account: for although it may seem he might have made
this comparison with things of a more express show of vanity then a garment,
as to have compared them with smoke, with the shadow of smoke, with the dream
of a shadow or such like: yet in comparing the time of the heavens, which are
so many ages, with a garment which is scace a year, it is as clear a
testimony al is nothing, as if al were not a minute of an hour. Besides this,
the cause of this comparison with a garment, was the similitude in which God
has set the Heavens, who has spread them like a corteine, and made them as a
covering to all his creatures: it was not to make the comparison less in show
of their vanity. Then here let us be wise hearted as the prophet was, as often
as our hope is before our eyes, to see our Savior Christ living for ever: let
us not only confess that our own age is nothing in respect of him, but let us
boldly continue even the continuance of the heavens, and account all thing
nothing that has an end: for let the days be never so many, which you can
call into account and multiply years into the longest continuance which your
thoughts can comprehend, that thousand thousands be before you, and ten
thousand thousands are in your mind, with one word you shall confute them
all, and with the breath of your mouth you may blow them away: and, as the
prophet says, make them all as a garment that is rent and worn: for reckon up
all thy thousands that thou can, and put this word, (Past,) unto them, and
where are they now become? a thousand thousand thousand years past, what are
they?

And if time be such a tyrant, to break the delight of ye long age of the
very heavens, that the wise heart of a man does say, even they are vanity, and
wax old as does a garment: what foolishness has wrapped up all our
understanding? and what blindness is in our hearts, that we see not our own
life, what it is? Not one of a hundred that has three score and ten years,
and of those a great part are slept out, so that we feel them not, and a
great part consumed with sorrow, either in loss of credit: or fear of
punishment: or pain of sickness: or grief of our labor: or pensmenesse of
our wants: or anguishe of our desires: or at least, even with a weariness of
time it self: so that of three score and ten years, let him speak that can
glory most, and he shall find that in them all, he has scarce ten full
years of pleasure: and this very pleasure, even then, when it is greatest,
what is it? Surely such as if he look down into his own thoughts, he should
say in the mids of it, his heart is heavy.

And shall yet this life, so short, so troublesome, so without pleasure, so
fast hold us bound with blind desire, that we neither long for nor look
after Jesus Christ, who lives ever, and has cast forth of his presence all
sin, and sorrow, and death it self?

Could the Prophet so show him in immortality and all his elect with him in
the glory of his father, that he bewailed the vanity of his own life, yea
though it should have lasted as long as the heavens, and while the Sun and
Moon endures, though he should have abiden king of Israel, was all this unto
him as a shadow or an idle dream in comparison of Christ who is for ever,
and whose years shall never fail? And shall we think we have the spirit of
God or any portion in Jesus Christ, who in his everlasting continuance, cannot
find such pleasure as in our visard of vain life, that soudenly appears and
is no more? who in the glory of his presence, and majesty of his Father, can
see no such delighte, as in carding, diceing, daunsing, and such like works of
reproach and shame, and horririble confusion?

Nay, I will tell you (dearly beloved,) and I will tell you true: your own
eyes and ears shall bear witness with me that I lie not.

These men that thus serve in the vile bondage of these pastimes, they carry
with them, the badge and cognisaunce of another master then of the living God:
for tell me, from morning to night are not their mouths full of adultery, of
wrath, of hatred, and swearing without shame^, in which God is dishonored,
and the cross of his Son Christ made despised? Then doubt not what these men
do, nor what master they serve, but pray that God may have mercy upon them,
as upon us this day, who love not their delights, that they may repent, and
withdraw them selves from the snare of the devil, in which they be holden,
according to his will, and begin while yet it is good time, to despise this,
and regard the life of Christ, in comparison of which they may say with the
Prophet: The Heavens shall perish and consume as a garment, but thy years (O
Lord) they have no end.

One other thing follows in the Prophet, which the Apostle recites not, but
for our times it has a very good instruction: the Prophet thus concludes:
The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed^ shall stand fast in
thy sight: because Christ had joined his Church to himself, he the head and
they the body, by him who endured longer then the Heavens, the Prophet knew
his people could never perish: and in his thought, if the Prophet had comfort
against the tyranny of the kingdom of Babylon, what comfort may we have now
against the enemies of the church of Christ?

They think they be many, and strong, and rich, and wise, and they will
prevail: their Pope shall up again, they will have Mass, they will exalte
the Church of Rome: they will become slaves to a vile person as they were
before: they will do, I cannot tell what. Alas poor souls, how fast they hold
a lie in their right hand! The shame that they seek for they shall never
find. For what are they? Or what is their strength? How much are they better
then grass, or then the flower in the field? What is their life more then a
vapor, or then a smoke that vanishes away? yet they boast them selves against
the Church of Christ, which is knit unto the son of God, lives in his life,
stands in his strength, whose right hand has made all things, and whose
years endure for evermore: while we trust in this, our hope is sure, and all
our enemies shall be ashamed. And let us pray, that it would please God our
heavenly father, of his great goodness, to have mercy upon us, that by his
spirit the eyes of our minds may be lightened, to see what great Salvation he
has given unto us in Jesus Christ: who is his only son: heir of althings:
creator of the world: who rules and governs all things: and shall show us
his glory in immortality, when all these creatures shall have their ^haunge.
And the Lord grant that in these days of our vanity, while yet we are
walking to the day of rest, we may in the mean season, see his grace and
glory in all his creatures, in which we have our pleasure, that we may enjoy
them to his praise, and with wise hearts measuring his times who shall endure
for ever, when all these things are past, we may mourn in spirit, to see the
time approach, when we with him shall both see and inherit his immortality,
through his son Jesus Christ, who has purchased it for us, and with his
mighty power, will keep us in safety unto it, against that day: to whom with
the father and the holy Ghost, our only comforter, beal honor and glory,
now and ever,

Amen.
The sixte lecture, upon the 13. and 14. verses.
13 Unto which also of the Angels, said he at any time? Sit at my right
hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool.

14 Are they not all ministering spirit^s, sent forth to minister, for their
sakes which shall be heirs of salvation?


NOW the Apostle makes the fifte comparison between the Angels, and our
Savior Christ: in which it is plain, he is exalted above all Angels: And
this comparison is out of the saying of the Prophet: Sit on my right hand
until I make thine enemies thy foot stool. A singular honor above all that
ever Angel had: for it signifies, that God has taken him into the fellowship
of glory, and given him all power, in Heaven and in earth.

Touching this Psalm, as it is most true: so it is confessed of all, that it
is a prophecy of our Savior Christ, how he should be King of his Church, and
utterly subvert all his enemies, and be our priest after the order of
Melchisedech: who should bring an end to the priesthood of Levy: and according
to this meaning of the Prophet, so the Apostle alleges this sentence, for
proof of this excellency of the son of God above all Angels.

And with this testimony, our Savior Christ him self confuteth the
Phariseis, when they denied his divinity, resoning of the force of this word,
LORD, because the comparison then was with David.

These words of the Apostle: To which of the Angels said he at any time etc.
they show plainly, what glory it is to sit on the right hand of GOD. For
when the Apostle says: The like was never said to Angels, that is: such glory
was never given them: what can it else mean, but that Christ is confessed to
be one God with his father? Or what can we understand to be higher then all
Angels, but God alone?

If the right hand of God could signify his presence, the Angels are in his
presence: and of them, thousand thousands are before him: and as our Savior
Christ says, They see the face of our heavenly father. If his right hand could
signify the fruition or sight of his glory: the Angels are all blessed
spirits, and see his glory even as it is.

If his right hand did signify any inferior power, though it were greater
then all the world, such power have also Angels: so that one of them have
smitten whole armies of men, and whole Countries: and therefore be they also
called principalities and powers, because no strength in the world can resist
them. But seeing his right hand notes unto us, that honor which never Angel
was received unto and above the angels we know none but God alone: therefore,
the Scripture speaks plainly, in setting Christ on the right hand of his
father, far above Angels: that he is one God and equal with his father.
Besides this, since it is said, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footestoole: it is plain, that this is the right hand of God, the
power of God given unto Christ, in which he shall overcome all his enemies:
and since this is the end of that glory, that glory is nothing but the power
by which this is brought to pass, and when this shall be accomplished, that all
his enemies shall be confounded, then this shall be finished: for him to sit on
the right hand of his father: not that Christ shall cease to be equal with his
father, but that this kingdom of Christ our mediator between God and us, in
which he keeps us: that shall cease, and he shall give it up unto his father,
and God shall be unto us, all in all.

And thus far of all these honorable titles given unto Christ: in all which
the Apostle proves him greater then all Angels. The first is, that he is
called the natural son of God. The second, that the Angels have
commandment to worship him. The third, that he is a King of glory, reigning
for ever in truth and righteousness. The fourth, that he is Creator of the
world, and indureth when the world shall perish. And fifthly, that he sits on
the right hand of high majesty: all which are proper titles to the son of
God, and greater then can be given to any Angel: and therefore Christ to be
exalted above them all.

Now in the 14. verse following, on the contrary part the Apostle sets
down, what is the proper glory of Angels, that by plain comparison, this
dignity of Christ might more appear: and so of Angels he adds, that they be
all ministering spirits, sent out for the safety of those which shall inherit
salvation. Where he calls them ministering spirits, according to the
testimony of David before alleged: He makes his Angels spirits, and his
ministers a fl^ of fire, which both names, spirits and ministers, the one of
nature, the other of office, he brings thus into the proper definition, that
they be ministering spirits. And because the ministry of any creature may be
in diverse things, therefore to take away this uncertainty, wherein their
ministry should be, he adds straight: that they are ministers for the
safety of Gods elect. So setting out a perfect definition of an Angel, fully
comprehending all that we can, or ought to know of those blessed spirits I
for all their glory is comprehended in the nature of a spirit: and the praise
which continually they sing unto God, is comprehended in their ministry: for
they are named ministers, according to Gods ordinance, and good pleasure, so
that with continual praise and thanksgiving, and rejoicing in the Lord, they
do their work as after their example we make our prayer: Thy will be done in
earth, us it is in Heaven. Now upon this definition of Angels, and the former
testimonies of the great glory of the son of God our Savior Jesus Christ,
by good comparison the Apostles conclusion is plain and manifest that seeing
our Savior Christ is so exalted, even above the angels, in all the honor of a
King, a Priest, a Prophet, we ought much more so to acknowledge him above
Moses, above Aaron, above all Temple, sanctuary, mercy seat, and all
ordinances of the law, that he might be alone our only health and salvation.
And thus he finisheth this first Chapter, in which I said, he sets out the
person of Christ according to his Godhead, bodily dwelling within him.

Now, touching the words, what we have to note of this, where he says: to
which of the angels said he at any time: I then sufficiently declared unto
you, as God gave me grace, when I expounded the v. verse. Likewise of Christ's
sitting at the right hand of God I spoke more fully, expounding the third verse.

Where it is here added: Till I make thine enemies thy foot stool: The
Apostle Saint Paul, speaking 1. Cor. 15. 23.
of this victory of Christ, he says: He shall abolish all rule, and
authority, and power: noting, as he faith in an other place, that we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, against
worldly rulers of this darkness, against spiritual wickedness in high
places: Ephesians. 6.
wherein we see, of what force and strength our enemies are.

And because he says: The last enemy shall be abolished, Continual enemies to
the church and of great strength.
which is death, we see, that there shall never want enemies to the Church:
whereby we should be provoked, in regard of our continual danger, to be
ever watchinge: and because of our strong enemies, only to put our trust in
Christ.

And here (I beseech you) let our hearts be in out own ways, and of our
natural life, let us learn wisdom, least we be also vpbraided of our Savior
Christ, that we can discern the face of the earth, and Luke. 12. 54.
of the sky, but we can not judge of our selves what is right.

Tell me, who of us having a long journey, by many thieves and wild beasts,
or passing the rockie seas in great and violent storms, though lie escape a
place or two, where no thief is, not a^ye beast has molested him: yet at
every place of danger, his fear is still renewed: And though he have passed
many high surges, and deep gulphes of water, yet at every wave, he is still
affraide: not careless, because he has passed far: but still careful,
because there is more behind: and this wisdom we use, because we know we may
as well fall toward our iourneyes end, and as well be drowned before the
havens mouth, as when we first began our dangerous voyage. Even so with the
Church of Christ in which this day we confess our selves to have our portion:
from the first day of her peregrination in earth till her last entrance into
glory, there is a perpetual hatred between the serpent and her head, and
between the seed of the serpent and her children, in which strife every one
of us particularly have our fight, so that from our mothers womb, till we lie
down in the grave, our life is a warrefare upon earth. No age, no condition of
life, no day, no night, but brings his enemy with him, and the same enemy
armed with sin and death, as well against the man of an hundred years old,
as against the child that is new borne: and as well we may fall into
condemnation through apostasy of old and crooked age, as through concupiscence
and pride of youth. And if at any time we become secure, like a careless
people who have our senses dulled with an idle dream of peace, it is not
because webe out of danger, but according to the parable in the gospel, The
strong man has possessed a^ and therefore al things seem to be so safe and
sure. Let us therefore be wise, and shake off the weight of this dull
sluggishnes, which presses us down, that with attentive ears we may
willingely hear his loving counsel, who one day will break the strongest
head of all our enemies. He bids us watch and pray, because we know not
the day nor yet the hour: and so much the rather let us do it: because we
stand not in danger of robbing, or drowning, or tearing with wild beasts:
which yet would make us affraide, though death should end our misery: but we
stand in danger of greater calamities, when death shall be abolished, whether we
shall be accursed in eternal fire, or whether we shall be the blessed of the
Lord. And as the peril is great, so we have heard the enemies are strong, and
such as before whom we are very cowards: for be we otherwise never so
valiant to endure pain, to quarrel, to fight, to despise any danger, as it
is the manner of a great many ruffians in deed: but men of good courage they
would be called: bring me one of them in battle against these enemies: we
have to strive against pride, against concupiscence, against idle games,
against all sin, and thou shalt see no boy, no woman, no sickeman so very a
cowarde: he has not the heart to strike one blow, but yields him self a
slave, and is led away as an ox to the slaughterhouse. Let us therefore
watch: Let us pray: for in this dangerous battle, in which these strong men
are very cowardes, what can we do? Even let us deny our selves, and trust
unto him that sits on the right hand of his father, and he shall make all
our enemies our footestoole.

And this word we must not lightly pass over: for it notes a certain and
great confusion upon the enemies of Christ: forthough it be sometime honor to
be named the Lords footestole, as where it is said: Heaven is my throne, and
the earth is my footestoole. Esa. 66..
And especially in the lamentations of Jeremy, where he says, The Lord has
darkened the daughter of Sion, and thrown down the beauty of Israel, and
has not remembered his footstole. Yet in this place, where Lamto. 2. 1.
it is spoken of Gods enemies, it notes their extreme ruin and shame, even as
of those, whom we do stamp under our feet.

An example of this we have in the Jews: whose name was once so honorable?
how do the Prophets glory of the house of Judah? yet since they have taken up
this enimitie against Christ, and set them selves against his Church and
people, they have had experience of the Lords right hand, and their name is a
name of shame and ignominy over all the world.

An other example we have of Rome: what city had once such honor? and what
name was of more renown? yet since it has been the seat of Antichriste,
enemy to the son of God and to his Gospel: as she has filled her self
with all abominations, so God has troaden her under feet, and (as the
Prophet says) she has left her name as a curse Esa. 65. 15.
unto the chosen of the Lord: that I assure you, in my ears, and in the ears
(I am sure) of many thousands more, the city of Rome is a city of contempt, of
ignorance, of sin, like a dead stock, whose sweet blossoms and pleasant
fruit is withered and worn away, And her root (as the Prophet says) Esa 5.
24.
is rottenness, and her bud as the dust: and such shall be the end of all
the enemies of the Son of God.

Now follows in the last verse this definition of Angels, whereof we spoke
before: in which we learn and so confess, that they are ministering spirits,
sent out for our safety and defense: so that hereafter, whosoever will dispute
with us about Angels, with one word we will answer him, and cut off all
curiosity. This we know, and we know it only, and who so ever knows more,
he knows nothing but the vanity of his own mind.

Angels are spirits, which serve the Lord* for his Churches safety. If yet
we will be vain still, and think: yea, but what are Archangels,
principalities, powers, rules, thrones, dominions? What are Cherubim and
Seraphim? All these, how so ever they be called in diverse respects diversely,
they are all Angels in condition and nature, as they are so here defined. For
if any Archangel, throne, or dominion, or any other name that is named, were
any way greater then an Angel, all this disputation of the Apostle were nothing
worth: for how could it prove the excellency of Christ above all creatures,
because he is greater then Angels? If Cherubim or Seraphim, or any Archangel
were also greater then an Angel? And therefore that the reason of the Apostle
may be (as it is) strong and unanswerable, we must confess, all blessed
spirits whatsoever they be, they be all this, and this is their glory, that
they be* Gods ministers, for the safety of his children.

This doctrine the Prophet David teaches also very plainly in the 34.
Psalm: The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about the^ that fear him and
delivers them. Psalm. 34. 8.
And again in the 91. Psalm: He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to
keep thee in all thy ways: they shall Psalm. 91. 11.
bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. And
according as this is Gods word, and his promise: so we have many examples,
how he has at all times justified his faith in the perfourmance of it, that
we might not stagger in this doctrine of Angels. The Patriarchs, the people of
Israel, the Prophets, the Apostles, and Saints of the new Testament, our
Savior Christ himself: we have seen how the Angels have been with them in
dangerous times, and ministered the help of God unto them.

Now touching the manner how the Angels of God execute this ministry, even as
it is not hard unto the Lord in the battles of men to save with many or with
few: so God sends out his angels, more or less, eue^ as he will, that it
might be known the power is the Lords. When Jacob feared before his brother
Esau, God sends to him an host of Genesis 31. 2.
angels to comfort him. When Eliseus was besett with the great host of the
king of Syria, and his servant 2. Reg. 6. 17
was now exceedingly affraide, Eliseus prayed to have his eyes opened, that he
might see the help of God, which was present with them, and he saw
immediately the mounteine full of horses and chariots round about Eliseus,
which were Gods Angels sent for the Prophets safegarde. When our Savior Christ
is in distress and anguish, God sends many Angels which do minister unto
him. Matthew. 4. 11
And so he testifies of the usual work of God common to all his saints, and
applies it particularly unto himself, in reproouing Peter, who would needs
draw his sword to maintain his cause. Think thou (says he) that I can not
now pray unto my father and he will give me more then twelve legions of Angels?
And as thus God sends out a great multitude, for the saftie of one: so
contrariwise, sometime he appoints but one for the saftie of many. So God
sent an Angel to deliver Israel out of Egypt, and to guide Frod. 23. 2^ Number.
20. 16
them through the terrible wilderness: and ever after in all their troubles,
when they called upon Esa. 63. 9.
him, the Angel of his presence (as y^ prophet Esai says) was their deliverer:
and when they should enter the Exodus 33. (...).
land of promise, God sent an Angel to drive out the Canaanites before them.
When the army of y^ king of Ashur came and besieged Jerusalem, God sent an
Angel, who delivered the City and in one 2. Reg. 19. 35
night slew, 185000. of the Assyrians. When David 1. Cro. 21. 16.
numbered the people, and procured the wrath of God: God sent an Angel into
Jerusalem, who slew with the pestilence. 70000. of the people. So we have many
examples where, upon occasion, to one man God sends one Angel: even as it is
said of one that he came to comfort our Savior Christ in Luke. 22. 43
the garden. To Lot God sent two angels. So to the women that came to the grave
of our savior Christ two Angels appeared, and told them he was risen again.
When the Apostles looked after our Savior Luke. 24. 5
Christ at his ascension into heaven, two Angels appeared unto them, to teach
them what they had to Acts. 1. 10.
do. When God would destroy Sodom and Gomorth, he sent three Angels to Abraham
to tell him Genesis 18.
of it. In the vision that Ezechiel had of the destruction of the city, God
sends out six Angels to execute Ezech 9. 1.
that judgment. And why is all this diversity? to the end (no doubt) we
should not be curious, but rest in the doctrine which the Lord taught us, that
the Angels are his ministers, for their safety who shall inherit his Kingdom.

Against this doctrine, as many have offended: so among all, there is none
which have sunken down so deep in folly, as the Papists have done. First they
have made to every country a peculiar and proper Angel: a thing altogether
strange from the word of God, and a mere imagination of their own head: And
the reason wherewith some would prove it, is nothing worth, though I grant
some Godly men do not utterly reject it: for they say there is named in
Daniel, the Prince of Persia, the Prince of Dan. 10. 13.
Graecia, meaning the Angels, particular governors of those countries. In
deed the Aramites might so have understood it, which did think, there were
some Gods of the mounteines, other some of the valleys: but Christian men that
read the Prophets, should know that in the next Chapter, Daniel him self
expounds, that those Princes were the Kings of those countries. And in deed
this is not the opinion of the Prophets or of the Prophets children: but it
came first from the old idolatrous Gentiles, who from the beginning had this
fancy, and made Noe him self whom they called Vertumnus to be Var. lib. 1. de
ling. lat.
the Angel, or country God of Hetruria, and from that day to every nation,
they made every patron even as they would.

Again, they teach that particular men have their particular Angels: one
good, an other bad: and some good men dare not utterly condemn this opinion:
but sure to me it is an heresy not much unlike the M^nicheies, who taught
that every man was violently drawn to do good or evil by a good spirit or
evil, which equally of them selves had rule in man: for what vanity is it,
when I know that Gods commandment is to all his Angels to have charge over
me, for me to seek whether any one have a particular charge! Or what comfort
can I have in it, except I think Gods commandments are some of light account,
some in earnest? Or except I think it is with Angels as it is with men, that
which is cared for of all is cared for of none? Besides this, it is a thing not
agreeing to the similitude of God and of his Saints: for Gods love is one over
all with out respect of persons, and our duty is to all our fleash, of what
nation or country so ever it be. A difference (I grant) there is, of
magistrates, parents, masters, kinsfolk, etc. which makes our fault more or
less: but this only is according to the age of men, a thing not incide^t unto
Angels. But they have also reasons to prove this is true: and first they
allege that Christ says of his little ones, their Angels see all ways the
face of my father which is in heaven: therefore every one has his angel. I
meruel wise men can like of this reason: for seeing they argue upon this,
because they are called their Angels, and are so named because of the
ministry which they have for their safety, may not these words as well
stand, though the Angels be appointed al over all, as if they had charge every
one over one? Nay does not the scripture thus expound it, when it says of
every one of those little ones, when they turn from their sins, that all
the Angels rejoice at it? But an other reason they have, where the disciples
being astonished at the news of Peter's coming, as they are amassed, they say
it is not he, it is his Angel. Sure this must needs be a slender truth that
has no better proof then the Disciples words: when they are amassed and know
not what they say. So we might prove that Saints might dwell in Tabernacles:
because Peter said Lord let us make Tabernacles, one for Moses, an other for
Elias. So we might think that dead men walk, because the Disciples astonished
at the sight of men, thought sometime that they were goastes. If it be said,
yet they spoke after common opinion of men, be it so: so was it the common
opinion, that dead men did walk, as appears by Herod, who thought our
Savior Christ was John Baptist risen again from the dead. And what if that
place were as clear as they could wish it, why might I not expound it, it is
his Angel, that is, some Angel which God has sent for his deliverance, this
being according to the scripture, more then that to have it his peculiar Angel:
but let this go an error as it is, had it never so great patrones: and let it
appear more manifest by the error which it draws with it, that likewise
every man has an evil Angel: for what reason has that when we know that
into one was a Legion entered? Let this also therefore go, even to the Gentiles
from whom it came. The first author of it, that I read of, was Empedocles the
Plut. in vita M. Anton^.
Philosopher, who as (Plutarch says) taught it, that every man had two
Angels, one good, another bad: and the Grecians have a common verse which they
use in manner of a proverb: Every man has his own Angel to be the (...) of
all his life. And so when Brutus was slain, the night before one appeared Plu.
de animi tranqu.
unto him, and said: I am thine evil Angel o B^utus. But beside these things
which I confess, some wisemen have believed, the papists have gone much
further, and have told us of the shape and figure of Angels: what color they
have: how big they be: of how many orders: what difference of each degree:
and many other things which I mean not here to touch, as things more worthy
to be forgotten for ever, then once with good reason to be confuted.

For if Moses by inspiration knowing the original of the world, how it was:
yet had it not revealed what to write of Angels. If Stephan, that saw ye
heavens open: yet saw not these orders of Angels what they were. If Paul, who
was taken up in the third heavens, saw yet so little of Angels, that who so
ever will teach so curiously of them, he says they be puffed up of a fleshly
mind, to speak of things which they never saw. If John in all his high
revelation, had no such knowledge revealed of Angels: Col. 2. 18.
who is the Pope, or what is his parentage, that in these things we should
believe him? In deed, to get him credit in greater folly then this, that
unchaste counsel of Laterane writes: that the Pope has Sess. 10.
authority over all powers in Heaven: But all the world knows now, such
witnesses have taught their tounges to lie.

One doubt may here arise, touching the degrees of Angels, because they will
seem to allege scripture for it. And first they say: The Prophet Ezechiel
describing the glory of the King of Tyrus, he names nine precious stones,
which are in his garment: in which place, he names the same King Cherub,
comparing him with the Angels: therefore these stones signify nine orders of
Angels.

The second reason is, that there be nine several names, with which Angels are
called in y^ scripture: principalities, rules, powers, dominions, thrones,
Cherubim, Seraphim, Angels, and archangels: therefore there be nine orders.

A third reason they draw out of this, because there is named Angel and
Archangel: in which names, is manifest difference of degree: therefore there
are nine diverse orders of Angels. Touching the first argument of the nine
precious stones of the King of Tyrus, it is nothing but folly: for what though
he were compared to Angels in glory, because his garment was full of precious
stones, does it therefore follow, that as many kind of stones as were in his
gown, so many orders there should be of Angels?

If I saw a man clothed in rich colors, and many jewels about him: so that
I would say, he shines like the Sun: must it needs follow that as many
colors as are about him, so many colors are in the Sun? But the thing is
all false, the king is not compared there to Angels: but because the Cherubims
that covered the Mercy seat, were of beaten Gold and excellent
woorkemanshipp, with them that King is compared, and called the covering and
the anointed Cherub: so that the nine precious stones must be nine orders of
Cherubims upon the mercy seat, or nine orders of clothing.

Now, where they say, there are nine several names of them: therefore nine
orders.

First, that is false: for here the Apostle out of the Prophet, alleges two
names more: spirits, and flaming fire. They are called in Job, ye sons of
God: so by this account there must be twelve orders of Angels. Or if they will
say, these names are common to all Angels: so is (I am sure) the name Angel,
which yet they make one particular order: therefore, if the community of the
name take away the particular order, then are there but eight orders: if not,
then are there twelve.

But touching these names, it is no doubt, they are so named according to our
understanding: as we see the great glory and power of God to appear in them,
that we might give him the praise of his work, and not imagine so precisely, a
just number of the orders of Angels. And this is most clear in Paul him
self, when he had reckoned up principalities, rules, powers, dominions, he
adds: And every name that is named in this world, or in the world to come: a
clear sentence of his own modesty, in confessing a holy ignorance of the
state of Angels: and such as should move us to sobriety, to say with S.
Augustine, The difference of these degrees I confess I know not: if any man
will say he knows it, let him speak: but let him prove that he speaks. And
in deed, very reason inforceth thus much, that none knows the difference: for
the names are such as we cannot make any good distinction between them: and
the same names are given also to the devils, that we should be sure, they note
no order, but Ephe 6. 12. Col. 2. 16.
rather signify the power that is in them. Now, for their third argument, that
there are Angels and Archangels, manifest words of degree: first this wants
much in account to make ix. orders: then I say, and it can hardly be confuted,
that wheresoever the name Archangel is mentioned, it signifies our Savior
Christ, and no creature. Or, if it be attributed to a creature, he that in one
work is called an Angel, in another work of greater glory in our eyes, he
may be there called an Archangel: yet I will not define any thing, neither dare
I affirm, that all Gods Angels are of equal glory. I have not climed into
the Heavens, to know such things: but this I know, that all this proves
nothing a diversity of thus many orders. Therefore, now to leave to speak of
things unprofitable to seek after: let us see, what true comfort God gives us
in this place.

The Angels, of whom so much we have spoken, and whose honor is such, that
seeing our Savior Christ exceeds them, the Apostle here proves, he is the
GOD of glory. In that, I say, these Angels serve for our safety: how great is
our saftie? And what shall we render unto God for this salvation? It were
exceeding love, to give to any man a guard of men about him: it were more to
give him a guard of princes. But what are men? what are princes? what are
Kings in respect of Angels, whom God has made to pitche about us? Not one of
us this day, that are Christ's, but have his Angels to keep us in our way.
What princes glory can now dazell our eyes, except we know not our selves?
How can we envy earthly blessings of houses, lands, servant, to abound
unto our brethren, except we be ignorant what God has done for us? How can we
fill our lives with any strange concupiscence of things which God has holden
back from us, if we believe what excellent treasure of his angels he has given
us? If his Angels be ours, how truly may we say with Paul: Let us not
hereafter glory in men: for whether if be Paul, or whether Apollo, or whether
Cephas: whether it be the 1. Cor. 3. 12.
world, whether life or else death: whether they be things present, or else to
come: all is ours.

And why should we now fear to be shodd with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, and go boldly whether truth, faith, holiness, duty calls us? What
if the world break with hatred, or men swell in malice against us, are the
Angels driven back with vain threatenings? Or, what if we do fall before the
enemy and he prevail against us (as it happened to our Savior Christ him
self) is this a want in Angels that watch over us? Or is it not rather the
good will of God, that we should dye with Christ, the sooner to reign with him?

Last of all, now let us know how this glory is given us: not of our selves,
but as we are members of Christ: for to him it does properly belong, who is
our head. He is the ladder which Jacob saw in a Genesis 28. 12.
dream, reaching from Heaven to Earth: and the Angels ascending and descending
by it, as him self plainly expounds it, saying to Nathaniel, that he should
see the heavens open, and the Angels ascending and descending upon the son
of man: so that this honor is ours, as we be Christ's: to him it apperteineth,
and to us it is given, as we be made members of his body by faith. And thus
far of angels.

Now let us pray, that it would please God our heavenly father, of his
gracious goodness, to lighten our understanding into all knowledge and wisdom
of his word, that we may be careful because of our enemies, lest at any time
we fall into temptation: and that we may be bold in Jesus Christ, who sits
at the right hand of his father, till he make all our enemies his fotestoole:
and who has given us his good guard of Angels, that we might see his love, and
know our honor, that so we may consecrate our selves to set forth his praise,
and walk before him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life,
who is our only Savior, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be glory
for ever,

Ame^.
The seventh Lecture, upon the 1. 2. 3. and 4. verses of the 2. chapter.
1 WHerefore, we ought diligently to give heed to the things which we have
heard, least at any time we run out.

2 For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every trangression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward.

3 How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us by them
that heard him.

4 God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will?


WE have heard before, how that the Apostle, after he had set it down that
Christ was the Prophet of the new Testament, that we might truly give him this
glory, straight he magnifieth his person by many titles, and by comparison
with Angels, proueing unto us that he is very GOD. Now to show more clearly,
for what purpose all those praises of Christ were rehearsed, himself makes
his conclusion in the beginning of this second Chapter: that therefore we
should most carefully hearken unto him alone. And this is the first part of
this Chapter, before the Apostle came (as I told you) to prove that our
Savior Christ is also perfect man. In this exhortation, first the Apostle
sets down his doctrine, then his reason by which he will persuade us unto
it: his doctrine is this.

That it behooves us now, more carefully to hearken to the words of Christ,
then before time it behooved our forefathers to hearken to the law of Moses. For
where he says, We ought more diligently: he makes this comparison plainly
with the fathers in the old law in the second verse following. And here we
must wisely consider, why he says: We ought to be more careful then they: not
that they might remitt any care: for expressly they are charged with all care,
to add nothing, to take away nothing, to change nothing, not to depart
neither to the right hand nor yet to the left, but day and night, at home and
abroad, to do always this, to study it continually without intermission, as
appears in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. and 5. 32. and 6. 6. and 11. 18. and 12. 32. and 28.
14. Ios. 1. 8. and 33. 6. and many other places. Nor it is not said that we be
more bound then they, as though the authority of God were changed: but this
is spoken after our sense, because now Christ has spoken by himself: then by
angels: now plainly: then in figures: therefore we ought more carefully to
hearken, not that all care ought not to be in them as well as in us: but because
our punish meant shall be more then theirs, even as we shall be despicers of the
greater grace.

After this, the Apostle adds his reason to persuade us to this especial
carfulness, above all other people, to hearken to the voice of Christ: and
that is, of the peril that insueth: Least (says he) we run out. The Apostle
uses a Metaphore taken of old tubbes, which run out at the joints, and can
hold no liquour. In such a phrase of speech one says of him self: I am full
of creuisses or little holes, and I flow out on this side and on that: meaning
thereby, that every vain thing which he heard, he would blab it out: so
we, if we take into us the sweet wine of the word of Christ, as into old
bottels and broken vessels, that it run out again, we become then altogether
unprofitable, all goodness falls away: and we be as water powered upon the
ground. This Metaphore the woman of Tekoa used to David, when in describing an
utter desolation of the people, she said: We are as water spilt on the ground
which cannot be gathered up again. And David him self describing the
extremity of all misery. 2. Sam. 14. 14.
which was come upon him, he said: I am like water powered out, and all my bones
are out of joint. Likewise, when he prays, yt all the plagues of God may fall
upon the wicked til they be consumed to nothing, Psalm. 22. 24.
he says thus. Let them mealt like the waters, let them pass away. So the
Apostle, noting the extreme Psalm. 58. 8.
peril, and ine^table death that is in neglecting the word of Christ, this
glorious son of God, he says, Take heed lest we be poured out: meaning as
water powered on the ground, and is never after profitable any more. And if you
will see an example, what this flowing away means: behold the Jews this
day, to whom it is threatened: A despised people, whose very name is as a
curse: so they have flowed out and are come to ruin: if their example do
make us wise, then this exhortation of the Apostle is not to us in vain.

It follows in the second and third verse: For if the word spoken by Angels
etc. salvation. In these words the Apostle aggrauateth his reason, and forces
it the more to fear the people. He uses to this end an argument of the
comparison before made between Christ and the Angels: that if the law given
by angels, were not broken without severe punishment, because it was given by
such glorious spirits: how much more shall we be punished, if we despise this
great salvation, preached by the son of God? That the law was given by
Angels, the scripture here is plain. Moses says of the delivery of it: The
Lord came with ten thousand of Saints. And S. Paul Deu. 33. 3.
says expressly the same. Gal. 5. 19. And Saint Stephan likewise, Act. 7. 53.
And how can it be otherwise? For when there was in the mounteine, thunders,
lightenings, tempests, fearful sounds of a trumpet, and the voice of a man
heard: I am the Lord Exodus 19. 16
thy God that brought thee etc. what could this be but the ministry of
Angels? For it must needs be true, which our savior Christ says: No man has
heard the voice of God at any time: Neither then could the John. 5. 37.
majesty of God speak, but the voice of his mouth would have shaken unto
nothing, both men and mounteine, and all the elements that were before him.
For how can corruption stand in his presence?

If we doubt because of the words, that the voice says: I am the Lord thy
God: And again, in the third of Exodus, it says: I am the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaach, the God of Jacob: true it is, that our Savior Christ then
spoke, who is the God of glory: but he spoke not in the voice of his Godhead,
but in the likeness of an Angel, which he took upon him. For though it be
true, that he took not the nature of angels, nor was made one of them: yet in
his heavenly wisdom, he took upon him the likeness of an Angel, and
according to that nature, so spoke words: so that still this is true: The law
was given by Angels.

Where it follows here, that all transgression of that law was punished: no
doubt he respects the people of Israel in the wilderness, where of so many
hundred thousands, all died in their sins, except Caleb and Joshua, who were
of an other spirit: which fearful example of this people, is likewise
alleged by Saint Paul in the first to the Corinthians, the tenth Chapter:
to admonish the Corinthians, that by their example they should learn.

And where the Apostle adds, How shall we escape, if we despise so great
salvation? how true this is, we cannot doubt, if we will open our eyes this
day, and look about us. What is become of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Philippi, Colossos, Thessalonica: all which Paul so highly
commends? What is become of the churches of Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia,
Bithynia, to which Peter writes? What is become of Smyrna, Pergamus, Thiatyra,
Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodycea, y^ churches mentioned in the Apocalypse? In all
Asia, Graecia, Macedonia, Syria, Palestina, and many famous countries else,
where are now their churches? Yea, to come yet nearer home. What is become of
the Churches in many Countries and Islands, which our eyes have seen to
flourish? The famous kingdom of Hungary, the great Country of Liuonia, how
have barbarous tyrants laid them waste, that scarce one Church of Christ has
peace within them? These are the punishementes which God has executed, for the
contempt of his Gospel: and our eyes and the eyes of our children this day
have seen it. If we will not be warned, but do as we do, despise the Gospel,
more then all nations round about us: suffer mockers and scorners to make
their banquets among us: give leave to proud men to have their pleasures at
home: and come not once to the church in xiiii. or xv. year: let the wolves
loose, whose ravening teeth are yet red, and their bellies full with the blood
of Gods saints: if we will do greater abominations then these: I will not
appoint times and seasons, for so God has not sent me hither a Prophet: but as
the scourge will surely come, so I dare boldly say: The wiseman sees the
plague coming and hides him, but the fool goes on forward and is snared. It
follows in the Apostle in the 3. and 4. verse: Which at the first began to be
preached, etc.

The Apostle continues yet his reason, added to this exhortation of taking
heed to the Gospel which as he did before, of the excellency of Christ the
teacher of it: so repeating that, he adds also for the more glory of it, the
way and manner in which it was taught, respecting herein the glorious manner
how the law was given, lest thereby any should less regard the Gospel. And
this manner of teaching he magnifieth, first by the author, who was no Angel,
but the Lord himself: then by the minissters of it, who were not one, but
many: and every one in as honorable and assured a calling, as Moses himself.
Thirdly, that the preaching of it was with signs, wonders, powers, and sundry
special gifts of the holy ghost, even as it pleased God to distribute them: So
that they shall be without excuse all the despisers of it. Here some have
thought that this epistle can not be Paul's, because he says: They which heard
this Gospel of Christ himself they have confirmed it to us: which thing Paul
never says, but always stands upon this, that he received it by Revelation.
This reason is not unlikely, neither yet is it necessary: for S. Jude being an
Apostle, yet says: Remember the words which before this you have heard of the
Apostles. And as Paul would not lightly have spoken it in his own person, so
here his name being concealed, and making him self one with those to whom
he writes, he might well speak it. And it is not to be pretermitted, that he
says not, it was taught us, but, it was confirmed unto us, which might be said
even of Paul him self being confirmed by Ananias, and conferring with Peter,
James, John, etc. and many other ways. Therefore this is a thing still
doubtful, and whether it were Paul, or not Paul, we cannot tell. That he
says here of signs, woonders, and powers: he calls miracles, signs,
because they were testimonies and seals to us of the doctrine to be from God:
he calls them woonders, because they were strange, and showed an unwonted
work, not known of men: he calls them powers, because they had an evident
proof of the power of God: the sundry distributions of the spirit, he
calls the extraordinary gifts, which followed those that did heleeue, as
our Savior Christ promised, and whereof S. Paul speaks at large, 1. Cor.
12. And thus the Apostle ends this exhortation; that we would carefully
hearken to the Gospel given by Christ, Mark. 16
preached by the Apostles, confirmed by the gifts of the holy ghost, whose
contempt God our heavenly Father will most assuredly revenge.

Now let us examine again the words, and apply them to our particular
instruction. In the first verse where it is said: we ought more diligently to
harke^ to the things that we have heard: we learn one lesson very necessary
for our time, and with which we may stopp the mouths of a great many papists,
when we reason with them about the study of the scriptures, how all men ought
to know them, if we allege the most clear places, as in the vj. of Deuter.
These Deu. 6. 6.
words shall be in thine heart: Thou shall rehearse them to thy children: thou
shall talk of them at home in thy house, and when thou art in thy way, when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up: Thou shall bind them for a sign
upon thy hands, and they shall be as a frontlet between thine eyes. Thou shall
write the^ in the entry of thine house, and grave them upon thy gates. These
and such like places, they have learned thus to answer: All that was meant in
y^ old law: now Christ has given the holy ghost to the church, and it can
not err, therefore we must hear her. Whether this be not wilfully to be blind
and see nothing, now judge, when you hear the Apostle making comparison,
namely between our fathers of the old testament and us, he says: that we
are more bound to the doctrine taught by Christ in his gospel, then all our
fathers to the law of Moses. But they say, God has given his holy spirit to
the church, to guide it in all truth. First I answer, this helps them
nothing: for it is a common argument which all sectaries and scismatiques may
like wise boast of it. But let them prove first that the church of Rome is the
church of Christ. Now touching this gift of Gods spirit, powered upon us, I
say it is a promise to the particular comfort of every one, that we shall
never fall from the grace and love of God: it is not a warrant generally to
all, that the church shall be ever in open rule and government and no blemish
within her: for how else could it be true that the scripture says, there
shall be an Apostasy of men from the faith: Iniquity shall have 2. These. 2.
Matthew. 24. Apoc. 13.
the upper hand: No man shall have the libertieof his life, but he that takes
on him the mark of the beast. And I would feign know of them, whether the
church under the law had not also this promise: Says not God by his Prophet
Esaie? My spirit which Esa. 59. 20.
is upon thee, and my words which I will put in thy mouth shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy sede, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed after thee from hence forth for ever more. What a glorious promise is
this? Should now the Scribes and Phariseis rise against Christ, as they did,
and say they could not err, they had the holy ghost, they were the church?
Nay, they were not the seed of Esaie, but y^ seed of murderers that killed
Esaie and the prophets: so these me^, they are not the children of God, but of
the man of sin, which exalts him self against God: and under pretense of
the spirit of God, blasphemeth the Gospel: which only the spirit has taught
us: and that he blasphemeth the gospel, I may say it boldly, and let them blame
me if they can: for does not the Apostle say here? All our care must be to
obey the gospel. And do not they say, that the Pope can dispense against the
gospel, against the Apostle, against the prophet, against the old and new
testament, against the law of God and nature? Only one thing can here possibly
be said: that they do grant all this care of the Gospel ought to be had, but
the gospel say they is not only the written word, but many other unwritten
verities taught by Christ and his Apostles, and therefore we are bound to
hold them. I beseech you (dearly beloved) mark these men's sayings a little
with me, and judge then with the spirit that God has given you. They say the
word written in deed we must keep, because it is of God: and so likewise
Christ and his Apostles preached things never written: which yet preached by
them, ought to have the authority of Christ himself. It cannot be denied, but
what Christ and his Apostles preached, it was the word of God, equal with all
writings of Apostles and Prophets. But tell me, is it the word of Christ
written, that we should not worship Angels: and is it the word of Christ
unwritten, that we should pray Col. 2.
unto them? Is it his word written, that we should not be bound to our
forefathers traditions: and is it his word unwritten, that our fathers
traditions should be to us as his Gospel? Is it his word written that we
should not observe days and times, nor make conscience of meat and drink:
and is it his word unwritten that we should keep Lent, Aduent, Imberdayes,
make difference of flesh and fish? 1. Tim. 4. Hebr. 13.
Is it his word written, that to forbid marriage, which is honorable in all
estates, it is the doctrine of devils: and is it his word unwritten, that
ministers shall be forbidden to marry? Is it his word written, that five words
in a known tongue are better in the 1. Cor. 14.
congregation, then v. thousand in a strange language: and is it his word
unwritten, that in all congregations, they shall have a strange language, and
speak all in Latin, which the people understand not? Is it his word written,
that the dead are blessed which did in the Lord, and they, rest from their
labor: and is it his word unwritten, that they are tormented in the fire of
purgatory? And yet to come nearer, is it his word written, that his
ministers should be subjects to kings, should be no Lords, should have Romans
13. 1 Luke. 22 1. Tim. 5. 1. Pet. 5.
no civil government, should attend upon their own flock: and is it his
word unwritten, that the Pope should displace kings, that he should have a
triple crown, y^ his bishops, so many should be secular princes, y^ they
should have more churches under the^ then ever they once looked on? Has God
written it, that Christ sacrificed himself once for all, and Hebr. 9.
made a perfect redemption: and has he left it unwritten, that a shaven priest
must sacrifice him every day and say a mass propitiatory for the quick and
the dead? What perverseness is this of men of a corrupt mind, thus to imagine
traditions, contrary to the word of God? But I will tell you: Esaie
prophesied well of these men, saying: This people draws nere unto me with
their mouth, and honor me with their lips, Matthew. 15. 8.
but their heart is far from me, but in vain they woorship me, teaching
doctrines, which are precepts of men.

They say, if we believe no traditions of our Fathers, why do we believe this
is the Scripture? And here every one obtrudeth S. Augustines saying: I would
not believe the Gospel except the authority of the Church moved me. If this
had been Augustines meaning, we would have answered him again^, that we will
believe the Gospel though all the churches in the world would deny it. But
Augustine speaks in y^ person of one that yet knows not God, as of him
self, when he was a Manicheie. To what purpose here would you allege Paul or
Peter, to one that knows not whether Paul or Peter were of Christ or not
Therefore how so ever Augustine spoke in this, either well or ill, his saying is
nothing to our purpose. But touching the scripture, seeing these men do cry so
loud, that they can not know them but by the church: I say again Ioh. 10.
27. and 5.
to them, that out of their own mouths we may judge them: for Christ his
sheep know his voice, and do sollowe him, and they do not know the voice of a
stranger, but flee from him. And touching this question, I will not answer it
by S. Augustine, but by a better man. S. Paul answering the like question,
says thus: In deed our eye has not seen, nor our 1. Cor. 2. 10.
ear heard, nor our heart conceived, how to judge this, but the spirit of
GOD has revealed it unto us. Mark (dearly beloved) the Papists say, they
know the Scriptures, because their eye does see where is the sea of Rome, that
has kept them, and so their ears have heard their fathers say: These are
they. But S. Paul says, their eyes are blind, their ears are deaf, their
heart is dull: all these cannot judge the Scriptures. Will they say now unto S.
Paul, then they will never believe them, if they cannot know them by the
church? Let them rather be wise and learn of Paul, that God has given us his
spirit, by which we should know the things that are of God, and of this I dare
assure them, they cannot so discern the light with their eyes, nor any sound
with their ears, as they discern the scriptures by Gods spirit: for if we be
regenerate by this spirit, the law of god is not now hid, nor it is not far
from us, y^ we should say: Who shall ascend up, or who shall desce^d down? Deu.
30. 10.
but the word is nigh us, even in our mouth, that we should speak it: and in
our heart, that we should know it. With this spirit, the Prophet David says:
I have known long since by thy testimonies, that thou Psalm. 119. ^52.
have established them for ever. And this spirit makes us see in the
scriptures a doctrine without all earthly thoughts, the wisdom of man boldly
troaden down, more force to move in plain speech, then in all the eloquence
of Tullie and Demosthenes, a doctrine which alone has stood ever in honor,
when all other doctrines have been worn out with time: a doctrine which has been assaulted with ten thousand imaginations of men, and yet abides pure with
out all infection of falsehood: this the spirit of God makes us see in the
scriptures, more clear (as I said) then we see the Sun light with our eyes:
and the word of God has all his credit in it self, it needs not the church,
and it will not have the Pope to bear witness with it. Now (dearly beloved)
if any of you feel not this warrant, in reading the word of God, ask of him
that gives, and vpbraydeth no body, and you shall understand all that I have
said. Set your heart upon it: love it with all your soul. Change your selves
with reading into those affections, in which you see every place written, and
you shall percelue, Solomon is your good warrant. Seek after wisdom, as you
seek after silver, and you shall find it. Thus much I thought good to say
unto you, by occasion of this earnest exhortation of the Apostle to hearken
diligently to the Gospel of Christ.

He says after: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Let us
note here, that the Apostle calls all transgression of the word of Christ,
the neglecting of so great salvation. We must not look till men either speak
open blasphemy, or do all things to the open dishonor of God, as men
manifestly given up to reprobate senses. All sinners did never fulfill one
measure of iniquity: but we see in the Gospel, as well he is condemned that
hides his talent in the ground, and does no good with it: as the other that
wasted his masters goods and lived riottously with drunkards and gluttons.
Even so it is with us: a great number of us will not blaspheme the Gospel as
Papists do, and call them which profess nothing but it alone, scismatiques,
heretics, Lutherans. etc. A great number of us hate the known sins of
many adulterers, drunkards, oppressors, dissemblers, flatterers etc. but be
not deceived, surely this is not enough: if we do but neglect the Gospel, how
can we escape? The law given by Angels, forbad not only the open breaches of
it, but it also required of us, that we should love it: that we should delight
in it that it should be more dear unto us then all our jewels or other
ornaments. How much more the word spoken by the son of God, must we not
only, not openly transgress against it: but also how ought we to love it, how
to delight in it, how to account all things but doung in comparison of the
excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ, that we may know him and the power of his
resurrection and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made like unto his
death, trying how we may Phil. 3. 10.
come to the resurrection of the dead? This (dearly beloved) must be our life,
and we must be as men, who have both dwelling and freedom in the heavenly
Jerusalem, to rejoice in the Lord, and always rejoice. For, if other we be of
a dull spirit, that we have no joy of our hope, or when we taste a little, if
it be straight forgotten, so that the Prophets words be true in us: That our
righteousness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes away: it is
with us according to the common proverb, As good never a whit, as never the
better: and all our Religion is in vain: for a spirit of slumber has
overtaken us. And though we draw not our sins after us, as with cart ropes:
yet we do neglect the great salvation of Christ. This I say that we might
stir up the grace of God that is in us, not once to be negligent in the care
of the Gospel: but that it may ever be unto us, as it is in deed, a promise of
gladness, the pleasure of our youth, the comfort of our age, that all our
days may be in peace.

It follows in the fourth verse: God bearing witness unto it with signs
etc. Here we learn that all signs wrought by God, serve to the setting out
of the Gospel.

The Apostle speaks plain, and we must needs hear: in all the signs that
are wrought by God, he bears witness with them to the Gospel of his son.
And our savior Christ him self is the first scholemaister of this doctrine:
for when he sends out his Apostles to preach, he gives them their charge to
preach: that The kingdom of heaven is at Matthew. 10. 8.
hand: and he gives them this warrant of the doctrine: Heal the sick,
cleanse the lepres, etc. And where Mark. 28. 6.
no opportunity was to teach the doctrine, he gives them charge there, not to
tell of any miracle done: so that assuredly we know, those that are true
miracles which strengthen the word, and all other are illusions of Satan,
whose end is superstition. A notable testimony of this truth, God him self
gives in his law, where he says plainly: If a prophet Deuteronomy. 13. (...).
come unto you, and work signs and woonders, though they have never such
effect, and be unfeigned: yet if that Prophet call you out of the way in
which God commanded you to walk, thou shall not believe that Prophet, but
thou shall sley him: for they are no signs and tokens in which thou art
justified: but the word of God is the seed of thy new birth, and the milk
with which thou art nourished to be a perfect man of God.

If signs and woonders carry away thine eyes, that thou should not see the
Gospel: cursed are y^ signs, and thou too that beleeuest, if thou turn not
again from such snares of Satan. And let us here (dearly beloved) carefully
beware, for our dangers are exceeding: you know how the vain heart of man is
not a little moved with every show of a wonder: if it be but a iuggler, whole
heaps will go after him, and be partakers of his sin.

If there come to pass any vn^yonted thing, rumor straight inlargeth it, and
carries it far and wide. The devil seeing this vanity of our mind, abuses
straight our foolish simplicity, and with many idle signs and shows, he
carries us in deed into deadly blindness. Of this our Savior Christ
warns us, and biddes us beware: for there shall come deceivers, Matt. 24. 24.
which will show great signs and wonders, able to seduce, if it were possible,
the very elect. And S. Paul foretelling the coming of antichrist, he says:
that through the working of the devil, he shall show 2. These. 5. 2 9
all power, and signs, and lying wonders. Even as it was ever from the
beginning, so it is: with strange things we have been delighted, and with
strange things we have been deceived. How Iannes and Iambres by many miracles
held the people of Egypt in continual idolatries, we may see in the book of
Exodus. How the Assyrians and Persians had their soothsayers and charmers, who
wrought them miracles, and held them in error, the scripture in many places
bears witness. And how all nations of the earth by miracles and wonders were
made idolaters, and worshipped before stocks and stones, all stories bear yet
record. Augustine says the Donatistes did glory of their miracles. Jerome
says that the Egyptians, when they were stung with serpe^ts, August in Ioh.
tract. 13 Iero. in prefat. in Iere. Ambros. sermon. de Agnes.
would go sacrifice at Ieremies sepulcher, and they were healed. Ambrose says
y^ all me^ were healed of all diseases, as many as came to y^ tumb of S. Agnes:
to be short, the fathers themselves here began to be blind, and their
posterity far exceded the^: til antichrist at last with lying signs got him
great victories: and by such miracles from the top to the toe all stands. A
miracle made S. Peter to be crucified at Rome: for (as Ambrose reports it)
when he fled away, Christ met him at y^ gate, at whose sight Peter being
astonnished, talked with him, and perceived Amb. Epis. 23. Amb. in Psalm. 40.
that Christ would have him go back and be crucified, and so he dyed at Rome,
then because Ambrose says: Vbi Petrus ibi Ecclesia, Where Peter is there is
the church, ever since the Pope has been head of the church. When this was
gotten by a miracle, then al things came apace by many miracles: we learned
Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the mass, prayer for the dead, going
a pilgrimage, holy water, holy bread, oil, candels: to be short, all and
for every point of Popery sundry miracles done: yea the very dregs of
miracles, in milkepannes and greasy dishes, by Robin goodfellowe, and Hags,
and Fayries, all wrought somewhat for their idle superstitions, that at this
day we should know their mysteries by their lying woonders. But we know all
the miracles of God are to confirm his word, other signs neither we nor
our fathers have known none. And now that y^ use of miracles is performed unto
us, and we do believe the Gospel, in token that our says is accepted of God:
now he has taken signs from us, which served us before when we were
unbelieving. And surely our faith is never so honorable, nor God so well
pleased with us, as when we have said both to heaven and earth, we seek no
signs from them, when the word of God has such a persuasion in our hearts,
that we have now taken hold of all the good promises of God, and said unto
miracles, Get you hence. The Jews seek a sign (says S. Paul:) surely we
that be Christians seek for none: when they were offered of God, he showed his
compassion upon our infirmity, now he has taken them away, he shows greater
mercy y^ he accepts our faith: and let us hearken to y^ word of Christ, by
it we shall live: if we believe it not, we would not believe all miracles in the
world, no though dead me^ should rise to preach unto us. For great miracles
have been already done, not only by the Apostles, but by Christ him self, to
confirm his word: if we believe not them, it is to to much childishness to
think we would believe other. Signs were when doctrine was more obscure: now
it is so clear the signs are gone. The son of God once revenged the
transgression of his law, with the earth opening, with waters, with fire, with
hurlewindes, that the people might fear: he does not so now; because his
threatenings have been heard of all flesh: Go ye cursed into eternal fire: a
voice that pearceth between the marowe and the bones, with greater fear then
the rage of earth or water. And Christ once showed loving signs to make his
people put their trust in him: but now he has spoken into our hearts: Come ye
blessed of my father into everlasting life: a voice that goes deeper into the
soul and spirit, then the hearing of all the miracles, by which Israel was
lead into the land of Canaan. And we shall do injury to our Savior Christ, if
now we will ask, that to these words he should add miracles: for if we bring
says to that which is spoken, it will fill our hearts with all fullness, and
will sell the sight of all the miracles in the world, to buy but one grain of
a constant says in Christ, wherein who soever shall stumble, let him accuse him
self if God giu^ over to his own blindness, that because he had no love to
believe the truth, therefore he should be ledd with lies and deceiuable things.
Thus much I thought to speak of miracles, that we might be wise to know them
as they be, and from henceforth for ever put our only trust in the word of our
Savior Christ, which only in the world is y^ power of God to save all that do
believe. Now let us pray, etc.

The eighth Lecture, upon the 5. 6. 7. 8. verses, unto: But we yet see, etc.
5 For he has not put in subjection unto the Angels the world to come, whereof
we speak.

6 But one in a certain place witnessed, saying: what is man that thou
should be mindful of him? or the son* of man, that thou would consider
him?

7 Thou made him a little inferior to the Angels: thou* crownedst him with
glory and honor, and have set him* above the works of thy hands.

8 Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. And in that he has
put all things in subjection under* him, he left nothing that should not be,
etc.


IN the last verse before, the Apostle had said, that God gave witness to the
Gospel of his son, with signs and wonders, and diverse, miracles and gifts
of the holy Ghost, according* to his own will.

The words now that follow depend upon these, as I judge in this sense:
According (I say) to his own will, for God has not put in y^ hands, no not of
his Angels, to dispense the riches of his new testament, to whom they will: but
this is the glory of his son, according to the prophesies gone before of him:
and therefore let us carefully hearken unto his word: So this is an other
reason added unto his exhortation. Now let us examine his words, to se how this
sense is gathered of them. He begins: For God has not submitted to Angels,
etc. This word (for) renders ever a cause of the speech before: so that here
we must needs so refer it: his last words were, According to his own
will: and why he said so, he shows: because God has not given it, no not
to Angels, that at their will these graces should be dispensed, but only by
the will of Christ. It follows, The world to come, of which we speak,
whereof the Apostle has spoken no man can doubt. All his speech has been to
bring us under the rule and government of Christ: then it is Christ's kingdom
which here he calls The world to come: which is through the power of the
spirit to renew the world, to kill in us the old man with all his
concupiscence, to quicken our soul and body into all righteousness, to
vanquishe sin, death, hell, and to establishe us in hope of perpetual
inheritance of the glory of God. This did our Savior Christ perfectly and
fully accomplish in his own person: and we by the same spirit, every one
according to the measure which he has received, so he does show forth this
victory. Thus the Apostle, when he had mentioned the gifts of Gods spirit,
comes into the speech of the kingdom of Christ, which by the gifts of that
spirit is set up in us, not according to the will of man, nor according to the
will of Angels, but as it has pleased God: and we if we will be partakers in it,
let us confess and serve the Lord Jesus, for he gives this blessinge to whom
he will.

It follows: But one testifies in a certain place: etc. that honor of
renewing of the world, which the Apostle before had denied to angels, now by
plain testimony of the prophet, he proves it to beelong unto Christ: and
where he begins thus: But one witnesses in a certain place, rather then
naming the prophet: both the unwonted speech better expresses the affection
of his mind, inflamed with the love of that whereof he spoke: and it is more
answerable with the words of the prophet, who not with usual speech, but with a
souden exclamation says: What is man that thou art mindeful of him? now
touching this saying of David, it is no doubt, but he spoke it in extolling
the goodness of God to all Mankind: both the words of the Psalm are plain,
in reckoninge up the benefits which apperteine to all men: and here the
Apostle expressly so understands it, in the eight verse, where he says: But
yet we see not all things subject unto him. How then is it applied unto Christ
rightly, truly, and according to the prophets meaning? for one thing let us
learn (which I have told you often) both of the prophets and of their
prophesies, they had a continual desire to see the days of Christ, and longed
after the time of his appearance, more then the chased Heart does long for water
brooks, or the fainte and thirsty soul longs for meat and drink, and
therefore had a delight even to speak of his coming, which they do often and
with glorious words, touching their prophesies: because they knew y^ all
benefits which God gave unto man, he gave them for Christ's sake who was only
beloved: therefore both in setting out benefits received, and foretelling the
blessings which God would surely bring upon them, in their words they had
respect to him, in whom all Gods promises were accomplished, and many times
uttered such speches, as could properly agree to no other but Christ alone, to
whom alone was given, and by whom we were partakers of it: so that, though
most of their prophesies had a truth of the present time, and incident unto
themselves: yet they are also truly and according to the prophets sense
applied unto Christ, by whom all goodness came upon them and us. So it is
here in this prophecy of David: the words then are true, and spoken of the
state of man as it was, but yet also are referred to Christ, because he is
author of it, and the only man to whom God gave this excellent glory, which
we also have, but through him: and that we may know thus the Prophet meant in
deed, he added these words: thou have made him a little while inferior to
Angels, thou have crowned him with honor and glory etc: which fully and wholly
agree to none but Christ. But of all this we shall have occasion to speak more
after. Thus we se how this prophecy is applied, out of which the Apostles
second argument of his exhortation is this. In the preaching of the word of
Christ, God has given us his kingdom, and eternal life, a glory which no
Angel could bring unto us: how then shall we not most justly be condemned, if
we contemn such a heavenly blessing? God has not made subject to angels the
world to come: the world present and the world to come.
we do here consider as it were two worlds, the one past and made by Adam,
which was sul of hatred, envy, rebellion, sorrow, shame, sin, death, and the
bondage of the devil: the other now restored by Christ, full of love, blessings,
obedience, honor, righteousness, life, and the favor of God: not
distinguishing these worlds by times, the one first, y^ other after: or making
any change of heaven, earth, or any creature, for they stand both together in
the light of the same sun and moon: but as in man are two estates y^ one of
Adam and natural, which is in death and condemnation: the other of Christ and
by grace, which is in life and salvation: so they are called the old world and
the new, which phrase is usual in the scripture: often when God speaks of
sending his son, he says thus: Lo I will create a new heaven, and a new
earth. Esa. 65. 17. and. 66. Esa. 9. 6.
And the 70. interpreters whom here the apostle follows, they call our
Savior Christ y^ Father of the world to come, because I say of this
restitutio^ which he makes in the world. And though the name properly be
given to these days in which the gospel is preached: yet the fruit and
benefit was also before: neither were Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, nor the other
Patriarchs and Prophets of the old world: but they also saw in spirit the
day of Christ, and were then of his kingdom, only the name is reserved to
us, because that blessing is now clearly revealed in perfect beauty, and
Christ the author of it has appeared as one of us, and dwelt among us in our
own nature. This world God has not put in subjection to Angels, that is, God
has not made his Angels neither purchasers, nor dispensers of this heavenly
treasure. It was never in their power to have done this thing. In vain we
should look for such blessing at their hands. If they should enter into this
work they would fall down under it, for it is not an Angel, but it is the
Son of God that shall change the world, which was in sin and shame, to
fashion it a new, into righteousness and glory.

This is a very good place out of which we may learn how to know our selves,
and all other creatures, and how to give unto Christ his own honor: for seeing
the world to come notes all the restitution which is by Christ, the full
change of all that ever was by sin, and therefore named World, because we
should assuredly know there is nothing excepted: if then no part of this
world be subject to any creature, and if it be Gods eternal counsel that it
should never be submitted to any, no not to Angels: in whom else can we
trust, or in what other thing can we put confidence, to have any part of this
wrought for us? We are all as our fathers were, men by nature of the old
world, our bodies and minds full of sin, holden under the condemnation of
the devil, all creatures against us, and God him self hateing us, no way to
renew our age, no man to change our state, no Angel but God has given it to
Christ alone. Will I say, that I can alter mine own will, to make it covet
goodness? Or put power into the members of my body to serve righteousness? Or
do the things in which is any merit to eternal life? Or purchase again Gods
favor which was removed from me? If I will boast of any of these, I speak too
proud words for either man or Angel, and say that this second world is made
subject unto me: all good will, all righteousness, al merit, al pleasure in
heavenly things, al reconciliation, all victory over death, all love of God,
all hope, to be short, all that is good, and all joy of spirit is of this new
world whereof Christ is king. And whosoever shall think, that any power of
these things is in himself, he is puffed up into pride of heart, such as an
Angel of Heaven should not bear unpunished: for not unto Angels, but unto
Christ these things are given. What can we now think of these men, that tell
us, the sacraments give us grace: the mass is propitiatory for our sins:
our submitting our selves to the Church of Rome shall save us: the Pope, if we
follow him, he can not err: Crosses, Bells, Candels, Holy water, Vestments,
Pilgrimage, Pardons, Relics, every one has his virtue: the number of
prayers has his measure of reward: flesh or fish it has his holiness
according to his time. These men, and all the lovers of their Gospel, which
take away from Christ the only rule of the world whereof we speak, and put it
in subjection to flesh and blood, and the elements of the world: what shall
we say of them? Shall we believe them? Or shall they prospet? Nay, they have
plowed wickedness, and they shall reap iniquity: they have wandered in
error, and they shall eat the fruit of lies.

Now, if this be so, that all flesh has no goodness in it: that all his
wisdom and travel can renew no whit of the lost world, or bring any light
into horror and darkness, but all is of Christ: what shall we yet do with
words of louder blasphemy, which they call works of supererogation? What
shall we do with the Pope himself, who by general voice of all his Church,
is said that he can dispense the abundance of merits which were in the
virgin Marie and in all Saints, by his bulls, to apply them Confessis and
contritis, that they shall have days of pardon as many as he will number? Are
they ashamed of these things? Nay, they are not ashamed: but even now they
lend us over whole volumes to show the fruit of pardons how good they are,
and of late have sent us a bull, that we should have experience how they hold
this doctrine.

And what shall we say of such a one? Surely (dearly beloved) even as the
Prophet says of the people of Israel: His formeations are in his sight, and
his adulteries are between his breasts: So his uncleanness is manifest to all
the world, and his mark is in his forehead, that he might be known to be
Antichriste.

And you (dearly beloved) when you talk with your friends, who are not yet
persuaded in the religion of Christ, when they think that we have free will,
or we may deserve by our works, or Lent and fasting days are holy, or flesh
or fish do please God, or the sign of the cross is good, or censing and
Music stir up devotion: or any such thing.

Do but ask of them whether they think obedience, love, devotion,
forgiveness of sins, purity, life, grace, and such other fruits of Gods
spirit and his mercy: ask (I say) whether they think them works of the
old world corrupt by Adam, or of the new restored by Christ? If they be of
the new, God has not given them, neither to our prayers, nor fasting, not
working, nor day, nor time, nor meat; nor cross, nor music, nor belles: to be
short, no not to Angels, but to Christ alone, to be dispensed according to his
will If thou were as good as an Angel, or thy meat as good as Manna that fell
from Heaven, or ^hy garments as precious as Aarons Ephod, or thy censinges as
sweet as the perfume of all the Tabernacle, or the days that thou keptst were
as honorable as the day in which Christ arose again from the dead: yet
neither thou nor thy garments, nor thy meat, nor thy days, can set one of
thy feet in this world we speak of: it is the kingdom of Christ, and be
has done it alone, according here as this prophecy is plain and manifest. ^
Now follows this prophecy, what it man that thou art mindful of him etc. by
these words the apostle pro ueth this kingdom of Christ both properly and of
right to be his, and also by faith through Gods spirit given unto us in our
Savior Christ: they have this sense: Was not thy glory great enough (O Lord)
in the work of thy hands, but y^ thou should give thy son to be made man,
in whom our nature should be so exalted, that al power should be given to him
in Heaven and in earth, who by his death should abolish all enimitie against
man, that he might be crowned with glory and majesty, and have eternal life
in his own hand? And all this according to the very sense of the prophet, and
therefore here alleged, as in deed it was, to be a prophecy of our savior
Christ. Of us also it is meant thus. The prophet considering both the great
majesty of God appearing in his works, and the base and low estate of a frail
man, that such a God of so great majesty, should have any respect of a frail
and wretched man, he could not but thus humble him self: What is man (O Lord)
that thou should regard him? Such thoughts (dearly beloved) let us have,
and with such secret counsels let us nourish our faith. This is the meditation
to which we are called in all the works of God, and for this cause God has
Meditation in the works of God.
given unto us hearts of men, full of reason and judgment, that we should
rightly consider of all his creatures. When we see the heavens, we cannot chose
but confess before them, it was not the hand of man that set them up so
high. We know the shining light of the sun, it is not given unto it from
earth or earthly thing, we are sure y^ earth is found: our own travel has
found it so, and our eyes do see the sun does compass it about: then what
strength of the world can make it stand in this wide empty space compassed
with the firmament? The sea that is so great and violent, who can stop the
proud waves of it, or make it keep his course to rise or fall? The devil may
for a while dull our hearts that we may be made like the horse and mule in whom
is no understanding, and think of chance and fortune, and we can not tell
what, so that for all these works we be never the better: but if the power of
the devil be broken, and we be carried out of the darkness that he has
scattered before us, our hearts shall see and feel it, and our tongs will
confess: The heavens declare the Psalm. 18. 1.
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie work: And not only in
these things which before the simplest eyes are great and merueilous, but in
every thing we shall learn wisdom. When we see the constancy that God
keeps with the day and night, which have their course for ever, we will see
much more y^ certeintie of his counsel, and the assured covenant that he has
made with his children. When we see how he cloatheth the flowers of the
fields, and feeds the young byrds that call upon him: much more we will know
that he will not leave his elect in their infirmities, but will cloathe their
nakedness, and minister food unto them.

And to be short, in all things we shall behold the goodness of God: and as
the Prophet David here does, above all works, we shall acknowledge his
goodness toward man, whom alone he cares for above all other: and whom alone
he has made ruler over all his creatures: with which thoughts wisely
conceived, it is impossible but we should be stirred up with thankfulness,
and with all our power show forth his praise, who has had so great mercy
upon us.

It follows: Thou have made him a little while inferior to Angels. In these
words y^ prophet breaks up this praise of Christ, with an acknowledgement of
his present state in earth, that if one should think: Where is all this glory?
Where is this honor he speaks of? Was not his life in much affliction? Least
any should be offended with this cogitation, he preuenteth it thus, as if he
had said: And thy son (o Lord) whom thou have exalted so highly, and given
us this glory through him, we confess thou did abase him, and made him a
while inferior to thine Angels, and gave him up unto death for thy peoples
sins: but thou did raise him again, and gave him honor and victory
over death and sin. The prophet Esaie, in the like purpose does notably set
out this great humbling Esa. 53. 2.
of our Savior Christ, not only beneath Angels, but beneath the lowest
condition of all men: and after shows how God would raise him up again above
all his enemies, that no man should be offended at his cross. And in this we
learn, that in deed he had experience of evil, he was in deed abased, in
deed bate our sins in his body, and was truly broken for our
transgressions: that in the feeling of his sorrow, we might the more sensibly
see what was all his love toward us. And for as much as the glory here
spoken of, is ours, as we be members of Jesus Christ, to whom it is given: we
learn here so to look for this glory, cue^ as our Savior Christ has
attained unto it before us. God humbled him unto a low degree, that he might
exalt him, our life must be as his, we must suffer with him, that we may come
unto his glory. Without him we are borne in anger, in him we be reconciled
through many afflictions. He that likes not thus to go unto glory, he may
lie down again in his shame, where Christ did find him, and make the world
witness of his unspeakable folly. And he that will murmur against these
afflictions in this way of life; which are no other then Christ him self did
suffer, a thousand-folde more then he has left them for us, let him leave his
redeemer, and dwell again in the bondage of death, that the Angels may beat
witness of an unthankful wretch.

But we (dearly beloved) as many as glory in the cross of Christ, we must
reloyce in afflictions, and think the reproach of Christ more honorable then
any ornaments of Gold and silver. Let us comfort our self in this, that
thought Christ were humbled, and our hearty desire is to bear the yoke with
him: yet his oppressiours live not ever. The seripture says: it is but a very
little while, that thus y^ Afflictions are but awhile.
have made him lower then Angels? even so are all our troubles, as a cloud
that is blown away, or as the dark night against the appearance of y^ Sun, a
very little while and they are no more. We may call it as Paul did, The
momentanie lightness of this affliction: or as Peter did, A little while now we
1. Cor. 4. 17
are made sorrowful: or as the Prophet David did, 1. Pet. 1. 6.
Heaviness may endure for a night: even so it is with us all, and what so ever
our troubles be, many in number, great in weight, grievous in circumstance, why
should we murmur? The Sun that shines, gives a salve unto them: the day
that vanishes, dries up the wound: and in a very little while it is quite
forgotten. A blessed medicine, that neither al Apothecaries can make worse with
drugges, nor all tyrants can keep it away with prisons, nor all frowardness
of the patient can make it of less virtue: but all afflictions, whatsoever
they be, they are healed with this: if we be humbled with Christ a very little
while, and all is cured. If this be not enough to prepare our hearts to
tribulation, that they are our leaders to a perpetual joy: nor this enough,
that Christ has tasted of them all before us, and we shall be like unto him: yet
this is enough, even for a froward man, that though all troubles do come upon
us; yet a very little while, and they are all consumed,

This is the goodness of God toward his church, he would not lengthen the
days of their life, into many hundred years, as he did at the first, when
his Church had greater peace: For if now we had such lives, it is
unspeakable, what should be the oppression of the godly, what tyranny, of
the wicked. How would they swell in pride, and tread the godly under foot,
if they should live many hundred years, that now do hate us to death and
beyond death, showing cruelty to our bones and ashes, when their own feet
stand at y^ graves mouth, and the earth is ready to swallowe them up? How
would the mighty men make us labor out all the strength of our body? the
covetous men make us pine with hunger? the ambitious men pour contempt and
shame upon us? if now, since their mind is so fraught with malice, their
bodies had also strength of a thousand years. But a short and frail life is
such a bridle in their jaws to pull them back, and death such a tyrant over
the^ to appall their courage, that they have no heart to do as they would: and
yet if they do rage as mad men, not seeing their end, yet God has had mercy
upon us, turning their plague into our blessing, and has given us but a short
life, least we should mourn too long: so that whatsoever temptations we fall
into, yet but a very little while, and the Lord will deliver us from evil: and
all our troubles have but a small reckoning, to the hinderance of our glory.
For it is but a while here that God has made us inferior to Angels.

It follows: Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, thou have set him
over the works of thine hands, thou Al things in subjection unto man.
have put all things in subjection under his fete. In all these words we learn
the exceeding honor unto which God has raised his son Christ. To be
crowned with glory and honor, is to have the excellency of al dignity given
unto him, as the words following in the Apostle do plainly expound it, where
he says: In that he put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing
not subject unto him. And in this, according to the Prophet, we must see our
own dignity also as we are Christ's: for this honor is not the natural
man's, as all the miseries of our life can testify: but it is his that sees
him self to be Christ's that can say as S. Paul says, I live not now, but
Christ lives in me: over such a one the providence of God watches, the
Angels pitch their tents about him, and he sees great security in all his
ways. Though the mounteines were moved, or the seas did make a noise, yet the
name of the Lord is his strong tower, and he shall not be moved: for GOD who
has made him Lord of all, makes that all things work to him for the best. If
at any time he seem afflicted to the world, it is but as a show or visard
that seems fearful, when the mild face of a man is underneath: so these are
but appearaunces without of a little mourning, when within is nothing but a
perpetual joy of the holy Ghost. S. Paul against those that are too much
troubled to behold our sufferings, he says thus: (I grant you) we are 2.
Cor. 4. 8.
wroung, but we are not crushed in pieces: we are troubled, but not at our
wits end: we are persecuted, but not forsaken: we are cast down, but we are
not killed: as if the Apostle should have said unto them: o, you think us in
great bondage, but our freedom is more then you are ware of. And in an other
place he notably sets out these afflictions of the godly, which the world
thinks to be so great, that men shrink back, and dare not look on them: I
will tell you (says Saint Paul,) we are as contemned persons, but in deed
honorable: as dying, but in 2. Co. 6. 9.
deed alive: as men chastised, but there is no death near us: lamenting, but
in deed perpetually rejoicing: as poor men, but in deed we make many other
rich: like men that had nothing, but in deed all the word is ours. So we see
how this is true in us, even now by faith, and after this in full perfourmance
of our inheritance with Christ, in the resurrection of the just: and thus, even
in outward things we are partakers of Christ's kingdom, so that nothing can
hurt us. Now touching y^ inward things, y^ is, a freedom of conscience above
al things: this we know, if we be ingrassed into ye body of Christ, we be his,
he lives in us, his victory over al is ours, we see it by faith, and all
thing is in subjection under our feet. Paul, Apollo, Cephas, things present,
things to come, life, death, the world it self, all is ours, the faith of
Christ exalts us, and has made us higher then the heavens. In heaven and
earth we have no Lord but the Lord Jesus, and all things are under his feet,
our faith has made us one with him, we are his, and all is ours: and no man
can now bear rule over our faith, except he will bear rule over Christ: by
faith we are one with him, his power is ours, we reign with him, we are risen
with him, and ye world has no more power over us. Will one com to us, and
forbid us flesh, forbid us whitmeat, command us fish? Hear it not, it is the
doctrine of devils. I speak not now of civil choice of meats, drinks,
apparel, etc. We be Christ's, and all meats are ours. Will he say, this garment
is holy, this day is fasting, this relic is to be honored, this order is
religious, this cross is defensive against the devil, this Cake is thy
Savior, this mass is propitiatory, this work is meritorious, this pope is
thy lawgiuer, this church of Rome is the warrant of thy faith: what shall we
say to such swine y^ lie wallowing in mire, and seek for righteousness in
dounge and clay, when Christ the son of God has offered us his righteousness?
What shall we think of such servile men, who will lead us into bondage of
every triflle, whom Christ has made rulers over all the world? For what is it
else to make me in bondage of things, then to bring me in this fear of them? I
may not touch them, I may not eat them, I may not use them: that will make me
holy, this will defile me, and such like. Is this y^ voice of Paul? To the
clean althings are clean? Is it ye voice of Christ? That which enters in at
the mouth Tit. 1. 15.
defiles not the man. Is this ye voice of ye Apostle in an Matthew. 15. 11
other place? You be bought with a price, be not the servants of men. No
(dearly beloved) if we have faith, and 1. Cor. 6. 20.
be of Christ, God our heavenly father has given us his own Son, sure with
him he has given us all things, we have received the liberty of the children
of God: and the conscience of a Christian man is no more in the power of all
the world, but that is only sin unto him which is the breach of the law of
(...). John. 3. 4.
God. Now, since this is the state of a Christian man, and thus all things are
in subjection under his feet, we see easily upon what ground our savior
Christ said: that The kingdom of heaven is like unto a precious stone, which
if a man find, he will sell all that he has to buy it: for all other riches,
of all dominions, they have their measure, only this treasure is infinite, and
has all things under it. Now let every man boast himself as he will, some
of chariots, some of horses, some of one thing, some of an other: but thou, if
thou will have perfect joy, boast thy self of a Christian heart. Neither the
gorgeous chambers of any princes palace, nor the rich iuell houses of the
earth are comparable in glory unto this: for what is it to be garnished with
gold, and silver, and vain sightes The heart of man is the richest of al
treasures.
of a corruptible eye, which in time consume, and the rust and canker frett
them away? But in thine heart which Christ has sanctified, there is greater
treasure then this. If thou look upon the earth, thine eyes are clear to see
from East to West, and all is thine, the stones in the street are at league
with thee, and the beasts of the field are at peace with thee. Let all the
tyrants in the earth lift up their hands against thee, they shall not find
any thing under heaven to do thee hurt: all creatures are sworn to thy
safety, and it is not possible for man to break their faithfulness: they can
do nothing unto thee but good. Look also without the bounds and compass of
Heaven and Earth, and with pure eyes thou see greater things then these:
thou see hell abolished, death trodden under feet, the first sorrow cast out
into shame, Saints and Angels are in thy sight, immortality has lengthened
thy days, and the glory of God is before thee in a glass. He that can build
thee such an other tabernacle, let him be thy God: and where else thou find
such treasure, there settle thy heart: or if this only be the greatest,
rejoice only in this: and pray for a sincere faith, that thou may in deed
see it, and have thy soul knit unseparably unto it: that thou may greatly
despise all other things, and say as the Prophet David said: What is man, that
thou art mindful of him? And thus far at this time. Now let us pray, etc.

The ninth Lecture, upon part of the 8. verse: and upon the 9. and 10. verses.
8 But we yet see not all things subdued unto him.

9 But we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, which was made a little
inferior to the Angels, through the suffering of death, that by Gods grace he
might taste death for all men.

10 For it became him, for whom are all these things, and by whom are all
these things: seeing that he brought many children unto glory, that he should
consecrate the Prince of their salvation through afflictions.


I Told you at the beginning, that the Apostle in the first and second
chapter, sets purposely out the person of Christ, how he is God and man: how
he set out his godhead in y^ first chapter you heard: unto which he adds
this earnest exhortation in the beginning of this chapter, whereof also we have
already spoken.

Now, in these words, which we have read, he begins the other part of
his purpose, to teach, that our Savior Christ is perfect man: and takes his
occasion of the text before alleged, which he applied unto Christ as chief
and principal, though it be meant also of all men: for when he had so highly
magnified man: in consideration of man's present state, a doubt is straight
moved: How can this be, sith we see not these things yet subject unto him?

To this the Apostle answers, that it is already accomplished in our
Savior Christ, who is beecome man for our sakes, and through death has
gotten this glory for us: so here is a full declaration how this prophecy
alleged, is verified in man: and a preperation to teach more at large, how
Christ is perfect man. In the words of this eighth verse: But now we see not
yet all things subject unto him: he moves the doubt, which is easily made
against that Scripture, which so highly extolled man: and answers thus unto
it. In deed I grant all things are not yet thus subject unto man, but yet in
Christ we see this already accomplished: for we have seen him made lower
then Angels, and yet again exalted, and crowned with glory and honor, even
as him self is witness: All power is given me in Heaven, and in Earth: and
so he is risen from the dead, that death has no more power over him for ever:
who being made man for us, in him it is accomplished, that man is ruler over
all the works of God now in part, and after this fully, when our base bodies
shall be changed and made glorious. In this we see, how he comes to speak of
the ma^hod of our savior Christ, which after he declares more at large. For
the suffering of death: Some translate this, Through the suffering of death, as
showing the cause, why God exalted him: but neither is that so pertinent to the
Apostles purpose, nor his words do so signify: but thus: For the suffering
of death, that is, to the end he might suffer death. So he shows the cause
why Christ was made lower then Angels, and that is, because he might die: for
otherwise, in the majesty of his Godhead, all death, and all corrupion fall
before him, and nothing can stand in his sight but life, glory and
immortality: therefore, to the end that that immortality and glory of GOD
might dye, and death might come unto him, it must needs be that he should be
humbled beneath Angels.

In the words that follow: That by Gods grace he might taste of death for all
men: he shows here y^ cause why he dyed. As this was the cause of abasing
him, that he might dye: so this was y^ cause of his death, that he might dye
for us, that is, that he might take our death upon him, and so by him we might
be delivered from it. Where he says, By the grace of God: he shows that it
was the free love of God, that gave his son unto us, no desert on our
behalf: but when we sought not after him, then he offered him self unto us:
and when we sat (as the prophet says) in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, then a great light rose up unto us: to this end, that we which are the
Gentiles might praise God for his mercy. And where it is said: that he might
taste of death, he calls here To taste of death, to have in deed sense and
feeling of the pains, not diminishing the passion, as a thing lightly touched:
but warranting the bitterness and all the sorrow of it, even to the bottom of
the grave, and death to be tasted and fealt in deed: and saying, For all: he
means not by (All) good or badd, whosoever they be: but as Saint John
plainly expounds it: God gave his John 3.
son to die, to the end that all that believe should not perish but have life
everlasting. So our Savior Christ says: Matt. 28. 28.
All that believe and are baptized shall be saved. So thus far the Apostle has
taught plainly, both how the former prophecy is accomplished in Christ, and
is verified in every one of us: and he has aptly begun to teach this
doctrine, that our Savior Christ is perfect man, which in this Chapter (I
said) was his especial purpose. Now, touching this great excellency of man,
whereof the Apostle has spoken, and how we be made partakers of it, a little
further weighe it.

He has spoken great and marvelous things, even as the Prophet had said:
Marvelous things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. Psa. ^7. 3.


There is neither Sun nor Moon, sea nor land, gold nor silver, meat nor
drink, no elements of the world, no observations of Moses law, no
traditions of men, that is over man, but man rules all, and all is under his
feet. Here straight way, both Jew and Gentile says: These be in deed golden
promises, but where are these honorable personages you speak of? Are not we
as our fathers were, and does not death devour us? To this the Apostle
answers: I grant we do not yet see with our eyes, how these things are:
but I say again, our eyes are no judges in this case. The glory is not
earthly, and the kingdom is not of this world whereof we speak: but the riches
spiritual, and of the spiritual man they are discerned. Know thy self, y^ by
says thou art Christ's, and he thine: that he died for thee, and thou live by
him: that thou art flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone, a member of his
body, and what soever is his, is thine: have this faith, and now come and see,
and thou shall see all the glory of the world less then the glory of such
a man: for thou see Christ humbled in deed once, that he might suffer
death, but even then, when he was in the shape of a servant, thou saw him
full of grace and truth, even as the only begotten son of God: thou saw
him soft of speech, but of merucilous wisdom: plain in teaching, but full
of grace and power: simple in countenance, but of an invincible courage: of
low degree, but of excellent power: of no account among men, but great in
miracles, at which man was astonished.

Thus thou have seen Christ, even when he was lowest, highly exalted: that
thou have no good cause to reason against thy dignity, though thine eye see
not, even in this time, all things subject unto thee: but see further into our
Savior Christ, and thou shall see more of thine own honor.

Thou haste seen him in thy fleash raised from the dead, and in thy nature
ascended into Heaven, that man in his person might be crowned with glory and
honor: we have seen him carry our fleash into the presence of God his
father: and it is no more possible to take this glory from us, as many as be
one with him, then it is possible to pull away again his personal humanity
from the person of his godhead. This I see in Christ, and know it in my self.
And what though yet a while the outward man be grieved? Thou fool, that which
thou sowest, it reuiueth not again, except it first dye: a little corn of 1.
Co. 15. ^6.
wheat, it can not have virtue to beco^e thirty forty times better then it
was, being multiplied to so many, all as good as it self, and bringing beside
fruitful increase of straw and chafe, except it first be cast in the
ground and dye. And how should thou have a change, but if thou be first
corrupt? And how much art thou better then a grain of corn, y^ thou might
surely know when through corruption thou shall come into incorruption, that thy
glory shall be then unspeakable, and althings shall serve thee to make thy life
infinitely blessed more then it is? Thy hope now, if thou could enlarge it a
thousand fold, yet it should be greter the^ thou can imagine: and thy faith,
if it could comprehend more assurance of immortality, then y^ eye does surely
of y^ light of the sun, yet y^ shall find y^ fruit of it above al thy
thoughts. This thou see, if thou see Christ: and this thou know to be
thine, if thou know thy self to be one with him. And for thy sins, howsoever
they cleave unto thy bones, hate them as thou hate hell: for from thence they
are, and the devil works them, but care not for them: for though they were
heavy in weight and many in number, what then? thou haste thy hope, not in
thine own person, but in the body of Christ, into which thou art graffed, and
in which there is no* spott nor blemish, but perfect righteousness, even
before God: and in him as all other things, so sin also is putt under thy
feet, and thou art ruler ouer^t. And thus far of the doctrine of the Apostle
here taught us, in this his Exhortation.

Now let us return to his other purpose, how he teaches the humanity of
our Savior Christ: the first reason whereof is in these words: That he
might taste of death for all. For, as to the end he might suffer death, it was
necessary he should be humbled, because death else could not come into his
presence: so suffering death, that man might be delivered, by that death it
was necessary that he him self should be man, for so were the just
judgments of God: he gave man a law and pronounced a curse to him that brake
it: therefore when we had all trespassed we were fallen into the punishment of
our sin: for y^ threatenings of God are not as the words of a man that can
alter, or by some intercession that they can be mitigated: but with God there
is no change nor shadow of change: that which with him is once purposed was
ever decreed, and his words are not weak, but what he has threatened, if we
fall into his hands, all the creatures of the world have no help for thee: So
that this being decreed of God: Cursed is he that Deu. 27.
abides not in all things written in this book: all people must needs say,
Amen: And, The soul that sins must needs dye: redemption from this there is
none to be looked for, but by suffering of it: for y^ Lord had spoken, and it
must be done: so our Savior Christ, since he would deliver us, he must be made
man like unto us, and in our nature dye the death.

Our sins are not imputed unto us, but they were imputed unto him. The
punishment of them is forgiven us, but it was not forgiven him. Righteousness
is freely given us, but it was not freely given him. He obeyed the law of his
father every jot and every title, that he might fulfill all righteousness. He
bare the condemnation of hell and death, that he might abolish it. He took
upon him the guiltiness of our sins, and bare them in his own body, y^ he
might nay le them upon his cross. When it pleased God our heavenly father of
his great mercy, to accept the obedience of his law for our perfect
righteousness, and to give unto it the recompense of eternal life: and when
it pleased God to accept this for a full punishment of all the sins of man,
if any man could be found to bear it before God and overcome it, our Savior
Christ craved no more but this: the residue he performed all in his own
body, and by his eternal spirit overcame it: so that in him is life, in him
is righteousness, in him is immortality, in him is the reconciled good will of
God, and that excellent wisdo^e which has made us by faith one with him, the
same has made us partakers of all his honor and glory. Thus we see with what
necessity we are constrained to acknowledge the humanity of our Savior
Christ, and why he must needs be made man.

It follows now in the tenth verse: For it became him for whom are al things
etc. The Apostle now goes forward, teaching more largely this doctrine of
the humanity of our Savior Christ: and first he takes away the offense of
it, then sets down manifest reason to prove it. Touching the offense, we
can not deny, but many thoughts and cogitations arise in a carnal man, when
he considers the son of God to take flesh of the virgin Marie, to be made
man in all likeness unto us, except sin, to hunger, to thirst, to suffer all
that he suffered: we would think this mystery very strange, if we had no more
wisdom but of the heart of man to meditate in it. And therefore to stop all
such offenses, and utterly to take away all the tentations of the devil
touching the incarnation and suffering of Christ, he says thus: For it became
him for whom are althings, and by whom are all things. An excellent saying, and
able to bring in obedience unto God, all the thoughts of man. All things serve
for Gods glory, and all things are according to his will: he has so decreede,
and this was best in his eyes: Who will reason against it?

It follows: When he would bring many children into glory, to consecrate the
prince of their salvation through afflictions. In these words the Apostle
sets down, what was this decree of God, that from henceforth all mouths
might be stopped, and no man should have just offense in the cross of Christ.
Beside this, in these words we may gather an argument also for the humanity
of our Savior Christ, which is, this: God decreed to bring man to glory
through afflictions, but so our Savior Christ entered into his glory,
therefore he was also perfect man. A necessary and sure conclusion in the
School of divinity, where we strive not about words. These words: Many
children, meaning all the elect, have respect unto these: The Prince of their
salvation, meaning Christ: for in that he is called their chief leader into
life, it is witnessed, that he is one in nature with the residue, a brother
among all the children, whom the other might follow: so these words, To bring
into glory, have respect to ye other after, To consecrate by afflictions: so
that ye decree of God, was, to make such a way of life, in which his children
by many afflictions should be made meet for an inheritance of glory, which
way, according to the will of his father, our Savior Christ has gone, that
he might be known to be man, and the author of our salvation. And so we see
the argument, whereof we spoke, why our Savior Christ was man, and submitted
unto death.

Now let us further mark, what we may profitablie learn in this verse.

First, where it is said: It be seemed him, for whom are all things, etc.

Let us learn in all things, whereof our hearts can consider, to make this
unto us a sure principle of all truth, equitie^ goodness: That so it was
decreed of God. How far so ever we decline from this, to think it either
strange, or any other thing better, so far we fall into all
unrighteousness, untruth, and sin, being seduced with the corruption of our
own hearts. Let us hold this then with an unchangeable purpose: if it be once
revealed, this is the decree of God. Bring down the hautinesse of thine own
thoughts, and humble thy mind and understanding to acknowledge all counsel,
wisdom and justice to be in Gods ordinance: and if any thing seem better
unto thee, confess the hardenesse of thy heart, and say with the prophet
David: This is ^y sin: further reasoning then this is all of evil, and
whosoever presumes to dispute more, he shall be overthrown at the last in his
own sollie, and give glory unto God in his own destruction.

The Apostle here to take away al foolish questions and superfluous, about the
humanity of our Savior Christ, with this one word he stops the mouths of
all proud men: So the Lord appointed: so it seemed good unto the Lord. Such
humility as this was in Moses, when he makes his long exhortation to the
people of Israel, and foretells them, that when they shall forget the Lord,
and despise his statuts, ye wrath of god shall wax hot against them, and he will
bring upon them every curse that is written in the law, even so doing with
them, as he did with the nations that were before them: which wonderful
judgments of God upon his own people, should make the world amassed: whereof
yet lest any man should curiously dispute, Moses adds: The secret things
beelong to the Lord our Deu. 29. 29.
God, but the things revealed beelong unto us and to our children for ever. As
if he had said: These are the ordinances of God, let us walk in them: if we
transgress, the punishment of our sin is before us: further we shall dispute
in vain, the secret things belong unto the Lord our God, and his judgments
can not be searched out. Such an humble confession was in the prophet David, in
his great persecutions and troubles, wherein (no doubt) all his sorrow was not
for the son of Isaie, he would not have made such complaints and cries for
the fall of a frail man: but he knew the promises that God had made unto him,
and all his faith how it rested upon them, so that all his foundations seemed
to be cast down, and it shook his heart and reins to see the strength and
rage of his enemies, and him self as a dead dog in Israel, that is, a man
without any account or reckoning: yet notwithstanding all this, though his own
wisdom had failed never so much, yet he says: I should be dumb, and not
open my mouth: for thou o Lord do it. How soever his own wi^ was turned
vpside down, that he saw nothing how things could come to pass, yet he
acknowledges his sin, that is, his folly, his ignorance, his infidelity,
Psalm. 39. 9.
if he should not confess all that God did, it was best, and the next way to
bring all his purposes to pass* The Prophet Jeremy being utterly amassed,
what it should mean that the way of the wicked did still prosper, or why they
lived all in wealth, that did rebelliously transgress, why God planted them,
to make them take root and to bring forth fruit: as he was astonished at
this work, and spoke forth the thoughts of his heart, yet first he
acknowledged his own ignorance, casting down the thoughts of his own reason,
and said: O Lord, if I dispute with thee, thou art righteous. Ierem. 12. 1.


It was a ready bridle to the holy Prophet to rule all his thoughts, to say,
The Lord has done it, let us hold our peace.

And an excellent example of this humility, is our Savior Christ him self,
to reach us modesty, that are but men: for he, who so loved the people of
Israel, that he weapt over their City, when they would not repent, prayed for
them, when they houng him on the cross, gave his life for them, when they had
cast him off and would none of his salvation, he that had this unchangeable
love to his brethren, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone (...) yet when
he called his humane thoughts to y^ consideration of the decree of God, he
humbled him self, changed his affections, rejoiced in other thoughts, and
said: I thank thee, O father, that thou have bid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have revealed them Luc. 10. 21.
unto little ones. When he saw he was sent their minister for the truth of
God, to confirm the promises made unto their Fathers, he had no other longinge
but how to win them: when he saw an other counsel of God, that they were
not all Israel which were of Israel, he knew this was best, rejoiced in
spirit, gave glory unto God, and would not reason of his unsearchable
judgments. Who is he now, or of what wisdom, that dare dispute against the
counsel of God? Are we greater then Moses, wiser then the Prophets, or higher
then our Savior Christ? Or have all these held their peace at Gods works,
that we should reason against them? Let us then rule our selves, or rather let
us be ruled of the Lord, that we may say as the Apostle said, and this may be
reason of all our belief: So the Lord has thought good. A place much like
unto this, is in the 24. of Luke: when ye two disciples y^ went to Ema^s
marueled exceedingly at all the things that had happened unto Christ, so that
their faith began to fail them: thus our Savior Christ reprooueth them, and
all the reasoning that was with them: O fools Luke. 14. 26.
and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken: must not
Christ needs suffer these things and so enter into glory? He refers them
first to ye prophets, to know y^ this was the decree of God: but the^ lays a
necessity upon the perfourmance of his word, that it must needs be so. And if
that be not only good, only just, only wise in our sight that are but men,
let us not boast, there is no cause in this world of out misliking: but
because we be fools, and slow of heart to believe. And thus far the thing
it self speaks, how meet it is for us to humble our selves under all the
ordinances of God. It follows in the Apostle: For whom are al things, and by
whom are all things: this is a singular reason, why we should be obedient, and
ask none account of all the dooinges of the Lord. Is man afflicted? Why should
he not be so? The Lord has done it, and for the Lord he was made. Are ye
reprobate ordained to destruction? Why should they not? The lord so ordained
it, and for the Lord they were made. Are the elect freely saved? Why should
they not? The Lord has saved them, and for the Lord they were made. Yea, but
the reason of these things I see not: yea, but (o man) who art thou that take
a contrary part to dispute against God? Are not all things for him, and art
thou only envious against his glory? Thus (dearly beloved) carry the word
of God to lean on, and believe assuredly it shall be fulfilled: and think
that it is best, and you shall not be moved for ever. If you come in place, with
those ancient worn creatures, who with a color of gray hair, which is the
wisest part in them, so long deceive our people, they or their disciples, if
they reason against you: Has God forsaken his Church a thousand year, and
were all our fathers deceived before Luther was borne, such antiquity, unity,
universality, was it all in error? These words taken up again in our days,
and countenanced with the gray heads of our Phariseies, Watson, Fecknam, Cole,
Heath, and other like, o Lord! how many men do they deceive? For their own
reason lifts up it self, and they say: How can this be so? So many wise, so
many learned, so many noble, all deceived? Had God forgotten to be merciful?
First, I would ask of these men but this one question: and if they will not
willingly be deceived, let them answer as they think. What one word of all
these, both might not and did not the Phariseies say against our Savior
Christ? And how dare they now reason against the Gospel of Christ, with
the same argument, with which the Phariseies reasoned against Christ? But they
will say, now Christ has made a promise to be with his Church to the end.

And had he not made this promise before? It not Jesus Christ both to day and
yesterday, and the same world without end? Look in the 18. of Deuteronomy. and in
the 59. of Esaie: as absolute, as Deuteronomy. 18. 1^. Esai. 59. 10.
full a promise then as now. But they were not so long in error: put case
they were not: he who punished the transgression of the law given by Angels,
with 400. years blindness: may not he punish the transgression against his
Gospel, given by his only son, with 800. or a 1000. years blindness? But
for your sakes (dearly beloved) I do more then I would, and with reason I
confute them which have no reason. Let us come to the text and answer out of
it. Was the world deceived so many hundred 1. These. 2. 2.
years? Why should it not? The Lord ordained that there should come an
apostasy, and a general 1. These. 2. 7.
fall from the faith of Christ: that the world might be seduced with the man of
sin: whose age began in the Apostles times, and shall not utterly die till 1.
These 2. 8.
the day of Christ. Thus the Lord appointed, and so let it be, for all things
are for his glory. And here let us rest in all the things that ^uer our
hearts can think upon, if we can see no reason of the word of God, we can see
humility to confess before him: o the deapth of the riches, and of the Romans
1^. 33.
wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments,
and how are his ways without finding out? And because we know, that of him,
by him, and in him are all things, let us speak it: To him be glory for
evermore. All counsels, all doctors, all examples, all decrees, all what you
will, they are not our scholemaisters, but our fellow scholars, that we may
learn together out of the word of God, whose decree shall stand for ever, and
whose judgments are perfect righteousness.

That which follows in the latter end of the verse: To consecrate him by
afflictions: or, to make him perfect by afflictions: the meaning is, that
Christ in his death accomplished a full redemption, and so was prepared to
receive an inheritance of glory, not attributing so this work to his death,
as though all his life had been impertinent: for in all his life, Christ was made
our redemption. Saint Paul expressly says: By the obedience of one, a great
many are presented righteous. And again he says: For this cause he was made
Romans 5. ^9.
subject unto the law that he might r^deeme the^ which were holden under the
law. And for this cause he pretermitted (...). 4. 4.
not one jot, or one title of it, that he might bestow upon us the fullness of
all righteousness: but ye scripture attributes commonly our redemption to his
death, because it was the chiefest and greatest work of all, the
accomplishment and perfection of a^ the rest upon the cross, he was lowest
cast down, and upon the cross he triumphed over satan, and Phil. 2. 6. Col.
2.
after the cross he obtained power over death and hell: therefore in it (as the
Apostle says) he was consecrate to eternal glory. And thus far at this
time. Now let us pray etc.

The tenth Lecture, upon the 11. 12 and 13. verses.
11 For he that sanctifies, and they which are sanctified ^re all of one:
wherefore he is not ashamed to call the^ brethren.

12 Saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the mids of the
Church will I sing praises to thee.

13 And again, I will put my trust in him. And again: Beholds, here am I, and
the children which God has given me.


THe reasons before used, to prove the humanity of our savior, were these.
First he dyed for man: and therefore it was necessary he should be man.
Secondly, it was the decree of God, to bring man into glory, through many
afflictions: but so Christ our head was also consecrate to enter into glory,
therefore he was natural man.

Now it follows: For he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all
of o^e. This word (For) notes a cause of that which was said before: as he
had said this: He that leads other into the glory of God, by the same way he
must enter also him self. He adds now the cause and ground of that saying:
because they must be of one nature, both he that leads, and they that are
led into this salvation.

Now, because the Apostle has spoken so plainly of the nature of our Savior
Christ, that he is perfect man, to teach us that yet not in our own nature,
but being regenerate by his grace, we are made children: Therefore the Apostle
changes his former speech: and in sted of saying, He that leads into
glory, which is the work spoken of, he says: He that sanctifies: naming the
virtue incident, by which the work was done: and in sted of, They that are
ledd, which is ye benefit employed, he says: They that are sanctified: which
is the quality, with which they are endued: meaning yet one thing before and
now: there, in plain words calling it our entry into salvation: here, by a
figure naming it our sanctification, which is the means of our inheritance
of it: and by this, exhorting us that we would follow holiness, which is our
likeness with Christ. And thus much touching these words, how they hang with
the former. Now, to consider them in them selves, we have the third argument,
for the humanity of our Savior Christ: which is this. He that shall
sanctify his people, must beecome one with them: but Christ has sanctified
us, therefore he is of our nature. And the force of this argument stands upon
that ground whereof we have spoken: that this is the decree of the just God:
that the nature of man could not be sanctified, but in the person of man.

A proof and declaration that it is so, is added by the Apostle in ye residue
of the verse: And for this cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren:
whereunto is straight added the testimony of the 22. psalm, out of which he
proves it: I will show forth thy name unto my brethren, in the midds of the
congregation I will praise thee: a plain and evident testimony, where our
Savior Christ calls us brethren: for the prophet David, who in many of his
afflictions bare the image of our Savior Christ, wrote that Psalm, though in
his own great calamities, yet especially in the person of Christ, as it is
certain: because the Evangelists and Apostles allege out of that Psalm many
places, applying them all to our Savior Christ: besides yt, the whole Psalm
is a lively description of the passion of Christ, and the latter end
foretells the calling of the Gentiles, which were only to be gathered to the
setting up of this glorious kingdom of Christ: so that yt is aptly here
applied unto Christ, which there the prophet David spoke in the person of
Christ. And here let us mark this, while the Apostle proves our savior Christ
to be man, he alleges the scripture so, as distinctly show the offices of
Christ, that he is our Prophet, our King, our Priest, that we might know we can
not give him these offices, and deny his manhood: nor grant him his
manhood, and deny him these offices: so here, this text, as in the name
Brother it proves he is of our nature: so these words, I will declare thy name,
and I will sing of thee: they show that our Savior Christ is our prophet, to
reveal the will of his father to us. Now, where it is said here: He that
sanctifies and they that are sanctified are al of one: we have to consider, y^
even in the manhood of our Savior Christ, is virtue and grace, in which he
does sanctify us: for not only as he is God he sanctifies us, but also in his
humane nature he has this virtue and power, to make us holy, not taking his
nature such from the virgin Marie but making it such by pouring into it the
fulness of his spirit. And this our Savior Christ himself witnesses: for
speaking of his sending into the world, how he was sent of his Father to call
his lost people unto salvation, he says in like sort, he also sends his
Apostles, and straight adds: For them I sanctify my self,

The holiness which the Apostles had in their calling, they had it from Jesus
Christ, made man, and walking in that vocation before them. Even so it is with
us: all that is good in us, and all the righteousness that can be in us, we
have it neither out of the East, nor West, but from the body of Jesus Christ:
neither is there in the world any other sanctification: so that all we that be
here this day, and all people else of the world, except we know perfect
manhood, and our own nature to be reallie united unto the person of the son
of God, who has sanctified himself for us, there is no sanctification for us
under heaven. Even as our hands and arms, and other members, are not nourished
but only by the meat received of the head: so our spiritual meat of
righteousness and life, is not given us, but from our head Jesus Christ. And
as the veins are means, by which nourishment is conveyed to every part: so
faith is the means by which we receive from Christ, all that is healthful
unto us. And as by joints and sinews, our members are really knit, and made a
body unto the head: so really, truly, and in deed, by one spirit we be knit
unto Christ, as perfectly and substantially made one with him, as our members
are one with our head.

If thou understand not this, or say with Nicodemus, How can this be done? I
say unto thee again, Pray that thou may be taught of God, and that his
spirit may reveal it unto thee: for if the tongue of Paul were dumb, not able
to speak what he saw in vision: how much less is man able to speak the
truth of greater mysteries? And if our hearts cannot comprehend all the wisdom
of God in the wind that blows, how he rayseth it up or makes it fall
again: how can we understand this wisdom of our uniting unto Jesus
Christ? Only this I can say: God has given us faith, in which we may believe
it, and out of which such joy shines in our minds, as crucifieth the world
unto us: how far our reason is from seeing it, it skilleth not, it is
sufficient if we can believe it.

We believe in the Lord our God: yet we know not what is his countenance. We
believe and apprehend by hope his glory: yet neither eye can see it, nor ear
can hear it. We believe and see immortality: yet our heart can not comprehend
the height, the breadth, the length, the deapth.

We believe the resurrection of the dead, yet we can not understand such
excellent wisdom, how life is renewed in the dispersed and scattered bones
and ashes. We believe our savior Christ is man, and we have seen him and felt
him: yet how he was man, borne of a virgin, all men in the world have no
wisdom to declare: Even so (dearly beloved) we believe that our Savior
Christ and we be one, he of us and we of him, he the head, we the body,
really, substa^tially, truly joined together, not by joints and sinews, for
that uniting I know well enough: but by his spirit, of which we have all
received, and this unity I cannot conceive nor utter, till I know God even as
he is, and his holy spirit which has wrought this blessing. Thus we learn
what here ye Apostle teaches us, and thus we understand what is here said:
He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one.

And where it is said here, He that does sanctify, showing the present time
and the work still a doing: it teaches us, that our sanctification has a
daily increase, and when it is fully accomplished, then God calls, and our
days are at an end. And let us note this well, for it behooves us much: If we
be Christians, we are still sanctified by the spirit of Christ, for so it was
in him: He grew still in grace before God and men: If thou begraffed into his
body, thou have his spirit, and it will have his work in thee. Thou shall
not be weary of well doing, nor cease to rejoice in God thy Savior: but
still increase in spiritual grace, til thou come to the age of the fullness of
Christ. There can be no affection in thee, according to the fleash, but if it
be great, it will appear in his work: much more this which is of the spirit
of God. If thou be sorrowful, it will make thy face sad. If joy be within, it
makes thy countenance merry. If thou have a flattering heart, all the members
of the body will straight serve so vile a thing. If hatred be within thee,
thy body will show it forth in all manner of cursed doing: and there is
nothing that can possess the mind, but it leads the members in obedience of
it. How much more if the spirit of God has replenished thy mind, will all
the body show forth godly desires. This the Apostle notes, when he says:
He that sanctifies.

It follows: For this cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren. Upon good
cause the Apostle says: He is not ashamed: for if he humbled not him self in
great love of us, how justly might he account it shame to be as we are? He
that made Heaven and earth, he that is the immortal and glorious God, one with
his father, before whom all Angels do obey, and all Princes are earth and
ashes: ought we not to say, seeing it pleases him to acknowledge us that are
but poor creatures, that he is not ashamed of us? It was great praise in
Moses, being so highly esteemed of Pharaoh, that yet he would vouchsafe to
visit his poor brethren. It was singular love in Joseph, when he was next
unto the King in honor and dignity, yet not to be ashamed of his fathers
house, who were heardmen and shepeheardes. But all is nothing in comparison of
this, that Jesus Christ is not ashamed of us: for what? the glory of the vain
world made not a mortal man ashamed of his duty, to acknowledge his poor
father and brethren, in whose persons he might suffer a little reproach: but
how much greater was this doing whereof we speak? The shining brightness of
the glory of God, made not the only begotten son ashamed, of his free
grace, to acknowledge us that were his enemies, in whose persons he should
suffer a most shameful and slanderous death.

This is the case between Christ and us, and this the Apostle means, when
he says: He is not ashamed to call us brethren. And if his highness abased it
self to our low estate, and was not ashamed: let us (dearly beloved) learn
to be wise, and know what the lord requires of us, for all the good which he
has don unto us. He says in the gospel: He that is ashamed of me and my word
before men, I will be ashamed of him before my Father which is in heaven. And
is not (trow you) this a just comdemnation: if we wretched men will be ashamed
of him, who being the God of glory, was not ashamed of us? How much is he
greater then we? Abraham, when he approached nere unto him, he felt him self how
he was but dust. Genesis 18.
When Job came nere to see the tokens of him, he abhorred him self, and
confessed how unclean he Job. 39.
was. When David saw the glory of his dwelling, Psalm. 84.
he said, he had lever abide but one day as a door keeper in the house of him,
then ten thousand days to bear rule in Kings palaces. When Paul saw the
glory prepared for us in his resurrection, he said Phil. 2.
he accounted all the world to be but doung, to the end he might win him.

If then, such a Christ be not ashamed to call us brethren: a marvelous and
unspeakable foolishnes is bound up in our hearts, if we be ashamed to call him
brother again. He were a folishe poor man, that were ashamed of the kindred
which the King did challenge of him: he is more foolish, though he were a
King him self, that is ashamed of the Son of God, when he offers himself
unto him. Yea, and be he never so proud a man, that now despises him, he
shall confess his folly then, when all that shall see him shall say: Blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Pride, or flattery, or covetousness, or vanity, or fear, or what you will,
may make us now ashamed to confess him, or to dissemble that ever we knew
him: but when all this corruption is taken from us, and the grave and death
shall take their own, that we shall live again in immortality, and know the
length of his days in our own bodies: our former foolishness will make us so
affearde, that we will pray unto the hills to hide us, and to the mounteines
that they would cover us: but vows and wishes shall be but foolish thoughts.

Let us therefore despise the shame which Christ has despised before us. If
it be imputed unto us for folly, that we fear the Lord: let us bear his
reproach. If our company have no liking, except we bring our sins with us,
to be content to hear the blaspheming of Gods name, religion evil spoken of,
Godliness mocked at, words to sow discord among brethren, ill reports of
men absent, boasting and bragging of vain persons, wanton and unchaste
speeches, or other vain and unprofitable babblings, such as is most usual
among men: if without this our company be not pleasant, seeing in this our
Jesus is dishonored, let us rather deny them, then be ashamed of him: and go
rather out of Babylon the mother of whoredoms, then out of Jerusalem the city
of God.

It follows: I will declare thy name unto my brethren: we are called the
brethren of Christ, not in society of flesh and blood: for that the wicked
have with him as well as we, who are yet no brethren, but strangers even from
the womb: but as they are natural brethren which are borne of the same
parents, so we are brethren with Christ that are borne of God, through the same
spirit by which we cry Abba, Father, the fruit whereof is in glorifying his
name, even as our Savior Christ says: He that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven, he is my brother. And where it is further said: In the
mids Matt. 12. 48
of the congregation I will praise thee: First, here we must needs confess
what duty is amoung men, even that they edify one another: for as many as
are of Christ, are called in this covenant: I will declare thy name unto my
brethren, in the mids of the congregation I will praise thee. He that
considers the days of his life, and finds his years many, and in all them
can not remember that he has been careful for his brethren, to tell them the
fear of his Lord, or how in companies and meetings he has spoken of his
praise, he can not know that he has any portion or fellowship in this kindred.
The graces of God are not such that they can be locked upon our hearts, or kept
secret, but they will burn within like fire, and make us speak with our
tounges, that we may make many brethren partakers of our joy. The prophet
says: I have believed, therefore I have spoken. Saint Psalm. 116. Psalm. 19. 2.
Co. 14. 23
Paul teaches that it is so with us, if we believe we will also speak. And
tell me (I beseech you) what man excels in any thing, and has not a delight
to speak of his cunning? Does not the shipman talk of the winds? the plowman
of his oxen? will not the soldier be reckoning up his wounds? and the
shepherd telling of his sheep? If he be good in hounds, hawks, horses,
shooting, or any such exercise, is not his name spoken of according to his
skill? nay, let it be in things worse then these, cards, dice, tables,
daunsing, is not ever the man's talk according to the delight of his mind? And
shall we think the knowledge of God has less affection of our heart, or
less obedience of our tongue, then the most vain and unprofitable desires of
worldly minded men? Or my bow and mine arrows, have they my tongue tied unto
them, to delight in their talk? and shall not the mystery of Christ, and God,
wherein I apprehend the forgiveness of my sins and eternal Esa. 43. 6.
life, has my tongue no portion of such comfort? or if it be in my heart, will
it not fill my mouth with praise? If I have heard of it, will I not also declare
it? I remember the Prophet Jeremy, once made with him self a solemn decree,
that he would no more Iere. ^0. 9.
speak in the name of the Lord: but the word of God says, He was in my heart
as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I
could not stay. So, when the Apostles were Act. 4. 20.
threatened exceedingly, not to speak a word of the gospel of Christ, they
answered directly they could not choose: for the things which they had seen and
heard, were such, as they were constrained to speak of them to other. So it is
with us, if we be the brethren of Christ, the covenant of our kindred, is: I
will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation I will
praise thee: let them know this, all, to whom it is spoken, and let them
discern between hypocrites and true Christians. Some thinck it a praise to be
close men, secret to them selves, that by their words you shall never know
them, of what religion they be: those men, where they think they hide them
selves most, there they lay widest open their shame: and while they think to
keep it secret of what religion they are, this their dissimulation proclameth
it louder then the blast of a trumper, that they be of no religion at all, at
all (I say) touching any religion of God: for if it were of him, it would show
forth his praise: and what their heart believed their mouth would confess it.
But these Laodicoeans, that be neither hott nor cold, nor what God they love
you cannot tell, y^ Lord has appointed a day when he will spue them out of his
mouth. Let us learn a better profession: I will declare thy na^ unto my
brethren: and let us hold it with joy and gladness, that in the mids of the
congregation we will singe praises to him.

And note how expressly i^ is said, in the mids of the congregation: as
showing y^ no fear of man should keep him back from it: for before one, we
will peradventure speak: or, before two or three we will be bold to rebuke
swearers or other ungodly doings: but if it be before many, in solemn
assemblies, and one impudent man alowde blaspheme the name of God: where is he
that in the mids of the congregation will praise the Lord* o how squeamish
we be here, and full of good manner! not to speak openly for fear of offense.

But, o poor wretched men that we be! who taught us this modesty, to be
ashamed of Christ before many? What is this else; but to keep the honor of
God for holes, and corners, and solitary places: and offer up sacrifice to the
devil, in our dyning chambers, and in the market places?

We are not ashamed at open feasts to fill our tables worse the with sp^ng,
that is, with open blasphemy of the name of God, and with many unclean words:
but we are ashamed of the sweet incense y^ makes all the house full of
pleasure, that is, brotherly to reprove y^ lewd sinner, that he may (...) to
(...) before the lord. A marvelous affection of man's corrupt mind, and I
cannot tell how to (...) it: for it is ten thousand times woo^ then ^y
madness.

We are ashamed to exho^ men to do well: we are no^ ashamed to provoke them
(...) sin. We are ashamed to minister talk of says and religion: we are not
ashamed of rotten and unclean works of wanto^nes. We are ashamed to speak to
the praise of God, we are not ashamed to blaspheme his name. We are ashamed of
Christ, we are not ashamed of the devil. But such sins the Lord confou^d
them. It is no reason in many words to confute the^, for where so ever they
have any lovers, I am sure without any man's words their own hearts will confute
them when they go to bed. Our savior Christ is our scholemaister, and has
taught us thus. In the midds of the congregation I will praise thee. The
prophet David was a good scholar in this doctrine, when he opened his mouth
unto God and vowed: I will speak of thy name before kings, and will not be
ashamed. Psa. 145. 21. Psa. 119. 46.
Pray (dearly beloved) that we may be partakers of the same grace. What can
they say of us? The woorst report they can give us, is, that we be godly men:
if they account this a reproach, let us be content to bear it: for when their
judgment is done, we shall reap the fruit of a better sentence.

It follows now in the 13. verse. And again, I will put my trust in him:
This Psalm the prophet made when he was delivered from the layinges of way to
of Saul, and from all his enemies: wherein, as he was a figure of Christ, so
it is most properly and truly verified in Christ, that he said of himself.
Besides this, many sentences in the Psalm are plain, agreeing only to
Christ. S. Paul in the 15. to the Romans alleges this as spoken of the
mercy of God, in calling the Gentiles by our Savior Christ, I will confess
thee among the gentiles, and sing praises unto thy name. And in the 43. verse
of the same Psalm the prophet says: Thou have made me the head of the
heathen, a people who^ I have not known shall serve me: by which it apeareth,
how this psalm is aptly aplied to Christ: for these words were never
accomplished in the prophet David. So it is alleged truly, as spoken by our
savior Christ: I will put my trust in him. Now, because the Apostle alleges
this, to prove our Savior Christ to be man, like unto us, mark how ye
argument follows. Christ says, I will put my trust in God: but it were a
very improper speech, and such as the scripture never uses, to say, God will
trust in God: therefore, there must be a nature in our Savior Christ inferior
to his Godhead, in which he speaks thus: I will trust in him, and that was
his perfect humanity like unto ours, in which we saw him subject to peril,
and how, according to his trust, God his father delivered him. And here the
Apostle alleges such scripture for proof of ye manhood of Christ, as also
proves y^ he is our king: for where he says: I will trust in him: it notes
that Christ was not weak in faith, but assuredly trusted in the power of God
his father, that he should overcome the devil. And where it is said: Behold
me and my children: he notes the sure safety of his children, that he will
keep them all from death, and hell, and not one of them shall perish. And
that the Apostle had this meaning, to prove also his kingdom, by these places,
his own words after, plainly show: for of these places he concludes, that
Christ in his manhood, by death overcame the devil, and set his children free
from the bondage of the fear of death. Beside this, y^ apostle (we are sure)
made best choice of the Scriptures, to prouchis purpose: and therefore with
great wisdom writing unto the Jews, who knew the law, he took such places,
not as in most clear words prove the humanity of Christ, but such as
proved it necessarilye, and prove plainly with all, that which they must
needs learn, that Christ is our Prophet, our King, and Priest. And let us
here learn, for our instruction, when we have had experience of Gods
benefits, as the prophet had, let us vow as he did: We will put our trust in
him. When David remembered how God had delivered him from a Lion and a Bear, he
was not affraide Sam (...) li. ca 17.
of the uncircumcised Philistine. When Saint Paul had reckoned so many
calamities, out of which God had delivered him, he boasted of a holy hope, and
said: he was sure that ever God would deliver him. Our Savior Christ, when he
would teach his disciples that they ought not to be careful for meat and
drink, he bad them remember, when of. v. loaves and two fishes, he multiplied
so much, that he fed 5000. men: yet remained xii. baskets full. Likewise, how
Matthew. 16. (...)
with vii. loaves and a few fishes, he fed at an other time 4000. and seven
baskets full remained. By this experience he would make them bold, that God
would feed them in all places: even so it ought to be with us. Have thou
experience of any benefit of God, which thou have received in all thy life.

In this is the greatest thanks thou can render unto him again: to trust
assuredly that he will be good unto thee still. Has God given thee joy at any
time in his Gospel, that thy soul has had comfort in the hope of eternal
life? Be glad of that in all tentations, and know that God is well pleased in
thy faith, and this shall be the fruit of the former benefit, if thou
persuade thy self that God will be merciful unto thee, and give thee the life
that is euerl^sting. Thus we shall be like our Savior Christ, and Gods benefits
shall be thankfully received of us: he has been good unto us, and we will
trust in him for ever.

An other testimony yet follows, to prove the humanity of our Savior
Christ, and it is this: Behold me and the children which thou have given me:
This is written in the eight of Esaie, in which chapter the Prophet fortelleth
the captivity of the Israelites, by the King of Ashur: how it is determined of
God, that the people for all their rebellions, should surely perish: but yet
so, that God for his Churches sake would bridle their rage, and save some who
might praise his name.

These threatenings and promises both, while the people did contemptuousely
reject: the Lord hiddeth the Prophet cease, and bind up these promises, for
another people, that should believe: and then the Prophet aunswering again to
God, in acknowledging all his truth and goodness, says thu (s). Behold, I
and the children that God has given me. This is the sense of the Scripture,
a^cording to that time, But in all deliverances of the people of God, thee^ the
benefit came upon them only in respect of Christ, and it was ever a figure of
the great deliverance through him, which at last should be openly given, from
death, and from the devil: For this cause in all extreme perils of that people,
whe^they would conceive any hope, they would make mention of their Messiah, and
of the promises of God in him, which should never be frustrate: even so in this
place, when the Prophet would speak certainly of salvation, in the midst of
danger, he said of all those troubles they shall happen in thy land, o
Emanuel: at the mention of whose name, he has so sure hope, that Esa. 8. 8.
he defieth the world, and says: Gather together on heaps, o ye people, and
ye shall be broken in pieces: gyrde your selves and you shall be broken in pieces:
take counsel, and it shall be brought to naught: pronounce a decree, and it shall
not stand: for God is with us: and so continuing his prophecy all according
to the similitude of the happy days of Christ, he says presently in his own
person, and figuratively in the person of Christ: Though both the houses of
Israel stumble, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fall down: yet behold, I and
the children that God has given me, will endure the reproaches of men, and will
believe the promises. Which words in Christ have this meaning: That how soever
the wicked of the world do fall, and are snared and taken: yet Christ will
keep his, and not one of them shall perish. Now, here we must learn, as the
Apostle teaches: Was the Prophet Esaic a man like unto his children, that is,
like unto those which obeyed his word? Then was our Savior Christ perfect
man, like unto us, whom he has delivered from sin and death: and if he have
saved us, he has saved those whom God has given him, flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bone: For this is his intercession unto his Father: Behold me and
my children.

One other thing we must learn in this. There was an apostasy of all men, so
that they which believed were made as signs and wonders: yet how so ever the
world was, the prophet says: Behold me and my children. Such shall be the days
of Christ, many shall fall away, religion and faith shall be persecuted,
iniquity shall abound: What then? Our Savior Christ says: Lo, I and my
children, if the whole world fall away, we would not regard their multitude to
follow them to do evil, but we would alone stand with the Lord our God.
Such a faith and constancy was in Joshua, when he said unto all the people of
Israel, If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, or if you will serve the
Gods which your fathers served Ios. 24. 13.
beyond the river: or the Gods of the Amorites in whose land you dwell: yet I
and my house will serve the Lord. Such a faith was in Elias when he co^sta^tly
followed God, although he thought there was not one man beside in Israel, which
had not worshipped (...). Reg 19. (...)
Baal. Such a faith was in Peter, when he saw all decline, even the disciples
and kinsfolk of our Savior Christ to fall from him, and utterly forsake him:
yet Peter vowed it unto Christ, that he and the apostles would not forsake him,
showing a good Ioh. 6. 68.
cause of al their constancy: Thou have the words of eternal life, and
whether should we go? Such a faith was in Paul, who cared neither for man nor
Angel in this respect, but grounded his faith upon Jesus Christ. Gal. 1. 9.
And if an Angel would teach otherwise, let him (says S. Paul) be accursed.
Thus (dearly beloved) our faith must be sealed in our own hearts, having the
witness of the word of God, on which we must so surely rest, that though we
saw the whole world to fall away: yet we would stand alone, and in the midds
of skorners and presumptuous sinners, we would speak as the prophet speaks
of our Savior Christ: Behold I and my children which God has given me. If
other will needs by unbelieving, seal up the promises that they may never see
them, and bind up the testimonies that they may never hear them, let them
fall and be snared, and be taken: yet I and my children will serve the Lord.
This boldness is the witness of a true faith: and this trial shall be made of
men, while the Gospel is preached: For thus Christ comes unto his Father when
all the world forsakes him: Behold me and my children. Here I would feign
know of any learned man, nay, of any wise man, or rather of any reasonable man,
whose heart is prepared to hear the word of God, and to obey it: let him tell
me, why do they cry, The Church, the Church? Or why do they think the Church
is always in a visible government? Or why do they carry us away to Rome, and
tell us the Pope cannot err, his faith is catholic: believe as he believes
and y^ shall be safe? how ca^ this prerogative of place and person, stand with
this trial where unto Christ calls so many: Behold me and my children?
that is, to hold the assurance of their faith in their own heart, when all
the world shall be against it. The Prophet would then have said, if such
privileged places had been: Behold Jerusalem I and my children will dwell in it:
And our Savior Christ would have said: Behold Rome, the City which thou
have chosen, I and my children will abide in it: but neither Jerusalem, nor yet
Rome have any exception: the prophet Esaie and our savior Christ regards
neither of the^: but if Rome or if Jerusalem or if the Pope, or if the high
priest teach an other faith then out of the word of God: Behold, I and my
children, we will believe the Lord, and bear record against Popes and
prelates: they be all liars. All places and all people are brought in order: if
they teach things that the word of God knows not let them believe it them
selves: Behold I and my children believe an other. And is it not (trow you)
strange, or have not those me^ lost their understanding, who yet run after
the cry of the church, the church, and believe a man they know not, a place
they never saw, a people they never heard, and a religion they know not what?
But with such froward persons the Lord has dealt frowardly, and when they ran
headlong they knew not whether, and inquired after a say the they knew not
what, God in his justice did bring the^ to Rome, the sinck in y^ world of all
sin and iniquity, and gave the^ their scholmaister to be the Pope, a man
made of all abominations and whordomes,

This is true (dearly beloved) and the Angels are witnesses with us, this is
true: but to this day, God has not given some a heart to believe, we owe them a
duty, and let us perform it unto them. Let us pray that God may open their
minds, and let us speak unto them the word of God, that they may learn
wisdom, that at the last in their happy conversion we may glorify God, who
has, and will deliver his out of all tentations.

We must farther mark in these words, that the Prophet says: Behold the
children which thou have given me. In y^ it is said, God has given us to his
Son Christ, it teaches us to acknowledge his free gift and grace. And let
none of us think, there was any wisdom in our selves, why we would choose him:
nor any constancy in us, by which we could cleave unto him: but God in his
grace drew us, that we John. 5.
might come unto him, and with his power he stre^gthned us, that we should
abide with him. This is it that our Savior Christ said unto the Jews: All 1.
Pet. 5. 10.
that my father gives me, comes unto me and showing in an other place, that
his children can not perish, he shows this reason: Because my father who has
given them to me, is greater then all: and in the long prayer which he makes
for all that do believe, in the 17. of John, he repeateth this often times, that
God his father had given them unto him: that John. 6. 37.
we by so many instructions, might be taught humility, that in us, that is in
our flesh, there dwells no goodness: but y^ he chose us, he did it of his free
grace and mercy, which he would show unto us. And as John. 10. 29
we know, that thus God has once freely given us to his son Christ, to
inherit with him eternal life: so we know our election stands suit,
because it is according to this purpose, who has loved us, and is not changed
for ever. But the time is past. Now let us pray etc.

The eleventh Lecture, upon the 14. 15. 16. 17. and 18. verses.
14 For as much then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood he also
him self likewise took part with them, that he might destroy, through death,
him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.

15 And that he might deliver all them, which for fear of death were all their
life time subject to bondage.

16 For he in no sort took on him the Angels nature, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham.

17 Wherefore in all things it behooves him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be merciful, and a faithful high Priest in things concerning God,
that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

18 For in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted.


NOw, after that the Apostle has proved y^ our Savior Christ was perfect man,
and dyed for our sins: he makes in the 14. and 15. verses his conclusion, in
plain words, showing how he was man, and wherefore he dyed.

Touching his humanity, according to the words last alleged out of the
Prophet: Behold me and my children: so he concludes of it: If then other
children be partakers of flesh and blood: even he also in like sort is
partaker of the same. This is therefore our faith, and thus we believe: as we
are, so is our Savior Christ, his nature like to ours, a reasonable soul, and
humane flesh in him, as well as in us: he differs in nothing except sin, but
all is alike in him, and us. Even as other children, so he has taken his part
of flesh and blood: a clear and manifest place for the humanity of Christ,
and such a one, as has confounded all the adversaries of it.

So it pleased the living God, he that in his meruaylous providence has mercy
over al his works, even he who sometime in these earthly things to show his
power, makethe the flowers to spring, and fruits to grow, where they were
neither sown nor planted: he (I say) in his great mercy and goodwill to man,
did bring it to pass, that our Savior Christ should be made man, and by the
work of the holy Ghost should be conceived and fourmed in the womb of the
virgin Marie: even as all other Children, as the Apostle here says
afterward: Like us in all things, only excep^e sin. Cap. 4. 15.


Here (dearly beloved) we must not only reject the foul and rotten
thoughts of such Heretics, as have denied the humanity of our Savior
Christ, but many other vain fancyes of men: who grant in deed, a natural
body to our Savior Christ: but they give it such qualities, as no body in
the world has (...) had.

Some say, it may be every where: whom God will teach better in his good
time. Others say: it may be made with five words, spoken with one breath: Hoc
est enim corpus m^m: For this is my body: a foolish people, and of no
understanding: and yet they are more vain then this, they think it may be
made of a piece of bread, without form or figure, and into bread they
think it may return again, if the wicked do eat it, or, if it begin to
digest in the good man's stomache.

Is this to make him like unto us, sin only excepted? Nay (dearly beloved)
it is to be drunken, or else to be mad in dallying with the body of
Christ, we cannot tell how. But they allege Scripture for this, and say:
Christ has showed such miracles in his natural body: as he walked on the
Sea: He came in, when the doors were shut: he became invisible to the men
that would have thrown him down the hill.

Therefore notwithstanding his likeness with us, yet he may be in every
Church in the pixe over the Altar.

In deed, if we saw him in the pixe, as we saw him walk upon the Sea,
there were some reason in their foolish and vain talk: but of things done
bodily by Christ, in visible and plain form, to imagine another thing quite
contrary to our eyes and ears, what force is in such an argument, or what
reason is in such words? Besides this, in all these things, Christ did
nothing; but he has made man do the like, that eue^ in this also, he might
show his likeness with us: Christ walked upon the sea, so did Peter^ he was
conveyed away soudenly out of his place, so was Elias: he entered when the doors
were shutt, so did all the Apostles, (if master Harding say true) and came
into the Chapel, to help Basil to mass. If all this may prove
Transubstantiation, then Peter and Elias, and all the Apostles might be
transubstantiate with him: But the folly of this confuteth it self, and let
us leave it.

Now it follows in the Apostle, wherefore this man Jesus Christ dyed, and he
says: That by death he might abolish him who had the power of death, that is,
the devil. And that he might deliver all the^, which for fear of death, were
al their life long subject to bondage. Two special virtues of y^ death of
Christ are here set out: one y^ he might vanquish the devil an other, y^ he
might set his people at liberty: which both things, how they were wrought in
Christ, in the words themselves, we shall more plainly see. Of the vanquishing
of the devil, he says thus: That by death he might abolish him who had the
power of death. The devil has the power of death, that is, he is ye author of
it: by his malicious nature he brought it into the wotlde: for god made it no^,
nor has any delight in it, neither it is good in his eyes, nor was ever
mentioned among the works of his hands, but from the devil and of the
devil, and in the devil, it began, and is, and abides: and therefore in the
Apocalypse his name is given him, Abaddon, that is, the destroyer: and as death
is of him, so for this cause also he is said to have the power of it, because
through his manifold tentations, he makes men sin, by which death reigns:
for so S. Paul says of Adam, being seduced by the devil: By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went over al men,
because all have sinned: this is it then that is said, Christ vanquished him
that had the power of death, that is, Romans 5. 1^.
he abolished sin, and the condemnation of sin, which was the kingdom of
the devil, and thereby triumphed over him. So Saint John says: for this cause
the son of God appeared, that he might lose the works of the devil, that is,
sin and death, which are both of the devil: for sin God condemns, and of
death he has said: I will be thy destruction: protesting he is author of
neither of both. And how has our savior Christ done this? Even by death. A
mer 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
uelous wisdom, and an unspeakable mystery, such as could never have been
found or done, but by God alone, for what else is death, but the power of the
devil, and the very misery of the world? To make this the vanquishing of the
devil, and the means to bring all happiness unto man, what was it else but
his excellent virtue, who (as Saint Paul says) calls things that are no^,
a^ though they were: and can raise up light out of darkness. And sure if al men
should have laid their heads together, to wish a plague to have fallen upon
the devil, they could not all have devised such another, that his glory
should be his shame: his power should be his overthrow: his kingdom, his
undoing? What could the Prophet David, in all his zeal of GOD, wish more
against reprobate men, traitors to Christ, and to his Gospel, then thus to
wish? Let their deinti^ tables be snares to take them, and let their
prosperity be their ruin. Even thus Christ has vanquished the devil: and
yet it is true, that he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
(...). Pet 5. 8.
may devour: and it is true that John says, that he has great wrath, and
makes cruel war against Apoc. 12. 17
the Church of Christ: but it is as true, his strength is all weakened, and his
power is broken, that it can not hurt us: for Christ has now overcome him.
And as Saint John says: The time is come, in which, the Prince of the
world is John. 12. 31.
cast out, and Christ has spoiled all principalities Col. 2. 15.
and powers, and triumphed over them, upon his cross.

But how is it then, thou will say, that his assaults are so fearfully
described, that he is said, to be Prince of this world, ruler of this
darcknesse, Ephe. 6. 12.
full of power and authority over fleash and blood? Because we should know,
no fleash is able to withstand him: neither was it according to the power of
mortal man, that he was vanquished: but only Jesus Christ of the tribe of
Judah, was the Lion to crushe him in pieces.

Will thou know then, where and to whom, the devil is abolished? Before
Christ our head, and to all the faithful, that are members of his body.

Will thou know, where, and to whom, the devil is in full power, and overcome?
Before the natural man, and to all those which in their own strength, seek
to resist him: and therefore Saint Paul, when he had described him in all his
greatness, he bids straight, cast away the strength of flesh and blood,
and put on all the armor of God: for only by it, we should stand upright in
the day of evil.

So the devil is abolished to all those that have the shield of faith, to
quench his fiery darts, that is, to all those which believe only in Christ
to be partakers of his victory.

The devil is in full force to those that are (...), trusting in their own
works, or in the liberty of their own will.

In that the devil is said, to have the power of death, as in other places,
where he is called, the God of the world: the Prince of this darkness: the
Author of sin, we must note this: if we rest in sin, live in error and
ignorance, follow the lusts of the world, or walk in all the ways of
death, then let me fear: for here is the kingdom of Satan, and my peril is
nigh, that I should be holden in it.

But if I be at covenant with my self, to have no pleasure, but utterly to
hate these things: if I like not to go in the paths of death: if I love not
the world nor the things of the world: if I have my delight in the word of
God, to understand the mystery of Christ, and to be lightened with it: if I
hate sin and all the enticements of it: then may I hope, I walk in the
likeness of our Savior Christ, and all the power of Satan is broken before
me.

Where it is further said: that Christ has done this by his death: that by
death he overcame him that had the power of death, we see a clear and manifest
testimony, what manner of death Christ suffered, even that, over which the
devil had his power: the same death, which is the reward of sin: by bearing
it, he overcame it: and he conquered no more then he submitted himself unto:
for by death he overcame death: if he suffered no more but a bodily death, he
overcame also but a bodily death: we shall all rise again, but in the
condemnation of the sin of our soul: or if he have overcome death and the
power of it, both in our body and soul, then Christ has suffered the pains
of it, both body and soul, yt we might rise again from ye bands of death, and
live with him for ever. For this is true, by death he has overcome death, and
he has broken ye force of it, no further, then he has felt the sting of it in
him self. Therefore, this let us hold, and let us so believe. Christ, body
and soul, was made a sacrifice for our sins: so he said himself: My soul
is Matt. 26. 58
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: and at the entr^e into it. Saint Mark
says: He began to be astonished Mat. 14. 33. Luke. 22. 44
at his grief, and was overwhelmed with his sorrow: in which agonies Saint
Luke says, his sweat was as drops of blood falling from him: and God sent an
Angel from heaven to strengthen him. And can we think all this came unto our
savior Christ, for fear of the death of the body? His servants that receive
of his fullness, do they so easily despise this death, that either they wish
for it, to be with Christ, or they rejoice in the mids of it before ye
persecuter: and did our savior Christ himself, in whom is the fullness of the
spirit, so fear and tremble at the remembrance of it? Did the Apostles sing
in prison, and went away rejoicing, when they were whipped and scourged? Did
Paul glory in so many tribulations which he reckons up? and did our Savior
Christ, in the like pain, cry with a fainting heart? My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? No (dearly beloved) it is not so: but that which made Christ
to tremble, would have crushed his Apostles in pieces: and that which made him
to sweat blood so plentifully, would have made them sink into the bottom of
hell: and that which made him cry, would have holden both men and Angels under
everlasting woe and lamentation. If then our Savior Christ were Psalm. 22. 14
(as the prophet says) like water powered out, and all his bones out of ^oynt,
if his heart were like wax mol ten in the midds of his bowell, if his strength
were dried up like a potsherd, and his tongue cleaued unto his jaws, if he were
brought with his sorrows into the dust of death: fie upon their blasphemous
speeches and cursed words, which say he suffered nothing but bodily pain. I
would those which are Papists among us, and in their simplicity are deceived
with the error of many, I would (I say) they knew the wickedness of this one
point of their doctrine, that they say ye soul of Christ suffered nothing but
only for the bodies sake, as our souls suffer when our bodies are weak, or
are sick, or die. If God impute this their ignorance unto them, how shall they
be saved from the death of sin and condemnation? Do they not know what the
scripture says? He bare our sins in his body, he submitted himself to the
death of them, and by the wounds of his stripes we be healed. Did our sins
deserve only a bodily 2. Pet. (...). 14.
death? or did they not deserve ye second death, which is the wrath of God,
holding body and soul in an everlasting fire? And how shall they escape it,
if they know not this death in the body of Christ, by whose stripes they may
see themselves healed? Let them pray, and let us pray for them, that if it be
the will of God, they may soon be converted, and know the unspeakable love of
our Savior Christ, who was accursed for our sakes, and suffered for us, not
only ye torments of his body, but the anguishe of his soul, and the wrath of
his Father* which wounded his flesh and spirit unto death, and would have
holden him in that condemnation for ever, if he had been no stronger then we
that deserved it. But because he was also the Son of God, in whom the
fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, the eternal spirit that was within him
did lose the chains of death and hell, and mightily arose up from the power of
Satan, of which it was impossible that he should be holden: and he has left
those his enemies the devil, death, and hell, in ignominy and darcknesse, and
has abolished them for ever and ever: not to hurt us any more, world without
end. In this hope (dearly beloved) is our delight and dwelling place, and they
that know not these sufferings of Christ, our souls shall have no pleasure in
their counsels. And thus far of the first benefit mentioned of the death
of Christ, that he has abolished the devil.

The second benefit is, that we be set at liberty from the bondage of the
fear of death: For so the apostle says: And should set them free, as many a^
with the fear of death, all their l^fe long, were hold^n i^ bondage: In these
words, let us now consider what bondage we were in, without Christ* and what
liberty we have obtained through him. Without Christ, all our life is a
miserable bondage: in fear and terror of eternal condemnation to come upon
us, for our sin, in the day of death: through Christ we see our sins
purged, the devil vanquished, death and condemnation abolished, and our selves
in the liberty of the children of God, to say: Our father which art in
heaven. This is the difference of estate between the children of God, and the
children of this world. And what misery (trow we) then do the wicked of the
world live in? There is in deed no peace unto the wicked, as the Lord has
said, when in all their life is fear and terror: when they carry in their
breasts tormenting furies, to hold them day and night in fear of endless
destruction. God has don it, and no doubt they feel it, there is given unto
the^ a spirit of bondage, and of fear, in which they tremble To (...). 15.
(...). Tim. 17.
at their own estate: they are the children of the handemayde Agar, borne in
the bondage of her Gal. 4. 25.
womb, and dwell in the deserte, and are in mount Sinaie, where is the burning
fire, and blackness, and Heb 12. 18.
darkness, and tempest, and sound of trumpet at which they tremble: for they
are without Christ, and therefore must needs be in bondage, and in the fear of
death all their life. But thou will say: The wicked prosper and rejoice in
their days, they are bound in no such bondage, nor fear no such fear. Thou
can not tell, nor thou know not the heart of a wicked man, howsoever he
boast in his substance, and has peace in his riches: peradventure there is a
bitter remembrance of death* within him. When Pharaoh the proud tyrant had
hardened his heart, and boasted exceedingly against ye people of Israel: Exodus
12. 31
yet he saw no sooner, the death of the first borne, but he feared and
trembled, as the leaves in the wilderness: and I remember Solomon says: There
is in deed a way that a man thincketh straight and pleasant, when the issues
of it lead unto death. But what pleasure is that, and what delight? Solomon
adds, even in that laughing ye heart is sorrowful: and that mirth does end
in heaviness: they do indeed Pro. ^4. 13.
strengthen them selves, and strive mer^eilously to cast out fear, sometime
with one pastime sometime with an other: but if they could cast it out as out of
a cannon, yet would it evermore return again and vex their heart, that so
flies from it. Balaam would feign have comforted himself, with riches and
honor, which he loved so much: yet was he not without fear, but at the last it
brake out and he spoke: Let my soul die the death of the righteous, and Number.
(...). (...)
let my latter end be like unto theirs. So I believe it is with all these men,
of reprobate minds, that stoare up violence and robbery in their palaces,
that fill their tables with drunkenness, their bodies with uncleanness, their
mouths with blasphemy: they know it, I think, and even as Joshua said, with
all Ios. 23 14*
their hearts, and with all their souls they know it, yt the righteous man's
life is better then theirs: they know that a groat well gotten, is better then a
pound stolen: that sobriety is better then righteousness: that the chaste
body is more blessed then the adulterous flesh: that the mouth that praises
God gives a sweeter sound then all their wicked talk: and if they do know
this, would they never so feign ^eare off their conseie^ce as with a glowing
y^on, yet sometime it awaketh them as out of a sleep, and they see a fearful
sight of death and bondage: so that, let us not frett our selves, because of
the wicked, nor be envious at their prosperity: for neither their house, nor
land, nor hidden treasure, can either take from their bodies their quartan
agues, nor this care from their mind, that they should not fear at the
remembrance of their sin. And if there be any that fears least, in whom
the strong man so possesses al, that the things he has, seem to be in peace:
yet for all that he is never the better, no more then the stalled ox is the
better, because he knows not that he is taken out to go to the
slaughterhouse: but a souden death shall have the greater fear: and therefore
(dearly beloved) seeing their condition, though we make the best of it, is yet
extreme evil: let not our lot be with theirs, but with the righteous, of whom
the Apostle says, that they are seit free from the bondage of the fear of
death. But you will say, where is this fredome? for the righteous man is yet
affeard to die: not every one: for Paul said, I desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ: and no doubt God has so Phil. 1. 23.
revealed this hope to many saints, that they despise the grave and death:
how be it, I grant this is rare: and it is natural to all, to be loath to lay
down this earthly tabernacle, notwithstanding we are free from this bondage to
fear at it, as though we had no hope. And though we die in body, yet we are
free from eternal death, and no fear of it shall overcome us so this is our
blessing, not that we shall not die: but that we shall not be holden in death,
and not that we shall not fear, but that we shall not be overcome with fear:
and he is a true christian man that nether refuses to die, nor yet sainteth
for any fear of death: for why should I repine to give this body to death? I
must needs die, because my body is full of sin: and I will willingly die,
that I may be delivered from this body subject unto sin: I must needs
die, because I am full of corruption which Romans 7. 24.
must be changed: and I will willingly die, because I would put on
incorruption, that I might see God: I must needs dye, because I bear the
image of an earthly man: and I will willingly die, that I may be like the
heavenly man Jesus Christ: I must needs die, because so is Gods ordinance:
and I will willingly die, that I may show mine obedience to his will: for these
causes I submit my self to the de: Heb. 9. 27.
cree of God, who has appointed for all men once to die, and I am either not at
all afraid of it, or the fear 1. Cor. 15. 36.
of it is not much: for I know the sting of it is gone, the victory of it is
lost, the curse of it is taken away, Gal. 3. 13.
that which remains is only profitable for us: for 1. Cor. 3. (...). To.
14. 7.
it shall bring an end of all our labors, and give us up into the hands of
Jesus Christ. Thus it is now accomplished, that here is spoken: that Christ
has set us free from the bondage of the fear of death: which (dearly
beloved) if we will learn and know, assuredly it will work great increase of
grace, it will change our minds more then we are ware of, and when we are
wise hearted to see in deed, no doubt we shall be as bold as Paul, and say
unfeignedly: We desire tobe dissolved, and to be with Christ.

It follows now in the 16, verse: For he took not at all upon him the
Angels, but he took upon him the seed of Abraham. These words are a further
declaration of that he said: He took part of flesh and blood, even as other
children. This he makes plain thus: He took not (I say) any nature of
Angels, but he took the nature of Abraham, and was of his seed: naming
Abraham, both in respect of the promises which were first made personally to
him: and because by his name, there was more weight to persuade the Jews that
he was their Messiah, and by example the doctrine is more plain, and in deed
it is very plain: as other children took fleash, so did he, flesh I say, not
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And if the Apostle conclude all
this, of these words of the Prophet, Behold me and my children, what may we
conclude, and how boldly of the words of Matthew? Abraham begat Isaak, Isaak
begat Jacob, Jacob begat Judas, and so forth, till he came to the virgin
Marie, of whom Christ was borne. How faithfully may we believe it, that he
was borne a man as other children were? And how boldly may we detest all the
madness of Martion, Maniche, Nestorius, Eutichus, Apelles, Apollinaris,
Ennomius, Cerdo, Valentinus, the Pope him self: and all their disciples, who
have so many way es denied the true humanity of Christ?

It follows in the seventeenth verse: Wherefore in all things it became him
to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
high Priest in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the
sins of the people. In these words the Apostle shows an other necessary
cause why our Savior Christ was man: that by experience of our infirmities,
he might be merciful, and faithful to work the reconciliation between God
and us: and so concludes this disputation of his humanity, applying it now
unto his priesthood, as before particularly he had done to his kingdom, and
prophefie.

These words: He ought in all things to be like unto his brethren: which are
repeated again Cap. 4. 15. they are to be marked of us, that we see how
expreslie still the Apostle urges, that Christ is a very natural man,
altogether as we be, except sin: like nature, the same flesh, like
affections, the same soul, like properties of body, the same hunger, thirst,
and other desires.

And as he is now, so we shall be, our bodies glorified Phil. 3. (...). (...).
as his: nor his no more infinite or in many places then ours shall be: and thus
it was necessary it should be, that he might be a faithful high Priest, to
reconcile us, even us body and soul unto God his Father.

It follows in the 18. verse: For in that he suffered, when him self was
tempted, he is able to succor those that are also tempted. These words show
the cause of the former saying, why our Savior being made man was so much the
more meet to be a faithful mediator unto us toward God: for being man, and
him self tempted, he felt our infirmities, and had the more compassion toward
us. Other things we have to note in the 17 and 18. verse, which the next time
we will more speak of. Now let us pray. etc.

The twelth Lecture, more upon the two last verses, and upon the first verse of
the third Chapter.
17 Wherefore in all things, it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be merciful, and a faithful high Priest in things concerning
God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

18 For in that he suffered, and was tempted, be is able to succor them that
are tempted.

CHAP. III. 1 Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly vocation,
consider the Apostle and high priest of our profession, Christ Jesus


THe Apostle (as I said) showed in these last verses, what profit is unto us,
in that Christ became man: for so he was made a merciful and faithful high
Priest. The means of this faithfulness was, for that he having experience of
our temptation, had the more compassion on us, to deliver us. How dangerous a
thing it is to deny that Christ has a natural body like unto ours.


Here we are first taught, that Christ became a faithful high Priest for us,
because he was man like unto us: so that, who soever denies our Savior
Christ to have a natural body like unto ours, he also denies that he is
either a merciful, or faithful mediator for us; for so it pleased God to
instruct him according to his manhood, that by experience and feeling, he
should learn to have pity on others: he calls him merciful, in respect of
the affection of his mind, which was full of compassion toward us: he is
called faithful, in respect of his constancy, who would never leave us, till
he had brought us into eternal life. In all this we must learn how to do good
unto our brother in affliction: and these two things in our Savior Christ, we
must carefully keep, if we will be righteous after his similitude: We must
join unto all our doing, a love and compassion to our brother in his want, and
a constancy in well deserving, that our love be not wearied with pain and
labor: for without love, what soever I do, it is nothing no, not though I
gave, (as Saint Paul says) all the goods I have unto the 1. Cor. 13. 4
poor. And, I pray you, is not this the law of God? Love thy brother as thy
self: wherein all our due^e is taught us between man and man. What then
though I do no murder, or steal not, or speak not evil, though I help the
safety of my brothers life, though I maintain his estate, though I bring him
increase of goods, though I care for the purity of his body; though I
maintain his good name? Except I have in all this an inward love and
affection to do it to him with such a heart as I would have another do the like
to me, and to be grieved with all his hurt, as though I my self sustained it:
except (I say) some measure of this love and compassion be in my doing, my
doing has none account in the fight of God. Mark this (dearly beloved) and
teach it your children: and I would our fathers knew it well, that boast so
much of the good works of the old world. There is no good work under the sun,
but that which is done in love and compassion of mind: and were their works
such whereof they brag, when they gave the rich altar clothes, and
vestimentes, the costly hanginges for their chancels, their bells, their gilded
crosses: when they carved curious images, and clothed the^ with goldsmithes
work: when they builded chapels and chanteries: when they went far on their
knees, gave rich gifts unto shrines? In all these works so much magnified,
where was mercy? what love, what co^pas sion was there in the^? They pitied
not (I am sure) the poverty of lime and stones, to cloth the^ so gorgeously:
nor they pitied not y^ priest in his furred gown, to put upon him a cope of
great price: and for all men in y^ world, let him speak y^ ever was the better
for it: whose body was y^ warmer for y^ costly clothing of y^ church walls?
whose house was ye lighter for ye torches and candels about ye altar? whole
head aked y^ less for ye goodly garland of an image? or if there were in all
this, no profit to my brother, no love, no compassion of the thing to which I
gave a gift, how could these be good works y^ had no goodness in the^? For I
think there is no man so vain y^ will think he did these things unto god: y^
were unspeakable blindness, to think y^ with the gifts of gold and silver I
could please god: he gave no gold nor silver for our rau^so^, nor he will take
none for recompense of our sins.

The Prophet plainly says: Al my goods can bring nothing unto thee, O Lord.
And how does the Lord him Psalm. 16. 2.
self reject such vain thoughts of our hearts, when he says? If I be hungry
I will not tell thee: and such other like speeches in the fifty psalm,
commanding expressly, if we will do good with meat, drink, cloth, gold,
silver, etc. bestow it upon the needy brethren: for God takes no such gifts
at our hands. And therefore (dearly beloved) al these good works of which you
have heard such boasting, before God they are as nothing, and there is no
goodness in them: for neither is there any mercy in such doings, and without
it, it is impossible to please God in thy doing. And thus we see their works,
even their greatest works, and of supererogation, when you have weighed the^
well, they are found lighter then straw. And their works of dignity next unto
these, they are of the same sort, of no value, as light as vanity it self.
Such are their penie or groate doles, when the man is dead, that his executours
use to give for his soul. Was there ever folly like unto this? No work is good
without love and compassion of mine own flesh: yet then is the work done for
me, when my flesh is without sense, and when there is no compassion or feeling
left within me. But God is just, and for so fruitelesse a work he gave a
helpless reward (...) they bestowed a very idle liberality, and GOD
recompensed it with very idle thanks, that for their benefit the foolish
people should say, Lord have mercy on his soul: for whom I think they
prayed not all the days of his life, when the acceptble 2. Cor. 6. 2.
time was, and the day of health (as Saint Paul says) in which they might
have been heard. But god at the last has visited us, and this vanity is
scattered away: I would y^ remembrance of it were gone with it.

An other property is here attributed to Christ, that he was faithful, that
is, constant, and immovable in his love, til he had finished our
reconciliation: a lesson unto us, y^ love should not faint within us, nor we be
weary with the labor and travel of it: for true it is, love is not an idle
affection, to say, I would he were well, Or, God help him: but love is
painful to help in time of need, and well willing, that no pain can weary
it. So S. Paul says: Eternal life is given to the^ which look for it, in
continuance Romans 2. 7.
of well doing. And in another place he bideth us not to be weary of well doing:
for we shall reap Gal. 6. 9.
the fruit of it, and not be weary: a thing (dearly beloved) confessed of al
men, yea, the very Gentiles knew it, y^ all my well doing is nothing worth, if
at last I would leave my brother in misery, and not help him still. But it is a
thing practiced of very few, when I have once or twice traueled in my brothers
cause, not to be weary, but to help him still: this corruption of y^ world,
let us take heed of it, and correct the frowardnes of our own nature. Tell me,
I pray, if I saw a man like to drown in y^ mids of the Thames, what if I came
unto him, and brought him nigh to the shore, and then lest him drowning by the
banck side, what good did I to him? Sure, no more then he that looked on, and
let him alone in the mids: only I made him languish with a vain hope,
whereby his death was the bitterer. And tell me thou fainting weary friend:
if Christ should have done so with thee, how great had been thy misery? If he
had endured for thee the pain of his birth, the travel of his life, the
affliction of his flesh, the reproaches of men, ye tentatio^s of the devil, and
then had left thee in bondage of death which thou could not escape, what
had thou been the better? Let us learn then to be faithful as he was
faithful, and endure to the end in well doing. I speak this with grief, to
see y^ world, how every man is left in his righteous cause: fair words and
goodly countenances are not hard to get, but a faithful heart to deliver the
just out of trouble, I have seen it in Christ: I have not else found it in
one. Yet this I am sure of, he that is faithful in this behalf, he is like
unto Christ, and Christ lives in him. And thus far of the last verses of
this second Chapter.

Now let us come to ye third. Therefore holy brethren partakers of the heavenly
calling, consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession Christ Jesus:
Now y^ Apostle leaves to make any further description of the person of Christ,
whereof we have heard, and begins a more particular declaration of his
offices: and first, how he is our Prophet, to the 14. verse of the next
chapter. And now let us learn to be fruitful hearers: and this exhortation,
let it make us wise, that carefully and diligently we may hearken, and learn
the my sterie of y^ Lord Jesus, in which we be saved: that we may have the
testimony in our selves, that we be y^ children of the New testament.

Therefore holy brethren, etc. Let us mark diligently every word, in this
excellent exhortation: for they are not only a wise persuasion to move us to
care and diligence in learning: but the exhortation is so gathered out of the
former doctrine, that this one sentence is a plain exposition of all the
doctrine taught before from the eleventh verse, to the end of the Chapter. He
says first: Therefore, Or, for this cause: as if he would say: Seeing it is so
with us, seeing God has received us into this grace, seeing such an excellent
prophet is given unto us, let us hear him. So in the first word he shows,
that this exhortation is according to his former doctrine.

Then he calls them, Holy, alluding to that he spoke in the eleventh verse:
He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are one: to teach us that we
be holy, that we are one with Christ, and y^ by his spirit sanctifying us, we
be received into his fellowship. He calls them Brethren, repeating that he
taught in the 11. and 12. verse, that Christ has taken our nature, and we are
even as his brethren, fellow-heires with him in the kingdom of his Father: and
that this is the meaning of, Brethren, the words following declare. Partakers
of the heavenly calling: these words show what brotherhood he speaks of:
that is, a heavenly brotherhood which we have with Christ: for Christ the
son of God, who has brought down heavenly gifts, has imparted himself
unto us, and made us fellows with him in these heavenly blessings: first
revealing his fathers will, then defending us from our enemies: and at last
presenting us faultlesse before God, abolishing the devil and the fear of
death, of which heavenly gifts he spoke in the 12. 13. 14. and 15. verses.
After he adds: The Apostle and high priest of our profession: In these words
he teaches, what offices he had before attributed to Christ, in y^ texts
alleged: first y^ he is our prophet, calling him by the name of Apostle, that
is, the messinger of God, to teach us our profession, verse 12: then y^ he is
our priest, to present us before God, as verse. 13. And although, as I have
often told you, his kingdom is also manifestly proved by that is said before:
yet by this place I gather, that the Apostle has especially and of purpose,
only taught this, that Jesus Christ, God and man, is only our Prophet and
priest, to declare and work our salvation, exhorting us now to learn
carefully so great a mystery.

Now let us consider further this exhortation, to see what profitable things
we have to learn in it: where we are first called Holy Brethren, we may see
in these words a good image of the Church of Christ: Brethren (as is said)
notes our unity with Christ our head, by the participation of his spirit, so
the church is a people graffed into Christ, y^ is, made members of Christ, and
sanctified with his spirit. This is our knowledge of the church, which is true
and catholic: it is not in any observation of time, of place, of person, but
where this brotherhood is a people joined to the Lord Jesus, and sanctified by
him, there is the church: to talk of any places, it is great folly, Christ
will not have his Church to be known by country or kindred, or respect of
persons, but only by this, that they are graffed in him, and made a holy
brotherhod. And here let us learn what is true holiness, even to be made
partakers of the holiness that is in Christ: for he has sanctified him self
for us, and is made unto us our sanctification of God, without whom we are
flesh and blood, the cogitations of our heart bent to evil, and all our
righteousness as a defiled cloth. For if the Angels that are greater then we
in all power and excellency, can not justify themselves in his sight: what
can we do, (as Eliphas says) yt dwell in houses of clay, whose Job. 4. 19.
foundation is in the dust, and who shall be destroyed before the moth? The Lord
has no need of our works, nor they shall ever come in account before him:
for if one man could do all that all flesh has ever done, yet still he might
say, he were unprofitable. The great justice, fortitude, temperance,
liberality, and all other virtues, which so abounded in some of the Gentiles,
what have they to glory in them? Nothing at all before God: except they say,
as Paul witnesses of them: When we thought our selves wise, we were very
fools. And why was all their doing nothing worth? Because they sought their
righteousness in them selves, and were not of y^ brotherhood of Christ, to seek
all their holiness in his person. Even thus (dearly beloved) and none
otherwise, it is with all Iusticiaries in the world, whether they be Gentiles,
or whether they be Papists, in their righteousness they are defiled, and in
their wisdom they are made foolish: if they seek their holiness in them
selves, or justify the work which their hands have brought forth. And let no
man, be he never so holy, if he were as good as Paul, exempt him self: for
Paul him self confesses this with us, that what soever he could do, he would
account it but as doung, that he might have the righteousness, not which was of
him self, but that which was by faith in Jesus Christ, that he might be of
this brotherhood, and as he says, that he might be found Phil. 3. 9.
in him. This is the true rule of holiness, otherwise to talk of our
grandfathers and fathers, what good works they have done: it is to show forth
our own ignorance in the faith of Christ. For what have our fathers done: but
Socrates, Aristides, Scipio, Fabricius, and a thousand among the Gentiles did
as much? Or, if they had done never so much, if they had given all their goods
to the poor, and their body to the fire, what then? Except they had been
brethren with Jesus Christ, one with him, and sought for their righteousness by
faith in him, they had no holiness in them. And I merueile how this being so
plain, so many yet can be deceived, to love still that idolatrous nation,
which teaches them to glory in their own works: and let no man think we
slander them, or that they give not this glory to their own works: for their
own words testify against them: they have named it distinctly, Opus
operatum, A work wrought of it self, without grace, without Christ, without
faith, Opus operatum, The thing done it is meritorious. Did ever Pagane
attribute more to them selves? Then we may boldly conclude against them, and
our Savior Christ shall be our warrant. They are not of God, because they seek
their own glory: and let us give glory unto God, to acknowledge all our
holiness to be in this brotherhood, as we be one with Christ, and Christ with
us, whom God has given a sanctification unto us.

In that we are said, to be Partakers of the heavenly calling: we must
consider what is the honor offered unto us: and that we be not dull of
hearing, when such a blessed sound is brought unto our ears. If we were called
to vile things, we might stop our ears, but having a heavenly calling, they
be, and let them be excuselesse that despise it. It was a usual persuasion
with Saint Paul, to put the Churches in mind of their calling they had of
God, to stir them up the more willingly to follow it. I beseech you brethren
Ephe 4. 1.
(says he to the Ephesians) walk worthy of your calling, in which you are
called. And of him self he testifies to the Philippians, that his continual
traue^le was to be carried to the price of his high calling of God, which was
in Christ Jesus: so let us also be inflamed Phil. 3. 14.
with the love of our calling, to follow it, lest it come upon us also, which
was spoken in the Prophets: See you despisers, and marvel and vanishe away:
for I will work a work in your days, a Act. 13. 40.
work which you will not believe, though a man should tell it you. We have not
to deal, as our fathers had, with men that preach lies, and are learned to
tell tales, and happy had they been, if they had rejected them: but the son
of God is come unto us, and has called us with a heavenly calling, and yet
again his voice has shaken, not the earth only, but also Heaven. And how
much think you were it better for us, that we were again in the dark days,
and blackness of our old superstition, then thus openly to hear the Gospel,
and little or nothing to give heed unto it? But this is a case almost
desperate, and when we speak, we are almost without hope. We have so many
years despised this heavenly calling: and lewd men, lewd I may well call them,
though some be rich, and some be high, who take such liberty, by reason of
their riches and titles, that they dare openly blaspheme the Gospel, and
contemn our church and congregations, and no man is to control them: for
this cause, (for my part) I am nighe persuaded, that God will cut off this
generation, whom he has loved, and raise up another, which yet he will bless
more, and they shall bring a discipline into his Church, which shall stop the
mouths of these mighty grants, which think by their strength, to do what
they will. But I leave this to the Lord, who does regard it.

Where Christ is said here, to be The Apostle and high priest of our
profession: we must learn this, that we that be Christians profess no other
teacher, nor no other Savior: but this is all we believe, and all we speak,
that Christ is both our wisdom and our justification: his word is ours, his
doctrine is ours, his wisdom is ours, we profess not one jot, or one title
whereof he has not been an Apostle unto us: and whosoever ever he be, that teaches
us other things, then what Christ has taught us al, he is not of our
profession, nor of our brotherhood: and more then this, we are sure he teaches
nothing but vain illusions and imaginations of men: for all treasures of
wisdom and true knowledge are hid in Christ. And seeing it has pleased him to
be our Apostle, who is the son of God, ye brightness of his glory, y^
engraven form of his substance, ye heir of al things the maker of heaven and
earth, far greater then Angels: how unthankful be we, if his doctrine be not
our profession? Nay, how madd be we, if we will change him either for any
other, or else for all other? What so ever glorious names they bring of Fathers,
Doctors, Counsels, and such like boasting words, we neither know them, nor
their names: if they be ministers of Christ unto us, their feet are
beautiful, and their names are honorable: if they be their own ministers, we
know them not, nor all their glory: if they say, they be Doctors, we may well
say again, they are but Phariscies that will be called Rabbie. We have no
Doctor but one, and that is Christ, and he is The Apostle of our profession.

Now, where the Apostle calls Christ the high Priest of our profession, as
we have learned before, if he be our Apostle, we have no other teacher: so we
learn here, if he be the Priest of our profession, no part nor parcel of the
office of his priesthood we may give to another, but profess it clearly,
that he is our Priest alone. And as the Priest is ordained to make sacrifice
for sin, and to be a mediator between God and man: so all this work we
must leave wholly unto him, know no other, receive no other, profess no other,
upon whom we will lay this reconciliation, to purge our sins, and to bring
us unto God, but Christ alone: for he is The Priest of our profession, he has
washed us from our sins, he has joined us unto God, let him have all the
praise of this salvation. Let us call all the world into a reckoning, who
soever they be, Popes, prelates, abbats, monks, friars, heremites, ankers,
their indulgences, their pardons, their blessings, their orders, their
garments, their vows, account all their works, prayers, fastings, meditations,
poverty, nakedness, and all the chastisings of their bodies: if in all this
laid on a heap, thou seek to counterpeise but the least jot of thy sin,
thou make thy self thy priest, and art an hypocrite or an hypocrites disciple
and have denied Christ to be the Priest of thy profession: for if he be thy
Priest, he is thy Priest alone, purging al and every one of thy sins, and
has neither fellow, nor helper in his work: but as he has said, so he has
done: and he has troaden alone the wine press of the wrath of God. Beware
therefore (dearly beloved) of such doctors, and of such doctrine, which in
the question of forgiveness of sins, carry away your senses to any man, or
work of man's hand: for it is but subtlety to make you blind, that Christ
should not be the Priest of your profession. And as it is thus in the purging
of our sins, so in being mediator between God and us, to offer up our
works, our prayers, and us our selves faultlesse before his father, there is
no other but he alone: for if all Angels would present our prayers, yet they
could not, our thoughts are so evil and our words so unclean, that the Angels
of God can not make them righteous in his sight.

But if Christ give unto us his spirit, to minister sighs in our-heartes:
and in his own righteousness in whose mouth was no deceit, will sanctify our
prayers, which are of polluted lips: then we have a fre entrance unto the
throne of grace: for he has sanctified him self for us, and what so ever we
ask in his name, we shall obtain: for thus neither our prayers are of us, but
they are of the spirit of God, niether are they presented from us, but from
him who is our Mediator, and gives them his own righteousness to make them
accepted: and thus in his holy and unsearchable wisdom, findeing a means to
sanctify with his holiness all that is ours, even us our selves also he has
sanctified in him self, and given us the righteousness of his humanity, to be
righteousness unto our flesh, and so presents us unblameable unto his
father. Thus Christ is the Priest of our profession, and in all Christianity
there is no other. It greeueth me here, to see the subtlety of some, who with
colored words deceive the hearts of many that are not evil. When they would
pull this profession out of our mouth, they speak not in plain words, to bid
us deny that Christ is our Priest, for then we would hate them: therefore to
keep their credit, and yet to worketheir mischefe, they stammer in their tongs,
that the simple should not perceive them, and they say, a Mediator (which is
one part of his priesthood) is of two sorts, one of redemption, and so is
Christ alone: another of intercession, and so are all the Saints and Angels.
Thus they stop the mouths of ignorant men, and then with a harlots forehead,
boast in their lies. But when you meet these Rabbines, and Apostles of their
own profession, ask of them what they mean by a Mediator of intercession:
they may as well say, an intercessour of mediation, for both are one: and it is
(as ye Logicians call it) a mere nugation: For where there is one Mediator
beetweene God and man, the man Jesus Christ, it is his office to redeem us
from sin, and to make intercession to God for us. And they rob him of this
last part of his honor, who make you believe it is a several thing belonging
to an other: as by example we may make this more plain. It is the office of a
king to rule over body and goods, in which cause God commands our
obedience: now a froward person, that would deny to pay his tribute, shall
say, a King is of two sorts, one over the body, another over goods: my body
I grant to any lawful service, as due to our King: but our King is not only
the King of our goods, and I will bestow mine otherwise. Do you not see what
folly is in this? because God has submitted to Kings, two things, body and
goods, therefore, to say, there be two sorts of Kings? Even so, God has made
a Mediator, both to redeem us, and to present us unto God: and they blind
your eyes, and tell you there be two sorts of Mediators. Surely, even with as
good reason they might say: because a man has body and soul, there be two
sorts of men, one of a body, another of a soul: but to let such deceivers
go, let us confess a better faith, and acknowledge that Christ is the one and
whole Priest of our profession.

And here let us not forget this, that our religion, our says, our hope, is
called our profession: so he calls it again in the fourth chapter, verse 14.
Our profession.
and again in the tenth Chapter, the confessiou of our hope: whereby we
learn, except we profess it, it is no religion, no hope, no faith.

The Prophet says: I have believed, therefore I have spoken: and S. Paul
makes this common to us all: (...). Cor. 4. 13.
we have also believed and therefore have we spoken: and Saint Paul says to the
Romans: As in heart we To. 10. 10.
believe unto righteousness, so in mouth we confess 1. Ioh. 4. 15.
unto salvation: and Saint John says, who soever shall openly profess that
Jesus is the son of God, God dwells in him and he in God. And who soever he
be, that for any sear of man, or for any cause makes it not known that thus
he believes, or will not profess his faith, the scripture testifies against
the thoughts of his heart, and says plainly: He loves the glory of man more
the^ the glory of God. Let us not be guilty of so great sin: for this cause
the calling of the Gentiles was so greatly magnified, because the name of God
should be great from one end of the earth to the other. How do we hold our
peace, if we be called in this covenant: and not only so, but what creature
is there which is his dumb nature, shows not out the praise of his
Creator? The Heavens declare the glory of GOD, and the firmament shows his
hand^e work: how should then man, of whom GOD has been esspecially
mindful, ty his tongue, so excellent a member of his body, and not with it
speak forth y^ praise of God, and make the world his witness what faith he
has in Christ? But of this I spoke before in the eleventh lecture, and upon
the twelfth verse. Now let us pray, etc.

The thirteenth Lecture upon the 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. verses, to these words: whose
house, etc.
2 Who was faithful to him that has ppointed him, even as Moses was in all his
house.

3 For this man is counted worthy of more glory the^ Moses, in as much as he
which has builded the house, has more honor then the house.

4 For every house is builded of some man, and he that has built al things,
is God.

5 Now Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a witness
of the things which should be spoken after.

6 But Christ is as the Son, over his own house, etc.


I Told you, the Apostle in this Chapter, begins a special discourse of
the prophecy of Christ: first (as you have heard) making an earnest
exhortation for us to hearken unto him.

Now, he goes forward, and teaches what manner of Prophet Christ is, and
how we ought to account him. First, that he was ordained of God: next, that he
was faithful in his calling, for he says: He was faithful to him that
appointed him: for in that the son of god was (as we have hard) thus made
man, this was gods appointment, to make him our Prophet: and in that he was
appointed of God, he is set forth with his warrant, that he did not glorify
him self to be our prophet, but his father gave him this honor by his
glorious voice sounding out of the cloud: This is my beloved son in whom I
am well pleased, Christ ordained of God to be our Prophet.
hear him: and let us take heed, not to refuse, or despise him, that is thus
sent of God, and speaks from Heaven, least we should be found to strive
against God. And here, that it is said: God appointed him: we see the root
and founteine of this love, that Christ should come a savior among us. It was
not only in the person of the Son, who gave his life for his sheep: but it
was also in the person of the Father, who so loved the world, that He gave
his only begotten Son, that every one which believes should not perish but
have life everlasting. So that we know, as the work and instrument of our
salvation is in Jesus Christ, God and man, who was crucified for our sins: so
the first cause is in God the Father, who according to his own purpose and
will, has predestined us in Christ, before the foundations of the world
were laid, that we should be vessels of honor, to set forth the praise of
his glory, who had mercy upon us.

And as we must give unto our Savior Christ, the glory of our redemption, in
the sacrifice of his body, or else we deny him to be the Son of God: so we
must give unto the Father, the praise of his mercy, that has freely loved
us, and predestined us eternally unto life, or else we deny that he is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: for as this is our profession, that Christ has
done the deed: so this is our profession, that God the Father has appointed
him unto it. And as the Apostle speaks here, that God appointed him to be our
Prophet: so our Savior Christ ever acknowledges, that he was sent of his
Father.

The second thing here witnessed of Christ, and in which we are assured he is
our only prophet, and we are provoked to hearke^ unto him, is: that He was
faithful in all the house of God: This faithfulness is truth and integrity in
discharge of this office committed to him, wherein he set all his care and
industry, that he might be found faultlesse, that like as he was sent of God
to be a Prophet to reveal his will: so he did faithfully perform it,
teaching only ye doctrine and ordinances of his Father: as in many places
Christ testifies this faith in his doing: My doctrine (says he) is not mine,
but his that sent me. Again, I do nothing of Ioh. 7. 16.
my self, but as my father has taught me so I speak. And Ioh. 8. 18.
again: The words that thou have given me, I have given the^. How diligently
then ought we to hear such a Prophet, Ioh. 17. 8.
as has so faithfully spoken? And here we have all a very good lesson taught
us, in the person of Christ, to what calling so ever we be called of God, in
the same let us be faithful: if we be preachers, faithful preachers: if we
be princes, faithful princes: if we be judges, faithful judges: if we be
treasurers, faithful treasurers: if we be merchants, faithful merchants: what
soever we be, faithfulness must be our praise: for as Saint Paul requires
of all: He that has an office, let him be diligent in his office: so he
gives this as ye praise of all diligence. It is required Romans 13. 1. Cor. 4. 2.
of every dispenser, that he be found faithful: and every unfaithful
servant shall be condemned in his work, in the day that his account is called
for: for he that has been unfaithful in things of this life, which are frail
and few: how can he think there shall ever be committed unto him
eternallthings, and infinite in number.

And we must here also mark, that it is say de of An account of our offices
is to be made to God.
Christ, He was faithful to him that called him: that is, to God: for unto
God we must make our account of every work.

It is true, that Kings make their under officers, but the offices are all of
God: Kings serve to appoint the persons in this ministry of man: but God
alone appoints them their work, which 1. Peter.
is the ministry of his justice, and the safety of his people, of which he
also will ask an account, and before him we do all that we do. When
Iosaphat King of Judah appointed his judges and officers, he gives them this
charge: Remember that now you execute not the judgments of man but of the
lord. There fore in every office, thou bear the image of God, 2. Cro. 19. 6
and nothing must make thee break the righteousness of it: not thy profit, not
thy pleasure, not thy kinsman, not thy friend, not thy Father, not thy King:
for if thou do, thou have sinned, and thy sin will find thee out in the day
in which shall be said: Come give account of thy stewardshippe. The Prince may
set thee in the seat of justice, but the prince must not make thee pe^uert
justice: he may give thee an office, but he cannot give thee thy Quietus est,
for the unfaithfulness of thine office: if magistrates and officers knew this,
they would not so ambitiouslie sue, as they do, and when they had obtained
they would be more faithful then they are: but this is a desperate disease,
and for me let it grow til it be rottenness in their bones: I speak not in
hope of any amendment, but I bear witness of their sin against the day of
vengeance. Further I say nothing, they have made their gain their God, and
with the idol to which they are joined, let them alone. In this matter of
faithfulness, which we have in hand, let us learn this: that as it is
necessary in all, so it is especially necessary in the minister. And to the
end that we may all learn what is the faithfulness of a minister, let us see
what was in Christ, whose faith is the example for all to follow.

It follows: He was faithful as Moses in all his house: What was the
faithfulness commended in Moses? Exodus 39. 42 Number. 30. (...)
That he did in every point, acording to that which God had commanded, and
pretermitted nothing of all that the Lord had said. This was The faith
fullness of a true minister.
then the faithfulness of Christ, to do nothing but at the will of his
Father: and this Saint John witnesses expressly in many places, that Christ
did and said all things, according to the word and will of his Father.

And thus Saint Paul, when he would show the faithfulness of him self and
his fellows, he says: He makes no merchandise of the word of (...). Co. 2.
17
God, nor mingleth it, as vinteners do their wine, but speaks as from God
himself. And in another place, he says: He does not mingle deceit with the
word of God. Now, the word it self is called by 2. Cor. 4. 2.
Saint Peter, the milk that is without all deceit, showing, whatsoever is
else of man, it is falshod, and no sweet nourishment of life in it: therefore
he that is faithful, speaks only the words of Christ, as S. Paul says,
in clear and manifest declaration of truth. And expressly in plain words
this is taught us by Paul, in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, saying:
Our exhortation was not by craftiness, nor by deceit, nor by uncleanness: but
as God allowed of us to commit his Gospel unto us, so we spoke: not as
studying to please men, but to please God, who tries our hearts: neither ever
did we either flatter you (as you know) nor sought subtle means to win
ought unto our selves (as God is our witness.) Here is the image of this
faithful minister, like unto Christ, one that preaches nothing but the word
of God, nor for any cause but for Gods glory. How many ministers know this,
the Lord alone can tell: but how few follow it, all we this day are
witnesses. And I may almost say here, as I said before of officers: I speak
not for any hope I see of amends: for I assure you, it is almost with us in the
ministry as it was in Esaies time with y^ people of Israel: The whole head is
sick and the whole heart is heavy, from the sole of the foot, to the Esal. 1.
6.
crown of the head, there is nothing whole therein, but wounds and swellings
and sores full of corruption: from the priests of the highest chaires, to the
beggarly curates of the country, a general neglecte is of this faithful
teaching of Gods people.

The other and greatest part of unfaithfulness, is, when we corrupt and defile
the word of God committed unto us, to mingle it with our own devices, and
bring it into small account, that we might magnify our own traditions: this
unfaithfulness we pray day and night, that the Lord would keep it from us, and
we exhort you, in the name of the Lord, receive the word ingraffed in you,
which can save your souls, and receive the immortal seal which is the word
of the living God by which you may be regenerate, and where in you have the
power of God to salvation, through a pure faith: and have no trust in man, for
every man is a liar. This faithfulness, by the grace of God, we bring unto you,
and beseech Iere. 1. 2^.
you to abide upon the foundation of the Apostles 1. Pet. 1. 23.
and Prophets: but of this faith, what one ^ot or title is left unto our
adversaries? Zimrie was as faithful unto Elahor, or Hazael to Benhadad, as they
have Romans 1. 16. Ephe. 2. 20.
ben faithful to the Lord Jesus, in this behalf: for what is it else but to be
guilty of y^ death of Christ, 1. Re. 16. 10.
to pollute as they have done, his Testament, which was confirmed in his blood?
What is it but to bring him down again from heaven, or to raise him up again
from the dead, to take away from us the word of faith printed in our hearts, by
the preaching of his Gospel, and to send us to Rome to inquire of our
religion? Surely (dearly beloved) I tell Deuteronomy. 30. 12 Romans 10. 6.
you true, and yet not I but Paul, nor Paul but Christ, y^ he that sends us
beyond the seas, to learn our faith, when we have the word of God at home, he
is an unfaithful creature, adulterating the word of God, and as one that would
pull Christ again down from heaven: and all the Decrees, and Decretalles,
and Constitutions of the church of Rome, which they have joined to Gods word,
and tell you, you must needs believe them, they are the very fornications of
the whore of Babylon, and have no thing but filthiness in them: and if any
doubt of it, let him consider what has been said. This was the faithfulness of
our Savior Christ, to speak only the words which his Father had
commanded him to speak. This was the faithfulness of Christ's Apostles, to
preach only what our Savior Christ had taught them. This is our faithfulness,
to believe according to the preachinge of the Apostles, and to be built upon
their foundation: not the Pope, who has exalted him self, and comes with
his dispensatious against God the Father, against his Son Christ, against
his Apostles, and makes Laws of his own, what a perjured and faithless
creature is he? And thus far of the ministers faithfulness.

Now, more touching this comparison here made between Christ and Moses, there
is no doubt but ye Apostle uses it the more to join the Hebrews unto Christ:
for how they accounted of Moses he knew well, and what soever was spoken of
him, they did willingly apply them selves to mark it, and learn it, and his
praise did win their affections to be more equally bent to learn Christ.
Taking this occasion, he begins his comparison, making this as common both
to Christ and Moses: that either of them ruled in the house of God, and either
of them was faithful in his charge: but yet so, as Christ was much more
honorable, and therefore to be of us acknowledged our only Prophet. The place
here alleged that Moses was faithful, is written in the 12. of Numbers, where
GOD gives him this testimony, and therefore makes it a warrant, that God had
chosen him above all other Prophets, to whom he would more clearly and fully
reveal his will: and therefore, none in all the children of Israel, not Aaron,
not Myriam, not any to presume against him.

A notable place and very fit for the Apostles purpose: for directly it
teaches, that likewise Christ, who of all other was most faithful, was also
most glorified of his Father, to be a Prophet above al prophets: and where he
says, That Moses was faithful in all his house: that is, in all the people of
Israel, which was his Church, called in the Scripture many times The house of
GOD, to show in how nighe a bond God had taken them: and that he adds (All)
it shows, that to every one, Moses was ordained of God a Prophet to reveal
all the will of God, neither any part of it was concealed from him that he knew
it not, neither kept secret by him that he would not declare it, but
faithful in all his house, whom in all things every one should follow: and
in this was an image of Christ to come, who in all ye house of God should be
absolutely faithful above all other that ever were before or after. Here we
have two especial things to learn. Christ was faithful in Christ is perfect
in his work of the Church, and we can not add any thing to better it. Ephesians.
5. 17,
al his house: if in all his house, then is there no piece of the house of God
which Christ has not built up unto perfection: for if any little part or
parcel of it, be least by Christ imperfect, then in it he was not faithful,
to finishe the work that God had given him. Our Savior Christ then if we will
receive him with all his praise, and give him the glory of all his work, we
must confess he has built a perset house, and made full all the holiness of
his Saints, that they might be washed from all uncleanness, and at the last
be presented by him, unto his father a glorious church, not haueing spott, or
wrinckle, or any like: for he is faithful in all the house of God, our faith,
our hope, our love, our wisdom, our woorshipping of God, our order, our
government, Christ has taught us all, and he is unto us all, and him alone we
must set to lead us in all our ways. If we should attribute unto him the
great and highest mysteries, our predestination, our redemption, our
justification, our sanctification, etc, and say, in such hard points he has
instructed us, but other things he has leaft to be done by man: what were
this but to say, Christ was faithful in building the stately rooms of his
Fathers house, to make the parlour, or hall, or great chamber, but nothing
else: so, manifestly robbing Christ of his glory, that he was not faithful
in all his house? And how are we blinded, if we do believe it: he that abased
himself so low, that he refused not the shame and curse of the cross, what
mean we to think, he did not abase him self to be with us in our own
likeness, and reveal unto us and teach us all the will of God, what soever we
ought to know or do? Let them go, them selves alone, and let not us walk in
their counsel, who dare require more then Christ has taught, or to presume to
speak more then they have learned of him: which is, to make him unfaithful in
some part of the house.

An other thing in this, is to be marked: if Christ were faithful in all his
house, then are they no part of this house, which are not built up by him: he
has not only made all perfect, but he has also done it alone, and not only
he builds the house, but they alone are the house who are built by him: so
that we if we will be this house, we must know and feel his workmanship in us:
and who soever knows him not, he has no place in the house of God: for the
faithfulness of Christ is in every part of it, which faithfulness, if it
have not wrought in us, we belong not unto it. And thus far of this
comparison with Moses, in which first the Apostle gives them both their
praise, that they were faithful in all the house of God.

Now least the comparison should seem equal, or Moses should be accounted as
great as Christ: even as before he has given Moses his due praise, to
testify how he honored so great a Prophet of God: so now he shows the
great excellency of Christ above Moses, that the Jews may also learn to
honor their Messiah, as it beecommeth them.

It follows: Now, this man is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, even
as much as he which builds the house, has more honor then the house: for
every house is builded of some man, but he that has built all things, is God.

Here, in one especial point the Apostle reserueth unto Christ a singular
honor above all other, and above Moses: that is, that Moses was so faithful a
ruler of the house of God, that yet he was himself a part of it: But Christ
is so a ruler of it, that he has also built it himself. Now then, seeing the
workman is more honorable then the house, and every part of it. Christ is
so much more honorable then Moses.

This reason, we see, is taken of the similitude of a house, a thing usual in
our life, and understood of all: and seeing it pleases God, to teach us
wisdom by so base similitudes, we are so much more excuselesse if we will not
learn.

Will you see the difference between Christ and Moses? Look upon a house,
and him that made it. When you see a fair house, who has the praise? The
stone and timber, and other matter: or else the workman that built them up
together? So is it with Christ and Moses: Moses was faithful, it is true: and
so is the stone and timber good, and sound, and very apt to abide the hewing,
til you can frame it together. But what is this to compare it with the workman*
Be it never so good, it is a lump without fashion, and never will have beauty
in it, except the workman set to his hand: even so Moses, because he is
flesh and blood, which nature our Savior Christ has sanctified to be a
vessel of the grace of God, he was an apt matter to be made even a beautiful
portion of this house: but what is this to Christ, without whom Moses had
perished in his own corruption, and his nature had been lost, no piece of it
to come into the house of God?

Seeing then Moses is as a part of a house, and Christ as the buylder, who
has set it up: Moses may have the praise, that he was set in an honorable
place: but the praise is not his own, but the workmans that set him in: if we
make a comparison between them.

In this similitude of the Apostle, that it might be a sul persuasion to the
Jews, they must know certainly, both that Moses is but a part of the house,
and that Christ is the buylder of it.

The first is a thing without controversy, that Moses was a part of the
house: for how was he else one of Gods Saints? or what comfort could he have
had of all the promises made to Israel: if his own portion had not been in
them, by being one of Israel? The other, that Christ has built this house,
the Apostle proves it thus. It must needs be, that every house must be built
of some body, and therefore the house of Israel, in which Moses was so
faithful, was also built by some man: it grew not alone, no more then timber
and stones can join together alone to make a house: who was it then has built
(...) or who made it? who? but even he that made all things, and that is God
him self: if then, as we have taught, Christ be God and the wisdom of his
father, by whom all things were made, in heaven and in earth: and if he has
taken our nature, that in one person God and man, he might be a faithful
ruier in this house of god: then he rules as the builder, as the maker, so
much more glorious then all other, as the builder of the house is more glorious
then the house it self: this is the plain meaning of the Apostle in these
third and fourth verses. Now if it be here objected: Only God is the builder,
therefore Christ being man, is also a part of the house: We grant it, he is a
part, because he is as one of us, has part with us, and we with him, he our
head, and we his body: but as he is a part, as he is man: so he is the
builder, as he is God: and therefore taking man's nature into the person of the
Deity, to glorify it with his own glory, he in this person God and man, is
now also the builder of the house: and therefore, al other must give him the
preeminence of honor. If it be again objected, that Moses was also a builder,
as S. Paul calls him self a builder and a wise builder, 1. Cor. 3 10.
it is true, that this name is given them, but only improperly, Romans 15. 20
as unto the instruments by which God builds: for otherwise Paul may plant
and Apollo may water: but there is no growing into ye house of God, except
Christ, who is God him self; give increase: for he is only the effectual
builder. He (as the prophet David says) even the most high, has Psalm. 87. 5.
stablished her: and by him all the body being coupled and knit together by
every joint for furniture thereof Ephesians. 4.
receives the increase of a perfect body, and is made a glorious house of God.

It follows now in the fifte verse. And Moses was faithful in all his house,
as a servant for the testimony of the things which should be spoken, but
Christ as the son is ruler of his house.

Here is an other difference, in which our savior Christ far exceeds
Moses, and that is: that Moses was in the house of god as a servant, but Christ
as the son. Now, how much more honor the son has in his Fathers house,
then he that is a servant, so far Christ is above Moses, and above all.

And in this, the Apostle needed not use many words: for the truth in all was
clear, that Moses was a servant: all confessed, and God calls him often his
servant Moses. And that Christ was the son, no man doubted, and the Scripture
gives him plainly the title of the Son of God.

This was unto the Jews a very plain, and a very strong persuasion: for
though they had been alieuated from this Son of David, whom the Apostle
preaches unto them, never so much: yet they must needs confess it, Moses was
but a servant, the Messiah must be the Son: therefore he to rule in the
house for ever, and Moses to give him place.

So now, this high honor of the Son of God, being given to this Christ
crucified among them, they could not be offended at the words, but were wisely
to consider, whether this was he they looked for or no: which by trial and
searching of the Scriptures, when they should find true, then Christ should
have the glory of our redemption, which thing, the Apostle now so carefully
goes about.

Here, we have all taught us a lesson of good humility, and how to know our
selves, and what place we have in the church of God. Who is there among us,
dare advance him self above Moses? yet Moses was but a servant. Which of us
is so great as an Apostle? Yet Paul says, We confess (...). Cor. 4. 5.
our selves to be servants of the Church.

To the end there should be no mo masters but Christ, it was necessary all
other should be servant: and to the end he might be Lord alone, so GOD
ordained it, that all his ministers The ministers are fellows, and Christ is
only our master and Lord.
should be fellows: so they are all fellow servant that are appointed of
God, for the ordering of his house.

Moses, in singleness of heart, was, and was called a servant: Paul a
servant: Peter a servant: all servant for the work of the ministry, to
build up the body of the Saints of God: this is Gods ordinance from the
beginning. But of late, one is risen up, a beast full of hypocrisy, more
lowely in name then any Apostle, or Prophet, and calls him self a servant
of servants: but as proud in spirit as the whore of Babylon, which makes
her self Lady over Kings and Emperors.

And this deceiuer has thus, as we see, profaned the Lords Sanctuary, and
exercised tyranny in his Church: he has driven out the servants which
labored in pain and lowliness to gather together, by preaching, all the
people of God, and has set masters in their steed, after his own likeness,
who too too long have now kept the Church of Christ in bondage, and cease
not to strive to keep it in bondage still.

And therefore, we ought the more earnestly to pray, that God would give unto
the nource* fathers, and nources of his Church, that is, to Kings and
Princes, wisdom to see it: and then we should have hope, that they should
also find grace to amend it. But let us return to the Apostle.

When he has thus showed, that Moses was but a servant, he tells after,
wherein his service was, and what was his faithfulness in it.

I^ follows: For a testimony of the things which should after be spoken. For
this purpose, Moses was a seru^unt, and in the perfourmaunce of this duty,
Moses was faithful: he was a servant, to bear witness unto the people of
all the words which God should speak unto them, that is, a servant
faithfully declaring all the law of God: for these words. The things which
should after be spoken^ though they be truly understood of the Gospel of
Christ, because in the figures of the law, it was shadowed: and Moses also
himself did bear witness of Christ: yet because here is comparison made
between Christ and Moses, distinctly speaking of both their callinges:
therefore I rather take these words of the Apostle here, only to be spoken of
the law given by Moses: so, Moses was a servant to bear witness of all the
things which should be spoken of the Lord. Here is the full office and whole
authority of a true servant, faithfully to do his masters message.

And Moses, the most renouned of all Prophets and greatest among the people of
Israel, what was he? A servant, to declare unto the people all that the Lord
had spoken. Who is he now will presume above Moses, to speak of his own head,
ordinances, and laws which the Lord has not made? who will establish decrees
of his own in the house of God? Whosoever he be, he shall carry his judgment:
he is not a servant, as Moses was: because he bears not witness only to the
words that God has spoken: but he exalts him self to be a master, and
has a mouth that speaks proud things, because he presumes in the house of
God, to give laws and orders of his own: for if he were a servant, he would do
the work of a servant, and bear witness what his master had said.

And here by this place, we may well expound it that the Apostle Paul, James,
Peter, write the^ selves the servants of Jesus Christ. The word it self is
manifest proof, they speak nothing but the words of Christ, no decree, no
co^stitutio^, no order was of their own, they were but servants: but al was of
the Lord Jesus Christ, who was their only master: and as their name gives
this testimony unto them, so Paul openly affirms it in plain words before
king Agrippa, that even to that day, he never witnessed any Act. 26. (...).
thing, neither to great nor little but only that which Moses before, and all
the prophets had said, should come to pass. Then let not ye papists hereafter
say, when we speak against all their vain devises, that they are traditions
left by the Apostles: for as they have not the Apostles places, but in stead of
servants are made Lords: so they hold no whit of the Apostles doctrine: or
if they will still auouche it, that the Apostles have delivered all such things
as they teach, then they must show where Moses or the prophets Romans 12.
have foretold it: for the Apostles were servants to bear witness only of
such things, as God had spoken by his servants before them, that is, by Moses
and the prophets, without whose warrant whatsoever comes, we may boldly say,
we utterly refuse it.

It follows: But Christ as the son is over his house. In this name (Son)
he does not only give preeminence to rule in ye house, but a perpetuity to
dwell in that house, and to reign (as the scripture says) in the house of
Jacob for ever: So that, being the son of God, who is heir of al things, he
rules in this house as Lord and governor, whose commandment alone does
stand. And again, being the Son of God, eternally begotten of his Father,
he ever did and shall do to the end, rule and have the souereigntie in this
house: and who soever he be, in this house, shall presume against ye Son, as
a rebellious servant, he shall be cast out of the house, and an other shall have
his room. Therefore, even as before the Apostle made his exhortation, that they
would consider this Apostle and high Priest of their prosession: even so let
us, and humble our selves under this high Lord in the house of God: let us obey
his voice and (as Solomon says) be more ready to hear, then to offer the
sacrifice of fools: and let us be all faithful in our calling, that before
him we may have a good account: especially the minister, that he will be a
faithful servant, keeping his fellowshipp in the church of God, and bearing
witness of all that the Lord has spoken. And now let us pray etc.

The fourteenth Lecture, upon the residue of the sixte verse.
6 But Christ is at the Son, over his own house, whose house we are, if we
hold fast that confidence and that rejoicing of that hope unto the end.
AS the Apostle has generally before exhorted them, to hearken unto Christ:
the high Priest and Apostle of our profession, showing the necessity of our
so doing, because of the excellency of Christ above all other, who were sent
of God unto us: yea, above Moses himself: so now more particularly, he
applies this unto them, and shows that by necessity of their condition and
calling, they are bound especially to this duty: because they, even they
themselves are this house of God, whereof he speaks, of which, Christ is the
builder, and in which he rules above all: so that they may be sure, it was
all one to deny Christ to be their only Prophet, and to deny themselves to
be the house of God. To this our purpose are these first words: Whose house we
be.

Another purpose of this speech, is, for their better instruction in the truth
of the gospel of Christ: that they should not, as their fathers did, hold
their faith toward God with respect of the Temple, then commonly called the
house of God: nor with any religion of all the ceremonies used in it: for all
these things had an end. God was now gone out of the sanctuary, and dwelt no
more between the Cherubims, but had made him a new tabernacle to dwell in,
which was the body of man: which tabernacle only we must have care of, to
keep it pure from ye concupiscence of the flesh, and to keep it holy from
the vain inventions of our heart, and then the Lord should be always with us,
as with the people whom he had chosen, to make them an habitation for him
self, and a tabernacle of his glory.

To this end also the Apostle says, Whose house we are: this we must learn
in all like places of scripture, where we are called by like name. Saint Paul
says: Do you not know that you are the temple of God, and that the spirit of
God dwells in you? And again: Do you not know, that your body is the temple
of the holy 1. Cor. 3. 16.
ghost which is in you, and which you have of God? And again, 1. Cor. 6. 16.
You are the temple of the living God, as God has said: I will dwell in them,
and I will walk in them, and they 2. Cor. 6. 16.
shall be my people, and I will be their God. And again: We be no more strangers
and forreiners, but fellow citizens with Ephe. 2. 19.
the Saints, and of the family of God. In these and all such places, we be
taught, that ye temple which was once the house of God, is now taken away: and
all the religion of the temple, which was once the service of god, is now
finished and has his end: from henceforth, there is neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision, nether Jew nor Gentile, but Christ is al in all: ye pure and
chaste body is his holy tabernacle, and spirit and truth is his heavenly
worship: thus much directly ye apostle teaches them in these words: whose
house be we: and therefore called the house of God, because his holy spirit
dwells in us, as appears in all the places before alleged out of Paul.

It follows now: If we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of our hope
unto the end: these words he adds, to teach them manifestly to know
themselves, whether they be this house or no: for if they be, they do hold and
shall hold the rejoicing of their hope, constantly and faithfully unto the
end. These words (dearly beloved) let us mark them well, and learn them
every iott and title, with a wise heart: for they contain a blessed
instruction, and most necessary for our time. There is not this day any other
thing, that holds back a great number from the gospel of Christ, but only
the ignorance of this one sentence: for what say al our adversaries against us,
but only this? Shall we leave the Catholic Church, to believe a few new
sproung up? Shall we leave the Church, and follow Luther or Zuinglius! The
Church has believed as we believe, ye Church has taught as we teach, and in
the Church we abide: thus, under the name of the church, the church, the world
is mocked, and as Paul says, the hearts of many men which are nor enill are
seduced, so that though they have no thing to blame in us, yet they dare not
come unto us, least they should forsake the brotherhod in the Church of Christ.
This general plague is easily cured, and all the evil of it is soon remedied,
if we can but hold our peace, and hear the Apostle speak for us all. This
same very question is here handled: the Jews were now affeard to receive
Christ, they thought him a new doctor, they had Moses, the temple, the
ceremonies, things full of excellent glory: and they were sure the church was
here, and these things were in the Church, to leave them all soudenly, and
cleave to Christ alone, were to leave the Church, and follow new doctrine. The
Apostle to stop this offense, he sets down first this plain doctrine
without question, or controversy, that the church of God, or (to use his own
word) the house of God, is not any building of wood or stones, not any city,
or any material Temple, but man is ye house of God. Here first we learn one
necessary lesson. Will thou know the house of God, that is, his Church? Look
not at Jerusalem, nor at Mount Sion: for neither the City, nor the Temple in
it, are now the house in which God dwells.

It thou doubtest know it for a truth, that Ierusalo^ long since is troaden
down of the Gentiles: the Turk and Infidels have defiled all the stones of i^
and for ye temple, there are many hundred years since the uncircumcised have
entered into it, and the abomination of desolation has stood in the holy
place, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken by the Prophet Daniel.

This therefore learn for a truth: The Church of God is not in any material
Temple, not it is not known by any City or Country, Jerusalem, that for this
cause, once was the glory of the world, and the beauty of the whole earth,
has no more this dignity: neither shall it be given to any place for ever:
but to find the Church of God, seek in the heart of man: for the Apostles
have all spoken plainly: We are his house. Now, let Rome go and boast her
self, and pronounce her proud decrees, that in her palaces the Church of
Christ does dwell: let all her lovers strive for her, praises, that she is
our mother: her we must serve, upon her we must wait, she cannot err:
against all these children of pride, we dare set out selves.

The house of God is neither in Rome, nor in the Capitol of Rome, no more then
it is in Egypt, or the high pinacled Churches in Egypt: but in every nation
and in every country, the men that fear God, and work righteousness, they
are the church, and the house in which God does dwell.

And as the Lord has done to Jerusalem, and to the ruins thereof, that the
place should not boast of the Oracles of God: so God has done to Rome, to the
idols thereof, that their boasting should be in vain of the church of God:
for what was Rome, even from her birth, but a City builte in parricide, then
strengthened with robbery, and made a sanctuary for murderers of all nations?
What was it after, but a slaughterhouse of the martyrs of God? And what is it
in ours and our fathers days, but the Queen of pride, the nurse of
idolatries, the mother of whoredoms, the sincke of iniquity, out of which
sorceries, witchcrafts, poysonings, adulteries, rebellions, and bloody wars,
have ouerflowed the whole earth.

I lie not on them (dearly beloved,) neither they them selves can accuse me,
if any of them hear what I say.

A thousand testimonies I have of this, out of their own stories, and ten
thousand ryming verses Citatur. Ca al test. ve^. to 535.
have been made against them, for their great iniquity: by example of one,
learn the residue.

A hundred and forty years past, one says of Rome, and of the Pope thus:
Imatenet Jupiter, c^lum habet Pluto:
Et accedit dignitas animali bruto:
Tanquam gemma stercort aut pictura Iuto.


We have brought GOD into Hell, and the devil into heaven, dignity is now
added to a brute beast, as a pearl to a dounghil, or a fair picture to a
piece of dyrt. Even such as these are, and no better, a thousand testimonies
are of the Church of Rome, all which, if we could not believe, yet let us
believe our own eyes: we have seen his wicked dispensations, the brother to
marry his brothers wife, and the sister to marry her sisters husband, the
uncle to marry his niece, and the nephue to marry his aunt. We have seen
his bulls to make the subjects rebel against their princes: we have seen his
stues in open and known places. The Turk has no more defiled Jerusalem, then
the Pope has defiled Rome: and all the altars of Mahomet are not so unclean,
as the Popes reverend altars, which serve for Sodomites: and as the Popes
honorable churches, in which they nourish up amorous boys. Nulla hie arcana
ro^elo, Mantuan says: I speak no secrets, the world knows this well enough.
And yet, if they will boaste, The Church of Rome, the Church of Rome, shall we
still believe them? or shall we rather believe the Apostle: that ye church of
God is not neither Rome, nor not Rome: but in Rome and out of Rome, the men
that fear God are the Church of Christ.

And let this be our first lesson, here taught us by the apostle, The church
of God is not found by places and countries: it is but a foolish thing to say,
Here is Christ, or there is Christ: he is in the desert, or he is in the town:
but as where the carcass is, there are the Eagles: so where are men that
believe in Christ, there is his Church. This is the Apostles meaning, when he
says: Whose house are we.

Now as we have learned to seek the church, not in places, but in the hearts of
men, so in the words following, the men are also described, that by their marks
we may know them from other men of the world, which are not of the house of
God, but an assembly of ye wicked. It follows: If we hold steadfast the
confidence and rejoicing of our hope, until the end.

Here the Apostle sets down three especial marks and properties, by which
the Church and children of God are known: the first is the joy of their hope,
the second the assurance of it, the third the constancy and perseverance unto
the end. The joy of our hope is, a present feelinge of immortality and the
glory of God, which the holy Ghost kindles in our hearts, and fills us
with all heavenly gladness, according to the promises preached in the word of
truth, which is his Gospel.

And let us not think, but that God has done thus with us, whom he has
chosen to eternal life. He has prepared our hearts to know and feel his
unspeakable gift, which he has given us: for if we should bestow any gift
upon men, we are not so unwise to give a precious thing unto him yt knows not
what it is: we would not give him a Diamond that would think it to be a piece
of glass: nor we would not give him a pearl, that would think it to be a
grain of salt: for so we should leese both our labor and our thanks. And
shall we think the Lord will so bestow his heavenly blessings? will he give his
gifts to those that know them not, who can not give him again the praise of
his goodness? no, he will never do it, but as Peter says, he has taken us for
his own people, to the end we should show 1. Pet. 2. 9
forth his virtues, that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous
light: and therefore, if we be in the covenant of his grace, appointed to the
inheritance of his glory, it is impossible we should not feel the comfort of
it, and know the height and breadthe of his great mercy and grace. If there be
a barren and fruitless man, that knows nothing of all this, in whose ears
the sound of the name of God has neither fear nor reverence, and in whose
heart his knowledge has neither joy nor gladness, he is yet a stranger from
the church of God, and cannot challenge any part or fellowship of the Gospel
of Christ: for while he can feel no greater pleasure then of bodily delight,
his eye to see, his ear to hear, his mouth to taste, his skin to touch, why
is not the ox as good as he? for these things are unto the ox as well as
unto him: or if honor, riches, authority credit, favor, be the things he
love most, and in which he has greatest comfort: what is he better then the
Paganes and infidels that were before him, in whom this desire was as much,
and this delight much more abounding then unto us? for we, in respect of them
are beggarly tenants: and they in respect of us were monarchs of the whole
world. If these things could make the house of God: the house of God were
among the beasts of the field, or among savage people worse then beasts,
whose desires, if they be our desires, and their delights, if they be our
delights, we shall be of them, and they of us: but the house of God shall be of
neither of both: for in the house of God is this hope yt we speak of: a feeling
(I say) of Gods glory, in which we have pleasure more then in all the world.
Let us take an example of Paul in steed of many, he protests thus: I
account all the world to be loss unto me: Phil. 3. 8.
yea, I account it but as doung, to the end I may win Christ: have thou
this heart, and thou have peace, and thou have sealed it, that thou art of the
house of God: and this is it that the Apostle teaches us here in these
words: if we hold this rejoicing of our hope steadfast unto the end.

Another thing here to be learned, if we will know our selves to be this
house and Church of God, is that as we hold this hope, so we must hold it
steadfast, and without wavering, unto the end: for so the Apostle says: We must
have steadfast assurance of our hope: he calls it in the sixth chapter, A full
persuasion of hope. Saint Paul calls it, His intentive hope, a hope, in
which he shall never be frustrate. Ca. 6. 12. Phil. 1. 20.
So that this assurance, and full persuasion, is in a true and living hope, and
it casts out mistruste and wavering, even as faith does: for faith and hope
cannot be separate, neither in nature nor property: but if you have faith, you
have hope: and as your faith is, so is your hope: a sure faith, a lively hope:
a wavering faith, a blind hope: for our faith is a persuasion of ye love of
God in Christ, and our hope is an apprehe^sio^ of ye glory which by yt love is
given to us.

It can not be that we should know the love and grace of God, which is our
faith, but we must know the fruit of his love, that is, his glory, and eternal
life, which is our hope: if therefore we be sure, God does love us in Jesus
Christ, we are also sure that God will glorify us through Jesus Christ: and
as our faith rejoices in Gods favor, so our hope rejoices in Gods glory:
and as our faith is sure that nothing shall separate the love of God from us,
so our hope: longs after the incorruptible inheritance which we feel and
know is laid up in heaven. So this constancy and boldenes of our hope,
without wavering, laid up in our breasts, and crying still within us, Come
Lord Jesus, this hope is our warrant we be the house of God. And all this I
speak more plainly and in mo words, because there are so many which either
cannot or will not understand it: for they conceive no other thing when we
speak of hope, but a desire to have a thing whereof we doubt, and if we ask of
the^, whether they be sure to be saved through Christ, they will answer they
can have no assurance, for the^ how could they hope? thus they make them a hope
of their own, a new hope which the Church of God knows not, a doubtful
desire of a thing they wish, in stead of a present feelinge of the thing they
long for. But let us be wise hearted, and know before the Lord (as the Apostle
here plainly teaches us) that we be the house of God, if we hold the
rejoicing of our hope steadfast, and sure unto the end: and if there be an
other people which have cast their hope from them, and taken in stead of it a
new fancy, worldly minded me^, which bring our worldly speech to measure the
truth of God, because in worldly things, we say we hope of that which we can
not surely tell whether we shall have or no: therefore to make also the hope of
salvation, a desire in us, whereof we are uncertain: if (I say) there be any
such people, let them boast they are the church, yet we know they are not ye
church, but an absurd people: for let them answer me but this one question.
I ask of them whether they be sure they are the church of God or no? if they
be not, sure they be blind leaders of the blind: and shall we follow them who
know not whether they go? If they be sure, do they think the Church of God
can perish? if it cannot, the hope of it is sure, and no man can come into it,
but he must have his portion in this assurance of hope. And all this I speak
not as though Gods children are every one, and always in this assurance, for
sometime their faith is weak, and their hope is shadowed, that they might
humble them selves under the hand of God, till they do acknowledge their own
unworthiness: and hunger and thirst after the righteousness of Christ: but in all
their weakness, they will confess their sin, and say, they ought more
assuredly to hold their hope: only this I say, and this the Apostle says,
this is the doctrine of the house of God, that they ought to hold the
rejoicing of their hope steadfast, and sure unto the end: and this doctrine,
that our hope is doubtful, and can not have any assurance of the thing we
hope for, this (I say) is not the doctrine of Christ, nor of the house yt he
has built, but of some other, an Idols house, and house of idolaters, y^
either know not whether their God be faithful and just, or but a deceiuer: or
whether themselves should believe his promises, or rather mistrust them. And
thus far of the church as here the Apostle has described it.

Now, the third thing which we must here mark for our instruction, is
perseverance: for so he says: We m^st hold our rejoicing continual unto the
end. A most necessary thing, and such as without which all our labor is
lost: but a thing hard to atteine unto, and full of difficulty: know it by the
experience of it: for scarce one of a great many does grow up into serue^cie of
zeal, and so continues unto the end. And therefore the more danger is unto us
in this behalf, the more watchful we must be to avoid the peril. Let us first
know it, and persuade our selves in it, there is no pleasing of God, but in
this perseuera^ce unto the end: for even as the prophet says, so we shall find
it true: If ye righteous man of an hundred year old shall forsake his
righteousness, ye Lord will also forget al y^ righteousness y^ he has done: and a
most just cause why our sins should be imputed, if at any time we should
faint and fall away: for he y^ can measure his obedience to God by days and
years, and accompteth times how long he will walk before the Lord, he is not
worthy to be reckoned among his servants, nor to be one of Gods children:
for God is not as men are, nor his rewards are as the rewards of princes: he
measures not his gifts, by such skant accomptes of years, and months, and
times past, as though at last he could be envious at our prosperity, but he
fills his hand with blessing, and his love with immortality, neither is
there any end of his mercy: and if we shall come to such cold reckoning, to
score up our years and number our doings, like prentices or hired me^, let us
go serve some God that again scoreth up his benefits, and with an evil eye
looks upon his lovers: let us worship with the papists al their
abominations: Saint Cornellis, who can only keep us from the falling sickness:
S. Apolline, who will help us of the toothache: or some other Gods of the
mounteines, or Gods of the valleys: if thou have such a God, that can do so
little good, make thy bargeine thereafter, and serve him, by times and moments.
But if thou serve y^ Lord God of hosts, whose mercy is over all his works,
and whose infinite goodness does endure for ever, thou seruest a bountiful
Lord, who gives thee all things, and vpbraideth none: and thou may not be a
nigardly servant, to give unto him either thy hand or thy foot, but all is of
him, and withal y^ must serve him. Thou seruest a loving lord, who will not
cha^g his favor toward thee for evermore: and thou may not serve him by
account of days, but to ye last hour thou must ever be faithful. A perfect
God, a perfect servant: an everlasting God, a perpetual servant: if thou fall
at the last, thou art fallen from him, and not he from thee: and thy
comdemnation is of thy self. Therefore our savior Christ has given us a clear
warning: that He that sets his hand^ to the plowe Luke.
and looks backward, he is not meet for the kingdom of heaven: but thus his
promise is unto us: He that persenereth Matthew. 24.
unto the end, he shall be safe: and in this assurance Saint Paul held the
rejoicing of his hope: I have 1. Tim.
strouen a good strise. I have finished my course. I have kept my faith. Now
the crown of righteousness only is behind, which he will give me, who is the
righteous judge. Even ^o (dearly beloved) let us be constant, let us cast away
the burden that presses us down, and this sin which so easily compasses
us about, and let us run with patience all out the race which is set before
us: so we shall be like unto our savior Christ, who for the joy that was set
before him, did despise the cross, and is now the author and finisher of our
faith.

The greatest enemy we have to make us slumble and fall, that we should not
hold this constancy, and perseverance unto the end, is, our own flesh. And
if it may have any rule in this work, or if we consult with it in these
heavenly things, we are undone, and all our labor is lost: for our flesh
will like of nothing long. All delights must have their change, and the
greater the pleasure is, the nearer is safety, in any thing what so ever
apperteineth unto the body. Would thou never so feign sell thy self to
serve any thing, thou shall find nothing that will give thee a perpetual
pleasure, to buy thy service: hunger and thirst are soon satisfied, the heavy
cyclid is easily filled with sleep, labor has weariness, and rest is soon
tedious: all play and pastim^, which so many make the crown and garland of
their life, this also is dullness in a little while, and this garlande is as
withered hay: an other thing must come to take this up, or rather then this
should be still, we would never play while we lived.

Thus, as the night does overtake the day, and the day does drive away the
night; so our worldly pleasures run one after an other, and the best of them
all do not endure long. Even as Solomon says, The eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor ye ear with Eccle. 1. (...).
hearing: but be the tune never so sweet, at last we desire another. This
flesh and fleshly mind, if we shall bring to our religion, can we (think you)
persevere in the profession of it? We cannot: no more then the Cat of the
mounteine can change her spots, or the black Moore can change his color. If
therefore we will hold this excellent virtue of perseverance unto the end,
let us make a good beginning: even that God (who changes not) with his holy
spirit which never forsakes us, may kindle our hearts with the love of his
truth, which shall nor be quenched for evermore.

This it is I say: let this be our coming unto the Gospel, in this preparation
of our heart, that our heavenly Father, the God of all grace, may give us his
spirit, that we may love his truth unto eternal life, This beginning shall
have still increase, and have at the last a perfect work: but if this be not
it, if the love of God be not all we look for, if ambition, authority,
riches, praise of men: if any fleshly affection be with us, when we have our
purpose, our work is at an end. Or, if by occasion the Gospel shall hinder
this purpose, our religion is at an end, fare well the Gospel, Book and all:
we begin to sing, a new master, a new. But o man blind and folish! What is
thy glory but in shame? and what is thy song but lamentations and mourning and
woe? Thou have gotten, in deed, a new master: for thou haste forsaken God,
who is from the beginning: and seruest the crooked serpent, who was an Apostata
before thee: and yet thou haste no new master, but whom before tho^ seruedst
in hypocrisy, him now thou seruest in vanity, and he holds thee bound, even
as he will him self.

Let us take heed (dearly beloved) and never be overtaken of such a shame.
Let us feel our hope, rejoice in it, love the glory that is set before us,
enlarge our hearts to comprehend immortality, and with all our soul serve
the God of glory. Let us delight in his statutes, and judgments, and make
them our songs in the night season: so we shall know we be the house of God:
we shall have this perseueraunce, whereof I have spoken, and we shall not be
confounded for ever. Now, let us pray etc.

The fifteenth Lecture upon the 7, 8, 9, 10. and 11. verses.
7 Wherefore, as the holy Ghost says, To day* if y^ shall (...) his voice.

8 Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, according to the day of the
t^tion in the wilderness.

9 Where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years
long.

10 Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They err^ ^uer in
their heart* neither have they (...) my ways.

11 Therefore I snare in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest.


WE have heard hitherto in this third chapter, how the Apostle has taught,
that our Savior Christ is our only Prophet, faithful in his work, even as
Moses was faithful; (...) much more honorable then Moses, as the workman is
above the house or the son above the servant: and this house which Christ
has built, and in which he reigns, are even we our selves: if we hold fast
what he has taught, and rejoice in the hope of it unto the end.

Now, he adds another reason, taken of y^ Prophet David, who in spi^ (...)
this of Christ: To day* if you hear his (...) ^y ^ll circumstances of y^ time
and words does manifestly apeare, and therefore let us open our ears and hear
this excellent prophet, and never suffer his doctrine to fall unto ye ground:
to this purpose, he alleges this long sentence of the prophet David, and
begins thus: Wherefore, as the holy Ghost does say: he had before exhorted
in his own words, he adds now more weight by the authority of the Prophet
David, to prick them the more that were dull to learn: for howsoever they
would otherwise have made light account of the Apostles words: yet to have
despised the admonition of so high a Prophet, it had been intolerable, even
among them selves. And to the end he might fear them yet more with their
sin, if they would not hear, he names not the prophet David, whose words
they knew well enoughe, but he names the holy Ghost, who spoke in the
Prophet, that they might know, to refuse it were not to refuse a man, but God,
who spoke by man unto them: for this purpose he begineth thus: Wherefore the
holy Ghost does say: and let us here learn, even as the Hebrews ought to have
learned, with reverence to hear and to obey the word, (for it is not the
w^orde of man but of God, no^ spoken by man but by the holy Ghost.) So saint
Paul speaking of the scripture, he gives it this title of special honor
above all writings, that it is inspired from God: and Saint Peter says, 2.
Tim. 3.
that prophecy is not of man or man's wisdom, but the holy men of God spoke
as they were carried of (...). Peter. 1. 21
the holy ghost. This must breed in us a singular regard of the word of the
Prophets, except we be exceeding blind: for if I do believe in my heart, as I
confess in my tongue, that God only is wise, God only is holy, God only is
our Lord: then I must needs acknowledge, that his word only is my wisdom,
and my understanding before all people: his word is my warrant, of all pure,
hollie and blameless religion. If I do confess that God only has
immortality, and is in light that shines for evermore, then must I needs also
say, as Peter says All flesh is grass: and the glory of man is as the
flower 1. Pet. 1. 23.
of the feelde, the grass withers, and the flower vadeth: but the word of
the Lord indureth for ever: To be short, if this be a commandment unto me,
Thou shall have none other Gods but me: let me hold this as a commandment
from him, that I have no word of life but his, yea whatsoever I owe unto him,
in the thoughts of my mind, in the words of my mouth, in the works of my
hands, in all my life: If this be his word, this must be my teacher, and in
obedience of it, I must do all that I do, make this account of the word of
God, or you make no account of it at all: and make not this account of any
other thing, or else thou worshippest God and an idol too. And consider (I
beseech you) but this one thing, and mark it well, that the Scripture is thus
called, the The word of God. There is no doubt, but Psalm. 113. 3.
the name of God is great over al ye earth and his name is praised from the
rising of the sun to the going down of the same, neither is there any
creature, but it shows forth his glory, yet has not God reserved the ^ound
of his name to be called upon (...) y^ name of any creature, but he has given
this only to his word. We do not say, The heaven of God, nor the earth of
God, nor any thing in them under the name of God is noted notwithstanding they
show forth his glory: but ye writings of the Apostles and prophets, by this
name we know them. The word of God: why else? but that his wisdom, his power,
his glory, his mercy, especially, and above al things shines in his word:
and therefore let us persuade our selves, that his majesty can not be so
highly offended in any abuse of all his creatures, as when his word is
despised. When man saw not his eternal power and Godhead, which was manifest
and might have been known, in the works of the creation of the world, yet God
did ouersee all their ignorances, and had pity on them, he gave them a better
testimony of his presence, and made his word known in the mids of them,
that they might believe it, and be saved: which word whosoever shall despise, he
has despised ye power of God by which he should be saved, and is more guilty
before god, the^ paganes and infidels which never knew him: neither can there
be any other mean of salvation unto him. To this effect (no doubt the apostle
gives this reverend speech to the prophecy. The holy ghost hath^ said.

Thus having prepared ye people to hear and regard, he sets down ye words
of the prophet, as follows: To day if you will hear his voice, harde^ not
your hearts, as in the bitter murmuring in the day of tentatio^ in the
wilderness, where your fathers, etc. To understand this exhortation well, we
must see the whole purpose of the psalm. The prophet makes this psalm, no
doubt, as a preparation for the people in all their holy convocation, how to
present them selves before the Lord: after the same manner, in a good and
laudable custom, we use it now in the church in our service unto God,
beginning with this Psalm, to stir us up into fear and reverence, and an
earnest desire of the praise of God. O come let us sing unto the Lord etc. and
because our zeal toward God is faint, and hypocrisy has infected the hearts
of many: therefore the Prophet touches them nearer, that if they will stand
acceptable before God; delay not, nor be faint hearted, but even speedily and
with a good courage: Today if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts
etc. And he rehearses the examples of their fathers who tempted God, and fell
in the wilderness, the fear of whose examples should make us wise.

This being now the plain meaning of the prophet, you see how fitly this
Scripture is alleged by the Apostle: as then the Prophet cried unto them in
their assemblies. Today if you will hear his voice etc: that they might keep
holy their Sabbath days, and be holy in their assemblyes before their God,
to hear his word with humility, and offer them selves in a holy obedience
unto it: So here the Apostle, applying it unto Christ, who then spoke by his
Prophets, that his word now might have also the reverence of his own
person, he says also to them: Today, if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts. etc.

Now, touching the words that he says, Today: Today.
he means all the time in which the gospel is preached, teaching us heerby,
that so long as the word is preached, so long salvation is offered. In like
sense Saint Paul exhorting the Corinthia^s not to receive 2. Co. 6. 2.
the grace of God in vain, alleges this saying out of Esaic: I have heard
thee in an acceptable time, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee:
whereunto he Esa. 1.
adds: Behold, now is the acceptable time, behold now is the day of
salvation: plainly expounding this time and this day to be so long as the
gospel is preached: by which we learn, how great a benefit it is to hear.
Christ preached: for then God offers him self unto us, then he stretches out
his hands (as the prophet says) to embrace us, then he calls us to come
unto him, then he will accept us, then is ye time of salvation for us: all his
favor, love, mercy, goodness, al his graces are laid out unto us: he has
opened the heavens y^ we might see, and showed forth his glory, that we might
understand, and be no more unbelieving, but believing. And what excuse (trow
we) can we take up, to bring before him, if this Gospel of grace, of peace,
of life, be preached unto us, and not regarded? Therefore, even as the Apostle
says afterward, so let us learn. While the Gospel is preached it is still
called, Today: harden not our hearts against it, through the deceites of sin.

And this (I beseech you) once again to remember, that when the Gospel is
preached unto us, then it is Today.

Take away this word preached, which is ye power of God to thy salvation, and
what time art thou in? Sure in the night in which no man can work: for this
is the day, when his voice is heard. Even as the days of our life, they arise
with the sun, and go down again with it: so the day of our salvation it
springs in the preaching of the Gospel, and it is shut up again with the
ceasing of that voice: and therefore the holy ghost says, when our savior
Christ does come to Capernaum in the borders of Zabulon and Nephtalim: The
people that sat in darkness Matt. 4. 16.
saw a great light, and to them that sat in the region and in the shadow of
death, light arose up unto them: this light is the light of the son of
righteousness: how long so ever it shines, so long shines the acceptable
time and the day of health: now would I feign know, what avail prayers for ye
dead: what helps sacrifices for them in purgatory: is not this Son gone
down upon them? is it not night with them, and they all have made their beds
in the dark? Have they any more ears to hear: or are they not as men dead
long ago? How then can yet their state be changeable? How can they obtein
grace, mercy, and peace, by our intercession? If they can, the Apostle says
not true: that it is no longer, Today, then while the Gospel is preached:
Saint Paul says not true, that now only is the Acceptable time: our Savior
Christ deceived us, when he said, The night comes in which no man can work:
but this was the envy of the devil, to bring us in a fools paradise of
prayer when we be gone, that we might not regard the God of glory while he
offered eternal life unto us. And for the Saints that are dissolved, and be
with Christ, they shall be witnesses against us, of our madness, which esteemed
them as tormented souls of purgatory: and other whom God has taken away in
his anger, to make them dye in their sins, when we fill their hands with our
foolish prayers, we join with them in rebellion against God: but their
torments can not be healed with medicines, and therefore as an unprofitable and
evil thing, so let it go: let the dark fancies of dead men alone, and let us
do our duty one to another, in all prayers and works and love, now in this
time, while we may do good, and while the day is yet upon us.

Now further, where it is said: If you will hear his voice. we learn by
warrant of the holy Apostle, that our savior Christ was ever y^ prophet of
his church in virtue and power of his spirit, even from the beginning, as well
as in nature and substance of manhood, after he was borne of the virgin Marie:
So the Apostle afterward again says of y^ prophets times, that The voice of
Christ did shake the earth then: and in all Cap. 12. 26.
the disobedience of the people of Israel, in the wilderness.

Saint Paul says: They tempted Christ: as noting him to be their guide and
leader in their deserte 1. Cor. 10.
ways. And this is the true acknowledgment of our Savior Christ, to be the
lamb killed from the beginning of the world: to confess that he is, and ever
was, the mediator and redeemer of his church, and the well-beloved son of his
father, and the prophet for ever, whom he had ordeiued for his people: all
which when we shall believe, then we shall boldly say, as this Apostle
says: Jesus Christ to day, and yesterday, he is the same: and the same abides
for evermore: Cap. 13. (...).
the same Prophet, the same faith, the same hope, the same God, even as we
confess one, and the same catholic church. As our fathers were saved, so are
we: and at this day we believe, not only as Paul and Peter did believe: but
we walk in the steps of that says: which was first in our father Abraham:
yea, and in all Patriarchs before him, as we have all had but one heavenly
master.

And whatsoever outward ceremonies God has ordained, according to the
diversity of times, they were ever appointed to be schoolemaisters to lead
men unto Christ, in whom only GOD was well pleased, and without whom there
is no salvation.

And herein the singular love of God to us has appeared: and these days of
the Gospel preached, are above all other blessed days: because this Savior
has showed him self unto us, and has been in the mids of us, flesh of our
flesh, and bone of our bones, and we have seen his glory as the glory of the
only begotten son of God: and he has revealed unto us the clear and
shining way of this salvation more openly then ever before: and therefore let
us hear the admonition: To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.

And here that he says: Harden not your hearts: we see how great a sin we
co^mitt, in not hearkening to the voice of God, we harden our hearts and cover
the^ as with a covering of brawne, that they may not be mollified with y^ grace
of God: for the word of God is living, and more sharp then a two edged sword,
and enters to the division of the soul and the spirit: neither is it
possible to keep it out, but as a sword, so it will pearce our heart, except we
have made it hard as flint. And as he says: Do not you harden your own
hearts: so let us persuade our selves, our sin is our own, and we have done
it, we may not excuse our selves, as the manner of some is, and say our hearts
are hardened whether we will or no: and who can do withal? True it is, and the
Prophet says it: We have of our selves stony hearts, and all the imaginations
Ezec. 11 19. and. 36. ^6. Genesis 8. 21.
of them are evil, even from our youth: so that all men, father and children,
may say a like: we know that in us (y^ is in our flesh) there dwells no
goodness, but what so ever the corruption of our nature is, be it never so
great, yet our fault is never the less, no more then if we had an Angels
nature, which willingly and wittingly we would pervert: for unto our corrupt
nature, we bring of our selves a perverse will, which did corrupt the Angels
nature, and made them fall from God: so lay no more thy fault on thy nature,
for thy will is set to work iniquity, with all delight to do evil. We wish
to bring our ill purposes to pass, we rejoice, we are glad, it is the thing
we would have: we will not hear any other call: we bid farewell to all, what
so ever would turn us from our sin.

The corruption which we have, our pleasure is in it: and all the goodness which
we want, we care not for it: but our will is after our work, and as we are, so
we like our selves best: if there be any wicked and dissolute man, that
denies this: either he has taught his tongue to lie, or a seduced heart has
deceived him: for let him speak that can, the thief that steals, the
adulterer that defiles his body, the envious man that speaks evil, the
beastly man that murdereth another, the blasphemous tongue, the rebellious
hand: which of these is not thruste forewarde of his own will? or who ever
that mourned and wept, that fasted and prayed not to be lead into tentation,
has been given over to so shameful sins? No, no, if God make us once mourn
under the body of sin, the grace of Christ is offered to the broken and
contrite heart, and sin reigns not in us, but because we delight in it: let
us hearken therefore to this admonition: To day if you will hear his voice
harden not your hearts.

It follows: As in the bitter murmuring, as in the day of tentatio^ in the
wilderness, where your fathers tempted me, proved me and saw my works forty
years. This example of their fathers rebellion, is well alleged, both to move
them the more to take heed by their fathers example, and because they were a
people exceedingly holden with an opinion of their fathers, that they should
yet remember their fathers were but men, and they should not follow them in
their sin and wickedness.

The story which the prophet especially means, is written in the 17. of
Exodus, where Moses shows how the people murmured in Rephidim, for want of
water: for then Moses gave these very names to the place, and called it,
Bitter murmuring, because they strove bitterly, and contended against Moses:
and he called it tentation, because they ceased to put their trust in God, and
rebelled for want of water.

So by the names it is plain, what story is meant: and we have in it to
learn. first how great a crime it is to resist the minister of God: for the
name of that sin, God has given unto the place for a perpetual remembrance,
what the punishment of it has been: and again, what it is to fall from our
hope that we have in Gods providence, to mistrust him, to fear that he will
fail us: for this is to tempt God: with which sin how highly he is
displeased, the name of the place to this day bears witness* which Moses for
that cause called tentation. And here again, let us learn, how, and in what
case, we may give names unto places, and that is, when the remembrance of the
name, is a putting us in mind of some special work of God toward us: as in
remembrance of the excellent vision that God gave Jacob, he caled the place
Bethel. When God gave to Abraham the life of Isaak his son, and saved him
Genesis 28. 19.
from sacrificing, Abraham called the place Jehovah Genesis 22. 14.
Iireh.

Likewise, in remembrance of GODS punishments, when he divided the peoples
tongues, he called the name of the place Babel. When God Genesis 11. Number. 11. 4.
destroyed from heaven, the host of Israel with fire, for remembrance of the
punishment, they named the place Taberah.

Many such examples are in the Scripture, good and profitable for us to
follow, if we had hearts that feared God, and had comfort in the remembrance
of all his works: but we have leaf^ that good work of our forefathers, and as
time corrupts all things, so it has here corrupted our manners.

In deed, we give names still unto places, but not now for any conscience
toward God, the better to remember his goodness toward us: but we erecte
thereby monumentes to our flesh, and make shrines of pride. We do (I am
afraid) as the prophet David says: the wicked do think their houses and Psalm.
49. 12.
their habitations shall continue for ever, and call their lands by their names.
We swell with vanity, and are puffed up with pride: and in this hautinesse of
heart, we give names unto our houses: this boasting is not good: and of such
high minded men the prophet says: They shall lie like sheep in their graves,
and death shall devour them. yea, and al their pomp with them: of this let us
beware, for it is a sin that cleaves fast unto us, and we are easily ledd
with it: otherwise, if God give us humble hearts, and minds, in the naming of
our houses after our own names, or after other, there is no hutt at all.

Now, where it is said: They tempted God, and proved him in the wilderness,
where they saw his works forty years: we must know, the wilderness was a
terrible and fearful place, full of temptations, where the people always
wanted, sometime meat, sometime drink, in fear of enemies, in fear of
serpents, in much affliction: but what of this? yet if they tempt God, they
are rebellious against God. For he that made the wilderness, and all the
terror of it, is not his power over it, to save his sainct^s? No place, no
man, no terror, must overthrow our hope in Gods providence: or, if it do, we
tempt God, and provoke him against us: therefore David said: Though I walked
through the vallie of the shadow of death, yet I would not fear, because thou
art Psalm. 23. 4.
with me.

And let us never deceive our selves: for if we be not, as David was, to trust
still in God, yea, though he seemed to kill us: Surely, let our days be never
so peaceable, yet every occasion will make us fall from God.

Solomon says: if we faint in the day of adversity, our strength was never
great: and if with the Israelites we Prou. 24. 10
would murmur in the wilderness, with the Israelites we would also rebel even
in the land of Canaan: for they were no more obedient when they had peace,
when their land flowed with milk and honey, then when they were in the
solitary desert.

And let us not look upon our fathers example, but look upon our selves this
day: does this peace of ye Gospel make us more thankful, or more desirously to
give us our selves to be servants of the Lord, then we were before, when we
felt y^ prison houses and hot fires of idolatric? the Lord knows, and he
judges: and we are wise, if our hearts be settled, for no cause at all to
leave our obedience to God: then we may be bold and say with Job: If he will
kill us, let him not spare: for we have not denied the words of the Job. 6.
(...).
holy one, let it come that he sends. Neither the wilderness, nor fiery
serpents, nor yet y^ fruitful vines and pleasant springs of the land of Canaan,
shall separate between God and us.

And here, that God says, he did xl. years show his works unto them, he
means both Manna, with which he ^ed them from heaven, and their continual
leading with the pillour of cloud, and pillour of fire, and all other miracles
which he did before them: wherein appears the long suffering of God, and as
Paul says: The riches of his bountifulnes and great patience, which is not
overcome with our Romans 2. 4.
sins: but he once promised it unto Abraham, to give a land unto them: and
all the rebellion of his children, could never falsify his promise. This ought
to strengthen our faith to the forgiveness of our sins: we have a covenant of
God, greater and better they y^ made with Abraham: even a covenant made in his
only begotten Son, through whom he has said, he is well pleased with us, and
will remember out sins nor our iniquities any more. And let us not fear,
neither the greatness of our sin, nor the craf^nes of our enemy, but in a
repenting and faithful heart, trust unto his promise that can not change his
grace, nor repent him of his mercy for ever. And yet, that we should not be
here secure, and commit sin without regard, as men that carry away the
grace of God to wantonness, thinking any outward calling to be warrant enough
of our election. To take away the gross opinion, and make us search better,
whether we be the children of the covenant, or no, therefore he adds, that he
was angry with this generation, and said: It is a people that do err in
their hearts for they have not known my ways etc. testifying by this
threatening, that his promises were not to them only in their birth, that they
were the children of Israel, but much more in this: if they walked in the
steps of the faith of Abraham. So all we this day salvation is promised unto
us in Jesus Christ, in a holy covenant, which shall never be broken: but God
will make all our enemies our footestoole, and will surely take us into his
glory. But let us be wise, to see whether the covenant is made with us or no:
for as not all that were borne of Abraham, were the children of Abraham: so,
not all that profess the Gospel, shall have the salvation of the Gospel: for
there are many drunkards, gluttons, adulterers, covetous men, blasphemers,
liars, contentious persons, and such other, which shall never into the
kingdom of of Heaven: yet will they boast of the gospel of Christ: but he
that dies with Christ, and is buried with him, touching the old man, and as
Christ is risen from the dead: so by the spirit of Christ, he that ryseth up
into newenesse of life, with him this covenant is mad, and with none other:
and he shall be justified by his faith, when the sins of the wicked shall fall
upon them.

Further, in this threatening, we have to mark first the cause, even ye
peoples sin, which the prophet sets out thus: It is a people that do err
in their hearts, for they have not known my ways. This is the beginnig of all
evil, to leave the ordinances of God, and walk in our own imaginations: and
this is only folly, to forsake the word of God, the founteine of all
wisdom, and to follow our own inventions, which are vain and fruitless.
So Moses vpbraideth the people, when they obeyed no longer Gods ordinances, to
do them: but made new laws unto themselves, to live by. They are (says he) a
nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding Deuteronomy. 32. 2^
in them: by this we know what they are, what wisdom and counsel is in them,
that take away the work of God, and teach their own traditions. It is a
plain sentence, They err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways:
So we may boldly say, It is a foolish people, an ignorant people, a people
full of blindness and sin, whosoever walk in their own imaginations: for
they have forsaken the ways of God, and now, what wisdom can there be in
them? And mark that he says, They err in their hearts: noting what study is
in the^, and how full they are of thoughts and cogitations what to devise,
ever m^sing, ever inuenting, and never the better, no quietness is within us.
So that we are sure, our own traditions, the more we follow them, our own
foolishness does the more vex and disquiet us: and we do nothing else, but
waste pensive days, and heavy nights, studying with our selves how we may
perish. If thou doubt of this, whosoever thou art, hear the word of the
Lord: They err in their heart, for they have not known my ways: if thou
hear it, and know it, leave off their woeful ways, who seek tradition,
and err in their hearts, and have no peace: and follow the word of God,
which only gives light and security unto us.

An other thing, in this threatening is: that God swears They shall not enter
into his rest. This oath is to persuade us, that with a constant purpose, God is
just, even as he is merciful: and let us not flatter our selves in vain hope
to escape his anger, while we will needs walk still in our sins, for in
justice and judgment the glory of God shines: and no more then he can break
his promise of love and mercy, made with his Saints: no more will he defile
his covenant, in which he has threatened the rebellious people: but he will
surely recompense their sins into their bosom, and his anger shall consume
them. Therefore to these also has he sworn, and he will not repent him: They
that have not known his ways, they shall never enter into his rest: of this
rest we shall have occasion to speak hereafter. Now let us pray, that God for
his sons sake would prepare our hearts to the hearing of his voice, that we
may not be despisers, as our forefathers have been, whom God threatened in his
heavy displeasure, and has showed his judgments toward them, even as he
would: but let us be as his sheep, that do hear his voice, that his word
may he in our hearts, a seed of regeneration, by which we may be borne a
new, into holiness and righteousness, to glorify him that is our God for
ever, etc.

The sixteenth Lecture, upon the 12. 13. 14. verses.
12 Take heed, brethren, lest at any time there be in any of you an evil
heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God.

13 But exhort one another daily, while it is called, To day: lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

14 For we are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end, that
beginning, wherewith we are vpholden.


IN these words, the Apostle begins more particularly to handle y^ former
words of the Prophet, and so to amplify his exhortation, that in no wise the
Hebrews should forget to hear and to obey christ their only prophet: and first
of all, in this that the Prophet says: To day* by which the Apostle gathers,
that we must not neglecte this time of our calling, but when the voice of the
Lord is heard, then we must show our obedience: for it is not meet that he
should speak, and we should be deaf, nor he should call to day, and we to make
answer we will come to morrow: such loose regard of the word of the living
God, becomes not those that are his Saints: neither does our savior Christ
so teach us himself, when he says so many times: He that has ears to hear
let him hear: therefore, when the Lord opens his mouth, let us erecte our
ears: and in the day that he does teach, let us learn in the same, and
glorify god in his goodness: this is y^ plain meaning of the Apostle in these
words of the twelfth and thirteenth verse: Take heed, brethren, lest at any
time there be in any of you an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart from the
living God, but exhort one another daily, while it is yet called To day, lest
any of you be hardened with the deceitfulness of sin. Beside this general
doctrine in the words of the Apostle, we have many things profitable to note.

First, that here again he calls them by the name of Brethren, he shows a
great affection of brotherly love toward them: for there is no doubt but he
was free from flattering words, and of the abundance of his heart his mouth
did speak, so that this testimony of his good will, had great weight to
allure the Hebrews the more willingly to hear him.

And we must learn a very good lesson, with what care, and love, and earnest
desire we must do all things to our neighbor. We must not, as in other
things, where we care not greatly whether they come to pass or no, so use our
exhortations and admonitions to our bret^en, but what we advise them or speak
unto them touching the fear of God, we must have all our heart bent to do
them good: no care, nor desire ought to be greater in us, then this, that by
some means we might do them good.

This affection the Apostle shows, when he calls them Brethren: and we
that this day preach unto you when we say, dearly beloved, or loving brethren,
or use such like names by which we call, you, either we have this earnest
affection to win you unto Christ: or else, in the pulpit also we have learned
to dissemble. I note this now both to sti^re up my self, and to admonish
other: for I hear daily such loving names of the people in the preachers
mouths, and I pray God, as much loving affection may be in their hearts unto
them.

An other thing in these words of the Apostle taught us, is this: what the
cause is why all the day long the Lord speaks, unto us, and few regard it:
and the cause is an unbelieving heart, therefore the Apostle says: Take heed
there be not in any of you an evil and unbelieving heart to fall away from the
living God: which words he adds as a declaration of the former words of the
prophet, where he says: It is a people that do err in their hearts, for
they have not known my ways: here we must first see where is the root and
founteine of our sin, which is not far off from every one of us, in the
East or West, or ends of the world, but it springs up and is nourished in our
own hearts, and what soever is evil in us, here it has his founteine: in
which we know first our sin is our own, and of our selves it rises:
accuse not, neither this nor that, but humble thy self, and confess thy sin
which is bredd within thee.

It is true, we have many tentations, but we could not be overcome of them, if
the corruption of sin were not within us: for our Savior Christ was also
tempted: yet he sinned not, and the cause was when the prince of this world
came unto him, he found nothing in him: if it were so in us, all temptations
should be in vain: but we, because we are borne in sin, and no goodness
dwells in our flesh, therefore we are straight carried as we most desire,
and our own concupiscence gives strength to our tentations. And again, here
we see, as our heart is a root of sin: so there is no sin but comes from
the heart: if thy heart accuse thee not, be of good comfort, thy sins are
abolished: if thy heart condemn thee, mock not thy self: for thy sin
abides. Our Savior Christ says: The things come not from without which do
defile a man, but they do proceed from the heart Matt. 15.
that is within: for out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, slanders, and all such
things as defile a man. A notable sentence, and full of godly comfort in all
our life: for when I see so many men vexed in mind, this way or that way: some
vow pilgrimages, some observation of days, some abstain from meats, some
one thing, some an other: in this wavering of many my hope is steadfast, I fear
not meat, drink, day, time place, person: for all this serves me, and I serve
the Lord, before whom when my heart is fetled in love and obedience, all the
world beside cannot defile me. Let us therefore take good heed of this, and we
take good heed to the safest tower of defense that we have in all our life:
take heed of thy heart, for if it accuse thee, it will kill thee: if it be on
thy side, let the heavens fall, yet the ruins of it shall not make thee
affraide: let thy adversaries be who they will, let their counsel be never so
subtle, and thy destruction that is conspired never so cruel: yet if thy
heart shall be faithful, thine enemies shall fear more then thou, and they
shall be ashamed more then thou: for innocence assisteth thee, which is
strengthened with the arm of God, and is not vanquished of a vain man. Let us
follow then the calling of the Apostle, and let us regard well our hearts.

Now, as this is the safety of thy life, to have thy heart clean: so mark
these words of the Apostle, and he will teach thee how to have thy heart clean:
Let there not be in any (says he) an evil heart of infidelity. Infidelity is
it which makes thy heart abound in Infidelity the cause of all evil.
evil, and if by any means it can get room to lodge within thee, thy heart
is taken, and imagines from henceforth al mischief. When our Savior Christ
so many times reproves sundry sorts of men, he makes this as a general
fault of all, that They are unfaithful, and slow to believe. When Saint Paul
condemns them as reprobate men, which do never see the light of the Gospel,
he makes this the cause of their sin, that The God of this world has blinded
the eyes of their unbelieving heart. And if we will be free from so great a
plague, let us follow 2. Cor. (...).
this counsel of the Apostle, that there be not in us unbelieving hearts. Let
us be, as our Savior Christ teaches Thomas to be, not unfaithful but
faithful. Whatsoever is spoken in the word of truth, let it have within us a
sure persuasion. If God say, he will be our defense, and our exceeding great
reward: let us believe the assurance of his promise, and know he will not
leave his Saints, neither yet forsake them. If God have promised eternal
life to those that walk faithfully before him, let us believe his word: that a
thousand thousand, and ten thousand thousand years before him have none
account: neither yet any time, which can be expired at the last: but above all
time, in immortality he has established a dwelling for his Saints. If God
have threatened eternal fire, to consume and devour his enemies: let never our
hearts doubt or waver through the temptations of the devil, but let us
acknowledge it in a certain truth, and believe it, as if we heard, even
now, the fearful voice to sound: Go y^ cursed into eternal fire. With such
a believing heart, let me foresee the latter end, and I shall not sin for
ever. But take now this fear away of those last judgments, and bring a
wavering heart to Gods promises, and the sentence is pronounced over thee:
because thou have not believed truth, thou shall err in thine heart, and
believe lies, till vanity waste away thy years, and thou fall into the
destruction which thou shall feel, before thou can believe that it is
prepared.

And let us not only believe these last things, of which last of all, men
must have experience: but in all things now incident into our life. Let us
not be hard hearted, but believe the truth, what it speaks unto us.

If Paul say: The glory of the wicked is to their Phil. 3. 19.
shame: let us yet while we have time, believe it: and cast out such ambitious
desires, as most assuredly shall bring confusion.

If Paul say: They that wish to be rich, they fall into te^tations, and into
snares, and into many foolish and hurtful 1. Tim. 6. 9.
desires, which drown (...) perdition and destruction: why do we not believe
it? and why make we not our affections as strange from covetousness, as we
wish to be far off from death; and from the grave?

If our Savior Christ say: If you love me keep my commandments: who has
bewitched us, that we Ioh. 14. 15.
should not believe the truth? what mean we to live in all excess of sin,
and pour out our selves into riot, and yet still say we love the Lord? Surely
(dearly beloved) one cause is of all: an unbelieving heart has seduced us.
We think we eat of the secret Manna, when in deed we seed of ashes. We
can not see, that God resists the proud, his judgments are high above our
reach: and therefore we will set up our own praise, and strive for honor,
even unto death, and we fear not the shame that we cannot see.

We know not what the kingdom of heaven is, neither can we know: for our eye
cannot see it, our ear cannot hear it, our heart cannot comprehend it,
neither has the spirit of God revealed it unto us. and when infidelity has
thus covered us, it is no marvel, though we hear in vain: It is easier for a
Camel to creep^ through a needels eye, then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven: for we cannot fear, where we think there is no danger:
we can not hope, where we look for no goodness: promises and threatenings are
but blastes of wind, where infidelity has taken away our wisdom: let us now
look into our selves, and search our heart and reins, whether we stand in
faith or no: for behold, this know, and the spirit witnesses it: there is no
ambitious mind aspiring to honor, no unclean and filthy concupiscence of
adultery, no covetous desires of Gold and Silver, no sinful delights of
worldly minded men, no falling from God, for these corruptible and vain
things, but infidelity is both root and branch, the beginning and ending:
an unfaithful heart causes all in all: and let faith but dwell within thee,
to believe the word of truth: know there is glory, and honor, and
immortality, and eternal life to those that patiently seek the Lord: and
indignation, and wrath, and tribulation, and anguish upon the soul of every
man that does evil.

Know that the world is vanity, and all flesh is grass: that
righteousness is perfect blessing, and the fear of God is happiness: believe
this, as thou beleeuest thine eyes to see the light of the Sun, or to
discern the darkness of the night, and thou shall never fall: were thy
^ntations never so many, thou shall overcome them, till the devil himself do
fly from thee: let us therefore pray, and pray continually, even as the
Apostles prayed: O Lord increase our faith.

The words following heete: In falling away from the living God: they show
both what it is to be unfaithful, and what work it has in us. For to doubt
when the Lord has spoken, or mistrust what he has promised, it is to fall
away from him: and when we begin in heart to waver, and call into question,
whether his word shall be performed, or no: we lay our selves open to the
assaults of sin, and soon fall away from the living God, to our own
vanity. And this general rule, that infidelity makes us fall from God, we
must particularly apply to all the works of our life, that we be not
hardened (as the Apostle says) with the deceit of sin. If I fall into
danger, and mistrust Gods providence, and seek worldly means and unlawful
help of man for my deliverance, the prophet Jeremy curses this infidelity,
and says: Iere. 17. 5.
we withdraw our hearts from the Lord. If in maintenance of our common wealth,
we seek only policies, and do that which is wisest with natural men: the
Prophet Esaias cries woe unto such, for Esai. 31 (...)
they fall away from God, they look not (says he) unto the holy one of
Israel, nor seek unto the Lord. If I use lying words, or any deceipte, in
buying and selling, thinking so to wax rich: I am a lying merchaunt that am
fallen from God: and as Solomon says: The bread of deceit shall be sweet but
for Prou. 20. 19.
a while, and then my mouth shall be filled with gra^ell: and therefore that we
may not at last be ashamed, and be guilty of this great sin, to forsake the
living God, let us take heed there be not in any of us an evil heart of
infidelity.

It follows now: But exhort one an other daily while it is yet called to day.
As before the Apostle taught us to beware of the sin: so like a wise teacher
he tells us here, how we shall do it, that is, by daily exhorting one
another.

So Saint Paul, when he would persuade the Thessalonians to walk as
children of the light, and (...). The. 5. 11.
as in the day time: he sets out this rule unto them, Exhort one an other,
edify one another: and this is the discharge of that great commandment: Love
thy neighbor as thy self: as appears by the law that is Leui. 19. 17.
written: Thou shall not hate thy brother from thine heart, but thou shall
reprove him, and suffer him not to sin: Thus the Lord has ordained, and this
duty he will ask at our hands, in which he will justify us, or else condemn
us. Saint James says: He that conuerteth a Iam. 5. 20.
sinner from going astray, let him know it he shall save a soul from death, and
shall cover a multitude of sins. Solomon says: The fruit of the righteous
is as a tree of life, and Pro. 11. 30.
he that wins souls, is wise. And the Prophet Daniel in clear and absolute
words speaks plainly: They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, Dan. 12. 3.
and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever.

This duty, I confess, is chiefly the ministers, then the magistrates, then
the fathers and masters, who are all according to their calling guilty of
blood, if men perish in their government for want of instruction: but yet,
this duty is also common to all and none excepted: we ought all to edify and
exhort one another.

There is no excuse of ignorance: there is none so simple, but has learned the
royal law: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In breach of this
duty, who is so simple, but he can sometime epsy the sin of his brother?
In this, let him exhort him after his skill: for though he have received but
one talent, yet must he occupy that, else he shall be condemned for a wicked
and a faithless servant.

Look therefore unto this, and watch every one over his brother, that he may
confirm him in the grace of Christ.

We have often meetings for the comfort of our life, and many brotherly
feastinges are amoung us: Take heed we drink not our wines in carved bolles,
and have sweet music at our tables, and none of us (as the Prophet says)
remember the affliction of Joseph, that is (I mean) and none of Amos. 6. (...)
us care for the adultery, drunkenness, gluttony, blasphemy of his
brethren: for if our meetinges be such, our comfort of our meeting will soon
be at an end, and our last mirthe will be in heaviness.

And here we must mark, when this duty of mutual exhortation is required:
the Apostle adds, While it is yet called to day: this is (as I told you
before) while yet life and forgiveness is offered unto us thoroughe the
preaching of the gospel: this is to stir us up, not to neglect the time of our
calling: so the prophet Esaias, Seek (says he) the Lord while he may be found,
call ye upon him, while he is near. We have al our times in which we are called
to repentance: if we neglect them, we shall not have them again, though we
sought them with tears. The day was past with the rich man to call unto
Abraham, for Lazarus to help him, when they were both dead: the day was, when
Lazarus lay at his gate despised of him. The day was past with Pharaoh, when he
was in the redd Sea: the day was, while Moses and Aaron wrought such miracles
in his sight. The day was past with Judas, when the devil was now entered
into him: the day was before, when Christ reproved him of his wicked purpose.
The day is with us, while yet we feel our hearts flexible, and our conscience
is touched with the fear of God: the day is past when at the last, our hearts
sink down into infidelity, and we can no more be soarie for sin: therefore
while time is, and we be yet sure it is the day of health, let us regard it,
and take hold of it, as it comes: for when it is gone, it is past recovery:
and behind there is no handfast to pull it back again.

It follows: Lest any of you be hardened with the deceit of sin: we see
here how we be carried into evil, y^ is, by craftiness, and by deceit of sin.
Sin never appears in her own cou^tena^ce, no more then y^ devil shows
himself in his own shape: but as he is a liar from the beginning, so all his
dooinges are deceiuable error as him self is false, so are all his doings in
falshoode. Saint Paul calls it, Iugling craftiness, to deceive cunningly.
Now then, if we this day confess that sin is of the devil, why do Ephe. 4.
14:
we not believe as the holy Apostle believes, that the sinner is holden in
deceit and error, to do the things he knows not? And if in sinning we do
we know not what, and as we would never do if we knew what we did: what
mean we so willingly to be deceived? Where is the glory of our gray hairs,
or the rejoicing of a manly countenance, when so childishly we will be led
into the pit and snares. We know it is ill, we know it is of the devil, we
hate the name of it, we are ashamed of the light of the sun when we do
committ it, we know the end of it is death, and it brings forth nothing
but our destruction: and what hearts have we yet within us, of flesh, or of
stone, of wisdom, or of madness, that we be still deceived with such a
monster? Where be now our politic heads, and wise counsels, of which we
boast so much, that we be ware men, circumspect in all things, foreseeing
harms, preventing enemies practices: and I wot not what idle praises of vain
men? For, where is their wit, where is their counsel, where is their sound
advice, and deep consideratio^s, when their greatest and dedliest enemies, am
bitio^, pride, revenge, injustice, covetousness, adultery lodge in their privy
chambers, and lie between their breasts? Alas (dearly beloved) what gain
should be unto us, if we with you, and you with us, should both perish
together. How much were it better, that we should admonish one another, and
live together to eternal life? Let us not then be mocked with the deceit of
sin. And at one word to all those wise men of which I spoke, and to all you
y^ be present of that number, this I say: and yet not I, but the Prophet
Jeremy, that you may be sure I say the truth. When all your vain praises
shall be scattered into the wind: when the Lord shall cut off all flattering
lips, and make perpetual silence of these empty idle blastes, that have
puffed you up: an other and a truer, and a more enduring testimony shall be
pronounced of you: that except you turn, while it is yet called to day, and be
not hardened with this deceitfulness of sin, you are unwise, and shall be
ashamed of your gross ignorance: for you have refused the law of the Lord,
and what wisdom can Iere. 8. 9.
be in you? This testimony I am sure is true, and the living God has spoken
it of the children of men: and how blessed are we if we do believe it? and how
much more happiness is in one day of our honor, in which we are wise to
escape the deceit of sin, then in ten thousand days, in which we should
fall from the Lord of life? This is wisdom, and he that has understanding,
let him mark where, and how many are his footesteps, that he be not overtaken
with the sleightes of sin.

It follows now in the words of the Apostle: for we be made partakers of
Christ, if we hold the beginning of our substance steadfast unto the latter end:
he amplified before the exhortation of the Prophet, by pondering of this
word, Today: willing us not to pretermit the time, but diligently to stir
up one another while this day of health abides. Now, he continues the same
exhortation, by waying of the residue of the words: If you hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, a^ in the bitter murmuring: showing, that our
forefathers example should be our instruction, and we ought to take heed by
their punishments: for, if God spared not them, how should he spare us? but
they, when they heard his voice, yet they sinned: and though he spoke unto
them, yet they believed not, and therefore his anger fell upon them: even so,
if now the voice of Christ shall be heard of us, and we believe it not, or else
little regard it, as we fall into the same example of disobedience, it
stands with the justice of our God, that we should be partakers of like
punishmente. To this purpose are the words of the Apostle, to the end of this
chapter.

Touching this 14. verse: the more to persuade us, the Apostle shows what
great benefit is unto us, if we will be faithful to hear his voice, and abide
constant in obedience of it: for so we shall be partakers of Christ. We know,
this is our hope, and all the assurance we have with God, that we be made
members of Jesus Christ: we must be graffed into him, and be made members of
his body.

Even as the vine-braunche, can have no life, nor bring forth any fruit,
except it abide in the body of the vine: no more have we either life or
righteousness, except we be, and abide in Christ. This is the mystical
uniting, and spiritual joining we have with Christ, he is our substance and
being in y^ inheritance of Glory: so his righteousness is our righteousness,
his love is our love, his life is our life his spirit is our spirit, of his
fullness we receive all: this is a great mystery which neither our eye sees,
nor our heart can understand: but yet it is a real joining of us with him,
which our faith does easily comprehend: and when we shall see that wisdom
which could unite in one person, God and man, we shall see the wisdom which
has made all us the body of that head, and members one of another. This great
benefit is here set out unto us, in a sure promise: We be partakers of Christ:
that we should (as I said e) be more moved with so great a blessing. And here
we have al to learn a good lesson, that is, how we are all set free from
sin, and presented faultlesse before the presence of gods glory, and that
is, by being made one with Christ, and appearing in his countenance: for of
him only it is true: This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased: if
unto him we be given, and with him be joined: then in him Matthew. 3.
we are also beloved, and through him we be accepted. This is y^ salvation we
have by him, to be graffed in him, and made partakers of his life. Even Abraham
our father, and before Abraham, Noe, Enoch, Abel, or whosoever since have had
highest praise, Job, Daniel, Samuel, John Baptist, the virgin Marie, all are
one before God, not one in himself excepted, but all were united to Jesus
Christ, in whom they were righteous. Were we never so full of good works, our
well doing extends not unto the Lord: nor they can possibly either deserve his
favor, or once come in his sight: but we must leave all our works in the
earth, where they are done, and they must die with the corruptible hands and
feet with which they are wrought: we must go naked and bare, and offer
nothing but that which is Christ's, yea our selves we must present in his
body: for in our own persons we can not possibly be accepted: have therefore
a wise and understanding faith: know how you are made one with Jesus Christ,
and there lay the anchorhold of thy hope: for in him it is impossible thou
should perish.

It follows: If we hold the beginning of our substance sure and steadfast unto
the end: this is the condition under which we shall be partakers of Christ:
perseverance and constancy until the end. Our Substance as the Apostle
calls it, that is our being, our upholding, our settled standing, this our
estate of uniting unto Christ, the beginning of this, now wrought in us, we
must hold it, and stre^gthen it unto the end, then we know we be partakers of
Christ: this beginning of our Substance is faith by the preachinge of the
gospel, by which we be now spiritually united unto Christ: this faith by
hearing y^ voice of Christ through which we are one with him, by the same word
we must nourishe it, and keep it steadfast unto the end, this is the same
thing which Paul teaches to the Colossians that Christ has reconciled us in
his body, if we abide in says grounded Col. 23.
and settled, and be not moved from the hope of the Gospel, which we have
heard preached unto us: touching this, I said much in the exposition of the
sixth verse, now this I will add: if you will know the church of Christ,
know it by this mark, it holds the beginning of her substance steadfast unto
the end: the beginning of our substance, he called before in the sixte verse,
the assurance and rejoicing of our hope. Saint Paul (as I told you) in plain
words expounds it thus: a sure faith in the gospel preached. Now you know the
mark of the church of Christ, a sure faith by the preching of the gospel: take
away assurance, you take away the faith of Gods elect, for it must be sure,
steadfast, settled, immovable unto the end: if hunger, thirst, nakedness: if the
sword of the Tyrant, if the stormy seas, if fearful visions of evil spirits,
if any of these make thee fear, in all these thus Christ reprooueth thee: O
thou of little faith: for if he that made all, be stronger then al, if in him
thou trust, thou must fear at nothing, but know for truth, that neither
height nor depth, nor death nor life, nor Angel nor power, shall ever separate
thee from the love of God this therefore: (I say) first mark: take away
surety, and take away the faith of Gods Church: Again, take away the
preaching of the Gospel, and you take away faith: for so Paul says: Our faith
is grounded in the gospel preached unto us: as in another place he speaks
expressly: faith is by hea^ing of the word of God: therefore the gospel Rom 10 17
Romans ^0. (...) G^l. (...). (...). Romans (...). (...).
has this name, to (...) called the word of faith, the hearing of faith, the
preaching of faith: and our receiving of the gospel, is called the obedience of
faith: neither is it possible to have faith, where thou have no word which
thou caust believe. Now consider (I bese^ch you) what Church is the church of
Rome? their faith they conceal it not, but thus reach, and preach, that it
has no certeintie: and for the gospel to warrant their faith, they seek it
not, but say: ignorance will stir up devotion: and will not suffer the people
to know the Scripture, nay, they say they need it not, but only believe as
the Church believes: are these the people to whom the Apostle writes, that
they should surely believe the Gospel unto the end? if light be darcknesse, if
good be evil, if holiness be sin, then are these men the Church of Christ:
but the time is past. Now let us pray, that it would please God to strengthen
in us a true and lively faith. and. c.

The seventeenth Lecture, upon the the residue of the chapter.
15 So long as it is said, To day if you hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, as in the provocation.

16 For some when they heard, provoked him to anger: howbeit, not all that came
out of Egypt by Moses.

17 But with whom was he displeased forty years? Was he not displeased with
them that sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?

18 And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them
that obeyed not.

19 So we see that they could not enter in, because of unbelief.


HEre the Apostle proceeds to amplify this exhortation of ye prophet, in
these words. If you hear his voice, harden not your hearts as in the bitter
murmuring: touching these words, you have heard the^ before expounded unto
you, therefore we now will let them pass, only noting this unto you: the
Apostle says: while it is yet called to day: that the prophet had said to day:
the apostle says: yet that exhortation is, and yet it is called to day whereby
we learn the prophesies were not for ye present time only, but daily we and our
children after us, are admonished instructed, and taught in their preaching: so
when ye prophet Esaie reproves the people for using their own counsel, and
seeking help of the Egyptians when they were inaduersitie, y^ we should know
it was not only then Gods will, that his people should trust in him, and not
make the^ vain (...) of men: but that always he should be our only refuge,
the prophet says: Now go and write it before them Esai. 30. (...)
in a table, and note it in a book that it may be for the last day, for ever
and ever. So the Prophet Jeremy mentions Iere. 45. 1.
how Baruche wrote all his words, making them an instruction unto the
posterity that should read then. This our savior Christ meant, when he said:
one John. 4. 3^.
sows, and another reapeth: meaning, ye prophets labored and we eat the
fruit of their labor: and so Peter 1. Pet. (...). 12.
says: that Not to them selves but to us they ministered those things which
now are preached unto us, not only meaning that they are witnesses of our
faith unto us but our hope, our love, and all is grounded upon that fou^datio^.
A lesson (derely beloved) well to be marked: for there be many, now a days,
which make to small account of Gods prophets: their boldness in their
ministry, their sharp condemning of man's foolish policy, their rules of
justice and judgment, a great many cast them off as things of another world,
or another people: but we shall see that God is vnchang able, and his
righteousness is one for ever: and he has made his prophets our
scholemaisters, and the same word indureth for ever. I speak not of figures,
and such outward laws as the Jews had, for an appointed time, but Gods
justice, and government which is eternal, is contemned of us, if we cast away
the instructions of rule and of righteousness whereof the Prophets preach: but
we, because we will not bring our necks under the yoke of the Lord, therefore
we make light account of their prophesies, though as the prophet says: they
be written for ever Esa 30. 8.
and ^uer: and thus far of this.

Now let us see, how in these words follow ing the Apostle applies this
exhortation, he says: For certain ^hen they had heard provoked hi^ to anger:
howbeit not all that came out of Egypt, etc. ^s if he should also add: but let
it not be so with us, let not us walk in the way of these sinners, which thus
provoked the Lord, and he was angry with them: but let us follow better
advice, and wiser guides: they did not all murmur that came out of Egypt: nor
all provoked God: let us follow those that obeyed, and if they were few in
number, yet let us strive to walk with those few, for their way is better
then the way of the multitude: this is the exhortation here made, and it ought
to be often considered of us.

Many times in the scripture, we be taught, to set out y^ examples of good men
unto us, but especially such examples as are in the scripture we ought still
to remember them: for, for the same purpose they are written unto us: and if we
set them not before us to follow, we regard not the voice of God which we
hear: this very example which the Apostle bids us now consider, S. Paul
says: It was written to teach and admonish us, upon whom the latter ends of
the world are come: and in the eleventh chapter of this Epistle, (...). Co.
10. 11.
the Apostle recites a great number of godly and faithful men, by their
example provoking us, that seeing we have such a cloud of witnesses, we
should cast off sin that wrappeth us about, and joyfully run in the
fellowshipp of so many saints. This is written to move us, and this ought
to move us, and this will move us: if we quench not the grace of God that is
given us: for who of us this day would not be as Paul or Peter, as Abraham or
Isaake, as Josias or David? Who (I say) that is wise in heart would not walk
in their ways, live their lives, and leave their memories behind them? Or who
had lever be as Simon Magus or Judas, as the Scribes or Phariseis, as Jeroboam
or Achab? And why then be we yet foolish? If our own hearts do sufficiently
instruct us, and the voice of the Apostle do so earnestly exhort us: why do
we not learn not to tempt God, as many have tempted him, and are destroyed:
but to obey and hear his voice, as many have obeyed, and their remembrance is
in blessing? let us hear therefore this exhortation. It follows: But not all that went out of Egypt: this is added of the Apostle to comfort any y^ were
weke hearted: for some would think has God so destroyed our fore fathers, and
made their carcases to fall in the wilderness? they that were Number. 1. 55.
in multitude as the sand of the sea, did he make them so few in number? of
six hundred thousand me^ and more were there so few left that dyed not in
their sins? what hope can I have? o^ how shall I stand before the face of
God? thus I say, if any man should fear, the Apostle adds a notable comfort:
they did not all provoke God, that came out of Egypt: but with whom was he
angry forty years? was it not with those that were disobedient? Here we
learn wisely to try and examine our selves, whether we be in the favor of
God, or no, and that is by searching our own hearts, whether we would obey
his voice or no: it skilleth nothing what other men are before us, or what come
unto them, but all is in this, what our own hearts are before God, and how we
obey him: if when any nation have filled up their iniquities and God root
them out, yet let not the faithful of that nation fear, for God is their God
unto salvation: put thy trust in the living God, and though a thousand fall on
thy left hand, and ten thousand on thy right, yet shall no hurt approach unto
thee: deny not the words of the holy one, and though the earth be moved, yet
thou shall be in peace: for God regards thee not by thy father or mother, or
by thy country: but if thou were borne among the most barbarous people, yet
by thy faith thou shall live. A notable example we have in Paul, who showing
the great sins of his people, and the vengeance that God had executed against
them, he makes straight this objection: has God then cast away his own
people? and answers: God forbid, for I am an Israelite: he held the assurance
Romans (...). 1.
of his Election, not by his country or brethren, but by testimony of his
own spirit, which feared not at ye fall of other, but stood in the assurance
of his own predestination. Thus here the Apostle comfort the weak: it is
true, God destroyed an infinite multitude of his people, yet fear not thou, if
thou abide in his obedience: for whom destroyed he but those whose hearts
condemned them selves, those y^ were disobedient? He destroyed not Caleb and
Joshua, that were of an other spirit: he destroyed not Moses that was faithful
in all his house: and if our hearts condemn us not, we have boldenes with God,
he will not impute our sins unto us, but he will geaunt all our request, and
fulfill all our desires: this rejoicing let us have in our selves, and how so
ever the world be moved, no man shall take our joy from us. It is not so with
them which put their trust in other things, whether it be in the Pope, or in
the City of Rome, or in the multitude of their fathers, or what soever, in all
these, is no surety at all: for if God shall destroy Rome, and all the
buildings of it, what will they then say? or what if the Papacy be troaden
down, so that none be after found in that seat, is not then all their
rejoicing done? and what a miserable faith is it, which is no stronger then a
mortal man, whose spirit is in his nostrels: or, then a walled town, which
is easily battered: is this the rock which Christ commends, which neither
storm nor tempest shall ever shake? nay, this is the blind confidence which
the people of Israel had in the temple and in mount Sion, which vanished as
smoke when the people were led into Babylon, and left the temple naked behind
them: So these men, when we shall see such things come to pass, they shall be
ashamed of the Pope their expectation, and of Rome which was their glory: but
we will dwell in the defense of our God, with a true faith, committing our
selves unto him: and neither Rome, nor Babylon, nor our forefathers, nor our
posterity shall ever turn away his love from us: this comfort is here taught
us by the apostle, in this example of our forefathers, which kept their faith
in the wilderness, and were not seduced with the multitude.

Now where he says: With whom was he angry forty year: we have here to
learn what is the long suffering of the Lord, who does not straight punish
the sinner, but as he endured the ma^ners of the people of Israel forty
years, so he bears with us in all our transgressions: and so the prophet
David sets out unto us this example, that God made his ways known unto
Moses, and his works unto the children of Israel, Psalm. 103.
that we might see, The Lord is full of compassion, and very stowe to anger,
and of great kindness: and again in the hundredth and seventh Psalm, reckoning
up the works which God did for his people in the wilderness, making this an
instruction unto us of his long patience and goodness, he adds straight: O
that men would therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindness, Psalm. 107.
8.
and his wonderful works before the sons of men: if thus we consider this
example and such like, we are no idle hearers, but profitably exercise
ourselves in his judge ments: and as we ought to give him this praise, that he
is long suffering, patient, and of much mercy: so let us know what duty we
ought again to render unto God, for all his goodness: for a great many of
us, we cry with loud voices, The Lord is merciful: but we be dum be and
deaf, and have no hearts, when we should learn what his mercy requires of
us. Be wise then, and learn of the blessed Apostle Paul, who thus teaches
the Romans: The bountifulness of God must provoke thee to repentance: Romans
(...). 4.
for else thou despisest the bountifulness, and patience and long suffering of
the Lord. Mark this well (derely beloved) and be not mocked: if we say God is
good, and the Lord is gracious, and full of patience to the children of men:
know, that our own hearts do then answer us: render again praises and
obedience to him, that is so good unto thee: for, tell me, what would thou
think of such a child, who, because his father is loving and kind, would
therefore be rebellious and riotous? what would y^ think of a servant, that
because his master is gentle and courteous, would therefore be careless in
his work, and not regard him? what subject (think we) were he, that because
his prince is good and favorable, would therefore be traiterous, and conspire
against him? would we not give speedy sentence against such monstrous and
unnatural men? and what hearts then have we that be here this day, if we
will confess this great goodness of God, our king and father, and yet walk in
our sins before him? we know it to be true, and we cannot deny it: if sin
should carry us still away, all the day long to be defiled in it, our
consciences would answer us at night, even as Paul says: This hardness of
ours, and hearts that cannot repent, they Romans 2. 5.
heap up unto us wrath against the day of wrath: when this merciful father
will show himself, that he is also a righteous and a just God: and if we do
not in time believe it, and foresee it now while it is yet called to day,
experience, which is the scholemistres of fools, shall make us confess at y^
last, that god forgets it not which he long leaves unpunished. I remember
this was once the fault of Israel, why they lied unto the Lord, and set not
their minds on him, because (as the Prophet says:) God held his peace, and
that of long time. But why should this fault Esal. 27. (...).
be ours, who by their example should learn wisdom: nay, let us rather leave
them in their ways, and follow the spouse of the bridegroom Christ, who in
the day of he^ calling, though she sleep, yet her heart waketh, and when the
head of her beloved Cant. 5. (...).
is full of deawe, and his locks with the drops of the night, she despises
not his long patience, but answers in the joy of her heart? I have put off
my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I file them
againc: as the Church says in the Canticles. Thus let us answer the long
suffering of our God: and how so ever he be angry with many, as with the
Israelites in the wilderness, he will be pleased with us, as with Caleb, or
Moses, and we shall enter into his rest.

Again, where it is here set out, how God was angry: let us remember the
commandment of our savior Christ to us: Be perfect, as your heavenly father
Matthew. 5. 48
is perfect. The prophet David being greatly provoked against his enemies, yet
would he not hurt Psalm. 26. 3.
them, because (says he) thy loving kindness was before mine eyes, and
therefore I walked in thy truth: So we, if Gods image and likeness shine in
our dooinges, we are sure we walk in peace: therefore, where the scripture
bids: Be angry, but sin not: how can we Psalm. 5. 4.
have a better rule, then to see in the word, how God is said to be angry
with his people?

He is angry here, because they refused wisdom, and embraced folly, because
they forsook the word of truth, and followed vain devices, because they
would not enter into the rest promised them, but had more desire to return to
the heavy labor and bondage of Egypt. This madness of the people, the Lord
is angry with, as a loving Father that had care over them. So if we will have
holy anger, let it be free from all hatred and revenge, and arise only for
the profit and well doing of our brethren. Thus we read our savior Christ was
angry, when he saw the frowardness of the Jews, who by no admonitions would
be made wiser. Thus Paul provoke Matthew. (...). 5.
Timothy to anger, when he says: Reprove and sharply rebuke men, that they
do not turn away from 2. Tim. 4. 4
the truth. So S. Jude bids us all, if we fall into Iud. 23.
company with froward men: To save them with fear as if we would soudenly
pluck them out of fire. Thus if we can have our affections moved, we are
holily angry: for the end of our doing is the profit of our brother. Thus,
you that be masters may be angry with your servants: God requires of them
faithful labor, no eye service, as seeking to please men, but in singlenes of
heart, to do their duty to him, under whom God has placed them: and in this
account every servant must appear before God. If thou seeing thy servant
disobedient or slothful, have this respect to be grieved with him, because
he offended God: thine anger is a blessed anger: and if thou chyde sharply
with thy servant, thy love is more acceptable before God: but if all thy anger
be for thine own cause, for thy meat, thy drink, thine apparel, thy hawke,
thy ^ound, if thou have none other respect, thy servant has done very ^l, in
being careless for his masters business, and thou have done much woors^e, who
for a trifle can be angry with thy brother: but if the other be thy greatest
care, that thy servant should know God, and do the duty which he requires
at his hand, then art thou blessed in thine anger, and thy ^luding words, are
as a sweet ointment (as David says) that shall not break his head. Psalm.
141. 5.


In the words following: Was it not with those that sinned, whose bodies fell
in the wilderness? The Apostle here shows, first, why God was angry with
them, then what punishment he laid upon them: the cause of his anger was their
sin: wherein we see, there is no calamity comes to the wicked but for their
sin, and all the chasticements of God, which come upon them, are to admonish
them of their evil, that they might turn unto the Lord: so when the sins of
Israel were high desperate, and past hope of amendment, the Lord says: He will
melt them, and try them: for what should he do else for the daughter of my
people: Iere. 9. 7.
noting this to be the extreme remedy, by which if we be not healed, we must
dye in our evil diseases.

So, long before when their fathers were as ^uil, and had all fallen away from
God, and were not amended by punishment, the Lord says by his prophet:
Wherefore should you be smitten any more: seeing you fall Esai. 1. 5.
away more and more: showing expressly this cause of their plagues, that they
should have turned from their sins: Let this be a great comfort unto every
one, whose sins accuse him, that he is not smitten of the Lord, but for his
amendment: let him not faint, because the hand of God is heavy up on him, but
let him rejoice, because the mercy of God is offered largely unto him: for
therefore he is punished, that he should repent. A singular example we have of
this, in Man uses, y^ king of Judah, who had set up al abominations, and
multiplied offenses without number, but when he was bowed down with many iron
bands, and the king of Ashur said him in painful imprisonment, where he could
not lift up his head, then he remembered the Lord God of his fathers, who saved
not only Abraham, and Isaake, and Jacob, and their righteous seed, but in his
great mercies received sinners into favor again: and therefore in his
tribulation, he humbled him self exceedingly, and came before God to ask
forgiveness for all his sins, which were more in number then the sands of
the sea, and the Lord was entreated of him, and forgave all his offenses.

So Saint Paul in all his hatred and envious persecutions, Acts. (...).
when he was stricken down, he despaired not, but with a good heart which God
gave unto him, he cried with trembling and with fear, Lord what will thou that
I should die?

These examples are set out unto us, which be so great sinners, that we should
not despair in our afflictions, but turn unto the lord, who offers mercy
unto us: and for our sins, be they never so great, yet the righteousness of
our savior Christ is greater: let us only believe, and they are abolished.

Now, as we know, the afflictions of the wicked are for their sins, and
that when they be chasticed, they be called to repentance: so also, we must
remember, that many occasions are, why God sometime chasticeth his saints,
though their sins are all forgiven and forgotten: for besides this, that we
should turn unto the Lord, many other benefits are also in our troubles: for
in them our faith is tried, that it is accepted of God: and therefore Peter
calls affliction, y^ trial of our faith: for though we ought all to have a
full purpose, in wealth and woe, to cleave unto the Lord: yet experience
brings boldness, that our faith in deed is strong, and fails not. We
trust that we would not forgett God, in the day of prosperity: but the prince
and noble man, who are full of peace, they know whether their hearts be knitt
unto God in love and obedience, which all honor and glory cannot shake.

We trust we would not murmur in adversity, but Job and Lazarus, and men so
far oppressed with misery, they know how strong their hope is to endure the
cross. We may rejoice in the persuasion of our mind, and our faith that
fears not, at the remembrance of the evil day, is well pleasing before God:
but they may glory more in the trial of their work, who have had experience
of evil, and fainted not: and, they may more boldly sing the song of victory,
that they glory in affliction, knowing that affliction has wrought patience,
and patience experience, and Romans 5. 3.
experience hope, and their hope shall never be confounded. This I add, that we
might know, though afflictions be to the amendment of our sins, yet always
the Lord respects not this, but by afflictions does give us greater glory,
and therefore let us not faint in them, nor be discouraged.

The second thing I said we should mark in this verse, is, what punishment
God brought upon them, that is, that their bodies fell in the wilderness: this
punishment Saint Paul also expressly notes in the tenth of the first to the
Corinthians, and therefore is well to be wayed of us* which so often is set 1.
Cor. 10. 15.
ou^ unto us in the scripture* their destruction therefore is our example to
beware, and to fear before the angry judgments of God: for their deaths
were no common deaths, but (as Paul notes) souden and great destructions, as
in one day, when 23000, were slain, for their fornications, and again; a
great multitude destroyed by fiery serpents, for murmuring against God: and
at other times the angel of God brought many plagues upon them, in which they
perished: the^ lieau^ judgments were not executed of God, nor written for us,
that we should forget them. The prophet David in the hundred and sixth psalm,
reherseth these and many other Psalm. 106.
punishments of that people: in consideration of all which, he finally makes
this exhortation to us al: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever,
and let all people say Amen: praise ye the Lord. If Saint Paul apply this,
to make it our instruction, that we should fear, and flee far from the like
sins: if the propher David in the remembrance of these so many, and so
righteous judgments, do so earnestly provoke us, to praise the Lord in all
his noble acts, and to show forth his praises, and to run under the
protection of his hand, to be saved from our enemies: why should we lightly
let go these admonitions, and not rather, with faithful hearts, see what
great things the Lord has done, and consecrate our selves, to do his will, who
is the God of glory: if we do not, what hope can we have to escape his
judgments? He that spared not his own people, the children of Abraham, the
natural plants, which he had planted: how should he spare us, that were
strangers from his covenant, and wild olive branches, which contrary to our
nature, are by his love graffed into the natural olive tree? Let us therefore
beware by their harms: and the great judgments, which God has executed in
our eyes, let them make us fear before him, and walk with reverence in his
ordinances and ways.

It follows now in the Apostle: Towhom swear he, that they should not enter
into his rest: was it not to those that obeyed not? This is but a repetition of
the other words of the prophet, all to one purpose, that by a double
testimony, as it were, we might have sure hope, that the punishments of God
shall not come, if our rebellion do not pull it down upon us: for the
promises of God are for ever true, that at what Ezech.
time so ever a sinner do repent him of his sione, the Lord will also repent
of all punishments, which he threatened to bring upon him: neither can we
possibly stumble and fall down in our ways, except we be sold under our
sin, to work wickedness in his sight without repentance. And thus far the
Apostle having clearly taught, that sin is all the cause of Gods anger.

Now in the latter end he says further: And we see that they could not enter
for their ^liefe: in these words concluding what is the root and founteine of
all disobedience in us, and that is unbelief, infidelity, a heart that can
not give full credit to all the threatenings and promises of God: of this by
occasion of the Apostles words I spoke unto you in the former Lecture, now
that the Apostle repeateth it, we may be sure as Paul says: as it was not
grievous unto him to tell us the same thing often: so it is for our saftie
often to hear it: and therefore I say unto you as I said before: let there be
in none of you an evil heart of unbelief, for hence is the provocation to all
evil.

Bring a faithful heart which with an assured assent, shall receive the word
that is preached unto thee, and thou art armed with a strong shield which
shall quench all the fiery dar^es of the devil. Ephe. 6.
No man can believe what things God has reserved for his Saints, but he must
needs account all the world to be but dung, to the end he may win Christ.

No man can see what are the threateninges of Hell fire, which is not
quenched, but he will abhor his sins more then he abhors any death,
and flee from them, least they should bring him to so great condemnation: let
us then be armed that the darts of infidelity do not wound us, and all the
sho^ of other temptations they shall scarce strike through our eyelids: true it
is, that our flesh is weak, but an armor of proof bringes it strong defense:
so we may be easily ^educed with y(...) dec^it of sin, but a lively faith will
sone lighten our eyes, that we shall not sleep in death. Though the world be
full of all evil concupiscence: yet, This is the victory that ever comes the
world, even our ^th. And see I beeseech thee, judge of the first sin of our
first parents 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
Adam and Eve, and by one offense judge all: was not Eve overcome by
infidelity? and first did she not dout of Gods threatenings, before she eat
of the Apple when God had said ye shall dye the death, did she not fall to
halting and began with p^aduenture? she could not tell well whether it were so
or no? and from this staggering fell she not away to sin, and turned not
till she fell into the wrath of God for ever* did not Adam also follow her
example? and this corruption let us be sure we have taken from his loins, and
sucked from her breasts: by it the devil is strong against us, but let us
beware of it, and be faithful, and his strength is broken. The Lion of the
tribe of Judah has overcome the crooked serpent, and by faith in him we shall
surely live.

This (dearly beloved) the Apostle here does teach us, a blessed lesson if
we can happily learn it, and in which we shall be saved forever more, and all
our enemies shall be our footestoole. And the Lord grant for his Christ's sake,
that we may be made rich in all knowledge of his will, and abound in a great
measure of faith, that we may cleave vnseparablie unto God, and vnremouablie to
be joined as chaste virgins, with a pure faith, unto his Son Christ. And
let us pray, etc.

The eyghteenth Lecture upon the 1. and 2. verses of the fourth Chapter.
1 LET us fear therefore, least at any time by forsaking the promise of
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to be deprived.

2 For unto us was the Gospel preached, as also unto them, but the word that
they heard, profited not the^, because it was not mixed with faith in those
that heard it.


YOU have heard two especial poinctes, in which the Apostle does amplify
this exhortation alleged out of the prophet: To d^r, if you hear his voice
harden not your hearts, etc. The first was, that he says: To day: therefore
we ought not to foreslowe the time of our calling, but take the occasion and
opportunity, while it is offered.

Say not unto the Lord, when he knocks: (...) and come again another time:
for thou know not whether he will return or not. Seek him therefore where
he may be found, and call unto him while he is near at hand.

The second point, the Apostle stood up on: was, that, If we hear his
voice, we should not harden our hearts: teaching us, that only by faith we
should be fruitful hearers. And if infidelity bear rule in our hearts,
all preaching and teaching is in vain, and the voice of Christ can be unto
us, but a savor of death, unto death: therefore, when we hear him speak,
let us faithfully receive the Gospel of salvation at his mouth, or at the
mouth of his minister, knowing he is our only prophet, given of God unto us:
of this the apostle now concludes in the first of this chapter: Let us fear
therefore least at any time this promise of entering into his rest, being
forsaken, any of you may seem to be deprived: by this conclusion yet once
again exhorting them, that they would not neglect their only prophet calling
them, and so at last be frustrate of their vain hope. Let us here lay
together these sayings of the Apostle: in the beginning of the second chapter,
when he had proved our savior Christ to be God, he says: Wherefore my
brethren, we must carefully hearken to the things we hear, least we fall away
as water.

In the beginning of the third chapter, when he proved him to be man also,
like unto us, except sin, he adds: Therefore my brethren, partakers of the
heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession Jesus
Christ: After again, when he had proved our savior Christ to be our only and
faithful Prophet, he confirms his doctrine by the word of the prophet,
alleging this exhortation out of him: To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, etc. Again, applying these words of the Prophet, he
says: See my brethren that there be not in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief.

Now, here again, as a conclusion: Let us fear lest this promise of entering
into his rest, being forsaken, we should seem to be deprived: And as though
all this were not enough, in the eleventh verse after, he says: Let us
therefore be diligent to enter into that rest, that no man fall into the evil
example of disobedience.

And yet again in the end of this chapter: Seeing we have a great high
Priest that has pierced the heavens, even Jesus Christ the son of God, let
us hold fast our profession, etc.

What shall we think of all this? what mean these often exhortations? surely
(dearly beloved) nothing else, but that we be dull of hearing, and
exceeding hard to learn: for tell me, notwithstanding this exhortation so
often made, are there not (^rowe you) many among us, which yet regard it not?
yea, and yet if again, and again he should cry unto us, would we all obey
his voice? we would, if we were wise: but foolishness is so wrapped up in
our hearts, that I am affraide, all the exhortations, not only here made by
the Apostle, but all other that have been made unto us thirty, forty,
fifty, threescore years, have not yet taught us all that be here this day,
with singleness of heart and with synceritie to love the Lord: and is it then
any marvel though the Apostle having compassion on his brethrens ignorance,
do this often exhort them in one thing? and if we be weak, subject to the
same infirmities y^ they were, let us think it is necessary for us. Only I
beseech you take heed, that seeing God has this mercy upon us, which he
had upon our fathers, that his word is thus unto us: Precept upon precept,
precept upon precept: let not us be again as they were, that notwithstanding
Es^. ^8. 10.
all these often and earnest exhortations, so plain to understand, yet that ye
Lord speak unto us, as with a stammering and a strange language, that we
understand nothing: for alas (dearly beloved) how unprofitable were that for
us? and how much better were it, we had never heard at all, then so often to
refuse the Lords calling? let this therefore be our wise understanding in this
case, and that which so often is told us, let us at the last truly learn
it.

Now touching these words of the Apostle, that he says: let us fear, that
we lose not this rest promised us, we must not take it, as though the: Apostle
taught that the elect should fear, as though they might fall from their hope:
or that their election were not sure: for you have heard before, how he
said, We must hold the rejoicing of our hope, with all assurance and
constancy unto the end: but here we must consider to whom the Apostle
speaks, that is, to such as are far off from a true faith, which have
showed no great regard to the voice of the Lord Jesus, which are yet in many
tentations of sin, doubtful to be carried away with the deceites of it. As if
at this day the apostle should preach, when we see so many worldly minded men,
so few hungering and thrusting for heavenly things, in this case, and to such
people (considering their outward works) the Apostle says let us fear, as
in deed there is just cause of fear: for when there is scarce in us any
zeal of God, scarce any love of righteousness, but all our thoughts do wander
in worldly vanity: if in this case we should boast of our faith, were it not
good to bid us fear, to take heed that we be not deceived? and what is this
against the assurance of the faithful, that the Apostle bids them which are
not yet called in holiness, to fear, lest they be deceived in their vain
hope?

If it be here said: the Apostle includes also him self, and therefore this
fear is also in the most godly: I deny not, but in other places of scripture,
fear is commended unto the most godly: but the cause The fear^ that is
commended to the godly, what (...) i^.
of this is, because we be all weak, full of infirmity, ready to sin, as
we see in David, in Ezechias, in Peter, in all the Saints of God: and
therefore this fear is commended in them, which is, a good care and regard of
their weakness, that they fall not: a care that may drive ou^ security, not a
fear to take away the boldenes of faith.

So when we are bid to fear, it is as when we are bid to watch, to be sober,
to stand with our loins gyrded, to have before us the ways of God with
reverence and obedience, it forbids presumptuous and vain boasting of
salvation, when the glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God, is not
regarded of thee.

So, when Saint Paul commends our faith, he adds: Be not yet high minded
but fear: and Job says: If I have done righteously, I will not lift up my
head. Romans 11. 20. Job. 10. 15.
This fear is a fear of falling into sin, least we should offend so
merciful a Father: it is not a fear of falling from his grace, least he
should take his mercy from us. A plain rule of this, Saint Paul commends
unto us all, writing to the Philippians, With fear (says he) and trembling
make an end of your own salvation: commending lowliness, and humbleness
Phil. 2. 12.
of mind, but yet joining it fast to the hope of eternal life. And this
counsel he followed him self, as he says to the Corinthians, I was among
you in weakness, and in fear, and in much (...). Cor. 2. 3.
trembling: Yet he held fast his faith, that Neither Romans 8. 38.
death* nor any creature should separate him from the love of God.

And this the Apostle, even in this place, teaches, when he adds: Least
any of you seem (...) deprived. For (in deed) he is not deprived, or
^rustrate of any hope, who never had hope: but it seems so to some, because
he would talk of hope. No more can any man fall, who never stood: yet because
it appears so, Saint Paul says: He that seems to stand, let him take
heed he (...). Cor. 10. 12
fall not.

It is most certain, Hope makes not ashamed: but Romans ^5
we deceive our selves, in thinking we have hope: for true hope, as is said
here, is in the promises, and Romans 4. 1^.
they are apprehended with faith: and faith has fear of sin. Where these
things are, no man is deprived of his hope: where these things are not, he
hops foolishly, who had in deed no hope at all. And he is said to fall out,
who at the last is found to have no inheritance with the Saints, who yet
never fell out: for in deed, he never was within the covenant: according to
that, which Saint John says: They went out from us, but they were not of 1.
Ioh. 2. 1^.
us: for, if they had been of us, they should have ^arried with us.

This I say, that you may know how to answer the enemies of our faith, who*
would have us still to doubt, and never to be sure of Gods promises: when they
obiecte unto us these places of fear, we may answer them, that our fear is
our humility and casting away of pride: our fear is our reverend care to
walk in the ways of God: if they fear any other fear, we will not fear
with them* For God has not given unto us the spirit of 2. Tim. 1. 7. Romans
(...). 16.
fear again unto bondage, but he has given us the spirit of adoption, by
which we cry, Abba, Father.

This is our blessinge, which we have of GOD, and in which, we should
always rejoice. I grant, we do not here obey God, as we should: for who is
he that sins not? We fear many times, and Gods dearest children are most
tempted: so that they are brought sometime even to hell gates: but this we
confess, is our infirmity, the truth of Gods promises ought to have greater
faith within us: but it is necessary we should feel our sins, that we might
be humbled, and we must die in our selves, that we may reign through the
victory which Christ has gotten: and in all our weakness we will still
confess, that we may not, nor ought not thus to fear, but much rather to
rejoice in the Lord, and always rejoice.

Now, it follows in the Apostle: For unto us has the Gospel been preached,
as well as unto them, but the word that they heard profited not them, because it
was not mixed with faith, in those that heard it.

In these words the Apostle shows the cause, why he has thus applied the
prophets exhortation unto us: because unto us now the same Gospel is
preached, which was preached unto them: and if we be unfaithful, how should
we escape, but be partakers of the same punishments?

This place is well to be marked, which teaches us, that the same salvation is
now preached, which was preached before to all Patriarchs and Prophets: in
which we know there has been but one way of salvation, from the beginning
of the world: for then this was promised, which is now performed: The seed
of the woman should break the head of the serpent: from which promise made,
there was never but one faith of Gods elect, Genesis 3. 15.
and one way of life, which was Jesus Christ: even as our Apostle says, Jesus
Christ yesterday and to day: he is the same, world without-end. And this
doctrine is not new, but the Prophets and Pat^arches knew it with us, and they
all believed the Catholic church and communion of Saints, even as this day
we do* Saint Peter says: That it was revealed 1. Pet. 1. 12.
unto the prophets, that not unto them selves, but unto us they ministered those
things, which now are preched unto us. And the Prophet Esaias, in the 14.
chapter, shows, how God called out all nations, as it were to dispute Esa.
41. 4.
with him, whether there were any salvation in the world, but by his free
grace: and first he asks, who called Abraham in that covenant of mercy
which was given him? who has done it? even he that called the generations from
the beginning: I the Lord, I am the first, and with the l^ste, I am the same:
expressly teaching; that his people of Israel had the sa^e salvation, which
Abraham had: and Abraham the same which all nations and countries ever shall
have: one saving health of all, even as God is for ever unchangeable. So
Saint Paul, making comparison between us, and the people of Israel, of
whom, here the Apostle speaks, he says: They 1. Cor. 10. 4.
eat all the same spiritual meat, and drank all the same spiritual drink:
for they did drink of the rock which followed them, and the rock was Christ.
And not only this one salvation is unto all: but this also, only Christ has
been ever the Prophet and minister to declare that Ca. 12. 26.
salvation: for so the Apostle teaches, then, and now, his voice was heard:
and as it is said after* his voice did then shake the earth: yea, before then,
ih the days of Noe he was preached unto the disobedient 1. Pet. 3. 19.
people, who were drowned in the floude, and are now holden in the prison of
their sin. So that this we know, in Christ are saved all his saints, and by
Christ they have been taught all that ever did believe. Whereby we learn all ye
sacrifices of ye patriarchs, and all sacrifices and ceremonies of the law,
they purged no part of their sins, neither was there any redemption in them:
for the Israelites had not the Fathers sacrifices, nor the fathers had their
ceremonies, nor we have now, either sacrifices, or ceremonies, which were in
honor among them, yet one salvation is unto us all: and therefore, as we may
boldly say unto them, all their ordinances in worldly elements, they did not
purge their consciences, Heb. 9. 9.
meats and drinks did not help them, who were dailye exercised in such
observations: so agaiue Heb. ^3. 6.
they may say unto us, neither our sacraments do give grace unto us, no more
then theirs unto them: they seal unto us the grace that is in Christ, and
assure us of the salvation that is in him: but in them selves there is no
health at all. And if we may say thus, even of the sacraments instituted of
God, in so much, that if they should be made causes of our lustification, and
the glory of Christ should be so given unto them, we might justly call them
the beggarly elements of the world, and unprofitable things.

What shall we say or think, of so many childishe toys, and foolish
fancies, as we have seen of late, when men will attribute salvation unto
them? When our own works have this honor given them? When Holy water,
Belles, Candles, Crosses, Palm bows, Ag^us deies, the beginning of Saint
John's Gospel hanging about your neck: when to these things we attribute
power against the devil, whom Christ vanquished only upon his cross, what
name shall we give these beggarly things? When pilgrimages, fastinges,
visiting of men's tumbes, kissing of relics, purchasing of Masses: when these
things are exalted and said to purge our sins, what shall we call them? what
drunkenness, what witchings, what madness, what brutish astonishment has
covered our spirits, that we should believe such things (what strange illusions
and sleights of Satan, have hid our understandings, that we should know
nothing? The ceremonies ordained of God himself, the sacraments of his
eternal testament, they are but helps of our infirmities, to lead us unto
Chr^ste: from whom when you shall separate them, they are no more Gods holy
sacraments, but beggarly elements, and our own fancies, and fond
immaginations, which are contrary to Christ, even from our cradle, to exalt
them thus, what is it, but a proud liking of our own presumption. This is a
clear proof, that in nothing is salvation but in Christ alone: and that one
salvation has been from ever, while these outward things have had many
chaunges

And again, in that Christ was then the prophet, we are sure the patriarchs
and forefathers did not worship God after their own will and device, but only
as the spirit of Christ did teach them: from which testimony of spirit,
when they fell away, all their religion was rejected: for only in Christ, God
was also well pleased: so that, though they had no law written, yet were they
taught of God, and his son was their scholemaister, to lead them in all
truth, revealing his will unto them, ever by such means as best pleased him:
and after, when God wrote his law, he wrote this also as a decree for them to
hold ever, that they should never add nor take away, but do only what they
were commanded: and much more now in these last days, in which our Savior
Christ has appeared unto us in our own nature, man like unto us, upon whom
we saw the holy Ghost to come down, and God him self has sealed him, in
making manifest the own glory, speaking out of his cloud: This is my beloved
son: hear him: much more (I say) we ought now only to hear his voice,
because now more clearly the^ ever before, he has revealed all the counsel of
God unto us: but now, the devil has been no less envious against the
salvation of man, then he has been before: now also he has made some to set
forth the imaginations of their own hearts, and has bewitched many to follow
their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth is blas phemed, and for their
own traditions sake, he has made the word of the Lord Jesus of none effect.

This work has he wrought in all ye Papacy, yet we cannot or will not se his
rebellious doings: Christ John. 1^. 3. 6
says his kingdom is not of this world: yet has he taught them to make their
Bishops Princes, and has given them power over life and goods: Christ says,
Matt. 20. 16.
The princes of the nations bear rule over the^: but it shall not be so among
you: yet has he made his first begotten son to wear a triple crown, and
all the kings of the nations to come kiss his feet. So Christ has Ioh. 4.
23. Matt. 26. 27. 1. Cor. 14. 19. 1. Cor. 10. 27 Hebr. 13. 3.
taught us to worship in spirit and truth, to drink the wine in the
sacrament of his body and blood, to pray in a known tongue, to eat of any
meats without scruple of conscience, to use holy matrimony in all estates,
as a remedy against sin: but as though Christ were no prophet unto us, we
have abrogated these his laws, and made other con^ratie of our own. This our
eyes have seen, and our ears have heard, and whether we will or no, we must
needs confess it: yet, some flatter them selves in a marvelous madness, and
doing all things contrary to the Lord Jesus, they say still, they cannot err:
but they shall one day see and know, that Christ is the only prophet of the
new Testament: and blessed be the Lord God, who has made us this day to
believe it: and while yet the day of health and acceptable time is, to hearken
only unto him, and refuse all the vain inventions of men.

It follows now in the Apostle: But the word that they heard prof^ed the^
not* because it was not mingled with faith to those that heard it. As before
the Apostle concluded, repeating again his exhortation: so in this verse, he
repeateth the cause, why they profited not by the word of exhortation, that we
again hearing the cause of our sin, should be made more wise, to take heed
of it: and the cause was their infidelity, because says he: The word was not
mingled unto them with faith: the word of God preached, is as a cup offered
unto us, of which we must drink whether we will or no: and one way, it is made
unto us, a cup of the water of life: another way, a cup of destruction, and
such a liquor, as is of death unto death: even as says or infidelity is
brought unto it, so it is a cup of life or death. In this similitude, the
Apostle speaks thus: The word was not mingled to them with faith.

As men that love to sit at the tavern, do mingle their drink with spices, or
their wine with sugre: so we in that most blessed tavern, in which the word
of God is offered us to drink, we must mingle it with the sweet spice of
faith, and it is a cup of eternal life unto us: otherwise, if we be
vnsaithfull, we have lost our blessing, and are fallen from the hope of life.
Christ, who is the head corner stone, in who^ the building does stand, he is
now to us a stone of offense, at which we have stumbled and are fallen down,
because we have not received his word, with faith.

It is true, the gospel is ye power of God, to save man, but yet to save the
man yt does believe, whether he be Jew or Gentile: and here we see, how God
has joined vnseparablie, his word and our faith: wherefore it is also called:
the word of faith: neither is it possible to be faithful without the knowledge
of the word: neither is any knowledge of the word profitable, but being
mingled with faith. This (dearly beloved) is no obscure doctrine, that you
should not understand it: neither is it taught us in ambiguous words, that ye
can doubt of it, but it is plain and plainly taught: that if we will be saved
by Jesus Christ, his word must be mingled to us with faith: if we be of the
new testament, and belong unto this covenant which is made in Christ, to the
forgiveness of our sins, then we believe the word that is preached, and the
laws of God are written in our hearts. And this S. Paul sets t. Cor. 1
21. Hebr. 10. 16
out so clear unto us, that it is impossible, impossible I say, for any to
know the Gospel, and to be ignorant of it: for this is the gospel, as Paul
says: The power of God to save all that do believe, do you hear this? and do
you understand it? tell me then, what think you of that religion, where this
preaching of Romans 1. ^6.
the gospel is holden back: nay where they have been so envious unto it, that
they have not suffered the word to be in such a language as the people might
once read and understand it? The Priests them selves, upon whom they laid
the work to sacrifice for their sins, and to whom they confessed their
sins, to have forgiveness of them.

And what (I say) will you think of such a people? or what religion have they?
does not the Apostle say true: there is no salvation but by believing the
word, as it is preached unto us? and do they say true, that the Mass purges
our sins* ye priest forgiueth them? and the mass is in latin, the priests
ignorant, ye people are led with vain imaginations: no faith, no word is in
all their doing? but it is no marvel though some men be robbed of their hearts,
and believe all the illusions of Satan: for how can a man believe the truth,
except the spirit of God be in him? Pharaoh was not taught by all the woonders
y^ Moses wrought in Egypt. The Jews were not the wiser for all the miracles
which Christ wrought before them. If such things have happened in the days
before us, though now the Apostles and prophets do all cry. Without faith in
the Gospel preached, you can never be saved: Ignorance is abomination before
God: and yet the Pope who takes the word from us, teaches us no faith,
covers us with blindness, prayseth ignorance in our hearing: if we embrace
him, follow him, love him, honor him, as Pharaoh did Iannes and Iambres, or as
the Jews did Annas and Caiphas, let us not marvel, no new thing has happened
in our days. The Lord has not lightened their minds, and what wisdom can be
in them? but we will leave them to him, who is just and merciful: and let us
pray, that his word may be always mingled unto us with faith, that in this
great darkness of the world, we may see light.

One thing else we may here mark, that it is said: the word did not proofit
the^, because it was not ^ngled with faith: whereby we know it is only faith
that com mendeth us unto God, without which the word is in vain, the
presence of Christ is in vain, to be his brother, sister, mother, al is in
vain: nothing but faith carries us with boldness into his presence. Many
singular proofs of this our Savior, Christ shows in many places, when a
woman cries unto him: Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that
Luke. 11. 27.
gave thee suck. Our savior Christ answers: nay rather, blessed are they
that hear the word of God, and keep it. When some said unto him: Behold thy
mother and thy brethren would speak unto thee: he answered again: Matthew. ^2. 50
He that does the will of my heavenly father, he is my brother and my mother. In
another place, when controversy was, how we should have life and salvation
through him, he says to his disciples: The flesh profits nothing, it is the
spirit that quickens: noting in all this, that not his John. 6.
bodily presence, not his kindred, not y^ travel of his mother, nor any thing
is imputed unto us for right ousnesse, but only faith, in which we believe,
according to his gospel preached unto us: y^ in his death al our sins are
purged, and in his resurrection we are justified.

This makes us acceptable, and without this it is impossible to please him:
this the Apostle teaches us here, when he says: For this cause, the word
profited them not, because it was not mingled unto them with faith: for only
faith does all, apprehends all, overcomes all, and the gates of hell shall
not in the end prevail against it: and the Lord increase this faith in us.
And let us pray, etc.

The nineteenth Lecture, upon the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. verses.
3 For we which have believed, do enter into rest, as he said to the other. As
I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the works
were finished from the foundation of the world.

4 For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise: And God did
rest the seventh day from all his works.

5 And in this place again* if they shall enter into my rest.

6 Seeing therefore it remains, that some must enter therinto, and they to
whom it was first preached, entered not therein for vnbeleefes sake.

7 Again, he appointed in David a certain day, by To day, after so long a
time* saying, as it is said: this day, if ye hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.

8 For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not after this have spoken
of another day.

9 There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

10 For he that is entered into his rest, has also c^assed from his own
works, as God did from his.


THIS Scripture, which now I have read unto you, I must needs confess, to
me it seems yet somewhat obscure, neither has God so revealed it unto me,
that I dare boldly pronounce, this it is: but, submitting my self to any
better interpretation, which shall be showed of other, according to that which
God has given me: so I will show you what I think most likely, and so much
the more boldly I will show you mine opinion, because, by the grace of God, I
will speak nothing, but agreeable to all which the Apostle before has most
plainly taught us. You know, how earnestly he has exhorted us to harken
unto Christ: what fault especially shall make us neglect it, and that is
infidelstie: what great peril we have in this sin, and that it: We shall not
enter into his rest. Now, he teaches and adds sure arguments to his
doctrine, how we shall avoid so great punishment, and so great sin, and
how we shall be obedient unto Christ: and that is, by faith, an humble
acknowledgement of him to be our Prophet, and a constant believing of all his
truth.

This doctrine first he sets down, in these words: For we enter into
his rest that do believe. This he proves first, by the manifest text before
alleged: for it was said: To whom I swear in mine anger, that they should not
enter into my rest: meaning the unbelieving and unfaithful: therefore we that
are believing and faithful, we shall inherit that rest. This I think to be
the meaning of these words following: As it is said: to whom I swear in my
wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. Now, because the Apostle has
reasoned long and much, out of this place of the Prophet, and will yet reason
longer, he wisely foreseeth, what might be here answered of the Jews* that
this place is of the people of Israel, meant of their entrance into the land
of Canaan, under condition of obedience of the law of Moses, and therefore
rather teaches them to keep still those ordinances, then to change them for
new, and follow this Jesus, of whomethey have not heard before. This cogitation
might easily arise, and they might soon be so persuaded, that the prophet
spoke of the present time: now therefore, in the words following, the Apostle
takes away this offense and doubt, teaching, that not unto them only, but to
us also it was spoken, and with this caution proves with other arguments the
former doctrine: that by faith grounded in our prophet Jesus Christ, we shall
enter into his rest.

And he says thus: Especially seeing his works were finished from the
foundation of the world. The word which is here commonly translated,
although I english it thus: Especially seeing: which I do because the sense
well agrees, and I know nothing to the contrary but the word may well bear
it: so now touching the objection before made, the Apostle answers thus:
Neither can this be meant of the rest of the land of Canaan, in obeying the
law of Moses: for when neither the law was yet given, neither the land once
promised, yet then was this rest of the Lord, into which his people did enter:
for the scripture says, even at the beginning: The Lord rested the seventh day
from all his works.

Now this objection thus being confuted, there is also in these words, the
second reason for proof of this doctrine before taught, that they enter into
the Lords rest which do believe: and the reason is this. Seeing God finished
his works, straight from the foundation of the world, so that then he was
said to rest the seventh day, men entered not into that rest, by the observation
of the law of Moses, which was not given, nor by any works of flesh, which
were ever unprofitable: but it is clear then we entered by faith: according to
this which is written: To day if you hear his voice, harden not your hearts:
this argument is plain in these words: Especially seeing his works were
finished from the foundation of the world for he says in a certain place of
the seventh day thus: and God rested in the seventh day from al his works: but
of this argument, we will speak again in the ninth verse. Here the Apostle may
seem to some of us, to reason not very strongly: for how proves he that it
is one rest of which it is said, ye shall not enter into my rest: and again,
the Lord rested the seventh day: for the one seems to be of God alone, the
other a figurative promise set out unto us: but this doubt is soon taken away:
for when it was said God rested the seventh day: was it not also said: he
blessed the seventh day and h^lowed it: which is, he appointed it to this holy
exercise, that man should leave off his other thoughts, and consider the power
and wisdom and goodness of God in all his creatures, whereon after he gave his
law written: Remember thou keep holy the sabbath day, six days shall thou
labor but the seventh. and c, by which it was plain, that this rest was the
same, unto which they were after called: and thus we see the Apostles words,
how apt they be to his purpose: It follows now: And in this place again, if
they shall enter into my rest. In these words the Apostle teaches, that this
is also ye same rest which ye first was: where we see that the rest of the land
of Canaan, was, that they should there enjoy peace, and in his holy place
praise God day and night, who had delivered the^ out of the cruel bondage of
Egypt, and from all hurt of the great and terrible wilderness: in stead of
which, he had given them a most pleasant country, that flowed with milk and
honey. Now upon the warrant of all this truth, that one rest has been from
the beginning, though the name may be often named in sundry respects, as
first, it was so called, because God rested from his works: again, because
the people entered into a peaceable land, instead of a perilous desert: so upon
other occasions, this name of rest is named, but all in one spiritual sense,
that is now a ceassing from our own works, to do the works of God, and after
this to dwell in the peace and rest of his glory for ever: therefore, where
promise of entrance into his rest is, it is a promise made unto all, and of all
ages: upon this (I say) the Apostle says further: Seeing therefore it
remains that some must enter therinto, and they to whom it was first
preached entered not because of their unbelief, again, he appointed in David a
certain day, by to day, saying after so long time, as it is already alleged to
day if you if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: in all these
words, he concludes as he taught before, that seeing this rest has been ever
set out, to our first fathers, to the people of Israel, yet they entered not for
unbelief seeing it can not be, but some must needs enter, for the graces of
God must needs be enjoyed, therefore in David it is again said: To day if you
will hear his voice, that it might be known, y^ we which do believe shall
enter into his rest. So in these two verses, is the conclusion of the two
former arguments: to prove, that only by faith, we shall enter in to his rest.
And this I take to be the natural meaning of these words in the 3. 4. 5. 6.
and 7. verse.

It follows in the 8. verse: For if Jesus had given them rest he would not
have spoken of any other rest after. These words prove by an other reason,
that the former prophecy is not meant of the land of Canaan, according to the
objection before spoken of: and his reason is this. Joshua led them into the
land of Canaan, a great many years before the Prophet David made this
exhortation: if therefore it had been meant of that land, to what purpose did
David speak thus so long after? could it be threatened unto them, they should
not enter into that rest, into which they had already entered, and dwelt there
four hundredth years? Upon this reason he concludes in the ninth verse:
Therefore, there remains yet a rest unto the people of God.

In the tenth verse, he shows at the last, what this rest is: that we should
no longer walk in our will, but resign our selves over to the obedience of
the will of God, even as we look to enter at the last, into that rest and
dwelling place, which is in heaven, not in earth, and which God had pitched and
not man, in these words: for he that has entered into his himself has also
rested from his own works, even as God rested also from his. Thus I have
plainly as I could, showed you the whole meaning of all these words which I
have read together unto you: and I have the fewer things severally to note
unto you in them, because, as you have heard the words were most of them
mentioned before: and as occasion was, then I spoke of them more at large unto
you: only of the other things, which before the Apostle spoke not of, I will
note unto you what I think necessary. In the third verse, I told you how
the Apostle taught us, that this rest, to which we be called, was the rest of
God from the beginning: because from the beginning, it was said, God rested
the seventh day: what we should learn in this, we may plainly see the
commandment: Keep holy the Sabbath day: For that day was instituted for this
cause: because then God rested from his works, and in that day a rest is
commanded unto us, that in it we should do no manner of work: and why
(dearly beloved) shall we rest? God is not pleased with idleness, he will not
have us like the idle men that at the ix. hour of the day, stand still idle
in the market: but God commands us to keep that day holy unto him, which
is to serve him in it, and not our selves.

Now, seeinge in this day we must glorify God, and rest from our own
works, to consider his works, from which in this What is a Sabbath days
work.
day he rested, it is plain and evident, that it is a Sabbath days work,
wisely to meditate in all the works of God: for as Paul says: They are the
wisdom of God, in which we should know God, and in them the invisible things
of God, that is, his eternal power and Godhead that we should know him and
glorify him, and give thanks unto him. So we read in the book of Job: when
Eliphas would persuade Job to the fear and reverence of Gods majesty, he
bids him behold the stars, how high they are. The prophet Esaias, when he
will assure the Esal. 40. 12.
church of the mercy of God, that he will according to his mighty power
fulfill all his promises, he says thus: Who has measured the waters in his
fist, and counted heaven with his spanne, and comprehended the dust of the
earth in a measure, and weyed the mounteines in a weight, and the hills in a
balance? In meditation of these great works of God, the Prophet would teach
them, to fear no man, but put their only trust and confidence in God. So the
Prophet Jeremy, sets out the constant course of the day and night, for us
to consider, and in it to know how unchangeable the love of God is to all his
Saints. So our Savior Christ, by the Matthew. 6. 30
goodly colors of the flowers of the field, he would have us learn, what a
fatherly providence God has over his children to cover their nakedness, who
clotheth so gloriously the vading flower. The prophet David in many places, and
specially Psalm. 104. does make a goodly rehearsal of the providence of God,
Psalm. 104. 35
in ruling the whole world: thereby exhorting us to obey God, to hate
iniquity, and concludes with this excellent sentence: Let the sinners be
consumed out of the earth: and the wicked till there be no more. O my soul
praise thou the Lord praise ye the Lord: If we by these Psa. 104. 35.
exhortations and instructions can teach all our senses, our eyes to see, and
our ears to hear, so that in the creatures of God, we can see his glory,
love his goodness, fear his majesty, express his image in all our
conversation: then are we sure we keep holy his Sabbothes, and we enjoy the
good beginnings of that blessed rest, into which we shall enter for ever: but
if we be unprofitable creatures in the world, if we have eyes and see not, and
ears and hear not, and the sight and use of so excellent works, can stir
us up, neither to love nor fear, not once to know so excellent a workman, we
are holden in the bondage of a spiritual Egypt, and wander in strange and
unknown ways of a spiritual wilderness, where we have neither any water of
life, nor any secret Manna, to satiate and fill our faint and hungry souls.
we walk in the world, as subjects of the world, and dwell on the earth as
servants of the earth: the ox and the horse do as we do, they eat, and
drink, and see the sun, and use at their will the day and night, and never
consider him who made all these things. Let us not be like unto them, but as
we have hearts able to comprehend better things, so let us use them, that we
may fill our ways with perfect peace. If God have given us the mean estate of
life, in which neither we want not yet abound, but our meat, our drink, our
clothing is suficient unto us, let us acknowledge the great goodness of god,
who has set in us an example of y^ estate of life, which him self has
testified to be good for us, in y^ prayer which he has taught us all: Give us
this day our daily bread. If God have given us poverty, cold, nakedness, and
much affliction, let us think with our selves: How good is God unto us even in
these days of calamity? for has he not made us like his only begotten son,
a man despised in ye world, and of small account, who had experience of all our
sorrow and grief, that we again carrying his image, might die with him, y^
we might also reign with him in the due time which he has appointed: again,
let me see this also in my poverty and affliction: God has by this means
prepared me so, that whatsoever is done unto me, God will impute it as done
unto himself: whosoever shall mock or despise my life, he reprocheth god y^
thus has made me Proverb.
whosoever shall cloth, feed, harborough me, Christ accepts it as his own,
as if he were hungry, and received Matt. 25.
meat: he were naked, and received raiment: what a mark and print of y^ love
of god is this in me, and how blessed is this estate, which of so many is
thought most miserable? if God has given us high and excellent honor, if in
y^ mids of my pleasure, with a wise heart can think thus: This is yet ye
place of my banishment, my bodi is a prisohouse in which my soul is in
bondage, my life is a pilgrimage in which I wander, as in a country y^ is not
mine own: and yet: if God have here filled my senses with so many delights, if
such be the glory of these kingdoms and this nobility? If the honor and
riches of these days, have so great gladness of heart: O Lord, what are
the Heavens of Heavens, where we are citizens, which is our country, where our
body is glorious, and crowned with life, where thy majesty shall shine in
perfect beauty before us, where all things shall be our own, and we shall be
thine. A happy lordship, a happy Earldom, a hap pie man, whose honor
teaches him thus to know the Lord, who has had mercy upon him. These and
such like meditations and thoughts, which carry up our minds from the
Creatures to the Creator, and from our worldly calling to him that has called
us, these do lead us into the rest of the Lord: these are our holy works
on the sabbath days, and this is our wisdom in enjoying all the benefits
of God. But of this meditation I spoke before unto you, in the exposition of
the sixth verse of the second chapter.

Now, touching this word whereof we have heard so much, that is, the rest of
God: we must mark how the scripture uses it: sometime for the truth, which
is ever one: sometime for the figures, which have been diverse. The true and
perfect rest is that which is now begone in us, the resting from our own
works, that is, our dyinge unto sin, and the crucifying of ye old man, that
we may give over our bodies unto the Lord, to be servants of righteousness,
and that only his spirit may reign in us, that as Paul says, it be not
now we Gal. 2. 20
that live: but that it be Christ that lives in us: and this rest shall be made
perfect in the resurrection of the just, when we shall be joined unto Christ
our head, and God shall be unto us all in all.

The figures of this rest (as I said) have been diverse. The first figure was
the rest of ye sabbath day, called our rest, because we were without bodily
labor, only in spiritual exercise, to consider ye works of God, his
greatness, and power, and goodness, and thereby to learn with all our hearts to
serve him, and to glorify him as our only god: so y^ all the seventh day long,
while the sun shined, it preached unto the people, that they should cease
from sin, and serve God, die unto the world and live in him. An other figure
of this spiritual rest, was the land of Canaan, called their rest, because
they ceased from the fearful travel of the solitary wilderness, and from
fear of enemies which always rose against them: and from their bondage
before in Egypt, now inhabiting a quiet country full of all fruit and
pleasure: and their spiritual exercise in this rest, was, to see from what
miseries God had delivered them, what blessings he had given them, how
mightily he saved them from al hurt of man and beast, and every creature: and
therefore now, in a holy rest and quietness, to be thankful unto him, to serve
him, to trust in him, to rest under the shadow of his wings. An other figure of
this rest, was also y^ temple, of which it was said: This is my rest for ever:
here will I dwell, Psalm. 132. 14
for I have a delight therein: called also ye rest in respect that before, the
tabernacle and the Arc was carried from place to place, but now it was
settled for ever in mount Sion: the spiritual exercise of this rest, was, that
God had now made known unto them his statutes and ordinances, in which they
should live, his couenauntes and promises were sure unto them, and that they
should not immagine vain thoughts, or follow their own devises, but abide in
the ways of God, acknowledging them alone, to be the ways of life, and so
give over them selves to walk in them. These were the figures of this
spiritual rest which abides for ever: and unto us now to who^ figures have
ceased, this rest is set out clearlie in it self, that we should live in it,
cease from our own works, do the works of our God, and worship him in
spirit and truth, having according to this exhortation of our Apostle, our
Savior Christ our only prophet, to rest in his word: our only priest, to
rest in his sacrifice for sin: our only king, to rest in his defense: our
only head, to rest in his nourishment, who only with his blessed spirit
feeds us to eternal life, and works in us all in all. This is that
kingdom of God, which we are taught to pray, that it may come and prosper:
and this is that the prophet Esaias says of the root of Ishaie, that in those
days his rest should be glorious: this is Esai. 11. 10.
the truth sigured in all the former restes of the Sabboath, of the land of
Canaan, of the temple, as Zacharias full of ye holy ghost, does most plainly
show. This is (says he) the oath which he swear to our father A braha^. that
he would grant, unto us: that we being delivered Luke. 1. 74.
out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness
and righteousness, all the days of our life: and this rest has in it, as Paul
says, a pure heart, that is, vn^ed and constant love: a sincere says, that
is, holy and true religion and, a good corscience: that is, peace toward God
through Jesus Christ: and these properties of our rest (dearly beloved) mark
them well, that we may know the place, where we dwell in peace: and lest we
think foolishly, that we are at rest, when yet we are tossed in the
tempestuous sea: our religion must be pure and untouched, from the curious and
entising fancies of Philosophy, from traditions and decrees of men, from
superstition of Col. 2. (...).
the elements of the world: as meat, drink, days, times, and such other: to
be short, pure from al things, which Christ our only prophet has not taught
us. And how can we think then, that we are yet in this rest, if we be holden
with decrees: Touch not, taste not etc. if counsels, and fathers, which are
diverse, and daily renewed, do lead us with their su^drie indgments: what rest
is in my religion, if thus I must walk vncerteinly? It was said of the first
rest: What Deu. 5.
I command thee, do that only: this rest is now abundantly confirmed unto
us, more amply the^ before, as Christ is greater then Moses: and how then do
we seek after any instruction, but only after the word of Christ alone.
Again, seeing in our rest is unfeigned love, contention and strife, and
quarrels are cast out: how do we say, we are entered into our rest, when this
dissension is among us, one with another: let us look unto it well, to whom it
belongs. It is a grievous thing to trouble the peace of the church: so is it a
grievous thing to see truth lie hidden, or despised: therefore judge not you
rashly, nor condemn any man's work before it be tried. We are called unto a
rest, and let us nourish our peace: who soever fall out with us, let us not
fall out with them, but let us seek the truethe in love, and so shall be built
up the decayed places of Sion: and to our selves every one of us this I say,
yet not I, but Saint John, That He that loves his brother he has no offense
in him whereat another should fall: and therefore, in any controversies 1. Ioh.
2.
that can arise in the church, if we fear God, let us follow this rule: let us
not do any thing for vain glory, for honor, for riches, for pleasing men:
for if we do, we may be assured, offenses will arise, and we shall be guilty of
the^: but if only Gods glory and the love of our brethren do constrain us, God
will give us the spirit of wildome and peace, and we shall not be offenses unto
any: but this let you and me commit unto the Lord with our hearty praires, and
he will bring to pass a good work in our eyes. Again, our rest must be in
all truth: and how do such men seek the glory of this rest, which fill the
world with lying and flattering, which call good evil, and evil good, light
darkness, and darkness light? The Prophet Amos complayneth of the Judges of
his Amos. 8. 6.
time, that they were so corrupt through brybes, that they were ready to sell
ye people for old shoes: if he were alive now, he would add to this another
complaint, that some preachers are also so corrupt, that they will sell the
truth for a mounrning gown. Let a man be now never so blind, that he walk
as at midnight when it is noone days, yet you shall find some Preacher will
commend his sight: if a man were as black as ye black horse spoken of in the
Apocalypse, that nothing were in him but Apoca. 4. 1
shadow and darkness, yet he shall find a black prophet, with a black mouth,
and a headlong tongue, to make him as white as the white woll, or as white as
the white snow: and if a false tongue could color him more then that, it is
set to sale, and it is easily bought. But have such men care of our blessed
rest? or do they delight in the glory of it? Do they think that in the church
of Christ it will be ever suffered, that the sweet and costly garments of Gods
saints shall be taken from them, and made a spoil for strangers? or he that
goes about this, shall he not disquiet our peace? Leave off then you that
fear the Lord, leave off to sell the praises of faith and of religion to
those which never sought and inquired after them. Remember Elihu says: If I
should give titles, my maker would destroy me: Do not therefore justify the
sinner while thou live. Thou Job. 32. 22.
foolish praiser, and thou folish praised, what substance is there in you, but
a blast of wind? Let us then leave off lying, and speak every man the truth
from our hearts, and so let us enter into our rest, and dwell in the peace of
Gods Church together.

Now, one word more touching this rest: the seventh day is called the Lords
rest: the land of Canaan, is called his rest: the temple, his rest: the
Gospel, his rest: yet were not all these his rest, but figures and
presentations of it: as times, places, means, by which we should rest in him:
yet had they the name of the rest, as things lively presenting the rest unto
us, and in which we enjoyed the spiritual rest: and thus it is in all
sacraments, because they present unto us Gods graces, and his holy spirit
works in the ministry of them, the more to assure our faith: they are also
named by the things which they present unto us. Now touching the sabbath day
which is here mentioned, you see, from the beginning it was a figure of our
spiritual rest in Christ: so that as al figures in him have ceased and are
complete: so the observation of that seventh day has also ceased, and the
truth of it must show it self, which is, that not the seventh day, but all
the days of our life, our thoughts should be with God, and our works to his
glory: and thus the old Sabbath was ceremonial, and is now abrogate, even as
you see: for that Sabbath, is now our saturday, in which we lawfully occupy
our selves, in all honest labor of our calling. An other end of that Sabbath
was according to the manners of men, necessary for them then, and now
necessary for us: and that was, that they might have a time, to meet together,
to worship God in ye congregation, to make public prayers, use his
sacraments for strengthening their faith, hear his law, and his prophets,
that they might learn his judgments, and edify one another in the knowledge of
God: this end of the Sabbath must needs be perpetual, as long as our weakness
needs mutual help, and as long as it is meet we should openly serve the
Lord: to this end the commandment is still read unto us, Remember thou keep
holy the Sabbath day: which now is our sunday ordained by ye apostls examples,
that the superstition of the Jewish Sabbath should be taken away, and kept
holy, that thus we should occupy our selves in that day: otherwise the old
Sabbath can possibly be kept of us, no other way, but as the Apostle here
teaches us in the tenth verse, that as we see God rested in it, from all his
works: so we in all our life must rest from our own works, that is, we must
rest from our care or regard of the flesh, to accomplish the desires of it:
but as we are bought with a price, so we must yield our selves servants unto
our Lord, and offer up our selves a holy and lively sacrifice to do his will:
and thus far of this text. Now, let us pray etc.

The xx. Lecture, upon the 11. 12. and 13. verses.
11 Let us study therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after
the same example of disobedience.

12 For the word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper the^
any two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing a sunder of
the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrowe, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart.

13 Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked and open unto his eyes with whom he has to do.


IN this eleventh verse, the Apostle makes his last proof of Christ to be
our prophet, because y^ ^ce of this word of God agreed ^t but with the majesty
of his person, and so enters into (...) description of the virtue and power of
this word, making earnest exhortation, that we would use the great benefit of
it, and therefore he says first: Let us therefore study to enter: that is,
let us labor, let us be careful, let us give all endeavor, let us care and
travel that we may enter: thus shaking off al sluggish dullness, and
quickening them from heaviness of spirit, as unto a thing of great weight, he
calls us with great care and study to give our selves unto it. And here, in
this word, Let us study, we have a plain interpretation of that he said in the
first verse: let us fear: for the whole verses, that and this, as you may see,
have one and the same meaning: there he says: Let us fear, lest forsaking
the promised rest, we seem to be fr^strate. that is, lest by such unfaithfulness
as was in them, we also make the promise to us in vain: here he says: Let us
study to enter into this rest, least we fall into their example of
unfaithfulness: thus the exhortation being all one, it is manifest, that this
word, Let us fear, which he used first, has the meaning of this word Let us
study, which he uses now: so that this is (as I told you then) y^ fear of
gods children, a careful study and in devour to walk faithfully before God.
And an other good lesson we may here learn: since the Apostle says, let us
study: it is plain we ought not to nourish in us (as the manner of the world
is) a careless security, to speak and think of our hope in God with a secure
mind, as if we cared not greatly for it, or longed not much after it: such a
careless mind is altogether unmeet for the profession of the gospel of
Christ: and it is a thing that we do all understand, none can excuse him self
by ignorance: we know the fault by the trial of our own heart, when we think
of God and his heavenly kingdom, what part and fellowship we have in it, we
can tell how our hearts are then affected: if it be our joy, our comfort, our
consolation: if it draw our delight and study after it, then are we children
of that kingdom, then we obey this calling of the Apostle which is here: Let
us study to enter into this rest: but if we can think or speak of the
kingdom of heaven, as we would speak of far countries, for talk sake, to
hear what is said of them, but without any care whether we see them or no:
then we are seduced with the deceit of sin, and this exhortation of the
Apostle is made in vain unto us. And let us not here deceive our selves to
think, we have our cares for the life to come, when we have no care at all
for it: our nature is here very blind, and believes easily her own vain
fancy: not only Scribes and Phariseis, and such froward sinners, do
presume much of their own righteousness, and glory in them selves, but eue^
Gods good people are soon beguiled with self-love: the Corinthians talked
much that they were wise, that they were spiritual 1. Cor. 3. (...).
and holy men, but Saint Paul says unto them: Seeing such contentions,
emulations, sects, are among you, you are yet children and you are carnal. So
we (dearly beloved) if we will say we fear before God, our care, our study, our
heart is in the kingdom of God, and yet we laugh when we talk of his
judgments, make our ieastes and rymes with his holy word: or if we be
nothing moved in spirit when we speak of it, then are we not studious, but
careless, secure, negligent, and we hear not this exhortation of the Apostle,
Let us study to enter into his rest: and thus is this exhortation ended, made
out of the words of the Prophet: To day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, etc.

It follows now. For the word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and
sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, eue^ to the dividing
asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and of the marrow, and
is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart, neither is there
any creature which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and
open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do. In these words, the Apostle
sets out the nature of the word of God unto us, upon what occasion, we
may easily see: he has taught that Christ is our only Prophet, and we have
no other schoolemaister to teach us, and instruct us in the ways of God: he
has also earnestly exhorted us to hear his voice, and faithfully to harken
unto him, lest we fall into the condemnation of others, who have been despisers
before us, and whose judgment we should not escape: for the word of God
wounds, even into the soul of the sinner: thus he comes to this
description of the strength and force of Gods word, as may appear by his own
words going before, lest we fall into the same example of disobedience: thus
proving it y^ we cannot escape, because the word is so strong and mighty. And
this doctrine of the Apostle, let it this day be our instruction, if we do
believe: or if we think the Apostle says true, that the word of God has so
great power in it, let us regard it, let us give our fear, our reverence,
our obedience unto it: for how great a sin must it needs be, to despise a
thing that is so precious? and how great peril is there in it, to provoke a
thing against us which is so strong? If it were but the roaring of a bear or
Lion, it would make any of us afraid, yet could it but only pearce into our
ears: if it be but the voice of thunder, it seems to make ye very earth to
shake, yet is it but a bodily sound, and the spirit hears it not a whitt:
what then? When he speaks whom the marrow within our bones does hear, how
truly says the prophet of him, his voice shakes not only the sea, and the
dry land, but the very heavens also? and can we have yet any excuse, Agg.
(...). (...)
if we hear not him that speaks so loud? If we believe not him, to whom our
own hearts bear witne^e of his truth? or if we hear not his word, whose
voice shakes both heaven and earth? or are we born of God, if so great virtue
and power of god have no feeling in us? No, no, be not deceived, God is not
mocked, his sheep hear his voice, we are not borne of him, but we are born of
hard rocky mounteins, a stony generation, nourished and sed of cruel Tygres:
if such instruction, such teaching, prevail not with us. Hear then (dearly
beloved) hear and learn, that we may be edified: let our hearts be softened,
that we may have the words of God written in them. And seeing we have so
excellent a prophet, let us be thankful scholars, and grow up in the
knowledge of his doctrine, if at it never be imputed unto us, that we have
hardened our hearts and would not know his ways. And to the end we may take
the more heed, let us mark these words of the Apostle, in which he sets
out unto us, the great force of the word of God: The word of God (says he)
is lively, and sharper then any two edged sword, etc. This place is well to be
weighed of us: for of purpose the Apostle speaks to teach us what the word
of God is, and what power it has, both to quicken the faithful, and wound
the disobedient unto death: whereunto so ever the Lord does send it, it
shall do his will: no time, no place, no person, can possibly change it: no
creature can break the force of it: the work that is appointed for it to do,
it will assuredly bring to pass. Let soul and spirit, joints and marow, heart
and thoughts, strive still against it, it will wound all and pearce through as
a sharp sword: even as al things are naked, and bare before the eyes of the
lord who speaks: neither let any man ever think, whosoever he be, that
hears or reads this word of God, but that it works in him the will of
God. Even all we here present this day, when after this sermon ended, we shall
return to our calings, know it assuredly and think on it, as you are in your
way, y^ the word spoken is entered into you: if it have quickened your faith, it
is ye word of life: if it have kill led your old affections, it is ye seed of
your new birth: if it have don you no good, it has detected your cor ruption,
and accuses you in your own conscience: for change it you shall not, make it
fruitless you cannot: there is no defense against the strokes of it, but it
pearceth through to the place to which it is sent: if it light in faithful
places, it brings the power of God unto salvation: if it fall where
infidelity is, or disobedience, it makes the heart as flint, or as an Adamant
stone. This is the effect of the Apostles meaning in these words, which you
have heard. The prophet Esaie to the same purpose, uses an apt similitude,
who speaks thus in the name of the Esai. 55. 10.
Lord. Surely, as the rain comes down, and the snow from Heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and
budde, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats: so
shall my word be, that goes out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me in
vain, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the
thing whereto I sent it. This John Baptist taught us, going before Christ to
prepare his way, when he cried to the people: Every Luke 3. 5.
vallie shall be filled, and every Mounteine and hill shall be brought low:
crooked things shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smoothe,
and all flesh shall see the salvation of God: meaning hereby that all offenses
and stumbling blocks should be taken away: no power in the world should be
so great, which should not give place to this word, which is the power of God
to save all that do believe.

The scriptures are full of such testimonies of the nature and strength of Gods
word, to teach us both to fear before it, and to humble our selves, for it
will prevail: and also to try our hearts, that it may have in us, a good and
profitable work, rather to renew us in the spirit, then to harden us in the
deceits of sin: but let us now come to ye words of the Apostle, and examine
the^ in all their proper meaning.

It is said first, The word of God is living, which property may be
atttributed to the word of God, in diverse respects: first in respect of us,
because it quikneth us into a spiritual life, and without it we are in
darkness and in the shadow of death: therefore it is a living word, and the
seed of our new birth. So Saint 1. Pet. 1. 23.
Paul says to the Corinthians, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
gospel. And S. John says: Of his 1. Cor. 4. 15.
own will has he begotten us with the word of life: expreslie calling it the
living word, or the word of life, Jacob. 1. 1^.
because it quickneth us (as I said) into a spiritual life, wherein without
all doubting we are taught assuredly to know, that if ever we will become the
children of GOD, that we shall no more live our selves, but what Christ may
live in us: thus we must be borne and thus we must be made a new: in taking
into us the seed of the word of God, and then as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of it, that 1. Peter. 2. 1
we may grow thereby in the fullness of our agee in Christ. If the Papists
did well understand this, they should also understand with it, that them
selves were bastards and no children, as being borne of mortal seed of
fathers, of counsels, of decrees, of Popes, not of the immortal seed which
is the word of God. Another cause why the word is called living, is in
respect of it self, because it is eternal and abides ever, according to the
nature of the living God, whose word it is: so Saint Peter expressly calls
it, where he says, we be borne of a new immortal seed, by the word of the
living God, and abiding for ever: therefore attributing life and immortality,
unto the word, because it is of the living and immortal God: of which we ought
to learn, that there is no wisdom, no instruction, no discipline, by which
we can apprehend eternal life, but only the wisdom and instruction of the
word of God: for what an absurd thing is it, that the wisdom of man, which is
vain, as man is vain, which is transitory, earthly, and is abolished, should
lead me into that life which fades not, but is eternal in heaven? yea, what
an absurd thing (I say) is it, seeing we ourselves and all that is in us, before
the presence of the Lord must needs be changed, so that no man possible ca^
see him and live, yet to think, that our wisdom can lead us unto him, or our
reason can approach unto the places where his glory dwells. Surely (dearly
beloved) this is much more folly, then to seek to gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of brambles: for it is to seek for light in darkness, and for life in
death: for out of a corrupt mind and a froward heart we seek for holy
obedience and immortality, as many as say, that without the word of God they
can please him: the papists do not yet understand this, and therefore they
weary them selves with their own inventions, and multiply ceremonies in
their churches, which God will cast out as he has begone, til their madness be
made manifest to all nations.

An other cause yet there is, why the word of God is called, Living: and this
cause most agreeable to this place: That is, because it enteret^ with power
into every part of us: so that, as our life is dispersed into every part,
and we feel it, both in grief and pleasure: even so, the virtue of the word
of God pearceth into every member, to bruise (as the prophet says) the very
bones, or to fill them with marrow and fatness: this sense is plain, and
agreeable to all the words following, and in this same meaning Solomon calls
it also: A living word: as his words are plain: The light of the Lord is the
breath of man, and it sercheth all the bowels of the belly: where also Prou.
20. 27
he calls the word, light: because it shines in ma^s heart as in a dark
place, and tries out all the secrets of his thoughts: in this meaning here,
the word is called lively, as I told you before, the more to stir them up,
not to neglect so high a prophet as the son of God, whose word came with
majesty and power unto them.

The second title here attributed to the word is, that It is mighty in
operation: meaning that it has in it, force and virtue able to subdue all
enimes, and bring us in obedience unto Christ: this virtue of the word,
Saint Paul notably sets out to the Corinthians, magnifying his
Apostleshippe by this means: Our weapons (says he) are strong by the power of
God, (...) cast down holds, wherewith we overthrow imaginations, 2. Cor. 10. 4.
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bring
into captivity, every thought to the obedience of Christ, and have ready
vengeance against al disobedience: howsoever a man magnify him self, or a man
exalt himself, in which arrogancy of spirit he seems (as it were) buried
in sin, and his heart hardened against the grace of God, yet let him hear
this word, and let it often fall into his ears, for it is as Iere. 3. 29.
the prophet says, a hammer, which breaks ye stone in pieces, and is able in
the power of God to mollify his heart: or, if the sinner be suncken down so
deep, that he will not rise, it will crushe him down deeper, that he may
perish in his sin: and so God says to his Prophet Jeremy: I will put my
words into Iere. 5. 14.
thy mouth, and it shall be as fire, and this people shall be as wood, and it shall
devour them. And this is it Saint Paul expressly witnesses, to be the only
means to glorify God, to preach the truth of his word unto all: for so
(says he) we are always a sweet smelling 2. Cor. 2. 16.
savor of Christ unto God, as well in those that perish, as in those that be
saved, to the one a savor of life unto life, to the other, of death unto
death. I would we that are preachers, could learn and believe this, it would
make us leave our vain babbling and much talk of philosophy and profane
things, and fill our mouths only with the word of the Lord: for this only
is mighty in operation, the other has at all no strength, no strength at all
in this behalf to glorify God, or to convert a sinner: but strong to delude
the people with idlo sounds, strong to tickle our ears with fond delight,
strong to puff us up with pride of our wits, but more weak then water to
teach us true repentance: for proof I say, let the sinner come forth, that
has been converted by hearing stories or fables of poets, I am sure there is
none: for faith is only by the word of God: of let the preacher come forth
that uses such things, and does it not either to please men, or to boast of
his learning: for this he knows that the word only, not profane things,
conuerteth the people: and why then does he use them? The Lord says, by his
prophet Jeremy: If they had stand in my counsel, Iere, 23. 22.
and had declared my words to my people: then they should have turned them
from their evil way, and from the wickedness of their own inventions: a
plain testimony why our preachings are unprofitable to the people, even
because we speak in our own fancies, and use exhortations of our own head.
And again, in the prophet Malachie, the Lord declares what covenant he made
with Levy, and how he promised to bless his labors in the teaching of his
people: The Law of truth (says he) was in his mouth, and there was no
iniquity found in his lips: he walked with me in Mal. 2. 6.
peace and equity, and did turn many away from their sins.

Can any thing be spoken playner? Hold fast the word of God, commit the
fruit of thy work to the strength of it, and thou shall find it as is here
said, mighty in operation: and thou shall convert many sinners. Let them tell
me now, all that have ears to hear, what madness is it, to fill the peoples
ears with unknown tales, and sweet words, in which is nothing but a
deceitful sound, and leave the word of God, mighty in working, to convert
their souls?

And, you (dearly beloved) who delight in such vanity, and make the preacher
transgress for your fancies sake, let me but reason with you, as S. Paul
reasoned with the Galathians.

Tell me whether by such tales, or by hearing the word of God, have you received
the spirit? that is, whereby were you converted from your vanity unto the
living God? was it the word of truethe, or else Gentile stories that wrought
this virtue in you? and are you so foolish, that when you have begun in the
spirit, you will now go forward in the flesh? Let us leave then this great
abuse: both you, to turn away your eyes to folly, and the preacher to use
the pulpit like a Philosophers chair. We may allege sometime a story or
profane sentence, I deny it not, but then it is good doing it, when the
remembering of the saying brings necessarily into memory the word of God
also, for which it was alleged, and gives light unto it, for a more clear
declaration of the truth: yet, when the story is told and remembered by it
self, there is then but a foolish delight of a vain man, to help him in his
talk, to multiply idle words: there is no edifying in it at all.

The third title of the word, now following, is this, That It is more sharp
then a two edged sword: and this similitude is often made in the Scripture. The
prophet Esaie, preaching the promises of God, he Esa. 49. (...).
says: His mouth is made like a sharp sword. And Saint Paul giueing armor
to a Christian soldier, by which he may kill his enemies, he bids him Take
Ephe. 6. 17.
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.

So, in the first and nineteenth Chapters of the Apocalypse, the son of GOD
is described Apoca. 1. 16 and 19. 15.
with a two edged swoorde proceeding out of his mouth: meaning by these
speeches, no other thing, but that by the preaching of y^ gospel, Christ should
get the victory, and bring all enemies in subjection unto him, even as the
Prophet Esai says: He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips shall he kill the ungodly: by which we do
learn, that the more we pray: Thy kingdom come: and the more we wish the
prosperity of the Church, the more we must strive to make ye word of God
known unto all: for that is the swoorde and scepter of his kingdom.

The next title here attributed to the word, is, That it enters into the
division of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrow. By
soul, here he means that part of us, in which our affections are, as joy,
sorrow, love, hatred, anger, mildness, or any such motion of us of good or
evil. By spirit, he means, the most excellent part of us, in which is
reason, wisdom, understanding, to consider and meditate of all ye works of
God. By joints and marrow, he mea^ieth all the members of our body: and thus
Saint Paul uses these words of soul, and spirit, and body, where he
says to the Thessalonians, as it is in ye fifth chapter: The God of peace
sanctify you wholly: that your spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless 1. These. 1. 23
until the coming of Christ: teaching us, what is a true Christian, when his
mind thinks, his soul desires, his body executes nothing, but what is
faultlesse before God and man.

So, when the word is said to divide between the soul and the spirit, it
notes the mighty work of it in the reprobate, to wound all their thoughts
and desires with fear and terror, and with astonishment of heart: contrary
in the elect, it crucifieth the old man with all the concupiscences and the
desires of it. When it is said to divide between the joints and the marrow: it
shows the work in all the members of our body, to sell them under sin, to
work uncleanness with greedines being hardened: or to sanctify them in the
power of God, that they may be servant of righteousness unto him, being
mollified. To be short, in soul, spirit, joints, marrowe, the Apostle
means, that the word once heard, the whole man is touched, and all that is
with in him, feels straight a change: except a heavier judgment be upon
him, that he have ears and hear not: wherein yet the word has a work, and
makes him fall deeper in the sleep of sin: if we will learn examples are
before us of good and evil, what to leave, or what to choose.

The prophet Abacuche, foreseeing the state of Christ's church, what danger
should be unto it, even then to be oppressed again, when it was not yet half
grown up, he says: When I heard it, my belly tre^bled, Aba. 3. 16.
my lips shook at the voice: rottenness entered into my bowels, and I
trembled in my self that I might rest in the day of trouble: here we see the
word dividing between the joints and the marrow, how it distempered the
prophets whole body, because of the heavy threatening of the Lord, and an
excellent blessing was unto him, for this fear and trembling at the voice of
the Lord, in the day of trouble he had rest. So the Prophet Esaias, at Gods
threatening against his church, that even in the days of Christ, her peace
should be broken off, and her flourishing glo rye should again be shadowed,
he cries: my leanesse, my leanesse, woe is me: as if he had said: it consumed
Esai. 24. 16.
his flesh, and wore away his beauty, to hear the voice of the Lord against
his people: if thus we fear in deed at Gods thretenings, and as his saints
do unfeignedly rejoice at all his promises, a good work of his mighty word
is in us, and it is his power to our salvation: but if we be despisers, and
regard not the word that is brought unto us, a while we may seem to be in
peace, as the sick man in his sleep feels not his pain, but the word will
wound at the last the spirit, and we shall feel it in our flesh, what we
have despised. We read in Daniel, of Belshazzar, a proud king, in the mids of
his Dan. 5. 6.
princes and all his roaltie, he saw a hand writing, and the word of the
Lord was before his eyes: straight his countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another, such fear and terror came upon him, when the
voice of the lord did pronounce his judgment. And not only thus, but we see it
further, the wicked not only wounded, but also slain with the word of God.

When many of the rulers of the people of Israel, led the people to most
shameful idolatry, the prophet Ezechiel was sent to preach unto them, and
when he prophesied before them, Pelatiah Eze. 11. 13.
the Son of Benaiah, one of the Princes which seduced the people, he dyed in
his presence? A like example is, of Ananias and Sapphira, who at the voice of
Peter, did both fall down dead: Act 5. 1.
so true it is that the word is forceable, to divide and enter between our
reins, that is, to sley the wicked and to quicken the godly. Last of all, it
is here said, that the word discerns between the thoughts and intents of the
heart, meaning, that how so ever the heart of man is prepared, the word of God
directs it, either more to be hardened with the deceites of sin, or wholly
to be renewed to the love of righteousness.

It follows now: Neither is thereany creature which is not manifest in his
sight, but all things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to
do. These words show an excellent proof, of all the former things spoken of
the word: for seeing it is the word of God, how should it not have the power of
God: if among men, as every one has most power: so his word is most feared.
how should it not be, but God, who is the searcher of our hearts and reins,
and is almighty over all, but that his word should have of his nature,
virtue, and power, to make the proud to fear, and to comfort the humbled.

Let us therefore now be wise in time, and let the word of the Lord fashion
all our hearts: if it do not, yet it works still, and we shall one day
know what voice we have despised: for as it is here, that all things are
open unto his eyes: so we shall hear his voice, when in all things it shall
show his power. It shall speak unto all creatures, and they shall hear it:
the earth and sea shall bring the bodies which they have consumed: the fire
shall yield again his ashes, and the air her dead; the elements shall mealt
away, and the Heavens shall vanish: the Lord shall speak, and the dead shall
all arise: then shall we too late bewail our madness, which have heard before,
this voice and regarded it not. And this let us learn with it, if such be the
strength of Gods word, of it self, when yet he shall multiply this power,
and make it also eternal which is infinite, what shall we say then: but, O
Lord who shall abide it: when he shall pronounce: Go you cursed into eternal
fire: what condemnation shall be upon the wicked: surely (dearly beloved) as
it is greater then our hearts can immagine, so yet in this similitude, we may
see, as it were an image of it: for as his word divides between soul and
spirit marrow and bones, cogitations and intentes: so we know that in every
part of them, the wicked shall feel Gods anger: head and arm, hand and
foot, back and side, shall have experience of his anger: all the thoughts of
their hearts shall be wounded with death, and so much the more unspeakable,
because their bodies shall feel and their mind know the immortality of
death, and everlasting destruction, that is upon them: which extreme
wretchedness, no horror of darcknesse, no weeping and gnashinge of teeth, no
gnawinge of conscience, no eternal fire, does fully and enough set out unto us.

But this we leave to the reprobate men, who even to this day have sold their
hearts to conceive mischief, and it repents them not. Let us fear now in
the day of health, and better things are appointed for us. We shall hear an
other voice: Come ye blessed into eternal life, possess the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning, which voice shall enter deep, and into all our
members, bring a sensible feeling of the love of God, and his great glory,
when with heart and mind we shall see and know our inheritance with God in
eternal glory: whereunto, if now we be raised up, and the promises of God
begin with us, this unspeakable and glorious hope, (so that our hearts be
fast holden in the love of it, never to change for worldly vanity or rather
shame, worse then vanity: for with what name shall we name it, that is
exalted against the Lord) if, I say, thus the word of God be unto us, we
have sealed it, that his word is living, and enters into the division of the
soul, and the spirit: and we have been fruitful hearers of all this long
exhortation, which the Apostle has made, and ended, to stir up his brethren,
faithfully to hear this prophet of God, his son Jesus Christ, and our
savior, who has revealed all his will unto us. And thus far of this former
part of the Epistle, in which we are taught, that Christ is our only prophet:
but the time is paste. Now let us pray. etc.

The xxj. Lecture, upon the residue of the chapter, the 14. 15. and 16. verses.
14 Seeing then that we have a geat high priest, which is entered into Heaven,
even Jesus the son of God, let us holdefast our profession.

15 For we have not an hye Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all things temped in like sort, yet without sin.

16 Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may receive
mercy and find grace to help in time of need.


WE have heard (dearly beloved) how the Apostle has taught, that Christ is
now our only Prophet, and what care we should have, diligently and faithfully
to harken unto him, if we will not be guilty before God, of great condemnation
and judgment. The reasons are of the Apostle to prove him our only Prophet:
first, because God sending his only begotten son into the world, made man
like unto us and revealing the will of his father unto us, the excellency of
his person inforceth us to confess, that God ordeyneth him alone to be our
Prophet.

Again, he was faithful in the house of God, and then what needs any other
prophet unto us? thirdly, he was more honorable then Moses in this office, and
many ways to be preferred before him: therefore no other Prophet is to be
joined with him. Fourthly the Prophet David said: To day if you hear his voice,
etc. which we must needs understand, to be a perpetual prophecy, and
therefore accomplished in Christ, whom we must hear, if we will believe, and
be saved. Last of all, the force and strength of the word of God, is such, as
it must needs warrant the majesty of God in Christ the author of it: and as n
one other has that glory, so none to be our prophet but he alone; unto all
those reasons he has added, as you have heard, ernest exhortatio^s, to give
more weight unto them, for the better persuasion of his brethren, to whom he
writes,

Now, he begins the other principal point of this first part of the
Epistle, that is, to prove that Christ is our only priest, which disputation he
continues to the eleventh chapter, as we shall (god willing) hear. He
begins it first with an exhortation, as he used the like often before, and,
as I said: to make us more carefully regard his words. Since the^, we have a
great high priest, who has entered into heaven, Jesus the son of God: let us
hold this profession: the force of this exhortation, is in the excellency of
the priesthood of Christ, secretly compared with the priesthood of Aaron, who
was in nature their brother, in person weak as other men, in office, earthly,
entering into a tabernacle made with hangs, in virtue, a figure of a better
sacrificer, himself not profiting at all: but Christ is another high priest
in nature the son of GOD: in quality, great and full of glory: in office
heavenly, entering before God to be our mediator: in virtue, holy and perfect
himself, to purge our sins. This the Apostle notes, calling him, high
priest, great, entering into heaven, and the son of God: and so much the more
we are guilty before him, if we shall not hold fast, and profess all his
instruction and doctrine. Now, least we should think the Apostles exhortation
is weak, and that he takes it for granted, which is in controversy (for he
calls our savior Christ high priest, which yet it seems he has not
proved) we must consider what has been spoken before, and so we shall see
good arguments in this exhortation for the proof of his cause. He has taught
him to be the son of God, made man, reuealinge unto us the counsel of his
father, purchasing a most glorious inheritance for us, and setting us free from
the bondage of the devil, in which we were holden under the fear of death,
which things before witnessed of our Savior Christ, and necessarily proving
him, for the same cause, to be our priest, according to that truth, in the
beginning of this disputation: he calls him, our great high priest. So he
began before the third chapter: Consider holy brethren, the Apostle and
high priest of our profession: not yet having particularly spoken of those
offices, but calling him by those names: because, according to ye description
of his person before made, it must needs follow, that he was both our priest
and Prophet.

Another argument of his priesthood, is, that he was here in earth, afflicted
as we be, submitting him self to death, from which he is risen, and now
ascended into heaven: therefore he is our priest, crucified for our sins,
risen for our justification, and making now Intercession for us before God his
father. Thus we see upon how good warrant the Apostle in the beginning
exhorts them to acknowledge Christ their priest: and thus much touching this
entrance of the Apostle, into this disputation, and why he uses such words.

Now, touching the matter. To teach that our savior Christ is our only
priest, he first shows by the works of Christ, what is the office of the
true priest, and that is: that he be great and strong to bear all our
infirmities: then, that he make an entrance for us unto God induing us now
with says and boldness of his spirit: and finally, giving us his grace and
salvation: which things, as they were never in Aaron, nor in all the sons of
Levy, so they have clearly appeared in Christ, and therefore with boldness
let us cleave unto him: to this effect is this exhortation. Now, where he
says: Since therefore we have a great high priest, who has entered into the
heavens, Jesus the son of God, let us hold this profession: I would we could
here learn of the Apostle, to be wise. The excellency of our savior
Christ, both of his person, and of his doings, was a strong persuasion unto him
to give glory unto Christ alone. Seeing Christ was the son of God, full of
power to do all he would, who had entered into the presence of his living
father: what man is he shall join him self unto him, to claim a part and
fellowshipp in that work, which Christ has taken upon him self? or, who
that may have his hope and rejoicing in Christ, will cast it off, to glory in a
mortal man^ this madness was so great in the Apostles eyes, that as a thing
which it grieved him to remember, so he besecheth his brethren never to let it
sink into them: but rather, seeing Christ was unto them such a one, let them
abide in him, and hold fast his profession. Thus we at this day, let us
strengthen our faith, and answer all our adversaries: if the question be,
whether justification be in our own works, let us say: seeing Christ the
son of the living God, has been conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of
a virgin, and sanctified himself for us, fulfilling all righteousness in his
flesh, and offering us freely of his fullness to be made holy before God, we
will hold this profession: and we that are but dust, and full of evil, we
will not join our selves with so excellent a savior: we renounce our
righteousness and the righteousness of our fathers, the righteousness of
Abraham, of Paul, of Peter, of the virgin Marie: and the righteousness of
Christ shall be our righteousness alone. If we be asked, whether the Mass be
a sacrifice for our sin, let us answer: seeing Christ the immaculate lamb
of God, by his eternal spirit, has offered up once his own body upon the
cross, and given eternal redemption to those that do believe: if an impure
priest of polluted members, will presume to be one in this business: let his
sins be imputed unto him, who with unchaste hands, will needs crucify
again the son of God: we will none of his cursed works, but will hold our
profession. Christ is our sacrifice and sacrificer alone: and he is the pro
pitiation for our sins. So in all other poinctes: if Christ who came down
from heaven, and is in the bosom of his father, has taken upon him to be our
prophet, let us hold this profession, and not care what flesh and blood can
say unto us. If Christ, to whom all power is given in Heaven and in Earth, who
is King of glory, and sits on the right hand of majesty in the highest
places, if he have taken upon him to lose the works of the devil, and set us
free from his bondage, why hold we not this profession? or why run we to
holy water, belles, candels, crosses, and such vanities: as though they holped
Christ in his work? Or if all our enemies think they can connute this, that
here we say, let them answer us: how is the reason of the Apostle good
against the priesthod of Aaron, that it is abolished, and no other sacrifices
are, but Christ? because he is so excellent a priest, the son of God, the
great high priest, and has entered the heavens. If this dignity of his
person, prove the priesthod only to be his, why does not the same prove all
these things we speak of, to be done and wrought by him alone? or how is it
possible, that his priesthood, for the excellency of it, cannot stand with the
priesthood of Aaron, which yet was glorious: and that it should stand with
the filthy stinking priesthood of a greasy handed pope, which is loathsome to
see and hear* or how can his glory bear no fellow in his priesthod, and yet
bear the fellowship or any partnership with other, in the office of a King
and prophet? Seeing then it is thus withvs, that we be glorified to have such
a priest, so high, so great, let us hold (as the Apostle says) his
profession, and acknowledge no helpers unto him. Thus the Apostle having showed
the dignity and glory of Christ our priest in the 15. verse following, he
shows also his mercy and compassion, that we may know him a perfect priest:
and for this cause he adds this, least the weak Jews should otherwise be
offended, and fall at the knowledge of his glory: for hearing our Savior
Christ exalted as God, they would easily think: and shall the Lord again
speak unto us? do we not remember the days of mount Sinai, when he spoke unto
them, and they were all afraid? yea, Moses himself, did he not tremble, and
the people pray, that they might hear him no more? shall it be so agiane with
us? or, has the Lord spoken, and we have not seen his majesty? to stop this,
or like offense, the Apostle adds this, of his compassion and love: for we
have not a high priest: which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort* yet without sin:
the sum of which words are, that as we acknowledge Christ to be the son
of God: so we also believe that he was made man like unto us: and in this
participation of nature, has taken also upon him, al our infirmities,
accounting them as his own: so that we may be bold to come unto him, who is
no more fearful in the glory of his majesty, but loving, in y^ similitude of
our nature. And that it is said here, he suffers with us, is tempted as we,
made like us in all things: we must understand it, by reason of that spiritual
and unspeakable conjunction which we have with him, in that he is our head, and
we are his members, a unity not known of flesh and blood: for it is not made
of joints and sinews, but seen only with the eyes of faith, according as it
stands by participation of the same spirit: and when we shall know what the
spirit is, we shall see the band in which we are knitt together, and be able
to speak it, how Christ now suffers with us, and how the afflictions of
his saints are such unto him, as if they were in his own body, even as he
says: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? by which experience, the apostle
Paul also, calls his afflictions the afflictions of Christ: in which we are
to learn: if God have so loved us, we ought also to love our brethren, to
remember them that are oppressed, as if we also were oppressed in body: and to
rejoice with those that do rejoice, as if our own hearts were filled with
gladness: and a just judgment is unto them all, who having Christ such an
example of love, ca^ yet notwithstanding hate their brethren.

And here we also learn, whatsoever afflictions are, yet are they less then
the strength given unto Our a^ctions less then the stren^h the (...).
us: neither shall they ever turn the love of God from us: for all
afflictions, without exception, Christ suffers with us. We see by Paul: how
many, how great, how above measure were his troubles by sea, by land, of
friends, of enemies, in body, in spirit: yet calls he them all the
afflictions of Christ, and his suffering. Lazarus, in all his poverty,
sickness, sores, suffered nothing, wherein Christ was not partaker of his
grief: if ye pains and miseries of patient Job, were now upon any man, even
Job fealt nothing which Christ fealt not with him: for while this mystery is,
which is for ever, yt Christ is the head and we the body, how should the body
be hurt, and the head not touched with the pain of it? Let us not then care
what crosses we bear, for as there is none more shameful then the cross of
Christ, so all ours are accounted as his. If we be poor, sick, contemned,
imprisoned, or whatsoever is the fruit of sin, God is not as man, to turn
his face from such children, but we are the dearer in his sight, and cucric
crosle seals the love of 2. Coi. 5. 21.
Christ, that he suffers this with us, to the end he might never cast us
away: even as he was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. Who now can be discouraged with the
afflictions of his life? or be envious against the wicked man, if we see his
days full of peace and prosperity? No, no, these be but broken weapons, and
can not enter to the hurt of our soul: only let us take heed of sin, that
it reign not, nor have any kingdom in us: for therein, Christ has taken no
part, and by it only we are separate from him, as by that with which he will
have no fellowship.

And where it is here said, that our Savior Christ was like unto us in all
things, except sin, it is a clear place to teach us, what to believe of the
What we must be leeue of
true humanity of our savior Christ: leave off foolish and vain questions,
in which there is no edification: dispute not of particular things, this or
that, wherein thy foolish mind may fall into heresy, the true humanity of
Christ.
and thy foolish heart may take offense, but believe it steadfastly that thou
haste learned truly, that in all things Christ was like unto thee (sin only
excepted:) if any thing be spoken of his humanity, not agreeing with this, it
is false, and to be refused.

It follows now in the last verse: Let us therefore go with boldness unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need: In these words the Apostle concludes, wherefore he has thus magnified
the priesthood of Christ, and what benefit we have by it, that is: to go with
boldness unto the throne of God, and know our selves assuredly reconciled
unto him: in consideration of which excellent and unspeakable benefit, he
makes his conclusion by way of exhortation, that we might never be slack
and slothful to receive so great a blessing, nor by any unthankfulness show
our vnworthnesse of it. Now, in these words are many especial good lessons
for us to learn: first, were he says: Let us go: which exhortation he
groundeth upon the former words, that Christ (as he said) is entered into the
Heavens: we must here learn to apply it to our selves, all that Christ has
done, as in deed he did it not for his own cause, but for ours: and we learn
how it belongs unto us, even as it is wrought by Christ in our nature, whose
members we are.

And thus, what so ever we can see in Christ that he has done, and what soever
glorious promises are made unto him: let us know our unity that we have with
him, and all blessings, that they are ours. If he have overcome sin, we have
also overcome it. If he have vanquished death, we have vanquished it also. If
he have risen from the dead, we shall rise also. If he have ascended into
Heaven, we shall ascend. If he sit on the right hand of majesty, we shall
also be glorified, and see God as he is: for we be joined all unseparably unto
him, as the head is joined unto the body, by the wonderful mystery of Gods
wisdom, who has made him of our nature and given unto us of his spirit: and
in this fellowship with him which he has given us, there is nothing so great,
but he has given us with him: the righteousness of all his works, and
glory of all his inheritance, with him is ours, and we are also Lords over
all: whether it be Paul, or whether Appollo, or whether it be Cephas: whether
the world, whether it be life, or whether it be death: whether things present,
or whether things to come: all things are ours, and we are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods.

Thus we must apple it, and make it ours, which Christ has given us: even as
the Apostle says of this, that Christ is our high priest and mediator: let us
therefore go unto the throne of grace.

An other thing we must here note, that the Apostle exhorts us, to go
with boldness, teaching us, that a constant persuasion, and good assurance
of Gods favor, do highly commend our prayers unto God: and without it, we
are like unto the floods and waves of the sea, which are rouled Iac. 1. 6.
up and down with the wind: and our hope with God is frustrate. Now, this
boldness which is thus necessary for us, we must learn likewise, both how we
have it, and what it brings unto us: how we have it, we can no way better
learn, then by the Apostle him self, who making again this self same
exhortation, in the tenth chapter following, says thus. Seeing we have this
great high priest, the ruler over the house of God, let us go unto him, with a
true heart and full persuasion of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: this is then the boldness
with which we approach unto God, steadfastly to believe, that with the blood of
Christ, our minds are washed from impure thoughts, and our bodies from sin.
This S. Paul also teaches in plain and manifest words: in Christ (says he)
we have this freedom and entrance Ephe. 3. 12.
with boldness, through faith in him: and in another place he says, this must
needs be thus, that by faith only we should have this access unto God, else
(says he) the promise of God, could not be sure and good unto all the seed
of Abraham: for he was a father of many nations, even of such as were
uncircumcised, and to whom the law was not written, Romans 1. 16.
therefore to the end that Jew and Gentile might both inherit this blessing,
it must needs be by faith and not by works. So then, thus far we are taught
by the Apostle, that if we receive Jesus Christ to be our high priest, our only
way to enter with him into the heavens, is by faith: and our faith has boldness
and full persuasion, in which it is accepted according to that which is
written: God has not given Romans (...). 15.
us the spirit of fear again unto bondage: but God has given us the spirit
of adoption, by which 2. Tim. 1. 7.
we cry, Abba, Father. Here (dearly beloved) let us learn to discern
spirits, and to try whether they be of God, or no: Every spirit that
confesses Christ to be our only mediator, is of God: for by him we have
liberty through faith, to go with boldness unto the throne of grace. And every
spirit that denies Christ to be our only mediator, is not of God, but it is
the spirit of Antichrist, of whom we have heard, that he is entered into the
world: for god 1. Tim. 6. 19.
dwells in light which no creature can approach un to, neither has any man
seen him, nor ca^ see him, Ephe. 2. 18.
but only by Christ, through one spirit we have all entrance unto him. These
(dearly beloved) they are y^ words of the scripture, they are not the words of
man: and when you are in place, object them unto the papists, see what one word
they are able to answer, who in times past, have told you yet of a great number
of mediators, confessors, martyrs, Saints, Angels, Archangels, every one in
his degree, they have made them mediators, and besought them to lead us unto
God. I beelie them not, ten thousand of their books are yet to see, and
ten thousand prayers in them, in which they have done this wickedness. Ask
them, and bid them speak plain, what one word have they of defense for this
dooinge? surely (dearly beloved) I tell you the truth, not one word they can
speak, which is a word of truth, a word of righteousness, a word of life, a
word (I mean) of God, to which you may trust: a fond fancy they have found
of their own, as he that dreameth does tell a dream: and they say there are
two mediators, one of intercession, an other of redemption: beside the
foolishness of this speech, a mediator of intercession, which you may as well
call an intercessour of mediation: for intercessour and mediator, are both
one: beside this (I say) manifest folly, let them name any Apostle, prophet,
or Evangelist, upon whom we must build and stand, that ever mentioned any such
thing: let them tell of whom they learned it: sure they will not, they are
stark dumb: they know they have no Scripture, no not a word, and of their
schoolemaisters, in deed, they are ashamed: but I will tell you who they be, and
they shall not deny it, except they be as shameless as they of whom they
are learned. The Gods of the Gentiles, which are devils, they had this
woorshipp amongst them: these devils among them selves, they which were
reputed of the lower sort were made, as means to come unto the higher,
whereof also they were called Dij medioximi, that is Gods only for
intercession: and Gentiles books are full of examples, how these things were
practiced: as if Neptune would speak to Jupiter, he made Mercury his means
and intercessour, and such like toys, which shall be abolished, and tholouers
of them. And we may see, how GOD has recompensed this their evil unto them:
for, where this is the comfort of a Christian man, to have peace toward God,
and which is given us, by having Christ our only mediator, they who have made
so many could never find it, but still they are in suspense and doubt,
wavering and unconstant in all their ways, and this doubtfulnesse they begett
and nourishe unto them selves, while they seek so many mediators: and what
else do they but teach all their posterity in choosing many mediators, to
have confidence in none? Even as the rebellious people of Israel, wearied them
selves, running (as the prophet says) like Dromedaries, to every high hill,
and every green tree, till they were weak and weary, and their souls
fainted in them, seeking peace and could find none: and in deed, how should
they find it? for though they followed a thousand Gods, yet was there but one,
the God of peace, whom they had forsaken: so, though the Papists seek a
thousand mediators, yet have they no boldness to go unto God: for there is
but one mediator between God and us, even Jesus Christ, whom they for their
Saints have forsaken: for Christ will be joined with no fellows. And what a
miserable brotherhood must they then needs be, which have no peace, but fear
and trembling is in their ways?

Again, we have here to mark, that the presence of God, to which Christ
leads us, is called here the Throne of grace: noting hereby, that by the
merits of Christ we be brought unto God, as before a judge, who from his
judgment seat does acquit us for ever, from al guiltiness of our sins,
and therefore called the throne of grace, because we be quit only by grace and
Gods free mercy: a monument of which love he sets before us, in the name of
the seat on which he sits, and calls it the throne of grace: neither
shall ever man be justified before it, who brings with him boldness of his
own works, nature, kindred, or any thing, and looks not only for his pardon
by grace and mercy: neither can the Lord any more show mercy unto him, that
is proud of his own self, then he can change the property of his judgment
seat, to make it no more the throne of grace.

Now, it follows: That we may obtain mercy and find grace to help: these
words teach us, what the throne of grace is, and what it offers unto us:
even as we said before, boldness and constancy, that we should not fear to
go unto it. For, if it be a throne of grace, that is, of favor, of mercy,
of love, of forgiveness, of life: then can there not be in it, anger,
guiltiness, affliction of spirit, bondage, and fear of death: but as the
Apostle says here: it gives unto us mercy, grace, and help, in the time of
need. Let us not then say, as the Papists say, that we ought to fear and
doubt of Gods favor, and fill our mouths with blasphemy, as they have done:
to say, It is presumption, to come with boldness unto the throne of grace:
but let us rather acknowledge all the goodness of God, and confess, that he
has set up unto us a throne of grace, before which we shall find nothing
but mercy, but pardon, but forgiveness, but help: neither will we ever
despise his grace, to bring doutfulnesse or mistrust unto it. If the Pope, who
is a servant of servants, will set up an other throne of miserable bondage,
of ignominy, of anger, of cruel death: let them fear before it, who list to
go unto it: for our part, we have once accurssed both the Pope and his throne,
and we will never more endanger our selves unto the censure of it. That which
the Apostle here adds last: In time of need: he applies to that which he
spoke so much of before, To day, noting (as I told you the^) that even now
while yet the Gospel is preached, the opportunity of time is, in which we
must be faithful, and inherit, as it were, the first fruits of eternal
life, which time neglected cannot be called back again, though we should wish
it with tears: and therefore let us regard it, now while it is offered,
knowinge this, that God has not ordained a throne of grace, but for those
which find their help and comfort in due time. And let us pray, that God
would lighte^ our minds, that we may be wise, to know the time of our
calling, etc.

The 22. Lecture, upon the 1. 2. and 3. verses of the fifte Chapter.
1 FOr every high priest is taken from among men, and is ordained for men, in
things perteining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins.

2 Which is able sufficiently to have compassion on them that are ignorant, and
that are out of the way, because that he also is compassed with infirmity.

3 And for the sames sake he is bound to offer for sins, as well for his own
part, as for the peoples,


YOU have heard before, how the Apostle has taught, that our Savior Christ is
our great high priest, and what manner of priesthood he has: even such a
priesthod, by which him self is entered into the heavens, and has given grace
unto us that do believe, that through his virtue and power, we might also with
boldness approach unto God.

This excellency of Christ and his high priesthood, the Apostle begins now
to prove, by comparing together Christ and Aaron. For, like as when he spoke of
his prophecy, because there was no prophet in Israel so great as Moses, and to
whom God so familiarly appeared as unto Moses: therefore, to prove the
excellency of Christ, he compared him with Moses. So now, in this matter of
his priesthood, because there was no priest comparable with Aaron, ordained
of God as he was, with so singular honor, so great promises, so much
reverence of his people: therefore he compares Christ with Aaron, that by the
difference, it might more clearly appear, that Christ both must needs be an
high priest, and in honor alone far above all other. He begins his
comparison thus: For every high priest is taken from among men, and is
ordained for men in things perteining to God: yt is, those which are priests
after the order of Aaron, first, in nature are their brethren, men like unto
them selves, subject to all infirmities, which the people are subject unto,
having nothing in them selves wherein especially to rejoice, but is like unto
other men: again, they execute their office, and do the work appointed them,
not for themselves alone, as men having a private business, but in the name,
and for the benefit of the whole people, that the fruit of their labor might
redounde unto many, and they serve the people in things apperteining to God. A
third property of that high priest was, that he came not before god in his
own virtue, but brought gifts and sacrifices with him, for reconciliation: by
gifts, he means all oblations of things without life, which apperteined to
the sacrifices: by sacrifices, all beasts which were killed and offered,
according to the law.

An other thing required in the priests of the old law, which were after the
order of Aaron, the Apostle adds in the second verse, in these words: Which
is able sufficiently to have compassion on the^ which are ignorant and out of
the way. This property here spo ken of, is compassion, in feeling the sins,
and errors of the people, as if they were his own: and having a continual
care, how to instruct them and teach them in the right way, that they might
cast from them all this corruption, and be reconciled unto God. After this,
he shows the cause why this compassion was in him, and how he was made so
loving: because that he also is compassed with infirmity, that is had
experience in his own flesh, how prove they were to sin, how subject to
tentation, how soon seduced from good to evil, and how ready to fall from
life to death: of which infirmities, he was so partaker, that the smart and
stinge of them was in his own flesh, and daily he was wounded with his own
concupisence, to do the things that he would not: and therefore grieved with
him self, and having pity on his brethren, he willingly executed his
Priests office, and did it gladly, which he found by experience must be done
of necessity, or no flesh should be saved, and offered sacrifice in sign of
the purging of their sins, and reconciliation unto God, as the Apostle adds
in the third verse: And for the sames sake he is bound to offer for sins,
as well for his own part as for the peoples: and thus far, of this beginning
of comparison between Christ and the priests of the law, setting now down
these properties of the Priest, and after shewinge the great excellency that
is in Christ, above them.

Now, in this we have to learn many profitable instructions.

First, where he says: Every high priest is taken of men, and appointed for
men, in things apperteyning to God: we learn, that no man can have accesie or
entrance unto God, but by a mediator: the Lord would not then receive the
peoples gifts, their offeringes, their vows, their prayers, their thanks
giving, what so ever it were: no man in Israel, were he never so holy, had his
access unto God, but by a mediator: nor he offered any thing unto God, but by
the priest. This was then their schoolemaister, to lead them to the Messiah,
without whom they knew, there was no agreement between God and them: so that
we know, they were taught in the same faith that we be taught, that man
through sin was once cast out from the presence of God: and from thencefoorth
for ever, to dwell in his shame, except some other work reconciliation for
him: for man had lost all his own power, and as Adam was, so were all the
Children of Adam.

All were gone out of the way, they were all corrupt, there was none that did
good, no not one. Psa. 14. 3.


An impossible thing for all flesh, eueragaine to come into the presence of
God, without a mediator, in whom GOD would be again reconciled.

This doctrine the Jews were taught in their high priest, who only entered
before the Arc, where was the signs of Gods presence, and all people else
forbidden to approach near. And as thus they confessed the necessity of a
mediator, so further in the person of the high priest, in that he was taken
from among men, that is, was a man, like unto his brethren, they learned also
yt this mediator should be a perfect man.

For, when God who wrought daily among them, by the ministry of Angels,
glorious and fearful works, yet never appointed Angel, nor other creature
to make the peoples sacrifice, and offer up their vows and prayers unto him,
to come unto him in the peoples name, to crave pardon and forgiveness of
sins: but in an unchangeable counsel, ever reserved his work unto the
priest, one of their brethren, a man like to them selves, he taught them:
plainly, that he should be a perfect man, of their own nature and
substance, who so ever should reconcile them unto God.

Again, in that the priest came not with empty hands before God, neither yet
might do except him self would be destroyed, but he had with him always his
sacrifice, to acknowledge all men endebted unto God, in payment whereof, he
would be reconciled: they learned herein, that their mediator must also offer
vpa sacrifice for them, in which God would be pleased, and accept it as a
sufficient payment of all our debtes unto him: which sacrifice they knew well,
should not be the blood of Calves, and Goats: for it is to vile a thing to
appease the anger of God, but another sacrifice, holy and righteous, without
spott of sin, unblameable before God, with such a one God would be pleased.
Thus the Israelites being instructed, of necessity, to seek a mediator, and
that mediator to be a man, and that man to offer up a sacrifice of his own,
without spot or blemishe, a satisfaction for our sins, and a reconciliation
to God: in this they were instructed, to confess as we confess, and to
believe as we believe: that as there is but one God, so there is but one
mediator between man and God, even the man Jesus Christ: who gave himself to
be the price of the redemption of mankind: this is ye faith 1. Tim. 2. 5.
of Gods elect, holden of Abraham, Isaake, and Jacob, as well as of us: the
faith of the Saints from the beginning: and we to whom now it is most clearly
revealed, let us be thankful for so great a benefit, in more constancy of
our faith, never to be removed from this holy truth. As often as we speak of a
mediator, let us confess, there can be none among angels, for they are no
men: nor among ye Saints; for they were all sinners: neither among all other
creatures, for they are all corruptible: so that we will not give neither gold
nor silver for the redemption of our souls, nor trust in the merits of saints
and Angels, who al want virtue for this work: but when we think of any
mediator, we will confess Jesus Christ the son of God, the son of David,
the only mediator, and purger of our sins.

And here further let us learn, seeing a priest is to do our things before
God, and to offer for our sins, let us know these two things both to be
done by Christ for us, that is, both to make intercession, and to purge our
sins, in neither of which works, let us attribute any thing to any other,
except we will rob Christ of the glory of his priesthood: wherein we may see
what the Papists have done: for if we be wise to judge rightly, and will see
that which God sets before our eyes, we cannot choose, but we must
needs see how they have taken both these things of the priesthood of
Christ, and given them unto other.

First, for the oblation of Christ to purge our sins, if we will
acknowledge it, we must confess, that it was done but once, and must never be
repeated the second time, both as the Apostle after in plain words
teaches us, and as the nature of Christ's priesthood does necessarily prove:
for he has his priesthood abidinge ever, even as he lives ever, neither can
it be carried Chap. 7. 24.
over to another: but as the sacrifice is his own, so he is priest alone to
offer it, which he did once upon the cross.

Therefore their Masses are above all sacrilege accursed, in which they say,
that the Priest though vnbloudily, yet he offers in a propitiatory
sacrifice the natural and royal! body of Christ, and not only thus they
tran^erre the purgation of our sins from the Altar of the Cross, where it
was made by Christ, to the Altar of an idol, where they would do it by a
priest, but they do not so much as confess, that it was once perfect and
full upon the cross, but find wantes in it there offered. I slander them
nor for it is their own doctrine, neither, am I sure, will they deny: them
selves write, that Christ satisfied for sins before baptism, both for the
giltinesse and punishment of them: but as for sins after baptism, he took
only away the guiltiness of the fault, but le^t the punishment for our selves
to bear, so much as by afflictions of our life, and by purgatory after our
life, we could possibly endure.

Thus lame they leave unto Christ the purgeing of our sins, the highest part
of his priesthood. The other part of his intercession, they handle it no
better: for do they not pray unto all saints and Angels* do they not call the
virgin Marie, the Queen of heaven, the gate of Paradise, the treasuresse of
grace, the refuge of sinners, the mediatresse of men, our life, our delight, our
hope? and what after this ca^ they leave unto Christ? And this (dearly
beloved) I allege not unto you, out of private men's writings, which they
might deny, but in their sacred holy Mass book, these things are written. In
their mass of the annunciation, they sing this song:

Salve virgo virginum,
Mediatrix hominum.
All hail, virgin of virgins, the mediatresse of men. In the mass of the
conception, they sing this:

Tuspes certa miscrorum,
Vere matter orphanorum,
Tu lauemen oppressorum,
Medicamen infirmorum,
Omnibus es omnia.
Thou art the undoubted hope of the miserable, the mother in deed of Orphans,
the refreshment of the oppressed, the healing medicine of all the diseased, and
thou art all things to all men.

You hear the rhyme of all this I am sure, and for the matter, it is not worth
englishing. Now, join unto this, more out of the mass book. O foelix
puerpera,
Nostra pians scelera.
O happy bringer forth of children, cleansing our wickedness etc. and out of
the Portesse: Tu per Thom^ sanguinem etc.
O Christ, make us to ascend unto heaven, whether Thomas is ascended, and by
the blood of Thomas etc. And tell me now, what is left unto Christ to be our
mediator? Surely (dearly beloved) the truth is, even as the Lord has
persuaded us this day: he that bosted so long to be the vicar of Christ, we
have tried him, and found him to be the very Antichrist, who denies in deed
Christ to be come in flesh, while thus he denies him to be our only
mediator.

Now, let us return further, to hear what the Apostle teaches. The fourth
property here mentioned, requisite in a priest, is, that he have compassion on
his brethren, according to that feeling which is in his own flesh, of his own
infirmities* this compassion is, to rejoice with his brethren, in all well
doing: and to be grieved for them, in their sins and errors: which property
the Apostle says was in the priest of the law, in a certain measure, as he
was help by experience of him self, and so much as God accepted in him, who
was for a time the priest of his people.

This ought to be now a special instruction unto us all, because we are all
made a spiritual Priesthood unto GOD, to offer up our spiritual sacrifices,
that we should have this compassion one toward another, to delight in the well
doing of our brethren, as having received the same spirit of faith, and to be
grieved with their offenses, even as men subject to the same infirmities. This
rejoicing was in Paul, when he writes to the Philippians, that if he might
procure their faith and constancy of godliness, Phil. 2. 18.
though it were with the loss of his life, yet he would rejoice with them for
the great blessing: and this holy sorrow for our brothers fallings, the same
Paul expressly commands unto us all, writing to the Galathians: brethren,
if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore Gal. 6. 1.
such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou
also be tempted: if this the^ be in us, and our brotherly love be measured with
this line, we are all this day Priests unto our God, offering up a most
sweet smelling sacrifice, every one his brother, to be a servant of
righteousness unto God. And as this is the duty in every one of us, so
especially the minister ought to be full of this compassion, to declare still
unto his people all the counsel of God, that they might be confirmed who are
called, and converted who go yet astray, that with one heart and voice, at last
they might glorify god together, this it is y^ ought to be: but, O Lord! how
far is this from being done? where may we find a man, that rejoices in his
brothers godliness, or pitieth him in his sin? who can boaste of his
friends, of all his acquaintance, of all his kindred, that him he has brought
unto the Lord? how many are the ministers in number, that are able to teach,
and have their dwelling with their parishioners, to teach the^ to know god?
surely these things are so far out of order, and iniquity has so prevailed
and gotten y^ upper hand, that we may take up again the prophets complaint,
Like priest like people: the people are so dulled with carnal concupiscence,
that all their company is, for cards, or dice, or dau^sing, or banqueting,
or some riot of life: the name of the Lord is not remembered, but when it is
blasphemed: this is the fellowship of the world: the ministry has not so
altogether cast off shame, but yet the faults of it are somewhat too great and
grievous: for many of them are hirelings, non reside^ts, dumb dogs, going a
whoringe (not after many women, which the world would detest) but after many
benefices, which the Lord God of Israel does as much abhor: would to God
this complaint were false, and it shall be false when god shall give his fear
into our hearts, and give us ears to hear that good promise of Christ: blessed
are those seruau^ts, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find wakinge. Luke
12. 37.
In the mean while, if admonitions may stir us up to be wise in time, let us
hear what the Apostle says more in this place.

It follows: because that he is compassed about with infirmity: this is the
cause why the high priest had such compassion on his brethren, because himself
fealt all their infirmities: thus the Apostle testified of Christ before, that
because he was tempted, he was made able to help those that were tempted: and
Saint Paul says, for this cause be we comforted Hebr. 2. 13.
in our tribulation, that we might be able to comfort other in their
afflictions: so our own sense and feeling must needs be a provocation unto us
to pity (...). Cor. 1. 4.
other: and in deed, it is a thing utterly impossible, that whatsoever I
suffer my self, I should not have a compassion of it in another: If I be
hungry, I pity all whom I hear cry for meat: If I be in pain, I pity all
which cry out in their grief: even so it is also with us, and much more in
the afflictions of spirit: I bear the burden of mine own sins, if I see
their loathsome appearance, and feel their heavy judgment, that I mourn
under them, it is utterly impossible but I should hate them in my self and in
all men, and I will seek diligently how to keep men free from such a deadly
sickness. Thus we see what is the cause why we be not careful one to edify
another: that is, because we have no true feelinge of our own ignorances, nor
perceive any weighty burden of our own sins, when we pray thus, the reme^
brance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is intolerable, we
speak with feigned and deceitefull lips, the sighs of our hearts they go
not with our words: or if they do, I appeal to your own hearts: how careful
you are for your brethren: for I am sure, the words of the Apostle must needs
be true, if I say you feel your own sins, you be careful for your
brethren, wishing and procuring as any occasion serves, that they also may
find grace to turn from their sins, and come out (as Paul says) out of
the snares of the devil, who has entrapped them after his own will: and if
this great misery 2. Tim. 2. 16.
of thy brother move thee not, thoufeelest not the misery that is in thine
own joints and bowels, which astonishment of sense, is barbarous and brutish
dishonoring both the heart and countenance of a man.

Another thing here to be marked is, that the Apostle calls al sins, by the
name of errors and ignorances: teaching us first, that al error and innorance
before God is condemned as sin, and whatsoever man does with all his good
intentes, if he be ignorant in his work, he oflereth but the sacrifice of a
fool, neither does God regard it. Wherein we may se what their church is,
whose whole religion is blindness, and whose devotion (as them selves
confess,) is bred and nourished by ignorance: and another cause why our sins
are named ignoraunces, is, because the sinners know not their own way, they
think they have peace and rejoicing. When danger and woe is nearest unto them:
they think their sin is sweet and full of pleasure, when indede it is nothing
else but anguish and affliction of spirit: for they see only with their eyes and
have regard after the present time, not knowing yt the time passes, and the
co^cupisce^ce is ended in it, and that yt lord after will call the^ to judgment.
Thus the Prophet Daniel names the sins of Nabuchadnezar, his errors: and
Abacuch making his Dan. 4. 24.
prayer for all the sins of Israel, he names them Hab. 3. 1.
their ignorances: let us therefore as this Apostle before warned us, beware
lest we be hardened with the deceites of sin, but know for a surety when we
be delighted with evil, it is our error: and if we were wise we would never be
deceived with so hurtful enticements.

It follows now in the third verse: And for the same cause he must, as for
the people, so for him self, offer sacrifice for sin: In these words the
Apostle bears witness, of want and imperfection of the priesthood of Aaron:
that though he appeared as a mediator between God and his people: yet he was
not perfect for such a work, but acknowledging his own sins, he set
him self in their number which looked for a better mediator, who was only
figured, could not be exhibited in his person: to this end he offered
sacrifice, both for the people, and for him self, according as he was
expressly commanded in the law of Moses, as we read in the ninth Chapter of
Leuiticus, and again after is here mentioned in the seventh Chapter following.
And Leuit. 9. 7.
here we see the property required in a mediator, and that is, that he be
absolute and holy, without spot, to whom it can not be said, Physician cure
thy self, for then could he be profitable to none: but who soever shall take
upon him this work, to pacific God and to conquer Satan; he must have a body
prepared of God to all obedience, and he must be armed with the power of God,
to beat and vanquish sin, hell, and condemnation, and so to abolish the
Devil: they never knew this, neither the righteousness, nor yet the power of
a mediator, who so easily have given this glory unto weak men: for this
straight condition, the justice of GOD requires of him, that shall reconcile
man unto God, that he bring in him self all the righteousness which his
holy law requires, by it first to sanctify him self, to be accepted, and
in that innocence to bear the punishment of the sins of his people, that
he might set them free: then in the power of his spirit to overcome that
punishment, and rise from it, that it might be abolished, and all with him
might have entrance into glory and eternal life. Now this comparison of the
Apostle, somewhat more plainly appears, in which we see the dignity of
Christ. Aaron was in nature a perfect man, and so was Christ, and more
excellent in property, being without sin. Aaron ministered for the peoples
sake, and for his own also being a sinner: Christ for his people only,
himself needing nothing. Aaron offered sacrifice, but of other things, none of
his own: Christ offered his sacrifice his own and him self.

Aaron had compassion on his brethren, but in a certain measure, and the
greatest part of it for him self, and sorrow of his own infirmities: but
Christ, wholly was grieved for us, and for our sakes only he bare
infirmities, of all which the doctrine is plain unto ye people of Israel, that
not Aaron, but Christ, was the great high priest to reconcile them unto God:
And here we see touching that that is said, the high priest offered for his own
sins and for the sins of the people, that is not meant that his sacrifices
were in deed a cleansing of their sins: for neither can the blood of Calves
and Goats wash away that infection, neither can a sinnful man offer a
sacrifice of such price: only the Lord Jesus offering his body, could do so
excellent a work: but that the sacrifices of the law, and that high Priest,
were said to purge sins: it was only in figure, as being signs and tokens
of Christ, and of his body, to be sacrificed upon the cross, which
redemption, they confessed and believed, in their oblations, and God sealed it
unto them, by fire from heaven, consuming their burnt offerings, that their
faith was precious in his sight, and he would perform his promises unto them,
according to their hope, and give them a sacrifice for their sin, even his
only begotten son that every one which believed in him should not perish but
have life everlasting: and in witness of this constant truth, because their
sacrifices were as figures of it, he gives them the name of that which they
figured, and calls them sin offeringes, and propitiatory sacrifices, and
reconciliations between God and them. And this is common to all sacraments of
the old and new Testament, that they might be unto us sure and undoubted
pledges of Gods promises, that he perfourmeth them all: therefore the name and
title of the thing, is given to the figure: so these sacrifices were called
sin offeringes, and peace offerings: circumcision was called Gods conenant,
the Lamb his passover, the Arc his glory, the temple his rest, Baptism the
washing of our new birth: and what madness is in men, I can not tell, why they
stum ble and fall, and are broken an this phrase: this is my body. Could the
name of reconciliation be given to the blood of an Ox, the name of Gods
benefits be given to the cutting off of a little skin, and to a white lamb:
his glory, his blessedness, his rightcousnesse, to gold, to stones, to
water: and can not the name of the body of Christ be given unto bread? or could
not the name of forgiveness, of mercy, of covenant, of glory, of presence, of
righteousness, change the nature of gold, stones, flesh, water, and such
like: and must needs the name of body straight change bread into flesh? or
is not the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, as glorious a mystery, as
full of truth as other sacraments were: and why should it not have a greater
honor, named by the thing which it represents: but this as occasion is
offered, and in a word, for the thing is plain to those that will understand,
and they that with affection have robbed themselves of iudgmente, let us pray
for them: and they that do belong unto the covenant, shall one day with us
confess the true doctrine of the sacrament in which it is sealed. Now Let us
pray, etc.

The 23. Lecture, upon the 4. 5. and 6. verses.
4 And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron.

5 So likewise Christ took not to him self this honor, to be made the high
priest, but he that said unto him: Thou are my Son, this day begat I thee
gave it him.

6 As he also in another place speaks, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech.


Told you, the Apostle here makes comparison between the priesthood of Aaron
and of Christ: that so by conference, the dignity of Christ might more appear.

The comparison hitherto has been in this, that the priest of the old law,
must necessarily be a natural man: then, that he must do the work of the
people, in things apperteining to God: thirdly, that he must do it with some
sacrifice: fourthly, with compassion for the peoples errors: in all which
Christ only is excellent above all other.

Now, the Apostle goes forward, and yet shows a fifte property of the high
priest before, and that is, that he was called of God, and thrust not himself
into that room and function. To this purpose now it follows: And no man
takes unto him self this honor, but he that is called of God as was Aaron:
then in the two verses following, shows how in this also Christ excelled
Aaron, and had a more glorious calling then he: first, because an high decree
of God was pronounced by the Prophet in which, under the name of a soon, God
ordained him priest, saying: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee:
Again, he called him not unto a priesthood of signs and shadows, which
endured but for a while, but he called him to the true priesthood it self,
which changed not, but made him a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech. So, as the son is higher then a servant, the truth better then
the figure of it, and that which abides ever, better then that which in time
is abolished: so much, this calling of Christ exceeds Aarons calling, and all
the priests of the law. Here let us first learn, since the Apostle speaks
plainly: No man takes honor to him self, but he that is called of God as
Aaron was: that both it is unlawful for any man without a calling to take
upon him the ministry, neither yet any calling ought to be, which is not
according to the will of God: for seeing ye ministry is honorable, and he
is justly honored that executes it faithfully: how can I exalt my self, but
of right I ought again to be brought low, and in steed of glory, have
shame? for what do I in this, but rob Christ of his glory, who is head of
his Church, and appoints ministers whom he will, who rules in the house of
Jacob, and ordeyneth officers at his own pleasure? If in an earthly kingdom,
subjects would presume to take offices at their own choice, were it not
extreme confusion, utter reproach and shame unto the prince? how much more to
bring this confusion into the Church of Christ? Therefore, both our Savior
Christ himself did openly ordeine his own apostles, and never any of them
executed that office, but with protestation, that they had this calling of God:
and therefore their Epistles begin (as you read) Paul an Apostle of Jesus
Christ. Peter the servant of Jesus Christ. And y^ same from the beginning has
been a perpetual law in the church of God. Moses, David, Esaias, Jeremy, and
all the residue, they took not this honor to them selves, but were called of
God, and in the name of God they declared unto the people, his visions and his
words, from which if they declyned to the right hand or to the least, they
made them selves sinners: and not only thus it is in the ministry, but for
as much as the Apostle gives it a general term: No man takes honor unto
him self: even in the common wealth, in matters of this vain life, not only
the God of peace will not have his people to live in confusion, every man to
exalte himself: but also limitteth to every one, the bounds of his calling, in
which God has given him honor, and without which, both he sins against
God, and offends his Prince that has appointed him. The Justice must deal
with those things which apperteine unto a Justice, and a judge with the
things of a judge: and as it is rebellion for the private man to resist the
magistrate: so is it presumption in a magistrate, to take upon him above his
calling. We have gotten among us I know not what proverb, which commonly we
call, A cast off our office: if this be to cast off the law of our calling,
and take more honor then is given of the higher power, we deserve it right
well, if for such pretty castes, our selves should be cast quite out of our
places: for in matters above us, we be all private men and must go unto them,
to whom God has given the judgment: where we our selu^s have the place of
honor: there let us be faithful as before the Lord.

The second thing to be learned in these words, is, that we have all, such a
calling, as we may be sure it is of God: for we must be called of God, as Aaron
was.

Here (dearly beloved) I would we had no cause to complain: or, seeing
things are so ill as they are, I would we had the spirit of the prophet
Jeremy, to wish that our hands were full of water, or in our eyes were a
founteine of tears, that we might weep day and night for the sins of our
nation: then the Lord in due time would hearken unto us, and the highest from
his holy seat would regard us, that our eyes might see all our ruins
restored. But now, touching this calling in magistrates and officers of our
common wealth, I will say no more, but in one word, as the scripture speaks.
God calls him unto his dignity, who is orderly appointed, and is a man of
courage, fearinge God, dealing truly, having no respect of persons, and
hating covetousness: otherwise, if by bribing, by ambition, or by any
unlawful means, he come to his preferment, the more he knows himself; the
more he will fear least his calling be not of God: but this they will regard,
to whom it belongs: our special doctrine here, is in the calling of the
ministers, whereof (by the grace of god) I will tell you the truth: but because
this, and other things are now in bitter controversy between our selves, so
that the uncharitable words of our mouths are witnesses against us of the
evil affections of our hearts, and our hurtful doings one toward another do
show abundantly, that evil will has taken deep root within us, I protest y^ I
have neither part nor fe lowship in this division, but in love and unity. I
bear him witness who speaks truth, and bear with his error who is
deceived, acknowledging my self more unworthy then either both. And that you
(dearly beloved) may hold fast the bond of peace, and not be broken off with
every temptation, I befeeche you consider but this with me: has not God given
his gifts diversely, to one more, to one less, to one ten pounds, as it is in
the parable, to another but one, and can we the^ all know a like? must we not
of necessity one know more, another less, one be more wise, another less, one
understand this truth, another that, even as God reuealeth it: and every one
of us have our wantes, in which we may be better taught: and shall it not be
ever so, as long as our knowledge is in part, and we see not the fulness of all
truth? and has not God given this diversity unto us for a good purpose, y^
thus standing in need one of another, we should all more effectually love and
help one another: look not for it therefore we all agree in every thing,
for it shall never be till we do all see the Lord Jesus, who only is perfect
wisdom and truth. But look for this, and pray that you may see it, that
seeing we agree in the faith of Gods elect, and in the hope of salvation, that
is, in the Lord Jesus, that we may walk together in it in love, and keep this
unity of the spirit, in the band of peace. And to those who are adversaries
in this case against us, if they vouchsafe to hear, most humbly I beseech
them to consider, how precious all truth of the Lord is, and to separate all
affections from them, so that their hearts may bear them witness in the
night, both vnseinedly they seek it, and faithfully they will embrace it, all
that the Lord shall reveal unto them: which mind the Lord grant unto us with
them, that his truth may be of all embraced, and his church may have holy
peace.

Now, let us return to our text: No man takes honor unto himself, but he
that is called of God, as Aaron was: a very flat and plain sentence.

No minister ought to be called in the Church, but he whose calling may be
known to be of God. Such persons, such qualities, such places, as may be
known, y^ Lord has ordained, only such elections ought to be in the
Church: and this all men must needs grant. Hereof I may first conclude,
touching the person of the minister: that because in all places, by the
prophets, by the Apostles, by our savior Christ, God always requires that his
ministers be of good report, well grounded in faith, able to teach his
people: therefore, if ruffians, if Papists, or men of an unknown religion: if
ignorant men, and not able to teach, be chosen unto this office, I dare boldly
affirm it, their calling is not allowed of God, and therefore not accusing any
of ruffianrie, or popery, I leave that unto the Lord: yet I think it not
amiss, to add a word or two of their popish orders, and priests of their
calling.

You know first this certain principle: No man ought to take honor, but he
that is called of God, as Aaron was. Now would I feign know, of all those
orders which the Papists had, what one of them was of God? either touching the
work whereto they are appointed, or else the qualities required in them, of
which they be examined? For first, touching the qualities of Gods ministers, of
which the church examineth them, we all know this day, that these they are:
they must be blameless, watchful, sober, modest, herberous, wise, gentle,
apt to teach, able to convince the adversary, such as govern well their whole
families, no drunkardes, no quarellers, no covetous men: these be the qualities
that God requires. But the Pope, how does he examine his priests? the
Bishop, or else the Archdeacon, with some other priests, they call the
parties, and examine them: first, whether they be xxv. year old: then,
whether he understand any latin: then, whether his father and mother were
honest, or whether he be a bastard: fourthly, they must mark and handle
every member of his body, whether they be sound, and number his eyes, his
ears, his nostrels, his hands, his fingers, his feet! and if they mistrust,
he must put off his shoes, to see whether his feet be of wood, or no.
Fiftely, whether he have chaste flesh: that is, whether he have married two
wives, or else a widow. Sixtely, how long he has been in orders, and what,
when, and of whom he had his orders. Seventhly, what living he has to
maintain him, either by patrimony, or by benefice, These things by straight
examination being well known, then the Bishop tells them that there be
xiiii. especial things, which Saint Paul to Timothy, requires in a
minister, and wishes them to consider of them. Was there ever dark night so
contrary to a shining day, as these bables of Antichrist, are contrary to the
ordinance of God?

Now, touching the office, whereunto God appoints the ministers of his
Gospel, is it not this: to preach his word, and minister sacraments? other
governors of his Church, are they not for the peoples obedience unto this
word, and, for provision of the poor? But the Popes officers from the highest
to the lowest, what similitude have they with these? the first officer in their
church is a porter, and he has this authority given him, to ringe The
Papisticall offices and offiicers.
the bell, ^o unlock the Church and vestrie doors to open his book, if any
man preach: and this he is charged to do sincerly, even as he will make his
account to God.

Their second officer is a lesson reader: and he must read, or sing the
lessons, and hallow bread, and all green fruit, and study the book in
which their lessons are, and all this he must do faithfully, and to the full.
The third office they have, is, to conjure: and the exorcist or coniurer, he
has charge with a certain charm to cast out devils: to bid them that do not
communicate, depart: and to power water into the chalice at communion: and
this he must do very diligently. The fourth office, is of Acolites: and
they must carry the candlestickes, light the tapers, and prepare bread and
wine, when there is a communion: and of this they must have great
consideration. Their fist order or office, is of greater account, and is of
Subdeacons: and they must provide water against mass, wash the palles, and
corporasse clothes, give the Chalice and cover unto the Deacon: and this they
must do very cleanly and diligently: beside, they must vow chastity, serve
at the Altar, and have authority to read the Epistle for the quick and the
dead. The sixte order is, of Deacons; and he may sometime for want of a better,
baptize and preach, but his especial charge and authority is, to serve at
the altar and read the Gospel for the quick and the dead: and he must
greatly bethink him, what an high degree he has taken. The seventh order is,
of priesthood: and it is told him that he must preach, baptize, bless, and
rule: but his principal and sole authority given him in consecration is, to
say mass, offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead, and to forgive sins.
This authority has also the Bishop, when he will: and specially, he must
bear a crosyre staff, wear a ring, and rule over other. The Pope him self,
he may do the like, but especially he may wear a crown and a pall, and has
fullness of power to do all things, for the glory of God, and the blessed
virgin, and the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, and for the church of Rome.
These (dearly beloved) are the order sof the Popish church, not one word
feigned of me, but every whit set out in their own Pontifical, as you may
plainly see it. Now judge your selves, and I appeal to the conscience of
every man y^ has an understanding heart, whether such creatures have their
calling of God, or no? I might likewise allege that form and manner of
ordeining, as contrary to Christ's institution as these former are: for, where
Christ's ordinance is, that his ministers should be made with prayer and
fasting, and with laying on of hands: they, as men thinking basely of such
simple dealing, and a great deal more to making of their priests: they must
have oil, candels, basens, towels, amices, albes, stoales, gyrdles, maniples,
myters, books, crosses, linen bands, chalices, pattens, singing cakes, wine
and water, flower, and such other things, trifled and toyed with all, with so
many foolish gestures, as I am persuaded, that any wise man, this day, reading
it in their own books, would abhor it, either as intolerable pride, or
unspeakable foolishenesse: but wisdom is the Lords, and he gives it to
whom he will: and let us praise him for his goodness, to whom he has given
eyes to see. If any will here obiecte, notwithstanding all these abuses: yet
the priest had that which was principal, liberty to preach and minister
sacraments: therefore their ministry not to be rejected.

I answer: In this, on one side was the great goodness of God, that in time
to come, his children might assuredly know, he reserved to him self a church,
even in the mids of all desolation: and that he called them by his word,
and confirmed by his sacraments, even as at this day: for seeing there can be
no sin so great, but faith in Jesus Christ scatters it all away, it was
impossible that the man of sin should so much adulterate either the word of
God, but that it should be to the faithful a gospel of salvation: or else the
sacraments of God, but that they should be pledges of eternal life to those
that did believe.

Again, on the other side, in that they kept this authority to their
priests, to preach and to baptize: it was the pestilent slight and subtlety
of the devil, the more easily by such a color to deceive them: for if he had
utterly dented preaching of the Gospel, and use of sacraments, who would then
have been seduced? these be his ways to destroy Pagans and Infidels: but to
corrupt the church of God, he puts on an Angels clothing, that under
pretense of holiness he might deceive. And in deed he did deceive: for he
has so far profaned the preaching of the Gospel, and the sacraments of
Christ, that we ought, according to the word of God, to separate our selves,
and to say, accurssed, to all their doings, although God of his infinite
goodness, who calls things that are not, as though they were, even in that
ministry gave grace unto his Saints.

I say therefore again, as I said before, that in the Popish church, from the
crown of the head to the soul of the foot, not one order is of God, nor any
piece of their priesthood is honor given of God: wherein I appeal unto their
own consciences, whose wisdom is without affection in them: and thus far
of this 4. verse.

Touching the two next verses, I have before showed the meaning of them, that
by testimony of the Prophet, the Apostle proves that Christ also had his
calling of God, even as Christ him self often witnesses, that he was sent of
his father: touching this text: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee: it means, that openly and plainly, God made it manifest, that Christ
was his only son, by many signs and miracles, in which, as Paul says, God
was made manifest in flesh: but of this I spoke more unto you in the exposition
of the fifte verse of the first chapter. The other text here alleged, is out
of y^ 110. Psalm: Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisc.
lcch: of which text we shall also have occasion to speak more largely
hereafter: this now we have to learn, y^ this Psalm is meant of Christ, and
this sentence is his caling to y^ priesthod: of this y^ apostle is a plain
witness, and our savior Christ in the 22. of Math. teaches yt this psalm
could not be meant of David, because it is said in it, The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestoole:
and reason teaches it plainly: for seeing, as is here alleged, it is to the
praise of an high priest, how could it be of King David, to whom the
priesthood in no case belonged? or how could it be of any Priest of the law,
who had their proper calling of God, where this was an other, after the order
of Melchisedech, who was both a King and a priest: and therefore it is plain
to be meant of Christ who was figured in Melchisdech. The conclusion then of
the Apostle in all this, is, that Christ had his calling of God, as Aaron had,
and a more glorious and excellent calling, therefore a greater high priest then
any before him: but the time is past. Let us pray etc.

The xxiiij. Lecture, upon the 7. 8. and 9. verses.
7 Who in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears unto him, that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared.

8 And though he were the Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered.

9 And being consecrate, was made the author of eternal salvation unto all
them that obey him.


THE Apostle, in this Chapter, begins to prove our Savior Christ to be the
only high Priest of the new Testament: and because the people of Israel, had
so great affiance in the priesthood of Aaron, that they could hardly be drawn
away from the deteyning of it, thinking assuredly, that unto that Priesthood,
the law and testimonies of God had been tied for ever: and not knowing that
all ceremonies of y^ the law were ordained until the time of reformation, in
which Christ should appear and change that Priesthood, to become him self
unto us a Priest of a better testament: therefore the Apostle first sets
forth the properties of the Priesthood, according unto the law, and after by
comparison applies them unto Christ, in whom they all shine in a much more
excellent sort, then before in Aaron: and therefore it can not be, neither
breach nor dishonor vndishonour unto the law of God, nor the priesthood of it,
if the shadow and the figure, which was Aaron, should now be taken away: and
the body and the truth, which is Jesus Christ, should be established for ever.

The properties which the Apostle speaks of, necessarily apperteining unto
every priest, as unto one that must be a Mediator, are these: that first he
should be man as we are, as Aaron and his posterity were. For neither Angel
nor Archangell, nor principalities, nor powers, can do this work, to present
flesh and blood unto the Majesty of GOD, when them selves are but spirits:
and therefore Christ, that he might be high Priest, took not an Angels
nature, but was made of the seed of Abraham, like us: that as there is but one
God, so there might be but one Mediator between God and man, even the man
Christ Jesus, in this respect as able to be high Priest as Aaron him self,
being as naturally and as truly clothed with our flesh, as Aaron was.

The second property of the Priest, is, that he should be ordained, not
only for him self to make his own atonement, but also for other men to
accomplish whatsoever was between God and them: that where they were before
enemies and strangers, they might by him be reconciled, and have free access
unto the throne of grace, to find mercy and succor in due time: and for this
cause Christ alone is a perfect Priest, more excellent then Aaron, who was
encumbered with his own sins, to make first reconciliation for them, and
therefore could not profit other. And as this was the Priests office, to be a
mediator for other: so the means he must use, and the mediation to be
wrought in this work, was to offer up gifts and sacrifices of sins: that
is, to present unto God the sacrifice of righteousness, pure and holy in his
sight, in which he might be pleased, and the sins of the people might be
taken away: the which sacrifice, because it must be so pure, that in it, they
for whom it was made, must be sanctified, and so precious, that it must be a
sufficient purchase to redeem man from all transgression: therefore it could
not be made with the blood of Calves or Goats which can not take away sin,
nor with gold nor silver which can not redeem our souls, nor with meats
and drinks which profited not the^ that were exercised therein, nor in any
such carnal rites, for which ye priesthood of Aaron was ordained: and
therefore, as an other priest must make this sacrifice, which can not be any
other then Jesus Christ, who being made high Priest of the good things to
come, by a greater tabernacle, and a more precious sacrifice, even by his own
blood has obtained for us an everlasting redemption, and therefore is now to
be acknowledged our only Priest: the first Priesthood, and the first law,
being altogether abrogated.

One other property of the priesthood, is, y^ none thrust in himself, being
not appointed, nor take unto himself this honor, being not called unto it:
And God ever showed himself a ready revenger against all such as should
defile his Priesthood, to take to themselves the dignity to which they were
not appointed. But this calling also was given unto Christ from God his father,
as before unto Aaron, both by word and by oath, that no flesh should resist
it, even as it is written: The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art
a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech: so that in this behalf,
our faith must be ever strong, that the calling of Christ is of the Lord, even
as the calling of Aaron was: and with so much the greater judgment it shall be
rejected, because it was confirmed with an oath.

The last property in this comparison is, that the high priest of the law
should have an inwar compassion to ward them that were ignorant, and were
deceived: in which perfect knot of unfeigned love, his ministry was accepted
of God, and his sacrifices received and accounted holy: and lest he should cast
from him this brotherly aflection, God printed deep in his own body the
infirmities of his brethren, that according to the measure of grace which he
had received, he might in deed be moved with his brothers harms, as with his
own: so that he did not withdraw him self from the service of the
Sanctuary, but put on the holy garments, was anointed with the holy oil,
bare the names of his brethren before the Lord, presented their sacrisices,
absteined from wine and strong drink, mourned not for his friends that were
departed, taught diligently the people, prayed for their transgressions, and
bare the burden of his people, as God had laid it upon him.

But yet this property exceeded more in Christ, then in all the tribe of
Levy: and the bowels of all compassion were more large within him, then the
vtmoste branches of it in any other creature. And this the Apostle notes in
this place, which now we have in hand, in which we may see (as in a most
lively glass) the perfect beauty of all excellent love. The things, they
were not light, nor the sorrows small, nor the sighings few in number, nor the
prayers faint, nor the anguish of spirit little, nor the death easy, by which
he has sealed it unto us, that he had compassion on his people: but as the
Apostle says: in the days of his flesh: (while he was here clothed in
mortality, like unto one of us, to the end he might be faithful for our
sakes) he did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong cryings and
tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was also heard in
things which he feared: and being him self the Son, yet he learned
obedience by the things which he susuffered: and being consecrate, was made
the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him.

These words, my dear brethren, we have now in hand, to search and examine
what the spirit teaches us, so much y^ more carefully to be harkened unto of
us, how much the more plainly it sets forth unto us, the great love and
compassion that Christ bears toward us. Two things especially here the
Apostle testifyeth: First, the sufferings of our Savior Christ, and then the
benefit that we enjoy by the same, according as his sufleringes were only
for our sake. His sufferinges what they were, and how great sorrow oppressed
him, he shows by those effects which his sorrows brought forth: that is,
prayers, supplications, cryings, tears, fear and anguish of spirit, which
things waited ever upon him, even to the accomplishing of all his passions,
which was the death of his cross The fruit that we do reap of these
afflictions which he suffered, is the salvation of our souls, and eternal
life, if we will obey him.

In this description of his sufferinges, though the things are set forth which
were common and usual unto him all his life: yet it appears especially the
Apostle means that greatest conflicte of sorrow, which he had a little
before his passion, described by the Evangelists, in all s^ilitude like unto
this which the Apostle here declares. For as it is here said, He made
prayers, noting by the word that they were many in number: so it appears in
the Gospel, that beside other prayers, three times he tepeated this one:
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: and as it is said: he
made supplications, humbling Matt. 26. 4^.
him self low under the hand of his Father: so it is said in the Gospel, that
then he kneeled down, Luke 22. 41.
fell upon his face, and so prayed unto God.

And as the cause of his prayers is here mentioned, To be delivered from death:
so the words of his prayer in the Gospel are like: Father, if it be possible,
let this cup pass from me: meaning the death of his cross, to which he was
condemned. And as here is mentioned his great and loud crying: so there the
Evangelist says: he cried out with a loud voice: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me: and like as here is said, He prayed with weeping tears: so
there is witnessed that he was sorrowful and greeuouslie troubled, that his
soul was heavy even unto death, and that in a great agony, his sweat was
like unto drops of blood: a woeful kind of weeping, but such was his
compassion, that we might have sure hope: and as here is said, he was
delivered from his fear: so at that time when all his spirits were troubled,
the Angel came from heaven to bring him comfort. These similitudes, they are
all so agreeable, that it is evident the Apostle respected especially above
other, this part of his passion, in which his perfect love and unchangeable
affection toward us, shined in most fullness of beauty, in that it was so
seruent and so deeply rooted, that neither fear nor trembling, nor any
anguishe of spirit, could make him shake: nor the force of death, nor any
bloody sweates, could pull it out of his bowels.

In this one sentence (dearly beloved) there is more for us to learn, then
either eye has seen, or ear has heard, or all flesh in this life shall
atteine unto: it is the depth of the glorious Gospel which the Angels do
desire to behold. But to note unto you some things, in which our faith may be
stre^thened, we have to learn by y^ example of our savior Christ in this
place, that in all temptations, we should approach unto our God, and make our
complaints unto him, who is only able and readier for to help us. He has not
forgot his promise that he has made of old, Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble, and I will deliver thee: he is a place of refuge and of Psalm. 50. 15.
sure defense, a strong tower against all assaults: the righteous man that
shall hasten unto him, he shall be surely saved: the author and finisher of
our faith, he is gone before us, we shall be surely partakers of y^ same mercy.
It skilleth not how great our temptations are, into which we are fallen, nor
how many in number: the Lord will deliver us out of all. It skilleth not how
many our sins are, nor how great in our eyes, that have procured our
troubles: the Lord will scatter them as the clouds from the heavens, and they
shall not turn away his loving countenance from us. Let us look on this
pattern Jesus Christ, that is set before us: it would crushe our flesh in
pieces to bear with him the weight of his afflictions, from which he was
delivered: and it would make our tears to be as drops of blood, to be
partakers of so great anguishe of spirit as he sustained, and yet it was not
so great, but the comfort of the Angel sent from his father, was much greater:
so that by prayer he obtained a most excellent victory, and has bruised the
serpents head, and broken all his force: and why should we then be discouraged?
If our sins be as crimson, or if they be red like skarlet, yet they are the
sins of our own bodies: but not ours only, but also the sins of the world:
they rested all upon Christ our Savior, and yet he prayed for deliverance, and
has obtained and therefore we may say with boldness, forgive us our
trespasses. If the love of Christ were so great, to bear the sins of us
all, and of them every one has gotten forgiveness, how should not we that
are laden but with our own sins, lift up our heads into great assurance of
hope, and hear with ioyfulnesse the word of promise: I will be merciful to
their Heb. (...). 12.
unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins and their iniquities no
more.

And what though our afflictions are exceeding many, that the whole head be
sick, and the whole heart be heavy, that from the sole of the foot unto our
heads, there be nothing whole in our bodies, but all wounds and swellings, and
sores full of corruption? yet all this is nothing unto his passions, by whose
stripes we are healed. And these troubles are nothing unto his mighty
cryinges, who was compassed about for our sakes with fears and horrors: till
his sweat was as drops of blood, and his bones bruised in his flesh. Then let
the whips and scourges of our chasticement be grievous, and let us yet be
beaten (if the will of God so be) with scorpions: Christ, in great compassion,
suffering with our infirmities, has borne yet a more heavy weight of
iniquities, and has been delivered: So that if we obey, we are partakers of
his mercies, and we have full persuasio^, that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor prin cipalities, nor powers, nor things prefet, nor things to come,
To. 8. 38. 39.
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yea and greater boldness then
this if it be possible to dwell within us, the Apostle here has offered it in
Christ Jesus.

If all the sins were upon him, and all sorrows in his flesh, and yet from
them all God has heard his prayers: why should we not be sure that our
sins and sorrows shall be done away: why should we not be sure that God him
self has appointed unto all that mourn in Sion (as the Prophet says) to
give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
gladness, for the spirit of Esai. 61. 3.
heaviness?

Let us therefore behold (dearly beloved) for he was wounded for our
transgressio^s, and broken for our iniquities, the chasticement of our peace
was upon him: these prayers Esa. 53. 5.
are ours, these supplicatio^s for us, auailable for more sins, then we are
able to commit: this is our victory that shall overcome the world, eue^ our
faith: in all miseries, and multitudes of woe, we are not sunken so deep Iaohn.
5. 4.
in sorrow, as he that for our sakes made prayers and supplications, with
strong cryings and with tears, and was delivered from his fear.

The second point that we have here to learn in this example of our Savior
Christ, is, to know unto whom we should make our prayers in the day of
trouble, which the Apostle testifies in these words: that Christ made his
prayers unto him that was able to deliver him from death: a rule to be kept of
us in all manner of our petitions, and supplications whatsoever, to make the^
known unto him that can grant our request, that is, unto God: this rule was
kept of the Church of God, from the beginning,

When men were once turned from their Idols, then in all their prayers, they
began to call upon the Genesis 4. 26.
name of the Lord: and God him self, at no time, does more sharply reprove
his people, then when they would ask of those that had no power to help
them. This lesson, that poor Leper so defiled in flesh, had yet humbly
learned, and with a pure heart he prayed accordingly: Lord if thou will thou
Mar. 1. 41.
can make me whole: upon this foundation, our savior Christ has built up
all the prayers of the true disciples, adding it as a special clause unto the
prayer that he taught them: For thine is the kingdom, the power, Mat. 6. 10.
and glory for ever and ever, Amen: then let us learn it, somany as will pray
in spirit, to make our prayers unto him alone, who is able to save us. It is
the sacrifice of the new Testament, that he has appointed us, that we should
offer up unto him (and not unto other) the fruit of our lips, which may
confess his name: and because this doctrine has been trodden down under
feere, and defiled by the man of sin withal spiritual uncleanness, I beseech
you add unto this one reason or two more, that you may answer the adversary,
and be able to stand in the day of evil.

When our Savior Christ was purposed to teach his disciples a true form of
prayer and a perfect pattern unto which they must frame their petitio^s, (or
it is impossible they should be accepted) he techeth them, that their beginning
must be from hence: Our father which art in Heaven. What blessing so ever we
would have, or from what plague so ever we would be delivered, he alone must
be the person of whom we crave, to whom this name and calling does belong:
Our father which art in Heaven. If this name be none of his, he is no patron
to be called up on: or if we will needs call upon him, we give him this name,
whether it be his or no. Christ is our good warrant, who has made this the
beginning of all christian prayer, Our father which art in heaven: therefore
the Idolaters of all ages, that have made them selves Saints to pray unto,
according to the number of their prayers, so they have multiplied their Idols:
and the children of God to whom they have sacrificed, they shall witness
against them in the day of Christ. And you my dear brethren, against all your
enemies, defend thus the holiness of your prayer, that you know no other way
of speaking, then as you are taught, Our father. Ad yet unto this, one reason
more, which you learn of Saint Paul, and I doubt not, but you shall be well
established in this present truth.

We know all, and do confess, that we are able to do no good thing of our
selves, but all our sufficiency Romans 7. 18.
is of God, we are not able so much as to think a good thought: Yea, the very
wisdom of the flesh is enimitie unto all righteousness, so true it is that
the Prophet says: Every man is a beast in his own understanding. And how
much less then are we Iere. 10. 14.
able to offer up unto God, that most precious sacrifice of prayer, and
thanksgiving, to make it acceptable in his sight, if we consult with our own
flesh and blood, and alter the will of man, so make our Romans 8. 5. verse. 16.
27
prayers unto God? We must needs acknowledge our own infirmities, and
confess with saint Paul that we know not what to pray as we ought, but it is
the spirit of God that makes request for the Saints, according to the will of
God: and in this holy spirit alone we must pray, if we look for the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to eternal life. The spirit that bears rule in
our heart, he must teach us all things, or else can we do nothing that God
allows. Now the voice of this spirit that always sounds within us, it
speaks not thus, either Sancta Maria, or Sancta dei genitrix, neither saint
Paul pray for us: nor saint Peter pray for us.

These are but the spicinges of the drunken cups of Rome, the soundes of words
which the spirits of errors have blown. But the holy spirit of God that
teaches us how to pray, it cries thus in our hearts: Abba, Pater, Our father
which art in heaven. As Christ himself has been our scholemaister of no other
prayer, so the spirit that he has given us, it knows no other sound, but
Abba, Father: these are y^ beginnings of our prayers. If we speak not unto
him, to whom do we bow our knees? If we will make the spirit subject to any
other, let us take heed that we grieve not the holy spirit of God, by which
we be sealed against the day of redemption.

Thus much I have added to the example of our savior Christ, who made his
prayers to his father, who alone could deliver him, that we might the more
assuredly be bold to abide in his steps.

It follows in the text. With great crying and with tears. Here we have to
note, in what measure our Savior Christ was afflicted, even so far, that he
cried out in this bitterness of his soul.

This the Evangelists do express in mo words, testifying of him, (...), that
he was greatly affraide, altogether astonished, even fainting for great
anguishe of mind, and full of pensive sorrows. For his Father had broken him,
with one breaking upon an other: so he kindled his wrath against him, and
accounted him as one of his enemies. The heavy hand of God was so grievous
upon him, that it bruised his very bones, and rent his reins a sunder, he
could find no health in his flesh, but was wounded to death, as without
recovery.

The Euangeliste himself bears witness of this misery, adding unto his
loud crying, this sound of words: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

This sorrow, because it was not assuaged with words, he cried out alowde,
and because in silence he could find no ease, his face was wrinckled with
weeping and the shadow of death was upon his eyes. For what grief could be
like unto this? Or what condemnation could be so heavy? When there was no
wickedness in his hands, and when his prayer was pure: when he was the
brightness of glory, and the Son of righteousness that shined in the
world: yet as it were to see his days at an end, and his enterprises broken,
his careful thoughts, to be so deep graven in his breast, that they changed
even the day into night unto him, and all light that approached into darcknesse:
this was a sorrow above all sorrows.

When his excellency was such above all creatures, that the world was not
worthy to give him breath, yet he to be made a worm, and not a man, a shame of
men, and the contempt of the people, all that saw him to have him in derision,
and to shutt up his life in shame and reproaches, so unworthy a reward of so
precious a servant: how could it but shake all his bones out of joint, and
make his heart to melt in the midst of his bowels? how could his strength
not be dried up like a potsharde, and his tongue not cleave unto the jaws of
his mouth? Who has been ever so full of woe, and who has been brought so
low into the duste of death? His virtues were unspeakable, and righteous above
all measure: yet was he accounted among the wicked. His temperauncie in
perfect beauty, and his appetites bridled with all holy moderation: yet they
said of him, behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine. His behavior honest
without all reproof, and his couersation unspotted: yet they slaundered him as
a friend of Publicans and sinners, and reported him as a companion of thieves.
He loved the law of his father, with such fullness of desire, that he would
not suffer one Io^e, not one title vnaccomplyshed: and yet they accused him as
an enemy unto Moses, a breaker of the law, a subuerter of the Temple, and a
teacher of new doctrines, such as were not of God. He harkened unto his father
in all humility, and loved him with all his heart, and with all his soul, so y^
he was obedient unto him, unto death, yea even y^ death of y^ cross: yet they
said of him presumptuously, that he blasphemed, and robbed God of his honor.
He was an enemy of satan even unto death, and by death overcame him that
brought death into the world, he hated him with so perfect hatred, and held
steadfast y^ enimitie that was between them, until he had spoiled his
principalities and powers, and triumphed over them in an everlasting victory:
yet horibly they reproched him by the name of Beelzebub, said he had a devil,
and by the power of satan he wrought al his miracles. O ye depth of al
abominations, and the bottomless pit of all uncleanness: who could once have
thought so lothso^e a sink to have been covered in the heart of man? O God,
righteous in judgment, and true in word, is this it that the Prophet has
told before, that the thoughts of many hearts should be made open? then
create (we beseech thee) new hearts within us, Luke. 1. 38.
and take not thy holy spirit for ever from us.

And you (dearly beloved) if these were the causes that Christ had to
complain, then think not that his cryings were above his sorrow: to see so
near unto his heart, even in his own person, innocency bla med, virtue
defaced, righteousness trodden down, holiness profaned, love despised, glory
contemned, honor reviled, all goodness ashamed, faith oppugned, and life
wounded to death: how could he yet abstain from strong crying and tears,
when the malice of Satan had gotten so great a conqueste? If just Lot dwelling
among the Sodomites, and seeing and hearing such a wicked people, vexed from 2.
Pet. 2. 7.
day to day his righteous soul with their ungodly deeds: what shall we think
of Christ, living in such a generation? But (O my brethren, beloved of the
Lord) open the eyes of your faith, and you shall see these things, they were
but ye beginnings of sorrow. What, shall we think, was his grief of mind for
the Jews his brethren, that were thus powered out unto wickedness: how did
his great love boil in sorrows of heart to see their destruction. If Moses,
Exodus 32. 35.
when he beheld y^ anger of God against his people: in great compassion of
their miseryes, prayed earnestly unto ye Lord: Forgive them O God, or raze me
out of the book that thou have written. If Jeremy in fore Iere 9. 2.
seeing ye captivity of Jerusalem, had so great grief that he cried out: O
that my head were full of waters, and mine eyes a founteine of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the stayne of the daughter of my people. If Esaias
in Esai. 22. 4.
like abundance of love bewailed his brethren that would needs perish, with
these words of complaint: Turn away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not
to comfort me because my people perish. If Paul, that most excellent Apostle,
haueing received but his portion Romans 9. (...).
of the great love of Christ, called God to witness that he spoke the
truth, how he had great heauine^se, and continual sorrow of heart for his
brethren, and that for their sakes, him self wished to be separate from Jesus
Christ: what manner of tears shall we think were those which Christ him
self poured out, when he wept over Jerusalem? what sorrow of Luke. 21. 41
mind, which then interrupted his spceeches, and made them imperfect? how
deep was that angry grief printed in his bowels, when he beheld the
blindness of the people, and was sorrowful for Mar. 3. 5.
them? what manner of affection was it that in the midst of so great
reproaches and mocks, could never be changed, but prayed still: Father forgive
them, they know not what they do. Luke 23. 34.


If it be grievous unto us to lose the thing that is most dear unto us in
this earthly Tabernacle: how much more did this sorrow pearce even through
the bowels of our savior Christ, to see man taken from him unto destruction,
for whose sake he would so willingly sacrifice up his life? this is an other
spectacle in which we may behold his great dolor and anguishe, to know the
pains he endured, and the causes of his mighty cryinges.

But this also (dearly beloved) though it were exceeding, yet it was not all,
no it was but a taste of grief in comparison of the rest. Behold, if you can,
his person here, and see the residue, and so you shall know the love of God.
His grief was exceeding, to see all virtue and godliness so troaden under
feet: and it was yet more infinite to behold Satan to prevail against man,
to his everlasting condemnation. No creature could ever bear such a perfect
image of a man of sorrow. But the height and depth of all miseries was yet
behind: the sin that he hated, he must take it upon his own body, and
bear the wrath of his father that was powered out against it. This is the
fulness of al pain that compassed him round about, which no tongue is able to
utter, and no heart can conceive. This anger of his father, it burned in him,
even unto the bottom of hell, of the which anger, the prophet speaks: Who
can stand before his wrath? or who can abide the fearcenes Nahum. 1. 6
of his wrath? His wrath is powered out like fire: and the rocks are broken
before him.

When the Prophet was not able to conceive the weight of his anger, and his
voice cleaued unto his mouth when he went about to utter it, the hardest of all
creatures he took for example, that the hard rock did cleave asunder at the
sound of his words. And as is said in an other place, such a voice, as
makes the forlorn wilderness to tremble. A voice so full of terror in the
ears and hearts of the Psalm. 29. 8.
wicked, that the son shall be darkened at the sound of it, and the Moon shall
not give her light, the Stars of heaven shall fall away, and the powers of
heaven shall be shaken. No creature at all shall yield his service unto them, the
elememtes of the world shall seem to melt away.

This state of misery Christ entered into, and sunk down deep in this
confusion, and who can express his sorrow? Being full of goodness he had the
reward of evil: full of obedience, he was punished as wicked: full of faith,
yet had ye reward of a sinner: inheritour of all things, and Lord of all: yet
nothing at al to do him duty: the King of Kings, and Lord of lords: yet
made an outcast and abject of the people: the ruler of all, and God of glory:
yet compassed with shame and great confusion: the author of life, yet wrapped
in the chains of eternal death: the only begotten of his father, and his
best beloved, yet cast off as a stranger, and chasticed as an enemy: the
brightness of glory, and the beauty of the highest heavens, yet crucified in
dishonor, and thrown down into hell. O picture of perfect wretchedness, and
image of misery, how just cause found he to cry out alowde, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? his whole body and nature like unto us, altogether
broken with the reward of sin: his soul powered out into all calamity: the
wrath of his father, and condemnation resting upon him. How truly may we here
say, and confess the article of our faith: He descended into hell? How lively
do we see it performed that the Prophet speaks of? The snares of death
compassed me, and the pains of hell took hold upon me: I found trouble and
sorrow. This was the compassion Psalm. 119. 3
that he had toward us, by which he suffered with our infirmities, more then
Aaron, or all the priests of the law could possibly have done for us. If we
could possibly consider (dearly beloved) as we should, we would gladly
embrace him as the high priest for ever of ye new testament: and when we shall be
made of one fashion with him, through some measure of his affliction to feel
the weight of our sins, then we shall confess what cause he had of
complaining, and how dearly he has bought the honor of the high Priest and
Mediator. The Lord lighten the eyes of our mind, that with open countenance
we may behold him, who for our sakes endured such a death of the cross: we
should not then need many exhortations, the remembrance of the latter end
would keep us safe from sin. But let us now see what the Apostle further
teaches us, and while our savior Christ is in these great extremities, what
fruit of well doing he has learned by it.

It follows. And although he were the son, yet learned he obedience by the
things he suffored. Lo, (dearly be loved) this was no little profit of all his
troubles: he learned thereby, how and what it was to obey his father, that when
these things rested all upon him, and yet he could say in meekness of spirit,
Not my will my father, but thy will be done, he might have great boldness that
his obedience was perfect. The shame of the world, the afflictions of the
flesh, the vexations of the mind, the pains of Hell, when these could make
him utter no other words, but, Father as (...) wilt, so let it be done: what
hope, what faith did he surely build on, that his obedience was precious in the
sight of his father? this example is our instruction. We know then best how we
love the Lord, when we feel by experience what we will suffer for his sake. It
is an easy thing to be valiant before the combat, or to dream of a good
courage before ye heart be tried: but in deed to be unshaken in the midst of the
tempest, and to stand upright when the ground under thee does tremble: this is
to know assuredly thou art strong in deed, and to say with boldness, thou
shall never be moved: this our Savior Christ might thoroughly glory of. The
heaven, earth, and elements, they were all his enemies: his Father in whom he
trusted, showed him an angry countenance: he that fainted not, but cried
still, Thy will be done O Father, he may be bold of his obedience: there is no
creature can make him falsify his faith. If this be the fruit of our
afflictions, the Apostle speaks not without great occasion: Account it for an
exceeding joy, when ye fall into sundry troubles. For what can be more joyful
unto the soul that is oppressed, then to (...). Pet. 4. 3.
give this in experience, that neither hight nor deapth shall remove him from
the Lord. The glory of Abraham was exceeding great, when he had sealed it with
practice, that he would forsake his country and his kindred, and his fathers
house, at the commandment Genesis (...). 8.
of God to go whether he would show him: then he knew by good proof, he was
made worthy of Christ, when he could forsake Father, mother, house, land, and
all things to come unto him.

The patience of Job, was not thoroughly known, till all his goods were
spoiled, and he left exceedinge bare, in that case, when he spoke so boldly.
Naked came I out of my moothers womb, and naked shall I return again: the Lord
has given, the Lord has taken away, as the Lord will, so is it done, the name
of the Lord be Job. 1. 2^.
praised for ever.

Now might Job be sure of the strong patience which should bring forth hope,
that never should be confounded. Our brethren before us, which so constantly
have holden the profession of their faith, that y^ flames of fire could not
make it waver, they had a good witness, that their election was sure, when
they might speak by experience, that neither life, nor death, could remove
them from the love of God.

Thus the good ground is known what it is, when the heat can not scorche it:
nor briars and thorns turn the good corn into weeds: but thoroughe all
storms, it will give nourishment to the seed, til it give greater increase to
Gods honor and glory. The best of us all, let us thank God for this
profitable experience, for before it come unto us, we know not how great the
rebellion of the flesh will be.

The Apostles of Christ, they bragged not a little, that they would never
forsake their master Christ: he alone had the words of eternal life, and they
would not change him for another: they believed him, they knew him to be
Christ the fonne of the living God: and there was no other savior. But when
they saw the swords and staves, the rulers offended, the people in an uproar,
and the cross at hand: their courage fell down, they forsook him all, and
fled away. Peter was not a little stout, as himself was persuaded: he would
never forsake Christ, though he should die for his name: and for proof of his
courage, he drew his sword, and stroke so venterously, that he had almost
slain one: he seemed to be at a point, and fully resolved, that he would not
leave his master, till the sword should divide them: but alas, this
boldness was but a blast of words. When there was no remedy, but Christ
must be had to Caiphas, Peter began to faint and to draw behind. When the
peril was more increased, and they began to cry, Crucifige, Peter was more
afraid, and began to swaere, he knew him not: so great infirmity is in
mortal flesh: experience is the greatest warrant to know what it can bear.
It is our bounden duty, and the Lord requires it, that we should determine
with our selves in all things, to approve ourselves the witnesses of his
Gospel in patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in stripes, in tumults, in
labors, in watchinges, in fastinges, in honor, in dishonor, in good report,
in shame, in life, in death: and our comfort is great, when we be persuaded of
these things, that we would contemn them. But how violently the flesh will
fight against us, we cannot well declare, till we have made the trial.

We therefore (dearly beloved) whom it has pleased God to keep in
heaviness thorough many temptations, we have here a salve against the wounds
of sorrow. Our afflictions do teach us, how far we can obey the Lord. If in
all grief of body I can say with patience: I have held my peace, O Lord,
because thou have done it: then I know y^ in all sorrows of flesh, I have
glorified God, and my heart rejoices. If my mind be full of anguishe And
sorrow, so that all hope be faint within me: if I can say yet unto my soul, I
will wait patiently for the Lords leisure, then I know assuredly God has
made me obedient, and he will hear my prayer: so that this experience has
bred in me the hope that shall never be confounded: I may speak the words
which the heavens shall seal unto, with everlasting truth, neither fire, not
sword, not principalities, nor power, shall remove me from the love wherewith
God has loved me: a sure token of this salvation I have found in mine
afflictions: when I traveled in sorrow, both of the body and mind, I found
the grace to say: O Lord do thy will: this is no small cause why we should
rejoice, when God does make us worthy to feel the trial of our faith. So
dearly beloved, faint not in your mournings, but endure patientlye: you know
not the happiness of that which seems your misery: let this be the first
cause why we should be glad of temptations. And to the end we may help our
common infirmities, let us learn yet more, why it is good for us to be brought
low: a most notable commodity the Apostle reherseth, where he writes to the
Romans: Those whom God has foreknowen, he has also predestinate, to be made
likvnto Romans (...). 39.
the image of his son: Lo (my dear brethren) these are the healthful
counsels of the Lord toward us, that we should be made like unto his son
Christ in many afflictions, y^ at the last we might be also like him in
eternal glory. These are the riches of Gods unsearchable wisdom. Death once
reigned through sin, and he has found a way to rise from it agaiue into
greater glory: this victory, because it was too great for saint or angel to
obtein, he has appointed it to be the work of his only begotten son, who
made it perfect in a most excellent conquest: he has taken upon him our nature
to make it strong, and in his own person he has filled it with the fullness
of miseries, with all sorrows of flesh, with all anguish of mind, with
persecution, with death, with sin, with hell, with condemnation: and from all
these, by the mighty power of his godhead he is risen again in our flesh,
ascended up into glory, and sits on the right hand of Majesty and of
power, being a mighty Savior unto every one that shall follow him. So that
this is our glory in all afflictions, we are fashioned by them into the
similitude of Christ, and we are made like unto him. So it pleased God, when
he would bring many children into glory, to consecrate the Prince of their
salvation through afflictions, and to make both him that sanctifies, and those
that are sanctified, all one: that they that suffer with him, should also
reign with him: and they that die with him, should also live with him. So we,
when we feel many troubles to rest upon us, we may say now we are like unto
Christ, especially, when we feel that greatest trouble, fullest of bitter
sorrow, that is, the mind oppressed: it makes us specially like unto him,
that we may say with Paul: now we supply in our flesh the remnaunt of the
afflictions of Christ. Let me look into y^ whole course of my life, and what
so ever pleases me best, health, honor, riches, favor, authority,
friendship, wife, children, in all these things I cannot yet behold the lively
image of Christ. Affliction and trouble, a mind broken with remembrance of
sin, a troubled spirit, these are the beginninges of great reioycings: with
the horrors of death, and a conscience burdened with the wrath of God: here
light shines out of darcknesse, and hope out of despaite.

As I think my self furthest off from the Lord, so in deed, I am nearest unto
him: and when I think my self fullest of confusion, they y^ image of Christ is
most lively within me. The Lord may hide his face for a while for a moment in
his anger, as he did from Christ, but he must needs return unto me with
everlasting mercies: for the image of his son is clear within me. A blessed
sorrow, and woe full of happiness, that fashioneth these days of my vanity
into the similitude of the age of Christ, that with him at last I might reign
for ever. A precious countenance it is, in the sight of GOD, that seems
without beauty in the eyes of man: and an unspeakable treasure of joy and
gladness, engraven in these vessels that are but earth and ashes. When
Christ is the pattern, whose similitude we do bear, who can be
discouraged under the Cross? We are afflicted on every side, but not in
such a strait that we are shut from 2. Cor. 4. 8.
hope, we are in poverty, but not overcome of poverty: we are persecuted, but
not forsaken: we are cast down, but we perish not. We are troubled in all
things, fightings without, and terrors within: but God that comfort the
abiects, he will comfort us. Unto this he has predestinate us, that we
should be like unto his son in all afflictions, and so be glorified with him
in the day of honor.

Thus far we have heard two special causes why we ought to rejoice in all
temptations: the one, that so we learn true obedience: the other, that by them
we be made like unto Christ. Add yet unto these, one third cause out of the
Scripture, which when you shall have learned, be bold (dearly beloved) in
all the fire of the enemies. For behold, in the truth of Jesus Christ I dare
be your warrant, the greater are your afflictions, the liker you are unto
Christ: yea if it should happen you to fall down into hell, Christ has
descended also: you should then be most like him in his agonies and bloody
sweates.

The third cause at this time which I will touch, is this: God sends us
sundry chasticementes, and especially that which is most grievous of al
other, the anguish of spirit, and affliction of the soul: for this purpose,
that we should be warned in time, how to turn unto him, and be free from the
plague when it comes: for the judgments of God that are daily preached unto
us, they pearce deep into the hearts of the true believers, and the word
that they hear, it woorketh mightily in them, more sharp in their ears then
a two edged sword, it enters thorough them, even to the dividing a sunder of
the soul, and of the spirit, and of the joints, and of the marrowe, and
examine all the thoughts and the intentes of the heart, so that it is
impossible that any part of them should be hid, but they are all open unto
judgment, and hear the voice of the Lord. Then their sin is revived in the
midst of their bowels, their conscience has no rest, they feel death working
in their hearts, and hell is before the^: they see sin on their right hand,
and Satan on their left, shame under their feet, and an angry Judge above
them, y^ world full of destruction without, and a worm gnawing the heart
within: the poor sinner knows not what to do, to hide him self it is
impossible, and to appear it is intolerable: then, he breaks out into
loud cryinges: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death: he gives no rest unto his eyes, nor sleep unto his eyelids,
until he find him that is able to save him from this wrath: in his bed by
night he seeks him whom his soul loves: in the streets and open places he
inquireth after him, and after many days in which he cannot find him, Christ
shows him self at the last, a perpetual deliverer, a victorious Lion of the
tribe of Judah, in whom he has strong salvation: when he has mourned,
because of y^ plague that was before him, Christ will approach near, and wipe
away the tears from his eyes. This y^ Prophet Abacuch sets forth in his own
person: When I heard (says he) Abac. 3. 16.
the word of God, my belly trembled, my lips shook at the voice, ro^nnesse
entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might have rest in the
day of trouble. Even so (dearly beloved) it is with us all. The plagues of
God, because they are pronounced against iniquity, it makes the child of God
to fear and tremble, that so foreseeing the harm, he might prepare him help:
and because of the destroyer, seek without wearines unto the savior: though
he hide him self at the first, the wounded spirit, and troubled heart must
needs find him-out. A great cause of unspeakable gladness, though we seem
swalowed up of pensive sorrow. We are full of grief, but we are chastised of
the Lord, because we should not, be condemned with the world: we die with
Christ, but because we should live with him: we lament and weep, but because
that Christ might wipe away all tears from our eyes: we are delivered unto
death for Jesus sake, but because the life of Jesus should be made manifest in
our flesh: we bear about in our bodies the mortification of the Lord Jesus,
but because the life of Jesus might be manifest also in our bodies: we have
anguishe of spirit and vexation of mind, such as has not been from the
beginning, but for this cause: that when souden destruction shall come upon the
careless world, we might lift up our heads, and behold our redemption at
hand.

Let us then be bold, and in patience possess our souls: for these causes we
are now afflicted, that we might receive mercy, and find grace to help in
the time of need: and for this cause we tremble and are affraide, that after
many prayers and supplications, we might be delivered from the things which we
have feared.

It follows in the Apostle. And being consecrate he was made the author of
salvation to all them that obey him. In these words we ate taught, what (...)
and commodity we have through these bitter sufferinges of our Savior Christ,
and also by what means we are made partakers of it: the fruit is eternal
salvation, the means to go unto it is obedience: in the first we learn, that
all promise and hope of life is in Christ alone: he has alone the words of
li^e, he is alone the bread of life, the water of life, the author of life,
the word of life, the tree of life, the only life: he that believes in him,
he has everlasting life: and he that dwells not in him shall see no life:
but the wrath of God abides on him. Take hold of Christ, and take hold of
life: reach forth thine hand to any other thing, and thou reachest unto
vanity, which cannot help. Look not for life, but where it dwells: in the
flesh of Christ alone there it rests. Death has reigned in all the world
beside, and led every creature into bondage. If thou look unto the heavens,
there is but vexation and anguishe: if thou look unto the earth, there is but
darkness and sorrow: if thou call unto Abraham, he knows thee not: if thou
cry upon Angels, they can not help thee: if thou look unto thy works, they
are all unclean: if thou trust in thy prayers, the Lord has no pleasure in
them: call for ye help of al creatures, they are subject to vanity: there is
no life but in Christ alone The elders, ye Angels, the baestes, and all
creatures, they give this honor unto Christ: Salvation is of him that sits
upon the throne, and of the Lamb, and altogether they cry, Amen. And if all
the creatures which yet are excellent good, are not of power to give any piece
of this life: then what shall we think of those people, enemies to God, and
murderers of his Saints, which so long have made us believe, that they have
life in them selves? that they can forgive us our sins for years, even as
they will, many or few: that they can make sacrifices propitiatory for us:
y^ they can purge us by purgatory fires, that their Pilgrimages, their
pardons, their vows, their holy orders, and such other spiritual drunkenness
of their sick brains, that these be auailable to purchase life. If they will
not be reclaimed, let us rest in the counsels of our God, and say with John: He
that hurts, let him hurt still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still. It is enough for us, that Christ is our Col. 3. 3. 4.
life, that our life is hid with Christ in God: when Christ which is our life
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. Now while we are
in the days of our pilgrimage, the way that we must walk unto this life in
Christ, is to be obedient unto his will. What so ever be the way that he
will show us and bid us walk in it: let us neither decline to the right
hand, nor to the left, but go forward in the same. We are not to look into
the world, how our fathers before us have walked. Our iniquities, and the
iniquities of our fathers shall be bound together. If we be partakers of their
evil doings. If we go after Baalims, which our fathers have taught us, we
shall be fed with the wormwood which our fathers have eaten. The government of
the church is upon the shoulders of Christ: he gives us the laws, by which we
live: he rules alone in the house of Jacob: his voice must be followed. We may
not now every one say, we have a vision, we have a dream: God has spoken by
his son, and charged all to hear him. We may not boast our selves of Saint
or Angel, to hearken to new doctrines which we have not learned: for God has
not put in subjection unto Angels, these days of the Gospel, in which we are:
but unto Christ, who is made the head of his people, and all things are in
subjection under his feet: so that this is the way we have to walk: Christ
is our Lord, let us receive his laws: he is our master, let us follow his
rules: he is our Apostle, let us hear his Gospel. Let us obey in all things,
and we shall be established. This is the glory that GOD has given unto his
son: he is our lawgiuer, we have no other. If we will leave the stubbernnesse
of our own hearts, and obey him: as life is in him, so we shall surely live:
for the Lord has not as great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as
when the voice of the Lord is obeyed. It is an everlasting truethe, That to
obey, is better then sacrifice: and to hearken, is better then the fat of Rams:
for to disobey, is as the sin of witchcrase: and to change the law that is
set before us this is wickedness and idolatry. Let us not be wise in our own
conceits, to frame God a religion, such as we will. This is to draw iniquity
with cords of vanity, and to pull sin after us, as with car tropes. A just
recompense of such wearye labors, when God shall say unto us: who has
required these things at your hands? Let us then follow so as we be called,
and bring into captinitie every thought of man to the obedience of Christ.
And the Lord our God for his Christ's sake, give unto us, hearts full of
humility, that we may think him wisest, and rest in his decrees: that we be
never spoiled through vain Philosophy, and the traditions of men, but harken
unto him, who is only wise, that at the last we may live with him, who has
alone immortality, and shall fill us with his glory for evermore.

Which times, the Lord God bring speedily upon us, and finishe the days of
sin, for his mercies sake, that we may enter into the heavens, whether
Christ is gone before us, and reign with him for ever, who is our only
Savior: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one
God, be all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
The xxv. Lecture, upon the 10. verse, and so forth the residue of the Chapter.
10 And is called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedech.

11 Of whom we have many things to say, which are hard to be uttered, because
ye are dull of hearing.

12 For, when as concerning the time, ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need
again that we teach you what are the first principles of the word of God: and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

13 For every one that uses milk, is inexpert in the word of righteousness:
for he i^ a child.

14 But strong meat belongs to them that are of age, which through long
custom have their wits exercised, to discern both good and evil.


WE have heard before, what comparison the Apostle has made between Christ
and Aaron: and how the excellency of Christ is incomparable above him in all
works of the priesthood, and our benefit by him vnspeakablie greater, as of
whom alone is all salvation. The conclusion of the same disputation, is added
now in the tenth verse: And he is called of God, an high priest after the
order of Melchisedech: which words do conclude in short sum, all y^ has
been spoken* first, that Christ is our priest, and has therefore ye name of ye
high priest given him.

Secondly, what kind of priesthod he has: not Aarons, for, for it Aaron
himself was sufficient and appointed of God: but another spiritual priesthod,
after the order of Melchisedech. Thirdly, that unto this priesthod he was
called of God: to this sense and meaning, the words are plainly set down in
this tenth verse, as you have heard, of all which we have spoken already.
Now, because this priesthod of Christ, after the order of Melchisedech, was
not well understood, what kind of priesthod it should be, of what virtue and
grace: therefore the Apostle means more at large to speak of this, that they
might understand it, as his manner is often to make exhortation to stir up
their dull spirits, least they should hear in vain: so here in the eleventh
verse, and after following, he makes a long digression unto the beginning of
the vii. chapter, both to persuade them to hold a good understanding of all
that has been spoken, and to prepare them more diligently to other things,
that should be taught, that so they might all glorify God, in good wisedom^
and knowledge of the mystery of his will. And this exhortation he begins
thus: Of whom we have many things to say, which are hard to be declared,
because you be dull of hearing. Here, first the Apostle, ye more to stir them
up diligently to learn this mystery of Melchisedech, how he was a figure of
our Savior Christ, and the priesthood of Christ was represented in him: he
says, first, that the matter is hard and difficult to be declared, and
therefore requires great heed and d^ligence.

This place (dearly beloved) let us learn well, for it has many good
instructions in it: it is hard, says the Apostle, and therefore you must add
more diligence to it.

Here first we learn a good cause, why it pleased God to leave places in
Scripture hard to understand, like as other places are easy, for as the
easiness is because none should be discouraged, but all learn: so the
hardness is, because none should be negligent and careless: and herein, the
Lord has dealt also mercifully with us: for seeing all carelessness in reading
his word, in which his wisdom is revealed, is the taking of his name in
vain: our own^ profit does now make us take more heed of this finne: for we
cannot understand or be edified by it, but with our care and diligence, for so
the Apostle here exhorts his brethren: the thing is hard and difficult
whereof we speak, there fore mark it more carefully and give greater heed to
understanding: this then is a good cause why the scripture is hard, even that
we should put far from us, all idle sluggish thoughts, and prepare our selves
with a good conscience, and great diligence, as often as either we hear or read
the same: and why should it not be so? is there any knowledge and wisdom
learned, but by labor and diligence? to plowe thy field, to dress thy
vineyard, to keep thy cattle, to buy lde thy house, to every work has not
God appointed care and travel? no otherwise has God dealt with his word. The
Papists not knowing this, or else dissembling it, they have told us an other
cause why the Scripture is hard, and that is, that either we should not at al
presume to read it, or if we do read it, yet we should not presume of any
understanding of it, otherwise then the Church of Rome has taught us. I do
not speak one word untruly of them, not one of them: but this day they will
confess it. This they teach. The scripture is hard, therefore every man must
not read it: and if any do read it, yet he must understand it after the
interpretation of the Church of Rome. Here (I beseech you) consider it
diligently, and tell me whether in such doctrine there be any reason, truth, or
godliness: we have a controversy with these men, whether the Church of Rome
be the Church of Christ or of Antichrist: the cause must be tried by the
Scriptures: is it any reason now for them to challenge, that we must believe
the scripture, according to their interpretations? is not this to make them
Judges of their own cause? when the Apostle bad us Try the spirits, whether
they be of God or no: 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
meant he (trow you) we should try them according to ye testimony of the
church of Rome? when the men of Thessalonica tried the apostles doctrine,
whether it were true or no: asked they the judgment Act. 17. 11.
of the church of Rome? Surely (dearly beloved) all this is but childish
follic: which of us ever heard of any men, who would be Judges in their own
cause, except those of whom it is said: ask my fellow if I be a thief: and
beside this their unreasonable talk, have they any truth in their words? was
there ever true and just man that claymed this manner of try all? is it not
confessed and agreed upon among all men, that truth seeks no corners? and
why run they for defense to their own dark hoame, and fear the open
judgment of all men? Learn of our savior Christ, who is truth it self,
says he not? If I should bear witness of my self, my witness John (...).
3^. John. 1. 54.
were not true: and again: If I honor my self, mine honor is nothing worth:
then, if beside the words of his own mouth, who was the son of David, he
had had no testimony, he could have been no true prophet: but therefore he
was true, because his heavenly Father bare witness to him, both in his
glorious voice, and in the assured testimony of the law and the prophets, and
in all his miracles, which made it manifest that he was the son of God. If
thus our savior Christ confirmed his credit unto men, and offered himself to
be tried by the scriptures: what proud people are these, and what proud
words are in their mouths, that would have no trial of their doings, but
the censure and judgment of their own mouths? Again, this unreasonable and
vnture speech, ye the church of Rome only must expound the scriptures, because
they be hard: is there any godliness at all in so saying? is it not taught us
many times, that if we love, fear, honor, serve God, we must obey his word,
keep his ordinances, make all his laws the rule of our life? how then do they
love God, or what godliness is in the^, that give not gods word credit in it
self, but make ye truth of it, to stand upon their own understanding? This
now we know: the hardness of scripture is not, that we should abstain from
reading and hearing it, nor because we should trust the interpretation of the
Church of Rome, but because we should with great and earnest affection, apply
our study, and pray unto God to lighten our minds, that we may be taught of
his spirit.

Now further let us consider yet these words of the Apostle. Because you be
evil of hearing: not only (as I have said) they teach us, because of ye
hardenesse of the scripture, to take more heed unto it: but also very plainly
and manifestly they teach us, by what means the scripture becomes hard unto
us: that is, through our dull hearing. And who so ever he be, to whom the
scripture is hard, let him accuse his own dullness: and whosoever blames the
Scripture in this behalf, he blames him self, both of slow ears, and of
a faithless heart: for, is there any thing thing more plain then these
words? therefore it is hard, because you be dull of hearing. Take away from
the man a deaf ear and a careless mind, and thou have taken from the
scripture all obscurity and darkness: leave the man in his negligent mind,
and thou make the scriptures, as hard as any dark speech, or riddle: and I
beseech you, the more to confirm your faith in this persuasion, mark how
often in the scriptures this is taught us: that nothing makes the scripture
hard, but our infirmity: our Apostle here once taught it before, The word
(says he) did not profit them, because it was not mingled to them Ca. 4. 2.
with faith. Saint Peter, when he had said of Paul's Epistles, that many
things in them were hard to understand, he adds: which the unlearned and
the unstable ^ Pe^. 3. 13.
do pervert, even as they do all other scripture: here you see again ye
scripture is hard, but you se to who^, and why: to the wicked, because they are
wavering minded, and will learn nothing, be it never so plain. Saint Paul
also speaking of the understanding 1. Cor. 1. 14.
of the mystery of the Gospel, says plainly, it is the carnal man that
perceives not the things of God, and in deed he can never understand them,
because they be discerned spiritually. Our savior Christ himself, being asked
Mar. 13. 10. Mar. 4. 11.
this question, why he spoke so darkly and in parables, he answers thus: To
you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to those that
are without, all things are done in parables: could he speak more plainly?
his word is not hard unto his children, but to strangers, to Infidels, to men
without God in the world, to those he speaks darkly: then (dearly beloved)
this case being so clear, let us be bold to say to all that accuse the word
of God of hardness, as Saint Paul has say de before us. If the Gospel be
yet hid, then is it hid to those that perish, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
in who^ the God of this world has blinded their unbelieving minds, that the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine upon them: for
otherwise, ye secret of the Lord is revealed to those that fear him, and his
word is a lantern unto their feet, and a light unto their steps: it is not
hard, but as Solomon says, It is easy Prouer. 14. 6
to him that will understand: he is a scorner that seeks it and can not find
it. Moses says: This commandment Deuteronomy. ^0. 10.
which I command thee this day, it is not hid from thee, nor sarre of, it is
very nere unto thee even in thy mouth and in thy heart to do it. The prophet Ose
says of the judgments of God unto his people, that they were as the morning
light. And the Lord says by the prophet Esaias: I have not s^oke^ in secret,
nor in a place of dark Ose. 6. 5.
nesse in the earth: I said not in vain to the house of Jacob: Esai. 45. 19.
Seek ye me. And if thus the doctrine of salvation were preached, while yet
the people were taught by signs and figures: how clear is it now since the
son of righteousness has shined in perfect light? what wrong is it to say
still, the scriptures are hard, and to make them to be Sphynx his ridles, or
the winding oracles of Apollo, which are the clear words of ye living God? I
appeal to your own consciences, all that have experience, whether have you
found such hardness in scripture: or whether do you easily see how we are
saved in Jesus Christ, and what obedience we owe again unto God. I am sure,
there is none of you, that with a single heart have come to read ye scripture,
that were ever driven back with any hardness of it. How is it then, and why do
the papists still cry out of the hardness of the word? why see they not this
easiness as well as we? sure, I will tell you, and the Lord is witness, how I
tell you true. Those men, they have come near unto God with their mouth, and
honored them with their lips: but their hearts have been far from him* and
they have worshipped God in vain, teaching Esa. 19. 10. Mat. 15. 8.
doctrines which were precepts of men: and for this cause God has covered them
with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up their eyes: and the gospel is unto
them, as ye words of a book that is sealed: so that, whether they be learned
or unlearned, they can read nothing. This is the great and hidden cause: their
sins have found them out, and gods judgments have blinded them. Another
cause, and that I told you before, is, because they would lead us blindfolde
after the church of Rome: and this cause I make not of mine own head, the^
selves (as I said) will confess it. For this is a solemn decree in their late
general counsel of Trident, the 4. session, the 2. canon: that it belongs to
their holy motherchurch, to judge of the sense, and interpretation of the
scripture: nether must we presume to leave those interpretations, although they
were such as were never meet to be openly taught and published. And their
great doctor Hossius says thus: if we have the interpretation of the church
of Rome, although we see not how it can agree with the words of the text,
yet we must believe it. But are not these (think you) unreasonable words? if
they be not, examine mo of their witnesses, and at last you shall find it and
confess it, that they are not only unreasonable, but exceeding shameless men,
while they hold this: that the scripture is hard, and to be understood after
the church of Rome: for thus they have termed the scripture, dead y^ke, a thing
Illirieus in normaroncilii. Sleyd* li 23. Kemp in exam. council, Trident. ^ess
4. c^n, (...)
without life, a dumb judge, a nose of wax, a black gospel, ynken divinity:
these and such other words are witnesses against them to all the world: and
their own books are extant: and with what spirit then have these men spoken?
surely, not with the spirit of the father David, or of his son Solomon, who
say: The law of the Lord is perfect, and conuerteth souls: it gives to the
simple sharpness of wit, and to the children knowledge and Psalm. 19. 7. Pro.
1. 4.
discretion: nor with the spirit of Paul, that says: All scripture is
inspired of God, and is profitable to reprove, 1. Tim. 1. 16.
correct, instruct, and to make a godly man perfect to every good work: this
is not to call the scripture a waxen nose, or ynken divinity, but these
speeches are much more agreeable to the spirit of the old heretics, which
said, the prophecies were dremes. But to let their uncomely speeches go, and to
come again to our purpose. They cry out still, that the interpretations of the
church of Rome are the sense of the scripture. And would you not now think,
that these interpretations of the Roman church, were merueilous wise, grave,
mystical, seeing they would have all the world thus to reverence them? See
therefore what they are, and judge: I will allege unto you some of them, in the
weightiest matters of faith. You are wise, judge what I say: these are their
most learned expositions of all other, in which they boast not a litile. Christ
says: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church: ergo, the
Pope is head of the church? how grows this conclusion? forsooth thus: if upon
this rock Christ will build his church, then upon Peter, for Peter signifies
that rock. If upon Peter, then upon Peter's successor: Cusan ad. Boaemos.
Epist. 2. Disti. 40. Non nos, in glosa.
for the truth does cleave unto the chair, and Peter makes his success our
inheritour of all his goodness. If to Peter's success our, then to the Pope, for
Peter was bishop of Rome. And if the church be built upon Peter, then Peter was
chief of all other, and so ye Pope is head of the church: if these collectio^s
be not theirs, let me be reproved as a slaunderer: if they be theirs, then be
you wise to understand what their religion is: for all these collectio^s are
utterly untrue,

It is untrue that Peter is that rock upon which ye church is built: for our
Savior Christ himself Math. 7. 24.
says, he that hears my words and perfourmeth them, he builds upon the
rock. It is untrue, that what faith Peter had, the same must be left to Peter's
successors: for Scribes and Phariseis, buyers and sellers, succeeded Moses and
Aaron. It is untrue, that Peter was Bishop of Rome: for he was the Apostle of
circumcision, therefore it was utterly unlawful for him, to be a Bishop among
the Gentiles. Again, they reason thus. The Apostles say to Christ: Lord
behold, here are two swords: therefore the pope has both civil and
ecclesiastical government: might they not better have reasoned, when Peter
would have used one sword, Christ commanded him to put it up, therefore no
such sword at all belongs to him. Again, they say: Christ promises to his
Apostles, the comforter which shall teach the^ all truth, therefore the church
of Rome cannot err: how bring they all the Apostles to the Pope of Rome? how
do they draw it that was spoken in Jerusalem, two thousand mile out of
Italy, yt it was meant only of the City of Rome? Again, they say, the sin
against the holy ghost, shall never be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come: Ergo, there is a purgatory: such are their proofs in their
greatest mysteries. And is not this (trow you) a miserable doctrine, which has
no plain and direct scripture, but by such wrested and strange expositions
can only be proved? and this I speak of their best expositions, which to this
day they hold and reverence: but infinite other expositions they have, and in
times past of greatest account, for they are written in their mass books,
their portesses, their pontificalls, their legends, their decrees, their
councels, their laws, that you may be sure they were expositions of general
consent and greatest force, how so ever now some would dissemble them: and
these are such expositions, as I assure you, and I beseech you to believe it:
for before the living God, you shall find it one day true: the mad men in
bedlem can not speak more foolishly: they reason thus. Peter drew his sword
and cut off Malchus ear, therefore ye Pope is head of the Church. The world was
finished in seven days, therefore none must marry within seven degrees of Vide
pet. Cr^ ^o. 1. conc. ^o ^o.
kindred. God made two great lights, the Sun and the Moon, therefore as much
as the Sun is brighter then the Moon, so much the Pope is greater Ant on in
sum.
then the Emperor. The Prophet says, behold the Par* 3. tit. 21. Cap. 5.
face of thine anointed: thus, says the pontifical, is a Bishops prayer over
the popes legate, when he kneeleth before the Altar. Behold I send my messinger
33. q. 3.
to prepare thy way before thy face, says God by his prophet Esaie: the
pontifical uses this as a prophecy fulfilled, when the Popes legate meets
the Emperor, to receive him into any city. I have found David my servant, and
anointed him with holy oil. My love is beautiful among the daughters of
Jerusalem. This they apply to kings and Queens when the clergy receive
the^ personally into their churches. The prophet says: sprinkle me Lord with
ysop and I shall be clean: that they apply to the priest sprinkling with holy
water. Lift up your head, O ye gates: and ye everlasting doors lift up your
selves: that is, when the Clarke opens the church door for the Priest to
come in with the cross on Palm sunday. Ten thousand such applications and
expositions are in their books, such (I say) as I think no bedlem man could
devise more vain and foolish. Now, if any of the^ be ashamed of these doings,
I pray God that shame may be the trial of their countenance, which testifies
against them, and so be in them a good color of repentance: if they will not be
ashamed then the wrath of ye Lord is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still, ^il he make their madness known unto all the world, and make them
a hissing among his people, who have so profaned his word of life. And thus
much touching the hardness of the scripture, which ye Apostle here speaks
of. It follows in ye Apostle: For whereas considering the time you ought to be
teachers, yet have you need again that we teach you the first principles of
the word of God, and are become such as have needs of milk and not strong
meat: this is the cause why the Apostle said, they were slow of hearing,
because they had profited no more in knowledge: a great while the gospel
preached and professed among them, yet they still so ignorant, that they know
not the principles of their Christian faith. We have had a great while the
Gospel preached, we might have been by this time doctors, if we would have
learned, I say not every day, or week, or month, but every year a little:
and what a shame is it fos us, if yet we be ignorant in the principles of
faith. how many sermons have we heard, or read in vain? how many times have
we made the sower to sow his seed in the high ways, or among the thorns,
and stones? If in xv. years, we be scarce past our A. b. c. when do we hope
that the secrets of the word shall be revealed unto us? Are so many years so
small a portion of our life, that we may give them to vanity and learn
nothing? the Lord grant that we may better look unto our selves: and seeing
every day takes away part of our life, and makes this earth lie tabernacle
more to corrupt, let every day bring increase of knowledge, and add to our
life, that when our course is run, our faith may be kept, and we may find
the crown of righteousness, which God has laid up for those that be wise of
heart. Or, if this counsel of the Apostle will not persuade us, but by leisure
in xv. years to come we will learn hereafter, I assure you, our graves will
meet many of us in our ways, while we are yet dull in learning: and when
then shall be the time in which we will enjoy our knowledge.

Let us look therefore to our selves, for I am afraid this sharp rebuke of
the Apostle, is as just against us, as it was against them: and it must needs
make us at last ashamed, except it make us in time repent our sluggishnesse.
And here by the way, I beseech you to mark well this place, to see the
difference of the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. The Apostle
checketh the people, because they be so dull of hearing, that the word of God
is hard unto them, which ought to be most familiar and easy. He rebukes
them of ignorance, that in so long time they have not learned to be doctors
in Christianity, able to teach others. He threateneth them, that if this
great sin be not amended, let them look for no other, but that vengeance
and wrath shall be a recompense unto them. Thus the Apostle says: but what says
the false apostolical man, the pope of Rome? forsooth, he pray seth them of
great modesty, that will not presume to read the scripture as those which are
dark and obscure writings: he allows well of learning nothing, and after
many years, to be never the wiser: for ignorance (says he) is the mother of
devotion. He blesses the men that have no wisdom in them, and though they
know not how to give account of their faith: yet he bids them believe as the
church believes, and they shall be saved. Can any thing be more contrary to
other, then the apostles doctrine is contrary to this? why then do we not yet
cast him off for shame, and bid, sye upon the beast, that speaks so
presumptuously against the word of God? let him and his foolishness perish
together: but let us learn the knowledge of the Lord.

It follows. For every one that uses milk, is inexpert of the word of
righteousness, for he is a babe. The Apostle before, provoked them to
diligence: first, because otherwise the scripture would be hard unto them.
Again, because it was ashame, after so long time to have profited so little.
Now, he exhorts them by showing the great hurt which shall be unto them by
their ignorance and rudeness* and says, that while they are such, they can
never know the precious, and hid treasure of righteousness, which Christ
has given only to those that are wise, and have learned his blessed Gospel.
For better understanding of this, you must know this figurative speech of
the Apostle, of milk and strong meat: by milk, he means the general
principles of doctrine, as him self after declares, as of repentance, of
faith in Christ, of baptism, of the resurrection, and such like, set out
breifely in general terms, and according to the capacity of Children, with
which they are prepared to the kingdom of heaven, and must still grow up in
more understanding, till they do see with all the saints, the higth, the
deapth, the length, the breadth, of Gods unsearchable goodness in Jesus Christ,
which the Apostle calls here the word of righteousness. Now, if we will abide
still in our first instruction, and when gray hayres shall be mingled with our
black, yet then still we will be children in understanding, the Apostles words
shall be justified in us, we are not meet disciples of the excellent knowledge
of the Gospel: for he that is still at his milk, has not yet tasted of the
word of righteousness, which is strong meat.

And it follows in the Apostle. For strong meat belongs to the^ that are of
perfect age, which through long custom have their wits exercised to discern
good and evil. In these words the Apostle makes it more plain, what is
milk, and what is strong meat, and why they are so called: that is milk,
which agrees to beginners, and such as have little experience: that is strong
meat, which is for old practitioners, and such as have wisdom to judge
between truth and falshod. And thus much briefly of the sense of the words:
out of which, what instructions we have to gather for our own edifying, I will
speak more at large, God willing, the next time. Now let us pray, etc.

The 26. Lecture, upon the 13. and 14. verses, before mentioned, and so forth
upon the 1. and 2. verse of the sixth Chapter.
13 For every one that uses milk, is inexpert in the word of righteousness:
for he is a child.

14 But strong meat belongs to them that are of age, which through long
custom have their wits exercised, to to discern both good and evil.

CHAP. VI. 1 THerefore, leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us
be led forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance
from dead works, and of faith toward God.

2 Of the doctrine of baptism, and laying on of hands, and of the
resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment.


WE have heard already, what reprehension the Apostle has hitherto made, of
the slackenesse of the people, in learning the mysteries of Gods word.

First, because they have been so careless, that they have made the word hard
unto them, that they cannot understand it: where I told you, y^ who soever he
be that accuses the scripture of hardness, the Apostle concludes against
him, that he has a hard and dull heart. Secondarily, he rebukes them in respect
of the time, which has been so long, that they might now have taught other,
yet they need to be taught them selves, yea even the beginnings. And here I
wish us to look well unto our selves: for all men know how long the time
has been, in which the Gospel has been preached unto us. and how little
we have profited, God knows. Thirdly, he blames them for their slacknesse,
because by it they spoil themselves of a great treasure: for while they be
thus rude and ignorant, the word of righteousness, that is, perfect
knowledge can never be taught unto them, neither can they be partakers of the
excellent knoweledge of the gospel of Christ: but it is utterly impossible,
even as it is for children to eat strong meat. Then he shows who be
strong, even those that have their wisdom perfect, so that they can judge
between good and evil.

To this purpose are these last words of the Apostle: Every one that uses
milk, is inexpert of the word of righteousness, for he is a child: but
strong meat, is for the perfect, which through long custom have their wits
exercised to discern good and evil.

First, we have here to learn this principle of Christianity: he that is
rude and ignorant, can not apprehend the excellent knowledge of the Gospel of
Christ: that is, he that can say no more but this: I believe in one God: we
must repent us of sin: we are saved by faith: we must worship God in spirit
and truth: we are baptized in the name of the father, the son, and the holy
ghost: we believe the resurrection of our bodies: we look for eternal life:
and such like confessions in general words: though, where this is confessed
with a single heart, and a mind willing to learn more: God may and will, for
his Christ's sake, accept it unto salvation: yet we that have received of the
Lord, both time, and ability, ought more exactly to understand: if we will
not be despisers of the manifold graces of God: as for example, the child is
taught, that there is but one God above al, and to worship him alone, whom he
confesses in three distinct persons, the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost. Surely, a young Christian man, which with this faith shoud humble him
self before God, and cry: Our father, which art in heaven: no doubt, God
would hear his prayer: yet notwithstanding, seeing this mystery is not only
taught in general terms, but is set out also in more particular points, in
knowledge of al, we must look for the fullness of our comfort, and rejoicing
that now we have in God. Thou say, I believe in God the father almighty:
thou say well, and it is a holy confession, if thou have heard no more: but
if thou have also learned, that God is a spirit, not of the nature of man, not
like unto the idols of the Gentiles, not like unto any creature that thou have
heard or seen: but a nature of majesty and glory, incomprehensible and above
the thoughts of man: then thou ought here to exercise thy senses with wise
meditations, how great and glorious the Lord is, whom thine eye cannot see,
thine heart can not conceive, no creature in Heaven or earth can resemble unto
thee: so thou shall learn obedience: to say unto thy senses, and unto thy
natural heart, what have I to do with you? All carnal cogitations and
thoughts of man, be they never so high, of Kings and Emperors, of gold and
precious stones, they are vile and filthy to carry into heaven: if thine
imaginatio^s will resemble them to the God of glory, thou do but fill thy
soul with corruption and rottenness: thy fleshly thoughts shall breed an
unbelieving heart, and thou shall be the fool which searches the majesty,
till he be overwhelmed of the glory: for thy God is a spirit, and in spirit
and faith thou can only see him. Thou shall now hate and detest the Idol
and idol maker, which have fashioned thy God like unto an old man, with a gray
beard, which have made him sit as in a chair of estate, and given him Angels
in gold and silver and flaming fire to sit about him: this is shame above al
shames. To say unto the king, thou art a slave: and unto the nobles of the
earth, ye are villains: they be words of honor in comparison of this
unspeakable sacrilege, to say unto God, thou art like a man. Again, when thou
say, thou beleuest in the father, the son, and the holy ghost, y^ say
well, and acknowledging in thine heart, three persons and one God, in a mystery
which thou can not express, thy faith is accepted. But when y^ hear, the
father to be called ye God of all grace, the author of life, being, and
moving: when thou hear the son called the shining brightness, and
engraven form of the father, of whose fullness we receive al increase of
grace: when thou hear ye holy ghost called the comforter, the spirit of
sanctification, ye pledge of thine election: when thou hear y^ the father
has eternally begotten his son: the son eternally begotten of the father:
the holy ghost eternally proceeding from them both: in all this, shall we learn
nothing for more clear knowledge of our faith? shall we not here confess, the
person of the father to be the beginning and founteine of al goodness, glory,
life, and immortality, that we our selves and whatsoever is unto us happy and
blessed, all is only of his free grace and mercy? shall we not confess that
truly and naturally, he is ye father: and because, he has eternally begotten
his son; that his son is one God with him without beginning? and shall we
not humble our souls, faithfully to believe this, and never to search or
inquire of, how it is? for our vain and corruptible hearts, how can they see
eternal and everlasting things? And because ye son is the image of his
father, shall we not learn that we know nothing of God, nothing at al of his
nature, godhead, majesty, working, will, power, honor, life, and continuance
for ever? nothing (I say) but what we have seen and heard in Christ his
son: for he is the shining brightness of his glory. What have I to do with
men, or with the children of men? what counsel can mine own heart minister
unto me, I must rob the son of God of his honor: or I must confess I
know nothing of God, but in him only. Again, if of his fullness we receive,
we have no fellowship with god: but in him, all gace, mercy, life, (...)
immortality: to him it beelongeth, of him we have it, and for his sake it is
given unto us. So likewise, when the spirit is said to be our comforter, to
proceed from the father and ye son: we confess he is one in nature and
godhead with the father and the son, in personal substance, proceeding
eternally from them both: and because eternally, therefore incomprehensibly,
which we believe in faith, and will not search by reason: only we wait and
rejoice in hope, till God strengthen our eyes to see his majesty: and then our
hearts shall be wise to comprehend this distinction of the persons. Now, this
spirit being our comforter, we acknowledge that it is the person of the holy
Ghost, which puts his grace into our hearts, to make us wise, faithful,
holy, and so seals unto us in full assurance, our inheritance that is in
Jesus Christ, according to the free purpose, and good will of God his father.
Besides all this, to confess the humanity of our savior Christ, how in his
own person he has borne the punishmente of our sins, and overcome the
devil, who held us in bondage: how he has sanctified our nature in
himself, and made it meet to stand before the presence of God, only by faith,
freely giving us his blessings. These and many other things taught us in the
scripture, to our exceeding comfort, shall we neglecte them, and learn only the
confession of Children. I believe in God the father, God the son, and God the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God: Sure if we will do thus, I see no other,
but that the little children through gods infinite mercy, shall be saved, in y^
little knowledge that they have learned: and we by his just judgments worthy to
be condemned, for his manifold wisdom which we have despised. Then (dearly
beloved) if we will not always be children, never learned in the word of
righteousness, let us not only hold the general principles of our faith, but
so far also as particular points are taught and mentioned, let us wisely
learn them, till we may feel in our selves good increase of Gods spirit, to
love him, to fear him, to walk before him, with all our heart and in all the
ways which he has appointed for us.

Now in the words following. But strong meat is for the perfect, which
through long custom have their wits exercised to discern between good and
evil. Here appears, as I said, who are children and who are strong: they are
children which have not yet had trial and experience whereby they might be
rooted in faith, and confirmed by knowledge against al falshod and error:
which kind of childhod, Saint Paul tells the Ephesians, at the last we ought
all to leave of, and Ephe. 4. 14.
grow up in the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, into
a perfect man, and to the full measure of our age in Christ: that we be not
always children, wavering and carried about with every blast of doctrine by
the deceit of men with craftiness, which lie in wait to deceive. And as this
is a plain description of Children: so, as plainly here the Apostle shows
who are perfect men: even those that are able, with wise senses, to judge
between good and evil, y^ is, who have their minds lightened with ye word of
God, so that they are able to try what is acceptable and well pleasing unto
god. Now (dearly beloved) if these words be plain enough, give me leave to
beseech you in this plain case, as Paul beseeched ye Corinthians in y^ like:
My brethren, be not children i^ understanding: be children in ma 2. Cor. 14. 20
lice, but in understanding be of perfect age: and if you see the plain and
manifest meaning of the scripture, what it is, be wise, and believe it: and
confess this, that we ought to be learned in Gods word, so that we have good
ground of our says, and be able to consute falshod. As now in our own days,
we see the Pope claims authority, that he can despense against the word of
God: but if our wits be exercised in the knowledge of the word of truth, we do
see where the six tribes of Israel do curse such presumption.

In the xxvi. of Deuter. upon Mouut Eball, Ruben, Gad, Asher, Zebulon, Dan,
and Nepthtalim, they pronounce a decree: Cursed be he that confirms not all
the words of this book, and all the people shall say, A men. If to confirm and
ratify, be not to repeal or give contrary dispensation, then all ye Israel
of the Lord must accurse his blasphemy, that wildispense against the word of
God. We see, the Pope uses a triple crown, and challenges honor above
Emperors and kings: but if we have learned the commandment of Christ, and
are lightened by it, to judge between good and evil: when Christ says, Kings
of the nations reign over them: and their rulers are called gracious Lords:
but it shall not be so among you: we Luke. 22. 25 Antichristian pride.
must needs know the Popes pride is intolerable, which takes such honor
unto him self.

We see how they cry against us: The Church, the church: and make us believe
that they are the church, and they cannot err: but if we be exercised in the
scripture, to discern between truth and salshod, we know that Christ has
built his church upon the rock, which rock is not Peter and his successors
in Rome (as the Pope expounds it) but our Savior Christ says, He that
hears his word and M^tt. 7. ^4. M^tt. 16. 18.
obeys it, he is the wise man that builds upon the rock, and neither
storms, nor tempests, nor the gates of Hell shall prevail against that
buyldinge: and Saint Paul Ephe. 2. 20.
says, The foundation or rock upon which we be buylte, is the doctrine of
the Apostles and Prophets. And who so ever comes unto us, and brings us
that doctrine, though they say they be Apostles, yet they belyers: and though
they say they be the church, yet they are an assembly of thieves and murderers.

Let us then be wise at the last: it is not ignorance, it is perfect
knowledge: it is not infancy, it is ripe understanding: that must commend us
unto God.

And mark it well, that you may know what God requires of us. That which is
here translated, long custom, the Apostle calls it (...), that is, a
knoweledge with long study and practice learned, as law in the Judge or
counselor, as physic in the learned expert Physician: so must divinity be in
us.

Again, he says: we must have our senses exercised: it is not enough to know,
nor to know much, but we must bring the practice of it in our life, neither
concealing our knowledge, nor withholding our obedience, but with mind and
body testifying our faith, til experience teach us, that Gods spirit has the
victory in us. Lastly, he says: we must be able to judge between good and
evil, or as S. Paul terms it, able to try the difference of things one
from other: that is, that we may know Romans 2. 18.
how to discern between^ Gods wisdom, and man's vain inventions: between
truth and falsehoode: between virtue and vice: not as the manner of some is,
that still be babes, and worse then babes, with whom if you will reason of their
religion, to persuade them by the word of truth, they will say, I am not
book learned, I can not dispute with you, let me alone with my faith, other
men have been as well learned as they be now, I am sure they believed
otherwise: are not these miserable people? and are not they more miserable,
which thus have seduced them? and shall not we thank God this day, who has
saved us from such unspeakable madness, both of the cursed teacher, and of
the wretched disciple? yes (dearly beloved) let us thank God, and let us leave
the blind leaders of the blind and let us pray, that God would give unto us
according to his glorious riches, the strength of his spirit in the inner man,
that by faith Christ may dwell in our hearts, and we may apprehende with all
the saints, the height, the breadth, ye length, the depth, and know the love
of Christ, which i^ above all knowledge, and be filled with the fullness of
God.

Now it follows in the sixte Chapter. Therefore, leuing the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, let us be led forward unto perfection, not laying again
the fou^datio^ of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, etc. In
these words, the Apostle first makes the conclu sion of his exhortation,
therefore let us leave the beginnings, and go foreward unto perfection. In the
words following, he shows by particular points what is this beginning
beyond which we must go, that we may be perfect, and he numbereth four
points, repentance from dead works, faith toward God, the resurrection of the
body, and eternal judgment, which principles were learned and confessed of
Christian men's children, in the day of their confirmation, of Gentiles that
came to the faith of Christ in the day of their baptism: in this meaning some
think he calls these forenamed points, the doctrine of baptismes and laying
on of hands: meaning thereby, that seeing this confession and knowledge is in
us then, when first we are received into the fellowship of the church, to be
partakers of their mysteries, how ought we of all duty to grow unto
greater knowledge and wisdom, when now many years we have been of the
Church, and daily taught all the counsels of God? or, it may be, that the
Apostle here recites the manner of catechizing, used them in Churches, for
instruction of children: in which they were taught especially, these six
principles of religion, what they are, and how they should learn them: that
is, Repentance, Faith, Baptism, Laying on of hands, the Resurrection, and
eternal judgment: which things being first learned of them, and given unto
them in books, such as our Catechismes are, the Apostle may seem to speak
thus. Let us not always be beginners: when we were yet children, we learned
this: since so long time hearing the word preached, and religion more perfectly
taught us, how shall we be blameless, if we learn no more? By which words,
the meaning of the apostle is, to give us no time of rest, when we should
think we were wise enough, we need learn no more: but as long as God
continues our life, so long we should continue our study, still to know more
of his unsearchable wisdom and goodness.

Touching the learning of these things, to be milk and meat of children, I
told you before by some examples, how we might understand it: it is milk, to
know these things in the simplicity of the words: it is strong meat, to be
able to distribute them into every part, and apply it to our selves in our
life. Repentance, whereof he first speaks, has here a sorrow and purpose of
amendment, as these affections can be in children, which is, to be grieved, or
weep, for a thing done, and to beware afterward for fear of the like: but the
wise and grave man, that has profited in the schole of Christ, his sorrow
sinketh much deeper: he remembers by good accounts, what things the Lord has
done for him, how he has blessed him, from what present perils he has saved
him, and how again him self has been ever unthankful, unworthy of the least
of al Gods mercies: yea, by many special crimes, deserving wrath and anger:
which thoughts do work in him a troubled spirit, and pensive soul: so
that, not only tears, but the state of the whole body, shows the grief of
his mind: and not the body only, but in all his life it works great care,
much praying, anger with our selves, fear, desire, zeal, punishment also,
that by judging our selves we may prevent the judgment of God: it makes us
detest our sin, and the remembrance of our sin, as in the Acts of the
Apostles, they burn their books of sorceries, which were of great price and
value: and as Saint Jude says, They hate even the coat spotted with the
flesh: and according to this is the amendment of their life, with all love and
desire. If they have been extortioners, they will make restitution: if they
have been usurers, they will give back increase: if they have given their
hands, and knees, and members of their bodies, to the Popish Mass, with all
their strength now again they will deteste it, and make it known, they hate
their first sin: this manner of repentance, is strong meat of perfect men.

The second point here spoken of, is faith toward God, of which, so much as
may be apprehended of children, is called milk: as to believe that God the
father of his great love, gave his only begotten son Jesus Christ, to be
made man, who in his body might fulfill all righteousness, and bear the
punishment of sin, which also by the power of his spirit he ourcame, and has
gotten eternal redemption, for all that shall believe. But so to examine this
faith wisely, and according to Scripture, that when we find the beginning in
God the father, the work in God the son, the applying and bestowing of it in
the holy Ghost: and when we be wise, so to distinguish these graces in every
person, that yet we divide them not, as taking away from the one utterly, what
soever especially we give unto the other: this I say, when we have so learned,
that we see all the glory of saving health is in God, no merit or desert in
man, but that without the law, the righteousness of God is laid open unto us,
witnessed by the law and by the prophets, then we be perfect to feed of this
strong meat, that faith alone justifies. Again, when we know that this is
the gift of God, with whom there is no change, nor shadow of change, but
he is constant in his love for ever: when faith hereof takes boldness, that
nether height, nor deapth, nor life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor any creature shall ever be able to remove me from the love with
which God has looued me: this assured boldness is the meat of the man of
God, who is perfect in faith.

Likewise Baptism, the third thing here mentioned, the milk of it is to
know, that by it they be sealed into the covenant of Gods grace and mercy,
which he has to the fathers and their children: but to know by this, how to
be baptized into the death of Christ, that as he is risen again from the
dead, so we should walk in newness of life, that is, to know that our
Baptism presents unto us, the free forgiveness of our sins, washed away
with the blood of Christ. While as he dyed and was buried for our sins: so
we also should dye unto sin, that it have no more rule in our mortal body:
and as he rose again from the dead, so that death has no more rule over him:
so we should after live in newness of life, offering up unto God, our bodies
and our souls, who has redeemed them, and purchased them unto him self. To
know all this according to the scripture, is the perfect knowledge of our
Baptism.

Imposition of hands, that was a solemn ceremony used with prayer, in which
it was declared, that the parties were accepted of GOD into his Church,
according to the faith of Christ, which then they professed: this was the
milk which children had fead on. But to see in it a free and bold profession
of faith, before all men to be holden, and a holy vow, or promise, in which
they bound them selves to perpetual holiness, by the laying on of hands, as
by a solemn oath, to have it witnessed of the Lord they were his children, and
to witness it in them selves, they would abide the temples of the holy
Ghost: to be short, to promise a persourmaunce of all, what so ever was hoped
for in us, in the day of our baptism: this is the strong meat. And this which
this day ought to be practiced, as a thing very profitable in the Church of
God, it is miserably defaced by the Papists: for where it was in the Church
of God an use, that Christian children should be taught the principles of
faith, which when they had well learned, and could give a good account of their
faith, then in y^ open congregation, with prayer and laying on of hands on
their heads, they were declared to be received as partakers of the graces and
sacraments of the church: this good order the Papists have changed, and made
them a sacrament of confirmation, only by the Bishop to be ministered, and by
him to little children of no knwledge, to whom he gives a new Godfather or
godmother, which should speak for them when they cannot speak for them selves.
And whereas in the scripture, this has been ever a ceremony, in solemn
blessings, in sacrifices, in admitting ministers, in giving spiritual gifts,
and no where used but only with prayer, this order seemed base to them, that
knew no end of their own inventions, and they would needs have crosses,
tapers, oil, miters, surplices etc. without which there was with them no
confirmation: thus in this as in all things, profaning the holy ordinance
of God.

The resurrection of the body, another point here mentioned, was for
Children, that they might know their bodies should not die. as the bodies of
beasts, to consume in earth and not return: but that they should rise
again at the latter day, and their own bodies should be made immortal: but
in this also, to see the glory, what a body it is which shall live for ever,
which shall be made like to the body of Christ, which shall be made able to stand
in the presence and behold the glory God, of which shall be set free, from
sorrow, care, sickness, death, and al adversity. This mystery which ye
Angels of God desire to behold, when we can wisely see it, and know therefore
we are here but pilgrims and strangers: another country is our own, which
God has made and not man, in which we set our heart, with all the delight and
pleasure of it, in this to rejoice: this the strong meat with which the hope
of the resurrection feeds perfect men. Last of all, here is mention made of
eternal judgment, which was taught to children, that they might know, when
all bodies should arise again, then the Lord would set a day of his
judgment, in which he would justify and crown with immortal glory, al
his children, and cast out into darkness and endless condemnation, all the
wicked and reprobate. But, so to have knowledge of this judgment, that we now
behold in faith, how the son of man shall come with majesty, and all his holy
Angels with him: how he shall come with a great cry, with the voice of an
Archangel, and with y^ blast of y^ trumpet of God, that all creatures may heat
his voice, to restore again ye bodies y^ they had consumed, so y^ al nations
and kinreds of men, should stand at once before him, of which he shall make
separation on his right hand, and on his left, to fill the one with life and
glory, and put songs into their mouths of everlasting joy: and to condemn ye
other in hell and death, with shameful crying and gnashing of teeth. To know
this with unspeakable comfort, and long looking for of all the promises of God,
and with fear and trembling at all his heavy threatenings: this is thy strong
meat of eternal judgment, which the Lord God of spirits grant unto us, for
his sons sake, who must needs be unto us a merciful judge, if we do rest in
him as in our only savior. The time is past. Now let us pray. etc.

The xxvij. Lecture, upon the 3. 4. 5. and 6. verses.
3 And this will we do if God permit.

4 For it is impossible that they, which were once lightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,

5 And have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come,

6 If they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance: seeing they
crucify again to them selves the Son of God, and make a mock of him.


WE have heard before, the Apostles exhortation that we should go forward, and
what points of religion he set down meet for children, beyond which we must
go, to know all the mystery of God and Christ. And in these points here
mentioned I told you, as the general knowledge of the^ was milk: so yet
exactly out of the scripture, to understand them as we are taught, even that
also it is strong meat. The Apostle now goes forward, and says: And this
also we will do, if God permit, that is, by the grace of God, we will go
forewarde, we will not be always dull of hearing, and children of
understanding. These words are an encouragement unto them, that they should
not be discomforted: for God would no doubt have mercy upon them, to give
them understanding hearts, and learned minds, to apprehend and see the great
salvation of the Lord. Then, to the end that they should not receive the
graces of God in vain, but use in deed all these good gifts to their own
good benefit, he adds, (because of the great rebellion of some, and hard
hearts that are not easily led) another reason unto his words, which is full of
fear and terror, assuring the^, that the Gospel cannot be preached unto them
in vain, but of force it must needs have his fruit, and be a sweet savor
unto God in Christ, either of life unto life, if they will believe and hearken:
or else of death unto death, if they will be despisers. To this purpose, he
says: For it is impossible to those which are once lightened, and have tasted
the heavenly gift, and have been partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come: if they fall away,
that they should again be renewed by repentanuce: crucifying again unto them
selves, the son of God, and making a mock of him. With these words, no
doubt, he would shake off from them, all carelessness and fleshly security,
which were sunken deep in some, and whose sluggish dullness was not healed
without sharp medicines: and therefore, he uses these words very forceable,
and sharper in deed then any two edged sword, to prick the conscience that
was nigh seared up.

Now (dearly beloved) that we may understand this scripture, and make it
unto us a good comfort, which might seem otherwise a heavy threatening: let
us consider in it, these two things: first, the purpose of the Apostle for
which he speaks it: then, them selves what they signify.

The apostles purpose, is, to stir us up, desirously to hear, diligently to
learn, wisely to increase in knowledge, and obediently to practice that we
have learned: for this purpose it was first spoken, to this end it is now
written: if then it have in us this work, and bring forth this fruit, we
have been profitable hearers, and it is unto us, the Gospel of health, and the
word of life. Let us then, not be as our forefathers were, slow of hearing:
let the word preached be mingled unto us with faith: let us use it to the
glory of God, that knowledge may increase, and righteousness may abound in
our life: and for our parts it skilleth not at all, what this great and
heinous sin should be, of which the Apostle says, man can never repent him:
for be it what it will, it is none of ours. This sin is the sin of those,
that have despised knowledge: but we are desirous to learn more. This sin is
of the contemners of the cross of Christ: but the delight of our life is in
it. This sin is of men, that have made the world their God: but God, whom we
serve, has had mercy upon us, that we account all the world but doung, to
the end we may win Christ: and therefore, whatsoever this sin be, God
himself bears us witness, it is none of the sins which we have committed:
and where so ever they dwell, that are in this condemnation, their tents and
tabernacles are not near us. And is not this a great comfort, and a singular
light rising (as it were) out of darkness: that where there are such sins,
as even the remembrance of them might make our bones to tremble, by their
description we know them, that they are far from us, as the East is from the
West, so that we need not fear. Neither speak I this of mine own head, but
by good warrant of the Apostle himself, and by the word of the holy Ghost:
for after this heavy threatening, says not the Apostle to them immediately,
and says he it not to us this day, that by cause we have loved Gods saints,
and have rejoiced to glorify his name, our state is faster knit unto
salvation, and these heavy things shall never come near us? In this
persuasion of perfect hope, we may stand boldly unto the later end, the
scorners and despisers of whom, you shall hear more hereafter, let them
look, and beware of unrepentant sin. And thus far of the purpose of the
Apostle, by which we being confirmed, that though we should fall through many
infirmities, yet we can never fall away.

We may now more boldly examine the words, to learn as God shall instruct us,
what this sin is: let us therefore come unto the words. For it is
impossible, that they which are once lightened, etc. We see here how the
apostle sets out the sin against y^ holy Ghost, showing who they are which
commit it, what the sin is, and what end it brings. But before we further
examine it, I must admonish you of two contrary faults, which are common unto
us, in speaking of this matter. The one is too much carelessness, the other is
too much fear. Some of us scarce having any conscience at al, or any reverence
of Gods secret judgments, being altogether children, and more ignorant then
children. If at any time talk be of divinity, straight with careless hearts,
and venturous toungs, they are up with predestination, or with sin against
the holy ghost. To these men I say: it were better for them, that they had
neither tongues in their heads, nor hearts in their breasts, then that they
should continue in this irreverent and most ungodly usage: for what do they
else but blaspheme the eternal wisdom of god. At al his words we should fear
and tremble: yet at his greatest mysteries, we are careless and mockers. The
knowledge of his predestination should cast down our proud reason, even to the
ground, to confess before him, that all his judgments are unsearchable, and
al his ways are past finding out: yet we like fools, who though we were braide
in a mortar, yet would not our foolishness depart from us: so foolishly we
examine y^ high judgments of God, to make them agreeable to our blockish
reason. Likewise, the sin against the holy Ghost, which is mentioned to make
us fear, that we be not despisers of the graces of God: but y^ we would love
him, and learn all his judgments, whereby we might assure our selves of his
favor, y^ we cannot possibly sin against his spirit: but whether soever we
fall, he would raise us again: as though this pleased us not, we make no end
of questioning, whether it be this sin, or that sin: when in deed, at all
sins we make but a mock. This fault (deatly beloved) I beseech you take
heed of: pray, that you may cast it from you: then no doubt, in this our
matter, the truth which we seek for, in fear and reverence God will reveal
it unto us. The other fault I spoke of, and of which we must take heed, is to
much fear: for some of us, and they of the best of us, on whom God has showed
singular mercy, greatly to humble them so that they cover their faces, and
hang down their heads at the remembrance of their sins, and hunger and
thirst after the righteousness of Christ, they would not have this spoken of
at all, and every sound of the sin against the holy Ghost does wound the^
as it were to death, for fear least themselves should be holden in the
transgression. To these men what should I say? nay, what can I say? for y^
su^me of all Christ has said, and spoken truly unto the^: fear not my
little flock, for it has pleased your father to give unto you a kingdom: and
if he have given unto Luke. 2. 32.
them a kingdom, purchased with the blood of his only son, how should he not
give also unto the^ y^ victory over sin and death? And now my good brethren
and sisterne, who so ever you be, since you have a spirit that desires
knowledge, delights in obedience, loves God, hates iniquity, rejoice in
this pledge of your salvation: for as the Lord does live, neither this sin,
nor the shadow of this sin, shall come nere unto you: only because it is a
saluinge medicine to many of your brethren, when they be sunken deep in
rebellion: and because it is the mighty word of the Lord, to crushe in pieces
the reprobate before him: therefore I beseech you with glad and faithful ears,
abide the hearing of it, and fear not the smoke, when the fire can not hurt
you. Now, to come to our purpose. In these words of y^ Apostle, I will show unto
you first: what manner of men they must needs be, y^ do fall into this sin.
Secondly, what manner of sin it is. Thirdly, with what manner of mind it is
committed: whereunto at last I will add some examples, that you may see more
clearly what it is. Touching the persons which sin against the holy ghost,
they are described thus by their qualities: first, they have been once
lightened: secondly, they have tasted of the heavenly gift: thirdly, they have
been made partakers of the holy Ghost: fourthly, they have tasted of the good
word of God, and of the powers of y^ world to come. Unto these qualities, we
may add more out of other parts of scripture: in the 12. of Matt. our savior
Christ speaks of such men thus, that the unclean spirit is gone out from
them, that they are swept and garnished: in the 2. Epistle of Peter the 2.
chapter, it is said of them, that they have escaped from the filthiness of the
world, through the knowledge of the Lord, and of our savior Jesus Christ. By
these and such like places we may conclude that God has many ways made
himself known unto them, y^ he has given them true understanding. y^ he
has quickened their spirits to receive gladly his gospel, that they had a
feeling of y^ kingdom of heaven, y^ they have known sin to be full of
misery and vexation of spirit, y^ they have confessed, there is no joy but in
Christ. This is y^ state of knowledge to which they were called, and these are
the graces which they were endued with: whereby we may first conclude, y^ Turks
and infidels, that all Atheists and Epicures, they have not yet sinned against
the holy ghost: not Pharaoh a vessel of Gods wrath, not Sodom and Gomorha
withal their filthiness, not Rabsaketh, or any such who would make them selves
Gods, they have not sinned against the holy Ghost: they are accursed
creatures, and their sins are abominable, they are bondslaues of Satan, and
strangers from the God of Israel: but yet, we may say truly: it shall be
easier for all those of Sodom and Gomorha, for Tire and Sidon in the day of
judgment, then for these wicked blasphemers of the holy spirit, which not
only fulfilled the full measure of these Pagans sins, but have also contemned
the graces, which were given unto them, and despised the spirit of which the
Pagans were never made partakers. Thus briefly I have set forth, what manner
men they be, which may fall away to so great confusion.

And that it may yet be made more plain: let us consider the words, by which
the Apostle describes them. The first mark of them is, that they be
lightened: that is, endued with the knowledge of God: not only by the heavens,
which declare his glory: nor by the firmament, which shows his work: nor by
any of Gods creatures, in which his eternal power and Godhead does appear,
and shine: and of which light, all nations are made partakers: but they are
also lightened with his holy word, which is a lantern to their feet, and
a light unto their steps, and have heard his Gospel preached unto them,
unto the which they have agreed, that it is the word of life. The second note
of them, is, y^ they have tasted of the heavenly gift: the heavenly gift is the
life and great salvation that is in Christ Jesus, by whom we are reconciled,
which likewise our Savior Christ calls the gift of god, speaking John. 4.
to the woman of Samaria: and this is that knowledge, into which they are
lightened by the gospel, and this they do not only know, but of this gift
they have also tasted, which is, they have gladly sometime received it, and
rejoiced in it, like as our Savior Christ describes them by the parable of
the stony ground, that incontinently with joy, they receive the seed: and
which also he notes in Mat. 13.
the Phariseis, speaking of John Baptist which was a shining lamp among them,
and they for a season did rejoice in his light. The third note of these men,
is, that they have been partakers of the holy ghost: which, is that many
graces of the spirit of God have been given unto them, as these two above
named, y^ they are lightened with knowledge, and rejoice in their understanding,
which is neither of flesh nor blood, nor of the will of man, but of the holy
ghost: unto these we may add also others, as y^ gift of miracles, the gifts of
toungs, or any such that God has distributed unto these, even as he will: these
things or any of them, when they have received to the praise of God, and glory
of his holy name, they are made partakers of the holy ghost, and they are
blessed with heavenly blessing. The fourth note is, that they have tasted the
good word of God, not much differing from that he first spoke of, that they
were lightened, that is, that they had knowledge of God, not only by his
creatures, but much more by his word.

But here naming, the good word of God, he notes especially the Gospel, by
comparison with the law: as if he should say: they have known God, not
only by his law, which is fearful to the sinner: but by a more sweet
understanding of the Gospel, which says: Come unto me all you that labor
and are laden, so calling it the good word, as that which is glad tydinges of
salvation: and therefore also good, because they have tasted it good and
joyful, and have seen the glory of it, as the greatest treasure that is
given unto man.

The fifte and last note, here set forth, is, that they know and confess,
that this Gospel has the end eternal life: and Christ is a mighty
Savior, who will keep for ever those whom he has purchased: and he names
the world to come, because the spirit has lightened them, to see the latter
end of this corruptible world, and to know assuredly, that here they have no
dwelling city: but another habitation is made for Gods chosen, not with
mortal hands, but everlasting in Heaven: and calling it the powers, because
it is made so strong in Christ Jesus, that it can never be assaulted: for all
power is given unto him, in Heaven and in Earth: and he has made that
heavenly City glorious for his Saints throughout all worlds.

Thus has the Apostle described those persons, whom he bids beware that
these fall not back to change so great glory into endless shame: for if
they will turn these things vpside down, and the graces that they had
received to Gods glory, abuse them to the reproach of his holy name, it is
impossible they should rise again by repentance.

And thus far, of the persons, what gifts they have received: wherein yet
let us understand a great difference between these men which fall away, and
the gifts which are in Gods elect, that cannot perish, nor ever sin against
the holy Ghost.

First in the measure of grace, that they have received, there is great
difference or rather no comparison: then, their obedience, according to this
grace, is nothing like.

The wicked, are but lyghtened with the beginninges of the Gospel, the elect
are more instructed in the mystery of Godliness. The wicked have but tasted
of the life that is in Christ, the Elect live not them selves, but Christ
lives in them. The wicked are but a little made partakers of the spirit by
some gifts of grace that are within them: the elect are watered so far with
the spirit, that they to be baptized in the death of Christ, to dye unto
sin, to live unto righteousness, so that sin shall not reign in the
mortal body.

The wicked have but tasted the Gospel of Christ, and his saving health: the
elect are fed with his mercyes, and still they hunger and thirst after his
righteousness, and see with exceeding ^oy ye height, the breadth, the length,
the depth, of the mystery of their redemption. The wicked have felt ye world
to come, and have for a little while delighted in it: the elect have their
conversation altogether, and with great gladness look from thence for a
savior, that this life is not dear unto them, but they will hold it forth
in their hands to all persecutions, to finish the short course that they have
here with ^oy. These are great differences, but the greatest is yet behind:
the wicked, they are strangers, even from y^ womb, not ingraffed into the body
of Christ, nor have any feeling of election in them selves: but the godly are
endued with faith and assured hope, that if this earthly tabernacle be
dissolved, they have a dwelling place with GOD himself, who has loved them:
this hope they delight in, in this they live, in this they rest: while this is
assaulted, they despise the world: when this is unshaken, then is their
sorrow: but the wicked, it is not so with them: their hope is not this, for
their joy is only here: when they have examined the secrets of their own
hearts, they shall rather find that their belly is their God: for,
notwithstanding, all the gifs of God that they have received: yet they want
this measure of faith, by which they are persuaded that God is their God, and
their delight is all in the Lord alone. And again, the obedience that they
show in their life, it is not to the true obedience that God requires, as
their faith is no true faith: for God requires this alone, that we love him
with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, with all our
understanding: and that we love our neighbor as our self: but this love is
not in them, nor they have not this end of all their works, that they may
glorify god in all their life: the joys of heaven do somewhat move them, and
the pains of hell, do much astonishe them: they see and know what gods
majesty is unspeakable, and his glory infinite, his favor is better then
life: and his displeasure is intolerable: the glory of his presence, the
fierceness of his wrath: these things do touch them, because they would
escape his judgment: so still it is them selves that they love. If there were,
neither heaven nor hell, they would not care for God, nor Christ: so (as I
said) this is all their obedience, because they love them selves: but the
godly, they obey for the love of God: their own soul is not so dear unto
them, as the name of the Lord, to see it glotified: nor their own life is
precious unto them, if the pouring of it out, may be to the praise of his holy
name. Thus much of the difference, between the good and evil, as touching the
graces of God, which they have both received: whereby we see plain, that faith
and love are two especial properties, by which the good and evil are
distinguished, and by which we may try our selves, if we be lightened, as the
wicked, or as the elect of God. Now let us see the manner of rebellion, how
far they fall away: first, we must observe what points the Apostle has
before named: in the beginning of y^ chapter he me^tioneth repentance from dead
works, faith toward god, the doctrine of baptism, and laying on of hands, and
resurrection from the dead, and eternal judgment, which here he calls y^
beginning and foundation of christian amity: then, he speaks of an apostacy
or falling away from all these points here named, even from the foundation
and first beginnings of the christian faith, so y^ all the former light is
quite put out, and the first understanding is al taken away: they laugh now at
repentance, and the first faith they account it folishnes: they esteem not of
our baptism, no more then of y^ washing of their hands: and for any
confirmation or solemn receiving the^ into the church of God, they care not
for it: the resurrection of the dead does but feed them with merry conceits,
they think pleasantly with them selves, what manner of bodies they shall have the
eternal judgment though it make the^ sometime afraid, yet they encourage the^
selves again, and say, tush, it is a great way off: thus they have turned
light into darkness, knowledge into ignorance, hope into error, faith into
infidelity, glory into shame, and life into death. Speak to the^ of the son
of God, they make a jest with the man of Galilie: tell them of the savior of y^
world, they will call him y^ Carpentars son: such a general apostacy the
Apostle speaks of, and this he calls the fall from which man can not rise
again by repentance: for how can they repent, when the Apostle notes them by
this mark among other, that they are fallen from repentance: they are now (as
S. Paul says) past sorrow for their sins, and as it is in the 2. to the
Romans, they have a heart y^ cannot repent: so says s. Peter, that they have
such eyes as can not cease from sinning. When they have done al things y^ are
abominable, yet they will say, wherein have we sinned? so they contemn,
because they are in y^ deapth, and they cannot return, because they shall find
no grace: they have sinned against the holy ghost, and condemnation is their
portion: they shall never repent, but fall into judgment: and thus far of
their sin, how great it is.

The third thing we have here to consider, is, with what mind they do
commit this great sin which here the apostle sets out, with these
words: they crucify again unto them selves the son of God, and make a
mock of him: which, what can it be else, but even with the spirit of the
devil (as saint Paul says) to say that Christ is accursed: for was not he
made upon his cross, a curse for us, y^ we might be made righteousness to God
through him? they y^ crucify him again, say they not again, y^ he has a
devil, y^ by Beelzebub y^ prince of y^ devils he casts out devils? does not
their heart load him again with all opprobrie and shame? and where it is said,
they do this unto themselves, it notes how desirously and willingly, and with
what consent of mind they do it, even so as they would again have the cross
of Christ a mocking stock in the world: thus their own conscience is their
accuser of most wicked rebellion against God. This also appears plain in the
12. Chapter of Saint Matthew, where when our savior Christ will accuse y^
Phariseis of this great sin, it is said, that he saw their thoughts. So,
in the Acts of the Apostles, where the graces of God are magnified, by the
preaching Act 13. 45.
of Paul and Barnabas, it is said of the Jews, that when they saw it, they
were full of envy, railing, and gainesaying all that Paul and Barnabas had
taught. So again, Paul says to Elymas: O Act^ 13. 10.
thou that art full of all subtlety and mischief. And it is written of Saul
king of Israel, who so highly hated and persecuted David, yet he said:
Behold, 1. Sa. 27. 21.
I know that thou shall be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be
established in thy hand: by these places it is clear, that their conscience
and heart, filled with envy and malice, do make them, with all greediness,
to commit abomination. And according as they have thus cast off God, so God
again has cast off them, and given them up to their own vile affections: so
that it is come unto them, according to the true proverb: The dog is
returned to his vomit: and the swine that is washed to the wallowing in the
mire: their hearts are fat as brawne, that they can not repent: and their
faces as brass, that they can not be ashamed: and therefore their sin is
written with an iron pen, and graven with the point of a Diamond, that it may
be kept in remembrance before the Lord.

And here again we see: the weak consciences that tremble for fear of their
transgressions, and mourn all the day for fear of their sins: they are so
far off, from the sin against the spirit of God, that the spirit cries
in their behalf: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people (says your God) speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry Esai. 40. 1.
unto her, that her warrfare is accomplished, and her iniquity is pardoned:
for she has received of the Lord double for all her sin. Their godly sorrow
has brought forth their repentance, which is unto salvation: and whereof
again, they shall never repent them. Neither let the^ here be discouraged with
the examples of Esau, Judas, or any such, who may seem to have been
sorrowful: for they were not sorroful for their sins, as it is plainly
testified of Esau, that he contemned his birthright, but they lamented their
ruin and condemnation: neither did they love God, but hated their own
punishment: neither did they strive against sin, but gave unto it a kingdom,
with power and will to serve it. But we that feel the law of the spirit,
striving against the law of the flesh, and in all our sins can say with
Saint Paul, that which we would not do, that we do: surely, we know no sin
against the holy ghost: we are sinners, but as Paul was, though our sins
be more in number, and greater in weight: yet God our father, through his son
Jesus Christ, does pardon us, and forgive us all our transgressions. Now,
beside all this that we have hitherto spoken, to conclude, let us see the word
it self by which this sin is named: it is named the sin against the holy
ghost, not against the Godhead of the holy Ghost, for the same God is also
father and son, nor against the person of y^ holy ghost, for it is no greater
then the person of the father, and of the son: but it is to sin against the
graces of the spirit within us, and so to sin against them, that we contemn
and despise the^, tread them under fete, account them profane, and
maliciously carry them away to all wantonnesle. This then is sin against the
holy ghost: in a continual apostacy, and general falling from God, to sin
against thine own conscience, so y^ thou despise the graces of God which he
had given thee to y^ setting out of his praise, and tur^e them to the contempt
of his majesty and glory. Now, a word or two, to show this sin by
examples, and so we will make an end. Our first example let it be Satan him
self, and the Angels which did fall with him: how could they be but lightened
which dwelt in the presence of the father of light? and what outward temptation
could they possibly have, which never had enemy beside them selves? nothing
could possibly be in these, but an apostacy or falling from God: after which,
tho malice of their own mind did seek to rob God of his glory, despising his
goodness, and withholding y^ honor which they knew to be due unto him for
their creation; thus sinning against the spirit of God, they were cast down
into horrible death: neither did ever God give unto them a redemer, by whom
they arise again through repentance. Other examples are not easily sound,
which are clear and manifest before us: yet in many, some appearances are, by
which we may judge, and not lightly be deceived. Caine slew his brother Abel,
and wherefore did he slaye him? because his brothers works were good, and
his were evil. A horible sin, to hate not the man, but the virtue of the
man, and hate it so deadly, that the bond of brotherhod could not pacify it:
neither did he this of ignorance, for god instructed him, bad him leave off his
anger, and lift up his countenance: why should he be malicious to his good
brother? neither was he provoked by any outward thing unto it: for Abel was
obedient to him, as his elder brother: neither did Abels virtue hurt him, but
that in well doing he might be also accepted: but the author of sin, who
wrought in his malicious heart, made him have no regard of all this: one
purpose he had, and that he held, except his brother would be wicked, he would
have no peace with him.

Another example we have in the Scribes and Phariseis: they knew Christ came
from God, and that his miracles were wrought by the spirit of God: and as
Pilate justly accuses them, of envy and malice they sought to put him to
death: their conscience accused them in all their dooinges: they corrupted
Judas with money, to betray him: they hired against him false witnesses: they
bribed the soldiers, after his glorious resurrection, that yet they should
say, his disciples stole him away by night.

This great, wilful, malicious working against the son of God, of men utterly
fallen away from the living God, our savior Christ calls it sin against
the holy Ghost. To these (I think) we may add Iulianus the Emperor, who for
his most wilful renouncing of the Lord Jesus, is called to this day the
Apostata, who was accounted at the first, as Hilarious calls him, a gracious
and religious Emperor, but after being spoiled by philosophy and vain
deceit, he began to account y^ word of God to be but foolishness,
persecuted the professors of it with many mockes and taunts, that they must do
good for evil, and bless where they were cursed: and all his life made a
mock of Christ, calling him in reproach the Carpenters son, and the man of
Galilie, for no occasion but only for this, because he would maliciously
strive against Christ, as plainly appears in his last words, now even
dying, when he lifted his face up to the heavens and said: O man of Galilie,
now thou have got the victory. Thus by examples I have showed that, which
before we heard in the word, that the sin against the Holy Ghost, is a
general apostacy from God, with wilful malice and an unrepentant heart to
persecute his truth unto y^ end: from which sin (dearly beloved) as we are
bound daily to pray that God of his mercy would keep us far from it: so in
the name of God I dare promise unto you, that as many of you as fear at the
remembrance of it, you are as far from it, as the East is from the West: for
this sin is a mocking and scoffing at the son of God: it is not a weeping
and mourning, least you should fall into it. Now let us pray, etc.

To the Reader.
Gentle reader I thought good in this vaca^t place to set down an excellent
speech uttered by the Author of this book a little before his death: whereby
thou may clearly see and learn, that there is a sweet peace in death, to
all such as painefully serve the Lord in life. For he being raised up in bed,
and his friend requesting him to speak, the Sun shone on his face, and
thereby took occasion thus to say:

THere is but one Sun that gives light to the world: there is but one
righteousness: there is but one Communion of Saints. If I were the
excellentest creature in the world: If I were as righteous as Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob (for they were excellent men in the world) yet we must all confess
that we are great sinners, and that there is no salvation but in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. And we have all need of the grace of God. And
for my part, as concerning death, I feel such joy of spirit, that if I should
have the sentence of life on the one side, and the sentence of death on the
other side, I had rather choose a thousand times (seeing God has appointed the
separation) the sentence of death, than the sentence of life.

The prayer which M. Deering used before his Lectures.
O Lord God, which have lest unto us thy holy word to be a lantern unto
our feet, and a light unto our steps, give unto us all, thy holy spirit:
that out of the same word we may learn what is thy eternal will, and frame
our lives in all holy obedience to the same, to thy honor and glory, and
increase of our faith, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Deering

DEring, in earthly life thy heavenly voice did teach
The ruth of sins, the truth of endless grace:
And with thy voice thy life conspired to preach
The praise of God with longing to embrace
The sweet delights wherein his Saints abound.
O blessed Organ of so noble sound.
When thou did cry repentant grief for sin,
When with inspired breath from ghost divine
Thy mouth powrde forth what heart did feel within,
Thy deep desire to draw men to incline
Their listening souls unto the healthful word:
O happy they that turned unto the Lord.
And when thou did his mercy sweet proclaim,
And did with thankful and deliteful voice
Set forth the honor of his saving name,
To quench despair and make the heart rejoice:
O happy hearers of so joyful news,
Unhappy wretches that such joys refuse.
O happy thou, and all that shall with thee
Well follow Him that led and is the way:
They follow well whom He has blessed to see
The path and trust, the guide that cannot stray.
Oh well, he lived whom God did so apply:
Oh well he dyed that lives eternally.
We thank our God for thee and for thy life,
And for the good that he by thee has wrought,
Thy speech thy traua^le in his service rise,
Thy writings left whereby we still be taught.
And in thy death Gods holy name be blessed:
O blessed dead that in the Lord do rest.
FINIS. T. N.

