(...) the most (...) and perfect honorable (...) Sidney Knight, late
Governor of Flushing (...) Famous ^^r Letters and Arms. He received his
(...) at a Battle nere Zu^phen (...) 22 of Septem^: And died at Arn^^^m the 16.
day of October. Ao. 1586.


The Image of Irelande, with a discovery of VVoodkarne, wherein is most lively
expressed, the Nature, and quality of the laid wild Irishe Woodkarne, their
notable aptness, celeritie, and pronesse to Rebellion, and by way of
argument is manifested their original, and ofspryng, their descent and
Pedigree: Also their habit and apparel, is there plainly shown. The
execrable life, and miserable death of Rorie Roge, that famous Archtraitour to
God and the Croune (otherwise called Rorie Oge) is likewise discribed. Lastly
the coming in of Thyrlaghe Leonaghe the great Oneale of Irelande, with the
effect of his submission, to the right honorable Sir Henry Sidney (Lord
Deputy of the said land) is thereto adjoined. Made and devised by Ihon
Derricke, Anno 1578. and now published and set forth by the said author this
present year of our Lord 1581. for pleasure and delight of the well disposed
reader.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Day. 1581.

To the right worshipful Master Phillip Sidney Esquire, Soonne and heir to
the right honorable sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, Lord President of Wales, and Merches of the same, Lord deputy
general of her highness realm in Irelande, and one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel in England, Ihon Derricke wishes perfect
felicity in Christ, AMEN.
Considering with my self (rig^t worshipful) that it is not only sufficient
for men toward their benefactors, to bear an inward affection, and mind
gratulatorie for benefits received, but also, that some outward and external
token, of necessity be thereto adjoined, lively to express outwardly, the
secret affectes of the same, though notwithstanding inward good will, be
such an excellent virtue, as who so ever has it, sta^des partly in security,
but who soever has and expresses it, to him is all thing made sure: Even so,
and for because I have ^uer studied, and employed my diligence, to flee
unthankfulness, that notable vice detested of God and man, and to embrace
gratefulness, that heavenly Sacrifice, approved of God, manifestyng it to the
whole world, in discharge of my duty toward my Lord your father, whom for
many respects, unfeignedly I honor, and in him to your worship as a pattre^ of
all benignity, proceeding from so honorable a kindrede, with all semely
reverence I worship, I say with all humility, sincerity, and integrity of
mind, as a notable argument of my unfeigned good will, these my labors being
the fruits of my travel, I humbly do offer, assuryng my self of your
favorable countenance therein, to whose protection I am so much the more
bolder to comme^de them, by how much I understand your excellent Nature
toward all laudable exercises. And though (peradventure) some will impute me
arrogante, and passing presumptuous in attemptyng the same: Having respect but
only to the naked parts of the outward gift and giver, not waiyng the inward
motion of the mind, whereof the outward accions spryng, nor yet sufficiently
ponderyng, that as it is impossible, for fire to be without heat or the Sun
without brightness, no more can the good meaning of the good be for ever
repressed, but that at the last it bursteth forth and is made manifest,
showing it self openly much like the flames of fire, after a thick and
smouldryng smoke: not yet diligently considering, like wise and cunnyng
Carpenters, that by how much the weaker a house and buildyng is, by so much
the stronger ought the posts and pillars to be, (I say) they having regard
to none of these things, or at the least not fully considering them,
neither remembryng how commendable a thing it is, for every creature to yield
his fruit simplye in his natural kind, without coloring or dissimulation,
be it little or much, but rather casting their eyes like senseless beasts
down to the ground, chauntyng upon the outward Elements, damnyng, and
condemnyng those external actions, signs, and tokens, and as vain,
frivolous, and of no effect, yet not withstandyng this may not discomfort me
in that which I have here determined, but that (maugree their beardes) my good
will must appear, giuyng them to understand, that it is as possible for
them, to put the whole seas, into a leather Bottle, and to drive all the
VVoodkarne of Irelande, into one Shepheardes bag, or Satchell, as it is to
drive me from my pretended purpose, because I know it consists in your
worshippes free choice, and liberty, to make both the gift, and giver, seem
sufficient worthy, etc. Thus being emboldened through fame of your courtesy,
with hope of remission for this my temeritie, I duetifullie end, besechyng God
to preserve your worship, in good health, and long life, with much increase of
worship, and honor, etc. At Dublin her Majesty's cheef City in Irelande, xvj.
of June. M.D.LXXVIII.

Your worshippes most humble Ihon Derricke.

To the right honorable and my very good Lords, the Lords of her Majesty's
realm of Irelande, and to all other in general of the said land, being
lovers of virtue, and imbracers of civility: grace be multiplied, and peace
everlasting.
IT may be thought (right honorable) and likewise be imagined of some, who
peradventure) readyng this my little treatise, of the Image of Irelande, with a
conscience corrupted, to be a thing devised and set forth, in reproach of
all the Nobility, and others, borne within this Realm of Irelande, as though
the party, meant nothing else but a mere contempt of so many Noble, and
worshipful personages, and that this title of Woodkarne, should be but a
covert, to shroude him from suspicion of the former allegation: Truth is my
very good Lords, if credit may be given to the artificer, simply as he
means, the substance is all one, (the matter I mean) to the very Title, of
that which is here called Woodkarne, who dissalowyng their Karnishe manners,
affirm their dissolute life, and inordinate living, better to pertain unto
Infidelles, and Heathen, then for those which in any respect profess the
name of Christ, (and what Christians they be, right honorable judge ye)
wherefore be ye not then offended, O ye friends of vertile* and imbracers of
civility, that I should so fore loathe, or enuaigh their far unseemly
manners, setting out in lively protractours, in contempnyng the same, both
their shape, and execrable accions, for (in very troth) my heart abhors
their dealings, and my soul does detest their wild shamrocke manners, yea
so much the rather, because there is no society, or fellowship between God,
and the Devil, little amity between the Wolf and the Lamb: like good will,
between a Rebel, and a faithful Subject. Now for as much then, as things
with their co^traries agree not, I most humbly beseech your courtesies, not
to deem the reprehension of these wild wanto^ Woodkarne, to be spoken of all
men in general, which is here meant but of some, of those I say, that are
Rebels to our (Queen) enemies to peace, and disturbers of the common
wealth, as for your (Honors) in good time be it spoken, and void of
flattery recited, who knows not, what festination by your Lordshipps has
been used, what godly care taken, what means practiced, what policy showed,
and diligence bestowed at all times (as occasion served) to serve, accompanied
either with the Lord Deputy, or by your Lordshipps alone, against those whom
I have here termed by the name of Woodkarne bestowyng not only your
trauelles, adjoined with great charges, but also ventred your lives in
aduauncyng her Majesty's honor, showing thereby, both a con^^ant faith, a
perfect fidelity, to her royal Croune, conflictyng by force of maine
batteil, many of these monsters, being sworn enemies to her noble grace, the
attempt whereof was laudable, and the action meritorious, before GOD and man.
This I trust may suffice (right honorable) your noble wisdoms, to withdraw
all sinister suspicions from your suppliant, and his book, giuyng full
credit, my purposed intent is not, neither yet ever was, to b^emishe any
man's renown, (being approved seruitours to her most noble and dreadful
scepter) whose continuance, I pray GOD, may be long and joyful, peaceable
as the days of Solomon, copyng with the long years of Ne^^or, to govern us
her people, with an admirable regimente, and over her foes, triumphantly to
reign. Amen. God bless your honors, with all manner of spiritual, and
yearthly blessyng^s, the favor, and love of God and manne, much honor in
your country: and to conclude, life everlasting etc.

Your honors most humble Ihon Derricke.

To the good and gentle Reader in all places wheresoever, but especially, to my
loving countrymen of Enlande, hearty salutations, and greetyng ever.
Diverse were the causes (good Reader) that moved me first to take in hand, the
caruyng forth of this Image, and lastly to commend it to thy gentle devotion,
hoping, that as with no small labor, and travel I have finishte, and brought
it to this perfection, and with no less willing consent, and single mind have
made it serviceable at thy good pleasure to use, so likewise on thy part, thou
will freendly accept the same, entertainyng it as a stranger, or messenger
come from a far Cou^^^e^, simply to report, and deliver unto thee, the state
and condition of his said Countremen the Woodkarne, without any imparyng of
their credites, the more notable members of the same, who differyng from them,
in their rusticall ^udenesse, do agree wholly with us, in all laudable
discipline. Touching which causes, though they be many, and as I said before
diverse, two yet especially, I thought good to signify, whereof, the one came
of a duetifull affection, and vnfarned good will (drawn of long continuance
through graces received) toward his person, which undoubtedly I honor, and
the other of a bounden duty, (through love inseparable) toward my native
Country: Or which two, though either of them were sufficient to move any man
(if he were not a forgetful person) to like indeuer, yet seeing they are
variable, an^ ^^he of them so laudable, I might in no wise slacken my pretended
purpose, but show my hearty good will, both to freende and country. If you
therefore (my beloved countrymen) for whose sakes (as I said before partly I
framed it, and for whose greater delight, I have clothed it with variety,
shall deem it worthy of your custody, or receive thereby any profitable,
pleasure, I obtain not only my expectation, touching such courtesy, but
also full recompense, of all my whole charges, (who doubtless accoumpte them
nothing, to pleasure either party). And if (by way of digression) some
peradventure (whose judgments are parciall in other men's labors) shall
cavil at this my imprinted Image, or impugn the things therein contained (as
reportyng matters of untruth) especially the third lease of this discovered
Woodkarne, affirmyng no such rudeness, in these our days to be practiced
with the rudeste of that most barbarous Nation, to such I reply (crauyng
their patience) saying, that it is not our English Pale, which in any
respect I have touched, nor yet those of the Southe, whom I have impeched, nor
yet of the Weste, whom I have nipped, but a people out of the North, whose
vsages I behold after the fashon there set down, and those are they whom I
have detected, shadowyng notwithstanding part of their manners with flowers of
that Country, and least peradventure ye might muse whom I meante, I will not
be curious in dischargyng my conscience, lettyng you understand, that they are
a people sprung from Macke Swine, a barbarous offspring, come from that Nation,
which may be perceived by their Hoggis^e fashion: So as my beloved
countrymen, and well desposed Reader, if wilfulness blind not the fightes of
your judgments) it manifestly appears, and may easily be coniectured,
that it is not against any one good member of this Common wealth of Irelande,
that I have made my discovery, but only against the pernicious Uipers of the
said land, which thing I wish heartily each one to believe, and credit,
knowing (for example sake) that war is not waged, against the Queens
friends, not yet a battle fought, save only against her enemies, which if
you so credit, and therewithal accept of my trauelles, (which do represent
my unfeigned good will) I leave not this simply as a pledge of a further
benevolence with you, but therewithal do paune even my credit, for
accomplishyng my promise, till which time farewell as your hearts can desire.

Yours as his own Ihon Derricke.

The first part of the Image of Irelande.
THe The aucthor in this his first beginning, shows that GOD was the only
cause, which moved him to write and set out this his works, helpyng and
favorably supportyng him in the same, who being otherwise insufficient, and
not able of him self to do the same, but by the goodness and furtheraunce of
God, yeldeth to him due honor therefore.
heavenly God puissant Prince,
the'ternall king of grace:
The lord which rules both heaven and earth,
with his Imperial mace.
Which caused first the cristall Skies,
in lively forms appear,
And by the course of glistryng Pheabe,
divided eke the year.
Which did the loathsome Chaos part,
and separate a sonder:
And plaste the earth above the Sease,
for mortal men to wonder.
Which gave commandment to the same,
in Natures perfect kind.
To multiply and yield the'ncrease,
to those that came behind:
(Which was to man as then not made,
a famous creature sure:)
Of all the works of mighty Jove,
(renowned rare and pure:)
Which gave him reason from above,
his will to understand:
Upholdyng heaven and earth likewise,
with his most holy hand.
Which did reduce from bale to bliss,
the wretched state of man:
And in exchange the sacred heavens,
allotted to him than.
(Not for the good desartes he saw,
in mortal flesh to be:
But merely of his own accord,
that grace extenden he.)
Which made the seat of Brittishe kings,
with honor to abound:
And eke their just deserved fame,
through glom'ryng world to sound.
Suppressyng all their mortal foes,
that up against them rose:
And by the force of bloody blade,
afflicted ever those.
Foreign Princes, Nations and Countries, can witness of the honorable estate
and Royalty of the kings of England since the time it was enhabited.
This sondrie Lands can testify,
as stories witness yield:
And we the fruit thereof do reap,
as from a fartile feeld.
Which to relate in this discourse,
I deem it not amiss:
Because I judge the same to show,
Probations.
a pleasant story is.
Prince Arthure is here brought forth as an vnreprobable testes (being as it
were) a most famous River that waters the face of ye whole earth, with the
streams of his immortal fame and renown.
And to begin with Marses knight,
that mighty man of of war:
Whose fame might not suffice the world,
but peerst the highest Star.
Who now though shrouded in the earth,
with body tournd to claye:
Yet ever living with the just,
and shall from day to day.
Who never made his back return,
once enterde in the feeld:
Till he had made the stoutest foes,
their stately Scepters yield.
And brought by Marciall force of arms,
their honor to the duste:
By pluckyng down their cheifest stays,
whereon their hope did trust,
Prince Arthure is that noble king, The honor of king Arthure his Acts,
manhood, conquestes Magnanimity, Chivalry, and what else, in chronicles are
sufficiently set out, to the great comfort and consolation of all Britishe
and English men's hearts.

whose fame and great report:
Stirde up the Nobles of the world,
to seek unto his Court.
This is the Prince whose courage stout,
his credit did advance:
This is the man that raignde as King,
in Britain and in France.
This is the knight whose bloody blade,
obtained Caesar's Croune:
This is the man that brought at last,
the haughty Romans down.
This is that thrice renowned knight,
whom stories do commend:
This is the Prince whose fame and name,
Dame honor does defend.
Thus here of this victorious knight,
I make a small end:
And to the kings of like renown,
in later years descend.
Wherefore attentive Lordyngs be,
your listnyng ears to fill:
For breefly of them will I speak,
according to my skill.
And as with Arthure I began,
so will I here proceade:
King Henry the second as Chronicles record for wisdom, knowledge, and
judgment was holden famous throughout the world in so much as Emperors,
(namely the Emperor of Rome, and of Constantinople) hearing of his notable
wisdom, sent by their Ambassadors to have his resolution and judgment in
great matters of strife and conte^tion. Read more of this Kings glory his
wealth and possess^ons in master Foxes Ecclesiastical history, I mean the
Acts and monumentes.
To write of Henry's noble name,
the second as I read.
To show his magnanimity,
in wrightyngs comprehended,
And other graces specially,
in Chronicles remembered.
For he it is which mightily,
augments our Countries fame:
And in his time most roially,
defended eke the same.
He is that second Solomon,
as writings do importe,
Which filde all corners of the world,
with fame of his report.
Which moude both Kings and Emperors,
and Princes far and near:
To draw unto his noble Court,
his wisdom for to hear.
He shows the cause why king Henry was had in such honor and great
admiration
For why, his domes were purely given,
in matters of debate:
He was an vmpere equally,
to every kind of state.
He forste not principallitie,
nor yet regarded might:
In every cause especially,
respected he the right.
For which his actions purely done,
by wisdoms rules approved:
Of Princes, Kings, and Emperors,
he highly was beloved.
Thus was he counted in his days,
the wisest under Son:
Through Europe and beyond those parts,
so far his fame did run.
And as for his possessions,
so largely they extended:
As never Prince before nor since,
had like as is remembered.
O King these things assuredly,
deserve to be enrolde:
And graven in tables sumptuously
made all of beaten gold.
The Scepter of the noble Relame of England, daiely more and more increased in
honor and fame, being as the Sun in the firmament of heaven, that casts ye
beams of his shine unto the vttermoste parts of the world, so that nothing
might be hid from the heat and presence thereof.
But did the glory of the Realm,
from thence forth ginne to cease?
Or did it not like the Laurel tree,
in freshness still increase?
Did not the Princes of the same,
by Marciall acts maintain?
The garlande of immortal fame,
that others erst did gain?
Go look and search the monumentes,
and there you shall behold:
That there their names among the best,
dame Honor has enrolde.
There shall you see the famous Prince,
in prease of worthies stand:
Even cheek by cheek to mighty Mars,
with dreadful sword in hand.
There shall you see dame Honor brave,
amide the golden rays:
This noble prices banner vaunce,
to his eternal praise.
Prince Edward is that noble Knight, Prince Edward the third is here a noble
testimony, to approve the above said allegation, being in his time most
excellent on earth, as in Chronicles is reported.

the third King of that name:
Approved in the Mysteries,
of Marses warlike game.
This is the Prince whose royal acts,
were known by sea and land:
This is the knight whose presence durst,
no foreign King withstand.
This is the prince whose co^quryng sword,
possessed a double Croune:
This is the manne that made his foes,
on every side come down.
King Edward not abiding the mallepartnesse of the dronken Pope of Rome, which
needs would be a stickler twixt him and the French King, stands at
defiaunce both with French King and Pope, and offers to fight hand to hand
with them both, which when the Pope understands, like a Coward, or rather
like a snaile in a shell, draws in his horns, for fear of a broken Costerd,
and quietly suffers this noble King Edward according his pleasure, to execute
the force of his sword against his adversary, which brave example if al other
kings would follow and imitate, the beast would beware how he entermedled
with Princes matters, impertinent to his calling.
This is the manne whose valiant heart,
for trial of his right:
Did proffer against the Romish Pope,
even hand to hand to fight.
But durst the Popes heroical heart,
take thoffer of the King?
No, no, the fool was wise enough,
he feared an other thing.
He knew that if he had assaied,
to tempt him in his rage:
That captive should he yield him self,
or leave his heart to gage.
Wherefore to save his credit then,
he knew no way but one:
Which was to take the Keys, and leave
the sword to him a lone.
For Peter needs must silence keep,
when Paul steps forth in place:
And know we not how Paul withstoode,
saint Peter to his face?
This thing importes a mystery,
of which here to dispute:
I purpose not, but leave the same,
for others to confute.
Yet might I say my mind therein
as some before have done:
But that I see the day forbiddes,
and time is almost run.
I see how Nox her self applies,
to shade sir Phoebus light.
But let the toothlesse crabbed queen,
boil in her own despite.
Yea let her ever frettyng live,
and pinyng fade away:
A just reward for such a drabbe,
her malice to bewraie.
But as for Phebe, you holy ones,
grant he may flourishe still:
And to the endyng of my work,
Lord guide my quiuryng quill.
When thus this high and mighty Prince, King Edward having long ruled the
scepter of his Kingdom with glory and great honor, resigned the same up to
his successors, who also augmente the fame thereof, and in his posterity is
more excellent then his antecessours, as in the tradations of histories is at
large discussed.

whose glory did extend:
Throughout all corners of the world,
even to the furthest end.
Had ruled, and rainde, and wealde the mace,
and Scepter of this land:
Long times and days and many years,
as wrighters bear in hand.
At length as all things has a time,
to spryng, to grow, and crease:
And back again in elder years,
to wither, fade, and cease.
Much like the sweet and pleasant herb,
or fragrant sentiue flower:
That rises bravely for a time,
and falls in an hour.
Or as the ancient aged Oak,
sometime of passing strength,
But yet through sondrie winters storms,
a feeble tree at length.
Or rather like the gallant Sun,
(that golden fiery ball:)
Which having past the top of heaven,
declineth to the fall.
Even so this famous peerlesse prince,
(that precious pearl of price:)
Through all the hosts and cope of heaven,
(renowned famous thrice.)
At last by Death arested was,
and forced to resign:
The things he conqu'red by the sword,
as which from royal line.
Did erst descend, surrendering them
to other noble Kings:
Whose praises all each sacred Dame,
in heavenly ditties synges.
Though sonderie of King Edwardes successors deserved immortal renown, who^
severally I omitted here to entreat of, yet amongst them all, one of late
memory I thought fit for proof and arguments sake to set forth as an
undoubted pattern of all Nobility, which is meant of King Henry the eight.
Amongst the which (though they deserve,
to have immortal fame:)
Yet here of one his praise to wright,
it joys my hand to frame.
The only look and countenance of King Henry the eight, was sufficient to
discomfort an host of men.
It gladdes my heart to name him once,
to bring him forth in place:
For him that only durst des^e,
his enemies to their face.
King Henry being at war with the French retains the Emperor to serve under
his standred, and there withal makes his foes to taste bitterly of the rod of
his correction, for his Majesty would not abide to be dallied withal.
He, he it is, and none but he,
in these our latter days:
Through Europe, and beyond parts,
has won like noble praise.
King Henry that most famous Prince,
the eight I mean by name:
Which left behind him for his deeds,
so high renown and fame.
This is the Prince whose only looks,
made diverse Nations quake:
This is the manne that made likewise,
huge towers and holds to shake.
King Henry waiyng with him self, what a miserable plague it was for him self,
his people and kingdom, to be subject unto the Pope of Rome (that presumpteous
Prelate to the admiration of all the world, vnhorseth the Pope, and makes him
go on foot (with a mischeef) where as before he spared not to ride in the necks
of Christan Emperors and Kings far better then him self. (So courageous was
ye excellent king) as therein he enterprised that which all the potentates of
ye world durst not attempt besides.
This is the Prince that did retain,
the Emperor in his band:
This is that knight that made his foes,
to feel his heavy hand.
King Henry waiyng with him self, what a miserable plague it was for him self,
his people and kingdom, to be subject unto the Pope of Rome (that presumpteous
Prelate to the admiration of all the world, vnhorseth the Pope, and makes him
go on foot (with a mischeef) where as before he spared not to ride in the necks
of Christan Emperors and Kings far better then him self. (So courageous was
ye excellent king) as therein he enterprised that which all the potentates of
ye world durst not attempt besides.
This is the Prince that of himself,
did hold the stately Croune:
This is the manne that durst attempt,
to throw the Papists down.
This is the Prince that freedom got,
to this his Country soil:
This is the manne that put the Pope,
and Popish foes to foil.
This is the manne that made his Bulls,
go flittyng down the streams:
And thrust out all his peltyng trashe,
The honor of King Henry is triple augme^ted in his successors (especially in
the government of our gracious and Sovereign Lady the queen's most
excellent majesty) who not only has continued in ye course of her Father,
by suppressyng ye pope but with more severity has holden his nose down to the
grindestone, as by continual grindyng it is almost worn out to the gristle and
bare stumps. The honor of our good Queen in her excellency is here in
published.

Queen Elizabethes sacred arm, as ye pope says, has given him such a cut
overthwart his Monkishe visnamie, that he is in dout whether he shall ever be
able to be cured of the wound, his Cardinals are utterly disco^forted, his
Chiturgians have given him over as all his doctors do doubt. The great care
of her majesty is ever in sekyng out the way by which she may govern her
people and country with al godliness tra^quillite and peace. The life and blood
of her Majesty (which GOD for his mercy preserve and maintain) is not to
dear in her Graces sight, for the preservation of her people and Country, but
that she would if occasion served (as God forbid that we should see that day
to be so distressed) both venture an hazard for defense of the same for which
God be^ praised, and her Majesty honored (a singular token of a most godly
and christian prince.) The aucthor stirs up all Christian people and true
subjects to give forth a sign of their hearty good will, and love toward
her sacred Majesty, by adding) Amen) to that which he before prayed for.

Here the aucthour exhorts al estates and degrees of men to pray for the
prosperity of her Grace, that God would be on her right hand, continually
giuyng good success to all her highness enterprises, (that she with us her
loyal and obedient subjects, and we with her our right dread and sovereign
Queen, the true anointed of the Lord) may reign, and live together in all
peace and godliness, to the honor and glory of God for ever.


out of his highness Realms.
This is the manne whose royal acts,
have won eternal fame:
Amongst the saints and sons of men,
deseruyng well the same.
But yet O King especially,
thrice famous art thou calde:
Through her which in the self same throne
of honor now is stalde.
I mean our (gracious sovereign Queen,
that sacred virgin pure:)
Whose reign God grant th^ice Nestors years,
with honor to endu^e.
This is the Prince whos^ worthy fame,
does live and reign for ever:
This is the Queen whose noble name,
can be defaced never.
This is the Prince which in her days,
wrought wonders in her land:
And made her foes like herds of Sheep^,
amazed for to stand.
This is the Prince whose sacred arm.
has wounded so the Pope:
That to recover his former strength,
he lives void of hope.
This is the Prince which to her Realms,
procures rest and peace:
This is the Queen that causes wars,
and bloody broiles to cease.
This is the Prince that little cares,
to hazard life or blood.
This is the Queen that nothing spares,
to do her people good.
O gifts of rare variety,
adornyng Princes grace:
Stand up eternal memory,
Elizas fame to blaze.
O perfect magnanimity,
thy fame continue ever:
As does the Son in circled Skies,
who^^ ^ight decreaseth never.
And euerla^^^^^ may thou live,
to (...)
To which (...) say,
unfeignedly (...)
O pray for her (...),
you people of her land:
That God may prosper happily,
what so she takes in hand.
That God may favor graciously,
the things she has begone:
That she with us, and we with her
a blessed race may run.
In this as in all other things, In all our petitions, actio^^, and requests,
we must refer the success ever to the good will and pleasure of God.

The cause why we should yield our will to Gods will is, because he is even
still ye self same thing that never changes nor alters his intent or purpose,
established in his secret counsel, but as he does and has purposed, so also
in time convenient does likewise accomplish by which we may perceive his
excellent purity.



the almighty's will be done:
Since nothing may prevent his grace,
or godly purpose shonne.
For why? he is that self same God,
that never alters kind:
(A God I say most excellent,
and of a constant mind.)
Which never does forsake the thing,
once taken in his protection:
Nor yet rejects utterly,
which is in his election.
(He is a God omnipotent)
on whom the world depends:
Whose vigor, force, and celsitude,
through every part extends.
(A royal God immencible)
that can not be inclined:
To change from all eternity,
his sacred purpose minded.
But that which his Deuinitie,
before all ages formed:
In his eternal secrecy,
shall doubtless be performed.
This is a portion of that which in the beginning was alleged, where it is
said, that God was ye cause principal, whereby the mind of the aucthor was
mightily enflamed to write some pleasant History, but wiste not what, till at
length by the self same cause he was enstructed and taught what he should
write, as more fully hereafter to set down.
This holy and immortal God,
even he I must confess:
Did stir me up most studiously,
my senses to address.
To write some pleasant history,
I musyngly began:
The aucthour is not ashamed to acknoweledge his imbecillitie, of him self
unable to bring to pass any notable exploite, save only that he depends on
Gods direction to fluishe the thing his goodness shall begin.
For to consider warely,
of what it should be than.
I was no fit Astronomer,
to treat upon the Stars:
Nor yet trainde up in Marsis court,
to tell of bloody wars.
I was no famous Orator,
nor crafty manne of Law:
Better to be mere ignorant, then to be over skillful to the hurt of other.
Which from a but of Muskadine,
a tun of Malmessies draw.
Nor yet recounted excellent,
in those high mist'ries seven:
By which I might upon mine oath,
tell what is done in heaven.
I was not of God Neptunes Court,
as Pirates be on sease:
I deemde it far a better life,
(though poor) to live at ease.
Meaning not acquainted in the science of Usurie, whereby he might have had
good occasion and matter to write of.
I was not skilful in their trades
which give out gold to gain:
No, no, I dare auouche such saints,
my pouche did never stain.
Nor yet with Merchant venterers, The aucthour still procedyng on in the
description of his imperfection, and having felt the ground of his knowledge,
seeing him self to be altogether unfurnished of that, which in historiographers
is required (does as it) were ask a question, how it were possible for him to
accomplish the thing he gladly desired, whereunto he makes answer, alledgyng
though in his own eyes he seemed insufficient, yet God who governs all
things, bids him but add to his good will, and he would further him in the
rest.

(those were too high for me:)
Unneath to show their famous slight,
acquainted might I be:
I found not in me verelie,
of wrighters that is required:
How might I then perform the thing,
my soul and heart desired?
But he that works all in all,
did will me forward venture:
And he would aid me warlike wise,
strong towers and holds to enter.
Whereon I took such heart of grace,
as with a joyful mind:
I marched forth in steadfast hope,
some good success to ^inde.
In which my trauells suerly,
he did so we^l attend me:
As nothing could be deemed fit,
but forthwith did he send me.
He gave me to associate,
a chosen Crewe of Dames
Three principal things are to be retained of every Chronicler and writer of
Histories, (that is to say) Invention, Memory, and pleasant Conueiance
without which, what soever a man does is altogether unsavory.
Invention, with good Memory,
these were their perfect names.
To whom Conueighaunce was adjoined,
as Corp'rall to the band:
Conuaiyng each thing pretily,
what so they took in hand.
With these I venterde forwardlie,
to prosecute with speed:
What so my heart assuredly,
had long before decreed.
The aucthour at last through many days trauail, obtains the Port and Haven
of rest, where his three foresaid companions Invention, Memory and
Conueighaunce, consultyng together, agree and conculde that he should entre^t
upon the Irishe soil and inhabitauntes of the same, with the fertility of the
ground.
And having now the loathsome goulfe,
of deep Despair well paste:
We did approach Thelysiane feelds,
of comfort at the last.
Where all the Crewe of heavenly Dames,
with one consent began:
To sit them down, and on my cause,
advisedly to scanne.
In which high court of Parliament,
it was concluded on:
That of the famous Irishe soil,
I should enlarge upon.
Mark the preparation made for the aucthour, lest peradventure he might
relate ought amiss, and so by false discovery of things therein contained,
roune in danger of reprofe, whereunto the nature of the Cauiller is passyngly
addicted.
And least thereof in any part,
I might relate a miss:
By reason of the longitude,
or latitude, there is.
A goodly brave Piramides,
erected passing high:
From whence all corners of the land,
I might at large discrie.
From whence I did behold and see,
most noble slowyng streams: By these flo^wyng stremes are meant, the goodly
Havens and Rivers through every part of Irelande, most famous for marchantes,
in which rivers also are store, change, and choice of all fine and delicate
fishes, and that in most abondant sort, a notable pleasure and necessary
commodity for a common wealth, and this is the first part concerning the
waters

Fit for the Marchantes of the world,
to sail from foreign Realms.
Wherein were sondrie store of beasts,
in waters that do live:
To whom their proper names I am,
unable for to give.
Yet were they such as do maintain,
and serve for common wealth:
By yeeldyng plenty to the soil,
where store of people dwelth.
Yea such and such (if credit may,
be given unto me than:)
As do refreshe the hongrie soul,
and serve the use of man.
All which I saw abondantlie,
a loose where I did stand:
As the Rivers of Irelande are notable famous for the variety of all manner of
fisshes, given in most plentiful manner, so is the land far more renowned
for her situation, pleasant air operation, and goodly store of all manner of
cattle behofefull for the land, and for all kind of wildfoule for pleasure
and profit of man, as in the discourse thereof shall spedely be set out.
But far more brauer things then those,
upon the stable land.
I there beheld how ^urie part,
and percell was conuaide:
With hills, an^ woods and champion ground,
most artificial laid.
The hills d^rectly ronnyng forth,
and turnyng in a genne:
Much like a sort of crooked mates,
and ouertwhartyng men.
The description of the woods of Irelande.
The woods above and neath those hills,
some twenty miles in length:
Round compaste with a shaking bogge,
a forte of passing strength.
From whence a certain fire is drawn,
to sheeld from Winters cold:
Whereas Poh Morishe hides himself,
as in a fenced hold.
The discovery of the Irish Nymphs, their pleasures, pastymes, and
accustomable vsages, wherein daiely they are occupied, are ^^guratiuely
expressed.
The Nymphs of sondrie matrones, I
have hard do there resort:
As time and fit occasions serve,
to use for their disporte.
Some for to shade them from the heat,
and some an other thing:
According as the rain does fall,
so do the flowers spryng.
One does rejoice to spend the day,
in plaiyng Barlibrake.
An other does (I mean no harm)
as great a comfort take.
This Nimphe does joy to scudd a longest,
the wood and riuerse side:
But she in snortyng in a bushe,
Receiu'th as great a pride.
These do inuit the Murm'ryng brooks,
these diue and rise again:
And bathyng in their sweet delights,
so long they do remain.
Till Cupid toul'th his sacryng bell,
to enter other Rites:
Ah would'treuiue a man half dedde? This do expound the true meaning of
the rest that went before.

to see those naked Sprites?
To see what games they can devise,
and sondrie pastymes make:
Twould cause I do assure you,
a Horse his halter brake.
To dance attendaunce on those Dames*
with reverent service then:
To weight upon them in that case.
it forces sondrie men.
These Nymphs deserves eternal memory for their holy conversation: yea,
though it were but with Asmodious the Devil of hell: For pity it were if they
should not be remembered somwhere and since they are not thought upon in
heaven, give them leave to be had in memory in hell.
O Nymphs of lastyng Memory,
your virtuous actions rare:
With Venus for integrity,
I freely may compare.
With Venus for agilitie,
(speak I of venial sin:)
In her celestial paradise,
ought you to enter in.
The cause why these Nymphs are worthy of such remembrance is because of ye
great pain and labor they took in the land in bryngyng forth fruit after
their kind.
For you are they which store the ground,
with fruits of your increase:
And make it daiely to abound,
(mean I with rest and peace?)
With little Nymphs and mountain Gods
transformed now and then:
From Bores to Bears, and yet sometime,
resemblyng honest men.
From whence there flows as from a spring,
an other generation:
The generation of these wood Nymphs are in their kind more craftier then ye
Foxes more frettyng then Bores, and terribler tha^ Bears, working by secret
conspiracies the subversion, ruin, and destruction of the hurtlesse creatures
of the land.
More subtle then the Foxes are,
in their imagination.
Who as they grow in elder years,
and springyng rise in strength:
So do they work the Realms anoye,
and hinderaunce at the length.
So do they work the lands decaie,
procuryng what they can:
The ruin and undoing quight,
of many an honest manne.
The Aucthour seeing the great inconveniences that happen daily by the
retaining of such a pestiferous generation, gives counsel to all those that
love their own saftie and security to rid their hands of them, least
retainyng and still maintaining them they do but foster a wolf, and cherishe
a sarpent, which are ready daily both to devour, and destroy them.
This is a thing that every one,
had need to look upon:
For else too late the door is shut,
when as the steed is gone.
And since the pale is often plag'de,
with such a hellishe sort:
Let that suffice, and let us all,
be warnde by true report.
So shall we shonne the dangrous snares,
our secret foes have set:
And ouerpasse the hunters toiles,
and Foulers crafty net.
So shall we fly the traitrous grinnes,
that treasons might procure:
And in a tower of strong defense,
our safties all assure.
The aucthour continuing in his exhortation thereby to drive it more deper into
the hearts of men brings forth a similitude of a tode and a crocadill,
signifiyng that it is all one equal security for a man to sleep with all
those poysonyng worms, as it is to keep about him those members before
specified, for (in conclusion) the worms can but poison them, and they murder
them, so that both of them do work all one effe^^te which is death.
We know by good experience,
it is a dangerous thing:
For one into his naked bed,
a poysning Tode to bring.
Or else a deadly Crocadile,
when as he goes to rest:
To lead with him, and as his mate,
to place next to his breast.
The mischeef thereof certainly,
is this that does ensewe:
Even nothing but a ^odain death,
to careless persons dew.
Then since the harm is manifest,
consent with willing mind:
To rid your hands from such a sort,
for Catte will after kind.
And be not witched evermore,
with their external sight:
For why should men of Th'englishe pale,
in such a Crewe delight?
Or eke repose such confidence,
in that unhappy race:
Since mischeef lurketh oftentimes
even in the smothest face?
Be not deceiude, It is a true saying* prevent the worste and the best shall
save it self.
prevent the worst,
the best shall save them selves:
And give not you, your lives to keep,
to such dissemblyng Elues.
Else if you do, (as practice proves,
in these unconstant days:)
You do but trust your mortal foes,
and seek your own decaies.
This is my dome and counsel eke,
embrace it who so can: Here the aucthour renueth his story and sets out
the operation of the Irishe ground, which neither breeds nor yet fostereth
up in it any venomous beasts or worms.

And to return unto my text,
I deem it wisdom than.
Within the compass of this land,
no poysonyng beast does live:
To Adder, Snake, nor Crocadile,
no respitte does it give.
Whereby the same repast may take
to feed his appetite:
But with a deadly percyng blow,
each vermin it does smite.
As soon as they do touch the ground,
even by and by they dye:
And hope of longer life to live,
from every one does fly.
Irelande time past, had store of all kind of worms, serpents, and venomous
beasts if fables be scriptures.
For where time past it did possess,
each hurtful wicked beast:
The hissing serpent with her mate,
and worm of poison least.
Yet now no such it will retain,
it voucheth not to see:
The Frogge, the Tode, nor Uiper vile,
within her bounds to be.
Doubtful obiectio^s, whether process of time, or the power of Gods
abbollished the serpents out of Irelande.
If time have changed thus the ground,
I stand therein in doubt:
Or whether that the Gods them selves,
have driven those Serpents out.
For things fore known to mighty Jove,
which after should ensewe:
Or for preseruyng of some graftes,
which there at that time grew.
Or if perhaps they meant to place,
the wandryng Huntresse theare:
Through hills and dales the wolf to chase,
in stead of Savage Bear.
Or if it were for Iunos sake,
who happlie begg'de the same:
In pasture for her new given Cow,
(that Io. Greekishe dame.)
Or if it hapte when thondryng fame, Amongst sondrie suppositions a very
likely hoode, opening the time of the worms exylement.

did pearce the stately Skies:
Affirmyng troops of mortal men,
in warlike sort to rise.
With engens framed for the nonce,
the sacred Turrettes hie:
In maugre Jove, and Jove's despite,
by force and policy.
To take, and make the same a place,
mischaunces to expel:
If afterward by fatal hap,
should hap them ought but well.
I think when as such brutes were made, The aucthour yields his verdict and
opinion, in this pretty tale.

then gods both great and small:
Consulted with the infernal ghostes,
and mountain Sprites withal.
How and what sort they might repulse,
or bring to small effect:
The worlds intent that would so vile,
dame Natures laws reiecte.
In which consult one stepped forth,
(as far as I can guess:)
Apollo was that reverend sire,
cheef in this business.
Who said, you gods that rul dome hold,
above the circled Sky:
Let out the threats of fadyng men, Good counsel never yet hurted ye receiver.

your graces terrify.
Mars confirms Appolloes saying, verif^yng his great wisdom, showing
reason why they should exempt fear.
In sothe said Mars (whose curled lokes,
did shade a doubtie face:)
Appolloes council noble is,
and fruitful in this case.
For why should we that molded man,
of man be thus a fraied?
Or for the soonnes of mortal men,
so greatly be dismayed?
The reason truly set down, for the abollyshyng of fear.
If man by sleight should scale the heavens,
we gods may think no wonder,
To see the highest God of all,
to spoil them by his Thonder.
But if we would defer no time,
for fear of worser happes:
But shun as much as in us lies
the brunte of after clappes.
Bloody Mars ouertwharteth Appollo, annichillating his reasons, giuyng
contrary counsel to the confusion of the enemy.
Let worthy Jove in Irefull rage,
restrain them by his might:
And suffer half his thonder boltes,
upon their pates to light.
Apollo contendyng with Mars, manifests his notable wisdom in waiyng the
royal estate.
Peace (said Apollo) conqu'ryng Mars,
that were not wisest lore:
For Jove to spend his warlike boltes,
if you behold the store.
And now the cicloppes are decayed
(whose connyng science sure:
Could make the seat of mighty Jove,
for ever to endure.)
But if that ye will list awhile,
and harken my device:
I will relate a better way,
which doubtless may suffice.
There be a Crewe of mountain gods, The device of Apollo is here most
excellent, who opens a mean to save both men and money.

possessyng earth below:
Pray that their Godheades would a few,
of Marshall men bestow.
To keep (say ye) a little plat,
in which is most mistrust:
And through which the forain foe
perforce there travel must.
For it is next the Articke Pole,
it houes you keep it well:
And no device may serve so fit,
their malice to expel.
Though god Apollo spoke full wise Mars addicted only to slauter gensaithe
Apolloes counsel, obiectyng, it to be void of wisdoms forecast, not having
regard to causalties that might ensue.

Mars ganne again reply:
My sovereign Lords let reason yet,
have superiority.
Since Marshall knights have felt the taste,
of Fortunes sweet and sour:
As those that fight in Princes cause,
do taste it day and hour.
How may the Gods that hills posses,
grant this unjust request?
Or who would deem Apollo sage,
had folly in his breast?
Know ye not in that savage soil, Mars shows reason, why the Gods should
reiecte Apolloes counsel, he sets out the whole rabble of ill beasts bred in
the land.

the Adder there to dwell?
And see you not the Coccatrice,
and sleyng Serpent fell?
Behold you not the Sloworme there,
with Uipers generation?
May ye not see the Frogge and Tode,
there have their procreation?
Cannot each wight (except the blind)
the savage beasts perceive?
As Lion, Wolf, and rau'nyng Bear,
whose heardes they often deceive?
The tamelesse Panther them amongst,
With Tigers cruel kind?
The Leoparde with a thousand more,
as Nature has assignde?
Mars makes here his conclusion.
How then may man have company, with
this hurtful generation?
Or soonnes of men with noisome worm's*
enjoy their consolation?
Apollo confu^eth Mars and his Marshall reasons being once experimented in the
mysteries of divinity having fore knowledge of Jupiters intent and purpose.
Why (said Apollo) angry Mars,
each part may well agree:
When as by Jove each sleayng beast*
abstracted thence shall be.
Jove first shall banishe quite the bests
yea he shall clean destroy:
The thing that might in any wise,
the Soldiers ought anoye.
And they debarred once from thence,
in ^aufe Security:
The Soldiers then in open field,
by day and night may lie.
To watch and ward, least Irefull foes,
through Pilgrims ^lye pretense:
Should unawares against the Gods,
their warlicke suit commence.
Yea they may sleep in bushe or hedge,
for safety shall be such:
As neither Snake nor Lion fearce
their slombryng corpse shall touch.
A mantill may suffice to shroude, It appears by this, that Apollo was first
deuisour of the woodkarnes glibbe and mantell.

their lethie naked skin:
And hear long grown may serve full well,
to lap their noddells in.
In deed (said Mars) it may be so, Mars convicted by reason, concludes with
Apollo.

if Jove thereto agree:
But first it is meet that every hill,
in leauell sort should be.
Be whishte (O Mars) said thondryng Jove, Jupiter to Mars in Apolloes praise,
rate^^yng, that Apollo had respect, to dangers as well extant, as to those
that might after follow.

Apollo in degree:
The second to my sacred self,
I hold him next to be.
Has said, what might suffice each one,
whose far forcastyng wit:
Preuenteth dangers even at hand,
as else not extant yet.
Each hurtful beast that noisome is,
I will command away:
Not one shall rest the Mountain men,
by any kind to fraie.
The crokyng Tode that ougly semes,
with Snakes and Adders fell:
Shall be desmiste and sent forth with,
to Plutos ghostes in hell:
To feed thereon, them selves to glutte,
sufficyng hongrie mawe:
Yea they them selves without constraint,
them selves shall thither draw.
Let therefore little Mountain Gods,
a troop (as they may spare:)
Of breachlesse men at all assaies,
both leauie and prepare.
The order of the Irishe kar^es apparel, is here allowed by Jupiter being first
found out by Apollo.
With Mantelles down unto the Shoe,
to lap them in by night:
With spears and swords and little darts
to sheeld them from despite.
And let some have their breaches close,
to nimble things annexte:
With safer means to dance the Boggs,
when they by foes are vexte.
It is agreed upon, by consent of the Gods, that Woodkarne shall wear glibbed
heds, signifiyng their monstrous malice, irefull hearts, and bloody hands,
which most stricktly they to this day do observe.
With glibbed heddes like Mars him self,
their malice to express:
With Irefull hearts and bloody hands,
soon prone to wickedness.
Jove spoke, it was done and I suppose,
then Serpents were dismiste:
And sent away, which to be true,
now credit if ye list.
(Again) the Irishe young and old,
presumes for to say:
The Irishe man, contrary to the former allegations prescisly says that
saint Patritke expulsed the venomous beasts out of Irelande, for which they
have him at this day in great addoration.
Their saint (S. Patricke) was the man,
that banishte them away.
And therefore is S, Patricke held
in passing admiration:
Still worshipped of all that stock,
with holy veneration.
No beast that noyeth mortal man,
is procreated theare:
A renuyng again of the history.
It brynges forth no Lion fear,
nor yet the rau'nyng Bear.
No beasts (I say) which do possess,
one jot of crewell kind:
Except the Wolf that nosome is, Great store of wolves in Irelande.

in Irishe soil I find.
But as for other sorts of beasts, Irelande replenished with all kind of
necessary and profitable cattle.

delightyng mortal eye:
Therein consistes her chefest praise,
who may it here deny?
First for gallant stouryng Steed,
man's help at all assaies:
And next for Neat, whereby his life,
is lengthned sondrie ways.
Dame Venus has a portion eke,
obseruyng well her turn:
Restoryng that which tracte of time,
and withred age has worn?
What this should be my mistress dear,
can construe very well:
Who vsyng it in time of need,
sore combattes does refell
And now as touching featherd Fowls, Plenty of all kind of wild foul in
Irelande whatsoever may be named.

and birds of each degree:
The number does extend so far,
that it is too hard for me.
The multitude thereof to know,
or show in plain prospecte:
Because I am no God at all,
my cunnyng has defecte.
Of hawks which retaining sondrie names, Irelande has great store of Hawks
(...) in it.

the Country store does breed:
Whose names if Patience will abide,
in order shall proceed.
The names of the Hawks that are bred in Ireland with their estemations
orderly which are in number seven.
The Goshauke first of the Crewe,
deserves to have the name:
The Faucon next for high attemptes,
in glory and in fame.
The Tarsell then ensues on,
good reason it is that he:
For fliyng hawks in Ireland next
the Faucon plaste should be.
The Tarsell gentels course is next,
the fourth peer of the land:
Combined to the Faucon, with
a lovers freendly band.
The pretty Marlion is the fifth,
to her the Sparhauke next,
And then the Jack and Musket last,
by whom the birds are vexte.
These are the Hawks which chiefly breed,
in fertile Irishe ground:
The Irishe Hawks peerles, for speedines of wing.
Whose match for flight and speedy wyng,
elsewhere be hardly found.
(And to conclude) of feathered fowls,
there breeds the cheef of all:
Many Eagles in Irelande.
A mighty foul, a goodly bird,
whom men do Eagle call.
This build her neast in highest top,
of all the Oken tree:
Or in the craftiest place, whereof
in Irelande many be.
Not in the bounds of English pale,
which is a civil place:
But in the Devils Arse, a Peake,
where Rebels most embrace.
For as this foul and all the rest,
are wild by Natures kind:
So do they keep in wildest Nokes
and there men do them find.
For like to like the Proverb says, The old saying is here found true, that
like loves like.

the Leoparde with the Bear:
Does live in midest of deserts rude
and none does other fear.
For as the Irishe Karne be wild,
in manners and in fashion:
So do these fowls enhabite, with
that crooked generation.
Yet when as they are taken young,
(though wild they be by kind:)
Enstructed through the Fauconers lure, By policy brute beasts are brought
to a peaceable order of living, seruyng and obaiyng man orderly in their nature
and kind, yea the very fowls of the air and beasts of the field, have a
certain kind of reverence and fear, toward those whom they consider do
work them any good, but only these monsters of the world, these pernicious
members of Satan, these wretched wretches have no consideration, nor yet bear
any kindly affection toward (her Majesty) whose mercy does preserve them,
whose gracious favor does protect them, whose royalty not only wishes them
good, but also does them good, not for a day, a week, a month, or a year,
but continually, for if her Grace would their subuertion, if then she had but
said the word only, judge what had followed (even utter desolation) which
thing, these blind Idi^ts do not or at least will not see or consider, O
ingratitude most intolerable, and blindness irrecuperable.

by trial good I find.
That they do come as twere at beck,
and when as they do call:
She scarce will stint on twige or bow,
till on his fiste she fall.
Thus they obey their tutors hestes
and do degenerate:
From wildness that belonged to,
their forepossessed state.
No policy, wisdom or cunnyng, scarce al^reth the wild Wodkarnes crooked
nature.
But Irishe Karne unlike these fowls,
in burthe and high degree:
No chaunglyngs are they love nowhit,
in Civil state to be,
In steed of ciuillitie, Woodkarne use villainy.
They pass not for civility,
nor care for wisdoms lore:
The felicity, that Irishe karne do most of all rejoice in.
Sin is their cheef felicity,
whereof they have the store.
And if perhaps a little Ape,
be taken from the Hen:
And brought from Boggs to cha^pion ground,
such things hap now and then.
The sow returns to the mire, and the dog to his vomit again.
Yea though they were in Court trainde up,
and years there lived ten:
Yet do they look to shaking boggs,
scarce prouyng honest men.
And when as they have won the Boggs,
such virtue has that ground:
This has been to well proved true in these late days.
That they are worse then wildest Karne,
and more in sin abound.
An exclamation upon Saint Patrick, chief Saint in Irelande.
O holy saint, O holy man,
O man of God I say:
O Patrick chief of all these Karne
if I speak to thee I may.
What moved thee, the wriglyng Snake,
and other worms to kill?
What caused thee on silly beasts,
to work thy cruel will?
What thing incenst thee for to strike,
them with thy heavy hand?
When as thou leftest more spiteful beasts, Irishe k^rne more hurtful then
Serpents.

within this fertile land.
Thou smotest the S^rpentes venomous,
and Furies did subuerte:
And yet the footers of the boggs, Saint Patrickes preachynges, could never
bring Woodkarne to holly perfection of life.

could thou no whit convert?
Could thou not bring them to thy bend,
nor bow them like a Bow?
Does not the Parsone teach his Clarke,
his duty for to know?
But thou good man enstructedst them, Saint Patricke is here excused, who
doutlesse took great pain and labor, if it had been possible to have made
Woodkarne be come religious Saints.

in school of Uertues lore:
Though they thy holy counsels did,
like graceless graftes abhor.
Thou tookest pain them to reduce,
unto a godly state:
But could thy means preuaill where Jove, No strength may prevail whom God
does withstand, no physic can cure, whom God in his ire strikes, showing
that God has given up Woodkarne to a reprobate sense infectyng them also with
an incurable botche.

smightes with a curelesse fate?
Can Phisickes art restore the lame,
or make the blind to see?
When as the Lord of hosts does say,
this wretch was plagued by me?
No, no, I dare auowe the same,
do Physic what it can:
In each respect it must confess, Signifiyng it is mere madness to strive
against the lord god. Irelande has no Pyes breeding in i^.

it self a mortal man.
No Pies to pluck the Thatch from house,
are breed in Irishe ground:
Better it were to have Pyes the^ prowlers.
But worse then Pies, the same to burn,
a thousand may be found.
Which will not stick without remorse,
whole tounes for to devour:
Where Irishe karne have superiority, there they commit all things to fire and
sword, as house, corn, and cattle, men, women and children. O viperous
VVoodkarne,
right sons of the devil:
A hangyng come to you,
rewardyng your evil.
A poor only hangyng,
for this pestilent brood:
Both hanging and drawing,
were for them to good.

Committing house and household stuff,
to Sulphers mighty power.
Consuming corn and cattle both
(O heavy tale to tell)
Like Satan's ympes regardyng naught,
the endless pains of hell.
Who being grown to sappie strength,
long norishte in their sin:
By murderyng, spoylyng and burning, Woodkarne hope to come to heaven, but it
must be by a ha^ter.
Suppose by plaiyng of such parts,
eternal joys to win.
By murderyng, spoylyng and burning, Woodkarne hope to come to heaven, but it
must be by a ha^ter.
O pleasant land deformed through,
the life of Irishe Karne:
The glory of Irelande wholly extinguished, through Irish karnes living.
O perverse flock that hell nor heaven,
from living ill many warn.
O frettyng Bores more bloudier then
the Wolf, or savage bear:
An exclamation drawn from the depth of the heart, wherein the aucthour
seems to bewail the deformation of the land by or through the lives of
these rebellious Woodkarne.
Was never beast more brutishe, like
less void of sovereigns fear.
Irishe karne brutisher then beasts.
No men so bare of heavenly grace,
more foes to Countries soil:
Nor traitors that do more rejoice,
when they their neighbors spoil.
No men more graceless then Woodkarne, none greater foes to their country, nor
yet any that rejoice more in unhappiness then they.
No monsters loving lesser peace,
delightyng more in war:
Nor Rebe^ls seeking feller ways,
a common wealth to mar.
Woodkarnes arms artificially displaide.
No wight regardyng virtue less,
more prone to sinful lust: Woodkarne of all creatures least regards virtue,
being given wholly to wicked sensuality and lust, they are of least credit
under heaven a notable commendaiton.

Nor creatures living under heaven,
that men may worser trust.
Gods grace must support where man can do no good.
God turn them to a better life:
reformyng whattes a miss,
For man may not comprice the same,
it is not in hands of his.
If cunnyng had prevailed ought,
or toil might win the game:
Then Sidney had through labors pain, Sir Henry Sidneys endeavor in reducyng
of Irelande.

long since atchiu'd the same.
If execution of the Laws,
could make them to repent: Two things practiced by Sir Henry Sidney, drawyng
the Irishrie to a conformity of good living, that is to say, judgment and
mercy.

Or Princes grace ablating crimes
might c^use their hearts relent.
Then doubtless he had been of force,
whose careful care was such:
As peace to win to Irishe soil,
he demde no trauaill much,
Sir Henry's care, wisdom and policy, could not bring the Woodkarne to a
better order and conformity of living.
But care he takes both night and day,
and means that he did use:
Might make this graceless cursed race,
their evil lives refuse.
Mark here the obstinacy of these wodkarne which by how much le^itie they
are better used ordered, and governed, by so much the more wilfulness,
frowardness and stubbornness, they are a^^enated, and enstranged from all good
discipline, and loyal obedience, a most evident sign and token of an
untoward generation.
The more he seeks them to win
the further of they straie:
As ympes that do detest to walk
the high and pleasant way:
I cease I cease more to relate,
their stratagemes to show:
Till place and space and heavenly grace,
shall fitter time bestow.
And to conclude this formoste part
herein I make an end:
Supposyng loiall subjects minds
in naught I do offend.
Though pictures, and protractours made,
by Painters cunnyng skill:
With gestures of the Irishe Karne
set out by quiu'ryng quill.
I published have, whereby the world
may know their inclination:
As how they pass for wicked life,
the synfulste generation.
And if for want of better art,
some things I pretermitte:
Which rightly here to this discourse,
might be adjoined fit.
A reasonable request to be granted in consideration of the pains.
Let patience Lordings yet supply,
the things so done amiss:
Or let correctyng of the faltes,
amend that faltie is.
At least declare when you have read,
in what I have offended:
And if it rests in my hands,
it shall be then amended,
FINIS.
The Prolog to the second part.
SInce sacred Jove whose royal throne,
is plaste in circled Skies:
Beholds things far distant thence,
with vewe of godly eyes.
And seeing that the Lord does guide,
each thing with heavenly might:
As well the Son and orient day,
as Moon in frostie night.
Conductyng them as seems him best,
disposing all at will:
Whereby his creatures diversely,
his pleasure might fulfill.
Support good God with heavenly grace,
my pen for to relate:
The second part that does belong,
unto the Irishe state.
Illuminate my senses all,
that I may rightly tell:
The nature of the Irishe Karne,
as how they do rebel.
And every thing to show aright,
thou Lord direct my course:
And lead me to Thelysian fields,
by thy triumphant force.
I seek no help of foreign Gods,
nor aid of such a crewe:
Because to trust in senseless things,
small comfort can ensewe.
But thy good aid is that I crave,
wherefore grant me the same:
That I by it may have the strength,
a pleasant verse to frame.
And in the same a matter fit,
applied to the thing:
Which is the chiefest cause whereof,
my silly verse does spring.
FINIS.
The second part of the Image of Irelande.
THough that the royal soil,
and fertile Irishe ground:
With thousand sondrie pleasant things,
most nobly do abound.
Though that the land be free,
from Uipers generation:
As in the former part I made,
a perfect declaration.
Though that the earth I say,
be bliste with heavenly things:
And though it is like the fragrant flower,
in pleasante May that springs.
Yet when I did behold,
those which possess the same:
Their manners loathsome to be told,
as yrcksome for to name.
I meruailde in my mind,
and thereupon did muse:
To see a Bride of heavenly hew,
an ouglie Feere to choose.
This Bride it is the Soil,
the Bridegroom is the Karne,
With writhed glibbes like wicked Sprits, The description of the Irishman,
as well of the Lords, as of the galliglasse and horseboy fully set out.

with visage rough and stearne.
With sculles upon their poules,
in stead of civil Cappes:
With spears in hand and swords by sides,
to bear of after clappes.
With Iackettes long and large,
which shroude simplicity:
Though spitfull darts which they do bear
importe iniquity.
The Irishe Karnes apparel most lively set out.
Their shirtes be very strange,
not reachyng paste the thie;
With pleates on pleates they pleated are,
as thick as pleates may lie.
Whose sleues hang trailing down
almost unto the Shoe:
And with a Mantell commonly,
the Irishe Karne do go.
Now some amongst the rest,
do use an other weed:
A coat I mean of strange device,
which fancy first did breed.
His skirtes be very short,
with pleates set thick about,
And Irishe trouzes more to put,
their strange protractours out
Lo Lordynges here the draught,
set out in open vewe:
For by instructions I am taught.
false forgynges to eschew*
Like as their weeds be strange,
and monstrous to behold:
So do their manners far surpass, Woodkarnes manners are more stranger then
his apparel.

them all a thousand fold.
For they are termed wild,
Woodkarne they have to name:
And marvel not though strange it be,
for they dosarne the same.
In manners they be rude,
and monst^rous eke in fashon:
Their dealings also do bewraie, The fruit shows the goodness of the tree,
approuyng all Woodkarne, strong thieves for to be.

a crooked generation.
For why, they fear not God,
nor honor yet their Prince: Irishe Rebbelles fear neither god nor man.

Whom by the laws of mighty Jove
they ought to reverence.
Each thief would be a Lord, The hautie hearts of Woodkarne desire rule dome,
but they shall have a rope.

to rule even by a beck,
The faithful subjects often times
they shorten by the neck. The Rebbelles envy toward a good Subject,
whereto many be joined, the affection of a pernicious Papist, toward a true
Christian.

And those that would be true,
to God and to the Croune:
Mark the most pestilent nature of the wild villainous Woodkarne.
With fire and sword, and deep despite,
they pluck such subjects down
Woodkarne are ^s Grasshoppers, and Catterpillers to their country, and people.
Thus they be mortal foes,
unto the Common wealth:
Maintainyng rackhells at their heels,
through detestable stealthe.
They harp upon one stryng,
and therein is their joy:
When as they find a subtle fleight, The joy of rebbelles is in plagyng of
true men.

to work true men's anoye.
For mischeefis the game,
wherein they do delight:
Spoiling and burning is the Irishe karnes renoune.
As eke they hold it great renown
to burn and spoil by night.
When time yeeldes true men ease,
such rest they pretermitte:
Woodkarnes exercises when true men take rest, to rob burn and murder, when
true men take rest, with fire sword and axcesse, these tra^ters are priest,
they take no compassion of men children nor wives, but joy when they do them,
deprive of their lives.
And give them selves to other arts,
for their behofe more fit.
To wound the harmless sort,
it is the Karnishe guise:
And other some to stiffle quight,
in slumbryng bed that lies.
An other sort they spoil,
even naked to the skin:
And leave him nothing for to wrappe,
his naked body in.
Irishe karne seldom leave any thing worth the bearyng away behind them, but
either they take it or else do set it on fire.
They leave no kind of thing,
that may be borne away:
The pot, the pan, the Horse, the Cow,
and much more may I say.
Now things that are to sad,
that may suppress their power:
They do commit to flames of fire,
the same for to devour.
The stolen p^ore Cow must be knocked down as soon as they come home, to make
the thieves a feast.
And when they have their lust,
the silly captive beast:
Must presently be knocked down,
to make the knaves a feast.
The woodkarnes Cooks.
But who shall be the Cook:
it is no question here:
Nor for the Pantlers chipped loves, Bread seldomly used amongst Wodkar^e*

they ask for once a year.
Each knave will play the Cook,
to stand his Lord in steed:
But tagge and ragge will equal be
when cheifest Rebel feed. Master and man all one at eating of meat

Well, Beeues are knocked down,
the Butchers play their part,
Tho take each one the intrails forth,
the Liver with the Heart. A most perfect description of Irishe horse boys
eating their meat.

And being breathyng new,
th'unwashen Puddyngs they:
Upon the coals or embers hot,
for want of Gredyron lay.
And scarce not half enough,
(draffe serue^h well for Hoggs:)
They take them up and fall thereto,
like rau'nyng hongrie Dogs.
Deuouryng gutte and limine, The rudeness of horse boys is herein set open,
who fill them with driffe draffe, farewell the good token.

no part does come a miss:
Whose lips and chappes with blood do swim,
most true report is this.
As for the greatest Karne, Behold here the difference twixt Karne and their
men, the Karne have the best meat, the horse boys eat then, of inmeates and
puddings, which to luck is imputed, their lips with green onytment being
foully poluted.

they have the cheifest stuff:
Though durtie tripes and offalls like
please vnderknaues enoufe.
Whereof they part do roste,
and other some they boil:
Thus what between the sodde and roste,
fearce honger they assoile.
No table there is spread, The very order of the wild Irish, their sittyng,
table, dishes, and cushens discribed O brave swinishe fashion found our
emongst hogs. Deseruyng for manners to sit amongst dogs.

they have no courtlike guise,
The earth sometimes stands the^ in steed
whereon their victual lies.
Their Coushens are of Straw,
of Rushes or of Hay:
Made banckesetwise with withies,
their tails to vnderlaie.
Their Platters are of wood,
by cunnyng Turners made.
But not of Peauter (credit me,)
as is our English trade.
The order of Wodkarne is to have a Friar bless him and all his household
before he sits down.
Now ere the Lordesitts down,
with concubine or wife:
Irishe Karne every year once or twice peradventure make exchange of their
wives, as they like the^ so will they keep the^, for they will not be bound
to them.
(Whereof he often makes exchange,
in compass of his life.)
Before he takes his rome,
a Friar does begin:
To bless the Rebel with his wife,
the place and thieves therein.
Which when he blessed has,
in highest place of all:
The Cheeftaine then this traitrous knave,
like honest man does stall.
Friars have chiefest and hiest rooms at feasts amongst the Irishrie, and why
should not we give them like honor at the gallows.
And next his Surgion he,
does set at Friars side:
And then himself his rome enioyth
adorned with his Bride.
(In fine) the hetlishe route.
Like unto like said the Devil to the Collier.
like luckie fellows met:
Do sit them down on straw or ground,
their victualles for to get.
Long stabbers pluck they forth, A Foyner of three quarters of a yard long,
is the Woodkarnes knife.

in steed of handsome knives:
And with the same they slashe me out,
good God what preatie shiues.
Not shiues of bread I mean.
for that were very rare:
But gobbes of flesh not boyld enough,
which is their common fare.
Their cheifest drink is Milk, The Irishe man's drink.

for want of Milk, the brothe:
They take which thing ye Surgio^ swears, A thing of necessity proved to be
physic, having his confirmation upon the oath of a perjured caitiffe Karne.

is Physic by his trothe.
And if that brothe be scante,
yet water is at hand:
For every River yeeldes enough,
within that goodly land:
Again if Fortune faunth,
or on them chance to smile:
She filles the^ then with Vskebeaghe, Vskebeaghe, is Aquanite.

and wine an other while.
O that is cheer in ^owles,
it beautifith the feast:
And makes the^ look with dronken noules,
from most unto the least.
Now when their gutts be full,
then comes the pastyme in:
The Barde and Harper mellodie, The Woodthiues love mirth after meat.

unto them do begin.
This Barde he does report,
the noble conquestes done, A Barde and a Rimer is all one.

And eke in Rimes shows forth at large, The Barde by his Rimes has as great
force emongst Woodkarne to persuade, as the elloquent oration of a learned
Orator amongst the civil people.

their glory thereby won.
Thus he at random ronneth,
he pricks the Rebels on:
And shows by such external deeds,
their honor lies upon.
The policy of the Barde to encense the Rebels to do mischefe, by
repeating then forfathers acts, O crafty Appostle as holy as a Devil.
And more to stir them up,
to prosecute their ill:
What great renown their fathers got,
they show by Rimyng skill.
And they most gladsome are,
to hear of Parents name:
Mark how apt and prone these thieves are to do mischief, in which is
verified the saying that is witten, like as the father is, such is the son,
knave father and knave son, to the twenty generation.
As how by spoilyng honest men,
they won such endless fame.
Wherefore like graceless graftes,
sprung from a wicked tree:
They grow through daily exercise,
to all iniquity.
And more t'augment the flame,
and rancour of their heart:
A wicked man never wants ill counsel.
The Friar of his counsels vile,
to rebels does imparte.
The Friar persuades the Rebels that it is an high work of charity, to kill
loyal Subjects, which thing they believe though never found on scripture, O
ghostly Friar as innocent as Judas.
Affirmyng that it is,
an almose deed to God:
To make the English subjects taste,
the Irishe Rebels rod.
To spoil, to kill, to burn,
this Friars council is:
And for the doing of the same,
Behold the plaguey counsel of a pockie Friar, the very fruit of Papistrie.
he warrantes heavenly bliss.
He tells a holy tale,
This flatteryng Friar promises to the Rebels everlasting life, if they
perceiuer in rebellyng against the (Queen.)
the white he tournes to black:
And through the pardons in his Male,
he works a Knauishe Knacke.
Behold the self same thing,
set forth by Caruers Art:
With pictures framed pretely,
expoundyng every part.
2
When Friars tale is done,
and Rebels waied have: The end of the Friars oration, is the beginning of
rebellion, he is a sharp spur to make them gallop hedlong to all kind of
mischiefs, and last to the gallows and devil of hell.

The circumstaunce of every word
reported by the knave.
From supper then they rise,
with Friars blessyng, they
Unto the English borders next,
do take their onward way. The Karne go forth with the Friars blessyng to
spoil loyal subiecttes, but look what enseweth.

And all in warlike wise,
the Borders they invade:
Supposyng subjects for to quell,
by force of Irishe blade.
But lo whom traitors serve, Whom the Friar does bless, them does God curse,
bringyng their wicked purposes to a wonderful end.

deceiues them now and then:
Deliu'ryng them and all their strength,
captives to loiall men.
For loving subjects rise,
the Captain with his band:
With strokes do lode these filchyng thieves
as long as they may stand.
The pray the rescude is, The pray is recovered to the Rebels damage.

and woodkarne buys it dear:
For heddes are swapt from shoulders quite, Sweet^ meat must have sour sauce.

a sause to stealyng cheer.
Whose heddes are taken up,
their triumph to declare.
And more to make their doyngs known,
As a notable Rebel had in his life time greater dignity then many of like
profession, so being dead, his head receives a more stately place of exaltation.
to Dublin they them bear:
Now if it were a Thief,
which had a bloody hand:
Or if he were as rank a knave,
as liu'th within the land.
His hedde is poled up,
upon the Castle hye:
Such Astronomers God send us enough daily.
Behidyng stars, as though he were,
in high Astronomy.
Now God be thanked hedlesse Woodkarne are not to be feared, fortune goes
beionde their expectations, which brings Rebels with all their revels to
shame and dishonor.
Their bodies lackyng life,
are left unto their friends:
To bear away, as to deplore,
their lucklesse fatal ends.
Thus hedlesse they return,
from whence they did proceed:
Receiuyng for their proud attemptes,
a traitors rightful meede.
The Friar mournes for the loss of his poor Woodkarne, he curses as black
as pitch their oppressors.
The Friar seeing this,
lamentes that lucklesse part:
And curses to the pit of hell,
the death man's sturdie heart:
The kindness of the Friar toward the Rebels after their death, by
purchasyng their pardons, with book, bell, and candell, which thing
artificially the knave does handell.
Yet for to quight them with,
the Friar takes pain:
For all the sins that ere he did,
remission to obtain.
And therefore serves his book,
the Candell and the Bell:
But think you that such Apishetoies, A notable question which demaundes, if
pardones from Rome, may bring damned souls from hell.

bring damned souls from hell,
It longs not to my part,
infernal things to know:
But I believe till latter day,
they rise not from below.
Yet hope that Friars give, Friars persuasions cause Rebelies still to persevere
in rebellion, O blind fools, to believe all that Papisticall Monkishe momes
tell you to be Scripture, when in the end they seek your utter destruction
and desolation.

to this rebellyng rout:
If that their souls should chance in hell,
to bring them quickly out.
Does make them lead such lines
as neither God nor man:
Without revenge for their desartes
permit or suffer can.
Thus Friars are the cause, The Friars in Irelande, are chiefest instruments
of Irishe disturbaunce, they are the only spur to prick them onward to
rebel against the Queen, procuryng the means of their utter destruction,
being the head welspring of all sin and wickedness.

the Fountain and the Spring,
Of hurleburles in this land,
of each unhappy thing.
They cause them to rebel,
against their (sovereign queen)
And through rebellion often times
their lives do vanishe clean.
So as by Friars means,
in whom all folly swim:
The Irishe Karne do often lose,
the life with hedde and limme.
Rebels bewitched or deluded by satan, measure not their own estate by
other men's harms, or calamities, but still march forward in the pursuit of
sin, till they come to like end of destruction.
Yet that avails not,
they so bewitched arre:
The loss of friends cannot dissuade,
the rest from mortal war.
But still they busy are,
leage Subjects to desease:
Their native country for to spoil,
and Princs to displease.
As by obaiyng the Prince, there springs rest, peace, and tranquillity, so,
in displeasing her Grace, grows trouble, vexation, confusion, and death.
In pleasyng whom is rest,
and thereof rises gain:
As in displeasyng of her grace,
procures naught but pain.
They raise still fearcer war,
The Karne go still on in their malice, growyng from petty fellonie to maine
treason.
and march in warlike wise:
Unto the feeld, with sword and spear,
which Mars did first devise.
They boste of their manhood.
They brag to fight it out,
their quarrel just to try:
They vow, the English hosts destruction.
They swear that all the Princ's friends, through bloody sword shall die.
Thus in their rage they frette,
and in their moodes do fume:
The success of reachlesse enterprises.
Whereof do rise a sudden plague,
these traitors to consume.
The celeritie of Sir Henry Sidney, to encounter with the Rebels.
Our valiant Sidney Lord,
who gouernes Irishe soil:
Does post himself with Marshall knights
those braggyng beasts to coile.
The noble stomach of the Captains described.
And Captains they do vow,
who did the heavens create:
Their hands should strike ye warlike stroke,
Karnes courage to abate.
The courage of the Soldiers lively expressed, who had rather then their lives
be upon the Iackets of these fif king and shippyng Rebels.
The Soldiers do rejoice,
to see that happy day:
In which Caliuers vantyng foes,
their just reward may pay.
And many Irelande Lords, Recommendation of the good subjects of Irelande,
their fidelity, loyalty, and service to their Prince is described.
being faithful to the Croune:
Protest through force of horse and spear,
those crakyng Knaves shall down.
The pot now ginnes to sees,
the fire is so great:
And Smith assaies with mighty sleadge,
the Iron hot to beat. The dai^ of ^^ttai^e is appointed, if wodkarne will
abide it.

The day appointed is,
the place likewise assignde:
The messenger he trotteth forth, In this is manifestly proved how the Lord
Deputy attempteth nothing unadvisedly, either in rearyng up of war or in
puttyng it down, whereby the Irishrie might find any occasion of rebellion,
or cause to rebel, for being come into the field in hostill araie, yet before
he sounds to the battle, mercifully allureth them to submit them selves
to the Queens good Grace, who refusing this offer, falling upon them, shows
no mercy or compassion, whose eye does neither pity them, nor yet his hand
spare them, but like a most severe warrier, executes the function and office
appertaing to war

to know the Rebels mind.
Who makes his back return,
with answer of the foe:
And word for word as he did speak,
he does relate it so.
Again behold the thyng^
in figures well requited:
Expoundyng breefly every point,
that was even now recited.
3
Now forward march our host,
in battaill raie beset:
Who with courageous hearts goes on,
the Karne to pay their debt.
Against whom comes the Karne,
far of in warlicke wise:
The march of the Irishry and their notable bragges being far from their
enemies, wherein they discover openly their courageous dasterly hearts.
With three and three in ranckes be^et,
to do some enterprise.
They make a goodly show,
till nere they come at hand:
They set them selves most lively forth,
like conquerers of the land.
But when they are in reach,
or compass of the bow:
The stately courage of the Rebels, is sone put down, at sight of our
Princes host.
Does not the vewe of Princes host,
Karnes courage overthrow?
Their pride God wot must swage,
where fear does pluck it down:
Fear a suppresser of the sturdiest Rebels heart.
What Rebel would not stand agaste,
to meet the royal croune.
The order of the Irishe war is plainly set out, who leauyng the order of
battle raye, being near the combat, fall into a cluster, therein they
suppose their saftie to consist^, making a most terrible noise of criyng to
terrify (if it were possible) the whole host of English men.
Now warlicke raie they leave,
and on a heap they clunge:
Supposyng safer for to be,
as better foes repunge.
And with a mighty cry,
our host they do invade:
But sone repulsed back again,
by warriors pearcyng blade.
The Trompetts sound me forth,
the scirmishe to reveal:
And murderyng gunnes their secret grudge
no further may conceal.
Here bulletts fly abroad,
there dar^es again are sent:
And blow for blow in recompense,
to either part is lent.
The horsemen scoures the coaste:
with shaking spears in hand:
And Rebels which before did boaste, Uauntyng Woodkarne do first give back.

now ginne to fly the land.
Still sound the trompetts forth,
each Soldiers heart to cheer:
And captains with two edged swords,
do give the traitors gear.
Here lies a Rebels hedde,
from shulders taken quight: Under these (...) tytles, the valor of all our
English Captains are expressed.

And here the Lions tearing paws
on woodkarnes costard light.
The Griphon here assaies,
to have his manhood known:
Whose valor has sufficiently.
from time to time been shown.
The Eagle with the rest,
no lesser honor has:
When as his bill and tallentes both,
in Rebels blood he has. O Soldiers of renown shield you from mischaunce,
which do in spite of Irishe karne, your Countries praise advance.

And all the lusty youths,
belongyng to the train:
To purchase fame by Marshall acts,
their azure veins do strain.
Now go the foes to wrack, Woodkarne must needs sweat, for their labor is
great.

the Karne apace do sweat:
And bag Pipe then in stead of Trompe, The piper seeing the Karne to have the
worste end of the staff, do lull the Irishe retreat.

do lulle the back retreat.
Who ears the Bagpipe now,
the pastyme is so hot:
Our valiant Captens will not cease, Commendations worthy of right, to be long
to our English Captains, who never shrincketh, but with great valor and
manhood tarieth the final end of the battle.

till that the feeld be got.
But still they forward pearse,
upon the glibbed route:
And with their weapons meet for war,
these vauntyng foes they cloute.
Lo yet behold a Knight,
our Princes proved friend:
In armor ready for to fight,
the quarrel so to end.
No danger ought to be eschewed, nor labor refused, in the defendyng our
prince and Countries cause.
This seeks by warlicke means,
his credit to augment:
And for his Prince and countries sake,
his Pistol forth is sent.
Which does relate the cause,
of her exceadyng Ire.
The gelousie of a Prince deuoureth like the flames of fire.
As how her just conceived wrath,
surpass the flames of fire.
That may not be extincte,
(signs verify the same:)
The anger of a prince cease not til he has brought his purpose to
perfection.
Till cuttyng sword and pearcyng spear,
Rebellyng foes do tame.
Here lies a breechlesse Knave,
smote just from coursers back:
Thus through the soldiers doubtie hearts,
the Woodkarne go to wrack:
The Irishe Karnes hearts now more and more do faint.
Now faint the ouglie beasts,
for Lion plagues them so:
As they are like to Bedlem folk,
that wot not what to do.
Irishe Woodkarne had rather fli^ then fight, and good reason they have so to
do, for who would take blows if he can shun them.
To fly they dare assaie,
for so they think it best:
As for to stand to fight it out,
their souls do it deteste.
Their hearts are molified,
with fear they are oppressed:
And now they wail ye thing which wrought
them this unquiet rest. Mark Traiters in the midst of battle is no place
to repent.

But will repentance serve? A notable question that demaundes, if the
repentance of ^ vile catrife, and rebellious Wodkarne, may satisfy the
Injuries committed against our Queen.

I put herein a case:
Or may it satisfy the wrong,
done to her (noble grace?)
When Lion once is stirde,
he by and by does rage:
And twill be long who knows it not,
before his anger swage.
And when he once begins, A similitude of the Lion.

to show his Princly force:
He stintes not till he tournth his foes,
into a breathless corse.
Even so the Irishe Karne, The Princes pleasure put in execution by Sir Henry
Sidney.

which do our Queen provoke:
Do thoroughly feel by Sidneis hand,
the weight of Lions stroke.
For why? he mailes them down,
he strikes them in the chase:
When gentleness prevails not, Bygour is meetest where clemency avails
not.

then rigor takes place.
And rigor being shown,
the terror of the same:
Perforce does make them celebrate, That which is done by compulsion, is no
go^ama^cie.

her thrice (renowned name.)
But then it is too late,
for Justice comes in: Justice and fortitude yeeldes Rebels their hire.

With Fortitude that (worthy wight,)
to contribute their sin.
The Soldiers wrecke their anger and displeasure upon the poor Irish karne
without all pity.
They prosecute the chase,
pursuyng fas^e the foe:
And with their weapons framde to war,
O hard hearted men that takes pity of none.
the Karne they overthrow.
Here lies a pack of Karne,
distracte of limme and life:
Woodkarne abides the brunt of fortune.
Here headless Knaves abide the bront,
of warriors mortal knife.
The Karne receive the foil,
being overcome by might:
Irishe Karne fight with their heels with greater courage, then with their
hands.
And for the saving of their lives,
each one does take his flight.
The piper and his bagpipe laid both flat on the ground.
The Bagpipe cease to play,
the Piper lies on ground:
And here a sort of glibbed thieves,
deuoide of life are found.
The Woodkarnes legs must help them when hands will not serve them.
Now fly whose luck is best,
the lucklesse man let stay:
And now bewail thou Irishe Karne,
thy hapless hap I say.
Uery good counsel given to the remnant of Woodkarne, warnyng them how they
do attempt any thing preiudicall to the honor of the Crown.
Lament thy woeful state,
deplore thy fatal chance:
And warefull be against (our Queen,)
how ye your selves advance.
Yea good aduicement take,
before you do provoke;
As the Lion is feared, and reverenced of all the beasts in the Forest, so
ought ^ King to be feared and loved of his subjects within his Realm.
The Lion for no mortal wight,
his purpose may revoke.
For as he is the Prince,
and king of eurie beast:
So would he have obedience shown,
from most unto the least.
Else if you should repunge, The reward of Rebellion is death.

against his noble mind:
You might expecte at hands of his,
naught else but death to find.
Let this a lesson be, A cauiat for Woodkarne.

to this Rebellyng route:
To Macke, and O. to Rorie Ogge,
to all the Traitors stout.
Let Brians fall suffice, Good reason that the Asses calamity should make the
Fox to be ware.

let Wolf and Fox beware:
How with the noble Lion they,
the gotten pray do share.
Still sound the trompetts forth,
the foe to terrify:
And Soldiers with courageous hearts,
upon the Karne do fly. The cord that rebellion did bind, may not be
loused by any means, but by the ingen of death.

The Karne apace do fall,
like leaves through blustryng wind:
And may nowhit unloose the cord,
that they them selves did bind.
Bohbowe now cry the knaves, The Irishe Karnes cry.

and lullalowe the Karne:
And English youths a cauate send,
rebellyng foes to warn.
Here part do take the Bogges, The remnaunt of the unslain Wodkarne, do
part take the Bogges, and other some the Wood.

and some the woods retain:
And other being hedlesse made,
like witless Geese remain.
Irishe coltes are tamed by the snaffie of war.
Thus vauntyng foes are tamde,
by gliues of warlicke youths:
Receiuyng strokes in steed of meedes,
for their inconstaunt truths.
English men return Conquerers
The victours do return,
they have their hearts delight:
For Woodkarne they are knocked down,
the rest are put to flight.
Untruste remains not one,
which may the least anoye:
For winds are stilde by mighty Jove,
O cause of endless joy.
Sir Henry Sidney is worthily renowmd for prudence and magnanimity.
Sir Henry is renowmde,
with fame unto the Sky:
And is receiu'de to Dublin town,
prais'de for his cheualrie.
Peace comes of war.
Thus peace ensewes by war,
the end of war is peace.
A Godly prayer that Irelande ought to use.
God grant the wars of Irishe sone,
by Sidneys means may cease.
Lo Lordyngs here the draught,
of that which went before:
And land discride, the wished tide,
has brought my Ship to shore.
FINIS.
AFter that I had finished the first and second part of the Image of
Irelande, and had there somewhat disclosed the nature and quality of the
wantone Irishe wild VVoodkarne, I thought it expedient for the volumes
augmentation, as more ampler by examples to prove the things therein
contained, to put next in sequence, the picters and protractours of the most
notablest Rebels in Irelande, (who as they are many) so do they ask sondrie
opperations, if of each several one I should make relation. (And again)
musing in my mind with whom I might encounter, as best begin withal, having
sondrie choice to chose upon, I supposed it a thing necessary, and at this
instant fittest to serve my turn, to lay the foundation of my attempt, ^ sure
substanciall corner stone, upon Rory Ogge our next neighbor, at this present
(a lively Image ^ pattern of rebellion) who after many pagentes of treasons
played, and notable offers of grace refused, being brought into great misery
(by Sir Henry Sidney the Lord Deputies daily instigation) and seeing him self
utterly forsaken both of God and man, at last moved through a desperate and
condemned conscience, confessing his folly, manifests to the whole world, his
crooked nature, complains of his fatal destenie (and finally) as it were
through a certain conjecture, fore tells of things that shortly shall
happen him. Wherefore behold in plain protractour, a gross and corpulent man,
lapped in a mantel overwhelmed with misery, being in a VVood (an ill favored
Churl) standing on a Hillocke enclosed with a shaking Bogge (his only refuge
in the time of trouble) vtteryng most lamentably, with brynishe salt woluishe
tears, his life as enseweth.

FINIS.
I Rorie Ogge, Rorie Ogg shows he^e the County wherein he dwells, and his
natural inclination, whereunto he is addicted.
inhabitaunt of Leasse,
A rebel false, against my (sovereign queen)
I love debate, expellyng godly peace,
I lead my life, in Boggs and thickets grene,
What mortal wight, my co^pere then has seen,
Which of ye lord nor prince does stand in awe,
Nor pass not for, the rigor of the Law.
My heart is bent, Mark where unto this Rebels heart is bent, (that is to
say) to all kind of mischief, sin and wickedness.
to eurie kind of ill,
Whose outward deeds, do well relate the same
I love the thing, supporter of my will,
I spoil and burn, thereby t'encrease my fame,
Thus by such acts, I gotten have a name.
Even traitor false, that never shall decaie,
Nor be extinct, by any kind of way.
I vilaine vile, and crafty as the Fox,
Rorie in accusing him self, is not to be judged of other, for here he shows
that he is as crafty as a Fox, an extortioner like the Wolf, falser then a
thief, and a traiter to the Queen, in which I believe him, though he neue^
swore for the matter.
Yea like the Wolf, which does extortion use,
I falser am, then thief that pickes the locks,
In deulishe sort, my self I so abuse:
(My noble Queen) for cheef I do refuse,
Whose royal name, does mo^nte unto the sky,
And curie where, is in ancthoritie.
What may displease, Rory Ogge going forward in the setting out of his
disposition tells that he does all this kind of mischefe of set purpose
against ye queen, who notwithstanding, lays all the blame and falte upon the
Devil.
her princly royal grace,
(I like a thief) do put the same in ure,
Her highness Laws, I daiely do deface,
And through ye same, her heavy wrath procure:
Thus Satan he, my senses does allure,
Who makes them thrall, to serve his appetite,
So that in naught, but sin I do delight.
She would me good, if I would loyal be,
But my ill hap, and crewell Destiny,
In part or whole, that thing forbids me,
Till Ize constrainde, through Sidneis policy:
Her mighty hand, perforce to testify,
Prostratyng me, before her fearful Law,
Though of the same, I stood not erst in awe.
In this he manifests the great goodness of the Queen, whose mercy is
daily extended toward those which are willing to yield to the observation
of her statutes and laws, but he in no wise may yield thereto, till by
compulsion he be constrained.
And forste perforce, God knows what does remain
But cruel plages, for my desartes are just,
Such is the meede, which eurie Rebel gain,
That does pursue, the chase of ragyng lust:
O careless Karne, O Rebel false to trust,
Rory Ogg being compelde to acknowledge ye great aucthority of the Prince, is
therefore worthy of small godamercie.
O Rorie Ogge, thrice cursed may I be,
Who mou'de to wrath, the queens high majesty
Woe Where Rorie bid the three curses light upon him, I wish him for every one
twenty (saving my charity.)
may I be, for mouyng her to Ire,
The M. woes, through which my soul possess
In each respect, surpass the flames of fire,
I languishe still, but hopeless of redress:
My wicked life, I needs must now confess,
Through which I feel, eue^ live ye pa^ges of hell,
A good note for Rebels, Marks the effect, of rebellion, and whereunto it
drives this wretched Roge, even to the brincke of desperation, who as he
says being yet alive, feels most apparently the torments of hell, and
here it is proved true, that a man's own conscience is better then a thousand
witnesses.
That neither pen, nor tongue of man can tell.
I am expelde, There be two sorts of people on earth, knaves and honest men,
whereon I gather that Rorie Ogge being banished the company of honest men,
must be entertained of his like e^uall companio^s, (who as him self says) is
daily pursued of the good in most woeful sort.
from crewe of honest men,
None but my mates, me traitor may abide,
As for the good, they hunte me now and then,
From wooddes to Boggs, beset on eurie side:
And where that I, so ever am espide,
There weight is laid, to catch my silly soul,
And with the axe, to short me by the poule.
Which thing to taste, I well deserved have,
Rorie is here (...) very penitent person, which confesses his life to have
deserved death, which refused the princes pardone once offered him.
Since freedom once, was offerde unto me,
Vain is the gift, that is profferde to a knave,
Who naught estemes, his Princes elemencie:
O Rebel cause, of all thy misery,
Which might have had, remission of thy sin,
What, greater gain, supposedst thou to win.
O happlesse wight, refusyng Princes grace,
Here Rorie Ogge takes on with himself for refusing the pardone, and
acknowledges him self an ass, and a beast in deniyng the same.
O dismalle day, wherein I it denide,
O perverse heart, that couldste not it embrace,
But like a thief, such courtesy denide:
O brutishe beast, who does not now deride,
The vauntyng heart, asspiryng over hye,
Whose haughty thoughts, did match ye rouling sky.
But true it is, that Fatal letters say,
Who takes no time, Rorie calls to memory the saying that is written, time
being once past, is not easily called back, whereby we are lea^^ed to take the
time present whilst it is of^^red.
when as the same is lent,
And hold it fast, him self thereby to stay,
Whom if it pass, the crooked way it went:
He may not find, the Tavern, House or tent,
Though them to seek, he spends day and night
And all because, he held not when he might.
He verifieth and approves the above saying by him self, which reiectyng
grace being offered, now seeks after it, but may not have it, though with
weeping he does request it.
Even so alas, when noble Sidney he,
My pardon sent, for faltes I did commit,
Though there I saw, each crime forgiven to be,
I not content, with chat his pardon yet:
Let pass the same, as gift for me unfit,
Which to reuert, now lies not in my might,
For God and time, have wrought me this dispight
Rorie Ogge shows for pardone, but may not obtain it, for Princes by Rebels
will not be deluded.
Now do I seek, though sekyng naught prevail
Feign would I find, the favor of my Prince,
But craft serves not, that stately forte to scaile,
For well she knows, my subtle hearts pretense
Who has a time, the same to recompense,
As seems good, unto her royal grace.
For God and time, Rorie Ogg seeing him self environed on every side with
enemies, manifests his misery, showing not one crafty hose or ^enne to be
free from the knowledge of ye Lord deputy, but that he has intelligence and
knowledge of it.
bid Justice to take place.
And Justice she, sendes forth her warlike crew,
With sondrie spies, my haunte for to disclose,
Who connyngly poor Rories tracte do vewe,
Relatyng it unto his mortal foes:
As naught is left, wherein he may repose,
Mo^gest all his de^nes a bulwark for his health
Nor yet a ho^e, to shroude his gotten stealth.
Rorie shows how spiteful greedy, the English Captanes and Soldiers are in
chasyng and hu^ting him.
Like greedy hawks, pursuyng fast their pray,
All fully bent, the same for to devour,
And as the Night, the Oriental day,
Does captive make, by his external power:
So time from time, small distance from an hour,
Pursude I am* and brought to such a baie,
As I expecte, naught but my dismal day.
Sir Henry now, Rorie acknowledges ye Lord Deputies notable wisdom, only
to have brought him to this misery.
who gouernes Irishe soil,
Has made an oath, to breuiate my days,
Whose stratagemes, have given me such a foil
As all the land, soundes out his noble praise:
For he it is, that breaks down my stays,
And who but he might Rorie overthrow,
Though Mars hmself, had sworn my mortal fo.
Who might have taken, He proves his affirmation by a most manifest example,
which was brought at that time to pas
out of my bloody hand,
Whom by my sleightes, I captive made to be,
That Marshall knight, and captain of a band,
No second one, (except again twere he:
In fine it was he, which made of bondmen free,
And put to sword, Rorie Oges wife is slain.
for my unstable truth,
My spoused wife, the garlande of my youth.
With many mo, my dear and special friends, Rories frend^s to the number of
sixtene are saine in a cabin, being in a Wood of the English men, and after
ward the cabin being set on fire, all their bodies are burned also.

Whose brethlesse corpse, were given to flams of fire
Good cause had I, to wail their lucklesse ends,
Though Jove agreed, to yield them such a hire:
O heavy plague, to move the heavens to Ire,
Through whose outrage, ye just often su^fers pain
To cause the rest, from wicked acts refrain.
And I my self, in danger of my life,
Round compaste then, Rorie Ogg being at that time in the foresaied cabin,
with those that were killed hardly escapes, though not without a good knock
of a halbert upon his costarde.
by men of worthy fame,
Sought out to shift, how to escape the knife:
That ready was, my courage for to tame,
Which when that I, well pondred had the same
I took good heart, it stood me then upon,
And leapt me forth, time wild I should be go^.
To leap well is very necessary sometime, as appears here by Rorie Ogge.
Now with that leap, I got me quight away
Most joyous that, I skaped had the trappe,
My legs were good, to vow that thing I may
Which set me free, that tide from that mishappe
Not over free, for one gave me a rappe,
Which thing I swear, did pinche me to ye heart,
The blow was great, and came so overthwart.
Rorie here shows that the English men, were very sorry for his escape out of
the cabin, and from their hands. This happiness is to be referred to the
English men, whose chance was to kill those rebellious knaves. Rorie Ogge
especially does be wail the death of one S^aue Macke Rorie Reagh above ye rest
that were slain at ye time.
But escape I did, so much the more their greef,
And got me soon, into an other den,
None fled with me, but one poor only thief,
As for the rest, they were saluted then,
That instant time, were xvi. of my men,
Put to the sword, in cabbande where we lay,
O my ill hap, but happy theirs I say.
Amongst them all, one ancient aged sire,
Whose councels I, each while did well allow,
Though old he was, yet pearcyng as the fire,
A crafty Fox, as any lives now:
Was murdered then, by chance I wot not how
Whose crewell fall, given by the sisters three,
Alas, alas, full sore disquiets me.
Here he sets out ye cause why he so ^eploreth his destenie.
For whilste he liu'de, my heart possessed his lust,
And lust enioyde, what so it could invent:
But since the post, whereon my hope did trust,
Receu'de his dome, by warriors fearce assent,
Like thra^domes slave, I since have been pe^t.
Rorie Ogge being be reaued of his counselors, is all most out of his wits.
In easlesse hold, not wittyng what to do,
Or what were best, to put my self unto.
My men were slain, When Rebels lack fawterers and helpers, the^ fall they to
misery.
which only were my stay,
My wife through whom, I often gat releef,
My fre^des which brought, to Rorie day by day
The stolen horse, the Mutton and the Beef,
Which things to want, who holds it not a greef?
Yea such a plague, as aucthours tell to me,
That to a man, no greater plague can be.
Lo first the woe, The first step to Rories misery.
my soul does over quell,
Behold ye straight, whereto I now am brought,
Mark well the place, where caitife I do dwell,
As eke the knight, this alteration wrought,
Then shall you se, if thoroughly you have sought
The perfect way, that leads to the hall:
Where are the plagues, on Rorie Ogge shall fall.
For Sidney now, The Lord Deputy is in armor against Rorie Ogge, whose fame
is spread universally through out the Realm of Irelande.
that thrice (renowned knight,)
T'augment the fame, and service of his (queen)
Stands out in feeld, by sword to try her right:
(Whose valiant heart, like to the Laurel green,
For courage stout, and prudence mixed between,
Is had in Price) renowned for the same,
Through Irishe soil, with trompe of happy fame
He sondrie ways, Sir Henry Sidney increases Rorie Oges misery, and works
his subversion by his notable industerie.
does aggrauate my smart,
He he I say, has wrought me sore anoye,
His wisdoms skill, has dau^ted sore my heart:
And my attemptes, does utterly, destroy,
He day from day, his accious does imploye,
False Rories days, to breuiate with speed:
Because that he, so vile a life do leede.
Soldiers are sent out to put in practice, the Lord Deputies purpose.

Rorie plaieth the Astronomer this star was seen from Dublin south west, by
which blasyng star, Rorie Oge conjectures his speedy fall, which
accordyngly happened. By these enis and cees, are meant the Mores and Comores
Rories chief friends.


His Marshall knights, and expert men of war,
By him are sent, to put the same in ure,
Who me of all, my freedom do debar:
Whereby I may, not long their force endure,
But force no force, since I did so procure.
Both heaven and earth, to be my mortal foe:
If in their rage, they Rorie overthrow.
Behold a Star, apparent in the Weste,
This H. does signify, how Macke Shave which is Rorie Oges father in law.
Whose fiery streams, I find by learned skill,
Betokens peace, tranquillity, and rest,
When M Ms and Cs, to serve false Rories will,
Debarde shall be, for thereof come the ill.
Or if that H. had seru'de his Queen a right,
Long since R. had been extirped quight.
This is a true and good confession of Rorie Oge, uttered in his extremity.
Rorie Oge is in his similitudes up to the hard ears, prouyng with manifest
arguments, unless he had been bolstered up by his said father in law and his
friends, it had been impossible that he should have continued so long
unexecuted or taken.
When H. does well, to deal with double hand
Else from his kind, he should degenerate.
But if that S. his slight did understand,
H. should be turnde, augmenter of debate,
In little space, unto a vi^er state,
*Though yet not spide, he goes uncorrected:
Which is the botche, wherewith R. is infected.
*Like as that house, whereon him self to stay,
Has sondrie posts, by workmen fastened sure,
With eurie puff, may not be blown away:
So long as they* in linked state endure,
Even so my self, I do you all assure,
Shall scarce betrapt with Fortunes fatal chance
Whilst friends with aid, my mischeef do aduau^ce.
But posts remou'de, the house sone has a fall,
And buildyng goes, Mark here Rories reasone, which speaks by experience.
with violence to wrack,
No part may stand, the rofe nor yet the wall:
When as the same, his vnderstaies does lack,
Even so my self, nowhit could hold out tacke.
Except that I had underpropped been:
By him or them, that seem friends to the queen.
Which if they were, Gods blessyng haste thou good Rorie for speaking the
truth.
from Rorie once remou'de,
Who would misdoubt, ye peace that should ensue
This by his like, the wise has often prou'de:
As now by me, it may be holden true,
If that the cause, Rorie Ogge takes upon him here, to have skill in Physic.
whereon the Phistoll grew,
Had first been taken, from pacient clean away:
No Phistoll then had sprouted there I say.
But as a part, As the Lord Deputy abbridged the days of some of Rorie Oges
fosterers in this his visitation, so he prophesteth of the end of the rest of
his said friends together with him self.
is silde through fatal chance,
Or by the slight, of Sidneys prudent skill,
So in good time, the rest shall trace that dau^ce:
Which hitherto, have seru'de my wicked will,
And since that they, have nourst me in mine ill.
They shall receive, with me for their reward:
Aguerdon due, long since of Jove preparde.
That time draws nigh, Rorie sees by some secret way that his prophecy is at
hand, ready to be performed, and so much the more he is certain of it,
because he does see Sir Henry Sidney bent wholly to his destruction.
and hour is at hand,
In which the cept, of my rebellyng race,
Shall be extirpt, and bolishte clean the land:
(For God him self, do sit in judgment place)
To Judge I say, with Justice now the case.
Which time from time, has ever been defard:
So that the right, at no time could be heard.
Rorie Ogge t^keth this sith to be the sword of Justice, which the Lord
Deputy has plucked out of the sheath only to do execution upon all
transgressors.
Lo lo I see, in Mowers crewell hand,
A fearful Sith, which does prognosticate,
Both here and there, throughout this Irishe land
That growth of things, are at their ripned state
Which must be cropped, by Sith of dismal fate.
For God and time, has sworn by sacred oath:
That Reed and husk, shall suffer penance both.
It is at hand, for feelds declare the same,
The date is out, and time appointed spent,
And reapman now, the vanter to reclame:
The Harolde of death is sent to Rorie Oge, certainly to make manifest, his
ruin and fall.
In Irefull rage, from mighty Jove is sent,
Whose message thus, unto me does present.
Affirmyng R. to come to desolation:
And his supporters, to suffer like destruction.
Then men shall walk, upon the mountains hie,
The peace is discribed that shall be after the death of Rorie Oge.
And fear nowhit, the Tiger, Wolf, nor Bear
The Kids shall sleep, with Leopard quietly:
And yet nowhit, his fearful visage fear,
For why? no cause, of tremblyng shall be there.
When as the thing, whereof they were afraied:
Shall be by sword, and crewell conquest laid.
The Lord Deputy in prosecuting his purpose against Rorie Oge, and through
procurement of the said Rories fall, deserves everlasting remembrance, with
all good and famous men.
The^ H. and S. through who^ this peace does spring,
For his desartes, shall crouned sit with Fame,
And over that, which is a better thing:
He shall possess, an everlasting name,
Amongst the just, that well deserve the same.
And though ye time, shall turn his corpse to clay
Yet shall his name, still florishe as the Baye.
Lo you that live, Rorie Oge makes here his conclusion, and gives forth a
good exhortation to all men, councelyng them to eschew and flee treasons, and
shows though sins be for a while let go unpunished, yet at length they are
recompensed at full.
and I that soon shall dye,
Behold I say, the salerie for sin,
Now let my cause, teach other impes to fly:
From treasons lure, lest stipende like they win,
For though it is long, ere Justice comes in.
Yet when it comes, it paieth once for all:
And suffers plages, by heaps on plages to fall.
FINIS.
ENteryng into the discourse of Rorie Ogge, at the first, I was purposely
bent, friendly with him to adioine the lives of many (the open professed enemies
of her Majesty's government within this Realm of Irelande) but before I had
ended that portion (even in the midst thereof) I beheld many impedimentes,
wonderful obstacklesse, stoppes, and stays perswadyng the contrary, which
being replenished with sufficient matter, grounded upon reason, wisdom
advised me, to consider thereof (least peradventure) ranging on rashely, I
might seem to prosecute an endless work, making a volume, more greater, then
grateful, and more painful, then pleasant, (which thing doubtless) I
utterly abhor. Seeing that praise consistes not, in the quantity, but
rather, in the quality ^ grace of a thing done. And thus I breuiated my former
intent, though in effect, nothing deminishyng that which I promised. For in
this discourse, you may perfectly se, as in a glass, perceive, learn, and
understand, to what vexations of mind, troubles of body, anguishe and
wretchedness in conscience all the rabble of Rebels are captiued unto.
Wherefore leauyng them with their ungracious Patrones; Phisniognamies,
external; and infernal, to thy consideration (gentill Reader:) It came then
into my mind, freshely to gather my wits together, to the setting forth of
an other manner of thing, of greater valor then as yet thou have seen (that is
to say) the coming in of O Neale to (Sir Henry Sidney our Lord Deputy of
Ireland) at the Newrie, with his submission, the oath that the said O Neale
the^ and there made, touching his perpetual fidelity, and inviolable
continuance of his duetifull aledgaunce, to the (queen's Majesty her royal
Croune and dignity) with sondrie other promises more, decently becommyng every
good Subject: not barely in words to say, but actually in deeds to
accomplish and perform, which if I had passed over in silence, some perhapps
would have blamed me of parcialities, who in this Image so sharply enueighyng,
against the wickedness and rudeness of woodkarne, should have omitted such a
presidente of humble submission, wherefore behold the said O Neale here
making his submission, as before is said, who^ the Lord Deputy in the
(Queens Majesty's) behalf most nobly accepts, renderyng such honor as to
his person appertains. The effect whereof hereafter follows.

IF silly beasts, If beasts which have no understanding, do rejoice at
winters departing, and at the coming in of summer, (the encreaser of their
delights) much more ought that man, who being long without the princes favor,
and kept in disgrace, be trebble joyous, (received at length to mercy and
favor)
long pent in droopyng stale,
Or if the Heart, sore pincht with chillyng cold,
No marvel joys, to see the Summer fale,
Through which the plants, kept down in massy hold
Their fragra^t se^tes, and beauties may unfold.
Or if the Larcke, when clouds are paste away,
Te deum synges, to see the Sunnie day.
Why should not man, the highest firmament,
Whose thoughts did pearce, where Jove resple^dent sit
Whose outward shape, the same does represent:
As next extend, for his forecastyng wit,
To whom alone, he only does commit.
The vastall world, with ruledome of the same:
The fish in Seas, and beasts on land to tame.
Rejoice I say, unbound from thousand cares,
From greef of mind, with sorrows over priest,
From sighing sobbs, far fetched with trillyng tears
From heaps of cares, clos'de up in pantyng breast,
From every thing, that might gainsaie his rest.
And now in place, and stead of such anoye:
To reap at full, his long expected joy.
This joy at full, I mean my Princes grace,
The favor of the prince is an inestimable treasure to that subject which has
it, surmountyng (...) and preacious stones.
The chefest wealth, that subjects can require,
A learned judge, to soil each doubtful case:
As readiest way whereby men may aspire,
To honors seat, from youth which all desire.
A pere^esse peat^e, (...) worth then gold:
And more o^ price, then Diamonds to be sold.
A tower of strength, and forte of Fortitude,
This sets out most lively in sondrie, forms and fasho^es, (...) what a
thing the favor and grace of our Queen is.
A Samson strong to riue the gates a sonder,
A mighty Sea, that land from land exclude:
A doubtie Mars, which Nations brings under,
A second Jove, that works mickle wonder.
A passing st^rne, to guide man's Shipp a right:
A pleasant feeld, and gardeine of delight.
O who can tell, expressyng eurie part,
The happy estate and condition of good subjects, is with out all comparisons.
The xceedyng joy, that loyal Subjects win,
Or who can show, the thrice redoundyng smarte:
That reachlesse lives, to rebels brings in,
Which make things seem, as though thade never bin,
(O pear^e of price) to honor Princes Laws:
Of health and wealth, the sole and only cause.
In deed, I think if there were any grace at al in him, which is once brought
to be a subject, he may not lightly be turned to be a Rebel again.
Who so did taste, once of that Sugared life,
And reap the fruit, that spryngeth of the same,
Bi't wildest Karn^, b'it infant child or wife:
Wearte fearrest ^oe, by conquest worthy fame,
Weart-Macke, or O. Macke devil weart by name
I think if grace, did them conduct a right.
Theilde no exchange, though change at will they might
If hap to change, Truly the condition of Rebels in Irelande is very
ticklish, and their chances very hard, as in this part^ is discribed.
the change for worser part,
As trial tells, each where in Irishe soil,
In reachlesse change, things light ouerth warte^
For though the foe, in treasons feelde domoile,
Yet dreades he sore, each while to get tho foil.
And though for once, he passes by the trappe:
Yet at the length, in pantell he shall hap.
Yea though their straightes, A most plain and true description of Rebels
timeros^rie.
hard fortune to expel
Are hundred Karnes preparde at all assaies,
Yet eurie Rushe, their haughty hearts does quell:
As whicly wind, their courage sore alaies,
Thus fear them daunt, by 1000. kind of ways.
They fear to see, the shiu'ryng of the day:
They fear as fast, when it is paste away.
Thus fear each while, Fear every while and where, troubles the Rebel,
waking, sleepyng, and at all times and seasons.
enuironth traitors mind,
And cares again, to sheeld them from mischance,
They are disturbde, at eurie puff of wind:
The dusked clouds, which over them do glaunce,
They say foreshewes, some sudden fatal chance.
And often times, the shaddowe of a tree:
Makes them believe, a band of men to see.
Such fear turmoiles, The traiter that thinks him self in most security,
is often times brought into greatest perplexity, such an horrible thing is
treasone.
the sturdest of them all,
Such fear I say, each Rebel does retain,
Such fear I vow, upon the best does fall:
Such fear I swear, the chefest foe does pain,
Such fear again, in loftest heart remain.
And though such fear, does ouerwhelme their hearts,
Yet cease they not, to play disloiall parts.
^ebellion is ^ very foolish play and pastyme, and most foolish is he, that
f^^^eth his heart and stomach with treason as if it were with most wholesome meat
Such play may well, be counted fools game,
For none but fools, therein do take delight,
Just was the cause, whereof it held the name:
As eke a curste, that brought it first to light,
In stead of food, to glutte man's appetite.
And band are all, in City, Feeld or Town:
That hold such play, against the royal croune.
Those that live well, and love well their Prince, is every where counted happy
and blessed.
But bleste are they, that do refuse the same,
And trebble blessed, that love their Prince a right,
Blessed shall he be, which pretermittes that game:
Yea bleste I say, both morning and at night,
Bleste shall he be, which has his whole delight.
In good attemptes, and furdryng Princ's cause:
Conductyng him, by tenor of her Laws.
This is the protestation of O Neale to the Lord Deputy.
My Princes freende, I vow my self to be,
And loyal eke, unto her noble grace,
A freende to her, a freende likewise to me:
As time shall try, the vtmoste of her case,
And who that seeks, her honor to deface.
I do protest, by all my force and might:
My blood to gage, but I Will maintain her right.
This is largely profferd of him.
In Princes cause, my hand shall strike ye stroke,
And who that dare, her Cepter to defame,
As he that will, not yet again revoke:
By Marshall acts, that person I Will reclame,
And make him yield, submission to her name.
Yea though he were, a second Mars I vow:
I Will make him stoop, to break, to bend, or bow.
Few Scotts in North (if Queen will have it so)
Shall there abide, O Neale promises to expel al Scots out of the North of
Irelande, if the Queens Majesty would but give him aid, or if her grace
would have it so.
the ground for to manure,
Except that they, their homage yield her to:
Auowyng eke, their fealty to endure,
Conioynyng it, with compliments most sure.
Not one I say (if Queen will me supporte)
Shall there possess, one castle town or forte.
Since I have reapte, the thing I did desire,
And won at last, the favor of the croune,
My heart is set, as twere in flames of fire:
By service just, Meaning Sir Henry Sidney, to whom O Neale made like
protestation.
t'augmene her great renown,
Which shall appear, by Rebels pluckyng down.
Withstandyng the^, that shall withstand her right:
In midste of feelde, (I vow'de it to her knight.)
Let them beware, An admonition to the enhabitantes and borderers near to the
North
that border nere my hold,
In any case* how they their lives do leede,
For with an oath, to vow I may be bold:
If to their cuttes, they take not better heed,
In heart and mind, I fully am agreed.
The best to quell, O Neale promises not only to be a scourdge to the evil
livers and disturbers of her Majesty's people, but also a friend and helper of
her good subjects to the uttermost of his power.
(that shall molest her grace:)
Demissyng them, from honor, life, and place.
But *those that lead, a faithful subjects life,
I their defense, do put my self to be,
Supportyng them, in eurie kind of strife:
Defendyng them, from cruel tyranny,
By way I say, of noble cheualrie.
And whereas I, may do them any good:
For Princes sake, I Will hazard life and blood.
FINIS.
The Aucthors exhortation.
Come each wight, which now do haunt the wood,
Submit your selves, unto your sovereigns law,
Come forth I say, receive my council good:
Let not fond lust, your senses thence withdraw,
But of the croune, like subjects stand in awe.
So shall you find, such favor of the Queen:
As hitherto, the like you have not scene.
In stead of woods, then houses you may use,
In stead of Boggs, the Cities at your will,
Proceed therefore, lest time you should abuse:
Now reap the fruit, of pleasure even your fill.
Let loyal love, Rebellyng fancies kill.
(In fine) submit, you (to her royal grace:
So mercy shall, areste you with her Mace.
FINIS.
THE miserable calamity of Rorie Ogge set out by means of the deadly pursuit
of valiant seruitures daily pursewyng him, remained nothing to the concludyng
of my labors, but the final endyng of his wretched race, which thing I
constantly believed would shortly come to pass, (admirable both to the
beholders and seers) for as his life was notorious and passing knauishe, so
could it not otherwise be, but that his death must agree, falling out equal in
each condition to his traitorous usage, for seldom is it seen, that wicked
rebelling has a blessed ending, and as men oftentimes hope not in vain, so I
expectyng, or rather wishing, the cuttyng of (of such a botchie member
(received at length, the reward of my expectation, in the fullness of the
thing I so long thursted for. (For as God would) it came luckely to pass,
(long time predestined by his unsearchable and secret counsel) efte sone, as
I had ended with the description of O Neale, that this cursed caitife, (cursed
of gods own mouth) was through the sword, by the means of the Lord of
Vppossery and his seruiters (a faithful subject of that Realm) bereaved of
his life, to the great tranquillity of Lease, and else where (her Majesty's
leage people there inhabityng) according to the true prophecy, in his living
story, at large set out. Wherefore, and for as much, as I suppose your desire
is, to hear some discourse consernyng his death, as you heard before touching
his life, suppose that you see a monstrous Devil, a trunckelesse head, and a
hedlesse body living, the one hid in some miskin and donghill, but the other
exalted, yea mounted upon a poule (a proper sight God wot to be hold (vanting
it self on the highest top of the Castle of Dublin, vtteryng in plain
Irishe the things that ensewe.

FINIS.
WHilste fear ioynde with hope, In this part Rorie Oge shows the state of that
man to be sure, so long as he keeps him self dutiful to his Prince and
Country.
liege people retain,
A fear to offend, the Prince or her law,
And hope for desartes, such goodness to gain:
As shall be imposde, to the line they draw,
Whilste one uprightly, twixt these stands in awe.
He dreades no turbulent storms that may chance
For time tries falsehood, the trothe to advance.
But fear expulsed, clean out of the mind,
Not waiyng Justice, That man which casts of fear falls into many
mischefes.
detectour of sin:
And hope of correction, which subjects does bind,
Their lives for to lead, the statutes within,
Are lightly extend, when rancour begin,
To play her pagent, as wily she can:
She spoyleth wholly, the nature of man.
Procuryng envy, He that has wicked rancour in his breast, has with it also
a great number of evil vices. Time is a detectour of treasone.
grudge, strife, and debate,
Anger, and malice, both fit for the turn,
Dissimulation, a principal mate:
That other vices, does neately adorn,
Holdyng them smouldryng, and never to burn,
Till time descries it, detectyng the treason:
Which then is maintainde, by color of reason.
Aledgyng reason, Treason espied, is execused by reasone.
such folly to cover,
Though treason not reason, is chefest pretense,
Thus whilste in malice, the Rebel does houer:
Raising a power, to be his defense,
To subjects disquiet, the Realm and the Prince,
Good God what reason, iste then to defend,
The thing that treason, is found in the end?
That traiter which is wilfully given to play the Rebel, has never regard to
the cause be it good or bad, for which he rises.
But man addicted, to fancy and will,
Forced by Satan, to follow his lust,
Regardes not the cause, be it good or ill:
For which in hazard, his life he does thruste,
He pass not a myte, b'it just, or unjust:
For as the Pooke leads him, so forward he must:
Not ceasing till bayarde, laith him in the dust.
A Rebel does not remember what is the end of his treasons.
He naught forcasteth, enflamed with ire,
At last what guerdon, false treason awarde,
Nor yet diserneth, through passing desire:
What plagues for traitors, ye law has preparde,
But ronnyng forward, not having regard,
To things before him, or after ensewe:
He sone possess, what for treasone is dew.
Though fortune does fauer the traitor for a while, yet at last she leaves
him in the briars.
Although for a time, dame fortune does smile,
Fauryng most friendly, the thing set abroche,
Whose crafty suggestions, compact in a wise,
At last bringes the Rebel, to shame and reproach,
Deludyng his rashness, that darde to encroche,
So much on fortune, abusing her wheel:
That least puff of wind, does make for to reele.
What here is spoken, a thousand have tried,
Who may be trial, the truth will declare,
The course of fortune, Many (...) found fo^tune very dec^iptfull.
they likewise have spide,
As how she seeks, but people to snare:
To snarle and entangle, with sorrow and care,
And they thus hampred, from them to fly,
Suffryng those captives, in fetters to lie.
Yet she forsakes not, To augment the mise^ie of man, fortune does some time
seem friendly, riddyng him out of one small trouble, to bring him in to four
greater, and then bids him adewe.
still men in their need,
But sometime faureth, their hardlesse distress,
As who that lists, in stories to reed,
Shall see how friendly, she seeks their release,
Though for no true love, yet more to increase,
The plague of vengeance, that after ensewe,
(A stipende justly, to traitors b'yng dew)
These things to confirm, I Rorie am he,
Who sometime mounted, Rorie Oge is a sufficient witness, to tell of Dame
Fortunes variablenes.
a lofte in the Sky,
And fortune castyng, a favor to me:
Provoked me higher, and higher to fly,
Thus like an Eagle, I neastled on hie,
Full little thinkyng, again to descend:
Or that my glory, would ever have end.
In all my actions, Mark how fortune did fauer Rorie Oge, according to his
own setyng, who being to much besotted therewith, fell to utter confusion and
shame at last.
most happy success,
Dame Fortune, ever allotted to me,
For what I minded, in heart to suppress:
The same accomplished, she caused to be,
Thus will and fortune, did ever agree,
Which thing espied, puffed up with aspiraunce:
I stood with Sir Henry, alas at defiaunce.
Much like a champion, addicted to war,
(...) Oge gathers eight score men to maintain his knauerie.
Time seruyng fitly, to anger my foes,
I somm^nde a number, of neighbors from far:
Twice eighty persons, the best I could chose,
For manhood, and sleightes, in whom to repose,
I might in saftie, my life and my land:
No dasterdes nor shrincklinges, but those yt would stand.
Rorie Oge troubles both Town and Country with his Karne, and sets more
then a hundred houses on fire in one night.
With these I marched, from place unto place,
With these I troubled both Uillage and Town,
With these in one night, I fired the Nace:
With these my Recisters, I spoylde of renoune,
With these I made many a Castle come down,
With these I yielded, augmentyng my fame:
The people to sword, and houses to flame.
With these I wasted, the County of Lease,
The places likewise, that bordred it nigh,
Rorie Oge makes the Farmers of Leasse to give over their plowing, by reasone
of his daily robbing and burning.
I made from tillage, the Farmors to cease:
I made them gladly, away for to fly,
Inuityng them nightly, with a fresh supplye,
Giuyng my woodkarne, their states to maintain
The fruit that growed, of other men's pain.
But God detestyng, this horrible life,
The just Justice of God permits not Rorie Oge to rage still on in his
fury, but calyng him to account yeildeth him his duty.
Might not of Justice, permit me further,
To rage in such fury, delightyng in strife:
Contemnyng virtue, addicted to murder,
His Justice, and Judgment, meetyng together,
For my demenure, since wilful I swarued:
Awarded me death, long sithence desarued.
And here I lie groulyng, poor wretch on ye ground
Spoylde of the Jewel, Rorie Oge head is sert upon the top of the Cas^el of
Dublin, for a spectakle to all the whole land.
I chiefly loved,
Thus God of Justice, does traitors confound:
When from their sins, thaile not be removed,
With shame and confusion, I now am reproved,
My head from the body, parted in twain:
Is set on the Castle, a sign to remain.
All men that hear this, take warnyng by me, Rorie Oge makes here his
conclusion and gives wholesome counsel more better then he ever could take, how
they attempt any thing that might be prejudicial to the prince, for fear of
like destruction.

Least that ye fall, in like predicament,
The art of treason, see likewise ye flee:
Wisely forecastyng, whereto ye consent,
Against the Croune royal, do nothing attempt,
For if against it, ye falyng at odd:
Do feel as I felt, the strength of the rod.
FINIS.

