A Dialogue or speaking together of two Personages of the which, the one is the
Well willing Comminaltie, and the other the Noble and most puyssant Prince, my
Lord the Duke of Aniou.

OUR MOST REDOVBTED LORD. etc.

Jmprinted at London, by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in newgate market, and are
to be sold at his shop over against S. Sepulchers Church. 1582.

The well willing Comminaltie. MOst gracious lord considering that the
government of countries has been always esteemed not only amongst the
Philosophers but also amongst all nations, to be a matter of great weight and
importance, specially when as a Prince and Governor does faithfully attend on
the same. Therefore now that we have conceived such hope of your highness, we
have been moved firstly in all reverence to salute your highness, and thereafter
as true subjects to present and show all obedience.


My Lord the Duke. My loving friends I thank you heartily for the love and
kindness which you do show unto me. And also do promise never to frustrate
you, nor make any default of the duetifull good confidence which ye do bear to
my person.


The well willing Comminaltie. We look for nothing else of your highness, but
for the office of a good Prince. Which is to protect and defend his subjects
from all wrong, outrage, and violence. And to love them as the father loves
his children, and the shepeheard his sheep, which does venture his life for to
defend them.


My Lord the Duke. My friends you speak very well and I will also fervently
endeavor my self to the same, for I hope even as you shall find me always a
benign and faithful Governor, that I likewise shall have you obedient
subjects, for like as the father is bound to love his children, and the
shepherd his sheep, even so the sheep likewise are bound to follow their
shepeheard and show him obedience.


The well willing Comminaltie. Your highness shall be hereof enough assured
having read over our ancient Consequences and Chronicles. Wherein every where
is to be found the great affection which we naturally do bear to our
lawful Princes and Lords. But in case your highness did vouchsafe to hear us,
it would not seem unto us to be inconvenient, (because your highness should
have knowledge of all things, which is most needful for well to administer
the government of countries,) that we now speaking together, might briefly
discourse or run over the estate of these our low countries, and the sum of
things which theirin be passed since the beginning of the troubles until now.


My Lord the Duke. My loving friends, I am very well pleased to hear the same
and that more is, I think it wholly necessary, to have knowledge thereof.
Because we might thereby in all things deal the more circu^spectly, to the
welfare of the country, and the salvation of us all. And therefore I request
you in no wise, to hide from me the knowledge of such things.


The well willing Comminaltie. Seeing that your highness does request this of
us, we will gladly do the same, thanking the almighty god that it has pleased
him to send us your highness hence forward to protect and make us free from the
tyranny, intended to be brought upon us by our enemies. Your highness must
firstly understand that the king of spain after the decese of the Emperor
Charles the first of worthy memory. Of whom he has received all these Low
countries, forgetting the services, which as well his Lord and father as also he
himself had received of these countries and the inhabitants of the same, whereby
specially the king of Spain has obtained so famous victories against his
enemies, that thereby his name and power became famous and feared through all
the world. And forgetting also the admonition which the Emperors majesty
aforesaid had given him at other times to the contrary he has bent his ear,
and given credit to those of the counsel of Spain, being near him which had
conceived in their hearts, and envy against these countries and there
freedoms. For that they might not have any charge to govern in chief
countries, nor to bear the principal estates or offices as they did in the
realms of Naples, Sicilia, at Millan, in India, and at other places being
under the kings dominion, whereof the most part of them knew the riches and
power.

Which Counsel of Spain or some of the principal thereof have declared to
this king at diverse times. That it was better for his Majesty's reputation, a
new to Conquer these countries for to command thereouer fr^ely and
absolutely, (which is to play the Tyrante according to his pleasure) then to
be driven to govern under such conditions, and restrictions, as he has been
fame to swear, in the acceptinge of the dominion of these countries, According
to ye which the king has ever since sought by all means to bring the
aforesaid countries from their ancient freedoms, and under a Tyrrannicall
government of the spani^rds inte^ding firstly under the cloak of religion to
put in new bishops in the cheefeste and most principal Cities, giving and
endewing them with adiunction and incorporation of the most Richeste Abbyes,
and adjoining unto them, nine Canonicos or Regulars, which should be of his
Counsel. Whereof the three should have special charg over the Inquisition* By
which incorporation the said Bishops (which might have been as well strangers
as Native of the Countries) have had the first places and voices in the
assemblies of the estates of these countries, And have been his creatures ready
at his commandment and devotion: and should have brought in by the said
adjoined Canonicos or Regulars, the spanishe Inquisition: Which has always
been (as it is manifest unto al men) so horrible and odious in these Countries
as the very bondage it self: In such wise that the said Imperial Majesty
having at other times proponded the same to the countries he did let it rest
again, by reason of the remonstrations which were done against it unto his
Majesty, therein showing the affection which he did bear to his subjects. But
howbeit diverse remonstrations which be done unto the King by word of mouth as
well by particular Provinces and Cities, as also by some of the principal
Lords of the Country, viz. The Lord of Montingni, and the Earl of Egmont,
being sent to Spayn to that purpose at sundry times by the consent of the
Duches of Parma then Gouernant over the same countries by the advice of the
Counsel of Estates and Generality. And also that the said king of Spain had
given unto them by word of mouth good hope to provide therein, according to
their request, he notwithstanding to the contrary thereof, shortly thereafter
sharply by Letters upon his indignation commanded to receive the Bishops, and
to place the^ in possession of their Bishoprics, and incorporated Abbeys, To
give the Inquisition her course, where it thertofore had been, and to follow
the ordinance of the Counsel of Trent. Which was in many points contrary to
the Privileges of the aforesaid countries, which thing being come to the
knowledge of the Comminaltie, has with good reason caused occasion of great
commosion amongst them: and an alienation of the good affection which they
always as good subjects have born to the said king of Spain and his
Predecessors. Specially considering that not only he did go about to play the
Tyrant upon their persons and goods, but also upon their consciences, of the
which they think to be bound to give reckoning, or make answer unto no body
but only unto God.

For which cause, and for pity of the said Cominaltie, the principal of the
Countries have exhibited a certain Remonstration in the year, 1565.
Requesting that for to still the Cominaltie, and prevent al Seditions, his
Majesty should assuage these points, and specially concerning the rigorous
Inquisition and punishment of the Religion, showing therewith the love and
affection which he as a benign Prince did bear unto his subjects, and for
to notify the same unto the said king of Spain more nearer, and with more
authority, and for to prove how necessary the same was for the welfare of
the countries, and to maintain the same in quietness, to put or leave of such
novelties, and mittigate the rigor of the general Petition of the Place at in
matters concerning the Religion at the request of the said Gouernant, Counsel
of the Estates, and of the general estates of all the countries, were sent to
Spain as Ambassadors; The Marquis of Berghen, and the Lord of Montingni before
named, But in steed to give attendaunce unto them, and to provide in the
inconveniences which there had been propounded, which by delaying of the
remedy in due time, according as the need required, did already begin to
appear or show themselves almost in all Countreies, amongst the Congregation,
he by the alluring of the spanish Counsel, has caused the said persons which
had made the aforesaid Remonstration, to be declared Rebels and to be guilty
of the crime of Treason, and consequently to be punnished in body and goods.
And moreover he thinking thereafter that the said Countries were wholly subdued
under his subiertion and Tirannye, by the power of the Duke of Alba, caused the
said Lords Ambassadors to be apprehended, murdered, and their goods confisked,
contrary to all common orders, or laws, which always have been inuiolately
observed amongst the most cruel and tyrannical Princes. And howbeit that the
greatest troubles risen in the said Countries, by the dealing of the said
Gouernant and her Adherentes, in the said year 1566. was again pacified, and
many driven away which did understand the freedoms of the countries, and the
rest oppressed and subdued in such wise, that the king had no cause at all to
oppress the said Countries by force of Weapons, yet notwithstanding, to have
such an occasion which the said Spanishe counsel of long time had sought and
looked for, according to the same is playnelye declared by th^^ intercepted and
detayned letters of Alana, the Ambassador of Spain, resident in France, being
at that time written to the Duches of Parma for to anic^^late all the
Privilege of the Countries, and to govern the same according to her will,
tirannically by the Spainiardes as the Jndians and the new conquered Lands: He
by the motion and counsel of the said Spainiardes, showing the little love
which he hare to his good subjects, contrary to that which he as their
Prince, Protector and good sheapheard was bound to do. Has sent toward the
said countries for to oppress them with a great army the Duke of Alba, being
infamous of hardness and cruelty, and one of the principal enemies of the
country: and being, for to be his Counselors, accompanied with persons of
like nature and humors. Which have executed such innumerable deal of
cruelties and tirannies upon these Countries, that the same would be to long
before your highness here to be rehearsed. And thereafter the great
Co^mandador (whom the King of Spain did send to these Countries after the
Duke of Alba not for to amend ought, but for to prosecute the said way of
tyranny by a more secret mean which have compelled the other countries which
they kept under the Spanish subjection with their Garrisons and built Castles,
for to use all their persons and might for to help to oppress them, showing
notwithstanding unto the said countries which they did employ in their
assistaunce as is aforesaid, no more favor then if they had been their very
enemies, permitting that the Spainiardes under ye cloak that they were in
sedition before the face of the great Co^mandador, forcibly did enter into the
City of Antwerpe there according to their discretion to waste and spend for
the space of six weeks at the charges of the Citizens, constrayning
furthermore in the mean time the said Citizens because they should be
discharged of the violence of the same Spainiardes to furnish to the payment of
four hundred thousand gyldrens, their demanded wages, and also thereafter the
spanishe soldiers using a greater boldness have advanced themselves publikelye
to take up their weapons against the country, thinking firstly to take the
city of Brussels, and in place of the ordinary residence of the Prince of the
Countries being there, to make their Cave of robbery, which thing not
succeeding unto them, they have overthrown the City of Aelst, and thereafter
forciblye taken, sacked, spoiled, murdered, and burned the City of Maestricht
and Antwerpe, aforesaid, and so handled the same that the most cruel and
Tyrannical enemies of the Countries can not do any more nor worse, to the
unspeakable damage not only of the inhabitants, but also almost of all the
Nations of the world, which there had their wares and money. And howbeit that
the said Spainiardes by the counsel of Estates (by whom at that time by
reason of the death of the great Comandador was accepted the Gouernmente of the
Countries by the charge and commission of the king of Spain) were declared and
published for enemies of the Land in the presence of Ieronimo de Rhoda, for the
outrage, force and violence which they used, yet the said Rhoda by his own
authority, or else (as it is to be presumed) by virtue of some secret
Instruction which he might have from Spain, had taken upon him to be the
Chief or head of these Spainguartes and their associated, And without to have
respect to these counsel of Estates to use the name and authority of the
king to counterfaite his seal, and to behave himself publikelye as gouernoure
and Liefetenaunt of the king, whereby the estates were caused to make agreement
at this time with my Lord the Prince and estate of Hollande and Zexlande,
which agreement has been approved and been found to be good by the council
of the estates and lawful Governors of the countries, for jointly and with
one accord to set upon and drive out of the countries the Spainguartes as
common enemies of the Countries. Nevertheless not pretermitting as good
subjects in the mean while with all diligence by diverse humble
remonstrations to the king of Spain and al fyt and possible means to sue and
beseeke the king that he taking regard and consideration on the troubles and
inconveniences which already were happened in these countries, and yet were
likelye to happen. It might please him to cause the Spainguartes to depart out
of the countries and punnish them which have been occasion of the spoil and
ruin of his principal Cities, and other unspeakable outrages, which his
subjects have sustained: for the consolation of those on whom the same had
fallen, and for an example to other. But the king although he feigned with
words that the same was chanced against his will and pleasure, and that he
did intend to punish their cheifes, and forthwith for the quietness of the
Countery to be willinge to appoint some order with all favor as it becomes
to a prince. Yet notwithstanding the same he has not only caused Justice nor
punishment to be administered against them, but contrary wise it does
sufficiently by his deeds apeare, that al was don with his consent, and by a
proceading spanishe Counsel, as the same within a while after found out by
certain Intercepted, and detained letters, that by the king himself had been
written to Rhodas, and other Captains (being an occasion of the aforesaid
mischeife) that he not only found their doings good but did praise them for
the same and promised to make recompense, especyally to the said Rhodas, as
having done a singular service unto him, even as also he has shown the same
in deeds, at his return in Spain, unto him, and to all other his seruiters of
the said tyrranny, which have been in these countries. And the king also at
the same time (minding so much the more to blind the eyes of his subjects) did
send as Governor in the said countries, his bastard brother Don John D'austrya
as one yt was of his blood who under the cloak that he did find good and
approve the agreement which was made at Gaunt, the promise to defend the
Estates, the Spainguartes to depart and to cause ye aucthors of the violence
and discordes which be done in these countries to be punished, And to take
order for the common quietness of the countries and the anncient lyberties,
did go avoute to divide the said Estates, and to su^dewe the one country after
the other, which thing even as that which is fainedlye done and with outward
show against, the meaning cannot long continue secret. So likewise the same
breakinge out before he had fully compassed his Intention. He could not
perform the same according to his purpose, but he in stead of peace sturred
and raised up new war, whereof he did boast at his coming and which as yet
does endure, we having resisted the same, according that reason does greatly
move us thereunto. Here you have heard most gracious Lord the principal matters
which be chanced in these our low Countries during the time of the aforesaid
troubles and therefore we beseech you with all reverence, That seeing your
entering is most heartily welcome unto us, it may please you to receive us in
your protection, and to execute at all sines on us the Office of a good Prince.


My Lord the Duke. Thereof my loving friends you need not in any wise to doubt
as long at it shall please the al^ightie God to grant me his grace.

The well willing Comminaltie.

We beseech the almighty God that it may please him here unto to preserve your
highness, and to grant us together much joy, and advancement, that we may
spedely see the enemy conquered by our hands.


Finis Coronat opus.

