The true description of two monsterous Children Borne at Herne in Kent.
The.xxvii. day of Auguste In the year our of Lord. M. CCCCC. LXV. They were
booth women Children and were Chrystened, and lived half a day. The one
departed before the other almost an hour.
depiction of conjoined twins

THe Monsterous and unnatural shapes of these Children and diverse like brought
forth in our days (good reader) are not only for us to gase and wonder at,
as things happenyng either by chance, or else by natural reason, as both the
old, and our Philosophers also hold now a days: and without any farther
heed to be had thereto, or else as our common custom is, by and by to judge god
only offended with the Parents of the same, for some notoryous, vice or
offense reygning alone in them: But they are lessons and scholynges for us all
(as the word monster shewith) who daily offend as grievously as they do, whereby
god almyghtye of his great mercy and long sufferaunce, admonysheth us by them
to amendmente of our lives. no less wicked, yea many times, more then the
parents of such mysformed be. That this is true they shall well perceive, yt
ryghtly wey and consider the answer of our Savior Christ unto his
Dyscyples, askyng him whether wear greatter sinners, the blind him self,
either else his parents, that he was so borne: To whom our savior Christ
answered, that neither he, neither they were faultye John ix.
therein, but that he was therefore borne blind, to thend the glory of God
might be declared on him, and by him. The same also appears in another
answer made by our savior Christ to them, which told him of the
Galleyans, whom Pontius Pylate put to death for their rebellyon against
Augustus Luke xiii.
their Emperor, wherein he declares (as also by those.xviii. persons on whom
the Tower by Sylotell) that there were as great offenders remaining alive, as
any of them were. Wherefore he eftsoon admonyshed them to amendment of life in
general: or else by their examples threatened them with as greauous
dystructyon, as fell upon any of them. These examples moved me (good reader)
in consideracyon of these days of our forgetfulness of duty, wherein we set so
light the great bounty and goodness of God, calling us by these and such like
examples to repentance and correction of manners, and not still to flatter our
selves while we judge others and wink at our own faults, to cause these
twynnes thus to be portractured. And sure to him that considers as he ought
to do, the great decay of hearty love and charytie (among many other wantes that
the world is now fallen in,) and had vewed and beheld the two babes, the one
as it were imbrasynge the other, and lenynge mouth to mouth, kyssyng (as you
would say, one another:) it might seem that God by them either does vpbraide
us, for our faulse dyssemblynge and Judas condycyons and countenaunces, in
freyndly words, covering Caynes thoughts and cogytacions, or else by their
semblaunte and example, exhort us to sincere amytie and true frendshyp, void
of all counterfeytinge, or else both. Neither let any man think this an
obseruacyon over curyous, for as much as Christ him self has by children
taught us, that unless we become like Children, we shall Mark x.
not come in the kingdom of heaven. God make us all children in this wise, and
perfect and well learned men-to note and observe to what end he sends us such
sightes as these, that here by (put in remembrance the rather of our duties
both to him and our neighbors) we may atteyne to life everlasting by Christ
our Lord. To whom with the holy Ghost for this and all other his works, be
all majesty, power glory and domynyon, now and ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London in Fletestreat by Thomas Colwell: For Owen Rogers dwelling
at S. Sepulchers Church door.


