The description of a monstrous Pig, the which was farrowed at Hamsted beside
London, the. xvi. day of October this present year of our Lord God. M.D.LXII.


THis present year of our lord GOD, a thousand, five hundred, three score and
two, one Robert Martin of Hamsted, in the county of Mid. beside London, had a
Sow the which brought forth. viii. Piggs, the. xvi. day of October, where of.
vii. were of right shape and fassion, but the eight was a wondrous Monster,
and more monstrous then any that has been seen before this time, as you may
se by this picture. It has a head contrary to all other of that kind, it has
a face without a nose or eyes, saving a hole standing directly between the two
ears which ears be broad and long, like the ears of a blood hound, and a
monstrous body, like unto a thing that were ^lean, without hear. It has feet
very monstrous, with ye ends of them turning upwards, like unto forked ends,
as it is plainly set forth here by these two pictures, the one being the
back part, and the other the fort part. This monster lived two hours, and the
rest of them lived about half a day.

These strange and monstrous things, almighty GOD sends amongst us, that
we should not be forgetful of his almighty power, nor unthankful for his great
mercies so ple^tifully powered upon us, and especially for geuyng unto us his
most holy word, whereby our lives ought to be guyded: and also his wonderful
tokens, whereby we ought to be warned. But if we will not be instructed by his
word, nor warned by his wonderful works: then let us be assured that these
strange monstrous sightes do foreshew unto us, that his heavy indignation will
shortly come upon us for our monstrous living. Wherefore let us earnestly pray
unto GOD that he will give us grace spedely to repent our wickednesses,
faithfully to believe his holy Gospel, and cencerely to frame our lives after
the doctrine of the same to whom be all praise, honor, and glory. Amen.

Imprinted at London by ALEXANDER LACY for GARAT DEVVES, dwelling in Poules
church yard, at the East end of the Church.


