A Description of a new kind of Artificial Bathes lately invented.
WHich are every way answerable unto the ancient Bathes of the Graecians, and
Romans for the diverse uses, though no way comparable to them for the excessive
charges* ^^d vain ostentation thereof; because those were built like Princes
Palaces, having distinct parts or offices, but these take up no more room
then is necessary, which is not above six yardes in compass, for the outward
form, like the body of a small Coach, either round or square covered all over
with leather, velvet, or other stuff, partly to keep out the better cold
air, and partly to keep in the hot vapors, and partly to adorn it; being
framed with no great cost, and may daily be used upon half an houers warning
without any tedious combersomnes unto the party bathing, or trouble to the
servants near attending: which being placed in any chamber for the purpose
close by the bed side yield forthwith at pleasure, four kinds of several
heats, either altogether well mixed, or some of them apart more, or less, of
the one, or of the other, whereby to augment, diminish, or correct any one of
the first qualities, either active or passive, and so consequently any one of
the second, as occasion shall require by the counsel of the present Physician.

1 First, a dry ayrie heat warming the cold moist air, and preparing the
body for sweat by a clean fire in one side.

2 Secondly, a moist vaporous heat, by a sweet boiling perfume.

3 Thirdly, a dry vaporous heat, by a sweet burning perfume.

4 Fourthly and lastly, but cheifely a moist heat by water, milk, oil, or
any other liquor simple or compound, which comes at pleasure from all parts
powering downwards, flying up wards, sprinkling round about with many
trickling streams like strong showers of rain by a continual circular
motion, and therefore penetrating and working more powerfully upon all parts of
the body, except the head; which is only free for the benefit of fresh air,
so covertly, that neither the party bathed, nor the attendants in the chamber
can either see, hear, or well perceive, how, from whence, or by what direct
means the warm water, or liquor comes, and goes with such a manifold
distribution, and speedy conueyance:

Besides five gallons of any dear liquor will bathe any man this way, as well
as sixescore gallons otherwise, if not far better, and shall work far sooner
the intended effects, by reason that the water thus moving without any labor
or pains to the party bathed, actuateth more speedily, then when it stands
dull and unmoved about the body.

Again, all these rayning showers, by the turning of a key, may be contracted
into one maine current; either directed upon any part of the body within the
balniatory, or upon the head without, if bucketing be needful, or otherwise
diuerted from all parts for the benefit of the hot vapors only.

Again, so great a stream (which is most profitable, and may be accounted a
fifth distinct heat) does continually arise by this swift motion, that one
gallon of the water, or more, in one hour, or less will euaporate upon the
body within insensibly.

All this while nature embracing with delight these soft and pleasant
imbracements, the party bathing, if he be weak by sickness, may most easily
without loss of strength, yield to and from the fire, or strong streams any
part most affected turning himself by a small inclination, or rather be turned
by the circular motion of the turning stool, on which with a Cork cushion, a
large sponge, or a linen bran-bag fastened, he sits easily: if he be
strong, he may stand upright with more pleasure and turn himself with more
ease.

And if toward the end a short sprinkling of water somewhat cold, or luke
warm be needful, as for some respects it is much auailably, it may be done
this way in a moment all over the body without fear of catching cold.

And lastly, the water ceasing his course, and at pleasure suddenly, as it
were van^^ising by the touch of a small string, as before it came by the like
touch, he may soon, safely, and easily be rubd, and made dry with warm
clothes put in unto him, and upon him, and so st^ep into the warm bed
adjoining.

Such as never were hitherto invented, or put in practice by any Physician or
other whatsoever, if we consider all things which so plentiously every way
concur to the making up of these bathes, that for diverse peculiar respects
they may seem to deserve diverse peculiar names.

1 As first, from the circular motion of the bathing liquor, they may be
called, Balnea Circularia, circular bathes.

2 Secondly, from the manifold streams, and trickling shoures, Balnea
Plv^^alia, rayning bathes.

3 Thirdly, from the contraction of all the little streams into one current
Balnea Embrocati^a, embrocatiue, or spout-bathes.

4 Fourthly, from the triplicity of the praedominant steames, and hot vapors
Balnea Vaporosa, vaporous bathes.

5 Fifthly, from the multiplicitie of heats, and variety of matter, Balnea
Diacatholica, diacatholike bathes.

6 Sixthly, from the diverse faculties, and contrary effects Balnea Catholica,
catholic or universal bathes.


