A TRVE AND PLAIN GENEALOGY OR PEDIGREE OF ANTICHRIST, WHEREIN IS CLEARLY
DISCOVERED THAT HE IS LINEALLY DESCENDED FROM THE DEVIL.
WHo so thou art that do desire to know,
The stock whereof proud Antichrist did grow*
Whom JESUS CHRIST did long before foretell,
Should in the Church against the Church rebel,
Making her mourn with pitiful complaints,
And being drunken with blood of her Saints,
Should tyrannizing over her remain,
Until his pride be deeply did in grain;
And then both he and's Kingdom down should fall
Without redress or any help at all:
Whose coming should not be with claps of Thunders,
But signs and miracles and lying wonders.
My rusticke Muse declares his very name,
His pedigree, and of what house he came.
There was a brave heroicke Gentleman,
As ancient as since the world began,
Whose industry and policy was such,
That all the world besides had not so much;
His Engines, Stratagems, and feats of War,
Made his dominions to extend as far
As Alexanders, that is sirnam'd the Great,
Such was his prowess by the Martial feate,
Conquering his trade, Apollyon his name,
Of that grand worthy, this great worthy came,
One deadly- Darkness was his eldest son;
And thus (in truth) this royal race begun*
And then that Darkness did beget by chance,
A son, an heir, and called him Ignorance;
Of his true birth there is no man need enquire,
You see the son is fully like the Sire.
This Ignorance lived a while, and then
He begot Error and his brethren,
Error begot Freewill and Self-conceit,
Freewill got Merit, that deceiving bait,
Merit begot Forgetfullnesse of Grace;
And then his son Trangression took his place:
And that Transgression did beget Distrust,
Who deeming God less merciful then Just:
Maugre his justice to maintain his action,
Begot a son and called him Satisfaction.
This Satisfaction, e're his father did,
Being excessiuely possessed with pride,
Rejected quite Christ's bloody sacrifice,
Which once for all he offered in such wise
That he for all his peoples sins thereby,
Did Gods pure justice fully satisfy.
The cause why Satisfaction did this thing,
Was, that thereby he might to credit bring
His only son, the sacrifice o'th Mass,
As proud a Knave as e're his father was:
For if to him come any one or other,
Desiring help for some deceased brother:
Upon condition of a golden fee,
He Will contradict the mighty Gods decree,
And disanull his judgments past also,
And bring to weal whom God has placed in woe,
For if you will trust him, this man does excel,
He Will hunt the place where all the Furies dwell,
And search the Lymboes: nay, he will not be sorry
To search throughout the furious Purgatory,
And every nooke and secret corner there,
Be It in the Fire, Water, Earth or Air,
(For though that he has fetched thousands thence,
And did withal their deadly sins dispense,
Has quite forgot, his wits are so decayed,
Whereof, wherein, and when that place was made,)
But having found him, then he will surpass,
And bring the man from where he never was,
Unto a place of mirth and melody:
Where, if he were not, he can never be.
The Priests annoynting his successor was,
And Superstition thereon came to pass.
This Superstition was a royal thing,
For he begot Hypocrisy the King.
Hypocrisy got Gain by offering,
And of that Gain did Purgatory spring,
Then Purgatory passing reasons bounder,
Was certainly, Anniuersaries founder:
He by a stranger without Matrimony,
Did then beget the Churches Patrimony,
Then Mammon, of Iniquity his son,
Begot a Child, as his Father had done:
A worthy spark, Abundance was his name,
And of Abundance, Ease, (a gallant) came.
Ease begot Cruelty, and he Dominion;
Dominion, Pomp; and Pomp, Ambition:
And of this man old Simony did grow,
A bribing Knave, how clear soever he show,
This man of issue was not without hope,
For why? he lived to see his son the Pope;
Who in this world does bear a great renown,
And on his head does wear a triple Crown,
Whose charity if it were to his power,
He could cleanse Purgatory in an hour;
And send the souls that in that place do dwell,
Straight up to Heaven from that smoky Cell.
He thinks perhaps his power hereon is grounded
The former place his predecessors founded:
And for the latter none can him withstand,
He bears the Keys of heaven in his hand.
But here is a grief that to a mischief grew,
Because his Holiness let in so few,
Or else just none, which is a grievous thing,
His Keys have lost their use of opening.
And as the Keys oth' Pharisees his brothers
Shut heavens gate against themselves and others.
So he by his does now naught else but shut
That gate against all that in him credit put;
And yet he vaunts himself to be Christ's Vicar,
I wonder much his wit should be no quicker,
For Vicars have not (that were too too bad)
A greater power then e're their Parsons had:
Now Christ his Parson, openly did show
His Kingdom was not of this world below.
But Pope his Vicar commands all estates,
Kings, Emperors, and greatest Potentates,
And turns his power to furious tyranny,
Against that Christ and all his company:
And by his rage they now abide affliction,
He Is Antichrist without all contradiction.
Thus TRVETH (A GEM) has here disco^ered (...)
Which many a man has long time wondered at*
If thou aright these Roman letters frame:
Inquire no more, thou have the Authors name.
Printed at London for SAMVELL RANDE, dwelling at Holborne Bridge. 16^4.


