A divine descant full of consolation, Fitting a soul plunged in desolation.
NO fitter Fountain for my soul to bathe her,
Then in those drops of grace from God -- Our Father
Nor sweeter solace to her can be given
Then thoughts lift up to thee -- Which art in heaven,
Such heavenly comforts do my heart inflame
And cause my tongue sing -- Hallowed be thy Name.
The wicked love the world, earth is their sum
But we do long until -- Thy kingdom come.
For then though earth and earthly things be gone,
Yet sure we are to see -- Thy will be done,
Which we poor creatures by our sinful birth,
Are all unable to fulfill -- In earth,
Oh Lord lift up our hearts, lumpish as leaven,
To do thee homage here, -- As it is in heaven.
And then we will confess, as well we may,
That it is thy goodness to -- Give us this day
The air to breath in, earth whereon to tread
Cloth for our backs, nay more, -- Our daily bread.
Since in our bodies thou do thus relieve us,
Favor our souls (Lord) pardon -- And forgive us
Most hapless else, yea, hopeless were our cases,
If thou in Christ forgive not -- Our trespasses,
But thy Sons merits do us this hope give,
That thou will pardon us -- As we forgive
Corrupt we are and yet thou not disdayn'st us,
So make us pardon -- Them that trespass against us.
Oh that our paths were made direct, to tread us
The way to life, Lord be our guide -- And lead us
Into all heavenly contemplation
And peace of mind, but -- Not into temptation,
Let not despair, nor yet presumption ever
Bar up heaven gate against us, -- But deliver
Yea, as our Captain, shield us from the devil,
So shall thou keep and save -- Us from all evil.
No strength at all, no fortitude does come
But from thee all, -- For thine is the kingdom,
Protect thou us therefore, each day, each hour,
From dangers here, for thou have -- The power
Man's life is but a blast, a bloome, a story,
Lord give us heavens joy, -- And the glory,
Let neither life, nor death, nor any cross disseuer
Us from thy presence, Lord, -- For ever and ever.
To thee, for these, and to no Saint, nor men,
We come, Lord grant them. So be it. -- Amen.

