The description of a rare or rather most monstrous fish taken on the East
cost of Holland the.xvii. of November, Anno 1366.
The Works of God how great and strange they be
A picture plain behold hear may you see.
depiction of a giant squid-like sea creature

Hear thou have (gentle friend) the picture shape and fashion of a fish
strange and maruailous taken (as is said) in Holland, having on his finnes
hard skales in form much like the beggars disshes, which in that Contrie they
were wont to wear in skoffe and derision, his eyes like an owl and mouthed as
a Popin gaye his tail reed and four cornered like to a priests Cap, which
fish has been seen and vewed of most Nobles and Pears of Flaunders, who
has plucked of his skales like to disshes and kepes them for a show and for
the more credit hereof, ye shall understand that the.vii. of December the said
fish was brought to the City of Antwarpt where it was openly showed and seen
as well of English men as other strangers what this monster with other uncouth
sights seen of late do Prognosticate and signifye unto us, that I leave to thy
conjecture (loving Reader) beseching God the Lord and governor of all
creatures not to deal with us according to our deserts but for Christ his
sons sake to power his mercy upon us and grant us Grace to amend and to
do those things which are pleasant and acceptable in his sight through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

AS thou this formed fish do see
I Changed from his state
So many men in each degree.
From kind degenerate,
To monsters men are turned now,
Disguised in their raye.
For in their fond inventions new
They keep no mean ne stay,
Their manners mad and monsterous,
what should I now discry?
Or yet their cates delitious,
why should I them espy?
If one that lived in this land,
A fortye years before:
Could be released from the band,
To be as he was yore.
would he not wonder wonderously,
when he our monsters spied,
In so small time so folyshly
From auntiant custume flyed?
These monsters therefore God does send,
To put us all in mind.
Such shaples shapes for to amend,
which now are out of kind,
Or else the God of kind and shape
will shaples us detest,
And with his plage will punish us.
But more to speak I rest.
Imprinted at London in Pawles Churchyard by Thomas Purfoote at the sign of
the Lucrece.

(...) Secretary. What needs assawte, I dare say she will consent
That ye shall enter by a reasonable poyntment
And tha^ take heed, for in keeping of this ward and hold
Is more danger than in getynge a thousand fold.

Ialowsye. She that is of mind somewhat rechelesse
Gyuynge her self all to ydelnesse
And loves to lie long in her bed
Who wayteth a time, shall he not be spedde.

Secretary. Time may nay, wait if she be in good mode
For out of the church, all times be good
But pass not thereon, though she say nay
For so she will, when she has best lust to play.

Ialowsye. She that can no conseyle keep
And lightly will sobbe and weep
Laugh again, and wot not why
Will she not be soon tyced to folly.

Secretary. The tears betoken a gracyous couroge
And laughing does all malice aswage
When she is in that taking, mark well mark
Let slyp, spare not for one course in her park.

Ialowsye. She that is fair, lusty and young
And can common in terms with fyled tongue
And will abide why sperynge in the ear
Think ye her tail is not light of the sear.

Secretary. By all these semely touches, me thinks surely
Her own tail she should occupy
Sometime for need, her honesty saved
She will wasshe often, or she be ones shaued.

Ialowsye. She that paynteth her in staring apparel
Use hot wynes, and daily fare well
And loves to sleep at after none tide
Who list to stryke, trow ye she will not stryde.

Secretary. I can not say, if she will stryde
But if reason be offered, nothing shall fall beside
For of troth, as frost engenders hayle
Ease and rank fedynge, does cause a lycorous tail.

Imprynted at London in Creed Lane, by John king.


