A SPARING Restraint, of many lauishe Untruths, which M. Doctor Harding does
challenge, in the first Article of my Lord of Sarisburies Reply. By Edward
Dering student in Divinity. With an answer unto that long, and discourteous
Epistle, entitled to M. Iuel, and set before M. Hardings Reioinder.

Hieremie. xxiij. The Prophet, that has a dream, let him tell a dream, and
he, that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is chafe to
the wheat, says the Lord? Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, for Humfrey
Toy, dwelling in Poules Church yard, at the sign of the Helmet.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, Master Thomas Wotton Esquire. Edward Dering
wishes all health and peace in CHRIST^.
AS often as I do consider the estate of man, here placed to accomplish his
appointed pilgrimage, I remember the saying of the rightuous IO^. that man's
life is a wa^fare upon the earth. But when I further see, what manner of fight
we have, what enemies to encounter with us, how great of force, how cankred of
will, how subtle in devise, how continual in assault, and on the other side
how weak we be of our selves* I remember the saying of our sanioure Christ,
that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived. There is no
condition without his enemy, no calling without temptation, no estate sure.
The world deceives those, who will not see that the world does pearishe. The
flesh defiles other, that think filthiness to be pleasure, and make
uncleanness their felicity. And where these two can not bring forth the
shameless breach of the law of God, there rages that Dragon, and old
Serpent, that seducer of the world, that li^r, and father of lies, and he
sows cockle among good corn, superstition and heresy, among the seeds of
obedience, and good b^hauiour, where of it comes, that such as will not be
partakers with SODOM, and GOMORRA, nor have fellowship with those rotten
wounds, and stinking sores, that make the blaspheming of Gods holy name their
honor, yet they should be drowned in wicked doctrine, that by some means
their salvation might be hindered. This estate of man; so much the more to be
lamented, how much the less it is regarded, would make a Christian minister to
muse much, and oftentimes, how he might be a fruitful labourer in Gods
vineyarde. For since the children of wrath do not cease to walk
disobediently, and with all care, and study, some in example of evil life,
some in profession of ungodly doctrine do allure and entice other to walk
with them in their open, and wide journey of everlasting wretchedness: how
shall not the children of light, according as every one has received gifts,
so apply their endeavor, that godliness, and good religion might call again
the lost children unto the narow way of everlasting happiness? The latter
days are come, and impiety does abound, iniquity has so spredde her self,
that she is plentiful both in word and deed, and that, not in secrecy
only, and in private assemblies, but in the face of the world, and in open
writing, while some prefer the present state before eternal life: other
delight more in dreams, than in the word of God. It behooves therefore every
true christian in all places to rebuke sin, to set forth Gods glory in open
meetings, and to maintain his word before the enemy, knowing that his
reward is the salvation of his own soul, and his place is prepared in the
kingdom of God his father. From this duty, neither King, nor Queen, Duke,
nor Earl, honorable nor other, are exempt, but every one as he is higher in
dignity, so his account is the greater in the day of judgment. It helps not
the lay man to say he is no minister. Where the cause is Gods, we are all a
chosen generation and a royal priesthode, an holy nation, and a peculiar
people to show forth his virtue, that has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light. If we will not walk in this light, we abide in darkness,
and in the shadow of death. If we will not show forth his virtue, we are not
his chosen generation, nor his peculiar people. If we have not his name written
in our foreheade, we shall not stand among the elect with the Lamb in Mount
Syon. If we have not the pleasant smell of life unto life, we have not Gods
gosple engrafted in us. As many, as be Christians, have given their faith unto
Christ in their baptism, under the witness of a great many. They have
forsaken the flesh, the world and the devil. If they will now be at league with
the sinner, and at agreement with the evil doer, they have broken their first
promise, and they are found unfaithful. And for their faith thus violate,
given unto the immortal God, God again will break with them his covenant of
mercy, if in time they repent not. This made me, right worshipful sir,
according to the talent, which God has given me, so in these evil days to
apply my labor, not doubting, but that little light, with which he has
endued me by his free mercy, may shine through the clouds, and mistes of
error, which the prince of this darkness has blown abroad. God turn their
hearts, that build upon his evil foundations, and God increase their number,
that be setters up of virtue, and zealous in the house of the Lord. And of this
number because God has made you one, of good will desirous, and of authority
able to defend the profession of a christian man, I could not but choose your
worship, under whose name my little labor should appear, both for a testimony
unto all men, that you are one, in whom your country does rejoice, and a
provocation unto other, that by your example they might learn to live. There be
diverse that love the word of God, and in common talk make a glorious
profession, but the world will not let them go uprightly unto the truth of the
gosple. There be other, whose conversation is not amiss, and in civil behauior
give good example, but they be so drowned in error, that their estate is very
lamentable: they be the little flock, and few in number, that do join virtue
and good religion together. It is hard, and laborous to flesh, and blood, and
therefore we turn us from it. The way is narow, where they are both coupled,
therefore few do find it. From the princes privy chamber unto the pore cottage
they have rare dwelling. It would make a Christian heart to bleed to consider
duly the manners of each estate. The scarlet and purple garments do hide and
cover unchaste and vnpure bodies* The ornaments of gold, and silver are had to
beutifie most horrible oaths: good learning and wisdom are abused to al deceit
and craftiness. Simplicity, and plainness is a cloak of many subtle
cogitations. Need, and poverty are common dwelling places of much dissolute
life. Truth is well nigh forsaken, and faith is almost perished from the face
of the earth. But Macte ista virtute tua* yet let your worship rejoice in Gods
mercies, for not withstanding these dangerous rocks, yet you are passed in to
narrow way, and the Lord God be praised, who shall increase the number, you
have some company. There be men of great honor, and estimation, yet lovers
of Gods truth, and void of all courtly wickedness. Would God their doings
were registered in Ceder trees, and they had golden pictures in the City
OLYMPIA* that they might be spectacles to all noble posterity. God has sure
given them double happiness. Their lives shall end here in honor, and then
it pleases their father to give unto them his kingdom. There are other great
governors of this common wealth, beautiful, and comely members of Christ's
body* which make not policy their religion, nor blasphemy Gods ordinance,
where man's law does not establishe it. They have chosen the good part,
which shall not be taken from them. God shall make their dwelling places sure,
when the adversary shall be thrown down out of his seat. Some other there be
of good estat^, and virtuous, not entangled with vanity, nor blinded with
superstition, which make not gain their righteousness, nor contempt of Gods
ministers their estimation. They shall receive an hundred fold in this life,
and when they have run their course, they shall have the crown of glory. And
as in the time of ELIAS, when the Prophet thought that all the children of
Israel had forsaken Gods covenant, broken down his altares, and slain his
Prophets with the sword, yet God made answer, I have reserved unto me 7000.
men, which have not bowed their knee to DAAL: even so at this present time
there is a remnant through the election of grace, that have not their inward
thoughts spotted with papistrie, nor their outward life with especial crimes.
With these and other, because your worship does walk together in the straight
path of true obedience, God has given unto you this fruit of your authority,
to be beloved among them where you dwell, and this comfort of your conscience,
that by your example they learn to know God. Now what remains, but that you
pray unto God, that he which has b^gon this good work in you, will make it
perfect unto the end, that as your youth has not been fed with such
wantonness, as in like estate, and fortune do the usually abound, so your
further years should be void of all ungodly desires, and you found faithful
unto your death: in the which hope, and confidence the Lord God through his
son Jesus Christ, send you long life, and happy years to the maintenance
of his glory, and comfort of his Church.

Fare you well in the Lord, from Christ's college in Cambridge the.2. of
April, 1568. Youres bound as his own. Edward Dering.

To the Christian Reader.
WHen I first perused this Reioinder of master Hardings, good Christian Reader,
and savve in what sort he made answer to M. Iuels Reply, I was grieved
both for his own sake, that so many good gifts should be so ill applied, and
especially for thy sake, least peradventure his deceitful talk should beguile
thee. I saw on the one side, the inclination of many, very daungerously bent
to the love of that religion. On the other side much wordly wisdom, and
understanding, countenaunced with such a singular boldness, and impudency,
that without the especial working of almighty God, I saw but little hope of
their further liberty, whose heart was set to receive bondage. I could not be
ignorant of the common proverb, which I had heard so often, that fair words do
make fools feign, and I saw again, the subtle kind of writing, the sugared
words, and entising speeches, which the enemy did use to call away the simple
unto their destruction. These evils, the more perilous they were, so I thought
it appertained unto all good men, by what means possible to seek the spedier
remedy. And therefore in the great business, which that good Bishop had in
hand, whose happy Sermon did first so much inflame the enemy, I thought it
some part of my duty, according to the gift that God had given me, so to
make answer unto the subtle adversary, and help to confirm in Gods truth
such our simple brethren, as were falling away. Upon this occasion I first
took upon me to meddle with this Reioinder. And when in reading it, I found
the whole nothing worthy answer, I did choose only so far to touch it, as I
might both make a sufficient discharge of all such blame, as was laid upon
master Iuel, and show forth an open, and undoubted proof of the residue of
master Hardings labor. Then I took upon me the answer of his long Epistle,
written to M. Iuell, wherein he spares nothing, save only truth, to allure
his reader, and the defense of those.225. untruths, whereby he would
discredit Gods true religion. By this means, I did trust, that some would
quench their longing thirst, to drink of that golden cup, full of poison,
and spiritual whoredoms, and perceiving the whole ground of their religion,
to be nothing else but quarrels, and wranglings, would at last run forth of
their ungodly synagoges, and most froward assemblies. This labor I had
finished more than.xij. months since, with so little diligence, that it made
wiser men to consider better of it, whose wisdom was also a longer stay unto
me, least either my true meaning might run in blame for want of consideration,
or my unripe writing, might give occasion to the enemy of triumph. But
afterward remembering the good council of Plutarche, (...). So I, after some
continuance of time, read over again mine own doing, in which as I could
have wished something altered, if I had sought the commendation of learning, so
I saw nothing but truth maintained, and that in such sort, as master
Harding might not well contemn it. Then knowing assuredly, that both the
defense of truth might edify the learned, and the manner of my writing
minister grace unto the godly Reader, I would no longer suppress that, which
being set abroad, might be fruitful. And upon this advise I delivered it unto
the Printer: but after perusing it, I espied in the Printing many faults,
which the indifferent reader, will not lay upon me. Only for my discharge I
thought good in this Epistle to admonish thee of some, that by them thou
might know whom to blame for the rest. In the.38. leaf for the house of
(...), thou shall find printed the church of Rome, and straight after,
modest, for immodest. In the.40. leaf, such language, for such laughing. In
the.46. leaf, the same has made us free, for the son has made us free. In
the.53. leaf, way for ^ay, fol. 64. corner it, for cover it. fol. 65. is not
yet, for, is yet. In the.96. leaf, thou shall find king Ionathas, yet good
render, I wrote king Iosaphat. If that fault had been mine, I would the^ have
allowed M. Harding, naming the holy captain Iosue, for the Prophet Ose. fo. 98.
(...), for (...). fo. 100. express, for repress. fol ^od. alone hereof, for,
in earth above her. fol. 102. but you have, for, but your church has fol.
104. cansabo, for, cantabo. fol. 111. Antonius, for, Antoninus. And after thou
shall find (...). for (...), destruction, for distinction, could easily, for
could not easily. These and such other faults escaped in the printing of my
book, as well in the words, as in the pointing, how many so ever thou shall
ascribe unto me, so many injuries thou shall do me. He is a simple scholar
that can not write truly, and the pointing is not so difficult, that it
requires any great learning, for other things what so ever shall be found blame
worthy, the fault is mine own, and wherein souer the enemy shall find his
fault, I doubt not but I shall by Gods grace be able to defend it. The force of
truth is such, that though the patron be simple, yet she will defend her self,
especially such truth, as has made her self so manifest. The truth of God
that stands upon a hill, and may be seen of all men, the truth, that shines
as a light in a dark place, and as the day star, arising in our hearts,
that truth, whose glorious beauty has darkened the painted, and deceivable
lokes of the purple whore of Babylon. It is now no mastery, since we know God,
to know him, that lifts up himself against God, since we know Christ to know
Antichrist, since we know Peter, to know Peter's forged successoure. And for as
much as to this issue al our controversy is come, that what right, or
authority so ever the Pope chalengeth, he makes his whole claim from Peter,
and the papists themselves will defend him no further, but so far as he
succedeth Peter, I will speak a little of Peter's bishoprike of Rome, so far
as the scriptures shall be my warrant. Consider thou of it, good christian
Reader, that shall be said, and if thou see, that all the glorying of Peter's
being at Rome, is but a fasing out of an impudent he, then judge what is their
other religion. First, here I must forwarne thee, that as a lie can not long
agree with it self, so in all this matter thou shall hardly find in all
points two popish chronicles agree together. So that what so ever I write, as
touching the exact computation of years, there must needs be many against me.
Therefore in that I will not strive, only I will write that which is certain,
and shall have as I said, either some warrant of scripture, or shall be agreed
on, by the consent of all ages. Our savior Christ was crucified for our
sins, the.18. year of Tyberius, as by all histories it is manifest. Peter is
said to be put to death in Rome, the last year of Nero, so Peter lived after
Christ, under Tyberius.v. year, Caligula 4. year, Claudius.13. year, Nero.
13 year. In all.36. years and odd months according to the reign of the
said Emperoures, in these.36. years and odd months, they write of Peter
thus. He was bishop *4. years in the East parts.7. years at Antioche,
and.25. years at Rome, where at last he died. Here this fable does almost
bewray it self, such hasty enstallings, and so many translatings out of one
bishopprike into an other does not well agree with our saviors words,
that they should have affliction in the world. But let us search the
scriptures, and try how these Bishopprikes vvil stand. After that our
Savior is ascended, they go into Jerusalem all the Apostles together, they
choose Mathie the Apostle. Act. 1.12. Act. 2.4.
After fiftye days they receive the holy Ghost, Peter conuerteth many.

After certain days Peter, Act. 3.1.
and John go up in to the Temple, they heal the lame, they are put in
prisone, they are forbidden to preach any more in the name of Jesus, then
they return unto the other Apostles, and tarry many days together, Act. 4.18.
Act. 5.12.
working many miracles among the people, in so much that the Cities round about
resorted daily to Jerusalem, to have their sick, and diseased healed. Then
again, the Apostles are put in prison, and God delivers the^, and many days
they preach in the temple, and in every house. After this came a great
persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, in so much, that they were all
dispearsed saving the Apostles. Act. 8.1.
Then at the last after many days, Peter is sent out of Jerusalem into
Samaria, where he preaches in diverse towns about. Thus far good Reader,
thou see plainly Peter is no bishop, nor yet in any special authority, when
the other Apostles send him out to preach. Then he returns again to
Jerusalem, and this is one year after the death of our savior Christ, as the
histories do all agree in reporting the conversion of S. Paul, which was now
done, as appears. Act. 9. This is the year of our Lord.35. In the year of
our Lord.38. He dwells in Jerusalem. Gal. 1.18. Likewise in the year of our
Lord.46. he is imprisoned at Jerusalem. Act. 12.2. Again in the year of our
Lord.48. he is at the council holden in Jerusalem. Act. 15.7. from that day
forward, he gives his faith unto Paul, and Barnabas, that he will be an
Apostle, not to the Romans, but to the Jews. Gal. 2.9. which truly he
accompli^hed even until his death, and doubtless never came at Rome. Now
christian reader, seeing the scripture lies thus, that Peter's aboade in
Jerusalem, after the conversion of S. Paul Anno Domini.35. is recorded.iij.
several times. And after the last time a covenant made, that he would
continue among the Jews. If I shall prove unto thee, that these several times
are rightly numbered, according to the year of the Lord, that is, that the
first time was the.38 year, the second time, the.46. year, the third time,
the.48. year, and then in the mean while between the.35. year, and the.38.
likewise the.38. and the.46. and between the.46. and.48. that Peter was not in
Rome, last of all, that he was true of his promise, and after the.48. year,
came not at Rome, then I trust thou will confess with me, that Peter was
never.25. years Bishop of Rome. But that all popery, as it is in it self
nothing but lies, so it is grounded wholly, and altogether upon lies. First it
is agreed upon by all, and the thing is plain in it self, Paul was converted
the year of our Lord.35. The^ Paul himself writes thus. Galat. 1.18. Act.
9.26.
After three years I came to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode in his house.xv.
days, so this was the.38. year of our Lord, when Peter is first in Jerusalem.
When he was after imprisoned at Jerusalem, Act. 12.2. that it was the.46. year
of our Lord, it is proved thus. The countries about* that is, Tire, Act.
12.20. Suetonius in Claudio. Euse. Beda. Orosius. lib. 7. cap. 6.
and Sidon, were then nourished with the kings provision. But that provision
Claudius made, in the great famine* the.4. year of his reign, which was the
year of our Lord.46. Again immediately after, the scripture me^cioneth Act.
12.23.
the death of Herod. But Herod was made king in the first year of Caligula,
and reigned 7. year, so he died in the.4. year of Claudius. And consequently,
as is said, the.46. year of our Lord. Peter being now in prison at Jerusalem,
and thus the second time, that Peter is mentioned to be in Jerusalem, is
the.46. year of Christ. Afterward, when the Apostles held the council in
Jerusalem, Other number these.14. years from his first going to Jerusalem, and
so this council is holden* An. 51.
that it was the.48. year of our Lord, it is proved by S. Paul, who after he
had mentioned his conversion, and his first going to Jerusalem, whereof we
spoke before, he says thus. Gal. 2.1.
Then after.14. years, I went up again to Jerusalem. So it was the.48. year of
our Lord, this being.14. year after his conversion, and he converted in
the.35. of our Lord, and thus it is proved, that in the years of our
Lord.35.38.46.48. Peter was in Jerusalem. Now it rests to prove, that in the
mean space Peter came not to Rome. That he was not at Rome between the.35. and
the.38. year, I have this proof. In the year of our Lord.37. Pilate wrote
his letter^ unto Tiberius the Emperor of Christ, and of his doctrine, Eus. li.
2. ca. 1. Tert. in apol. Orosius. Nauclerus. fol. 512.
and how the Jews accounted him a God, whereby the Emperor was so moved,
that he would needs make Christ a God in Rome* If Peter had been in Rome,
Pilates letters had not ben necessary. The Emperor should have had better
instruction. Thus in those three years Peter was not in Rome. Between the.38.
year, and the.46. year they say, such is their impudency, that Peter was
Bishop all the while at Antioche. If it be so, then by their own confession he
was not at Rome. But the scripture is plain he was neither at Antioche, nor yet
at Rome. And how these 7. years are passed, mark, and thou shall see. In the
beginning of these.7. years, Peter goes forth a preaching. First into all
Jury, Galile, and Samaria, which would require some continuance. Afterward he
goes up to the saints at Lidda, Act. 9.32.
and there tarieth. From thence he goes to Ioppe, and there tarieth dies
multos, a long while. Act. 9.39.
From thence he goth to Caesarea, and there couerted Cornelius, Act. 10.24.
the first gentile that ever he converted, as is plain by the scriptures, then
he abides certain days at Caesarea, all this well nigh.400. miles from
Antioche: and now for proof he makes no have to Antioche, Act. 11.2.
he comes home again to Jerusalem, where he is again joined with the
Apostles. And now the Apostle hear word, that certain gentiles at Antioche
are converted, not by Peter, but by the disciples, that fled when Steven was
stoned. Act. 11.22.
Act. 7.60. and 8.1. Well did the holy ghost here name them that preached this
while at Antioche, or else here had been some color for Peter's bishoprike. But
mark further, when the Apostles hear this, to confirm the gentiles, they
send to Antioche. But whom send they? Peter? Sure they vvoulde have done,
had he then been their bishop, but Peter abides still in Jerusalem, and
Barnabas is sent to Antioche, where he abides, after goth in to Tarsus to
Paul, from thence they come again both to Antioche, and there tarry
afterward one whole year. About this time says the scripture, Peter was put
in prison, Act. 12.2.
which was as is proved, the year of our Lord.46. And that he continued in
Jerusalem ever since Barnabas was sent to Antioche, we have this conjecture.
When he was delivered out of prison, and knocked at Mary's doors, Rhoade the
maid knew him by his voice. Act. 12.15.
And so well, that the Disciples said she was mad, or else it was Peter's
angel. Yet were the thing never so incredible, she said she was sure it was
even he. This perfect knowledge of a man's voice, required some continuance
of acquaintance. And thus we are come to the.7. year of his bishoprike of
Antioche, in which time he yet never came at Antioche. Now the year of our
Lord.46. the.4. of Claudius, he goes from Antioche to Rome, and there is
bishop.25. years, 2. months.8. days, from the.16. of January, to the.24 of
March. Such account I trow they make, that tell us how many mile it is to
heaven. But be it so, he is gone out of the prisone in Jerusalem.2000. mile of
to Rome to be made bishop. If the story of dame Ioane were so incredible as
this, master Harding with some countenance might have written against it.
But let us go foreward. Act. 15.7. Orosius. lib. 7 cap. 6. Suetonius. Nauclerus.
In the year of our Lord.48. notwithstanding this posting to Rome, he is yet
at Jerusalem. Gal. 2.9.
And from he^ceforth that he meant not to go to Rome, but keep his promise that
he would continue among the Jews, we have this proof. First his oath where
James, Peter, and John do swear unto Paul, and Barnabas, that they would
execute their Apostleships among the Jews. Which sure Peter would not have
done, if he had thought to have gone to Rome, and all the Papists in the world
shall never be able to answer it, iangle how they vvil, that Peter was
bishop of Rome. He was not, he meant it not, he kept his promise. Paul
calls him the Apostle of circumcision. Gal. 2.11. Gal. 2.7. 1. Peter. 1.1.
Jacob. 1.1. 1. Ioh. 2.24.
He was afterward among the Jews at Antioche, he vvryteth* his Epistle to
the Jews, that were strangers, and scattered abroad in Asia, even as James
does to the twelve Tribes scattered among the nations, and John to them that
had heard and seen from the beginning, which were the Jews. Thus did those
Apostles mind their promise, though we talk of bishopprikes, we know not
what. But because there are yet three and twenty years behind, let us as we
may, examine them by the scriptures. In the Acts we read, Act. 18.2. Orosius.
lib. 7 cap. 6. Suetonius. Nauclerus, and alij.
that Priscilla and Aquila, and all the residue of the Jews were banished
out of Rome. But this was done the.9. year of Claudius. Anno Domini.51. When
now Peter should have been more than.5. year bishop in Rome. Thus ill may this
fable agree with the scriptures of God. But let us examine it further.

About six years after this, and the beginning of the reign of Nero, Paul
writes his Epistle to the Romans, as appears, for that he then carried up
to Jerusalem, for the pore saints there abiding, such distribution as they of
Macedonia and Achaia had gathered, Romans 15.26.
which was a little before Paul's last going to Jerusalem, as most writers
agree, in the last year of Claudius. And for proof it was so, now al things
are quiet at Rome, Paul saluteth Priscilla, and Aquila, which in the.9. of
Claudius were both banished, and the Acts do specify certain years after,
in which Paul and they were together. So now being at Rome again, it agrees
well, that the Epistle to the Romans, was written about the beginning of the
reign of Nero, and the year of our Lord.56. at which time Peter was not at
Rome, as may be proved above all gesses, and conjectures, out of the word of
God. First he saluteth diverse by name, and yet he speaks not of Peter, Romans
16.
a sure proof that Peter was not at Rome. Again, he saluteth Andronicus, and
Iunia, with this especial note, which are notable among the Apostles, Romans 16.7.
and were in Christ before me. How much more occasion had Paul, thus to salute
and commend Peter, whom he calls other where a pillar of the Church, and
who was not only before Paul, Gal. 2.9.
but before all men, saving Andrew his brother, called to be a disciple.
Nothing may be here answered, but that only, which is true, Peter was not at
Rome. If these reasons seem not strong inoughe, then good Reader, look in
the.15. to the Romans, thou shall have an other, which by no means may be
shifted off. Thus he writes, I enforced my self to preach the gosple, not
where Christ was named, least I should have built upon an other man's
foundation, but as it is written, Romans 16.20.
to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see him, and they that heard not,
shall understand him. Then he adds, therefore also I have been often let to
come unto you, by which words it is manifest, they had but weak maintenance
of their faith, and the true Disciples had no long continuance among them. But
how could this be, if Peter were.25. year, Bishop there. Again, he saluteth
the household of Narcissus, which Narcissus says, Ambrose was Presbiter eius
ecclesiae, a chief ruler in that church. and how could Paul here have
forgotten Peter, being Archpresbiter, the chief of all rulers, and Pope
himself? Thus are we past.xj. year of this Bishoprike, and yet we can not
once find S. Peter in his diocese. In the year of our Lord.58. and the
second of Nero, Paul comes to Rome, and then Peter is not at Rome, Eusebius
in chronico. Act. 28.2^.
as appears by this saying of the Scripture, where the chief of the Jews
in Rome speak thus unto Paul. We will hear of thee what thou think, for
as concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.
Then when Paul had preached unto them, and some believed, and some believed
not. The text says, when he had said these, the Jews departed, and had
great reasoning among them selves. Is it possible that Peter should now have
been thirtene year bishop, and yet the chief of the Jews that were there
when Paul came, had scarce any understanding of Christ* They may believe it,
that will needs be deceived. Two year after this, until the year of our
Lord 60. the fourth of Nero, Paul abides in Rome. All which while,
undoubtedly Peter came not once there, as may plain appear, if thou read the
Epistles, which Paul vvrote in Rome. To the Galathians he speaks much of
Peter, and of his conversation with him, about twenty years paste, but of
his present being at Rome, not one word, and yet he speaks of him to this
purpose, to get the more credit unto himself, why then does he not name
him, as now present with him? In like case, writing to the Philippians,
Philip. 1.2.
he begins his Epistle thus, Paul and Timothy, why could he not here,
have begone Paul and Peter? Nay what folly was it to bring Peter's testimony
many years past, which now might be doubted of, when he might have had his
present, and most certain witness, with subscription of his own hand, to
confirm his doctrine? Again, he vvryteth thus unto the Philippians, that many
brethren in the Lord were boldned through his bands, Phil. 1.14.
and durst frankely speak the word, if bands would have made them
faithful, no doubt Peter had long before, confirmed them, surely he would not
have shronke neither for chains, nor prisones. It is his own doctrine, that
here unto we are called, 1. Peter. 2.21.
he could not so sone have forgotten his own good council. Again, Paul
writes, he had no man like minded as Timothy was, Phil. 2.20.
how could this be, if Peter had been there? Again he writes, he had only
Aristarchus his prisone fellow, Col. 4.10.11
sure Peter would have been in prisone too, if he had been in Rome. Again,
Mark, and Iustus, Phil. 23.
are only my fellow workers, and shall we think that Peter was now bishop, yet
would not help Paul in preaching? Read over all Paul's Epistles, written in
Rome, and if the spirit of truth be within thee, thou will say Peter was not
in Rome, yet now he should have been even in the flower of his bishoprike.
Now are there only left ten years behind, in which likewise it shall
appear, whether Peter were in Rome. At the latter end of this ten year, Anno
Domini.7d. Neronis.14. Paul comes again to Rome, and is again imprisonned,
whence he writes his second Epistle to Timothy, as Jerome, and Eusebius, and
diverse other do think. Then Peter is not in Rome. Only Luke is with me,
says S. Paul, 2. Tim. 4.11.
if this be true, where then was Peter? Shall we think he vvoulde not once
see Paul a prisonner? Again, at my first aunswering, no man assisted me, but
all forsook me. 2. Tim. 4.16.


O unthankful vvretches, and deserving ill of Peter, that vvoulde now
think Peter were Bishop. But here are now nine years, in the mean
season, in which it is sone proved, Peter could be no bishop. Paul reioysed
that he had escaped out of the hands of Nero. 2. Tim. 4.17.
But what needed he, if that Peter could set quietly bishop? Seneca writes
secretly epistles unto Paul, Seneca.
and Paul unto Seneca, but never a word of Peter. Nero made proclamation that
no man should speak either to Christian, or to Jew, and how could then
Peter be bishop? Orosius lib. 7 cap. 7.
Nero when he had set the City on fire in the.9. year of his reign, to avoid
the envy of so great a mischief, he laid all the fault upon the Christians,
whereof Tacitus, that wicked heathen, writes thus. Cornel. Tacitus. lib. 15.
Repressa in praes^ns exitiabilis supersticio rursus ^rump^bat. That wicked
superstition, that was now well repressed, sprang up again. But is it like if
Peter had been then bishop, that christianity should have been so quenched,
that no man did scarce remember it? But be it that all this were true, let
Peter become unfaithful, let him forget to profess Christ, and feed his
flock, were he never so unthankful, yet sure he could not be then bishop of
Rome. For in the.10. year of his reign, Sueton. in Nerone. Eusebius. lib. 2.
cap. 25. Egesip. lib. 4.
Nero made such great persecution of all Christians, that in no place they
could be sure, but every where were drawn forth unto most shameful
deaths, and this persecution continued.4. years without intermission, and how
was Peter then a bishop? They had beasts skins put upon them, and then were
weryed with dogs, they laid them on heaps, and burnt them to give light in
the night time, they hong them up quick upon gibbets: they practiced all kind
of exquisite crueltye against them, and yet for all this shall we think that
Peter was bishop? 2. Pet. 1.14.
I leave here to speak of Peter's own epistles, the last written a little
before his death, what time this persecution should have been in the greatest
rage, yet Peter does not so much as once mention any such thing. The former
was written about the.12. year of Claudius, and by express words dated from
Babylon, which thing because it is a most evident token, that Peter was the^ no
bishop of Rome, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Therefore they make this gloss upon it. From Babylon, that is from Rome, and
what a miserable shift is this, in defense of Peter's bishoprike, to confess
Rome to be Babylon? But Rome, as it is, it shall be Babylon, and their religion,
as it is, it shall be the purple whore, and the Pope as he is, he shall be
Antichrist, rather than they will lose this succession of Peter. And here to
make the fable perfect, they shut it up with two especial lies. Eusebius.
Hieronimus. Aegesippus Ambr. Epi. li. 5. ad auxentium. Act. 7.58. In Epist. ad
Gal. cap. 1.
The one, that Paul and Peter both died in one day. The other, that Christ
met Peter flying away, and bad him go back, and suffer death. As touching the
first, we read of Paul when he was converted, he was a young man, and
when he went to Jerusalem to see Peter, Athanasius says, he went for
reverence* that he bare to Peter's age. So it seems Peter was gray headed,
when Paul was but young. Philip. 9.
About.25. years after Paul vvryteth to Philemon. Though I be, as I am, even
Paul an old man. Then what was Peter at these years? Yet Paul lives
after this ten year, and then writes of him self, 2. Tim. 4.6.
that the time of his resolution is at hand. Paul had now finished even his
natural course, a very probable conjecture, that he outliued Peter. But this
other untruth that we speak of, is above all conjecture shameless, and
unreasonable. They say that Peter the night before he should suffer, fled
away, and as he was going, Christ met him, whom when he had seen, Peter
said unto him, Domine, quo vadis? Master, whether go thou? Egesip. lib. 3.
cap. 2.
Then christ made answer, Romam iterum crucifigi, to Rome that I may be
crucified again. Then Peter perceived that Christ spoke of him, and so he
returned, and was crucified, as if Peter him self had never taught us, that
the heavens must contain, and keep Christ, until the time that all things be
restored, which shall not be accomplished until the last day, Act. 3.21.
and thus ends the fable of Peter's bishoprike in Rome.

Now good christian Reader, thou consider of it, as the truth shall move
thee, and way the Pope, and Papistry, what it is. Search the scriptures
says* our savior Christ. For they do bear witness of me. Ioh. 5.39.
But search the scriptures while thou vvilt, thou can not find one line
for the Popes supremacy, no title for proof of Peter's bishoprike in Rome. A
certain argument, the Pope is not of Christ. And as this head, and well
spring of all this iniquity, I mean the Pope him self, has no vvarrant in
the word of God: so his religion, that it may be like him self, is
altogether contrary, and beside the word of God. What should I here recite
all particulares? Search the scriptures, thou shall not find neither Mass
nor Mattens, Diriges, Trentals, Dispensations, Iubileis, Indulgences, Pardones,
P^lgrimage, Holy water, Holy bread, Crucifixe, Rodes, Banners, Tapers, Sensors,
Paxes, Pixes, Canopies, Copes Corporase, Vestments, Albes, Stoales, Tunicles,
Saccaring, Elevation, Altar, Altareclothes, Superaltaries, Howseling,
Shriuing, Aneling, Dispeling, Creping, Halovving of Bells, Halovving of
Churches, Halovving of Fountes, Months minds, Lent, Vigill, Aduent, Praying
to saints, praying for the dead, praying in a strange tongue, none other of
the xxv. Articles, mentioned by master Iuell. And what should I speak of
all, that are almost infinite. Read their Portuise, and read the Bible, thou
shall find no leaf of agreement. And this none can deny, who so ever is
most frovvardly bent. What rests then, if we love God, and his holy word,
but that we consider our vvayes, and see whether we walk as he has
taught us. There is no heaven, but his dwelling place, no vvalking unto it but
by his commandments, and his commandementes no where to be found, but in
the Scriptures, which he has left us.

Next unto Gods glory, we have nothing so precious, as the sauegarde of our
own souls. And where shall we find the salvation of our souls, but in the
word of God? God grant unto thee his holy spirit, that thou may hear
his word, and keep the same, to the obedience of his will, and the salvation
of thine own soul. Amen.

Farewell, from Christ's college in Cambridge, the.iiij. of April. Anno
Domini. 1568. Thine in the Lord. Edward Dering.

An Answer to M. Hardings Epistle, written unto Master Iuel.
Hardyng. Although M. Iuell, when you proclaimed your challenge at the
beginning, you promised to yield and subscribe, if any man alive were able to
bring any one sentence out of any old Doctor, Council, Scripture, or example
of primitive Church, for proof of any one of all your articles: yet verily I
am persuaded, no wise man believed, what soever, or how much so ever were
brought, that you would stand unto your promise. etc. So then the largeness of
your promise, to others makes show of your confidence, and to your self the
regard of it increases stubbernesse.


Dering. WHen king Alaxander had proclaimed war against Darius, a certain
boasting Persia^ in steed of more manhood, used much vnreuerent talk against
them of Macedonia: and especially against Alexander himself: But Memnon his
Captain, perceiving this soldiers valiantness to be all in his railing
tongue, at the last, struck him with his spear and said, Ego te alo vt
pugnes, non vt maledicas, I retain thee to fight, and not to speak evil. The
very like of this is happined among us, and this pratyng Soldiour does play his
part again. The Bishop of Sarisburie our Alexander in Christian war and
godly courage, has made proclamacion against the Pope that proud Prince
Darius, and King of Babylon. Now least there should want a Soldiour to speak
evil of Alexander, Master Harding has taken upon him that part: and spares
no piece of his cunning by all means possible to debase this good enterprise.
God (if it be his will) once make him know him self, or if he shall continue
in his evil speaking, send over him some Memnon that may chasten his
intemperate tongue.

In this beginning of his Epistle, there is little worthy aunswering. He
pronounces boldly of M. Iuels intent: yet no man knows the things of a man,
save the spirit of man which is within him. i. Cor. 2.11.
His writing is like a Crow in Peacocks feathers, or an ylfauored Ape in a
purple garment. The handlyng of his matter is very beautiful, and the
substance is nothing worth. And yet in his manner of resoning because M. Iuell
will not subscribe, he concludes that he is both confident and stubburne. His
confidencie I grant. He has learned the good lesson of his heavenly Father,
Confidite, John. 16.33. Psalm.
ego vici mundum, be confident, for I have overcome the world. The Lord is his
helper, and he shall not be moved for ever. He is guilty to him self of no
crime herein: he waxes not pale with the memory of any fault, and therefore
in the fear of God he has said unto his soul, hic murus aheneus esto, stand
fast as a brazen wall. Would God M. Hardyng had had the like confidence, the
scornful reproaches of the proud should not have proved him stubburne.


Hardyng. Our Lord yet (if it be his pleasure) once open your eyes, and give
you grace to see the danger of the poole you wade in. Beware by time M. Iuell,
you fall not into the horrible gulf, that Solomon speaks off. Impius, cum in
profundum malorum venerit, contemnit. When the wicked man comes into the
bottom of evils, he becomes careless, setting all at naught. If once you fall
into this bottom, what hope is there of your recovery? For whereas none
returns from evil, but he that repents him of evil: How can he repent that
has cast away all care? Yea, how can he step back from evil and be made
good, that says (whose miserable state Esaias lamenteth) evil is good, and good
is evil? How can he see the right way, that makes darkness light, and light
darkness? How can he delight in sweet things, that takes sour for sweet, and
sweet for sour.


Dering. From these uncharitable beginnings M. Harding falls (as it may
seem) to a charitable prayer: but were the same acceptable in the sight of
God, he himself should return from all his abominations: now it proceeds
from the Minister of iniquity. We are put in mind of the country proverb, that
it is ill with the Geese when the Fox preaches. If the prayers were ryghteous
he pretends here, not our blood, but their own tears should have watered
their eyes. Now, because their prosperity has been the slaughter house of
Satan, this submission in adversity can be but the Crocodiles tears: If God of
his justice should carye us again captives into Babylon, we know the purple
whore, and the whyps of her fornication. But God be praised, the lines are
fallen to us in pleasant places: yea we have a fair heritage, Psalm. 16.16
for the way that Master Iuell wadeth in, it is not that horrible gulphe,
which M. Harding can not see, wherein the bottom of all evil abides. The
spirit of God is our warrant, that it is the narrow way which leads unto
everlasting life, there is no cause why M. Iuell should repent him of this
iourneying, he walks in the way of health. God of his good will and mercy
shall give unto him that his course be finished in the same. He makes not good
evil, nor evil good, Esaias. 5.20.
he puts not darkness for light, nor light for darkness, he says not
sweet is sower, and sower is sweet. And for as much as the whole controversy
between us, does rest in this, whether of us is in darkness, it shall not be
tedious unto the Christian Reader, if in the word of God we do seek for
trial, for that gives unto the simple sharpness of wit, and to the children
knowledge and discretion, Pro. 1.4.
neither is it hydden but from the eyes of the scorner, neither yet perverted,
but of the wicked. Pro. 4. 2. Pet. 3.16.
Let us ask of the same word what is good, what is the light, and what is
sweet. 2. Pet. 1.19. Psalm. 19.
It is good for thee (says Peter) to harken unto the word. And thy word
says David is a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our steps, and the
same word is more sweet then honey and the honey comb. Then as this same word
is true, so we are assured of all goodness, all light, and pleasure, if we
follow it: and therefore bless onesse is pronounced over him that reads,
Apoca. 1.3.
and them that hear that prophecy. Now do we call the world to witness,
whether they or we do set out this word. We have it in our churches and
private houses, we expound it to the people: we exhort them to read it: we
call the ignorant from their errors with the same voice that S. Augustine was
called, toll lege, toll lege, Take up and read: and this is as the holy
Ghost does witness, good, light, and sweet. But these men that crake so of
their goodness, what have they done? They have pulled this word out of their
synagoges: they have not suffered it in the poor man's dwellyngs: they have not
expounded it as the whole world can judge: they have not made it the squire of
their religion: And if in any place that little book was seen, though in the
houses of Bishops and Prelates, yea, in the very palaces of Popes and
Cardinals: yet did it sleep in the dust: or if the candle was light, it was
set under a bushel. The people did not know the means of their salvation,
the merit of Christ's passion was mingled with man's good works, his
continual intercession darkened with the mediation of saints, his bloody drops
wiped away with the remembering his holy martirs: his crying out on the cross
at the yielding up of his spirit, was not hard through the abusing the name of
his blessed mother, and in stead of other understanding, wherewith our souls
are comforted, we harkened after the strange sounds of unknown trumpets: in
gadding on pylgrimage, in paynting of Tabernacles, in sensing of Idols: in
setting up of Candels before stocks and stones, in blasphemous Masses: in
idolatrous Altars, in halowing of Temples: in christining of Bells: in selling
of Merits: in turning of Roodes, in a thousand mo iuglings, invented by Satan
and practiced by his ministers: that from the top to the toe, from the hill
altars unto the church door, there was nothing whole in that froward
generation. Neither they themselves can deny this though they like to
dissemble it, cry out how they will, yt we make evil good, and good evil. And
for the charging us with darkness, the thing so disagreeth, that the ignorant
require a further proof, and the learned do see there much wrangling
eloquence: do we make darkness light? I say as before, what shadows do we
walk in? what darkness do we preach? wherein are we blind leaders of the
blind? Accusations may not go for arguments, nor slaunderings for sufficient
proof. O Master Harding turn again to your writings, examine your
authorities, consider your counsails, apply your examples, look if any line
be blamable in our service, and take hold of your advantage. I think Master
Iuel will accept it as an article. No, no, this offer does not like you, you
see to great a hazard of your little estimation. Our service is good and
godly, every title grounded on holy scriptures: and with what face do ye call
it darkness? Sure with the same that the prophecies of the holy ghost were
sometime called dreams, the doctrine of the Apostels heresies, and our savior
Christ a Samaritan. But as for your Portuise which is your light, whether it be
darkness or no, I crave no Arbitrer, I require but trial, and as Elias said
to the priests of Baal, let us take either our bullock and lay the pieces on
our aultars, and on which God sends fire, let that be the light. You have
halted to long on both sides, it is now time to walk up right. Offer up your
Portuise to Master Iuell, if he prove it not a heap of lies, a sincke of
iniquity, a deep dungion of blasphemouse herisies against the eternal son
of God and his everlasting priesthood, we will all subscribe. And for the
assurance of our meaning, we say with the Apostle, behold before God we lie
not: Galat. 1.20.
if you dare not do this, the Christian Reader must remember you are worse
then Baals prophets. Consider then Master Harding in what waters you wade, and
look better what is light and darkness. For the ignorance of gods word the
Gentiles were said to sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, the
unbelieving Jews to be blind leaders of the blind, and he that knew it not,
to go he wist not whether. But the darckning of that word has been your
chiefest light, and ignorance the mother of your devotion: and as in the
sacrifices of Isis and Serapis you have made Harpocrates image with his finger
on his lyps in token that your mysteries must be kept secret, and as the
Egiptians you have your two diverse caracters, that Robin Hoode and Gui of
Warwick and Beuis of Hampton and such like should be had of the people in
english letters, But the mysteries of our redemption, and the glorious tidings
of the death of Christ were in strange figures, and for the hasarde of
devotion they might not be made common. So that of Lancelot Dulake, of
Lamorake de Galis, of Sir Tristram de Lyones, or Marlin the Prophet we could
tell many weary tales: but of Paul, of Peter, James or John* besides the bare
names, not one among a hundred could tell a line, not withstanding the
continual crying of wisdom in the streets, Prou. 1.20. Math. 19.14
the calling of our Savior for the sielie lyttleones. O M. Hardyng, this is no
light. It was the time of Dioclesian, when the Scriptures were burned, the
abominations of Manasses when they were hyd in the Temple, the kingdom of
Antiochus when they were cut in pieces: and to compare like with like, your
Antichristian jurisdiction, where they are kept in covert. Wherein you show that
great plague to rest upon you, which who so hears, Iere. 19.3. Amos. 8.11.
either ear shall tingle that you have the famine of the word of God. When
the cogitacion of ma^s heart even from his youth was evil, and the world
ouerrun with covetousness, Gene. 7.
God purged that iniquity with his drowning waters: when the cry of Sodom
and Gomor did ascend to heaven, God quenched their filthy lusts with fire
and brimstone: the frowardness of his people, the breach of his laws, Gene.
19.
the blood of his prophets, with pestilence, famine, banishments, and such
other sundry and diverse plagues: but the death of his only heir, Math. 21.41
with the letting out of the Uineyard to others: and the blood of his beloved
Son, with the scourge of ignorance: that unto this day they believe not his
glorious Gospel. And how must the Popes kingdom needs tremble and fear that
acknowledges the punishments of Christ's death to maintain their religion?
Now for our delivery from the maintenance of darkness, Galat. 1.8.
S. Paul bids us not believe an Angel of heaven that brings an other
Gospel, therefore we dare not be led with any blind custom to shadow the
same light we have received. If you shall otherwise be always minded, I se in an
Etnick heart, the effect of that etnicks prayer virtutem vt videant
intabes^antque relicta, that you might see virtue and pine away with want of
it. After this follows a sober excuse that Master Harding makes of him
self, that although through infirmity he oftentimes offend yet in matters of
faith he has no perverse judgment: The reason is because he does submit him
self to the church of Rome* Much better this argument would hold the other way:
because he is in the church of Rome, he is in all filthiness and superstition
of a sinful life and of a corrupt religion, having the heavy hand of God over
him, that except he repent: the same woe shall light upon him, which so
unwisely he has derived to other.


Hardyng. This matter is well to be weighed, the case you stand in is deeply
to be considered. This much you cannot deny: you have for your part broken
the unity, that is so much commended unto us in the scriptures, and all holy
fathers. The Catholic church (says Saint Cyprian) can be one, it can not be
cut and divided a sunder. The catholic Church alone is the body of Christ,
says S. Augustine, whereof he is the head, the savior of his body. Without
his body the holy Ghost gives life to none. Therefore in an other place he
says: whosoever is seperat from the catholic church, how lawdable so ever he
thinks himself to live, for this only wickedness that he is divided from
the unity of Christ, he shall not have life, but the wrath of God remains
upon him.


Dering. Here is a sad admonition, concerning the catholic Church, which we
acknowledge to be the body of Christ, and he the only head of it, so that
without it there is no salvation. But for the trial of this Church we go to
the Scriptures and do examine each spirit whether he be of God or no: 1. Ioh.
4.1.2.
and such as say they be Apostles and be none, we have found them liars:
Apoca. 1.2.
therefore we run out from among them, as out of the midst of Babylon; out of
their wicked assemblies and done of thieves, from their abominations of Moab
and spiritual fornications, and ar come again to our merciful Father that
has prepared his fatlings for us, and put on us our wedding garment, and
placed us at his great Supper in the fellowship of his church, where we abide
thorough his mercy, and look for our resolucion, that our joy may be full.
And for our assurance to be of that number we have the warrant of the
Scriptures: first for that we harken only to Christ, and hear not the voice
of any stranger: John. 10.3.
then for that we confess that they alone can save our souls. Ia^o. 1.21. ^.
Tim. 3.16.
And as S. Paul says, can make the man of God perfect to all good works. And
considering that Prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man, 2.
Pet. 1.21.
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by ye holy ghost: we dare not
admit any private interpretation, but take heed unto the word, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, for that is the day star which is risen
in our hearts. Therefore we presume not to understand above that which is mere
to understand, but that we understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt
to every one the measure of faith, and we prophecy according to the
proportion thereof, since the Scripture may not be interpreted by other spirit,
Romans 12.3.
then it has been delivered. For as no man knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of man, which is within him, 1. Cori. 2.11.
even so the things of God no man knows, save only the spirit of God. As for
the exposition of the holy Fathers, and Doctors, the same holy Fathers, and
Doctors them selves have taught us soberly, and with reverence to leave them,
if in any wise they think other then the truth reports. Neither yet of
counsails have we any fore judged sentence, to be led by the counsel of Nice,
or Areminum, but confer matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with
reason, according to the scriptures. And upon this ground we more esteem one
lay man bringing scripture for his defense, than a whole assembly without the
like assurance. For were it not extreme madness upon the credit of men to go
careless in the mire, we know not whether, since the things are written
whereby we may live? Even as our savior Christ gave answer to him, that
sought life, referring him to the scriptures, and asking what he read: Luke.
10.36
so we upon those scriptures have builded up our church wherein, we have rather
chosen to be door keepers, than to dwell in the proud palaces of ungodly
buildings. But here M. Harding cries out for the Apostles constitutions, and
with rumors, and heresies, and deceitful traditions, brings battred weapons
against our Church walls. But alas infelix puer atque impar congressus
Achilli, O unhappy child, and unmeet match for Achilles. This ordinance is
but quilles, these pellets are but paper, this powder is but wind, and all
these engines are but rotten wood. Thanks be to God that has made us our
dwelling places, and indewed us with hope, that shall not be confounded. We
have left to walk in their slipperie ways, we have left of to go after them
in their unfruitful iourneis, we have left of our gaping so long after flies:
would God Master Harding you would so turn from your folly, but you are
drounken, Esaias. 29.9.
though not with wine, and you stagger, though not with strong drink: for the
Lord has covered you with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes.
Concerning traditions, I say briefly, such turning of devises shall be esteemed
as the potters claie, yet mean I not this of all, but of popish traditions, of
forbidding marriage, commanding to abstain from meats, which S. Paul says
is the doctrine of Devils: 1. Tim. 4.1
of lying Legendes, which are the tokens of Antichrist, of massing garments,
which for all new gloses must needs signify the loking for of a new Messiah.
To be short of all such traditions rites worshippings as at this time set forth
the superstition of this romish service, concluding this place with S. Paul
Phil. 4. what so ever things are true, what so ever things are honest, what so
ever things are just, what so ever things are pure, what so ever things
pertain to love* what so ever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, or if there be any praise, think on those things which you both
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, those things do, and the God
of peace shall be with you. Now he that can bring most au^tient proof what these
traditions were, it is best reason he should be believed. Speak now for your
church Master Harding, and if you win, for my part I will yield. Speak out
therefore alowd, and tell us your witness names. Ignatius, Martialis, Abdias,
Hippolitus, Amphilochius, Leontius, Dyonitius. Old witnesses sure even molded
with their many years: yet such is your fortune, even these are to young. Call
for your Clemens the Appostles fellow, yet he will not serve: There is one
comes aganist them longer of continuance, and more travailed in the world,
yet not worn with his years, nor w^ried with his labor: he is as good as
Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
his eyes are not dimmed, nor his natural force abated: he is like unto Caleb
as strong now as when his Moses first sent him, as strong as he was then, Io^.
14.11.
even so strong is he now for war or government: a companion of S. Paul's
iourneis: whose praise is in the Gospel thoroughout all Churches: who saluted
the Collossians: who only was with Paul at Rome the.xiii. year of the
raygne of Nero, 2. Cori. 8.18 Collo. 4.14. 2. Tim. 4.11.
(though you say Peter was then Bishop) an excellent Physician, and one that
can cure the very hardness of your heart: If you care not for his commendacions,
yet regard his name: I do mean S. Luke the holy Evangelist. Let us stand to
his judgment, what were these traditions? These traditions, says he, are the
Gospel and the Acts which I wrote to Theophilus. For these are his very
words. It seemed good also to me most noble Theophilus, Luke. 1.1.
as soon as I had searched out perfitlye all things from the beginning, to
write unto you thereof from point to point. All these things thus exactly
written, he received only of his Master Paul: And therefore, as it is
thought, the same Apostle, speaking of S. Lukes writing, calls it his own
Gospel. So that what so ever Luke reports not written by S. Paul, it is
Paul's preaching, and that is his tradition, yea even from point to point.

O master Harding, you think not reverently of the spirit of God, if you can
imagine that S. Luke, after such a promise unto Theophilus, pretermitted any
thing that seemed necessary: there is nothing sufficient, if this be not
sufficient. And yet there is an other witness, more ancient then Luke, and
yet more fresh, then all your withered Doctors, and that is S. Paul him
self, who in the.xv. to the Romans, as may well be gathered, says, Romans
15.17^
that he wrote unto them that same that he preached. Now since we have so
sufficient warrants, call us not into law, for rejecting your dreamings: but
acknowledge, we say truly, in deniyng that Church, whose faith you profess to
be the catholic Church.

For a brief answer to your order of Bishops, I say it is a token, that may
fail in the Church, or else was there no Church from the death of Christ,
till S. Peter was a bishop, and so like in all vacations of Popes, be they
long, or short. The church must be tried by the word of God. Let Augustine be
the Judge, Aug. ep. 166 Chriso. in Math. hom 49.
Epist. 166. and Chrysostom upon Matthew, hom. 49. Now for the better discharge
of Luther and Zuinglius, which in Gods cause have been Symeon, and Leui, to
revenge the adulteries of Sichem: I will lay forth your argument, and make it
no worse then it is. S. Augustine says, if the order of Bishops may prove
the Church, there was never yet Bishop of Rome a Donatist, ergo says master
Harding, there must needs be an open succession of Bishops. Let who will be
cheyned in such bands of yarne.


Hardyng. But as it is certain, you will fail in proof of your church of the
Caluinists, so I doubt not, but the world ere it be long shall see, how weak
are the other parts of your doctrine. A man would think, who has herd or
read your Challenge, that either you were well furnished with substantial
learning, to defend what you took upon you, or that you were a man of passing
impudency, or of extreme madness. Your Challenge was answered, you have
replied. What you could do in this Reply, you have done. What help might be
had among that whole side, you have not wanted, School masters, Greek
readers, Lawyers, Canonistes, Ciuilians, Summystes, Gloss searchers, Divines of
all your sorts, and all others, that could do ought, have put to their hands.
The whole forces of your side into your book, are brought together. God be
thanked for it. All shall turn to the joyful victory of truth, and to the
glory of God, and to your own confusion at length.


Dering. Now M. Harding, as though you had gotten the victory, you do untimely
blow up the triumph, hasting, as it seems to Paris to sing Te Deum for the
battle of Aging^ court: with an odious rehersall in your manner of eloquence,
of Schoolemaisters, Greek readers, Lawyers, Canonistes, Ciuilians, Summystes,
Gloss searchers. etc. with whom as with Master Iuels helpers, like the lusty
green Knight you will needs encounter. But why do you use such untrue
demeanor, to judge of any other by your own doing? Touching this Reply,
against which such a troop have sent out their papers, I speak as I have sure
knowledge, that if all these were helpers, yet does it not shame the doing. If
it be master Iuels own in good proof, in elequence, in memory, M. Harding
is far behind him. And for further declaration of this, they that have seen
the former answer, and this Reioynder, do know, that if M. Harding confess
it, he has taken by force, if not, he has stolen of his cunning.

But, says M. Harding, this Challenge was answered. I grant he has written,
when the offer was once made vastis cum viribus offert, ora Dares, he for his
part has done what he could. But, says he, you have replied: O master
Harding why did you not before consider the fame of the Chalenger? Why saw you
not those tokens of victory hanged up in his houses? Though during the
silence, your answer did seem so plausible, yet now this reply has
shadowed all your praises, your tents are spoiled, your defenses are weakened,
your holds are ouerturned, and your Captains slain. James and Chrysostom do
say no more Masses: Dionysius has renounced the ordering of Angels: Clement
has no more acquayntaunce with the Apostles: Hippolytus begins with enim,
Abdias is a Liar, Amphilochius is a Dreamer, your Massing, or rather masking
Priests, are sought for, and behold women, boys, children, laymen, fables,
dreams, and visions, your Church, and Minister for your half Communion, and
they are deathbeds, sickfolkes, infants, and madmen: Proofs for your Lattin
service, and surmises, gesses, conjectures and likelyhoodes: In your supremacy
he has marked your wanderings, and seldom or never he has found you in the
right way. In the other Articles he has opened your forgeries, laid abroad
your fallacies, untied your cunning knots, losed every joint: and your
answer is fallen. What rests now, but that you beweepe your fair Turnus,
and cry with the pensive Father, gnate vbi forma vitens niueaque in front
Serenus ille decor, O answer, answer, where is now thine old shining
beauty?

Surely M. Harding, the paintings are rubbed away, the goodly feathers are
gone, and the Crow appears: The Lions skyn is pulled of, and the seely Ass
is bewrayed, therefore it is no maruail though you complain of his helpers, as
the Cowarde that has been once beaten in the dark, thincketh every bushe to
be a Man, so your answer being shaken with every line of that Reply, made
you think every leaf to be a new adversary, notwithstanding yet you have
graven a fresh in your buckler (...) with good luck at adventure, and in a
desperate cause maintain a little hope with a new Reioynder. But alas, Fortune
is deaf, and can not hear, or if she will do any thing for you, and make this
reioyning labor serve worthy answer, then alas little book, cui te fortuna
reseruat exitio, what misery shall come upon thee?


Hardyng. Many thought ye were invincible: By this it is well perceived, ye are
easy enough to be conquered. Men supposed some great thing to be in you. Now
all is seen what ye have. And when it shall be made manifest that you have
nothing in substance, but only certain shows of things: your craking and
boasting shall end in your contempt and shame.


Dering. The opinion of Master Iuels learning hangs not upon M. Hardings
commendation. Men be not now led so far into error, that if M. Harding say
any thing, they will straight believe him. As God has lightened our hearts with
the knowledge of his heavenly word, so he has joined understanding unto our
senses, least vain talking should deceive us. And therefore it skilleth the
less how much M. Harding or his fellows write. Concerning that Challenge,
that has so much enflamed them, I praise not the Challenger, he has nothing
that he has not received, the glory does belong unto God, the praise unto
God, thanks giving is due unto God: Master Iuell has no more to boast of his
ten talents, then he that has but two: But this much I dare truly affirm,
that as by Elias God destroyed the Prophets of Baal, by Micheas found the
Prophets of Achab liars, by Elizeus killed the railing Children: so by M. Iuell
he has well confirmed us against all idolatrous Priests, all lying Prophets,
and al railing Companions.


Hardyng. The event of your vanity puts me in remembrance of one Megabysus
a great Captain under the King of Persie. This Megabysus came on a time unto
the shop of Appelles, that most famous Painter at Athens. Beholding the Tables,
and giving his verdite of those excellent works, he praised, and dispraised,
liked, and found fault, as his fantasy blundered, not as skill directed.
Apelles that while standing behind a cloth, and hearing what he said, stepped
forth, and spoke thus unto him. Hitherto Megabyse thy purple, gold, and
precious stones, and the train that wayteth on thee, made us believe, thou were
a man of great worthiness: now these boys here that grind my colors,
hearing thee to speak so foolishly, set naught by thee, and laugh thee to
scorn. Verily, though I be not like to Apelles, yet is your case M. Iuell, not
much unlike to Megabyses. Heretofore your Rochet, and your square Cap (for I
trow you be not yet come to be one of the Rou^dcap Ministers) your Bishopric
of Sarisburie, your sightly state and condition, your Rhetorical persuasions
in the pulpit, with a holy holding up of the hands, and casting up of the eyes
to heaven, and with your lamentable crying out of your Oos, which you use very
commonly, weening thereby to persuade the simple, your stout asseuerations,
your favor of the common people, and others, that clap you on the shoulder,
your vain Pulpet buzzing, your Gloria patri at Paul's cross: all this has
made many a one believe, that M. Iuell was a great Clarcke, a pillar of the
Gospel, a peerless fellow. But now that you have said all that you, and your
whole side had to say, now that you have discovered that lay hid before, now
that your best stoare is laid abroad, now that you have made the world
witness of the proofs you have for your doctrine: they that have but mean
skill behold a further weakness to be on your side, then before they had
conceived. Better it had been for you, ye had mayntained your opinion and
estimation among your own deceived brotherhed with silence, and with your
accustomed craking, without showing forth any proofs.


Dering. Now is M. Harding come to his pretye solace with one Megabises, a
great man, and of little name, and in his own device lyking him self, well
forces much his eloquence, as if the Owl were the fairest bird in the wood.
But we should do him much wrong to bar him of his pastime, that has
nothing else to comfort himself withal. His cause is naught, his books are
contemned, his credit is lost, and that which greeueth him most of all, he
has made an unequal match. In these extremities, what if he use his tongue
at will? Megabises and he both can do but little harm. The one does but milk
an he Goat, while the other does hold under a syue. It is now no time to
spread abroad any cunning, to prove my Lord of Sarisbury is not learned, as
long as his Replye lives, and it shall live till his adversaries be
confounded. Neither his square Cap, nor his Rochet, nor his sightly state, nor
his Bishopric, shall at all commend him. We have the testimonies of his
mind, which God has made so bewtifull, that all his other ornaments are
known to be to few: yet concerning his good estate, I do answer with
Solomon, God overthrows the wicked, and they are not, but the houses of the
righteous shall stand. For this description of his manner of preaching, first it
becomes Diogoras better than a Divine. Then what skilleth it, though Zoilus
or Zerophanes do scoff at Homer. Pardon me, M. Harding if I say the truth
(...), it is easier for you to mock at it, then to do the like. But what
mean you thus bitterly to rail at his preaching? Why jest you at his
lame^tacion for the peoples disobedience? Have you lost both your cause and
your learning together? Uerily when your Pope was Deane of S. Paul's, there was
then neither lifting up of hands, nor bringing down of hearts, neither crying
out of Oos, nor inward grief of Iis, neither yet gloria patri, nor mors
praedicata filij. You might hear the heavens harmony, for any pulpet noise,
yet loftye descant within among the Balamites, organe pipings at pleasure, and
although no pulpet, yet goodly chauncell buzzing. I maruail you durst make
mention of his preaching? But such is the blind man's hap, that sees not his
way, by making haste, goes over his shoes, ere he be aware, in the mire.


Hardyng. How little truth you have for your side, and how many untruths you
have uttered by your reply, partlye by this Reioynder, and more largely by the
labors of other men, it shall be declared.


Dering. Now after this long a do, what proof brings Master Harding
against this Reply? for sooth he refers us partly to this Reioinder, partly
to the bird in ye bush, that is, to other proofs that shall come hereafter. I
know not well in this case what to write. If I should vnrippe this Reioynder,
and show all the faults it has, then os and impudentia a band of Louanistes,
cry out in the air of lyings, corruptions, misconstruings, alterations, and a
thousand such other. Some send over their pamfletes, some return their
untruths, some whet leaden hatchets, some seek real presence, some make
blind discourses, some hunt out their Purgatory, some fight for their images:
some stumble on their rock, and such as can do nothing else, cry, beware of
M. Iuell. But truth must not be still for fear of the sclaunderer. God give us
grace to take heed of this Reioynder, in uttering of an heresy, it is more
talking, tha^ the Turtle, in speaking out the truth, more dumme, than a Fish:
in avoiding authorities, more winding than the Serpent: in resisting Gods
spirit, more hard than iron: in substance, an open market of all manner of
evil. We that see it, do give God the praise, that makes his truth to shine
through so many clouds: They that favor their doings, may bewail with
Andromache, lifting up Astionax hands, Spes nullas habet Troia si istas habet,
Troy has no hope at all, if it have no hope but this. Concerning those other
proofs that shall come hereafter, I can say but this, pro boscide vnius
abscissa monstratum est mori posse belluas, we know by this Reioynder, all your
other books are soon answered.


Harding. As concerning your answer to my preface, it is like the rest of
your book, all together void of truth, and plain dealing. etc. that you have
discovered our wants therein, you speak untruly.


Dering. Now is M. Harding come to the defense of his Preface, and as his
manner is, blaming M. Iuels whole writing, reioyneth, as he sees good, where
it likes him best, and first boldlye enough denies, that M. Iuell could
discover any wants on their side. But alas, this is but a brag. Is there no
want on their side? Why then does he handle his friends so vngentlie? Why
turns he them over to their own defense? Why dissent they one from an other?
If perhaps he say, their Church has no wants, his own fellows are against
him. Scotus says, Can. Apost. ca. 6. ^t. 6. synodus. ca. 12.
the Church has somewhere the harder part. Their Councels conclude some, one
against an other, some against the Apostles them selves. Their Popes have
extremelye hated one an other, in such sort as never Turk or Infidel has
done the like. Yea, such is the impudency of their Church, and so little
account they make of disagrement, that they would make Christ's Apostles teach
one contrary to other. The.6. Canon, and the.40. Canon, and the.50. Canon of
the Apostles, allow the marriage of priests, the.25. Canon forbids them to
marrye. The.80. Canon of the Apostles does straightlye charge and command
that no Bishop or Priest do debase him self to any worldly labor, and
allege for their purpose this scripture: No man can serve two masters. Constable.
Apost. lib. 3. cap. 67.
And yet the co^stitutions of the same Apostles do quite contrary, and
command that the Priests do labor, using their own example, of which some
were Fishermen, some Tentmakers, some Husbandmen, and such like, this
contrariety of Apostles could never be in Christ's Apostles. Then by like M.
Hardings Church, that is feign to make them Apostles, has some wants. And yet
because M. Iuell said thus much, he falls out in a rage, that his Challenge
was foolish, his Reply without learning, his arrogancy much, his Gospel
false, his weakness discovered, his modesty stained, and I wot not what. A
heap of shameless lies in half a side of a lease. The Challenge was foolish:
yet Harding, Dorman, Rastell, Marshall, Stapleton, Heskins, Saunders, and
Shacklocke, do sweat these.iiii. or.v. years about it, and are never the
near. The Reply was unlearned. Yet M. Harding in a year, could reioyne but
with a few leaves, and that non absque theseo, Summysts or Glosesearchers,
every one does help a little. Concerning these other sclaunders, his pride
can not be much, that always commends his adversaries cunning. His Gospel
is not false, that embraces nothing but the Gospel of Christ. His weakness
is little, that is vpholden with so many authorities. His modesty is not
stained, whose enemy evil reports him. Nor his bragges are many, where the
victory abides. Therefore this filthy foam of such uncomely railing, does
rather bewray the sickness of the writers mind, then reprove the person against
whom it is uttered.


Harding. That you looked fiercely, and shoke your sword terribly, I said it
not, as you report me. etc. from thence to digress to the odious vpbraiding
us with cruelty. etc. it was more spiteful, then pertinent to the matter.


Dering. Master Harding much blames the racking of this example, but he may
not now well discemble his meaning. His own writings, and Master Shacklocks
old withered tree, do show how gladly they would bring us into hatred o^
bloudinesse, and when they secretly insinuate it, is it not wisdom to bring
open remedies? They may not well discharge them selves of such secret doings.
Master Harding was but little gone in this Epistle, when he would closely
seem to be Appelles. But his painting was not singular, and therefore I passed
it over. After that he has said in this matter what he can, he comes to his
woonted rhetorike of Runnagates, Apostataes, Forsakers, and Rebels, as if he
were talking of him self or Staphylus and such companions. But Master
Hardings mouth is no slander, our constancy is yet unblameable. He blames much
our vncourtesy toward our adversaries, but he shows not wherein we do so
evil entreat them. We neither tie them up in cheines, nor shut them up in cole
houses. Perhaps he will say they are in ^uraunce. Yet that is but his own
false surmise. Their great good lyking is a token of little hard handling. As
touching these many yffes of the beginning of Master Iuels profession, they
need no answer. What he meant, a godly man may judge, in seeing gods
blessing of his proceadinges. He finds not him self guilty with Core,
Dathan, and Abiron, in gods mercies he fears not the fall of Lucifer. And as
you Master Harding, have regard to the salvation of your soul, for Christ's
sake, he requires you, to enter into your own conscience. If promotion made
you shrink, remember Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin. If shame make you
continue, remember Pharao, that would not yield to Moses: What ever keeps you
back from the true joy of Gods gospel, remember Iulianus. You shall cry in
time, vicisti Galilee, O Galilean thou have the victory.


Harding. That you were enforced thereto by our importunity, as you say, who can
believe you. For who of us al troubled you? Who provoked you? Who did so much as
pull you by the sleue? Had you not before shut us up. etc.


Dering. Where he denies that M. Iuell was provoked by their importunity, and
thereto rayseth a heap of his idle questions: what private cause he had, I
know not. Of their great importuniti, all the world is witness. What if M.
Bonner were in prison, that had tied up so many? What if testie M. Watson held
his peace? Or what if M. Harding were quiet? Are there no more enemies of Gods
truth, but they? Was all at rest? Was al hushed? Was not the world daily seduced
by their popery? Was not Christ's merits darkened? Antichrist still fighting for
his seat in the temple? And will not this importunitye stir up a good
Bishop? I pray you M. Harding (I speak it not to vpbraide you, but to admonish
Gods people) what if your watchmen, were blind and had no knowledge? what if
they were domme Dogs, and they would not bark? what if they lay a sleep and
delited in sleeping, do you think therefore that the vigilant pastor of
Sarisburie could see the woolfe come and run away, see the thief, and
keep silence? Your great murderer Hosius was buste, your Sorbonists were
occupied, your Louanists at their labor, this might move the bishop, though a
few of you foxes did not much trouble y^ fold, dissemble not your knowledge for
shame any longer, confess this was great cause both of grief and vehemence.


Hardyng. You find fault with my want of modesty for showing forth your
bosting, for my part I pray God I be never found more faulty for want of
modesty.


Dering. Master Harding excuses him self, that he has not passed modesty,
and prays God that therein he be never found more faulty: but whosoever
reads over his writing, and raketh up together the scourings of his modesty,
shall find such a heap of railings, that if he yet fear, going over them: it
is very true that he that is once past shame, is like to prove notoriously
impudent. But it skilleth not much, how immodest he be in writing, that
defends such a shameless cause.


Hardyng. If the truth you mean were manifest and known, why could not Luther
see it, by whose spectacles you have espied many points of your Gospel, by his
mind, the truth of you that be Caluinistes, is not manifest.


Dering. Now M. Harding falls into his common place of Luther and Calvin,
and those men, the more excellent their virtues were, the more opprobrious^ye
he reports them. I could have wished in the one less vehemency. But it was
a froward world when he first preached, the people could not be won with
entreatie. The other may be a spectacle in all posterity, to behold the great
mercies of God, that endued his sinful creatures with so rare virtues. He
preached so often, and wrote so many books, that if the truth bare not
witness, it might seem incredible. He expounded the scriptures in such virtue
of the spirit (give me leave to speak as I think, seeing all is to the glory
of God) that neither S. Augustine nor S. Ierom the great lights of Gods church
have ever done the like. But let such men rest in the peace of the Church,
Master Hardings reuilings can not blemish their good names.

After this he expounds his meaning in calling Master Iuell Goliath, which he
says he did not for his strength, but for his craking. I maruail he has so
sone forgot his Philosophy, Aristotle says, that craking is to boast of that
thing which a man has not, but Goliath had more strength, then any one
Israelite, had not God of his mercy toward Israel confounded it: so take away
this comparison, and he must confess his oversight: let it stand in force, and
he must acknowledge M. Iuels strength: which strength, seeing that God does not
overthrow, but increases it with his mercy, it is not Goliathes boasting, but
it is David's faith, against which, because M. Harding has so adventured, both
his strength is weakened, and his ignorance bewrayed. By David's slyng and his
scrip (he says) he knows not what is meant: yet me thyncketh, a man of his
years, should not be ignorant, that by denying one man's things, to appertain
to an other: We say the persons are not like. But M. Harding, because you know
not what is meant by this sling and scrip, you must remember David came against
this Philistine, in the name of the Lord: but you come girt with Saules sword,
and his Target, that is, with men's devises to counteruaile Gods word. David
came to show, that Israel had a God. But you come to declare that there is a
Pope in Edom. David confessed that the battle was the Lords. But you would
help win the field with your own merits. So since you neither have David's
mind, nor his purpose, Master Iuell said you had nether his scrip nor his
sling. And you shall never have them, till you cast away your own armor, and
in matters of faith take unto you the furniture of the word of God. Wrest not
therefore against the saints of the Lord this saying of our savior, obmutesce,
et exi de homine. We can abide your sayings with the comfort, that we have
received, blessed are you, when men revile you, and say all manner of evil
against you. Math. 3.11.



Hardyng. For that I, and certain learned men by sundry treatisies have
wrought to the confusion of your goliathship, we look not for the praise of
ladies. The loking after such reward we leave to you, whom the hope thereof
entiseth to sustain this wicked travail. etc. How you have knocked Goliath in
the forehed, as you crake, let it be judged by that is of late returned upon
you, by him, that wrote a return of untruths upon your Reply.


Dering. Master Harding is very good in insinuations, even now by Appelles,
and now by learned men. He would have us ween him self is sombody, but what
he is God knows. Here he does grosely imagine of the ladies of Jerusalem.
But with better aduisement he will forget this fancied pomp, and remember a
spiritual triumph. So he shall not be very hasty to sing before the victory. He
says he will dissemble Master Iuels vain, and ministerlike talk of the
Pope. In deed it is his fashion in most parts of this Reioinder, when he can
not answer the auctority, to pass it over with dissimulation. But why does
he with such disdain name this ministerlike talk? Does the name of a
Minister so much offend him? God grant he once look better to his feet,
and see where he wadeth. Let him remember the Prophets prayer, make the heart of
this people fat, make their ears heavy, Esaias. 6.10.
and shut their eyes, least they understand, and be healed. It is to be feared,
God has given him up to a reprobate sense, he is pleased with the name of a
priest, and the thing belongs not unto him, he misliketh the name of a
minister, yet all the Apostels of Christ so named them selves. But neither the
Apostels names, nor yet their religion can please a popish prelate.

After this Master Harding comes to the issue of this controversy, and how
he has handled his matter, he does appeal to the censure of the return of
untruths. Why sir is Thomas Stapleton made Pope of late? You told us even now
Master Iuell had challenged all the learned men in the world, and shall this
young man sit Arbiter in so great a controversy? May he now judge, and be judged
of no man? Take heed you make not two heads of your synagoge. Good Lord, to
what issue is Master Harding come? Diruta sunt aliis vni tibi pergama restant,
though other might well scale the ghostly walls of Jerusalem, yet to you they
stand strongly fensed. When he has given sentence, you may have room for
your history of Megabises. Apelles has set out his tables, and you bring the
Shoemaker to be judge, but if he pass the slipper, we may not then forbear
him, we will not set to his decree, the note of the tribune, in token that we
agree as he decideth in his cheyre. But an evil cause, fears an indifferent
Judge.


Harding. But to what purpose is it to stand long in ripping up your answer
to my preface? you start from place to place, and seriouslye proving nothing,
fill your paper with much matter impertinent. etc.


Dering. Master Iuell (says M. Harding) does start from place to place. I
perceive it is ill halting before a Creeple, who soever starteth aside, he
soon espieth him: In holes, creauises, corners, and bywaies, he has made many
a escape in this Reioynder, he is seldom long together in the right way.
Whosoever sees the great skyps in this article, would muse how he came
headlong so soon over it: and yet seeing his stays in many places one would
think surely he had no further to go, so Tigellius like he walks in his
Reioynder. As touching M. Iuels manner of confuting his preface, seeing it is no
part of their purpose, it skilleth not much whether he confute all in order or
no. If M. Harding can say no worse by him, let him have his saying. For the
matter, whether it be impertinent or no, the book is his own Judge, and let it
rest upon trial.


Harding. You make much a do about your negative, and bear the world in hand,
you may lawfullye, and reasonablye stand upon the negative in denying many
points of our faith, and religion, because S. Gregory used a negative
proposition against John B. of Constantinople. What though S. Gregory said by
way of Negative, no B. of Rome ever took unto him this name singularity?
Again what though S. Augustine by a negative said, In this order of
succession, there is found no B. that was a Donatist, what though I would sai,
as I might say truly, if the whole number of them, that have been B. of
Sarisburie before this time, there can be none found that was a Caluinist?
Likewise, that of all the Bishops, that ever were in England, none was married
before Cranmer? Because these things are said by way of negative, in defense of
the truth, shall it therefore be lawful for you to utter your heresies, and
sclau^derous doctrine by a negative, to impugn the truth?


Dering. In this long tale of M. Harding, we have to note many things, first
how unawares he speaks, contrary to him self. He confesses flatly that this
negative of S. Gregory, wherein he denies any ought to be universal Bishop,
is in defense of the truth. Yet Master Harding in the fourth article goes
about to prove that the pope is universal B. so by his own confession he goes
about to prove a lie. Secondarely, he confesses at the last, that Master
Cranmar was a Bishop, and Master Iuell with other his fellows are Bishops, yet
at other times, he, and his fellows will in no case grant it. Thirdly, he
says, no B. of Sarisburie was a Caluinist, before Master Iuell, and that is a
manifest lie. Fourthly, that no Bishop of Canterbury was married, before
Cranmar, and that is an otherlie. So in all this former piece, either he
speaks nothing but lies, or if it be true, it is such truth, as by open
writing he has impugned. But Master Harding because he can not deny this
contrariety, he will bid us prove the other, that any B. of Sarisbury has
been of one religion with Calvin, or that any B. of Cant. has been married. In
deed this is the ground of their whole religion, bold asseuerations without
any manner warrant, and then they bid us prove the contrary. But although this
unequal dealing be not good, and he that teaches any thing, should prove
the same to be true: yet I am content for truths sake, to reprove in few
words these negatiues of Master Hardings.

First, this forbidding marriage, was universally established by Pope Siluester
the second, who was made Pope by the means, and woorking of the devil, as
their own writers confess, in the year of our Lord 980. Yet I grant, Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 11. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 11. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 11.
through the folly of unlearned bishops, about.400. years after Christ,
matrimony in the clergy began to be misliked, especially in the West church.
For in the East church, they made no account of it, yea they thought it was no
hinderaunce to the minister for perfourmance of his duty in Gods church. But
as I have said, the West church in many places forbad it. And S. Ierom,
although in many places he speak reverently, and well of it, yet in some
places, upon his own private affection, he misliketh it. But as touching this
purpose, more then three hundred years after Christ, Priests marriage was
thought very lawful. But the English men received the faith of Christ in the
latter time of Nero, as Gildas witnesses, an old writer and a Britan, who
lived in the year of our Lord.580. and will Master Harding say, that the
thing being lawful, yet in.300. year together, there was never a Bishop
married?

And let Master Harding here make no exception, either that in those days
there was no Bishops of Canterbury, or Sarisbury, De curand. gra. affect. li. 9*
or that Gildas auctority is not good. Theodoretus says, that S. Paul him
self preached here in his latter time. Nicephorus and other more, say they
received the faith in the year of our Lord 63. by Joseph of Arimathia. Pol vir.
angl. hist. lib. 2.
After this supersticion began again to breed, then an.179. many preachers
were sent, for to call them again to their former profession. Whereupon
Tertullian, speaking of this age, says, Brita^norum inaccessa Romany loca,
Christo fuerin^ subdita. And Petrus Cluniacensis, Ad D. Bernhard.
speaking of the Scots, calls them christianos antiquiores, the most ancient
christian men. And the story is known, how Lucius then King of England, was
very diligent in setting out the Gospel. Thus it appears the true faith has
been in England almost ever since our savior Christ died. Now yt in those
days there were bishops in England, it is likewise manifest. Naucl. vol. 2. genesis
7.
When Eleutherius the Pope 177. sent preachers into England, they found here.3.
called archiflamines, and.25. called flamines, which he turned in to three
archbishops, and.25. bishops. Thus much then is clear, that in England were
Christian bishops, and they might mary. Now to prove that they were married,
Gildas de excidio Britan.
it is plain by Gildas, in the latter end of his book, where he reproves
the Bishops, their wives, and their children. So this lying negative of M.
Harding is reproved, that says, no Bishop was ever married in England, before
Bishop Cranmer. For the other negative, that there was never B. of Sarisburie,
of that religion which Calvin taught, it appears by M. Iuels Reply, which
shows, that not only in England, but in all Christendom that religion was
in the chiefest articles professed. And yet because it is here brought with the
surety of M. Hardings warrant, we will speak a little of this negative. It is
boldlye avouched of many popish Priests, that Christianity was placed here
by Augustine, which is called the English Bishop. He was sent from Rome, and
landed in the I Will of Tenet in Kent an. 596. But it is already showed, that we
had the faith of Christ long before. Then what did Augustine here? I will tell
thee Christian Reader, and I will tell thee that, which M. Harding shall nener
be able to confute. He did first persuade the King and Queen, not to enforce
his new religion, but to leave it freely to men to follow, if they would.
Afterward, being made Bishop of Canterbury, by consent of a Synod, he thrust
into that Church altars, vestiments, images, Masses, challices, crosses,
candlesticks* sensers, banners, processions, holy water, holy bread, funerals,
tithes, and such other stuff, which before that time was never seen in
England. Then he changed their keeping of Easter day, taught them many
ceremonies in Baptism, and when he could not bring all men to his diet, Beda.
lib. 2. cap. 2. hist. Anglic. Bed. lib. 1. cap. 29. and.33.
he moved great persecution against such as defended the liberty of the
Church. Then he received from Rome relickes of diverse Saints, buylt a
Monastery to Saint Peter, wrought many fained miracles, and so at the last he
died about the year of our Lord.610. Now for further proof of this, that
Augustine marred, and not made our religion, it is very probable, that we
never received our faith from Rome, but from the East Church. First, because we
(until Augustine came among us) kept our Easter after the manner of the Greek
Church. Now it is well known, Pet. Clunia. ad D. Bernard.
what mortal hatred there was for that matter, so that he which was enstructed
of the one, would in no wise use the order of the other. Again when Augustine
should be sent unto them, he came back for fear, and the Britains would not
receive him, Call. card. de Brit. hist. lib. 8. cap. 4.
nor acknowledge any authority of Pope Gregory over them. Which sure they
would never have done, if they had received their faith from Rome.

Thus much then follows, we had the faith of the Greek Church, without all
superstitious ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and so it is manifest our
bishops were then of Master Caluines profession, in the whole substance of
their religion. And so is this other negative of M. Harding proved a lie. This
I have said the more at large, because M. Hardyng and his fellows, would have
us believe, that our faith came from the Pope, and Dan Augustine the Moonke, was
the messenger. Now to quit these negatiues, with which M. Harding is so well
pleased, with like negatiues we may well and truly overthrow all popish
religion, taking example of our savior Christ's doing. For he never allowed of
their ceremonies. He never celebrated his last supper alone. He never ministered
in one kind. He never made any universal bishop. He never named
Transubstantiacion, Mass, Mattens, Euensong, Dirige, nor Trentals. He never
went a procession, with cope, cross, or candlestick. He never ^ensed Image,
nor sang Latin service. He never went to shrift, nor sat in confession. He
never preached of Purgatory, nor pardons. He never honored Saints, nor prayed
for the dead. He never fasted Friday, Uigil, Lent, nor Aduent. He never
hallowed Church, nor chalice, ashes, nor palms, candels nor bells. He never
made holy water, nor holy bread. He never wore Rochet, nor Tippet. He never had
Cross nor Myter, Corporas nor Portas, shepebooke, nor Massebooke, Frankincense
nor Peterpence, wax, nor flax, nor any such trumperie. And therefore by these
negatiues we may well conclude, that M. Hardings religion is not of Christ's
institution.


Harding. Upon this negative it likes you well to dally, and because (say you)
it offends us, you will turn it on our side. etc. And when you have made all
your turnings, you do as much for us, as if you gave a Snake for an Adder.
etc. What proofs we have, and how iustlye we confute your Objections, and
Replies, let our treatises be examined.


Dering. Master Iuels negative is this, that they can not prove by Scripture,
Doctor, Council, or any example, any one of these articles, which are
called into controversy. This negative misliketh them. Therefore says M.
Iuell, we will take the affirmative, and prove their religion not to come from
Christ's Apostles. This I trow is not to dally, but plainlye, and unfeignedly
to seek (...) the truth. Yet, says Master Harding, this is a Snake instead
of an Adder, and in deed it is true, the calling of these articles into
question, has stoonge that whorish religion even unto death. And that
Aesculapius Adder, that has lurked so long in Rome, for all his quick sight,
is by this means discovered, God be praised for it, for ever and ever. Where
Master Harding says further, let this matter be tried by treatisies, I fear
not such judges, for sure of all men's doings their own lyinges, dreamings,
visions, oracles, coniurings, and such devises, have given their religion the
greatest overthrow.


Hardyng. You report my words untruly, as your common manner is, making men
believe although, I said all these articles were of light importance. etc. The
lightest of them is of weight to draw you down to the rufull state of damned
souls, if for maintenance of your private opinion, you fear not to break
the unity of the church. Yet, as though I had said, what you faslie report me
to say, you proceed, and scoffingly demand whether ye may think that our
religion increases, and vadeth, waxes and waneth as does the moon.


Dering. These be Master Hardings words, in his Preface to his answer. Why
treat you not of matters of more importance, then these be of, which yet lie
in question between the church of Rome, and the Protestants? As the presence
of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, of Justification, of the value
of good works, of the Sacrifice of the Mass. etc. This obscure manner of
speaking may seem to make light of these waightye mattters, and therefore who
so ever should say so of them, deserved little blame. But here Master Hardings
choler is to much inflamed, because Maiste Iuell noting their inconstancy,
asks whether their Religion increases, and vadeth, waxes and waneth, as
does the moon. And has he not, think you, good occasion to ask this
question? Does not Master Harding say in many of these articles, that they
be no keys of their Religion? Yet here he says, if a man deny them, when
they be received, they are of value inoughe to dampne him. Where is his wit
become? What is so contrary to it self, as this? What is waxing, and waning?
What is increasing and vading, if this be none? And what Christian ears can
abide this saying, that such trifels as they be of them selves, and such
filthy whooredomes as they be now made of, should condemn us, if we should
speak against them? He paid not the price of souls, that so easily sends
them away from there master, unto Satan. The casting away such scourings of
the Romish uncleanness, shall never do it, nay it is a witness unto our
consciences, that we be the children of the highest.


Hardyng. Concerning the rest of your answer, wherein you treat certain
common places, and utter much spite against the Pope etc. against
transubstanciatio^, against invocation of saints, against aultars. etc. Prayer
for the dead you condemn, and show no cause why. etc. I think good to let
pass, and contemn it.


Dering. Now sure well done master Harding, where you can not read, skip
over, but take good heed least in your l^aping you hurt your self, and do
your cause no good. If men shall understand, that you will not allow the authority
of Pope Nicolaus, Pope Leo, Pope Boniface, Pope Sergius, and the common Law,
all which Master Iuell alleges, you shall make the Pope that now is, beshrew
you, and so peradventure you shall get a curse, and you shall make all good
Christian people mistrust you. Of transubstantiation, and aultars, we will say
more hereafter. Prayer to saints is now nighe forgotten. You ask in the
margin, why we do not answer the book of Purgatory. In deed now you come
to the point. This article is very ancient about.1900. years a gone. Plato
spoke of it in his book de animo, where this your cleansing place has his
first ground, and foundation. And therefore for our good, and sufficient
discharge in this matter, I answer out of the same book of Plato. We meddle
not with your book of purgatory, because we fear not our shadows. You know,
that ye yo^g nouice in Philosophy feared not ye three hedded Cerberus, the
roaring of Cocytus, the rolling stone of Sisyphus, and how should we fear your
painted paper walls of Purgatory? Christ is our Savior. God engraffe in us a
desire to be with him, and for my part, since purgatory has no grant in Gods
word, I reckon it scarce worthy answer. Yet because you ar importune,
somewhat shall be said hereafter.


Hardyng. You have piked out, or set some a work, to pike out for you, all the
terms and words used in my book, which a good man may justly bestow in
rebuke of vice upon evil men. etc.


Dering. Here Master Harding is fallen into a very shameless vein of
writing, and thinks good at large to excuse his own modesty. The words, in
which he seeks after it, are these, Thersites, Goliath, Heathens, Publicanes,
sacramentaries, Lucians, scoffers, rash, presumtuous, ignorant, peeuishe, and
such like these, he goes about orderlye to apply unto Master Iuell. To
answer them all in order, were to enter into needelesse labor, and to
contend in words, with those, which delight in railing. But because Master
Harding for some proof of this matter, brings this authority of Doctor
Luther against us, and so uses our contention against our selfs, let us all
pray unto the God of peace, and consolation, that he would give unto us to be
all like minded, that with one heart, and one voice, we may praise God, even the
Father of Jesus Christ. Romans 15.5.
Our agreement shall soon spread abroad Gods glorious Gospel, and stop the
evil mouth of the sclaunderer. It shall defend the common hold of all good
men, and turn over the refuges of the Papists. There is no way so straight to
set out Gods glory, as where the Preachers go al together. There is no
persuasion so effectual, to pull the people from ydolatrie, as the Ministers
to love, one an other. Happy were those times of the Israelites, when the
people were in Jerusalem* as if they had been one man. Happy was the condition
of the Apostles, when they were al with one acc^rd in the same place. 1. Nehe.
3.
Then did Israel build an altar unto the Lord. Then did the Apostles receive
the holy Ghost, when they were all of one mind in Salomons porch, Acts. 2.4.
many signs and woonders were showed by them. When the Philippians did
continue in one spirit, Acts. 5.12.
and in one mind, helping forward the laboring faith of the Gospel, they did
well become the Gospel of Christ. Phil. 1.27.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion, Phil. ^.1.
and mercy: let us fulfill our joy, that we be like minded. Christ pleased not
him self, but even, as it is written, the rebukes of them, that rebuked, they
fell on me, Romans 15.2.
and shall we abide strife, and contention? He was wounded for our
transgressions, and broken for our iniquity, Esaias. 63.5.
and shall not we bear the infirmities of our brethren? A bruised reed he did
not break, and the smoking flax he did not quench, Esaias. 42.3.
and shall we tread them down, that we think are a little deceived? Where is
that voice of Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
Charity is more strong, than a wall of Adamant stone? Where is the voice of
S. Paul the Apostle, bear one an others burden? Paul.
Where is the voice of our savior Christ, by this all men shall know, you are
my Disciples? Have we forgotten the co^maudement, that was so lately given us,
be you one, as my Father, and I am one? Consider, I beseech you, O my fellow
servant, how dangerous times are come upon us of the Christian common
wealth. Consider the great perils, John. 15.
whereinto we are fallen. In the heads of a very few, very many of our
weak brethren have great danger. The wicked do triumph, and rejoice, when
the bold, and ungodly Louanis^s have nothing to object unto us, they set our
own contention in the eyes of all men, when they have no testimony of
scripture to bring against us, and (such is the mercy of our God) are not
vpholden with the favor, and authority of our Prince, yet they have a
certain confidence in our disagreement. Take from them this hope, which yet
they lean on, and it shall come to pass, that either they shall leave their
popish thraldom, and with the lost Child return unto the merciful Father:
or if they will still abide in those papal tempests, they shall be broken with
the rocks of errors, and perish in the shipwrackes of their own devises. God
the Father of all mercy, give unto us for his Sons sake, that with one will,
and agreeable minds, we may all praise his name. And thus far of this
argument.


Hardyng. There was never any Hickescorner, that ieasted more pleasant at any
toy in an interlude, then Master Iuell scoffeth blasphemously, at the most
holy and dredful Mysteries. And may no man be so hardy, as to name him a
Lucian, or a Scoffer?


Dering. Surely, a man would think by these proceedings, that Master
Hardings new Dioclesian, has enstructed him in old Genesius learning. He
would defend his modesty, and yet never was there a more saucy gester, against
a Christian bishop. But let him come forth on the stage, and behold his
vnnourtered gestures. Master Iuell scoffeth, says he, at the dreadful
mysteries. And how proves he it? Is his word an oracle? No, no Master
Harding, he is no Lucian, that abhors your ungodly sacrifice. He is no
Scoffer, that speaks by the spirit of God, against your wicked mysteries.
Ezechias called the brazen serpent nehushton, 2. Reg. 18.
yet he iested not at Gods institution. 2. Reg. 23.
The scripture calls mount Oliuet, the mount of corruption, yet blames it
not Gods creature. S. Paul calls circumcision overthwart cutting, Phillip.
yet does he not scoff at Gods sacrament. Christ said, the Temple was a
den of thieves, Math.
yet he confessed it ought to be a house of prayer. And may not a man call your
mysteries by their name, in which is as great abuse, as ever was in the brazen
Serpent, in mount Oliuet, in Circumcision, in the Temple of God? Yea M. Harding
your Mysteries are Idolatrous, though you cry out, that Ezechias has taken
away the high places of God, and his altars. Para. 2.32
But who can let Achabs Prophets to speak ill of Micheah?


Hardyng. What mad man ever ouershot him self so far, as to make such a
hasty Challenge, specially in matters of religion, by so long practice of the
Church determined? Who ever presumed so to make defiance, as it were to al
learned men, yea to al men alive? who ever defended a matter so stoutly
avouched, with less learning? Who in so weighty points made Arguments of
less pith, so light, and so childish? And yet this ioly fellow stands so high
in his own conceit, that whiles he lays about him, flingeth, and stryketh at
all men, spares not the reverence of his Mother, no not the Majesty of the
holy Ghost, and Christ our Lord, he may not be touched, so much as it were
with a venue of these most deserved terms.


Dering. Now is Master Harding come to his last, and least reason, and with a
company of brave Interrogations, of what mad man? and who ever? without any
answer made, concludes at adventure, that these, and many more modest terms
were well applied. But soft sir, a hasty Bitch brings forth blind whealpes.
If you come to this issue, by my former granting of every question, let the
fault be mine, if by your own presuming, you are never the near. You have
roled up Sisyphus stone, and it is fallen down again, and therefore you must
begin a fresh. What mad man say you ever ouershot him self so far? etc.
Master Harding, when he took upon him to answer the Challenge. Who ever
presumed so to make defiance? etc. God, when he said, come now, and blame me,
if you can, Esaias. 1.18. And his son Christ, Esaias. 1.18.
quis vestrum arguet me de peccato, which of you can convince me of sin? Who
ever defended a matter? etc. Your doctors at Oxford against these reverend
Fathers D. Cranmer, D. Ridley, and M. Latimer. Who ever in so weighty points?
etc. You, in your answer, and here in defense of your modesty. And yet this
ioly fellow, etc. I will speak nothing of this modesty. For undoubtedly it is
far spent. But this is a Popes disputation, to ask us first our minds, and
then to conclude whether we will or no. But fare you well Master Harding, now
you are off the stage, give us leave a little to speak to the audience. Mark
christian reader this man's intemperancy. He has purposed to defend his vain,
and beastly Religion, and thou shall sooner ouerturne the whole estate of his
life, then bring him from it. He has woorshipped so long in the church of
Rome, that Elizeus, the Prophet cannot call him out of it. He cares not, what
he says, nor how boldly he affirms, and he is not ignorant of this him
self, but he is so far of from having any thing for him self, that he
thinks he must not only speak against us, but even against nature, against
the warnings of reason, against the opinion of al men, against the scriptures
of God. He defe^deth his modesty, with mostim^odest words. He shameth not to
say Master Iuels Book is foolish, which is a looking glass of learning to
all that understand it. He says his arguments be peevish, which if they be not
grounded in Gods word, I require thee believe them not. He says, he spares
not the majesty of the holy ghost, and Christ our Lord, and yet in so great
blasphemy, brings no one conjecture. And how does he handle all this? With
so good, and chosen words, so handsome colors, so whole sentences, that
although he has made war against God, and his Church, yet he seems to
speak deep divinity. God give us grace to beware of him. He is a blind
leader of the blind. But he is come again, and let us see what he has more
to say.


Harding. You would have men think, this were Vetus Comoedia. No M. Iuell, it
is Zelus Dei, it not Vetus Comoedia. The imitation of Vetus Comoedia, has ever
been taken for a badge of men of your profession. etc. You mock, and scoff at
our persons, as the naughty boys of Bethel did at Elizeus, but at our ancient
Religion, and at the church of Christ. Yet we curse you not in the name of our
Lord, as he did those evil nourtered children, that ye might be toren of
Bears. etc. With your wicked doctrine you have so brought the people from God,
as now for a great number, they may seem not to halt on both sides, but to be
fallen down right. Yet do we not call for fire to descend from heaven, and
burn you up. Neither do we stir the people to take you, and destroy you,
as Elias bad the people to destroy the false Prophets.


Dering. Have you not left iarring of this immodest string? Belike it is very
pleasant music in your ears. This manner of behavior, say you, is not Vetus
comoedia, no open naming of men upon stages. What is it then? It is Zelus Dei.
I may not judge directly what you are within. Paul was a persecutour in
defending their traditions, but sure your zeal is not according to knowledge,
you love darkness, more the^ light, and therefore you dwell in ignorance, you
seek not after wisdom, as after silver, and gold, and therefore you find her
not. You say we scoff at you and your Religion, as the. etc. At your persons
we scoff not, God is our witness, we weep to see the temple of the holy
Ghost to be the temple of an Harlot, it greeueth us, that in the Image of God
should appear Satan's vglye visage. And you want not our prayers for your
return. But your ancient Religion we hate, and abhor it. It is so old,
that it is rotton, and one piece will not hang with an other, it is a smoke,
that at the flaming out of gods word is vanished, it is a stinking mist, it is
ouerblowen with the sweet winds of the holy spirit. And therefore do not
blame us, if we cannot abide it. Your Religion is as good, as your vaunt is
true, when you commend your selves for clemency above Elizeus, or Elias. You
say you pray not, that we may be torn of Bears, nor that fire from heaven
may come down to destroy us. What your prayer is inwardely, I say it often, I
know not. But for your good will toward us, if you could command either
beasts, or Elements, we should not escape neither Bear, nor fire. The
abundance of our blood cries out to heaven, that you are as merciful as the
woolfe, or the Tiger. But O passi grauiora, dedit deus his quoque finem, his
name be praised for evermore.


Harding. Certain false preachers, for their great impudency, and for that
they barked at the light of the Gospel, as dogs do at the Moon by night, S.
Paul called dogs, and bad the Philippians beware of them. etc.


Dering. Here Master Harding would cover his ungodly demeanor, with the cloak
of godlynes, for that S. Paul called certain ungodly teachers, dogs, and
evil laborers, and therefore he would gladlye say, as much to Master Iuell.
But who were they, that thus barked at the Gospel? Uerily men of their own
Religion. Phil. 3.
For thus says S. Paul: Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of
concysion. For we are the circumcysion, that worshipp God in the spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. But O the
wretched Church of that confounded Babylon, what one-peece has it of this
spiritual woorship, that is, to rejoice in Christ alone, and have no
confidence in the flesh? Do they not make Angels their mediators? Do they not
call upon Paul and Peter? Do they not say, that their whoorish Mass is
propitiatory? Do they not bid men go range a pilgrimage for the greater
meades? Do they not say, there is a merit of our works? And what say they not,
that leans to flesh, and blood? This* is the barking doctrine, this is the
tearing, and renting in pieces of Christ his merits. S. Augustine says, non
gratia ex merito, sed meritum ex gratia. Grace comes not of deserte, but
deserte comes of grace. Let them leave off their jesting, at Master Iuells
worship, it is no time to speak evil of authority. Even in such language, the
heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness.


Harding. Jeremy calls them of Iewry Staliens, for that they neyed each one
at an others wife. Ezechiel calls the false Prophets of Israel Foxes, so
Christ him self named Herod a Fox.


Dering. Yet M. Harding proceeds in the long space of his own modesty, and
as he must needs do, alleging truth for falsehood, heapeth up scriptures
against himself. Jeremy. Ezec. 13.
Jeremy calls the people of Judah Stahens, Ezechiel, the false Prophets,
Foxes, and so does Christ call Herod. But who were these fed horses of Judah?
those, says God by the Prophet, whose children have forsaken me, Iere. 5.
and sworn by them that are no Gods, that when they were fed full, yet they
committed adultery. And who swears by them, that are no Gods, either we, or
they? Have not they taught us, to swear by the saints of God, by his holy
Euangelies, and by their wicked Masses? And trow they, this is not swearing by
false Gods? Ezech. 13.
Of whom speaks Ezechiel that they are like Foxes in the wasty places, even
those that Prophesied of their own spirit, and lying diuinations, and whether
do prophecy of their own spirit, we that search only the word of God, or
they that preach forth their own traditions? Who has seen lying diuinations,
we that reject all their dreams, and visions, or they that do stay their
whole Religion on them? Though all the revelations, which are written, in manner
infinite, did not show it, Master Hardings own answer, would sufficientlye
prove it. This is a special note, that their Pope is Antichrist, often spoken of
in the scripture, 1. Timo. 4.
and bewailed of S. Paul to Timothe in his earnest exhortation to continual
preaching, where he says the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome
Doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall harken after their own lusts,
get them a heap of teachers, 2. Timo. 4.
and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables.
Thus while Master Harding does maintain his modesty, he has overthrown his
religion, and in heat of spirit as he goes forth in evil, he does breath out
evil terms in such sort, that chaste ears may not well abide them. He
calls marriage an unchaste life, wives strumpets, and an undefiled bed a
lecherous neying. O Lord, are not thy eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken
the^, but they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed them, but they have
refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder than a stone,
and have refused to return. But they know not the way of the Lord, nor the
judgment of their God. I will answer no otherwise but with S. Paul's
words, that their doctrine is a doctrine of Devils. He tells us of
spiteful guyles, and wyles, with which we intrappe men, of our lewdness, and
our false dealing, that makes them to smart, and yet he says, he will not
chasten us with reuiling words. How full of gall is Master Harding, that
these words do not yet seem bitter? What shall we look for, when his spiryt
is moved, that thus quyetly breathed out such reproaches? But so his tongue may
run, or his pen be walking, it seems, he cares not what he write, or
speak. Why does he not tell us what he means? Is it like he knows any
harm by us, and will not tell it? Such silence would require a mylder
stomach. Now after a little talk to no purpose, when he has swet long in
bringing much for his modesty, yet can prove none, he thinks good policy,
to make other compartners of his impudency, and after mature deliberation, with
a few pretty metaphores, thinks it good to bestow his talk upon Master
Iuell, and so with a bold asseueration begins his purpose.


Harding. Verily of all the writers that I have read, I never found any, that
uses the loathsome manner of scoffing, and mocking so much, as you do. When
reason fails, a scoff is at hand. When an argument presses, a mock serves
for answer. When the matter goes plain on the contrary side, then
Hickescorner be stirs him, and with ieasting pulls away the mind of the
reader to an other light thought, that so all might be laughed out, and the
chief point let pass.


Dering. Now verily Master Harding you are in a mad case. You may be Simo for
your luck, your harms come so in order, your arguments are so slender, your
witnesses so indiscreet, your adversary so strong, that when you have done
what you can, at last you keep the shame your self. You told us before of
blasphemies against the dreadful mysteries, of strikinge at all men, not
sparing the reverence of his mother, no not the majesty of the holy Ghost, and
is this bloody tragidy ended with a poor scoff? Has Master Iuell so
tempered his Reply, that Master Harding can find in it no one reuyling
word? Why then M. Harding, call together your friends, and let many hands
make the burden lighter. Unless your reuylings be marvelous uncomely, you
shall have them of your own side that will bear them up stoutly, and M. Iuell
is content with a little jesting, in time convenient. But that either scoff, or
mock, or your Hickescorner, does stand in stead of an answer, this is an
other of your railings, and you must be content to bear it your self. If you
will have us believe it, why show you not the place? Must the enemies words
stand for good accusation? But who can bring proof of a shameless lie?


Hardyng. In old time Philosophers had names given them of some special
property and disposition of mind. Socrates was named the dissembler, Plato the
Divine, Heraclitus the Dark, Carneades the Subtle, Chrysippus the sharp,
Theophrasius the sweet, Diogines the Doggish. Certainly, had you been alive
at those days, you had been named, Jewel the Scoffer. Yet for your learning,
I wene, you had not ben annumbred among Philosophers.


Dering. Here to help to discredit his adversary, he utters a little cunning
in old Philosophers names, and yet in the end is very loathe to account him
among them. This is the craking M. Harding told us of, to set out his learning
after so unlearned fashion. But this is no fault in the rethorike of Louain.
The Tarentynes, and the Sicilians, to whom he writes, shall accept it for good
eloquence. But let the cunning goo, let us examine the cause, he does measure
his forefathers by his own affection. What if we should deal in like manner
with him, and reason thus. Ptoleme for his foolish pyping was called a
minstrell, Ochus Artaxerxes for his cruelty Machera, Tarquinius for his
uncivil behavior, the proud Deniochares, for his bold prating (...).
Aristogiton for his impudency a Dog, Antiochus for his great promysing, and
little perfourming, Dosas, Trebonius for speaking ill of his betters, Asper. And
had M. Harding of our days, been then living, he should have been called for
his little modestye, Harding the rayler. Certainly, though he might be one of
those, for his behavior, yet I will not bestow of him, any particular name, I
leave him to the judgment of others. Now once again for his full discharge,
he shows out his general acquitance, and says that in all his answer, he
has used great modesty. Much like to Ptolome, one of the Kings of Egypt, that
when he had killed his Father, and his Moother, and his brother, yet he would
needs be called (...). So M. Harding will say needs he is modest, but his
word is no warrant. Concerning M. Iuell, whether his greatest grace be in
scoffing, I marvel that he now does ask the question. In prefat. beware of
Master Iuell.
Does not M. Rastall, his own dearlyng, confess, he has a rare gift in
writing? Though his authority be otherwise very light, yet against M. Harding
it is very weighty. And why will not M. Harding confess as much? Is he not as
well learned, as M. Rastall? Yes sure, but malitia mutauit intellectum, malice
has changed his understanding.


Hardyng. If ye seek to be revenged on me, for that I have been so bold, as to
answer your vain Challenge, and by this Reioynder, to confute part of your
colorable Reply: either hold your peace, or speak so, as you be not found a
liar, if you can. For truly, by your evil speaking of me, you shall but
increase the heap of my felicity. etc.


Dering. Master Harding would have the world to think, we are offended with
his writing. And in deed we are so, and take it as a scourge of God, to keep
us in humility, and a manacing against our sinful lives, that as often as we se
their books, we should repent us of the idolatries, wherein we have been
drowned. But he in his impiety, runs desperately forward, and appealeth unto
Gods judgment, with such securitye as appears, as Flauinius at Thrasimenus,
or Varro at Cannae went to meet with Hannibal. Well may I use this similitude,
since all his doings are nothing else but gentillitie. Master Harding does
accuse us of evil speaking, before we offend him. Where he says, he is sure
he stands upon a sure ground, let him take heed he be not wise in his own
conceit. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of God. They are not all true worshippers
that go up to Jerusalem, but such only as woorship in spirit, and verity.
The Jews with as great a confidence, said they had one Father, which was God,
but Christ answered, they were of their father the Devil. Saint Paul speaks
of the wicked, that gloried so of God, but he says, by such means the true
God is dishonored. The Scribes, and the Pharisees bragged much of Moses, but
Christ said, the same Moses should be their accuser. All Israel did ever
boast, they were the children, but yet only in Isaac shall the seed be called.
Even so these braggings of Christ, seeing he follows not his Testament, shall
be his own confusion. But by like he feared this, that here I do answer, and
therefore with a vain occupacion he thought best to prevent it, and make a
false claim him self, to that saying of Christ. And to prove it, does
allege that weary argument of their Romish church, which because it is so often
alleged, it shall not be amiss to speak somewhat of it, and to way a little
the difference Jerusalem, nor in this hill, the true worshippers do worship,
but in spirit, and veritye. But the Church of Rome, does hang upon old
rotten posts, they observe months, and days, that they may be made free,
they run into cloisters, and monckery, for to worship, and Math. 28.
who soever does believe, and is baptized, shall be saved. But the church of Rome
does condemn them that go one foot from her, she pronounces them accursed
that will not drink of her adulteries, and without her she says, there is no
Gala. 1.
then Christ has delivered, and the scripture is the rule of her whole
religion. The church of Rome does harken after unwritten verities, she gives
credit unto dreams, and visions, she says the Scriptures may be drawn into
diverse senses, and will not allow them, but after her 1. Cor. 13.
she does receive with meekness the word that is ingraffed in her, and does
confess, Iaco. 15.
that it can save our souls. The church of Rome is buylt upon men's devises,
and for insufficiencye of the word, adioyneth pilgrimages, and pardons,
sacrifices for quick and dead, Masses, and purgatoryes, Invocation of Saints,
worshipping of Images, and a thousand such trumperies, and will not confess
that all is written, which is necessary to salvation. The Church of Christ does
acknowledge that by Christ Rome makes merits of her own, has invented wor^es
of supererogation, has great confidence in Bulls, Relics, Indulgences, and
salutations of the Pope. The church of Christ, Rome, is a den of thieves, her
hye Priests are sorcerers, coniurers, necromancers, murderers, unchaste
adulterers, Sodomits, church robbers, and such like infamous creatures, as is
evident by Platina, Be^no, and all other that have written their lives. The
church of Christ does use the keys aright, as she Rome does bind and lose at
adventures, sends pardons to persons that she never saw, and because she
has not received freely, she sells unreasonable dear, and has made men
pay for their sins, an hundred thousand ounces of gold. To conclude, Rome,
Acts. 20.28
is the body of Antichrist, the members of an Idolatrous harlot, that has gone
a whorehunting after diverse lovers. Therefore the church of Rome, is not the
church of Christ. And as this church of Rome is in deed the synagogue of the
Devil, so she has not so much as the marks of Christ's congregation. The
right use of the sacraments, which is the badge of Christ's church, Psalm.
and the reading of scriptures, whereby her steps are lightened, are as far
out of Peter's church in Rome now, as in the time of paganism there were out of
the capitol, as it shall appear upon further discussion. First, if they have
the right use of the sacraments, then have they nothing in them but Gods own
ordinance. For we may not intermeddle our own constitutions with Gods
commandment, as the prophet does likewise witness of the sacrifice. For if
we do follow our own ways, Esaias. 66.3.
he that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a
sheep, as if he cut a dogs neck, he that offreth an oblation, as if he offered
swynes blood, he that remembers incense, as if he did bless an Idol, so
much does God hate to have our devises joined with his wisdom. And who
knows not how the sons of Aaron, for offering strange fire were miraculously
consumed from heaven. Leuit. 10.
Se now whether the Romish sacraments are not in like sort defiled. I speak
not of the huge multitude, which they have made on their own head. The two
sacraments of the body of Christ, and of Baptism, how do they use them? As
Christ did? Would God they did so, they would return with the lost son,
into the lap of the heavenly father. How then do they use them? The sacraments
them selves they have profaned, with giving them to unmeet creatures, the
communion bread unto dead men, Baptism unto Bells, and Ships, and restrain
them from fyt persons, as the sacrament of Christ's blood from the Laytie. The
manner of Christ's institution they have all together perverted. For where as
Matthew, Mark, Luke, Paul, do witness, that Christ only took, blessed,
brake, and delivered, they like not this simplicitye, they have invented new
guises. Concerning his apparel, first he puts on much masking attire, as if
he should go somewhether a mumming, not as though he should go to serve God. In
canone missa rubrica.
His body sometime must bend forward, sometime be upright, sometime turn
round about, sometime but the half turn, sometime bend over the aultare,
sometime not touch it. His hands sometime he lays down, sometime he
lifts them up, sometime he joins them flat together, sometime one finger
with an other, sometime he rubbeth his hole hands, beyond the chalice, least
any crummes should stick on them, sometime he rubbeth but his fingers, some time
he touches the bread, sometime the aultare, his eyes sometime he lifts
up, sometime he casts them down, sometime he must look very demurely,
sometime after the common manner, sometime he must cross his face, sometime
bend down his head, his arms, sometime he must hold them up a cross,
sometime with his hands together, he must pray, sometime for himself,
sometime for his friends, sometime for his parishoners, sometime for all men,
sometime for no mothen are present, his words sometime a loud, sometime
secret. Sometime the Clarke alone must answer, sometime the Quire. He
speaks sometime at liberty, sometime certain words with one breath.
Sometimes he kisseth the altar on the right hand, sometime in the midst. But
with the Cake, and the Chalice, especially, he has most strange diuises. His
Chalice must sometime stand still in the midst of the altar, sometime it is
a little lifted up, sometime it is covered with the patin, sometime with a
clout, sometime he makes three crosses on the Cup, and Cake together, sometime
severally on each of them. Sometime he holds the Chalice aright, sometime
with his sore fingers and thumbes fast joined together. Sometime he makes.v.
crosses together, one quite beyond the Chalice, an other before it, on ^che
side an other, and the fifth on the bottom. Sometime he crosses it thrice
within, where the wine is. Sometime the Deacon holds the cover in his hand,
and stretches his arm out, as far as he can, Did. 93. diaconi.
and upon pain of presumption, the Priest may not touch it, till it be given
him. Sometime the Priest takes it, and does kiss it. Sometime he touches his
eyes, sometime he crosses his head with it, sometime he lays it down.
Likewise the Cake sometime is on the Chalice, sometime before it, sometime he
crosses it, sometime he lifts it, sometime he takes two pieces of it, and
holds them in his left hand, and the third in his right hand. Sometimes he
takes one piece of it, and dippes it in the Chalice, sometime he takes an
other piece, and makes a cross before his mouth, and when his pastime is
done, sometime he hangs it up in a box.

All these, and such other toys they teach in the canon of their Mass, and
what christian heart would not bleed, to see Gods mysteries so impurely
handled, yet read the book, thou shall see more Monsters then these. There are
words which thou must not speak, but first the one half, the^ make a cross,
after speak out the rest. If the word be of more then two syllables, yet thou
art taught how to utter it, in benedixit thou must first say be, then a cross,
after that nedixit, in calicem, first ca, then after a cross licem, in
immaculatam, first immacu, then a cross, then latam. Diverse such words they
do crossecut, and what shall we say to it, but as S. Paul says: Cauete canes,
Philli.
cauete concisionem, cauete malos operarios. Beware of dogs, beware of cutting,
beware of evil laborers. I pass over for breuity diverse more contrarieties,
between our savior Christ's institution, and their doing. The godly, and
faithful man shall sone perceive them. And thus much of the eucharist.
Concerning baptism John did baptize in Jordan, Philip by the way side, no
coniurings, or incantacions before used, and our savior says, ite in
vniuersum mundum. etc. Goo in to the whole world, and baptize them in the name
of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. But this plain doing
of our Savior Christ, does not like their satanized imaginations. They must
have salt, oil, cream, spittle, breathing, sensing, crossings, candle
droppings, hallowings of the Funt, putting their hands in the water, the Infant
must hold the taper, and then he that worst may, does hold the candell, and
such other iuglings they have, that I can not rehearse. Which doings being
compared with the institution of the Lord God, they shall appear nothing else
but an apish mocking of his eternal wisdom. Which being duelye considered,
their church of Rome shall be known, for a dungeon of Iniquity, or as Master
Harding termed her, a sincke of Sodom, and a forge of the Devils mysteries.
We contemn therefore these vile reproaches against the B. of Sarisbury, Luther,
Zuinglius, Galuin, Peter Martyr, Beza, and such other, and pray unto the living
Lord, if it be his good will, and pleasure, to mollifye the hearts of our
enimyes.


Harding. Now I come unto your other point, wherewith as with a most heinous
crime, you charge me, which is my departing from your Cospel, as you say. This
you object bitterly unto me, not only in your Answer to my Preface, but
also in very many places of your Reply, and specially in your Conclusion. ctc.


Dering. You guess very often at Master Iuells meaning, yet hitherto to have you
not once gessed charitablye. But the God of love does not direct your goyngs,
and therefore you make such often reaches at hatred. What prejudice should
Master Iuell bring unto your cause, which of it self is weak, and of all
Godly men forsaken? What harm unto your person, whose return should be his
exceeding joy, and whose obstinacy is the increase of his commendations?
Because, say you, in the person of an other, he puts you in remembrance,
from whence you be fallen. Why M. Harding are you offended to hear of your
evil doing. Uerilye the wise man says. He that refuses instruction, Pro.
15.31
despyseth his own soul. But what speaks this person, whom you mean, unto
M. Harding not long since. etc. O custom of evil speaking, what a pleasure
do thou bring unto the evil disposed person? We have heard often of
Master Iuells rai^inges, and scoffings, every leaf of his discourteous
dealing, a long common place of his bitter kind of writing. After so much a
do, seeing there will be required some proof, he seeks busylye, and when he
can find none, he makes the greatest leap, though there be many very wide,
that is in the reioinder, even out of this preface quite over the Reply, in to
the conclusion, and there he has found a poor man which asks a question,
which has set him in these fiery passions, what is there in such manner
dealing, but either singular impude^ce, or extreme folly? Bear yet with him
good Reader. Bar him of these leapings, and all his pastime is done. But let
us hear what Master Harding can answer to this poor man. Thus Master
Iuell makes him speak unto Master Harding. Not long since you taught them of
our side the Gospel, even in like sort, and form, as it is tought now. Here
Master Harding because he can make no good answer, thinks it not amiss to
stop this pore man's mouth with a little sophestrie. You taught us, says this
poor man, the Gospel. By this, says Master Harding you do us to weete what
your gospel is, and wherein it consists. Blame not this poor man, though he
can say no more. I have been a scholar almost this twentye years, and yet I
can not see what this answer means. They must be L^nces eyes, and such, as
can look through milstones, that can see this conclusion, very deep
cogitations must go so far into sentences, and a man had need of a warm
nightcap, that should follow them. But seeing we can get no better answer, the
poor man's saying shall stand still for true, and Master Hardings obscure
gatherings shall verify the common saying, that it is better to say nothing,
then to hold ones peace. In the end Master Harding denies, that he ever
spoke these words, whereby he does empayre his credit in all other matters.
Let the Christian reader for his contentation, when time, and occasion may
serve, enquire of any, that then lived in Ox^orde. This simple way may not
countervaile so many witnesses.


Hardyng. To answer to the matter simply, and truly, as before God, I will not
here for my better excuse, accuse the will of the Prince, in whose days I was
brought up in learning, the ernest endeavor of the Governors, then being, to
satisfy his desires, the crueltye of the laws, the yielding of all in
general, except a very few, the great silence of preachers, that then durst
not teach necessaries, the common ignorance of men. Omitting^ all these, which
I might bring for some part of excuse, I am content for truths sake freely to
accuse my self. In certain points I was deceived I confess by Calvin
Melancthon, and a few others, as you by them, and sundry others are now
deceived in many.


Dering. Now he comes to the simple, and true answer for his turning, but
he turns so many members in one sentence, that he turns all sense quite out
of the periode. Perhaps he thinks he speaks to the poor man again,
therefore he speaks in riddles. Or if it be not so, the truth I trow
breaks out. And again, he accuses the iniquity of those days, but his
dark heart cannot abide the light, straight he starteth back again, and is
content to take the fault unto him self, because all other excuses are vain,
and ungodly. And as well as he can, in so great a storm, he runs under the
covering of S. Augustines authority, but it may not help him, sith their
turnings are not like. Saint Augustine turned from traditions unto scripture,
but he turns from the scripture, unto traditions. Again, S. Augustine turned
from the vain trust, that he had in man, unto the sure confidence, that is
fixed in Christ. But he is slidden away even from Christ, to see how far men
have established his authority. This is true, as his own conscience does
judge, and his writings do testify, when under the name of the Church, he
g^eth from the word of God. Therefore is his turning neither modesty, nor
repentance, but a shameless falling away, and an obstinate forsaking of God.
God give him grace herein to judge him self, that in the day of wrath, he be
not judged of the Lord.


Harding. Now, as to confess this much, truth requires, so to acknowledge
your false reports, wisdom forbids. Them would I have also not let to
confess, if I wist God were delited with our lies. Where then you say I taught
your Gospel, even in like sort and form in all respects as it is taught now,
that I deny utterly. In deed I hobde and roued sometimes, but your pricks I
ever took to be to far for me to shoot at. Neither truly could I see the
mark, that you M. Iuell, and such as you are, shot at, it was so far of,
and therefore I stood out, and shot smaller game.


Dering. Now after this confession made, you go as you say, from the truth to
your wisdom, and tell us in what sort you preached the Gospel. You say you
hobde, and roued, but you never shot at any certain mark. Why were you one of
Baals prophets, that haulted on both sides, that would serve both God, and
Mammon too? That eat meat with the Gentiles, and yet dissemble it before the
Jews? The waueryng is unconstant in all his ways, and because thou art
neither hoate, nor cold, I will spue thee out of my mouth, says the Lord?
This hobbing was the cause that you fell again to your vomit. And this rouing
ever since, made your shooting uncertain. You could not see the mark, that M.
Iuell shootes at, the vale of cold devotion was before your eyes. You looked
even now like an Eagle, in the poor man's question. But now you have oyled
your blere eyes, that you can not see Christ. God lighten your eyes, that you
sleep not still in death. You stood without (you say) and shot smaller game,
in deed you shot such game, as was not worth your labor. At the imaginations
of man's brain you roued so much uncertainly, that you shoot yet now beating
the air. Therefore have you eyes, and see not. etc. There be many such
hobbers now adays. God give us grace to beware by your example, and to take
heed of such cold play.


Hardyng. As for your respects, to say truly I never knew. what they were.
At the gaming of your Gospel, you shote, to strike down the true, and real
body of Christ, on^ of the blessed sacrament of the altar, with certain
phrases of spech with, telling the people of your tropes, and figures, with
comparing the Eucharist to the baptism, with making the presence of Christ,
like in both. You bend your force to strike away the eternal, and singular
sacrifice of the church, with such a sort, and form, as I hitherto never used,
and yet think to be very strange, as for example with teaching as you do,
that missa signifies not the mass, but your Communion, that Eucharistia is to
be taken not for the sacrament consecrate, but for common bread, wherewith one
Bishop did present another. That Melchisedech, and Malachias signified the
sacrifice of your communion, whereat the people lift up their hands, and
hearts, as you say, unto heaven, prays, and sacrifices together, rejoicing
in the Lord. That in the sacrament of the altar, there is no virtue, nor
grace, but when it is used, no more then in water, after that one is baptized.
That there is no difference betwixt the priest, and the people, in the holy
ministry of the sacrifice, and that lay folk, me^, and women, do make the
sacrifice, and be priests after the order of Melchisedech, that God is the
author of evil, and drives men to sin. Many other such sorts, and forms of
shooting, you, and your companions use at this day, with which I was never
acquainted, as nether any man living can burden me, and God is witness, which
to me is a sufficient discharge. Wherefore you do me the greater wrong, in that
you say, I taught your Cospell, even in like sort and form, and in all
respects, as it is taught now.


Dering. But you proceed at your rouers, and tell an uncertain tale of the
respects of your preachinges. You say you never preached against
transubstanciation. These are vain repetitions, to fill up your paper. How
could you preach against such filthynesse of the Sea of Rome, that were
always hobbing, and never preached out Christ in the simplicitye of his
Gospel? I am easily persuaded, that you never did it, seeing, whereunto you are
again returned. But whether you did it, or no, one day it shall be revealed. All
these points here alleged, are fully discussed in Master Iuells Replye. And
good reader, leave of hobbers instruction, and with the formest shoot^ at the
very mark, which is Jesus Christ, and thou shall soon perceive, what is his
truth. Now for thy better instruction, I will speak of those marks, which are
laid out, as bre^fly as I can. Transubstanti^tion. Clement. lib. 3. tit. 16.
cap. Si dominum.
First this transubstanciation was first mentioned in the council of
Laterane.1215. year after Christ. And corpus Christi day instituted in
Vrbanus time, more then.40. years after that. So thou see the antiquity is
but of late years, it has no warrant in scriptures, as their own doctors,
Fisher, Biell, and Scotus, do witness. How it disagreeth both from
scriptures, and Doctors, M. Iuels Reply has aboundantlye taught thee. Yet for
thy better furtherance, I will lay before thee for thine instruction certain
of those places, which ouerturne this fond Doctrine. August. de doct. Christi.
Thou must first consider that this sacrament, and Baptism are the two
sacraments that Christ has left unto his church, which two were prefigured in
the old law, baptism in circumcision especially, and the Eucharist in the
pascall Lamb. Exodus 10.
Now for the true understanding of these Sacraments, thou must remember that
the Scripture uses in them such a phrase of speakinge, that the thing
signified, is given unto the sign. So of Circumcision, which God had
commanded Abraham, the scripture expressly says, this is my covenant, Gene.
17.10
yet was it the sign of his covenant. Of the pascall Lamb it is said, this
is the Lords passover, Exodus 12.11.
yet was it but a token of the passage of the Angel. Likewise of the rock Paul
speaks. The rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10.16
which was yet but a figure of Christ, and the sacrifices are said to be the
purifiynges, yet were they but a token of there sanctification. And as this was
spoken thus in the figure, so it is now in the truth. S. Paul calls baptism
lauacrum regenerationis the washinge of the new birth, yet it is but a sign of
the inward renewynge of the holy Ghost. In like sort it is written,
baptizare. Titus. 3.5. Acts. 22.
etc. he baptized, and washed away thy sins. Yet baptism was but a token,
that his sins were washed away. So Peter, 1. Pet. 3.
baptismus nos quoque saluos reddit, yet it is but the seal of our salvation.
The holy Ghost must come upon them before they receive grace, In like manner it
is said, Acts. 19.6.
of the other part of this Sacrament: This cup, yet the holy Ghost means
the wine. It is said further, this cup is the new Testament, yet the wine is
not the same, but a token of it. Iere. 31.33.
The new testament is, that God is our God, and we are his people, that he
has forgiven our iniquity, and that he will remember our sins no more. But
woe be unto that man, that shall look only to be saved, by that, which is in
the Priests Chalice. What madness is it then, seeing this manner of speaking
is so usual to the Sacraments, to choose only this sentence of our Savior
Christ, this is my body, which thou will receive with out figure, when neither
the scripture it self does allow it, nor the phrase of the spirit of God so
often uttered unto us, does enforce it. I need not here to recite the plain
sayings themselves, Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.^4.
which literally laid together, can not stand, this is my body, says Christ,
(...) which now given for you, yet Christ's body was not then betrayed. So
saint Peter, (...), which is broken for you, yet was not his body then
crucified, whereby they are enforced, yea even in the same sentence, to forsake
the letter. And for the better assurance, that we may do this, upon a good
warrant, John. 6.63.
we have the exposition of our savior Chirst, it is the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. The words, that I speak unto you, are
spirit, and life. And saint Paul does call it bread, 1. Cor. 16.
even when it is ministered. The bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ? This is sufficient for him, that will understand, how
these words are taken, this is my body. He that will yet stick unto the
letter, let him further consider the saying of Saint Paul, that the letter
kills, and many other sayings of the scripture, which be in like manner, as
this is, spoken of our savior Christ. John. 1.
The word was made flesh, says S. John, yet the deity of Christ, which is
the word, was not turned into man. My Father is greater than I, yet Christ,
and his Father in deity were one. In the Gospel some were called the brothers
of Christ, yet it is known, they were but his Kynsmen. John was called the
son of Mary, and Mary, John's mother, yet it is manifest the meaning is not
so. These places are (...) sufficient to instruct us, that sometime in the
scripture, we must have spiritual understanding. He that requires further,
many places are plain of Christ's corporal departure. It is good for you,
that I go hence, John, 16.7
says Christ in the Gospel. And again, but now I go away to him, that sent
me. And in the same chapter twyse, I go to my Father. 16. and. 18.
And least of these sayings we make any strange meaning, the Disciples do
make answer, lo, now speak thou 19
plainly, and thou speak no parable. It is like that other where is spoken,
you shall have the poor always with you, but me ye shall not have always.
And yet an other most undoubted testimony, of his bodilye absence. Now am I
no more in the world, but these are in the world, John. 17.11
and I come unto thee. And in the acts of the Apostles, Acts. 6.
Steven did see him standing on the right hand of his Father. And it is
written, that in his return, he shall come again, Acts. 1.11.
even as he was taken up, which could not be so, if the Priest might fet him
again with whisperings, and incantations. This may suffice the Christian
Reader, concerning this transubstantiation, which M. Harding so vpholdeth. God
give his children grace, that such brightness of his holy word, may illumine
their dark hearts, that they may behold clearly, what is his truth. And thus
much of his first mark. Another is, that he never shot at the external
sacrifice of the church, meaning hereby, External sacrifice.
that the priest does offer up Christ unto his Father, a sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick, and the dead. This romish presumption of the
child of perdition, though it sufficiently be beaten down by disproofe of
transubstantion, yet because M. Harding will needs make this an other mark, I
will speak somewhat of it.

Let us first lay down this strange opinion in plain words, even as they
teach it, so shall we the more easily remember, what they say, and the more
effectually hate their wicked doctrine. Thus then they teach. The priest daily
at the aultare does offer up Christ unto his father, a sacrifice propiciatorie,
and unbloody, both for the quick, and for the dead. Out of this one outrageous
sentence all the froth, and filth of the sea of Rome in manner flows. There
are in it welnigh as many lies, as there are words. For as it is here meant,
we have now no Priest, no daily Oblation, no Aultare, no offering up of Christ
unto his father, no propitiatory Sacrifice, no Mass, no remission of Sins
with out blood, no Sacrificing for the dead. All these things being proved by
testimony of the scriptures, I trust all godly consciences shall be quieted, and
all Master Hardings sacrificing imaginations shall be buried again in that pit
of iniquity, out of which they are spronge. First then, as touching this name
Priest, we have to consider, A priest.
both what the scriptures do attribute unto our savior Christ, and again
what commission he has given unto his ministers. Of Christ S. Paul says,
pontifex factus in aeternum, Heb. 6.20.
he is made priest for ever, even as the prophet says, thou art a priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech. And again, Psalm. 100, 4
because he endures for ever, he has an everlasting priesthood, (...) a
priesthood that cannot be transferred unto an other. Therefore al other are
blasphemous yt either make the^ selves his successors, or pretend any other
sacrifice. And yet for an absolute proof, that only Christ is now a priest,
and no other, the name (...) is properly given unto him alone in all the new
Testament. Neither Paul, nor Peter, nor any other Apostle, or Evangelist did
ever claim it, but called them selves commonly the ministers of Christ, Christ
alone being our high priest. Whereby we see these massing sacrifices, first in
the name, rob Christ of his honor, and in their further arrogancy contempneth
the name of minister, wherein S. Paul did so often glory. And thus much of the
priesthood of our savior Jesus Christ. Now it rests, we should see what
authority he has given to his Apostels, and this we are taught by S. Matthew,
where Christ gives his Apostles their commission altogether indifferently,
saying to every one, Math. 28.19
goo and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, the
son, and the holy ghost, teaching them to observe althings whatsoever I have
commanded you. And lo, I am with you always unto the end of ye world. Here is
the whole authority of the minister out of the new Testament expressed. For
they ar told what they should do, yt is docete teach, and baptize. etc. and how
far they shall go, docete cos. etc. teaching them to observe althings which I
have commanded you. And in the words following, lo, I am with you always, he
confirms that authority, which before speakinge unto Peter, he had given unto
al, that whosoever they bound in earth, should be bound in heaven, and what
soever they did loose on earth, should be loosed in heaven. This self
commission is likewise expressed by S. John, when Christ says to his
Discipels. As my father sent me, so also I send you, John, 20.21.
where immediately follows, and when he said it. etc. whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted. And in what sort God sent his son, it is likewise
expressed by the prophet, saying as S. Luke resiteth it, Spiritus Domini super
me. etc. Esaias. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me, Luke. 4.18.
that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should preach deliverance to
the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at
liberty them, that are bruised, and that I should preach the acceptable year of
the Lord. Thus in these three is the whole office of the minister, to preach,
to minister the sacraments, to remit sins, no one word concerning
sacrificing. And this is the miserable blindness of the whole papacy, to foster
up, and norish that incestuous Religion, where every one commits whooredome
with his own devises, yet the chiefest keys of their religion has no one
word for warrant in the scriptures. What manner of lantern do they make the
word of God? What manner of light to guide our steps? Psalm.
What manner of rule to correct our evil ways? and what manner a testament, that
is sealed with the blood of Christ, if so many things are necessary, which
our only savior, and his eternal word have not commanded? But the Apostle
has spoken, and it must be fulfilled, that the time should come, when men's
ears would itch to harken after lies. But let us see, how do these massing
Priests execute that, which Christ has committed to the Minister of the
Gospel. Do they preach? Do they instruct the people? The great ignorance in
the time of their rule, is an everlasting witness, that they did not. If thou will yet be contentious, examine the thing farther. Did they teach to observe
those things, which Christ had commanded? How could they then have pulled
his commandments, and his whole Bible out of their Churches? Did they give
sight unto the blind? Who could abide to hear it spoken, they made it their
common Proverb, Ignorance is the mother of devotion. Did they preach the
acceptable year of the Lord? as the Prophet says, alluding to the year of
Iubyley. Nay, their own conscience does cry no, and their deeds witness
against them. As though man's delivery had not been yet wrought, the Pope has
set up a new year of Iubyley, and in a marvelous sort of innumerable people
forgave sins after his own pleasure. O horrible wickedness, and blasphemy
against the blood of Christ. But let their preaching go. How are their
sacraments administered? Read, that is said before, alleged out of the Canon
of their own Mass, and thou shall think their ministration a Puppet play,
rather then Gods service. But do they remit sins? Sure as they do the other,
they preach in abomination, minister in apish toys, and forgive sins in
blasphemye. Christ does bid, heal the broken hearted, but they will send their
pardons, if they be paid thereafter to men, that they never saw. They hold
fast this promise, to thee I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, but
they do not consider, that Peter before made his confession. Math. 16.
Tu es Christus ille filius dei viue^tis, thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. They hear, we may bind sins: but they remember not, Math. 18.
wh^t Christ bad do before we accounte our brother, as an Ethnicke. It shall
not be necessary to tarry longer in this. It is sufficiently proved by this,
that Christ only is our everlasting Priest, and we ministers of his Gospel,
and that the Popish Prelates are no priests, and therefore have no bodyly
sacrifice, neither yet are true ministers, and therefore they are not of God.
The second lie, that is found in this assertion of M. Harding, is, that there
is daily oblation, that is, Daily oblation.
Christ is now daily offered in their Mass. And for proof of this, S. Paul
says, Christ is entered into the very heaven, to appear in the sight of God
for us. Non vt saepius offerat semet ipsum, Heb. 9.25.
quemadmodum pontifex, etc. Not that he should offer him self often, as the
high priest entered into the holy place. If therefore Christ can not be offered
again, the imagined sacrifice of their daily Mass, is wickedness. Christ is
once dead, and he can dye no more, Romans 6.9.
than how can the priest sacrifice him? So says S. Peter, Christ has once
suffered for sins, the just, for the unjust, 1. Pet. 3.18.
and again S. Paul, Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many,
and unto them, that look for him, Heb. 9.28.
shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. And again,
the Apostle comparing the sacrifice of the law, with the sacrifice of Christ,
says: Every Priest appears daily ministering, Heb. 10.11.
and often times offreth one manner of offering, which can never take away sin,
but this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever
at the right hand of God, and after, for with one offering has he
consecrated for ever, them that be sanctified. These words are very plain,
and the gates of hell cannot obscure their understanding. If the simple Reader
do muse, why the Papists do not credit it, let him remember, the Scribes and
Pharisees would not credit Christ's miracles, having farther the manifest
testimony of the word of God. Such are the plagues that God does send upon
the contemners of his word. Esaias. 29.14.
The wisdom of their wise men, shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent, Esaias. 29.14
shall be hid, and he has sent in message unto them the plagues, that he has
prepared, commanding his prophet to speak unto the obdurate people. Esaias. 6.9.
Ye shall hear in deed, but ye shall not understand, ye shall plainly see,
and not perceive. God for his mercies sake, when his good will, and pleasure is,
lighten their dark heart. I have sufficiently declared, that Christ has been
offered, and he shall be offered no more. So is there no such daily sacryfyce, as
Master Harding sancieth. If they will make here escapes, and say they make no
more offerings, but it is the very same which Christ did offer, this is a poor
shift in deed, and a common veil, that shadoweth all their eyes, least they
should see the truth. But Paul takes away this stumbling block out of the
path of the godly, saying, that by Christ's will, we be sanctified, Per
oblationem corporis Jesus Christi semel peractam, Heb. 10.10.
even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made the sacrifice, is
not only one, but it is semet peracta, once made, and no more be repeated, no
new sacrifice may be sought for. And thus appears we have now neither
Priests, nor daily offeringes.

The altar.
The third lie that is found in this assertion, concerning the altar. For it is
manifest now we ought to have no such. The altar, Exodus 27.1.
as we read in Exodus, was made for the brent offerings, take away brent
offerings, and we take away the altar, and if it be lawful to be had, it must
be made of Setim wood. We must have the four horns on the corners, and we
must corner it with brass. We must have the ashpans, and the besoms, the
basins, and the fleshhookes, the censors, and other instruments of brass. God
commanded all in the Mount, and we have no commission to retain what we will,
and what we will reject. I leave the good proof, that I may have of the word
(...), as much to say, as a place appointed wherein to make a sacrifice. So
take away the sacrifice, and take away the altar, and I think Master Hardyng
will not say that (...), this sacrificing is (...) yet remaining. For saint
Paul says, (...), Heb. 10.12.
he has offered one sacrifice for our sins. And our savior Christ says it
in the Gospel, (...), Math. 9.13
I will have mercy, and no sacrifice. Teaching us, that in his kingdom, that
saying of the prophet Oze should be fulfilled. Oze. 6.7.
But what need we seek after many reasons? Saint Paul's words be plain. We
have an altar, Hebr. 13.10.
of which it is not lawful for them to eat, that serve in the Tabernacle.
Teaching us, that our conscience is confirmed by no outward thing, but only
by grace. For the Tabernacle he means all figures, and ceremonies that are
adjoined unto it, so whosoever will retain them, can not eat of our altar,
which is the only food of our soul, even Jesus Christ the righteous. And
this was figured in the offering of a red Cow, Number. 19.2.
which God commanded to be given to Eleazar the Priest, and he should burn
her without the host, with her skyn, and her flesh, and her blood, and her
doong. And Eleazar the high priest, and the inferior priest that burned her,
should wash their clothes, and their flesh, and be unclean until Even.
Likewise he that gathered the ashes of the Cow, should wash his clothes, and
his flesh, and be unclean until Even. No part of it should be reserved for
the Priest, whereby we are taught, that the sacrifice of our savior Christ,
whereby his people are sanctified, must be alone made with out any thing
appertaining either unto the priest, or tabernacle, for which cause as S. Paul
says, he suffered without the gate. Heb. 13.13.
Let us go forth therefore out of the camp, bearing his reproach. For we have
here no continuing city, but we seek one to come. Let us therefore by him,
offer sacrifice of praise always to God, that is the fruit of the lips,
which confess his name. Let Massings, and Massing garments go, let the hill
altars alone, meddle not with Ieroboams golden calves, to do it now were open
blasphemy, which before Christ's coming, God had co^maunmaunded our savior
Christ is the truth it self. He will not be coupled with the Tabernacle, which
is blind shadows. Saint Paul makes a plain separation of the altar, and
the Gospel, 1. Cori. 9.13.
where he disputes for the maintenance of the Minister. Do ye not know,
says he, that they which minister about the holy things, eat of the things of
the Temple, and they which wait at the altar, are partakers of the altar? So
also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. Which argument of the Apostle had not been well gathered, if
the aultars should have been in the Christian congregations.

Christ is not offered up again unto his Father. Heb. 5.4.
The fourth heresy, that is found in this popish article, is this, that Christ
is offered again unto his father. S. Paul says, no man takes this honor
unto him, but he that is called of God, even as was Aaron. But no title in the
word of God, that gives unto a mortal man this authority, therefore they may
not claim it. And our savior Christ says to the Samaritan woman: John,
4.21.^3.
Believe me, the hour is come, when neither in Jerusalem, neither in this hill
you shall worship the father, but the true worshippers shall worship in
spirit, and verity. For the father requires even such to worship him. God is
a spirit, and they, that worship him, must worship in spirit, and truth. But if
Christ were really offered up to his father, there were a truer woorship, than
the worship of the spirit. Again, S. Paul says, let them have mysterium
fidei the mysterye of faith in a pure conscience. 1. Tim. 3.9.
He would^ doubtless have said, mysterium sacrificij, the mystery of this
sacrifice of Christ should yet oftener have been offered. And S. James faith
pure religion, Jacob. 1.27.
and undefiled before God, even that father, is this, to visit the fatherles,
and widows in their adversity, and to keep him self unspotted of the world.
But Master Harding says thus. Our Religion must have a sacrificing of Christ
unto his father, and therefore we are assured that Master Hardinges Religion is
not pure, and undefiled. The scriptures are full of such places, which teach us
how to please God, and take hold of salvation. But in all those places no such
sacrificing of Christ is mentioned, and therefore to fancy any such
imaginations is, neither to please God, nor to walk in that way, which leads
to salvation. If this be not sufficient, which is sufficient to a christian
man, we have besides most certain proof, which by no means can be colored.
S. Paul says, where there is remission of sins, Heb. 10.18.
there is no more offering for sin, but Christ has already forgiven us all
our trespasses, and put out the hand writing of ordinance, which was against
us. etc. Collos. 2.13. 1. Pet. 1.19.
And as saint Peter says, we are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spot. And therefore Christ is not now
offered for sin. And here appears moreover the fifth heresy in M. Hardings
proposition. For if Christ be not offered to his father, neither any oblation
for sin is remaining, then is there now no propitiatory sacrifice, but only
one, which God has already made, upon the altar of the cross. And that this
should be but once made, it appears, Leuit. 26.2
for that Aaron might but once in the year go into the holy place, within the
veil, before the mercy seat, where he made atonement for him self, and for
his house. So speaks S. John, of the sacrifice once made, meaning it alone to
be propitiatory. If any man sin, 1. John. 2.7.
we have an advocate with God the father, Jesus Christ the just, and he is the
propitiation for our sins, he makes intercession before his father, he is
not sacrificed on the altar. Again he says, herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son, to be a propitiation for our
sins. When Christ made this propitiatory sacrifice, he was sent of his
father, 1. Ion. 4.10
and he was sent but once, even than as S. Paul says, when the fullness of
time was come. Now is the time of his imbassage done. He has satisfied the law
of God, first toward his father, Gala. 4.4.
in that he was obedient unto death, even unto ye death of the cross, tha^
toward his brethern, in that he had that great love, that he gave his life for
his friends, from hence forth he cease from that legacy, and sittes at the
right hand of his father in glory, and makes continual intercession for us.
Therefore now his father does no more send him, and he will not again be
sacrificed. This is enough, if we were not dull of hearing, to take from us
these ungodly devises, concerning any other propitiatory sacrifice, than that,
which is already made. But M. Harding, and his fellows, that can so well
peruerte the scriptures of God, they have many shifts to defend their own
fancies. This our sacrifice, say they, is no new sacrifice, but the same which
Christ made, yet Saint Paul says it was one oblation, and semel peracta, but
once made. Heb. 10.
To this again they answer, that it was but once made bloody, but theirs is
unbloody. But the Apostle says, Absque sanguinis effusione non sit remissio,
without sheding of blood there is no remission of sins, Heb. 9.
what than avails this unbloody sacrifice? But they say further, it is an
application of the death of Christ. But the Apostle proves, that the
sacrifices of the law were imperfect, Heb. 10.3.
because in them was a remembrance again of sins, every year, so there is
now no such kind of application. They cannot possible so turn their devises,
but the Apostle must needs prove their Mass full of Sacrilege. Christ only
was meet to offer up himself, but they in their Mass will have a priest to
offer him. Christ's sacrifice was but one, and once finished. In their Mass,
if their sacrifice were one, yet is it daily iterated. There can be no
remission of sins without blood. In their Mass they make it unbloody, yet
they have it to cleanse sins. Thus their Mass, and the Apostle cannot be
reconciled. God for ^is mercy root it out, that we may be made free from that
wicked mystery. There rests yet one piece in this idolatrous assertion,
Purgatory.
whether there be any sacrifice for ye dead. This controversy is very
foolish, and full of old wives dreams, neither grounded on the word of God,
because it is ungodly, nor requires much impugning, because it has no reason.
Yet seeing M. Harding could never see the mark to shoot at, I will let it
plain before him, if he will shoot at it with the word of God, he shall be
sure to overthrow it. King Solomon has made him fit arrows, even for the
nonce, if he will draw truly, he shall hit the mark. What soever says
Solomon, thy hand does find to do, do it spedily, Eccle. 9.10.
for there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave, whether thou go. If the case stand thus with us when we are gone,
concerning our doings, then is there no more purgatory. Again he says, if
the tree do fall toward the South, or toward the North, Eccle. 11.3.
in the place that the tree falls, there it shall be, and these words of the
holy Ghost are true. Therefore no Pope, no Trentalles, no Indulgences, nor
pardons can move the tree out of his place, in which it is once fallen. Again
it is written, defraude not thy self of the good day, Eccle, 14.14
and let not the portion of good desires over pass thee meaning thereby, we
should take the time of our life. For after it will be to late to ask
repentance, and in that chap. it follows. Give, and take, and I sanctify
thy soul, work thou righteousness before thy death, for in the hell there is no
meat to find, which sayings are likewise confirmed by that which is spoken by
S. Paul. Behold now is the acceptable time: behold now is the day of health.
To the same sense it is likewise spoken. All corruptible things shall fail,
and the worker thereof shall go withal. By which scriptures it appears how
little holdfast these purgatory patrons have. And here I would have them
answer if they can. We have often in the scriptures the death of men
described, yet never any word of purgatory mentioned. In the law there were
sacrifices, for the prince, for the people, for the priest, for ielosie, for
child birth, for the leprosy, for diverse kinds of diseases, for sundry
infections, and griefs, pertaining unto men, and yet in the whole law not
once sacrifice appointed for them in purgatory, an undoubted token, that
purgatory was than unknown. David fasted, and went in, and lays all night upon
the earth, while his child was sick, but when he was dead, 2. Sa. 13.16.
he arose up, and washed, and anointed himself, and did eat, and answered
why he did so, while the child, says he, was yet alive, I fasted, and wept.
etc. but now being dead, wherefore should I now fast? The popish priests might
soon have answered, to release him out of Purgatory. But the prophet David
did know of no such matter. When we object these, and such other proofs,
some stagger, and have not what to say. Some make this answer, that
Purgatory was not in the time of the law, but these good patrons do little
spare the great mercies of Jesus Christ, if they teach, that he brought his
people this place of torment. The testimony, that he gives of his own good
will, can not bear it, John. 17.
where he prays: Father, my will is, that where I am, there they may be with
me, whom thou have given unto me, that they may see my glory. But the glory
that his elect shall see, is not (I trow) the pains of Purgatory. If M.
Harding will make exception, and say that was spoken only of the Apostles, and
such as should be of greater perfitenesse, than other are, that device is
confounded even by the testimony of the same Jesus Christ, where he says in
the same chapter. I do not pray only for them, but for such also as shall
believe in me, through their preaching, so that whosoever dies in the faith of
Christ, he shall not know Purgatory, but every one, which is saved, shall dye
in the same faith, according to that, which is written, Abacuc.
the just man shall live by his faith. And this is again proved by the example
of the thief, who in no point was of such perfection, as the Apostles were,
yet to him it was said, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And S.
Paul him self testifies the same, where he writes, that the crown of
righteousness was laid up for him, a reward of all his labors. And least we
should misconstre his saying, as the Papists do, and say, that for his great
perfection, he passed from this life straight, into the kingdom of
righteousness, he takes away that vain gessing, and says further, that
crown is reserved against yt day, Non solu^ mihi. etc. not only to me, but to
every one yt loves the coming of Jesus Christ. They may not well doubt, that
Paul meant by that day the day of his death, since he defines it him self in
an other place, Cupio dissolui etc. I desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ.
Philli. 1
Then if all sorts of men, as many, as be beleuers, by accepted a like
concerning their present happiness, as the scriptures every where do testify,
then let all these foolish devises pass. Such manner hobbings, and rouings,
what have we to do with them? Let us harken after the word of God, the
sovereign, and alone medicine for the wounded soul. Besides all this, that we
should not fear any purging fire, S. Paul testifies of Christ, that he is
able perfitely to save all them that come, Heb. 7.25
unto God through him. But when we go unto God, if Christ from thence send us
into purgatory, how does he than make perfect our salvation, which the soul
does enjoy, till such time, as it be again joined to the body, and than made
full? Again in the same Epistle: I will be merciful unto their
unrighteousness, and their sin, Heb. 3.8.21.
and will remember their iniquity no more. Much less than will he send us
into Purgatory. But what need we seek long for the overthrow of such
buildings? S. Paul in one word derideth yt whole controversy. Heb. 9.27
It is appointed says he, unto all men, that they shall once dye, and after
that comes the judgment. If it be so, what then avails prayer for ye dead?
What helps it to have trentals? Where is purgatory? After death says the
Apostle, comes judgment. Here is no color of shift, least except they will
say after death, that is, when the general day of judgment shall be. And if
this might serve, then had they somewhat to say. But S. John has prevented
such wrestinge of scriptures. After death, as he teaches, is, immediately, as
soon as we be with God, for this he writes. Blessed ar the dead which dye in
the Lord, Apoc. 14.13.
from henceforth says the spirit, they rest from their labor. No labor
abides any more for them, after death, immediatlye they are received into joy,
and their works do follow them. And this present joy of the godly is
likewise specified, where the same Apostle writes, that an hundred, forty,
and four thousand did stand with the lamb in ye mount Sion, meaning the
elect, which were with Christ in his kingdom. An hundredth such other places there
are in the scripture, which testify of our estate after death, and do quite
overthrow the Popes purgatory. Now for the better contentation of the Reader,
it were worth the labor to answer to al those places of the scripture, in
which they make so many blind gesses at purgatory. The places are Math. 5.26.
etc. 12.32 etc. 18 34. Luc. 12.59.16.19. l. Co. 3.15. Phil. 2.10. Apo. 5.15.
But read these places who list, in the fear of God, and true desire of
knowledge, he can by no imaginations have one guess at purgatory, and yet for
the establishing of such a doctrine, it had been requisite they could have
showed even the name for the interpretation of other men be they never so old.
We may say with the Apostle. Every man abounds in his own understanding, but
no man knows the things that are Gods, save God alone, and his word, if we
will not be deceived, must be our only guider. But they have one place 2.
Match. 12.44. in plain words, that it is good to pray for the dead, 2. Ma. 14.41
if that book be of able authority. We read likewise of one Razias, an Elder of
Jerusalem, which first ran upon his own sword, and when he missed of his
stroke, he ran to the top of the wall, and threw him self down among the
multitude, and yet having life in him, went to the top of an high rock, and
pulled out his own bowels, and threw them among the enemies, and for this
doing he is commended. So by the authority of the same book, a man may kill
himself, which Master Harding him self, I trow will not constantly affirm,
yet this being scripture it might not be doubted. Again the same author says:
If I have done well, and as the story requires, it is the thing, that I
desired. 2 Mac. 15.35
But if I have spoken slenderly, and basely, it is that I could. These Iffes,
and Andes are not of that spirit, which has written the scriptures. Thus
doubting of his own ability, besemeth not the holy ghost. Beside this, the
greek in the same place is so corrupt, that scarce any sense could be made of
it. And Joseph ben Gorion, out of whom that story seems to be gathered, Lib.
3. cap. 10
in the same place, does quite leave out this praying for the dead. But it may
be, that in those days some ignorant Jews, upon an unwise devotion, did
think it good to pray for the dead, and likewise to pray again unto them,
that they would help us. Which if it were so, by such means this place might
come into the Machab. And that some did think thus, though they were always
otherwise instructed, it appears by one manifest place, which is read in Philo
Iudeus, where he writes the death of Debora, Bib. antiq. cap. 40.
who made a godly exhortation to her people before she dyed. For afterward they
should find no repentance. There some made answer unto her, Ecce nunc matter
moreris, and ora itaque pro nobis, and post recessum tuum, erit anima tua memor
nostri in sempiternum. Pray for us after thy departure, and let thy soul be
mindful of us for ever. To whom Debora makes answer. Adhuc viuens homo
potest orare, et pro se, and pro filijs suis, post fine^ autem, non poterit
exorare, nec memor esse alicuius, yet while a man is living, he may pray for
him self, and for his children, but when he is dead, he can neither entreat,
nor be mindeful of any. And it follows, your similitude then shall be like the
stars of heaven, which are now manifest in you. Hereby we see what judgment
the common people might have in such matters. And yet how the godly did
otherwise instruct them, read this place, thou shall find it so plain, that
no wrangling may shift it of, but needs we must confess that it teaches us,
that we ought neither to pray unto saints to help us, neither yet again can
we help them when they be gone. Whereby it appears what manner of archer
Master Harding has been, that could not shoot at so plain a mark. But he
did shoot at his own dreams, and so he lighted on Purgatory.

Yet there follow a great many of marks, at the which M. Hardyng could never
shoot home. The first is, that the mass and our Communion is one, Mass and
Communion.
with that mark, says he, I was never acquaynted. His loose without doubt is
very ill, or he shoots to low a compass, or else he draws not close. For
M. Stapleton, that shoots with the same bow and arrows hitteth this mark,
The return of untruths, the 7. untruth.
even at the first. The Mass and the Communion, says he, duelye ministered, is
all one, and it is folly to think any contradiction between the Communion and
the Mass. Thus it appears M. Harding is a very wrangler, that will not
shoot at that mark, which his own fellows find. An other mark, that M.
Harding could never shoot at, Eucharistia.
is this, that Eucharistia does signify not the Sacrament, but common bread. I
maruail he could never shoot at this mark. For since he began first that
babbling answer to M. Iuels learned Challenge, he has always been hobbing
among those marks, where this is one, though he never shot at the self same,
yet has he seldom shot, but at such like. For it is a mark of slaundering,
and a mark of lying, at which mark, as well in this Reioynder, as other where
M. Harding most commonly does shoot very nere. I never said (says he) that
Eucharistia was common bread, but the sacrament. This mark I could never see.
In deed no maruail, for who can well see the thing that is not. But you father
this saying upon Master Iuell, which report is all together untrue, and
slanderous, and in shootinge at this mark, you draw maruailous clean, and
have good delivery, be it pricks, or rouers, you have measured the ground so
often, that you know what to shoot. But I pray you M. Harding, where says M.
Iuell thus? What be his words? Where are they to be found? Think you,
notwithstanding your often untrue demeanor, that you can discredit your
adversary, upon your bare word? The place whereunto you direct us, has no such
saying. Thus it has: In my judgment this word Eucharistia in this place of
Irenaeus, signifies not the sacrament already consecrate, The Reply page 40.
but rather other common bread. After this he alleges three sundry
aucthorities, that it may be so taken, and in fine, he says, how be it
herein I will not strive. Other words then these Master Iuell has none, and
is this to say Eucharistia, is not the sacrament? Has he any such absolute
saying? Or does he affirm any whit at all? O that the Reply had been of M.
Hardings penning, he would then sure have good matter against it. Now it is the
bishops own doing, he can say little, and not corrupt his words. But mark
Christian Reader, in this shooting, what ill favored feathers he has upon his
arrows. The vpmost is corruption of M. Iuels words, the 2. that lie upon the
bow, the one is deceit, the other ignorance. The corruption is already
manifest, the deceit is, where he would have thee to think, that Eucharistia
might not signify bread, but where ever it were found, it should make for his
transubstantiation. The ignorance is, in that he makes it so strange a thing,
that Eucharistia might signify bread, not yet consecrate. When in his popish
Mass before consecration the bread, and wine are called sancta, and illibata
sacrificia, holy and immaculate sacrifices.

Concerning the word Eucharistia, it is found in the new testament often times,
Acts. 14. 1. Cori. 4.14. Ephe. 5. 2. Cor. 4.9.
yet always signifying either open thanks giving, or else thankfulness of the
mind, so in that the sacrament is called Eucharistia, it is a good argument
against transubstanciation. An other mark, that Master Harding could not
shoot at, is, concerning the prophecy of Malachie, that it should signify
the sacrifice of our Communion. Malachi.
Of this mark read the untruth. An other make is this, that in the sacrament
of the aultare, there is no virtue, but when it is used. This mark says he,
was out of my reach. But if he say true, he is then but a bragger, either he
has not read so much, as he pretends, or else he is a loytering truant,
(...) that has forgot so good a lesson. In this one thing he offends both
ways, the godly, in that he will not shoot at that mark, which the holy Ghost
has set up, the ungodly, and men of his own devotion, in that he denies any
virtue to be in the water of baptism, but when one is christined. For if it be
so, why sing they over that water, where none is christined, sis fons viuus,
aqua regenerans, vnda purificans. etc. be thou a living spring a water of new
birth, a water that does purify. etc. Master Harding cannot deny how merrily
this has been song in Colleges, yet none have been christined I trow among
them. And a Doctor of their own side, says, si Asinus bibit aquam illam, 1. q.
1. detra in Glossa.
bibit sacramentum, if an Ass drink that water, he drinks the sacrament.
Whereby it appears they repose virtue in the water, though none be baptized.
Yet in this opinion they agree not. Scotus says, it is Asinina quaestio, a
question meet for an Ass. But of the water he says, it is cold, running,
clear, necessary, and common, cold to repress concupiscence, running to
turn the course of our disobedience, clear to lighten our faith, necessary
to bring us into the way of health, common to all men. And in commendation of
this judgment, In. 4. sent. did 3. quest. 3.
it is written in the margin, doctrina singularissima, a most singular
doctrine, fit lattin for such a purpose, to attribute such virtue to the
water. But M. Harding will say, these virtues are in the water, as Scotus
speaks, in ipso fieri, but even while the child is a baptising. And of that
opinion Thomas Aquinas seems to be, where he says such prayers as are said
over the water, 3 part. sum. qu. 66. ad ter.
are not necessary, but only for the solemnity. But here we may ill believe
either Thomas, or Scotus, for Pope Celestine says otherwise: Sieve paruuli,
sieve iuuenes, whether they be Infants, or whether they be young men, let them
not come to the sacrament of regeneration, which is the well of life, De cons.
dis. sieve paruuli.
before the unclean spirit be driven away, exorcismis, and exsufflationibus
Clericorum, with the cuniurings, and the blowings of the Priests. And of this
opinion is the Master of the Sentences. Whereby it appears, how little
Master Hardinges Doctors are many times beholding to him, that will so
flatlye deny their opinions. For if these things be necessary before the
christeninge, then has the water virtue in it self at other times, then the
very time of christening. But thus much he said rather against his Doctors,
then against him self, for his words seem in this place to confess a truth.
There is no manner virtue in the water, but only in the use of it. But where
he says, it is not so in the sacrament of the aultare, but that there is
virtue in it, though it be not received, that offends the godly, and varieth
quite from the word of God, and robs us of our great comfort, that we have
in Gods mysteries. For S. Paul says: Panis quem frangimus the bread which we
break, is it not the communion of Christ's body? 1. Cori. 10.16
For we being many, are one bread, and one body, because we be pertakers of one
bread. By this opinion we might be thus persuaded, if virtue be in the
sacrament, when it is not received, then we may be incorporate into Christ's
body, though we receive it not, contrary to S. Paul's doctrine, that says, to
be of this unity, we must be pertakers of one bread. And here I would feign
ask Master Hardyng this question, if by these words hoc est corpus meum, the
bread is become no bread, and a new grace is put into it, whether it be
received, or no? I demand, what if the bread be kept till it be consumed,
concerning the flesh? He answers, the Lord departs again, when he is
profaned, or when he is denied. What then is done with the grace? Does it
likewise return? How is it then true, that the prophet writes, verbum meum
non reuertetur ad me vacuum, my word shall not return unto me in vain. But how
does it not return in vain, when being employed upon a dead creature. It
returns unto him again without farther quickening his lively image, which is
man, or hardening the heart yt is already obdurate, to Gods further glory.
Again, be it thus that a lofe once consecrated be set before a stranger, who
feeds on it as upon common bread, if there be virtue in it, 1. Corin. 11.
he discerns not the Lords body, so should he receive his own damnation. How
could it be then true, that our savior says, Mat. 15.11
that, which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man, or that which S. Paul
says, al things are clean, to them that are clean, and nothing is to be
refused, that is received with thanks giving. And in an other place, whatsoever
is set before you, eat it, and ask no question for conscience sake. These
sayings cannot stand with Master Hardings religion, about such questions, how
the word of God might agree with it self. Those busye heads might have been
better occupied, then in moving such doubts, as a Christian heart adhorreth to
remember. But if they had been so occupied in Gods most holy euangelies, as they
were in Peter Lumberdes fancies, they would soon have turned over these wind
shaken opinions. Now while Master Hardings friends shall muse, how these
sayings may agree, I will show thee godly reader, how the Eucharist has no
use, except it be received. Consecrate while they will, cross round about the
bread, breath over it at their pleasure, look demurely as they can, intend
what they list, except the bread be received, no manner conueyaunce can bring
Christ's presence. Somewhat for proof of this, may appear by the usage of
the pascall Lamb, and of Manna. Of the lamb nothing might be reserved til the
morning, Exodus 12.10.
what did remain, should be burnt with fire. Therefore we may conjecture it
should not be lawful to reserve the sacrament. So likewise of Manna, nothing
might be reserved till morning, Exodus 16.20.
if ought were had, it was turned into worms, and stanke. These being both
figures of our sacrament, the conjecture is not evil, to think likewise the
Eucharist might not be reserved, then the case were plain, it had no virtue,
but being received. How be it, I will not force any such comparisons. God
does lighten, whom it pleases him. The scriptures do other where testify
plentifullye this, that we teach. First the Eucharist is to us, as the peace
offerings among the Jews, which was a sacrifice, or thanks giving offered for
peace, or prosperity, and as they that made any such offering, must do it
before the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation. etc: so Aarons sons
sprinkled the blood about the altar, otherwise it had been no peace
offering. So we in the Eucharist, must come to the Congregation, give thanks,
and praises unto God, preach out the death of his son Christ, and eat, and
drink of that heavenly mysteries, or else it is not the Eucharist. And the
church naming this sacrament Eucharistia, has well declared, that without open
thankes-geuing, there is no such sacrament. But who can doubt any whyt of this
matter, that reads the words of our savior Christ, reported by S. John, or
the other Evangelists, and S. Paul? Labor for the meat, says Christ, John.
6 27.
that the son of man shall give unto you. He says not, for the meat which
is hanged up in the Pixe. And the people make their answer, Lord, give us
evermore of this bread. Again Christ says, The bread which I will give, is
my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. There is then no
benefit, where this bread is not given, and in this chapter it is often
repeated, that we must eat this flesh, or else we have no life in us. Yet in
all this place, nor in any place of scripture, any one word is found y^
commends, either mencioneth this sacrament without the use of it. So if we
will apply this.6. chap. of John, to the sacrament, as M. Harding in any wise
will do, we see how there is no grace, no virtue in it, if it be not used.
Concerning the words of this sacrament, reported by the other Evangelists,
and by saint Paul, they are very plain: Take, and eat, this is my body, say
they, and of the Cup: Drink ye all of this, this is my blood. etc.

But by M. Hardings doctrine, the holy ghost might have spoken in this sort:
Look all upon this, and worship it, this is my body. And of the cup: Drink
none of you of this, yet it is my blood. Such is the sacrilege of that wicked
mass, in doing, to undo that our Savior has said. But here I cannot a
little wonder at them. In their own inventions they have placed in their Mass
these words, accipite, manducate, and some think they are very requisite to
transsubstanciation: yet when they utter them, they mean nothing less, than
that any other, but them selves, should take part. They prepare but a little
cake, and a draught of wine, to make sport with. They intend not to
communicate with other, yet they say always: take, and eat. A lie is very
evil in any manner doing, but in the service of God, it is very detestable. God
when he will, turn their hearts. Here we se concerning this sacrament, Christ
commanded nothing, but that we should in a holy company eat, and drink, in
remembraunc^ of his death, and passion. But how turns the Pope, our saviors
commandment? He cares neither for eating, nor drinking, but when he goes
forth, he sets up his sacrament upon a white horse back, and men of each
side with tapers, and little belles, and so teaches the horse, that he will go
to the aultare, and there kneel upon his knees, till his Masters god be taken
down. Thus will the Pope teach horses to worship God, even as sometime the
Levites would carry the Arc in a new carte, when they brought it out of the
house of Aminadab. For neither have we any one word, to carry about the
sacrament, Sam. 6.3.
neither had they of the carte. And this is a great misery, that having no
warrant for our Merchandise, our candels, our sensors, our vestiments, our oil
boxes, our corporasse, our por^uisse, and six hundred thousands such other,
yet we make no account of them as though they pleased God. If any thing seem
somewhat doubtful, then we turn us to Doctors, to councels, to decrees, to
scholemen, and to the holy closet of the Popes own breast, as though Gods
word were not our wisdom, and our understanding in the sight of all people.
Deuteronomy. 4.6.
But God be thanked for his own ordinances, and laws that are so righteous.
Now to the next mark that Master Harding could never shoot at, and this
mark has a great many pieces, and such as is not easly discerned, which is
the greatest, so I know not certainelye where at to measure. The first piece is
this, there is no difference betwixt the Priest, and the people, in the mystery
of the sacrifice. But what means Master Harding, to find the mark him
self, and then refuse to shoot at it? Would he have us think, this were
Master Iuels mark? He says no such thing. Sure M. Harding has very
strange artillery. His bow is made of slanders, and it will shoot nothing
else but lies. He can get nothing with cunning, therefore he would save him
self by facing. This stood them in good stead in the disputations at Oxford,
where their friends were moderators, but in a book that is written to all men,
this shift is shameless. Let us see, what says M. Iuell of this mark? Not one
word. Why does Master Harding report it? He is disposed to lie. But whereupon
does he gather it? Forsooth out of Bernard, for he says as Master Iuell
alleges, not only the priest sacrifices, but also the whole company of the
faithful. But what makes this for Master Harding? The priest, and the people
both do sacrifice, therefore is there no difference in the ministerye? S.
Peter says, you are a kingly Priesthood, therefore is there no difference in the
function between the minister, and the lay man? True it is, that the minister,
and the people do offer up a like one sacrifice unto God, but that makes
nothing to Master Hardings saying. Thus we se while he hobbeth, and roueth,
and shoots at every mark a lie, he was an hypocrite, when he was at the
best, and now is led forward still to be an open enemy. Read the.222.
untruth. An other piece of this mark, is this, that men, and women make the
sacrifice of the altar, and be Priests, after the order of Melchisedech. Of
this read the.158. untruth. The last piece of this mark is yet woorst of all,
nothing else but malice, slander, and wickedness, here against M. Iuell,
because he writes not one such word, and commonly against the truth of God,
God is not author of evil.
which the wicked do always pervert. And this is that mark, that God is the
author of evil, and drives men to sin. What should I here answer, but even
say with the Prophet: Esaias. 28.15.
The scornful have said: We have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity we
are hid. If every such evil saying might claim an answer, M. Hardings one
Reioynder would require many volumes. But for a sufficient contentation of the
Reader, I say in all M. Iuels book, there is no one such word. I add
further, nor in all the books that ever were written by any godly man of M.
Iuels profession. Let M. Harding, or all his companions, in searching over
their wrytings, bring but one letter, whereby we may guess that ever such a
saying was meant, and for my part, let his writings be approved. If he can not
do this, consider of his religion. Job. 13.7.
He would not speak wyckedlye for Gods defense, nor talk deceitfully for his
cause. If any man require what our opinon is, let him read any learned man,
entreating of the predestination of God, or of man's free will, or for a better
warrant, let him read the scriptures it self. We say, all that God made, was
very good. He created man in honor, and gave him free will, Gen^.
and man of himself gave place to inordinate affections, where he might have
obeyed Gods word, even as it is written: He has set water and fire before
thee, stretch out thy hand unto which thou will. And again, God created man
without corruption. And concerning sin, we say, Eccle. 15.16. Sap. 1.23.
through the envy of the Devil, came death into the world. Neither need we
make exception against this authority, because it is not in the cano^. For the
Apostle does authorize it, where he writes: He that commits sin, 1. John.
3.8.
is of the Devil. For the Devil sins even from the beginning. And in an
other place: Diabolus est mendax, and pater eius, John. 8, 44.
the Devil is a liar, and the father thereof, not as your friend Master
Dorman does interpret it, and so was his father before him, for that were in
deed to make God the author of evil, which is the mark you talk of. Now
even as the Devil is author of evil, so we by his suggestio^ have the next
cause in our selves, which is an unclean heart, like as our Savior says: Out
of the heart proceed evil cogitations. etc. Mat. 15.11.
Of God we say, and we say again, and we preach it, and we write, and believe
it, and in it we rejoice, that God is neither the author of evil, neither yet
would it should be committed. The sheep go astray, without the shepherdes
will. The groate is lost, and the poor woman would not so. Christ would
gather together Jerusalem, as the Hen does her Chickens, but they would not.
But this we say, that the ways of God, are not like the ways of men, that he
should not know what things were to come. He could not be deceived in his own
creature. Romans 9.19.
He did foresee the fall of Adam, and by his omnipotency could have made him
stand. For who can resist his will? He could have made him so pure, that he
should not have sinned, even as he has now made his Angels, and will make the
whole number of his elect, John.
that no man any more shall take away their joy from them.

And as we are sure this is Gods omnipote^cy, so why he did it not, we ca^ not
assign any cause, but because he would not. For we know he has done al
things that he would. Psalm.
Yet a cause there was, and that a most just, and good cause. For their is no
iniquity with him. Roma.
And this cause he did know in his eternal secret counsel before all
worlds, for as much as all things are present with him. To enter further into
Gods council, and ask why he appointed such a course in which the reprobate,
both Angels, and men should fall away, this were presumptuous folly. Roma. 9.
Shall the pot say unto the potter, why have thou made me so? The Godly will
stay here, and in the fear, and love of God will profess, and believe, both
that God rules all things with his mighty word, Heb. 1.
and yet wylleth he no man to sin. We have so much corruption in our selves,
that we need no further provoking unto wickedness. Now to Master Hardings
purpose, thus much we say, that God permits sin, and with long patience
does suffer the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction: Roma. 9.22.
but yet this permission we say, does appertain unto the will of God. For he
does not suffer it, either enforced, or against his will: neither yet does he
so suffer it, that he does nothing him self. For he rules, and governs,
even their iniquity. He suffers it not, to rage at will, but guides it,
either to the punishment of the wicked, as he often punished the Israelites with
the wickedness of strange Princes, or to the trial of his elect, as it is well
acknowledged of the prophet David, saying of Shimei: he curses, ^. Sa. 16.10.
even because the Lord has bid him curse David, yet God made not the malice of
Shimeis mind. Likewise where it is said of the destruction of Jerusalem, that
God brought upon them the king of the Chaldeans: God did not ingraffe in
Nabuchadoneyzar his great cruelty, but being bred in his own mind, 2. Par. 36.17
he brought it upon whom it pleased him. Therefore Christ says, all the hears
of our head are numbered, and with out Gods appointment, Luke: ^1.7.21.18.
there shall not one of them perish. This therefore is our doctrine, God is no
cause of wickedness, but men cannot apply their own wickedness, but where it
pleases God, neither do they exercise their wickedness, but when, and how far
his grace does leave them. For plainer declaration of this, we may compare the
grace of God, and the sun, If the sun be over the earth, there is then
light, if it be gone, then is there darkness: yet is not the Sun cause of
darkness, but such is the nature of the world, where the Sun is not, there is
forthwith darkness: So God is the light, and man is full of darkness, John. 1.4.
because of corruption which it has received. When the light of Gods grace
does shine in this darkness, then man sees his goings, and walks forth in
righteousness, but if the darkness do not comprehend the light, then man through
his own impurity, does walk in all uncleanness: yet is not God cause of this
evil doings, no more then the Sun is cause that the world without it, is
darkness. Ion. 13.
But who so does receive this light, he is borne, not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Romans 9.16.
And as S. Paul says, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs,
but in God that shows mercy, for it is he that works in us, Phil. 2.13.
both the will, and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Therefore the prophet
Oze says, thy destruction O Israel, does come of thy self, but thy salvation
is of me. Thus we se man does of him self the thing that is evil, God only
does that which is good, yet in such sort yt what so ever is done in the world,
good or evil, by consent, or unadvisedly, God disposes al. Chance, and
fortune has no place, all manner circumstances are at Gods will, to his glory,
and the comfort of the elect. And this is plainly taught us in that law of
Moses, where he that presumptuously does kill a man, is commanded to be taken
from the altar, that he may die. For there it is said, if any one do kill an
other, and have laid no wait for him, Exodus, 21.13.
the^ God has offered him into his hand. So chance is no chance, fortune is
no fortune, but God is all in all, and therefore it is well said of S. Ierom,
nihil accidit bonorum, aut malorum temere, et sine prouidentia, sed omnia
iudicio dei accidunt. No good nor evil does happen without a cause, or by
fortune, without Gods providence, but al things do happen after his judgment.
For all creatures are, as it were, Gods instruments, to use after his own
counsel: yet man does of him self, that which is wicked. Thus used the
Assirians, the Caldeans, the Persians, the Grecians, the Romans, they through
their own ambition made war upon the Jews, but God appointed the time, when
it should be a scourge for his peoples disobedience. So in all wickedness God
does also work, but he only that which is good. In the punishment of Job, the
Devil worked to satiate his malice against mankind, God to the trial of his
servants faith, that he might pour again his mercyes more abundantly upon
him. Christ was crucified on the Jews behalf, that they might work, as envy
moved them, but on Gods behalf, that he might pay the ransom for the sins
of the world. Now if this be to say, God is the author of evil, then has
Master Harding found out a true mark, if it be not, he then shoots in a
false ground, and his lying arowes are broken upon ungodly stones. Thus it
apeareth, what part we give unto God in evil doyngs. And this the scripture,
when so it shows, how God works in the reprobate, Exodus, 4.21. Psalm. 5, 4.
as where it is said, ego indurabo cor Pharaonis, I will harde^ Pharaos heart,
we must know God is not he, that loves wickedness. For God has said of Pharao,
I know that ye king of Egypt will not let you go, Exodus 3.9.
but by strong hand. So his wickedness was of his own will, when God did not
mollefie his heart with new grace. But God did use this wickedness for his glory,
even as he testifies. For this cause have I appointed thee, Exodus 9.16.
to show my power in thee, and to declare my name throughout all the world.
Now to ask further why God did not send Pharao more grace in meekness of
spirit: we must answer with S. Paul: O man, who art thou that pleadest with
God? He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens. Our wisdom
is but foolishnes with him, we must seek no further, then Gods word has
reveled. Sure we are, he is a righteous God, and shows mercy unto thousands
of them, that love him. So that, if by testimony of our own conscience, we
hang upon that mercy, and walk as he has commanded, the less we see is in
our selves, the more sure is our hope. For how often we think on him, so many
testimonies we have of his love, and we are sure no man can pull us out of his
hands. And thus we do see the marks M. Harding could not shoot at, meet
marks for Christian Archers, save those, which he him self has set up. With
which marks, because he was never acquainted, we have to understand, that as
he is now a professed enimye, so he was then a dissembler, and a man pleaser.
Therefore we yield unto him this conclusion, that he has not taught the Gospel
in such sincerity, as we teach it now. We believe him with out his oath, he shall
not need to take God to record, that has brought their imaginations to
confusion.


Harding. Touching the other points of your Gospel, which you speak, how so
ever I spoke once at Oxford of purgatory, and at an other time of the Mass,
otherwise then now by Gods grace, and study of more mature years, I have been
instructed: yet that any time I told you of the Paper walls, and painted
fires of Purgatory, and that the Mass was a heap of Idolatrye, and the
Mystery of iniquity, it is all together false. Those Ministerlike terms of
Paper Walls, and painted Fires, in good sooth I remember not, that ever I
heard before your book came forth.


Dering. This that M. Harding grau^teth here, makes great presu^psion yt he
has said more. For if he has spoken against Purgatory, then he has
confessed those fires are but paintings: if he have thought wickedness to be in
the Mass, how could he not abhor these former wicked opinions? But we must
pardon him in speaking not considerately, and he will provide to speak little
truly. Once he spoke against purgatory, an other time against the Mass, but
very modestly. In deed they be such tender chicke^s of the Popes brood, that
if ye handle them roughly, they will surely dye. But if Master Harding do
speak now from his heart, when he is so vehement: doubtless if he were then so
modest, he was an hipocrite. Now his zeal is so much to his holy father of
Rome, that he spares no reproaches against Gods ministers. Then his devotion
was so cold in setting forth Gods glory, that he could not spue out his deep
dissimulation. But what skilleth it how he preached then, since he is now
revoked, and like a dog is returned unto his vomit? Here he shows us the
cause why he was converted, or rather perverted. And in that he is not
constant, as he was before in his Religion, the grace of God (says he) and the
study of more matures years did instruct me otherwise. This cause does
sufficiently confute it self. For Master Harding changed his Religion in
seven days, in which he had not many years to study* nor yet quiet time to
deliberate. Here follows a little jesting at the name of Ministers, and
ungodly Metaphores, to the defacing of their preaching, all not worth the
answer. And in deed who so would scour away all that froth from his
writings, should leave him in most places, nothing but white paper.


Harding. What I should have done, and how far I should have gone, in case
Gods providence had not changed that state: he saw, to whom nothing is unseen.
And perhaps in continuance of time, I should have joined further with you,
except his special grace had called me back, and severed me from you. What
soever in those days I thought or said amiss, our Lord forget, and forgive.
Very like it is, had not the condition of that time been altered, that I
should have thought, and said worse then I did, and have been carried away
further. But now I see what great cause I have to rejoice and thank God, who
used the change of the time as an occasion, and mean, whereby to change me
unto the better. For whiles I feared to suffer that I would not, by new
condition of the time, I was compelled to seek the truth, which before I knew
not, and willingly to hold that, which before I refused.


Dering. In this paragraphe before, Master Harding says, that the grace of
God, and more mature years did better instruct him. But he had little hope to
find many years in seven days, therefore now he says, that Gods especial
grace, and the change of the Prince, did change him also. So yt whether of both
did help, many years in a week, or the change of a Prince, he has called
God to witness to a lie. But let it be, the change of the time did change
Master Harding, yet let him not ascribe it unto God, which is his own evil
doing. Surely for the Minister to turn suddenly with the world, it is an
vnweented kind of calling, and such as the holy Ghost has left none in
example. Advince. Epist. 48.
But you defend your self with S. Aug. saying. True it is, a man may be
brought unto Christ through fear of punishment, else why serves authority?
Yet as this liked you in. S. Aug. to know it might be done, so may it please
you also in ye same Epistle, to know how it is done. S August. says, ac sic
ista cogitatione docibiles facti, non in calumnijs, et fabulis humanis, sed in
diuinis libris, promissam per omnes gentes inuenirent eccleziam, that by this
due consideration of earthlye punishment, we being made apt for instruction,
not in men's wranglinges, and deuyses, but in the heavenly books, we should
find the church promised through all the world. This piece Master Harding
has concealed. For in his turn he did not seek for the church in Gods
Scriptures, but in men's tradicions. Therefore he is little helped by S.
Augustine. Nay he does rather show ye cause, why Master Harding is now so
obdurate, quam multos, says he, obduratae consuetudinis grave vinculu^
colligabat, how many has the heavy yoke of old custom tied together, that
it might be fulfilled in them, the froward servant shall not be amended with
the word of God: so that he not clayming his turn by the advertisement of
the scriptures, but cleauyng fast unto old custom, has delivered him self
from this help of S. Augustine. Here he makes a long discourse of his
private doings, impertinent to his private Mass, which I can not meddle with,
because I know them not.


Harding. If I may be believed, telling that of my self, which I my self, and
God know best, this is the truth. My error was of ignorance, not of malice.
My understanding was obscured, my will was not of self purpose perverted.
Wherein I offended, it was not so much through malice of will, as through want
of skill, I did not with animositie, as S. Augustine calls it, maintain what
lyked my private choice, but ignorauntly I received, what guilefully the
condition of the time obtruded.


Dering. Here M. Harding, upon better advise, assigns yet again the third
cause of his turning. He has now forsaken better instruction, by mature
years, he takes hold no more of the change of the Prince, but for his more
commendation says, he was turned by prayer, I trow, by saying our Ladies
Mattines, and this cause, because it is the best cause, he sets it out with
his best manner of writing, and with the dissolute figure, sometime speaking
ryme, sometime having no reason, he concludes this third cause, that is here
alleged. But what needs this any long answer. If his error were ignorance,
how got he so speedy knowledge? If his understanding were obscured, how was it
so quickly lightened? What books red he? who was his teacher? Has he found so
many miracles for his private Mass, that he would have us ween he was turned
by a Miracle? Yet he says it soothly, that his offense was not so much
through malice of will, as through want of skyll. Now verily M. Harding, this
like falling figure, falls in this place quite out of order. This other
repetition about the sayings of our savior Christ, seek, and you shall find.
etc. has preatie turning in words, but M. Harding in his life has turned
himself quite from them.


Hardyng. That I proceeded no farther in error, it was the goodness of God, who
with his merciful hand stayde me back, from running to the extremity, that
you be run unto.


Dering. Now M. Harding can show no good cause of his falling away in to the
power of darkness, it likes him to guess, what brought him so far into the
kingdom of light. For seeing by his hobs and rouers, his heart was not upright
toward God, he can not judge, why he was esteemed such a preacher of his
Gospel. But this gessing at his going forward, is as vain, as the causes of
his return have been found unconstant. Satan can turn him self in to an
Angel of light, to make his Ministers think they do God good service. The
idolatrous Israelites would seem to seek God daily, Esaias. 58.1.
even as a nation that did righteously, and had not forsaken the statutes of
their God. So M. Harding would feign have his turning, for his more humility,
and his sudden reuolting, for his further well doing. But what needs so
busy search, in so plain a matter, (...), his own hobbing, and double
dealing, made God give him over to his old idolatries, out of which before, of
his free mercy, he had drawn him. So let M. Harding seek no farther cause.
Esaye. 59.1.
His iniquities have separated between him, and his God. God for his mercies
sake once turn him again. For now he does nothing, but hatch Cockatrices
eggs, and weaueth the Spyders web.


Harding. You seem to maruail how I became so perfect a Catholic in so short
a time. As you say, I preached the contrary many years, wherein you say
untruly. For neither preached I full two years, and that not many Sermons,
neither was I priest before Queen Mary's time. So you pretend it to be an
impossible thing, that in seven days (for of that time you speak more then
once) I should read over all the Scriptures, Counsels, and Doctors. as though
a man by Gods special grace, could not be turned from error to truth, whose
heart was not stubbornlye set to maintain a part, nor yet drowned in many
errors, unless he first read over all books of Diuinitye. What mean you M.
Jewel. Will you appoint God a tracte of time to work in, when he touches the
heart of man? S. Ambrose could have taught you to judge otherwise, where he
says, Nescit tarda moliminae sancti spiritus gratia.


Dering. Now Master Harding in a long discourse comes again to his former
matter, and as the Poet says, sopitos suscitat ignes, stirs a broad again
the fire, that was well raked up, and tells us a new cause of his tourning,
and that was Gods secret inspiration, and thereto alleges the sayings of
Ambrose, and Leo, and the exampels of Elizeus, Paul, and Matthew. As touching
the grace of the holy Ghost, I must needs confess, it needs no protracte of
time. It may make in one moment, of a plough man a Prophet, of a persecutour an
Apostle, of a Publicane a Disciple. But shall Master Harding therefore think,
that by the same spirit he was made of a preacher an apostata? And for further
proof of this, he tells us when he was made priest, as though he had taken
the charecter of the beast, and fallen down, and worshipped her, by the mocion
of the holy Ghost? Better had Master Harding stood to his other causes, that
longer years gave him more understanding, or the change of the Prince changed
him, or else he was converted by prayer, then to make the holy ghost author of
his evil doing. But O miserable state of that man, that should be plunged
thus in errors, and yet sees not his sins. Such confidence had the Jews in all their fornications, that being stirred to repentance, Malac. 3.7.
would deny their evil doing, and say wherein shall we return?


Harding. And why do you charge me with the sudden change of seven days?
Was it not one whole year after king Edwardes death, before I came in pulpit?
And did I not of mine own accord, without all compulsion, or request of
others, simply, and fully acknowledge, and confess my former oversight, and
error? Was not all the university of Oxforde witness hereof? O Master Jewel,
I doubt not, but by that my voluntary and humble confession, I have put the
Devil to silence, through the same. He shall not have power to object unto me
mine error before Christ our Judge, in that dreadful day.


Dering. Now least for all this trifling, we should accuse M. Harding of
rashness, in fine he brings a whoole years deliberation. But Lord what manner
of defense is this? After so long reasoning, to prove nothing. Was all this
defense of a sudden change to excuse the thing, he never committed? This was
the first cloak for his turning. If it shadowed it well, why did he cast it of?
If it did not, why does he take it now again? Cast it away Master Harding, if
you be happy, your tourning and all, and yet again turn once for the better,
you have not put the Devil to silence with this turning, our Lord deliver you
from him. It is he that walks through dry places, and when he can find no
rest, returns thither again from whence he was driven out, and as though he
had found you sweapt, and garnished, so after made his ingredience, in your
seven fold wickedness. You say Master Iuels malice does seem to pass the
malice of the devil. But it is enough for the Disciple, to be as his Master
is, and the servant, Mat. 10.^5
as the Lord. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more them of his household? The authority here brought of S. Cyprian, is to
little purpose. But had you better considered that Epistle, you would with
better advice have spared the reverence of that good Bishop. You know what his
name does signify. And S. Cyprian says, this always is the work of the
devil, that he should be lie the servants of God, and with false opinions,
gloriosum nomen infamet, slander their glorious name, that they which are very
shining in the testimony of their own conscience, might be defiled with other
men's report. Well God grant unto you, according to Master Iuells prayer.


Harding. But what meant you Master Jewel of all men, thus discourteously, and
with all very falsely, to deal with me?


Dering. After all these devices in defense of his own doing, he fashioneth a
new invention against his adversary, and in long examination of his whole life,
he has espied in him once, a little going back, and of that would feign make a
cover to hyde his own apostasy. And that this piece of the Epistle may be all
like in it self, he makes the first entry with an open lie, and says,
Master Iuell has reported falsely of his turning. But the world is witness
both of Master Iuels saying, and Master Hardings doing. But he goes
forward, and asks Master Iuell this question: Are not you one M. John
Iuell, that once subscribed to certain articles? etc. Why brings M. Harding
this? This is confessed in his answer to Doctor Cole. Therefore I grant
Master Harding it is even he, that when the anointed of the Lord was taken in
your ^ettes, R^m. 4.20.
under whose shadow he should have been preserved among the heathen, he was
scattered among the other sheep, till God turned his hand upon his little
ones, to carry forth his name among the Gentiles. Zacha. 13.7.
But mark good Christian reader, what this man has espied in this Bishops
life. He did once subscribe in S. Mary's church in Oxford, and did not all
Christ's Disciples once forsake him in Jerusalem? Math. 26.36 Gaia. 3.11.
Acts. 18.18 Acts. 16.3.
Did not Peter dissemble at Antioch? Did not Paul shave his head at Cenchrea?
did he not circumcise Timothy at Lystra? Have not all the serauntes of God,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and martyrs done as much? Is this the greatest
fault you can lay to that good bishop, that for fear of your tyranny, he did
ones write John Iuel? God be praised, that has so directed y^ course of his
servant, and God send us all his spirit, that do profess his Gospel, that our
lives may so answer our profession. Now touching those disputations at Oxforde,
where Master Harding says, the uttermost was heard, that could be brought on
our side, that is one among his other untruths. It is known how discourteously
those reverend Fathers were entreated, their sayings could not be heard for
the others shameless ^issings. This commendation of Master Hardings catholic
Doctors is out of season. Their learning, because it is Gods gift, I do
reverence, their usage I detest, and abhor. The rumors of some of their
doings, are yet hot in Cambridge. If I would make base notes in the mergin, as
Master Hardings companions do use, where they do speak slanderously, I
could say the truth, and make ^ Christian man's ears to glowe at their
filthynes. But God amend them, and let the report of their evil, be buried
with their evil.


Hardyng. What if God so dispose, that now also the heart of the Prince,
detesting the lewdness of their lives, who profess your Gospel, and seeing
the untruth of your doctrine, and lamenting this universal decay of virtue
proceeding thereof, and the utter damnation of so many souls, be wholly bent to
restore the Catholic Religion of the Church, and abandon all these wicked new
devises of Geneua? What will you then do?


Dering. Now after that Master Harding has enquired much after Master Iuells
inconstancy, and can espy little worthy reprehension, in an uncharitable
imagination, he will needs guess what Master Iuell would do, if he were
again put to his trial. And here with a sighing supposition he does feed
his Popish vein, and asks. What if God so dispose the heart of the Princes.
etc. To this I answer, that if God should so do, his just judgment should be
upon the sins, as well of the Prince, as of the people. For it is his mercy
that we be not consumed. But what if God will not so deal with his
enheritance? What if he will not show his people such heavy things? Psalm. 60.
What if the king of Ashur shall overcome us no more? What if we shall no more
be led captives into Babylon? Psalm. 3, Psalm. 9.
What if the teeth of the wicked are broken? What if destructions be come to a
perpetual end? Surely if our iniquities do not turn away Gods blessings,
the hope of the ungodly is like a thin foam, Sa^. 5.
that is carried away with the stream. As touching our Princess, her heart is
in the hand of the Lord, and though we be no men pleasers, yet this is the
contentation of our conscience, that we see in her the express tokens of the
child of God, and we are witnesses unto our selves, how willinglye we obey
her. David was a good king, 2. Sam. 7.
though he would build God an house, though it liked him not, that the
tabernacle should be covered with Goats hear. Ionathas was a good king, and
very zealous, though the high places were not taken away. 2. Par. 21. a
Ezechias was a very godly king, though when God left him, to try him, and to
know all that was in his heart, 2. Para. 32
he found him faulty. Josias was a virtuous young Prince, as ever was in
Jerusalem, yet he was a feared of Necho king of Egypt. 2. Para. 33.
Deborah was a good Queen, and is not blamed in the scriptures, yet no doubt
she was not with out fault, and what if our Queen, that has restored Gods
religion should do something, that liked Master Harding? Does he therefore
think, she will pervert the ways of the Lord, and set up again his Romish
Idolatries? Their prophecies are now expired, and that old rotten Epistle
before the confutation of the Apology, is now forgotten. From what stomaks such
flatteries proceeded, it is not hard to judge. But peace be upon Queen
Elizabeth, and upon the Israel of the Lord. For this great decay of virtue,
whereof Master Harding complayneth, it is not in the word of God, it is our
corrupt manners. This is an old objection made against true Religion. S. Paul
does complain of it, that for this cause Gods name was evil spoken of among
the gentiles. So ye wicked Jews would complain: Roma. ^.
Since we left to burn incence to the Queen of heaven, Iere. 44.
we have been consumed with the sword, and with famine. Yet the leaving off of
their Idolatry was no cause of their evils.


Harding. You did once confess to me plainly in Sarisbury, when ye came
thither in visitation, that you never lyked the Supremacy of the temporal
Princes over the Church of England. Did you not tell me, that it stood
neither with Scripture, nor with Doctors, nor with the judgment of the learned
men of Germany, Geneua, and the parties where you had been? And why then preach
you not this Doctrine abroad?


Dering. As touching this private talk of Master Iuell, had with Master
Harding at Sarisbury, concerning the Queens supremacy, it is a malicious lie
of Master Hardings uncharitable heart. If it were true: yet I might well
answer with the Philosophers, that there are.iiii. sorts, in whom is
singular impudence, in a woman, that puts on a man's garment, in a gheast,
that thinks him self as good, as his host, in him that will be talking of
Princes, where he has no occasion (...), and in him that when a thing is told
him in secret, does tell it abroad openly. Now if this accusation were true,
yet what witness has Master Harding to cry out of his impudency. But what
if it be false? What if it be a shameless lie? A christian man will say with
weeping eyes: God amend the evil speakers. But Demosthenes said to the people
of Athens: If you see a Uiper, or a biting Spider, though they did never sting
you, yet you will kill them, (...). Contra. Aristog. pra^oc. 1. in fine.
Like wise O ye men of Athens, when you see a slaunderer, having this vipers
nature, tarry not till he sting you, but kill him as soon as you se him. If this
accusation were true, the very Gentiles could not abide it, if it be false,
they think M. Harding not worthy life. And that it is false, his own words
are a sufficient witness, which say, he spoke after the opinion of the learned
men in Germany, and other where, who do all grant that their is no authority
in the earth next under God above the authority of a Prince, and that in all
causes, and estates ecclesiastical, and temporal, even as S. Peter says:
Submit your selves unto all ordinance of man, whether it be unto the King, ^.
Pet. 2.13
as unto the chief, or unto governors, as unto them that he sends. This
supremacy which S. Peter grau^teth unto the king, the papist will in no wise
acknowledge, but will have the proud Pope to tread upon the Emperors neck,
and Princes to hold his stirrup while he goes to horsbacke, and wait bare
foot at his gates, to abide his papal pleasure. Good Lord how was that world
droonken with superstition? We give our Princess her authority, we submit our
selves to her government, she is the anointed of the Lord, and chosen chief
ruler of his church of England, and God grant her many years to reign, till
the fretting envy be confounded in all flattering stomachs. That ever Master
Iuell denied her supremacy, it is doubtless an abominable lie, foreged out of
secrecy, because it should not be co^uinced by witness. But it shall not be a
miss, because this thing comes to question, to note what M. Iuell might
say, and what the Prince must do. It is not unknown, what authority has
been given unto the Pope, that he has rule both of heaven and earth, Did. 22.
omnes. Did. 40. Li. Papa.
and he that takes one jot of this authority from that church, is an
heretic. And that he may not be judged, as Pope Boniface has decreed, though
he draw innumerable souls headlong into hell, and that he has all knowledge
in the closet of his breast, De. cor. pr^b. proposuition glossa. Did. 19. in me
moriam. Did. 19. enimvero
that he can dispense against the Apostles, and against the old testament, and
that we must abide the yoke that the Pope lays upon us, though it be
intolerable, and that seat is apostolica sublimitas, even as high as the
Apostles, and that quicquid statuit, quicquid ordinat, what soever the Pope
appoints, what soever he ordeineth, perpetuo, and irrefragabiliter
obseruandum est, it must be observed for ever, without any contradiction. Such
blasphemous authority given unto the Pope, made, that in the time of restoring
the Gospel, even good men attributed more unto the Prince, then was
convenient, and flatterers more then was to be borne with all, as in the time
of the six articles Bishop Gardener, and his fellows, did unto King Henry the
eight, when they gave him authority, in the church of God to institute or
disanull Laws, as it lyked him best, to forbid the marriage of ministers, to
deny the people the cup in the Lords supper. The granting of such authority is
flattery in the subject, and the receiving it, presumption in the Prince. The
church is ye spouse of Christ, purchased with his precious blood, and joined
unto him, even as a woman unto her husband. The Prince is here a subject, and
may set the church no Laws, but as her head appointed. Christ does sanctifye
his church with the washing of water through the word, that is, with baptism,
Ephesi.
and the preaching out our justification in his free mercy, if the Prince say
it shall be sanctified, with crossing, and creeping, with diredges, and
Trentalls, with holy Bread, and holy Water, with Pilgrimage, and Bonfiers, the
Prince is rebellious, and the Subject must yield his life. Then for a brief
conclusion, if the Prince will make any new holiness, or forbid the minister to
preach ye word, that is written, or if he will say we shall Prophecy no more
at Bethel, Amos. 7.13.
because it is the Kings chapple, and because it is the kings Court, it lies
not in his authority. Woe be unto the Prince, that shall be so led with error.
But if the Princes will do nothing, but she will ask council at the mouth of
God, if she will humble her self under him as low as the poorest creature in
the world, if she will set out his glory, and ^^presse the wicked blasphemies
of the honorable, if Christ crucified for her sins, be always pictured
before the eyes of her soul: then shall she run a happy course, and in the
end have a happier garlande. If she should here of enemies, her own
conscience should make her without fear, if all iniquity should stir us to
rebellion, she should sit immovable. The Lord has placed her, and who is he
shall put her down? She is a good nourse of Christ's mystical body, and no
authority is alone hereof, yet in all this supremacy we tie her unto the word
of God, and as she has regard unto her own soul in the name of her God, we
charge her not to go beyond it, In this is her prerogative, that she can
enforce other to this obedience, and no man can enforce her. This supremacye
Master Iuell did never deny, the popish supremacy no good man will grant. Let
it then be contemned, wherewith Master Harding makes up this tragedy, that we
teach one thing at home, an other thing abroad. After this usual invention he
frames a little Philosophy of his own, and then furthereth it on Epicure,
wherewith he faineth his comparison. Now let the indifferent reader judge, which
of these is the wavering man, Master Iuell, that in his life has gone not one
hour back, or Master Harding, that many years has preached contrary
doctrine. Doutlesse had he lived in Seuerus time, notwithstanding this long
apology, Alex. ab. cl. lib. 2. cap. 13.
his armor should have been pulled off, and he left naked in token of an
apostata, and his adversary commended, that in all his life has been found so
constant.


Hardyng. What fault so ever you find with my change, certain it is, al
chaungs be not reproueable. He chau^geth well, that changes from evil to good.
It is a happy change, that is made from error to truth, from schism to
unity, from heresy to right faith, from contempt of Religion, to the love of
Religion, from darkness to light, from pride to humility, from pleasing men,
to study how to please God. Who so ever makes this change, he is not to be
accounted mutable, nor inconstant.


Dering. Hitherto Master Harding can not deny his turning, now least it should
prejudice his estimation, he thinks good to commend it, true it is, he
turns well, that turns for the best, it is better to return, then to run
always evil, but whether you have made this turn, or no, it must be tried
not by your word, but by the truth of God. The Prophet David does ask the
question how one should turn aright, Psalm. 118.9.
and does answer him self, by taking heed unto Gods word. Now I appeal to
Master Hardings conscience, what part the word of God did work in his
turning, he makes continual crying out of the church, the church, but very
deep silence of the word of God. Yet Christ says, heaven and earth shall
pass, before his word do pass. S. Paul says: We may not believe an Angel,
that preaches any other doctrine. S. James says: It is the word, that can
save our souls. S. Peter says: It is as sure, as the voice of God him self,
that was herd from heaven, and what mean these men under a vain title of the
church, so to neglect it? Christ promised to be with his church until the
latter end of the world, Math. 28.
but his word is his presence, not man's inventions, his Euangelies are our
learning, not supersticious ceremonies. The days are now come, that we shall
say no more, Ier. 3.16.
the arc of the covenant of the Lord, but by Christ alone we must make our
prayers, and by him alone offer up the sacrifice of praise unto God, that is
the fruit of our lips which confess his name. Therefore if you will make a
good turn, you must turn to that church which turns only unto him, and to
the simplicity of his Gospel. But you have put on the adulterous attire of
strange intercession, and clothed her self with altares, and altar clothes,
with Copes, vestimentes, Awbes, Tunicles, Curtains, Sensors, Candlestickes,
Crosses, and such other. You are not turned from error to faith, but from the
church of God, to the synagoge of the devil. And for our own defense with the
prophet David we make answer unto the blasphemers: Psalm. 118.42
Our trust is in the word of God. After this Master Harding finds fault
with to much constancye, and considering his own changes, would have it seem
some commendation to turn up, and down a little. Then he brings in the
examples of Arrius, and certain heretics, which in their own opinion were
found to obstinate, and compares Master Iuell with them in wilfulness, and
otherwise speaks contumeously against him, and for all this, will be judged
by his Reioinder. Now consider good Reader what manner of writing this is. In
long talk before he required that his doings might be wayed, and doubted not,
but Master Iuell should be found the more unconstant. Then fearing that he
could not color the great difference between them, excuses his own turning,
as though he had done well. Now that his writings might be as unconstant, as
his life has been, he overthrows quite his first accusation, and confesses
that Master Iuell has been as obstinate, as ever was Arrius, or any heretic,
which had rather dye, then in any point to seem to relent. If this be true,
where is all that a do which was made about the six articles, and I know not
about what subscription? O M. Harding, oportet mendacem esse memorem, it
behooves a liar to be mindful. Give Lord understanding, and M. Hardings
writings shall need no answer, one leaf does confute an other. Concerning
these examples, which he uses, it appears, that as in these tragedies he
has set apart al honesty, so in mani places he has more show, than learning.
How can this saying agree with it self, some had lever suffer death, then to
seem at any time to have been out of the way, they use examples of Arius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches. Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 21. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 34.
Did not diverse Arians subscribe in the Council of Nice, and made open
protestation, that Arrius held the same faith, which the Council set out? And
did not Arrius himself make the same profession, both in word, and writing
unto Constantinus the Emperor, after his return unto Constantinople? Toerat.
lib. ^ cap. 25.
Did not Macedonius so use the matter, with Alexander B. of Constantinople,
that when he dyed, he commended him to be his successor, and after set up by
the Arrians, and deposed by the Emperor, Sozo. lib. 4. cap. 27.
did he not quite forsake his Arrian heresy? Did not Eutyches, cited to the
Council of Constantinople, send one in his room to subscribe to the faith of
the Ephesine, and Nicene Councels? Did not Nestorius cry in the open council
at Ephesus, Dicatur Maria Deipara, and cesset haec molestia, let Marye be
called the Mother of God, and let this trouble cease? This I have showed, that
it might appear, how fitly M. Harding does apply his examples. Now his
writings standing thus, sometime without learning, often ill agreeing, and most
commonly without honesty, what skilleth it in this behalf, if the Reioynder
sit in judgment? They say, a scabbie horse is good enough for a scaule Squire.


Harding. I say not only as you do in your preface, but in this Reioynder I do
manifestly prove in due place, some Doctors by you to be untruly alleged,
some corruptly translated, some peruersly expounded, some guilefullye applied,
their woo^des sometimes abbridged, sometimes enlarged, sometimes altered,
sometimes dissembled. With these false sleightes you burden me in word, and
with the same here I have charged you in deed. Sundry ancient fathers, which
you deny, by good authority I have avouched. Your own childish arguments,
falsely, and fondly by your self devised, and fathered upon me, I have wholly
contemned, and so returned them unto you again. For the.45. Untruths, which
you pretend to have noted in my answer touching your first Article, I have
returned upon you.225. noted in your Reply of the same Article. Those which
you impute unto me, be now already partly, and may shortly be justified. And
therefore proved not to be untruths at all. Yours you shall never justify.
When you attempt it, you shall do it, but with a multiplication of infinite
other untruths.


Dering. Now M. Harding, as he is witty, seeing it is not all gold which he
has made to glister, and fearing least his colors might be rubbed away from
his writing, upon good courage says boldly, he has spoken nothing, which he
will not prove in his Reioynder. Much after such a sort began Cyclicus the
Poet, fortunam priami ca^^abo, and nobile bellum, and when Cyclicus has made
an end of his Iliades, M. Harding shall be as good as his word. He charge
M. Iuel with corrupting the fathers, yet in all this Reioynder, as appears by
his untruths, he is not able to convince one authority of falsehood. He
says, there is no proof in M. Iuels Preface, yet in his own Epistle, here is
neither truth, nor honesty. The childish arguments he will pass over with
silence. So he does in deed many of them, and a great piece of this first
article beside. Where no show of answer may be had, silence can do least
harm. But Master Harding, though he say it, yet perhaps will not stick much
in this. Upon entreaty he will yield unto us true allegations of the Doctors,
and will stick to take unto him his Arguments again, but touching the.44.
untruths, in that he will never yield. They are all justified, and shall be
justified, and.225. returned upon Master Iuell, which shall never be
answered, and if we but attempt it, we shall but multeply more Untruthes. But
soft, good Reader, be not a fearde of vanity. I remember a certain
Lacedemonian, that when he saw one tying together long circumstaunces of
speech: Now I make God a vow said he, this is a hardy man, that when he has
no reason, yet can roll his tongue so handsomely, and what other is this of M.
Hardings, but tongue rolling his own Untruthes, he says are all justified.
Yet Master Stapleton confesses that in one place Master Harding was
ouerseene. I have returned says he 225. untruths, yet he has turned some one
of the^.7. times. If he had served them so all, he had returned above fiftene
hundred, and these, as he says, can not be answered without multiplying of mo
untruths. How true this is let the reader judge. Sure for my part, if it be
so, I will revoke that I have written. But this I must forewarne them, I do
not take it for untrue, to say their Pope is Antichrist, and their Mass
Idolatrous, and their church a sinagogue of iniquitye. If otherwise I make any
untruth* either in misconstring the word of God, or falsifying other men's
authority, by Gods grace, when I shall understand it, I will revoke it, but
my conscience is yet clear, I have written nothing deceitfully.


Harding. Since it is thus, the best advise I can give you, is first, to
consider better of these matters, and to call to your mind, what has moved
you to enter so far. Next, how faithfully you have dealt in the same. Then
what reward you may look for in the end.


Dering. Of this wicked Epistle gentle reader thou art now come to the
peroration, although it be long, and odious, as the manner of old buyldinges is
to have wide ruinous kitchins: yet thou shall do well to read it, to learn to
take heed of such manner doing, and although the filthy synckes be somewhat
loathsome at the first, yet by the grace of God the savor shall not infect thee.
First says he, what moved you to enter so far. Doublesse Master Harding the
free mercy of God the father, poured upon him through Jesus Christ, and this
was the efficient cause. His end was to glorify God, that God might glorify
him again, 1. Sam.
for his faithful dealing. It has been such as flesh, and blood could
suffer. That which is wanting shall be accounted unto him by the merit of his
savior Jesus Christ. The reward that he looks for, is not of merit, but of
grace, and it is the inheritance of that kingdom which was the portion of
Gods chosen, ordained from ye beginning. Now these beginnings being thus,
Master Hardings further running can be but hastening to new lies, what so ever
he shall further say of Master Iuells profession. These other ungodly words,
yt came after, full of much bitterness, are not worthy answer. Every one may
invent them, that delights in evil speaking, and they can not carry any good
man to mistrust.


Harding. If this council can not sincke into you, if neither this, nor any
other the like advise shall take place with you: what is my part to do, but to
leave you to your self, and to the will of God?


Dering. After sundry ways atempted, how Master Harding might bring our
doings into suspicion, at the last very modestlye he does leave us unto God,
but by and by he breaks out again, he cannot suppress his coler, and for a
full proof that all his fayer speaking is hipocrisy, he raueth straight so out
of measure, that he does exceed him self, not proving any thing, but as if
his word were Apollos oracle, he presumes with out controlle to speak what
he lists, and goes away so fast in his frothy matter, that contrary to his
woonted cunning he forgets how to speak, for after a great heap of words,
of which every one according to his number does specify a new untruth, he
writes thus. Leave to do as not only through your whole Replye, but also
through your first article you have done. Who ever spoke after this manner? what
writer? what scholar? what child? when (...) after (...) does signify
nothing. This phrase of Master Hardings shall be allowable, but that surely he
shall not only never prove, but also not before he set out his next book.
After this uncomely speaking he brings in very absurd matter, and charge
Master Iuell, because he bolstreth up his Religion with the authorities of
late writers. Yet where Master Harding brings one sentence out of the old
fathers, give me leave in a doutfull matter to use one of Master Hardings
gesses, Master Iuell, I think brings twenty. But what forces he to speak,
that speaks, he knows not what?


Harding. If you intend to write against any of our Treatises, cul not out our
sayings forth of a whole heap, as your manner is, leaving what toueheth the
point in controversy, and taking part that being put alone and besides the
rest, seems to have less force.


Dering. It were hard to find such an other Caligula, that so approves this
(...) a shamlesse behavior in him self. He charge Master Iuel with culling
out of sentences who lays forth his whole answer word for word, and
finds no fault with him self, that skippeth at adventures, sometime two
leaves at once, and answers not a word. Again, about this he uses a heap
of vain words, as though in much bibble babble all controversy were decyded.
This manner of writing does make me remember a certain Lacedomian, which took
a nightingale, and pulling of her feathers, when he saw her little body, thou
art even a voice said he, and nothing else, and surely Master Harding is but
a nightingale take away his feathers, that is his gaye words, and there is
nothing but a little withered carcass underneath. He accuses Master Iuell of a
childish wit, but with how childish a judgment, who sees not? I will make no
comparison of the man, he has nothing, which he has not received, if any man
do not think him as well learned as any English Louanist, if Apollo might
awarde him his hyre, he should have Midas ears. It forces not what
correction Master Harding uses to discredit his Reply. All the learned men
in England will seal it with their judgment, yt it shows a rare replier. He
talks of burning it, and no doubt him self would carry a faggot to help make
the fire, but it is cast in a good moulde and shall keep his fashion,
notwithstanding this rabble of new carpenters that would disfigure it.


Harding. Remember Master Jewel, it is the cause of God, you would seem to
treat. God has no need of your Lies. Leave wrangling, ieasting, scorning,
mocking, scoffing. Contend not about words, and syllables, forsaking the
matter. Obscure not the truth with vain Rethorique, ouerwhelme it not with
your abundance of words. Bring not confusion to the matter, when it is clear
of it self, make not show of victory, where you are least able to answer.
Make not your reader to laugh, where he would be taught. Affect not so much to
be pleasant, seek rather to be a true handler of Gods causes. Put not the hope
of your victory in the coldenesse of your Adversary, but in the truth of the
matter. Refuse not to stand to their judgment alleged against you, whose
witness you bring for you. Allow not a writer in one place, condemning him in
an other place.


Dering. Now sure if Master Harding were a boy in the Grammar school for
this pretty tale he deserved to go to play. I have not seen one in copia
verborum vary a sentence more handsomely. And how shall all this be answered?
Even as Cleomenes answered the Ambassadors from Samos, to such a long oration
of so little purpose, the whole hangs so loosely, that the beginning I can
not remember, and therefore I understand not the midst, but such things as
are in the end are altogether disalowed. For Master harding says in the end,
he is a cold adversary, if he mean cold in religion, it may be well
granted, if otherwise cold, it may not be allowed, look what heat of words
either will, or ability can utter, in his Epistle, and Reioynder, there is
nothing wanting.


Hardyng. If you will use the testimony of the Scholemen, and Canonists,
consider it to be reason, that you subscribe to their faith. It is well known
unto you, they be catholic in doctrine, as whom therefore you account for
Papists. Yet who ever alleged them so thick as you have done, though to no
purpose, in your Reply? It seems you were desirous to show all your wares at
one market. Use their testimonies, and believe them. If you believe them not,
what mean you to use them?


Dering. Now Master Hard. has gone well forward in untruths, as the violence
of his nature draws him, he falls into a paradoxe. If you use a man's
authority (says he) it is reason you subscribe unto his religion. What reason
is there in these words? or who would speak thus, that knew what to speak
well? Does not Master Harding mean to blind the eyes of the simple, when he
will adventure to speak such monsters? or has he not little to say, Act. 9.
where he takes hold of this? Christ used the testimony of the Scribes, and
Phariseis, of Pindarus an Ethnike Poet. S. Paul of Epimenides. Yet it is no
reason Christ should subscribe to ye Jewish religion, Paul should become an
Ethnike, I need not make this long by examples, they are in manner infinite
every where to be found. But because Master Harding makes this so strange,
I must put him in mind of a saying that Tullie uses against Verres: Tuum
testimonium, Divine in ver.
quod in aliena releue esset, id in tua, quoniam contra te est, grauissimu^
debet esse. The witness which in an other man's matter were little worth, yet
in thine own, because it is against thy self, it must be of great authority.
Now surely this saying of Master Harding is very gross. But yet ludus, and
iocus, prae vt huius rabies quae dabit. It is nothing, if you compare it with
that which follows. He bids Master Jewel leave off to fill his readers
ears with vain, Plut. Phil. 2.
and false fables. Now Lucullus may have leave to speak like Cato. and Antonie
to accuse Tullie, for placing shakebucklers in the Capitol. Gracchus may
speak of sedicion, and Verres may reprove men of theft. Master Harding does
find fault with fables. I must answer as Tullie does: O miseru^ sieve haec
tibi nota non sunt, sine sunt, qui apud tales viros tam impudenter loquare, O
wretched man whither he know it, or know it not, that speaks so shamelesly
unto his readers. Master Iuell has not one tale to prove any article. Master
Harding and his companions have above one hundred thousand to prove their
religion, and how could it be otherwise, when the Legend it self, whence they
fet their divinity is nothing but lies. After this, because Master Harding can
espy never a fable avouched by Master Iuell, he thinks good to charge him
with that, he says not, whereby such as will believe him on his word, may think
at the least he has brought somewhat for himself, and upon some such
consideration this he tells forth his tale.


Hardyng. Where as you make so much ado with me for one vision of S. Basile,
which nevertheless is reported by men of good credit, remember your own
self are not able so well to justify your own fables, which you tell at the
beginning, as that Pope Gregory, whom you had rather call Hildebrand, was a
Necromancer, and a Sorcerer. that Emperor Henry was poisoned in the Communion
bread, that Pope Victor was poisoned in the Chalice.


Dering. Here, Christian reader, thou have four lies in four lines. First
says he, Master Iuell finds much fault with me for one fable, that is one
lie, for Master Harding has many fables, one out of Abdias. diuis. 5. an
other out of Leontius. diuis. 32. the third out of Amphilochius, diui. 33.
beside all the allegations out of other petie Doctors. This is then one
untruth, forasmuch as M. Hardings words seem to acknowledge but one fable. The
second lie is, that it is reported by men of good creedite, and that is not so.
Vincentius, and Antonius are of little better credit in their histories, then
Arthur of little Britain. I have not numbered their lies, but sure it is,
neither of them have so few as a thousand. For trial, read the books, and
if thou go ten lines without a lie in Antonius, thou must light upon the cover,
and in Vincentius thou shall not seek much further. These Authors then are not
of good credit. The third lie is, that master Iuell is not so well able to
justify the histories of Victor, Henry, and Hildibrand. For he can hardly
allege any of less credit then Vencentius and Antonius. But let the defense
of the Apology be a trial of this matter. The fourth lie is, that these
fables are Master Iuels own. For he does not so much as once say they be
true, but only writes that this it is reported, and he alleges Hermannus
contractus, neither in that place does Master Iuell care whether they be true,
or no. But Master Hardings tale of Amphilochus is soothly avouched, set out
with many circumstances, and made a solemn proof of his private Mass. Yet I
have heard many better tales told by old women of Robin goodfellow. Then the
warest council that I can give him, is, if he will further his Mass, let him
speak no more of fables. The residue of this Epistle, which is very little, is
concerning certain untruths, which are answered in their places, the manner
and form of writing is still like it self, full of uncomely words against
the Reply. At the last he concludes thus.


Harding. If men be not utterly blind, and as I may say, so bewitched with
the spirit of error, and lying, as to believe what soever you say, be it true,
be it false: I doubt not but after they shall have read my Reioynder, and what
is written by others here of late, in their judgment your Reply shall find
small credit. Now to end. If you fear not God, to whom of so many
untruths you shall give account, yet reverence man, of whose wordly estimation
you depend. For my part, I shall pray, that either God move your heart to
repent, and amend, or that he give the people grace not to believe you.


Dering. It is true which our Savior Christ has said, the time should come,
when if it were possible, the very elect should be deceived. For who can see
these bold asseuerations, which M. Harding uses, and the great assurance he
pretends for his Religion, and would not think, that the word of God were
his warrant. But be not deceived. Such confidence is not strange, neither
toward God, nor man. Cossutian in no wise would fear Caesar. Esaias. 36.10.
And Rabsaketh the Captain of proud Senacharib, said the Lord ^ad him come
to destroy Jerusalem, the Grecians have a proverb (...), some man's mind
may as hardlye be pierced as A^ax Buckler, and the Scribes said, John. 9.29.
we know that God spoke with Moises, but this man, we know not, what he is. But
Theog^^s says (...) by foolysh persuasion I am undone. And our Savior
Christ. Even Moses, John. 5.45.
in whom you trust, he shall accuse you. So that if Master Harding had this
confidence, he would seem to have, yet had he not the truth. But even as the
Prophet said, Zach. 7.12.
we might say of him, posuit vt Adamantem cor suum, he has made his heart
even as the Adamant stone. Apo. 5.15.
But his vain assurance shall be as the dust, that is blown away with the
wind. Though he say, peace, peace, yet there shall be no peace. Ier. 6.14.
Ier. 7.4.
Though he cry, the Church, the Church, yet their wicked Sinagog is not the
Church. The proud City did say, I am, and none else. Yet was she sin, and
iniquity, and nothing else. Esa. 47.8.
The Prophets said swoorde, and famine shall not be in this land. Yet by
swoorde, Ier. 14.15.
and famine those Prophets were consumed. Since then it is so, that the wicked
may have this vain trust, let us not be deceived with either bold, or
entysing words. Let us not be wise in our own conceyte, let us lay no
foundation of our faith, other then is already laid, but let us look after
Christ Jesus, and learn what is his will, let us search in his holy word,
and seek what is our wisdom. So shall neither the spirit of error
violentlye draw us captives, nor vain imaginations lead us away. We shall
be followers of Jesus Christ the righteous, and we shall walk as they do,
that have him for their example, we shall care for those things, that are
above, and we shall have our conversation in heaven, from whence also we look
for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall make our vile body, that
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, which time for his mercy
sake he vouchsafe to hasten, who of his mercy has ordained us unto that
kindgome, where he lives one God, and three persons, the father, the son,
and the holy ghost, to whom be all honor, and glory, world without end.
Amen.


A sparing restraint of many lauishe untruths, which master D. Harding would
find in the first article of the Bishop of Sarisburies Reply, by Edward
Dering, student in divinity.
The B. of Sarisburie. Master Harding makes his first entrye with a Cavil.


Harding. The.1. untruth. It is no Cavil.


Dering. NOW MASTER HARDING has so diligently examined this first article,
and searched out, as he says, many, and great untruths, I must crave of thee
which art the indifferent reader, to yield unto those things, which he can
not blame: and to acknowledge it for true, which he can not control. Of this
shall thou have this great benefit, that when thou have duly tried all that
is written, thou shall cleave in the end to the truer part, and find the
salvation of thine own soul. Read them with an indifferent, judgment, and
believe as the spirit of God shall move thee. If Master Harding say true, that
in this first article there be.225. untruths, for my part I crave no
parcialitie, say boldly Master Iuell is not, as he pretends. But if this be
false, and Master Hardings report be altogether slanderous: then pray that he
may soon repent, and confess that godly, and learned Bishop, to be a
faithful labourer in the harvest of the Lord.

This first untruth is that Master Harding in his answer begins not with
a Cavil. The question is moved, whether within the space of.600. years after
Christ, there were any private Mass. Master Harding makes answer, that
every Mass, Hard. diuis. 1. linea. 1.
concerning the oblacion, and Communion is common, as likewise it is concerning
the first institution, and will of the Priest, Linea. 6. Diuis. 3.
But in consideration of place, time, audience, purpose, rytes, and other
circumstances, it may be private. The untruth lies, whether this answer be a
cavil. Here we may answer two ways. One after the common use of speaking,
an other after the nature of the word. For our common speech it is certain,
we call that a cavil which is a drawing of any word known well enough, into a
strange signification, as Master Harding uses here his Mass. For who
knows not that by private Mass, we do mean that, which the priest
practices alone at the altar? Now here to come in with this distinction,
which (I ween) never before was heard of, what is it else but to Cavil? Thus
if we follow the common speech of men, this is no untruth. If it like M.
Harding to stick unto the nature of the word, let us examine it, and so see
whether this distinction, be a Cavil. Cauillatio, says the Lawyer, est
subdola ratio, quam conscij nobis mendacii proferimus, a Cavil is a subtle
reasoning, which we our selves know is false, but yet we use it. Now if this
distinction be false, and that Master Harding know well enough, then is it
manifestly a cavil. The distinction is this. Every Mass by institution, will
of the priest, oblation, and communion, is common, as touching persons, place,
time, etc. it may be private. Now first whether the Mass by institution be
common. Gabriel Biel says, as touching the substance, and first institution
of the Mass, Biel. in can. in proemio. ca. 1. and 2. Biel cap. 3. and de
consecrat. did. 1. hoc quoque in glossa.
there is nothing necessary, but, in the thing, bread, and wine, in the
priest, orders, good pronunciation, and a pure will. These being rightly had in
all places, at all times, whether any be present or no, Missa rite celebratur,
verum est sacrificium. The Mass is truly celebrate, there is a true
sacrifice, therefore Mass by institution is not common. If Master Harding will
reply, and say, that even in such Masses, the sacrifice is effectual to the
whole Church, and so the Mass is common, that answer were very childish, and
would breed dissension in their own church. For both G. Biel denies it in
plain words, and the thing it self altogether disagreeth. Biel says, Biel.
ca. ^.
impeditur tamen fructus, eo quod inordinate, and indigne consecratur, and
sumitur, though the Mass be a true Mass, yet there is no fruit of it, for as
much as consecration, and communion are unorderly, and unworthily ministered.
And for the thing it self, M. Harding knows the benefit of his Mass is so
applied, if their be one to answer in the name of the people, but in these
Masses it is not required, Biel. cap. 3.
that any one be present to make answer. It follows then, that some Mass
by no means is common, and so Ma. Hardings distinction is a cavil. I pass
over for brevity the beginning of this Mass, how it has nothing of the
Apostles. And before the sixth Synod of Constantinople no part of it was ever
song in Latin, but this spoken of Biels authority, is proof sufficient for
this present purpose.

The second thing that we have to consider, is whether the Mass be common by
will of the priest, or no. And this question though it be hard to decyde, yet
we may have some probable conjecture, why the priest does not always mean to
bestow his devotion upon every man. We have had a common proverb, rising upon
the disagreement of the priest, and the lay man, that upon the displeasure
conceived, we would say one to another. Let him never be in thy Memento. If as
the Philosopher says, the voice of the people be the voice of nature, then it
is certain, that sometime the priests will was, to abridge the commodity of
this common Mass, and in his Memento to seclude some from this common
benefit, so that even in this point Master Hardings distinction is a mere
cavil. Again concerning this will of the priest, I might ask of Master
Harding, what manner of Masses Pope Gregory the.vii. said, yt minded nothing
more than sorcery, or the priest, that poisoned Pope Victor the third in the
Chalice, or such priests as I have known some in Cambridge, that when they
have played all night at dice, in the morning being called away to Mass, have
sworn a great oath, that they would make have, and come again. A man had
need to know his conditions well, that would ground his Religion upon the
priests intent. Thus it appears, that neither by institution, nor will of
the priest, every Mass is common. Concerning the oblation, and communion, how
can they be common, when in some of their Masses they have none at al. First,
their is no oblation without bread, in Can. Miss. catech. par. 2. Decretal de
cele. Miss. ca 5
and wine, as the cannon of their own Mass does command, and as Biel does
witness. But in some of their Masses ye use of wine is forbidden, as appears
by pope Gregory, therefore in some of their Masses there is no oblation, or
sacrifice. Then how can that be common, which is not? Likewise it is manifest
in the communion, how can that be made of the priest, without bread, and wine?
Now is there no excuse remaining, why this distinction being false should not
be a cavil, except Master Harding will say, him self did not know so much.
Yet if he do, that will not serve. For the very nature of a cavil is only
this, In reg. iur. lege ^a est.
vt ab euidenter veris res perducatur, that the matter may be brought to open
falsehood. And thus much is said, for the exact discussing of the word, so that
it is plain, both by the common speech, and by due trial of the very word,
that Master Harding makes his first entrye with a cavil.


The B. of Saris. For where the matter is agreed upon, it is folly to pick a
quarrel upon the word.


Harding. The 2. untruth. It is not agreed upon.


Dering. Master Harding has purposed to epsy a great many of untruths, and
fearing least they should not amount to their just number, he thinks good
where opportunity serves, to make of one, either two, or mo. For where Master
Iuell says, this distinction of Mass, is but a cavil, because the
signification of Mass is known: Master Harding here notes two untruths,
one, it is no cauil, an other, it is not known. And what needs this
doubling, if through vain babbling he did not think to blind the eyes of the
simple? Who ever would deny, both antecedent, and argument, both where they
hang one of another. The noting of this untruth, is a good proof, that ye
other was a cavil. Whether the signification of Mass be known or no, small
proof will serve, let the world be judge. But why is Master Harding so
pleased with his own distinction, that upon it, he will fownd mo untruths?
Forsooth he is a defender of antiquity, and such distinctions are very
ancient, more than 2000. year agone, Anaxagoras made such another, and stood
stiffly in it, Cic. in acad. quest.
that snow was not white, because it was understand two ways. One as it was
water in substance, and so it was black, another as it was congealed, and so
it was white, but such deep fetches do not sinck in shallow wits. Let us be
content with plain understanding, and so it shall be known, that private mass
is with the priest alone, no man communicating with him, and snow shall be white
still.


The B. of Saris. Every Mass says he, is common, and none private. If it be
so, then has he already concluded fully on our side.


Hardyng. The.3. untruth. I say not so, but with addicion.


Dering. What addicions you make, only wrangling excepted, I see not. If
there be any untruth in these words, the fault is your own, take it unto your
self. Master Iuell affirms nothing, but upon your saying, that every Mass
is public. He infers if it be so, then you have concluded on his side, you
are not zealous for the truth, that would thus carry away your reader with
trifling. Were your addicions never so good, and godly, yet Master Iuels
words might stand without misreport of your saying. But because we be fallen
into these addicions, mark good reader, what manner ones they be. Every
Mass, Reio^d.
says he, is common concerning both oblation, and communion. If it be so, then
his Mass it self must needs be somewhat else, which Master Harding I am sure
will not grant, and so unawares for greediness of an untruth out of time, he
quite ouerturneth his untrue religion. For the whole substance of his Mass is
nothing else but this oblation, and communion, these be the additions of his
Mass, oblation, and communion, Hard. diui. 8.
and all the other vsages are referred unto it, without all which these four
words hoc est corpus meum are a perfect Mass, as Master Harding himself,
and also his own doctors do confess. In steed of many, it shall be
sufficient to allege one. Clingius a great doctor of Master Hardings writes
thus. Essentiale Missae sunt ve^ba Christi, hoc est corpus meu^, hic est
sanguis meus, etc. omnia alia quae circa Missam fiunt, vt orationes,
ceremoniae, vestime^ta, gesta, crucis signaculum etc. non sunt Missa, sed sunt
ad maiestatem and ornatum sacramenti ordinata, vt cum omni gloriositate hoc
officium Missae celebretur. The substance of the Mass are these words of
Christ, this is my body, this is my blood. etc. all other things about the
Mass, as prayers, ceremonies, vestments, gestures, crosses, and such other are
not the Mass, but are ordained for the majesty and ornaments of the sacrament
that the Mass might be said with all gloriositie. Now this being true, as
most of their doctors confess it is true, what a monster will Master Harding
make of his Mass, that teaches the whole substance of it to be but accide^ts,
or as he calls them addicions. And thus much, if it were true, that M.
Harding spoke not but with addicion. But now, what if he make no such
addicion? what if he belie him self? what if his plain words be these,
every Mass is common? is it not then a shame for him to say the words, and
then to get an untruth* or to mock his reader. Deny them again? read
the.112. untruth, thou shall see these are his very words: I say not that
every private Mass is common, but that every Mass is common. If these be his
plain and express words without all addition, every Mass is common, what
means he here to deny them? if they be false, well may he prove himself a
liar, he can make no untruth in Master Iuels words.


The.B. of Saris. If there be no private Mass at all, then was there no
Private Mass in the primitive Church, which was my first assertion.


Harding. The 4. untruth. I say not there is none at all. For there is private
Mass, as private is taken in another sense.


Dering. This untruth stands upon a distinction of private, and yet he
tells not how private is taken diverse ways. He has forgotten his Logic,
and therefore gesseth out blind distinctions at adventures. We talk of his
mass, and how can that be private mo ways than one. If none receive but the
priest, then that which should be the communion, is private to the priest
alone. If he have other company, then is there no private Mass, that his
Mass stands in the oblation, and communion. What this distinction has other
but deceit of the people, a clowdie show of a little mystery, and in deed a
blind imagination, no man, I trow, but Master Harding can see. But a short
answer will serve this untruth, his own Reioinder does sufficiently confute
it. He says plain no Mass is private, and that saying he yet avouches. But
he denies that he says none is private at all, Reioind. fo. 4.
and what a childish asseueration is this in a doctor of divinity. I speak not
this in debasing of M. Hardings learning, which I confess is good, but so are
Gods judgments, where is the wise man, where is the scribe, when God does
confound their understanding. If these propositions are one, there is no
private Mass, and, there is no private Mass at all: whereto is this (...)
this vain repetition to make one untruth both the third, and fourth, and yet
the same without any reason? If he think that in these propositions, those
words, at all, do make any difference, to much malice has changed his
understanding. Well knows he, that in a negative proposition, the latter
word is always universal. And it is one to say, a man is no stone, and a man
is no stone at all. Master Harding has not yet forgot his Logic: in omni
negante enunciatione attributum universe capitur. Many such untruths would
soon shame the fault finder.


The.B. of Saris. In the.22. Article of his book, entreating of the accidents
of bread, and wine.


Harding The.5. untruth. In that place I speak not hereof.


Dering. This untruth is soon decyded. Read the place, if Master Harding say
true, then is this an untruth. If he say otherwise, such impudency will wound
his credit, even among his friends. Read. Art. 22. diuis^. 3.


The.B. of Saris. He says these matters were never taught in open audience,
but privately disputed in the schools, and set abroad by learned men in their
private writing.


Harding. The.6. untruth. I say not so, but otherwise.


Dering. There is nothing so plain that impudency and boldness will not
affirm. But it is well, that the book may be the judge. Read. Art. 22.
diuisi. 2.


The. B. of Saris. As touching Mass, sometime he makes it the sacrifice,
sometime the Communion.


Harding. The.7. untruth. I never said the Communion to be the Mass.


Dering. Yet well worth Master Stapleton, that thus begins his.7.
slanderous untruth, the Mass and the Communion is al one. Allow this doctors
judgment, and I will soon prove Master Harding a fond man. For this Master
Stapleton writes against master Iuell, you do fondly to make any
contradiction between them. Here master Harding says you say untruly, that
you do not make a difference between them. Belike whatsoever master Iuell
say, they are at a point it shall be controlled. Yet more warenesse in such
unequal doing, would not be amiss. This great disagreement between D.
Harding, and master Stapleton, is a discharge for the B. of Sarisburie, that
this is no untruth. It is not good for them to meddle any more with this. They
must take heed how they endaunger one another credit. If one of them upon
good advice, would forsake the others evil company, he would disclose so
much conference, that not so much as M. Shacklocke could be blamed. But M.
Saunders, and Harding should have rebuke.


The. B. of Saris. But if his Sacrifice be common, why does he give it these
private titles, this for the living, this for the dead.


Harding. The.8. untruth. I give it not these titles.


Dering. If Master Harding does not give it these titles, then can it not be
denied, this is an untruth. Yet what occasion master Iuell had to report them,
for his better discharge, I think it good to admonish thee. In the Canon of
master Hardings Mass, when Jack an apes is at all his gestures, the rubric,
that makes all the sport, does bid the priest, sometime to bestow his devotion
upon himself, sometime upon his parishioners, sometime upon his father, and
mother, sometime upon those that are by, sometime upon all men, and at the
elevation of the Chalice, the priest says. Offero pro peccatis meis, pro
salute viuorum, requie defunctoru^. I offer this for mine own sins, for the
health of the living, for the rest of the dead, and for whom soever it likes
the priest. This being commanded to all Massing priests, who would not
think, that master Harding did observe the same. But perhaps his great
acquaintance with Amphilochius his Basil, he would feign say Mass after his
own fashion. Let him yet remember, nisi quid rubrica vetarit, he hassards his
whole consecration, if he go any whit beyond his commission. And here I trust
master Harding will make no difference between M. Iuels saying, and the
commandment of his Rubricke. If he think these words are not plain enough,
Gabrel Biel will help out even to the utmost. In 4. sent. did. 1^. q: 2. conc.
2
For thus he writes. Whatsoever our savior did merit upon the cross,
generally for all men. etc. Hoc sacrificio applicatur particulariter singulis*
by this sacrifice it is applied particularly to every one. And in another
place, defining more exactly of this matter, he says, Non potest ex aequo, and
aliis, and primo, In supplem. dis. 45. q. 2. p.
in eode^ applicare gradu, he cannot equally apply his devotion upon him, for
whom he especially says Mass, and upon other. Lo, here we are expressly
taught, that the sacrifice has these private names, this for one, this for
another. Yea, and here they move a learned doubt. What if he that have hired
the Mass, will not have others partakers of it. Biel answers, recurrendum
est in hiis casibus ad iudiciu^ viri sapientis, in such cases we must have
recourse to some wise man. But what need so deep philosophy, to search out
so plain a matter? It is the usage of their whole Church, and the doctrine of
all their preachers, that the sacrifice may be applied to one or other, even as
the priest will. And where their Mass book bids that the priest break the
host in three pieces, Durand. lib. 4 cap. 53.
and hold two pieces in his left hand, and one in his right, the mystery of
that device is this, that one piece, I trow that in the right hand, be for
them in heaven, an other for the living, the third for them in purgatory. I
grant this is but a foolish device to fancy any sacrifice for those in
heaven, yet so it is, and so they teach. Whether master Harding say Mass as
he is commanded, or no, that no man, I trow knows but himself, his breach
of order may be no good proof of an untruth.


The B. of Saris. His second reason is this, it is a feast, therefore it is
common, and so he salueth one error with another.


Harding. The.9. untruth. It is no error to say it is a feast.


Dering. Master Hardings word, is no very good warrant, therefore it shall
not be amiss to see his reason. As a dinner may be a good dinner, says the
Reioinder, though the gestes do not come: Reioind. fo. 6.
so this may be a feast, though it be not eaten. Note good people, this is an
argument a simili, and that you should note it the better, Master Harding has
caused it to be printed in the margin. This argument by like is very
plausible among them. In exam. 5. Philp.
With such an other did master. Bonner once prove transubstanciation, but
because whatsoever that wise man speaks, is not straight way reason, I would
gladly know of master Harding this one thing, whether that be a good dinner,
when neither the gestes come, nor yet any good meat is prepared? All men know
that such a banquet they make of their Mass. There is nothing at all prepa^ed
but for the priest alone. These weak untruths would have well borne some
stronger reason.


The B. of Saris. What if his will be to work sorcery, as it is reported of pope
Hildibrand.


Harding. The.10. untruth. This is reported by no true vvryter.


The B. of Saris. Or what if his will be to poison some body, as Henry the
Emperor was poisoned in the Communion bread, Pope Victor in the Chalice.


Harding. The.11. and.12. untruth. They dyed otherwise.


Dering. Well may this Reioinder of M. Hardings be called a book of
distinctions, and this great number of untruths.225. wranglings. For neither
without a distinction can he defend one jot of his double Religion, nor
without wrangling argue one untruth. It is reported, says master Iuell, of
Pope Hildibrand, that he was a sorcerer, of Henry the Emperor, and Pope
Victor, that they were poisoned in the Communion. Here comes our late untruth
maker of Louein M. D. Har. and where as nothing is affirmed, in his manner of
multiplicatio^, he says there are three untruths. The first of Hildibrand,
the second of Henry, the third of Victor. Concerning the truth of these
histories, pardon me good reader, though I dare say nothing. I can not mend
that which M. Iuell has written, Read the defense of the Apology. God for
his mercy sake preserve that good Bishop, to the accomplishing of many other
such labors. As touching our present purpose. No man I trow, but Master
Harding would have noted any untruth. Master Iuell does only say, these
histories are reported, and so they be, as thou thy self must needs confess.
What if they be false? yet it is the error of the history, no untruth in
master Iuell. What if no man defends Papistrie, but enemies of Gods word,
and true religion, yet we may say, that Papistrie is defended? We may say of
Gargantua, that it is reported. Of the Legend of lies that they are written. Of
Basils private Mass, that Amphilochius tells it, and yet is there no
controversy, but these are all lies. Then what if it were not, ye Pope Gregory
were a coniurer, yet it is reported, yea, and thou thy self, good Christian
reader, upon the sight of master Iuels book, shall confess it was so. But
here I must require of thee a little to consider, the unequal dealing of these
english Louanists. Master Harding in his answer speaking of Abdias, says
that he saw Christ in the flesh, that because it is altogether false, master
Iuell notes it for one untruth. Now comes master Stapleton, and for the
return of this untruth, he says. If it be untrue the fault is in the author
that so affirms, and not in master Harding. Stap. in the 7. untruth,
slanderous.
And yet master Harding speaks this affirmatively, as though he would avouch
it. And shall lying Abdias be a sufficient ground for master Harding, to say,
this is true. And shall not so many good writers, be a warrant for master
Iuell to say this is reported? Sure master Hardings own friends must needs
wish, that either this had been vnquoted by himself, or that other undefended
by master Stapleton.


The B. of Saris. Or what if his will be to work feigned miracles, as Lira
says many are wrought in the open Church, to mock the people.


Harding. The.13. untruth: Lira says it not. The.14. untruth. He says not to
mock the people.


Dering. We had even now three untruths in one sentence, if these were to
many, in token of some moderation, here is one abated, and yet such success
has this vntruthmaker in his collections, that even these two can not stand
with his honesty. This is master Iuels allegation. Lira says, many miracles
are wrought in the open Church, to mock the people. Of these words thus does
Master Harding gather two untruths. The first, Lira says it not. The second,
he says not to mock the people. Here would I feign learn of Master Harding
in the first untruth, Lira says it not, what he means by the word* it, if
he do mean the whole sentence, why does he repeat this piece, to mock the
people, and so makes an other untruth, if he mean Lira has all but this, why
does he note the residue for an untruth. If he mean that Lira never says
this, nor the other part, why does he not mark mo untruths. The first, as it
is one general, Lira says it not. The other deducted perticularly out of
every word, as, he says not there are many. He says not there are many
miracles, he says not, they are wrought, he says not in the open church. He
says not to mock, and so this last he says not to mock the people. This would
well have furthered M. H. number, to have had.vii. in steed of two, and sure
the sentence has no privilege, but that in every part, it may as well be
broken off, as in this one. But since it is so, M. H. durst not note to many,
let us examine these two, how good ground they stand on* Lira, says Master
Harding, says it not. He says not to mock the people. In these untruths my
labor shall not be necessary. Lira himself must be master Iuels discharge.
Read then the place, thus he writes. Similiter sit in ecclesia maxima
deceptio populi in miraculis, fictis a sacerdotibus, Lira in. 14. cap. Daniell.
and eoru^ ad haerentibus propter lucrum temporale, likewise it happens in
the church, that the people are very much deceived through feigned miracles
wrought by the priests, and their adherents for temporal gain. Let Master
Harding deny it, and deny it, and deny it again, these are Liraes very
words, let the book be judge. And what fault is there in master Iuell, who
reports of Lira, that many feigned miracles are wrought in the open church, to
deceive the people? Forsooth, says M. Harding, Lira says not that miracles
are wrought. Yet Lira says, similiter fit, in like manner it is done. Further,
Reioind. fo. 9.
says M. Harding, he says not in the open Church, yet these are his words,
in ecclesia, in the open Church, for what mean Gretian would deny, that
(...) is the open congregation, and (...) to call assemblies. Last of all,
master Harding denies that Lira says to mock the people. Yet thus Lira
writes, maxima deceptio populi fit in miraculis. The people are very much
deceived with feigned miracles. But it follows in Lira, propter lucrum
temporale, for temporal gain, and therefore, says master Harding, it was
not to mock the people. Now sure this is a very ill defense of his friends.
Turpe lucrum res pessima, filthy gain is the woorst of all thing. That it is,
which has laid to sale Masses, Dirges, Trentals, Dispensatio^s, Iubileis,
Pardons, Indulgences, Purgatory, and all the Popes pedlarie. This defense the
truer it is, the more it verifieth Master Iuels saying. For he that has
pleasure in such gain, would have some pastime in the peoples error. But I
pray master Harding was all your miracles for gain? When S. Andrew saw dogs
running after a hare, Sulpitius in vita Martini. lib. 3.
and suddenly made the dogs feet all cleave to the ground, what gain had he by
it? When our lady came down from heaven and sowed Thomas Beckets hearne
breaches, In vitis sanctorum.
that her priest might have leave to say Mass again, what got she by it? when
Saint Thomas rose out of his kingly tumbe, and asked those, that watched them,
what they made there, saying, non hic sum, ascendi enim, I am not here, but I
am ascended, Abdias histo. apost. lib. 9.
who gave Thomas ever a grote for his labor? And that we may use your own
example. What helped it Christ, or all his Apostles to come down from heaven
and help Saint Basil to Mass, what was he the ritcher? or when all the
Apostles came, Legend. aurea in ass. Mariae.
some a thousand, some two thousand mile in less than a quarter of an hour,
to see our ladies assumption, what got they by their hasty journey? And to
come nerer home, among us, when Roodes were made sweat, or roll their eyes, or
nod their heads, what gain was their in it? When Christ and our lady came
down to walk upon the aultare, when four angels came down to minister the
Chalice unto the Abbot, when the Crucifixe did walk from the sepulcher to the
aultare on Easter day in the morning. When twenty such other miracles were
made, was it all for gain? Ten thousand have seen it, and never cost them
penny. Then we our selves are witnesses, that sometime blind miracles were
wrought only to deceive the people. Why therefore does Master Harding note
this for untrue, if the estimacion of his honesty, the regard of his reader,
the love of truth, or the fear of god, do move him, why does he blame this
allegation of Lira? except as Thraso says, he was never any where, where all
men did not love him, to M. Harding thinks no man will read his Reioinder,
Ter in (...). Act. 5. sc. e. vl.
that will not believe him. But what he thinks, only God knows. Sure his
doing has very great suspicion of evil meaning.


The B. of Saris. Pighius acknowledges errors in the private Mass.


Harding. The.16. untruth. He acknowledges no errors in the private Mass.


Dering. Now master Harding begins to hew and mangle Master Iuels words,
and will not, as he is requested, lays them out plainly and so say against
them what he can. But we must bear with greater faults then this, or else
burn the Reioinder. Therefore I will let his skipping alone, it is a good
proof, he could not confute it. Let us see what is this untruth. Pighius,
says he, acknowledges no errors in the private Mass. Why then does he not
show us Pighius his words. He would, no doubt, if they had furthered his
purpose, but it was good to conceal them. Some man will perhaps believe him on
his word. In deed Pighius does not say, there be errors, using this word,
in the private Mass, but he speaks plainly, that there are well nighe all
manner abuses in it. These are his words, Quod si qui abusus in rem
sacratissima^, and saluberrimam irrepserunt, In loc. co^munibus de priuata
Missa.
velut irrepsisse plerosque non diffitemur* etc. What will Master Harding have
us think that plerique is a few, or certain, or is this word so taken in
Louaine. Sure I am that in the Romans time, it signified a great sort, very
many, the most part. I need not to use example. Every child of the Grammar
schole does know it. But I think master Harding will not stand in this. He
will deny that an abuse is an error, that is a simple shift in deed, and the
saluing of one error with an other. Erro, is unwittingly to be deceived, to
fail, to go amiss, and error, or erratum, a fault coming of ignorance, and
therefore it is called quasi deceptio, in manner a deceyuing. And Tullie says,
Etsi aliqua culpa tenemur erroris humani, a scelere tamen liberati sumus.
Although in some part as men we are deceived, yet we were free from any great
offense, and in another place. Errauit, an potius insaniuit Apronius? Was
Apronius deceived? nay he was rather mad. Hereby it appears that an error is
but a small offense. Now if Pighius had said, there had been errors in the
private Mass, he had said but little to the disproufe of it. But he says
there are almost all abuses in it, as no doubt it is a sincke of all
abominations. Abusus says he, that is evil, dishonest, uncomely, wicked
usage, not of ignorance, but of purpose, and malice. So Donatus says, we use
by right, and duty, we abuse with injury, which is a rooted vice. Vtimur cum
honor, abutimur cum iniuria. So Pighius granting Plerosque abusus in his
private Mass, mean what he will thus he says, that in his Mass of malice,
of set purpose, of a wicked desire, Gods people are injuriously abused. This
do the very words enforce. Yet I do not think that Albertus Pighius did so
mean it, though his tongue would not let his heart to lie, but as it were some
injury to rack the word so far, so is it great folly to deny that it may
well be englished errors. Yet about this untruth Master Harding makes so
great exclamations, as if he should declame for the victory. Such Hercules
buskins, he can apply to little legs, and make so great vaunts, where
himself is furthest deceived.


The B. of Saris. The name of Mass is seldom, or never found among the
Catholyke fathers.


Hardyng. The.17. untruth. It is often found among the old writers.


Dering. Note good Reader how this man fears not to note untruths so his
number may grow. This word is seldom found ^aith, Master Iuell in the
catholic fathers, it is found often, says he in old writers, as though who
soever were ancient, he were strait way Catholyke. Himself has removed in
the 21. untruth, certain commentaries of Ierom. And I must certify thee,
there be other which notwithstanding their age, yet have no more authority
than old Aesopes fables. Then notwithstanding Master Hardings note of old
writers, yet M. Iuels saying of the catholic fathers may be true. But I will
not urge Master Hardings words, admit he meant no guile in the naming of old
writers. How proves he this untruth. He brings in.ix. fathers and counsels
in which this word Mass is found, he says he could bring three mo, that
is.xii. in all. The old books which are written are almost infinite, so
in.12000. books he can find that he seeks for, but.12. times, yet says he
it is found often. Master Iuell grants, it is found sometimes. Such
untruths will soon shame the controller. Now this word Mass, or Missa, least
it should beguile thee, for that it is sometime in catholic fathers, I will
brieflye declare unto thee what it is, and in what sense it is found. That
which master Harding calls so often the Mass, as Basils Mass, Chrisostomes
Mass, and James his Mass: in Greek it is (...), which signifies an open, or
common function, and this signification it has, as well in profane writers,
as in the scriptures (...) says Aristotle, he is occupied in the
administration of the common wealth, Polit. 5.
and (...) to execute common offices. So (...), the open worshippinges, and
service of their Gods. Acts. 13.
In like sort it is used in the scriptures, (...) as they were openly
preaching, and Saint Paul says, Romans 15.
(...) that I might be an open minister among the Gentiles, and this is proved
by the Etimologie, or true explication of the word (...) quasi (...), he that
has common business in hand. Hereby it appears that either M. Hardings
Mass is not (...), and so neither Chrysostom, nor James, nor Basil, nor the
other Greek authors ever said, or named Mass, or if they did, the very
word does quite overthrow the private Mass. As touching the Latin word,
Tert. co^t. mar. lib. 4. Cip. de bono par. and li. 3. ep. 14.
Missa, we have to learn it, as the fathers said, remissa, for remissio, so
also they said, missa for missio, that is a sending away, when in the primative
Church such as were Nouices in christian faith, were sent away from the true
beleuers, which was before the communion. And this appears by Saint
Augustine, where he says. Ecce post sermonem fit missa cathecumenis, Sermon. de
tempore. 237.
manebunt fideles, venietur ad locum orationis. Behold after the sermon, the
Nouices are dimissed, the faithful shall abide, and shall go unto the
communion. For so master Harding does witness, that orationis in Saint
Augustine does signify, and in deed in this place it is true. Here have we
three especial things to note, the craft, and subtilitie of Master Harding,
and his friend Stapleton, who both, as it may be well thought, upon conference
have aledged the same places out of doctors, and councels, where this word
(Mis^a) is found, and yet neither have mentioned this place of Augustine. If
they knew it not, they are not of that reading they pretend, if they knew it,
it is to maliciously concealed. Secondarily there abode no more in the Church,
but such as were communicants. So this late gazing at a popish Mass, was not
then in use. Thirdly they did all communicate, and then where was private
Mass? So this gorgious show to bleare the simple peoples eyes, with the
antiquity of this word Mass, is an invincible argument, whereby pryuate
Mass does fall. Examine the places, that they themselves bring, thou can not
wreast any likelihoode of private Mass out of them. Yet this is moreover to be
noted that within.380. years after Christ, the word was never named in any
probable author, whereby it sufficiently appears, that it was never known in
Christ's time, nor in his Apostles after him. And thus much of this word Mass.


The B. of Saris. Clement was very lately found in the isle of Candie, by one
Carolus Capellius a Venetian, written in Greek, and in these Countries never
heard of, nor seen before.


Harding. The.19. untruth. It has been seen before.


Dering. Here Master Harding commits three great faults, the one to charge
master Iuel with an untruth, when he alleges Peter Crabs authority, an other
for misconstruing those words which are plain, and common, the third for
clipping of Master Iuels words. For where he writes it was never seen in
these countries, Master Harding quoteth his untruth, it has been seen. But
considering these poor shifts whereunto master Harding is driven, I will
grant these words to be master Iuels, that it was never seen. Who knows
not that never here signifies of long time or seldom, if it had been never
seen, how could it have been written? These gross gatherings in so fine a
wit, needs must savor of malice. It is the phrase of al la^guages, (...).
Says Achilles, Iliad. 1. Homerus.
they did never wast my fertile fields in Pthia, and yet not many years before
were great injuries done by the Trojans, eue^ in Achilles country. So
Agamemnon, Hom. Iliad. 1.
(...), O prophet of harms, thou never yet toldest me pleasant things. Yet it
were much for M. Harding to say Calchas pleased not Agamemnon, Iliad. 2.
when he foretold what time Troie should be destroyed. In like manner says
Euripides, (...). There was never good son of an evil father, yet was Ezechias
good of wicked Ahaz. So in the common proverb (...), more ancient than the
world, we mean great continuance. We say the same in Latin. Cic. in verr.
Nunqua^ tam palestricus praetor. There was never such a wrestling chief
Justice, meaning very seldom. And in our english, I never saw such an other.
But what we mean by it, that in deed was never doubted of, neither is Master
Harding so simple, that he knows it not, but he had rather speak against his
own knowledge, then say nothing against Master Iuell. This is enough to any
indifferent reader, to show that these untruths are but wranglings. But read
the reply, and thou must needs confess it, were thou never so parciall. For
Master Iuell himself alleges Leo, Gelasius, and Bessarion, which disalow
this book, and how could that be, if it had never been seen. These hasty
untruths have yet little speedy success. Let us se the residue.


The. B. of Saris. That they were written in Greek, and not in Latin, that
they could be laid up in secrecy for the space of a thousand five hundred
year, and more, and no man miss them.


Harding. The.20. untruth. They were known to the fathers.


Dering. It was very wrangling to begin that untruth, which common sense does
teach us had no falshoode in it, to pursue it, that is great oversight, but to
make two of it, that is extreme folly. They were kept in secrecy, says
Master Iuell, these 1500 years, and this is true, they were not openly
known, as Master Harding himself does confess, therefore they were secret,
and how could they have been secret, except some had hid them, but why does
he not tell Master Iuels tale hole? They were not known says he in these
countries. Master Iuell himself, as is aforesaid, does allege Leo, and
Gelasius, both Bishops of Rome, and Bessarion a cardinal, who all condemn the
book. Read the Reply good reader, and thou shall find it true, and how could
they have done it, if they had never seen the book. This wrangling, this
lying, this wicked Reioinder, were it not that some ignorant man might believe
it, it should not have one word answered. But God deliver us from such
contagious poison.


The B. of Saris. Saint Ierom by the report of Eusebius says, certain other
books are abroad in the name of Clement, as the disputation of Peter, and
Appion, which books were never in use among the fathers, neither contain they
pure, and apostolical doctrine.


Harding. The.21. untruth. Saint Ierom is falsified.


Dering. It is reported of Brutus, that he was wont to say, he had spent his
time evil that could deny nothing. M Harding perhaps to eschew this blame,
has prepared himself, when it pleases him, to deny any thing. The fault that
Master Iuell here finds with Clement, is, that by the testimony of Saint
Ierom his books are not pure, and apostolical. It is never a word so says
Master Harding. Saint Ierom is falsified. If Brutus were now alive,
peradventure M. Harding might be commended. But because Saint John has bid us
not to believe every spirit, every bold asseueration must not stand for true.
Let us see what Ierom himself says, and we shall judge the better, whether
Master Iuels report be true or no. Thus he writes. The old writers have
quite rejected these other books ascribed to Clement. In ecclesiast. Ser. de
Clem.
And Eusebius in his third book of the ecclesiastical history, does reprove
them. Now except Master Harding will say, that the Apostles writing is
condemned of these old writers, and catholic fathers, or that Eusebius that
good bishop of Caesarea reproves their doctrine: Why will he not have his
Clement to be accounted not apostolical, whom the old fathers reject, and
Eusebius reproves. The substance of such untruths do make the gatherer
appear either ignorant, or evil disposed.


Harding. The.22. untruth.


Dering. Here Master Harding makes one untruth jointly out of Saint Ierom,
and Eusebius, where Master Iuel says, Saint Ierom by the report of Eusebius
says thus. etc. M. Harding for the better multiplying of untruths, says
first, Saint Ierom says it not, next, Eusebius says it not, thirdly they say
it not. Had he dwelt among the Lacedaemonians, for this great talk of
untruths, and little reason in showing them, he should surely have been
accounted for a babbler. If we grant that his sayings are true, yet are these
three but one untruth, and that not made by M. Iuell, but by S. Ierom. Thus we
see when it pleases him, he will not understand, neither the common phrase of
speaking, nor what is meant by plain sayings. Again when it pleases him, he
will use more Logic, then either is true, or honest. Such a Proteus he is in
his own understanding.


The. B. of Saris. Clement is condemned by Gelasius.


Harding. The.23. untruth. It is not condemned by him.


Dering. Now Master Harding is come to his old compass. He denies, he
cares not what. Nothing shall want a bold asseueration, if his simple
authority may prove any untruth, but let us not trust him, before we try him,
so we shall know the better what Gelasius says. His words are thus reported
by Gracian. Did. 15. sanct. romana.
We have thought good to note certain books which are come to knowledge, and
ought to be avoided of catholic people. First the council holden at Ariminum,
gathered by Constantine the Emperor, the son of Constantinus, by mean of
Taurus lieutenant, from thenceforth, and for ever we judge worthy to be
condemned. Likewise the Iournall of Peter the Apostle, bearing ye name of
Clement. Eight books are secret, unlawful writings. Now consider with these
words of Gelasius, this book which for his Mass sake M. Harding does so much
defend. It goes under the name of Clement, so does that, which Gelasius
condemns. It contains.viii. books, and so does that. They are accounted
Apocrypha, secret writings, and so are the other. Beside this Gelasius
condemns a book called the Iournall of Peter, and this Clement himself
says that S Peter willed him to write that book, but yet under this title, Ad
Jacob. Epist. 1.
that it should be called the Iournall of Clement. And to conclude, those
books condemned by Gelasius teach evil doctrine, and so does this Clement.
And shall Master Hardings plain words counteruaile so much likelihoode? Well
may those err, that needs will be deceived. But among the lovers of truth,
such untruths will be very odious.


The B. of Saris. Abdias was conversant with Christ.


Harding. The.24. untruth. I say not he was conversant with Christ.


Dering. Master Harding may score up his untruths after what sort it
pleases him, but any indifferent man must needs think that Master Iuell
does not falsify his words, when he layth them altogether even as they are
written. If in repetition of any part of them he do mistake the meaning, such
error deserves very little blame. But because M. Harding is so far driven,
that if he should let slip even the least advantage, he should sustain great
loss of his whole cause: let us examine all that is reproved, and yield unto
the utmost, that may appear faulty. I say not, says he, that Abdias was
conversant with Christ. But he says he saw Christ in the flesh, and wrote
diverse histories of the Apostles doings, at which he himself was present: of
this to say he was conversant with Christ, is scarce worth the fault finding.
Yet master Harding says stiffly, he only saw Christ in the flesh, he was not
conuersaunt with him. By like he looked through the creuice with Eubulus, when
Christ helped Saint Basil to Mass, and by that means Abdias could but see him.


The B. of Saris. Lazius says that Saint Luke borrowed whole histories word
for word out of Abdias.


Harding The.25. untruth. Lazius says not so.


Dering. Here is first a very grave note in a weighty matter, that M. Iuell
names him Zazius, in steed of Lazius, as who say that every man must not
needs know Wolfangus Lazius, that has seen Abdias. In praeface in Abdiam.
False printing can not blame the author, where wrangling is not in place.
Lazius says, either Saint Luke borrowed hole stories of Abdias, or Abdias of
S. Luke. By this it appears Lazius is well content if you think S. Luke
borrowed his writing of him. Now for the more contempt of so vain and fond a
saying, Master Iuell may well report his words absolutelye, and ought not for
that to be blamed with untruth. Yet let us admit that Lazius saying were
sufferable. I ask of M. Harding, how a disjunctive proposition may be improued
without affirming, or denying one certain part. Besides this, it is no news
to Wolfangus Lazius to speak sometime at random, when he should speak truth.
He has other where is many absurdities, and some both slanderous and odious to
rehearse, ywis by good account, a man may easily find more lies in his books,
than friar Furius can challenge in Sleydaines commentaries, but let them go. For
this present matter, Master Iuell either in contempt of this vain
imagination, or for the more appearaunce of so great an absurdity, without any
suspicion of untrue dealing, may before all good men report these words, as he
does.


The. B. of Saris. He makes many shameless lies, and says that he was
present with Christ, and at most part of the Apostles doings.


Harding. The.26. untruth. He says not so.


Dering. If we mark M. Iuels words well, we shall sufficientlye be
forewarned. As touching these untruths, he makes, says Master Iuell, many
shameless lies, and says he was present at the Apostles doings. Here master
Harding can challenge no untruth, concerning Abdias shameless lying, but for
his presence at the most of the Apostles doing, that says he is nothing so.
Let us take that which by silence M. Harding confesses, and then if Abdias
have many shameless lies, how can he further Master Hardings Mass? or if he
have not, why is it not noted for an untruth? By like he thought that by
speaking nothing of Abdias lies, they might be forgotten, and by calling them
to trial, Abdias should be quite shamed. For my part I mean not to meddle
with them, they are mo in number then in short time may be recited. Only I
advertise thee to read the book, due trial shall be surest judge. As
touching this present untruth, whether he were co^uersant with the Apostles or
no, it makes no great matter, what skilleth it, what he was, or what time he
lived? It is small credit to Esopes fables, that the author lived in king
Croesus days. Yet for master Hardings pleasure, let us see this untruth. He
says not, says master Harding, that he was present at most of the Apostles
doings. I answer that it is not necessary to be very scrupulous in reporting
of Abdias his words, it is more then he deserves, if we vouchsafe to recite
his meaning. Thus much master Harding and Abdias do say, that he was the
Apostles scholar, that he was present at the death of Saint Andrew, and Saint
Thomas, and at the doings of Simon, and Jude, which were all Apostles, and of
all this is it much, if we say that he was present at the most of the Apostles
doings? Such is this Abdias. He has deserved ill master Hardings friendship.
His credit is so little, that he can not further his private Mass. His doings
are so unreasonable, that they can not be defended without shame. But the
proverb is verified, like will to like. An ill cause has most ground in
insufficient witness, and an ill patron is best content with unable
authority.


The. B. of Saris. It may be gathered by Saint Augustine in sundry places,
that some part of this book was written by certain heritikes called the
Manichees.


Harding. The.27. untruth. Saint Augustine has no such thing of Abdias.


Dering. This untruth is little worth, and soon answered. It may be gathered
says Master Iuell. But saint Augustine speaks not of Abdias says M.
Harding. It is true in deed saint Augustine does not name him, for if he did,
there neded the^ no gathering. The thing were plain. It is an easy thing to
find many untruths, if we make our adversary to say, what we list. Whether
Augustine mean of Abdias or no, that shall be seen in ye next untruth. Here
is nothing affirmed, but that he may seem to mean him, that this may be
gathered M. Har. denies not. That Abdias is meant, it must appear by the next
untruth. So either master Harding makes two untruths of one, as his manner
is, or here speaks nothing to the purpose (as he commonly uses.)


The B. of Saris. For he reports the fables of Saint Thomas, of Saint Matthew,
of Saint Andrew, of the Lion that slew the man that had stricken Saint Thomas,
of the dog that brought the same man's hand to the table of Maximilla, wife
unto Egis, and other like tales, even in such order, as they be set forth by
this Abdias.


Harding. The.28. untruth. Saint Augustine names not Mathevve.

The.29. untruth. He names not Andrew. The.30. untrue.

He speaks not of Maximilla which Abdias meant.


Dering. M. Hardings untruths amount not yet to his mind. Therefore he thinks
it not amiss to quote them a little faster, upon which advice, he makes three
in one periode, he might as well have said, S. Augustine mentions not these
stories, and so have made but one, save that he loves not such plain dealing.
But the matter is not great, as short an answer will serve for all, as if
they had been but one. Saint Augustine names not Matthew, nor Andrew. Mark
good reader, this untruth. Master Iuell says, Saint Augustine tells the
tales of Matthew, Contra faust. lib. 11. and. 22. cap. 97.

Cont ad. le. and christo. ca. 20. co. Ad. ca. 16.


and Andrew, and so he does, let the book be the judge. Master Harding
says, S. Augustine names them not, neither does master Iuell say he names
them, take away this much wrangling, and here is no untruth at all. But this we
have to note by the way, for the better credit of master Hardings Abdias,
that Saint Augustine condemns those tales for lies, which Abdias tells for
a certain truth. Concerning ye tale of Maximilla, wife to Aeges, which master
Harding says is not reported in the same sort by Abdias, as it is by Saint
Augustine, first we must know both Augustine and Abdias mean the same woman,
as shall appear in ye.31. untruth. Then Augustine speaks of her, as of a
foolish and vain tale. Abdias speaks of her doings, as of true, and weighty
stories. Thus it appears though Saint Augustine do not name the parties, yet
he agrees in the tales, and when this shall be known, the.27. untruth shall
be justified. That it may be gathered, Saint Augustine means of Abdias, and
these three latter untruths, which are but the proof of Master Iuels
coniectture, shall appear so good, that before the true christian reader, the
quoting of them shall seem but wrangling, and this new counterfeit Abdias
shall be rejected, as a teller of dreams, and a lying writer. And for our
great comfort, god will bring to pass, that when it shall be known to the
indifferent reader, that Papistrie can not stand without such shameless
doctors, they shall begin to learn, that it is a shameless doctrine.


The B. of Saris. Behold what things they be, that be written of Maximilla
wife to Aegis, that she being once christened, would no more yield duty to
her husband, but set Euclia her maid in her own place, and other like
fables. All these, and such like tales thus disalowed by S. Augustine, are
reported by Master Hardings Abdias in great sooth.


Harding. The.31. untruth. These tales be not reported by Abdias.


Dering. Now is master Harding come, as he says, to a great, and impudent
lie, and such a one, as by no means can be excused, let the book, says he,
be judge. I do M. Iuell great wrong to write in his cause with so little
diligence. But for this cause I do it, which I trust I shall well perform,
that the unlearned should not be deceived. For the learned, be they not of will
blinded, Master Hardings books can not hurt them, he has made so unequal a
match. Thou see good reader for the iustifiing of this untruth, whereat are
made so great exclamations, one should read over all Abdias, which labor I
lothed so, as if Amaras porrecto iugulo. etc. as Horace writes, I should have
stretched ^ut my neck, and listened after bitter histories, yet when there was
no remedy, I took the book, and in diverse places read so much I think as
amounts to one whole leaf or more, and of that little reading as I can, I
answer. There is named in Augustine one Maximilla, such one is named in
Abdias, she was wife to Aegetes or Aegeas, so was Abdias his Maximilla, she had
a maid named Iphidamia or Iphidama, Aug. de fide cont. manich. cap. 38. and
Abdias lib. 3.
so says Abdias of his Maximilla, and her handmayd Iphidamia says Saint
Augustine, went to go hear S. Andrew, and so did the handmayde in Abdias, and
of all this I say as M. Harding says, let the books be judge. Now reader I
must crave thine indifferent judgment, see whether Augustine, and Abdias mean
one Maximilla. If they do, remember Augustine says, they be impudent lies, and
Abdias does tell them in great sooth. But says Master Harding, Abdias and
August. do not write a like of Maximilla. Sure it is the more like Abdias is a
lier. But what if we say, Abdias did write, whatsoever Saint Augustine has?
Bar master Harding of his gesses, and he can not confute it. John Faber, a
great fabler of master Hardings side says, that this Abdias, when he was
found was all reveled, In Praef. in Abdiam:
and without any fashion, full of faults, so that one could neither read him
by understanding, nor understand him by reading. Then no marvel if some part
of it be perished, and the book be not come wholly unto our hands, though
Abdias say not every whit that is in Augustine. When master Harding can bring
any piece of likelihoode, how this agreement may be between them, and yet they
mean not both one, then let this go for an untruth. In the mean season
consider, whereto this shameless, impudent, and notorious lie is fallen,
whereof he has made such tragedies, and what the other untruths be, when so
great account was made of this. This is it, that I said before, master
Harding was little beholding unto Abdias. First, he could not pleasure him for
his small authority, now he has shamed him with this unshamefast defense.


The B. of Saris. Saint Augustine seems in diverse places to have given his
judgment of this book.


Hardyng. The.32. untruth. Saint Augustine means not of Abdias.


Dering. Master Harding has good lyking in his own doing or this untruth
should not have been noted twice. For the matter, there is enough said in the
former untruth, the argument of the thing does witness of Augustines meaning.


The. B. of Saris. The like judgment hereof is given by Gelasius.


Harding. The.33. untruth. Gelasius means not of Abdias.


Dering. Master Harding is so jealous over his Abdias, that in no case he will
let him be spoken off. The book be like is so full of lies, that he is sure no
man can speak any good of it. But how so ever he be affectioned, we must
think of authors no otherwise, then we find them. He is not yet Pope, and
therefore may err, his word is no good witness of an other man's meaning.
Gelasius whom so ever he means, certain it is he may mean Abdias for the
worthiness of the book. And whereas master Harding for some proof of his
side, says that he condemns certain acts of Martyrs which are thought to be
written by infidels, Gelasius has not one such word. Reioin. fo. 42.
But where as master Harding says further for the discharge of Abdias, that
Gelasius speaks of one Quiricus, and Iulita his mother, this is a mocking of
his reader without all regard of honesty. First what kindred was between
these two, it skilleth not much, but Iulita may as well be his daughter as his
mother, for any thing that Gelasius says. But let the kindred go, master
Hardings reason hangs thus, Gelasius rejecting one hundredth books, among
other names the passion of Quiricus, ergo he rejects not Abdias, and this is
all the reason on which he groundeth this untruth, read his Reioinder. Now
way on the other side, what cause Master Iuell has to think Gelasius meant
Abdias, and upon conference of either reason, this untruth shall be very soon
answered. The second book that he condemns is the acts of saint Andrew,
Did. 15 sanct. romana.
Abdias does write the acts of S. Andrew. The third is the acts of Philip,
Abdias li. 3. Abdias li. 10. Abdias lib. 1. Abdias. li. 9.
Abdias writes ye acts of Philip. The fourth is the acts of Peter, Abdias
writes the acts of Peter. The fifth is the acts of Thomas, Abdias writes the
acts of Thomas. Beside this, he rejects the doings of Maximilla, and Abdias
speaks of Maximilla. Now let the indifferent reader judge, whether Gelasius
means of Addias, or whether master Hardings word, and misshapen argument
may cou^teruaile all these conjectures.


The B: of Saris. Thus it may be supposed by Saint Augustine, and Gelasius,
that this book was written by heritikes.


Harding. The 34. untruth. A burden of untruths.


Dering. If this be a burden of untruths, no doubt the substance of them is
very little. For take away the.32. untruth, that Augustine means not Abdias,
and the.33. untruth, that Gelasius means not Abdias, and except Eubulus come,
that saw Christ help Basil to Mass, all this burden of untruths is like to
be undone. As touching the untruths, there is enough said already. Whether
they meant of Abdias, it appears that master Harding is to blind a judge to
guess so boldly the contrary. Here I must put thee once again in mind of the
numbering of these untruths. First Saint Augustine speaks not of Saint
Matthew, the.2. nor of Saint Andrew, the.3. nor of Abdias his Maximilla, the.4.
nor of Abdias, the.5. nor Gelasius speaks of Abdias, the.6. nor they two
speak of Abdias. Thus the whole being joined, is but one true proposition, yet
out of it after his manner of cutting master Harding has carved.6. lies. And
thus much of lying Abdias.


The B. of Saris. Martial was so defaced in many places, that it could not be
read.


Harding. The.35. untruth. It could be read, else how could it be printed?


Dering. By guess. Why should not the printer have as much liberty in printing
this little old book, as master Harding uses for proof of his whole
religion? Morel. in fine libri.
The Printer himself says prae nimia vetustate vix legi potuerunt, for
estreame age they could scarce be read. Now where as master Harding does
ask, how then could they be printed. I ask of him, how Abdias was printed.
For of him his sorbonist Doctor writes, he could neither be read, nor
understand. Faber in pre^. in Abdiam.
An other might much better have moved this doubt then master Harding. He is
not now to learn what gesses may do. But how soever he was printed, sure
this untruth was not worth noting.


The B. of Saris. It is judged by John Colet, and other grave men, that
Dionysius can not be that Areopagita, Saint Paul's disciple, which is mentioned
in the Acts.


Harding. The.36. untruth. It is not judged so by John Colet. The.37 untruth.
They are no grave men, that so judge.


Dering. These untruths can not be good, that are made so fast, nor yet so
many as the maker would have them, when one is told so many times. If this were
untrue that master Iuell writes, yet were it not two untruths, but one. But
because there is no remedy, we will take them even as they fall out. As
touching the former of these two it needs no answer, Master Harding does
not deny it, but that John Colet has both spoken it, Reioin. fo. 44.
and preached it, then what skilleth it whether it be written, his preaching is
a witness of his opinion, though master Harding say nay. For this other
untruth, that such other, as deny this Dionysius to be the true Areopagita, are
no grave men: he is sure no grave man, that has noted it. I may answer this
with the words of Saint Paul, horum laus non ex hominibus, Romans 2.29.
sed ex deo, these men's praises are not of men, but of God. Master Harding
should not for his modesty sake have noted it for an untruth, to call the godly
fathers of our age grave men. His belligods, Popes, Cardnals, Friars, Monks,
Priests, and others of that ken^ll, have not so much labored in searching out
the truth in five hundred years, as these other have done in fifty. But God
has given the increase, his name be praised for ever.

As touching this Dionysius, whether we have his works, or no, it is a thing
soon judged. How unlike is it, that the conversion of Dionysius should be
mentioned by Saint Luke in the acts of the Apostles, Acts. 17.
yet he him self would not mention it once in all his works? or if this might
be, yet what may we think of that, that in all his book he does never so much
as once name Paul? May it yet be doubted, whether he be that Dionysius, which
Paul converted? Besides this, S. Ierom making purposely a rehearsal of all
ecclesiastical writers, speaks not one word of this Dionysius. Other
ancient fathers do never allege him, his own books are so strange fancies
of many secret mysteries, that sure it is, he is not the true Areopagita.


The. B. of Saris. Saint James Liturgy has an especial prayer for them, that
live in Monasteries, and yet it was ^erie rare, to have Monasteries built in
all Saint James time.


Harding. The.38. untruth. There is no mention of such Monasteries, as we
commonly mean, when we speak of Monasteries.


Dering. As be for Monasteries, as Monasteries are to speak of the things
themselves as they are in deed, so to say of Monasteries as they be considered
in this meaning of Monasteries, so Monasteries, and so forth, a man should go
far that should follow Master Hardings wrangling.


The B. of Saris. Chrysostomes Liturgy prays for Pope Nicolas by these
words. Nicolai and sanctiss. and vniuersalis Papae longa sint te^pora. We
pray, God send Nicolas that most holy, and universal Pope, a long time to
live. But Pope Nicolas the first of that name, was the second Pope after dame
Ione the woman Pope.


Harding. The.39. untruth. He prayth not for Pope Nicolas of Rome. The.40.
vntr. There was no such woman pope.


Dering. Now Master Harding after he has given so many offers, and makes
never a wound: he directs his engines quite contrary, and assayeth if that
he can give the Pope a blow. Pope Nicolas says Chrysostom, that most sacred,
and universal Pope. That is no good proof says Master Harding that he
means the bishop of Rome. Here is a full subscription to the.4. article. The
authorities alleged for the Popes supremacy are quite overthrown, to be
called universal bishop is no proof of his supremacy. Had Master Harding
well considered it, this untruth had been quoted some other where, but doubting
that this be not answer good enough, he lets it go, and granting it to be
said of Pope Nicolas, Reioin. fo. 47.
thereupon he asks this question. If Chrysostom might not pray for Pope
Nicolas, how is the death of Moses described in the books of the law? There
is no man, says he, so hardy to deny that Moses wrote these books. Be not
afraid, good reader, of these big words, nor of M* Har. daring. All this is
soon answered. Either Eleazar, or Iosue wro^e the.34. Chap. of Deuter. And
they might well write of Moses his death. Or if Moses wrote it, he knew it by
revelation. For so he himself writes. Deuteronomy. 31.2.
The lord has said unto me, thou shall not go over this Iordane. Sure of a
doctor of divinity, this was a very simple question. If he can show any such
revelation that Chrysostom ha^ of Pope Nicolas, then let this be Chrysostomes
Mass. The.40. untruth is concerning pope Ione, who never did the sea of Rome
more dishonesty, then she has stood master Harding in good steed. For both
she helps out his Reioinder with untruths, and makes a great piece of his
confutation of the Apology. But says master Harding there was no such woman
Pope. What skilleth it to this present matter, whether there were such a Pope
or no. A filthy Strumpet is good enough for such a whoorish kingdom. If there
were such a one, Pope Nicolas was second after her. Whether there were or no,
my profes are needelesse, my lord of Sarisburie has resolved us in that
behalf.


The B. of Saris. Now it were much for me to say that Chrysostom prayed for
men by name 700. years before they were borne.


Harding. The.41. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. This is a proper untruth. Now by like Master Harding is non plus.


The B. of Saris. Thou see Christian reader, what doctors here be brought,
as master Harding says, to ground thy faith and salvation upon.


Harding The.42. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. If Master Iuell should so misreport master Hardings saying, as he
himself for his untruths sake does commonly use, then had he good cause to
cry out both of misconstruing, and corruptions, for he will say, and unsay,
and all with one breath, for to seek advantage. Thus he says expressly, he
has brought these authorities for ye confirmation of thy faith. And again he
has brought these authorities for the stay of all christian men's belief. See
his book, thou shall see the words. Diuis. 5. and 6.
The^ why says he not, yt he brings these authorities to ground thy
salvation on? or how could he without blushing note this untruth? There is no
other difference in the sayings, save where Master Iuell reports it to
ground thy faith, Master Harding has to stay, and confirm thy faith. If here
be any difference, always wrangling excepted, let this be an untruth. And yet
were there any, Master Harding speaks plain enough in the confutation of
the Apology. Thus he says there. Are not these trusty men, Apol. par. 5.
cap. 3. diui. 10.
to whom you may commit the charge of your souls for your faith, and
salvation? These words I trow are plain enough to prove this no untruth.


The. B. of Saris. It is the very express order of the Communion.


Harding. The.43. untruth. It is not so.


Dering. This untruth master Harding has not in the text, but has wrested it
out of the margin, and because he thinks that for the base matter it would
be little regarded, to make us the more attentive, he begins with this
admiration. But what means Master Iuell. Reioind. fo. 54.
etc. But to quite Master Hardings wonder, I ask of him again, what means
he thus abruptly to rush into master Stapletons possessions? He has taken
upon him to return those untruths, and why does master Harding meddle,
Diui. 5. the. 12. untruth.
where he has no thank? There be already a great many past, which he has not
touched, and why does he out of season thus meddle with this? If he think
master Stapleton has returned it nothing cunningly, I do easily grant, that
he is in deed a naughty workman, if he think by his labor it shall appear
more beautiful, I must needs grant his turning is much better, but yet the
matter it self is never a whit the truer. And for as much as the thing must
try it self, let us somewhat better examine it. Master Harding says in
the.5. division of his first book, that Ciril has expounded the Mass used in
Jerusalem. Master Iuell notes this for the.12. untruth, saying that Ciril
expounded the communion, and not the Mass. Master Harding returns this
untruth again, saying it was the Mass, and not the Communion. I might with as
great facility deny this again, and say it were the Communion, and not the
Mass. But because my testimony were in this not of weight, I am content to be
furthered with the witness of master Stapleton. He says plainly, that
master Harding brought not this for proof of the question, In the 15.
slau^derous untrue.
and that it makes nothing for private Mass. But here Master Harding says
that it was a Mass. Therefore this untruth gathered by master Harding, is
answered thus by master Stapleton, that it is not so, and till they agree
better, a longer discourse of that place of Ciril is neither profitable nor
necessary.


The B. of Saris. What if all these doctors testify against master Hardings
Mass.


Harding. The.44. untruth. They testify not one word against it.


Dering. Master Iuell alleges, James his Liturgy, Abdias, Justinius,
Dionysius, Basil, Chrysostom, and Ignatius, read the Reply. fol. ii. of all
these, says master Harding, they be M. Iuels buts, and therefore he will skip
them over, and not answer a word, neither rhyme nor reason. What shameless
demeanor is this in men, that profess to seek the truth? if we would do the
like, how soon would this Reioinder be answered. It is an easy matter if
this be enough, M. Harding must seek better stuff, this will not serve.
Although in deed it be true, that this Reioinder is all false, and ungodly
stuff, yet seeing christian people are so evil disposed, the falsehoode, of
this stuffing must be in some part disclosed. How much then should this
discredit master Hardings religion, against so express authority to make so
slender answer.


The B. of Saris. Hippolytus was lately set abroad in print, about seven
years past, before never acquainted in the world.


Harding. The.45. untruth. He was well known before.


Dering. That man is well known, of whom most men have heard, or with whom
many be acquainted. Now how proves M. Harding this Hippolytus is well known.
Saint Ierom says he named him. Surely this is a very small acquaintance to be
named but of one man in all the world. Yet not this bastard Hippolytus, but
that other bishop, and martyr is named of Saint Ierom. Such untruths have
great savor of envy, or of folly, or of both. Since master Iuell says that
Hippolytus was never acquainted in the world, and Master Harding does show
but only that Saint Ierom did name him. This untruth, if truth were well
regarded, should surely have been spared. How be it I grant, not only Ierom
named Hippolitus, Li. 6 cap. 21 In Polim.
but other many. Eusebius speaks of him: so does Theodoretus, and alleges
diverse sayings out of his books. Gelasius, Epiphanius, and Niciphorus also
have named him, and yet all these had but small acquaintance with him.
Eusebius, and Ierom, and Theodorete knew not where he was bishop. Cont. Eut.
and Nest. 1. Lib. 4. cap. 3
Gelasius says he was a bishop in Arabia, Nicephorus says he was bishop of
Ostia a haven town in Italy. Ierom says Origene was stirred up by emulation
of Hippolitus, yet it appears by sundry records, that Origene was made
bishop of Alexandria.x. years before Hippolytus did write. By this it
appears, that ye true Hippolytus, was, not long since, well known in the
world, so that were this book good, yet master Iuell said true. But how good
it is, and how unworthy the name of Hippolytus, read the Reply, and thou shall
well perceive. Beside this, the book by M. Harding alleged, entitled de
co^summatione mundi, is not once mentioned, neither by Jerome, nor Eusebius,
nor Theodorete, where they make especial mencio^ of Hippolytus books, then I
trow we may say truly, this is no untruth.


The B. of Saris. He begins the first sentence of his book with enim.


Harding. The.46. untruth. He begins otherwise.


Dering. Here Master Harding makes himself merry with wondering at Greek
readers, and scholemaisters, musing how they could have been so ignorant. But
may it please master Albutius, that so feign would be a Grecian, to remember
the Greek saying, (...) to laugh out of season is a great misery. Had this
defense of his (...) been his own, though it be little worth, yet it had been
somewhat. Now it is altogether borrowed of Budaeus commentaries, the vpbraiding
of other is a testimony of his own arrogancy. A manifest proof all his
Greek is not much, and a great conjecture, that much of his divinity is out
of tables, but him self knows best what he is for this defense of his (...),
it is no doubt folishe, and of so great store, he has made very ill choice.
For in this sentence by him alleged (...) may well signify enim. As touching
the word, I grant sometime in the course of an oration, it may be placed,
only to adourne the sentence: but this happens very seldom, even as enim
does in Latin, and this use was only peculiar unto such as followed the proper
phrase of Athens. In an interrogation it is often put after ye same sort, as in
this verse, (...) does God know this? or does he know it, and will not
revenge it? So it is very often found in Plato, (...) an non? and thus joined,
(...), and such other it is not denied, but it may signify nothing, but in the
beginning of an oration no doubt it is never used, in the beginning of a book
it is very foolish, and if Hippolytus had not been, it had never been heard
of. As likewise I trow if master Harding had not been, it should never have
been defended. In this doing he could mean nothing but to bleare the peoples
eyes. They that list may still think well of his doing, but Gods children shall
one day forsake his evil doctrine.


The B. of Saris. He says, and soothly avouches, that Antichrist shall be the
devil.


Harding. The.47. untruth. He says not so.


Dering. Here I must advertise the reader for the better discharge of master
Iuels sayings, that I have not read all these new found old writers, neither
yet mean I to read them, if other necessity shall not enforce me, so that
how to verify this untruth plentifully out of ye Author, neither I know,
neither is the labor requisite, only Master Harding that makes this
untruth, gives testimonye sufficient, that the untruth is his own. In his
Reioinder thus he does allege Hippolytus words. Reioin. fo. 59.
Antichrist shall be a devil incarnate in the shape of man. What troweth M.
Harding is there any difference between the devil, and a devil incarnate, or
is it not shameless ignorance to affirm either of Antichrist. S. Paul
calls him hominem scelerosum, filium perditum, the wicked man, the son of
perdition. He calls him a man not as Hippolytus does a devil incarnate, 1.
These. 2.3.
he says his coming shall be (...) according to the operation and strength of
Satan. Then it shall not be Satan himself. What may we judge of this
Hippolytus, that is so ignorant in the scriptures, or what may we judge of M.
Harding, that can abide his Hippolytus, which should teach that Antichrist
should be a devil incarnate? He has no true zeal unto the scriptures.


The. B. of Saris. He says that he shall build up the temple at Jerusalem.


Harding. The.48. untruth. He says not so.


Dering. Hippolytus, as master Harding reports, says thus. Antichrist shall
build up a Temple in Jerusalem. Reioind. fo. 58.
M. Iuell says the Temple. Here be two very ignorant untruths, both made by
turning the, into a, for the, may be expressed in ye Greek, but a can not. So
make the best of it, these untruths are but gesses, and so much the more
shameless, because they can have no assurance. But what if they were true:
between a devil, and the devil, a church and the church, when both are lies,
what skilleth it whether are reported?


The B. of Saris. If he should build upon the word pontifices Bishops, then
all priests shall stand back.


Harding. The.49. untruth. It follovveth not.


Dering. Thou have heard before christian reader many untruths that were not
worth reconing, now here follows one without show of wit or understanding,
and yet it is set out to the utmost, as if master Harding had here an
especial advantage. He solaceth his heavy spirit with many foolish questions,
and asks when Master Iuell will be ashamed of his foolish conclusions,
Reioind. fo. 58.
and of his peuish arguments? and in the end he makes master Iuel to reason
thus. Christ shall call Bishops to his kingdom, ergo he shall call no
priests. If all these merry toys be applied in season, then let master
Harding have the victory. If this be master Iuels argument, then let this one
go for an untruth. But if this sport be disgraced for want of truth, and these
pretty questions nothing worth, because they stand upon a lie, then this
untruth is answered, and M. Hardings pleasant writing is proved foolish. Read
the Reply, thou shall see how master Iuell goes about to enterpret
Hippolytus words, and says, they are not to be understood directly as they
lie. For if master Harding should build upon the very word, then because
the mention is made of Bishops, all common priests should be excluded. But
this shall not be so. Therefore we must not take the words as they lie. Now
judge whether Master Iuell do make this foolish argument, or if he do not,
why is M. Harding so malapert without occasion.


The B: of Saris. If he make reconing of this word daily, where shall the Pope
and Cardinals stand, that scarce sacrifice once in the year.


Harding. The.50. untruth. These Cardinals say Mass most days, and this Pope
every day.


Dering. Their kingdom is falling, therefore bylike they underprop it with so
many Masses. But if it be so: Lord how has that adulterous city multiplied
her whordomes? Well may the preachers say over her, as the Prophets over
Jerusalem. Wherefore should you be stricken any more? The whole head is sick,
and the whole heart is heavy. There is nothing in her but wounds, and
swelling, and sores full of corruption.


The B. of Saris. But the meaning of Hippolytus seems be these, that all
faithful people in this respect be priests, and bishops, like as Saint Peter
also calls them.


Harding. The.51. untruth. It seems not so.


Dering. Why seems it not so? because, says master Harding, neither I take
it so, nor any other Catholic. Reioin. fo. 59.
But Master Iuell thinks so, and so do all good christians, and therefore it
seems so. This is a proper untruth.


Harding. The.52. untruth. Saint Peter calls not the people by that name.


Dering. Now sure good reader truth among these men is perished, Ier. 7.28.
and gone out of their mouths. Saint Peter says master Harding, names not
the people bishops, yet he names them priests. Master Harding grants now
if it were no otherwise, master Iuell said true, because he names them
priests. But Saint Peter names them by an higher name, and therefore confess
that they may be named bishops. He calls them (...), a kingly priesthood. 1.
Pet. 2.5.
And (...), a holy priesthood. And it is said in the Apocal. Christ has made
us (...) kings and priests unto God, Apo. 1.6.
even unto his father. As for Hippolytus word (...), let not master Harding
think that Master Iuell takes Saint Peter to attribute that name unto the
lay people. Let the word go unto Hippolytus, from whom it came, it is neither
in Saint Peter, nor in the whole Testament. It is attributed neither to the
priests, nor to the Bishops. This is master Iuels saying. The priest, and the
lay man, concerning the name priest, are one, and no difference of name given
to either (...) in their proper significations, that is priests I gladly leave
to master Harding, and his fellows. It is given to no mortal men in the new
testament, But to Jupiters priest. Acto. 14. Only our Savior Christ is our
high priest, and that for ever after the order of Melchisedech, and without
blasphemy against him, the name can be no more given unto man, Ebre. 8.3.
Ebre. 7.
for as much as every priest is appointed to offer sacrifice. But he alone has
made that one sacrifice, whereby we are cleansed for ever. And this Paul
gathered well of the offering that Abraham made unto Melchisedech, writing that
in Abraham Leui himself was given up for tithe, being then in his fathers
loins, when that offering was made. So that in the appointed time, when Christ
should be reveled, an everlasting priest after the order of Melchisedech, Ebre.
7.10.
the Leuiticall priesthood should be then ended, and no particular men should
be separated any more to serve in our tabernacle, that is, to be the preachers
of Christ's gospel, and dispensers of his mysteries, but every one is like
accepted before God, all spiritual priests before him. And as the public
minister shall answer for the sins of the people, if he do not tell them
Gods threatenings against all iniquity: so the father shall answer for the
son, the master for the man, the husband for the wife, Apoc. 7.3. Leuit.
19.17.
and one christian man for another, if we bear not the name of our father
written in our forehead, and openly in all places reform one another
offenses, and such as are under our rule, if we do not bring them up in the
fear of the Lord. God for his mercy sake give us his grace, that we may
consider our calling, which no doubt we would do, if we were well instructed,
and delivered from M. Hardings filthy priesthood, which bears us in hand, yt
with Pardons, and Indulgences, and Massing abominations, they could do away
our sins. And further who knows not, that the oblations, ceremonies,
sacrifices, feasts, priesthood, and all other rites, and customs of the old
law, were figures, and are verefied in Christ. 1. Co. 5.8. 1. Co. 6. Romans 12.
So Paul calls Christ our Passover, newness, and sincerity of life, our
unleavened bread, our bodies, our temple, our wickedness, our leaven, the
fruit of our lips, our offering, our selves, our sacrifice. So Saint Peter
calls Christ, our corner stone, his children, the living stones, their
profession, the holy temple, 1. Pet. 2
and their obedience, a kingly priesthood.


The B. of Saris. Some of them have said, the people are dogs, and swine.


Harding. The.53. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. Master Harding calls them swine in plain words, he says further,
they are vnreuerent, and of an impure life. Art. 15. fo. 155
Again he says, they are curious, rash, vnreuerent, contemptuous in all holy
things. Now to join all these, Confu. Ap^l. par. 5. cap. 3 Diui. 4.
that the people are vnreuerent, impure, curious, rash, and contemptuous
swine, it is as much I think, as if he called them dogs, and swine. How be
it, whether terms soever he used, they are vnreuerent, impure, rash,
contemptuous, and swinish sayings, and if he had been ashamed of them, he would
not for so slender an untruth, have called those words again to memory. But
the common saying is, past shame, and past grace.


The B. of Saris. The.7. deuis. Yet now must their negligence be the rule of
Christ's religion.


Harding. The.54. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. Look well on master Iuels words, thou shall see master Harding is
not named. Again consider this manner of speaking, thou shall see this untruth
has no ground but ignorance. Master Harding does confess, that his private
Mass were not good, in case the people were more diligent to receive, but
considering their vndeuocion, it is not meet, that the daily sacrifice should
cease. This master Iuell reports as a thing very absurd, that the negligence
of the people should be the rule of Christ's religion. And what is here
untrue? who is so ignorant, that knows not, to make any such vain saying by
repetition the more contemtuous, that it is usual to change the words? Well
knew M. Harding, that the learned here would soon epsy his doing, but he
accounts it a small matter to deceive those, whom he takes as vnreuerent
swine. etc.


The B. of Saris. But now the priest may say two, three, or mo Masses in a day,
yea although he have none to receive with him.


Harding. The.55. untruth. Priests say not many Masses in one day.


Dering. Surely good reader lies are good cheap, and soon made, where this is
one. The Decretals were wont to be a sufficient warrant, for the usage in the
Popes ministry. Will now master Harding be so saucy to control the Pope?
Does he not know that this says Pope Gregory, Decret. de mis. celebr. cap. 3.
and tetesphorus Papa.
excepto die natiuitatis, and causa necessitatis, sufficit sacerdoti semel in
die celebrare, except on Christmasse day, and the cause of necessity, it is
sufficient to say one Mass a day. Here we see some days mo Masses than one
were occupied, and sure though one Mass be one to many. Yet considering that
three do signify the three times, before the law, under the law, and the
time of grace, De Miss. cele. ca. 3. in glossa.
where Masses go for good, me thinks three every day would do well. And again
because the Pope says, yt if need be we may say mo Masses in one day, Decret.
and glo. vt supra.
and the gl^se does enterpret need to be either for honesty sake, or for
profit, sure such Masses as be either honest, or profitable, should ever for
charity sake be thrice iterate. Yet I confess that Pope Alexander, and this
gloser do not well agree in profit. For he says, De conse. did. 1. sufficit.
qui vero pro pecunia presumunt vno die facere plures Missas non estimo euadere
damnationem, but he that for money shall presume in one day to make many Masses,
I think he can not escape damnation. And yet notwithstanding this Popes
censure, the gloser will not relent, In gloss. vt su.
but without addicion of necessity he says flatly. They may say one Mass for
the dead, an other for the day. Mary for cause of controversy in this matter,
Pope Gregory make^ this prouiso. So he pour no wine on his fingars after he
has received at the first Mass, Decre. de miss. celeb. ex part.
least in licking them again, some drop should go down his throat, and so he
should break his fast. But I will let pass these high points disputed in
their Canon law, and greatest doctors, and of this, that is said, I desire the
christian reader to judge, whether these words are untrue, that a priest may
say two or three Masses in one day.


The. B. of Saris. Concerning consecration he does great wrong to charge us
with the breach of it, before he him self, and other of his side are better
resolved, wherein consecration stands. For Scotus, and Innocentius the.3. say
that this word, benedixit, works consecration.


Harding. The.56. untruth. We are resolved herein.

The.57. untruth. Scotus and Innocentius say it not.


Dering. Master Harding to make his untruths very common, uses such Logic
as is very rare. Where the antecedent and argument do hang together, he makes
them both untrue. Well may this doing have credit among the simple: but when
the learned do see it, they do easily say, that these untruths have more
consideration of number, than regard of good matter, and substance. But let us
take them, as they be, the folly of the vntruthmaker shall the more appear. We
are says master Harding fully resolved herein, that is, wherein consecration
stands. It is pity that his word has not the Popes privilege, that it
might not err. He never wants audacitie to deny at adventures, whatsoever
mislyketh him. He says in consecration we are all agreed, In 4. sent. q. 6.
art. 1.
but Marcilius one of his own doctors says, it is not so. Whether of these
say true, it shall appear hereafter. We agree, says master Harding, that
consecration of the bread, and wine, is wrought by these words, hoc est corpus
meu^, this is my body, and hic est sanguis meus, this is my blood. And of this
judgment is their Pope holy patriarche, Sess. vlt. in fine council. in
antididag. in Io^. tr. 80. de sacra li. 1. cap. 5.
Saint Peter Lumbarde: yet the whole counsel of of Florence say, consecration
is wrought with all the words together, as they lie. The chapter of Coleine
say, these words are not sufficient without the Canon of the Mass. Saint
Augustine says, it is wrought with the word of faith, which we preach. Saint
Ambrose says, these words, accipite, comedite, take, and eat, are part of
consecration. So have these men, the council of Florence, the chapter of
Coleine, Saint Augustine, and Saint Ambrose against them. Now let us see how
they agree among themselves. Scotus says in final resolution. Dico breuiter,
quod non est nobis traditum certitudinaliter, an ad formam co^secra^ionis
sanguinis partineant aliqua verba post illud, sanguis meus, In. 4. sen. did.
8. qu. 2.
vel an aliquot illoru^ sequentiu^ vlque illuc, hoc facite* etc. Ideo
periculosum est hoc asserere, de quo sufficiens authoritas non habetur. I say
briefly that we have no assurance at all, whether any other words appertain
unto consecration of the blood, after this is once said, this is the cup of my
body, or whether the residue words following be part of consecration, or no,
until it is said, take and drink. etc. Therefore it is dangerous (...)
affirm any thing, where you have no sufficient authority. And it follows
in Scotus, and by this it is manifest, Quae verba sunt deforma.
they speak vndoscretly, which say it is necessary to know in every sacrament,
what are the precise, and very words of consecration. He says further. Let no
man say, I will use these precise words, simplicity is much surer. And upon
this he remoueth a doubt, that if the priest should say this is my body, and
say nothing of that which gooth before, we ought not to worship it, but on this
condition, if it be consecrate. Cont. Ga. Biel in expos. can. Missae.
And these are Scotus very words, judge now whether he agree with Peter
Lumbarde, or whether he be resolved, what to say, or whether Master Harding be
not past shame, that so boldly writes of all the men that ever wrote, master
Iuel might worst have alleged Scotus. And that all Catholic be fully resolved
in this. Reioi. fo. 70. b
For a larger proof, let us yet examine it a little further. Gabriel Biel
expounding the Canon of the Mass, fol. 71. a part. 4
over these words benedixit, fregit, he writes: over benedixit, consecrando:
over fregit, non panem, sed panis speciem, In vita chr. par. 2. ca. 76 In
officio miss. li. 8. cap. ^^.
so by Biels opinion, Christ did consecrate with benedixit, he blessed. Ludulp
de Saxonia, and Ihnocentius 3. agrees with Gabriel Biel. Thomas, and
Bonauentura say, that Christ spoke these words twice, hoc est corpus meum, and
so consecrated by them when he pronounced them first secretly. Then thus far
M. Hardings doctors do not well agree. Alexander de ales knows not well what
to say, he says in one place Christus dixit bis. Christ spoke the words of
consecration twice. Afterward he says, consecrauit, nos quo modo nescimus, he
did consecrate, we know not how. Part. 4.9.33. mem. 2. and deinceps.
Lastly he says, virtus erat in manibus, there was a secret power in his
hands. This Doctor is much like Scotus, he knows not what to say. Marcilius
says, how Christ did consecrate, doctores diuersimode dicunt doctors are of
diverse minds. Some said he consecrated without pronouncing any words. Thus
every man speaking his fancy, not guided by the word of God, they walk in
darkness, and can not tell whither they go. But Master Harding will say,
though they can not agree, how Christ did consecrate, yet they are fully
agreed, how themselves do consecrate. This as is before aleaged out of Scotus,
is not true. But before I show their diners opinions, I would demand of some
of master Hardings friends, how a good conscience may be satisfied,
concerning this matter. How Christ did consecrate, as appears, they do not
agree, and so much master Harding grants, In. 4. sent. disl. 8. vt supra.
and upon this Scotus says. Intendebant narrare rem gestam, non tradere formam
consecrationis. The Evangelists intended to set forth the story, not to leave
unto us any form of consecration. And Marcilius says, nullus Euangelistarum
nec etiam Apostolus videtur hanc formam vidisse. In. 4. sent. q. 6 art. 1.
None of the Evangelists, neither yet the Apostles seem to have given our
form of consecration. Here I make this reason. The Scriptures bear witness
of Christ, and how his body was made, but the scriptures bear no witness of
consecration, therefore by their consecration his body is not made. Again,
consecration being of such force, that they themselves confess their host
should no time be worshipped, but with condition, if it be well consecrate, and
yet this consecration is not taught us by the scriptures: how is the saying of
our savior Christ true, that the holy ghost should teach us all truth, or how
has Saint Luke fulfilled his promise, that said he would write of all things
even from point to point. Again, Luke. 1.2.
where master Harding says, and commonly his other doctors hold, that Christ
did consecrate by these words, this is my body, if they will stand to that, for
ought yt I see, they overthrow their own Mass. Christ did break ye bread
before he spoke those words, as appears by all the Evangelists, and by Saint
Paul, but they hold it up whole, and bid us worship, and after at more
leisure, they break it in pieces. But to what purpose should I examine their
doings. God deliver us from that crooked and froward generation. Now for trial
of master Harding his vaunts, I will allege some of his doctors, that thou
may know, whether they are agreed about their own consecration. The common
opinion is, consecration is wrought by these words, this is my body. In 4.
sent. q. 6. art. 1.
But Mercillius says that enim is part of consecration, and that the Church
was so taught by Saint Peter. Gabriel Biel and his companions say, that enim is
not necessary for the consecration, in a^sent. did. 8: q. 3
but for him that does consecrate, and he that leaves it out, should sin
deadly, and yet Matthew, Mark, Luke, and Paul, all four did leave it out, I
trow without deadly sin. The Decretals teach us, De cele. Miss. quae sinisti.
that all, which is in the canon of the Mass, though it be not in the
scripture, yet we must take it as received from the Apostles. And so the matter
shall be fully discussed. That is of consecration which the Canon appoints.
De cons. did. 2. panis est and quia corpus.
Gracian alleging S. Ambros, makes the priest to say in the person of Christ,
all these words, accipite, comedite. etc. so alleging, that for the
consecration, he makes these six words of consecration, take, eat, this is
my body. He says likewise alleging Eusebius. Now for the consecration of the
cup, M. Harding says these are the words, this is my blood. Nay says Gabr.
Biel, In can. Miss.
forma indubitata, the undoubtful form is this, this is the cup of my blood,
and says boldly, sufficienter and plene significant conuersionem, fully and
sufficienly they work consecration. Yet upon better advice, writing upon the
master of the sentences, he says, forma consecrationis specierum vini
necessaria, In 4. sent.
and precisa, ex scriptura canonica non est sufficienter determinata. The form
of consecration of the wine, what is precise and necessary, the canonical
scriptures have not sufficiently determined it. By this it is plain that M.
Hardings doctors will not all agree, except you take them in their good mood.
Biel sometime will not stick in it, you shall have consecration wherein you
will, another time he is flatly resolved and says out of doubt thus it is. And
least master Harding should wrangle with his words, himself makes full
resolution of his meaning and says further, dubium est an aliqua verba preter
illa, hic est calix sanguinis mei, sint de necessitate consecrationis, there is
a doubt whether any words beside these, this is the cup of my blood, be of
necessity of consecration. And being not able to determine such a learned
question, he says this is certain, say all the words in the Canon of the
Mass, and consecration is among them. Here thou see, good reader, this man,
that is one place makes no bones at it, but says out of question it is thus,
in another place he cries peccaui, and for his life dares not affirm one
word, and yet did Gabriel know as much of consecration as M. Harding does. In
4. sent. dis. 8. q. 2.
But let us hear other. Scotus as is already said, knows not what is the
exact form, and says that the Greeks use an other form, than we do. And here
by the way, note that M. Harding finds great fault with Master Iuel, for
alleging the Greek Church, and says they were but certain Scismatikes, yet
Scotus alleges the same, and accounts them as Catholics, but so is master
Harding prepared in a burning desire to gainsay M. Iuell, that he often falls
out with his own friend. But let this pass. Thus Scotus concludes, that if
the priest entend to do, as the Church does, and read all the words
distinctly, he does consecrate, though he know not how. In 4. sent. dis. 8. q.
vnic. art. 4
Frauncis de Mairon an other of master Hardings doctors, says that these five
words, hic est calix sanguinis mei, this is the cup of my blood, work
consecration, yet again in the same article, moving a doubt of the same matter,
he answers thus, some say it is so, but Scotus says nay. Marcilius says, it
is probable, these are the words of consecration. In 4. sent. q. 6. art. 1.
part. 2.
Hic est calix sanguinis mei. But I will determine nothing in so high a matter.
And after for a full declaration that they can not agree among themselves, he
says. Hoc no^ est expressum per canone^, aut sedem Apostolicam, it is not
determined, neither by the Canon, nor by the Apostolical seat. Thomas Aquinas
says, all these are the words of consecration. 3 par. summae q. 78. art. 3.
Hic est calix sanguinis mei veteris, and noui testamenti, misterium fidei, qui
pro vobis, and pro multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum, this is the cup
of my blood of the new, and old testament, the mystery of faith, which shall
be shed for you, and for many. Bonauenture says, In 4. sen. did. 8. q. 3 art.
2.
these latter words are not of consecration, but they do express the
quality of the thing turned. Clingius, a late writer, and a chief doctor of
M. Hardings side, says the words of consecration be these, this is my body,
and hic est sanguis meus. etc. this is my blood. etc. Sin. doct. chr. cath.
tit. 103.
When he has not what to say, he turns it over with. etc. After in the same
title he says absolutely, these are the words, this is my body, and blood,
and in them is all the substance of the Mass. But again he says in an
another place, De Miss. prec. and. c. lib. 4. ca. 28.
hic est sanguis meus noui testimenti etc. this is my blood of the new
testament, and so forth, and there he says all that follows is the chief
substance of the Mass, and that all those words are spoken in the person of
Christ, and so consequently be part of consecration. He says further, that the
words of consecration, An ab haeret. and. c. li: 3. ca. 35 de Miss. prec. and.
c. lib. 4. ca. 28.
being pronounced by any unmeet person, do work nothing, and that it was
never showed by any sign, or miracle, that a lay man might consecrate. Yet
master Harding says, that God showed a miracle upon certain shepherds,
which sang these words, and knew not what they meant, Ar. 16. diui. 6
and they consecrated unawares. Thus master Harding passes not, so he may
say somewhat to be at some dissension, even with his friends, and thus much
of this. Let the reader examine these places, and he shall see whether master
Hardings word be a good warrant, that in consecration they all be full agreed.
And sure this great disagreement is so much the more blameable, for as much as
if they would have followed their supreme head the Pope: there had been no
controversy in this matter. For by his censure, the very words of the canon in
the Mass, are the words of consecration, used both by Christ, and his
Apostles, although none of the Evangelists have expressed them. Decre. de cele.
Miss. quae sinisti. cap. 6.
These are the popes words. Credimus ergo quod formam verborum, sicut in
canone reperitur, and a christo apostoli, and ab ipsis eoru^ acciperint
successores. We do surely believe that that form of words which are in our
Canon, the Apostles received of Christ, and there successors of them. If this
sentence might prevail, then the case of consecration had been clear. But it
is well, if the Popes friends will not believe him. For my part I mean not to
purchase him any credit.

57
Now rests the.57. untruth to examine, whether Scotus, and Innocentius do say
that benedixit, he blessed, works consecration. Master Harding stands
stiffely in it, and does adventure his credit, that they say it not, and being
to much inflamed against Master Iuell, he writes with a good countenance,
that of all the men, that ever wrote, he had least cause to bring Scotus for his
purpose, and that he is very rash in so doing. And if thou will believe him,
for a clear justifying of this untruth, he says, that Scotus, and Innocentius
never said that benedixit works consecration. Surely good Reader these
desperate assertions might well make thee think, that thy bishop had deceived
thee. But be not yet to hasty of belief, be simple as the done, but be wise
as the serpent, yea, eue^ as the Romish serpent, that has so well provided for
his young ones. His Prelates may not be accused without.72. witnesses. Let not
thou a good bishop be discredited with one slau^derous tongue. His priests may
not be controlled of any lay man, be he never so religious. Decre. tit. 2. de
constable. ca. 10.
Let not thou Gods minister be blamed of an Apostata, yea, and as though they
were not yet provided for well enough, Nancl. vol. 2 chr. onol genesis 4 Con. Lat.
ca. 42. sic epistulus anteri, anacleti Zepherini, fabiani, Euar. fas. temp. etc.
Pope Euaristus ordained that the people should not accuse them at all. Yea,
and that whole Laterane council upon good warrant of that saying of S. Paul,
the servant stands, or falls unto his lord, by authority of that sacred
assembly, they exempt them from such temporal jurisdiction. Then let us be
somewhat ware in defense of a Godly Bishop, that master Hardings bold
reprehensions may not prove him faulty.

Scotus, and Innocentius, says Master Iuell, do say that benedixit works
consecration. That is a false lie says M. Harding. Then upon good trial let
the truth appear, and let us here what the Authors themselves say. Scotus in
deed says thus, verba consecrationis sunt quatuor, hoc est corpus meum. There
are 4. words of consecration, this is my body. If Scotus had said no more,
then master Harding had alleged all. But it follows a little after, sed
haec verba, hoc est corpus meum prolata sine praecedentibus, non significant
hoc absolute. But these words pronounced without the other words going before,
do not absolutely signify this, that consecration is done. Lo Scotus says
not as master Harding reports him, that consecration is wrought by these
four, but says he there is no consecration if the words before which are the
blessing, be left out. And now to avoid all vain cauilling about these words.
G. Biel says, speaking of the same matter. Quid si verba praecedentia
omitterentur. Respo^detur, licet hic Scotus sit alterius opinionis tamen hoc
communiter tenent doctores, quod haec quatuor sola sufficient ad effectum
co^secrationis. What if the words going before be omitted, it is answered
though Scotus be here of an other opinion, yet the common sentence of doctors
is, these four are sufficient. Here besides the manifest words of Scotus, G.
Biel is also a witness that as master Iuell says, this is the common
opinion, but Scotus thinks, that the words going before are necessary. If
then Scotus own words, and G. Biel witness are better proof of Scotus
meaning, than Master Hardings imagination: it is true that the consecration is
wrought by the whole blessing. And this other saying before alleged by M.
Harding must be thus qualified, that in that place, he says those are the
especial words. Thus is Scotus saying avouched, by master Harding disalowed,
by his own plain words, and by the testimony of Biel.

Concerning Innocentius, whether he thought consecration was wrought by
benedixit, he blessed: if Master Harding had regarded his own credit, he
would not have denied it. The whole troop of his doctors do so allege his
opinion. First Scotus says. In. 4. sent. d. 8. q. 3. art. 3.
Sacerdos profert illa verba, quasi materialiter, quia recitat ea, sicut a
Christo dicta, vt patet per rationem praecedente^ in Canone. Christus autem,
qua^do illa dixit, non transubstantiauit panem in corpus, quod probatur ex
verbis illius Canonis, quia ibi praemittitur benedixit. Vnde dicetur, quod per
illam benedictionem praecedentem consecrauit, non per ista verba, hoc est
corpus meum. Cui concordat Innocentius. Deoff. Miss. par. 3. ca. 6 and. 14.
Concerning the third article, it is said; that the priest speaks those
words as the matter of consecration, because he recyteth them even as they
were spoken of Christ, as it appears by that, which goes before in the
Canon. But Christ, when he said those words, did not transubstantiate the
bread into his body, as likewise is proved by the Canon. For there it is said
before, he blessed, whereof it is said, that by that blessing he did
consecrate, not by those other words, this is my body, and of this opinion is
Innocentius in his book of the office of the Mass.3. part. the.6. Chapt. and
the.14. Here have thou Innocentius avouched, and his opinion confirmed by
Scotus. Now for the third point of this untruth. Where Master Harding says
if Master Iuell had any mo, he would have named them. May it please him to
read par. 4. q. 33.
Alexander de Ales, quol. 2. fin.
Okam, 4. pa. su^. d. 8.
Gotfrey, in 22. luc.
Albertus Biel, in 4. sen. di. 8
Marcilius, and diverse other of his own doctors. Either he must accuse them
all as liars, or there are other of this opinion. Thus we see these great
exclamations whereto they fall, that in one title he cannot justify one
untruth. But whether master Iuell had mo to allege, or no, read his defense
of the Apology, thou shall see. fo. 208.


The B. of Saris. Cardinal Bessarion Bishop of Tusculum, writes thus.


Harding. The.58. untruth. He vvriteth not so.


Dering. If shameless lying were punished in Loueine, then no doubt master
Harding would be more ware what he wrote. Now as may be thought, impunity have
made him confident. Let the book be judge of this untruth.


The B. of Saris. How be it, by what soever words consecration is made, it
stands no^ in abolishing of natures, as master Harding teaches.


Harding. The.59. untruth. I teach not so.


Dering. Certainly good reader this untruth is very strange. M. Harding is a
great mainteiner of transubstantiation in all his doing, yet here to get one
untruth, he is content to forsake it. I do not teach says he, that
consecration consists in the changing of natures. If it be so, then by
consecration the nature of bread does not change into the nature of christ's
flesh, to this I gladly yield. Would God master Iuell said here untruly.


The B. of Saris. Consecration is in converting the Elements to a godly use, as
we see in the water of Baptism.


Harding. The.60. untruth. The consecration of the water in baptism is far
different from the consecration of the Eucharist.


Dering. Accedat verbum ad elementum says Saint Augustine, and fit
sacramentum. Let the word come unto the element, and it is a sacrament. Saint
Augustine here makes no difference at all, he bids not consecrate the one
with whisperings, the other with open voice, as master Harding bids, he
teaches no difference of grace in them both, as Master Harding teaches.
Likewise Saint Ambrose says. non aqua omnis sanat, Li. 1. de sacra. cap. 5.
sed quae habet gratiam Christi, not all water heals, but that which has the
grace of Christ. And again, water heals, if the holy ghost do come down,
and sanctify it. And again, water heals, if the voice of the father be
heard from heaven. So this operation of the trinity is the virtue, and the
consecration of the water. This like operation does make the bread, and wine,
to be our heavenly food, as M. Harding must needs grant, so the consecration
of either both is one. If he say the words of consecration must be pronounced
by the minister, whereby, as by a mean, God does pour his grace upon us, and
joins us unto him: I confess it is so, and those words are these, take,
eat, this is my body. So in baptism after our prayers made unto god, we
pronounce the words of consecration, whereby we know that gods mercy does
sanctify us, and the blood of his son does wash away our sins, and those
words are these. I baptize thee in the name of the father, of the son, and
of the holy ghost. So we see thus far the consecration in either sacrament is
one. If he make any difference in the words, for the manner of speaking, in
that it is said, this is my body. Saint Paul speaks likewise of baptism
that it is lauacrum regenerationis, Tit. 3.5.
the washing of our new birth, now lay these all together. By the Eucharist we
be joined unto Christ, 1. Cor. 5.8.
keeping the feast of our pasouer with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and
truth. By baptism we be sanctified and cleansed, Ephe. 26.
by the washing of water through the word. The Eucharist is sanctified by the
heavenly words spoken of the minister in the person of our savior Christ: so
the water does wash away our uncleanness by being baptized in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. The Eucharist for the high, and
dreadful mystery of the body of Christ, by says feeding our souls, is
called the body, the water for the heavenly operation which God works in
washing away the natural uncleanness in which we are borne, is called the
regeneration. And therefore the consecration of them both can not be diverse. M.
Harding after his manner may a little dasell simple eyes, but his conscience
does bear him witness, that this doctrine is true. But here I must confess,
that the popish consecrations, if master Harding do mean of them, do differ
much the one from the other, and both from Christ's institution, as I have
showed in the epistle. So Master Iuell speaking of the sacraments of christ's
Church, and saying consecration is like in both, says not untrue, though the
iuglings of the antichristian Sinagogue are never so diverse.


The B. of Saris. This is well noted, and opened by Saint Augustine. Tract: in
Ioh: 80.


Harding. The.61. untruth. This is not opened by Saint Augustine:


Dering. Master Harding by like thinks, he is disputing with one of his
popish doctors, what hoc signifies, in hoc est corpus meum, and therefore he
asks, what it is Saint Augustine has opened. Sure not this popish
consecration. For he never heard of it, but this spiritual change of the
elements to be come of creatures ordained for the body, salues whereby our
minds are healed. And thus is your untruth answered.


The.B. of Saris. The word of faith which we preach, says Augustine, not the
word which we whisper.


Harding. The.62. untruth. Saint Augustine says not so.


Dering. Well said Anaxagoras. Stande-stiffely to this opinion. Sure snow is
not white. What though it seem so? S. August. says it not. What if the word
be there three, or four times for failing? Say on still, saint Augustine says
it not. Some of your friends perhaps will believe you. But my God I thank, I am
none of those. And you that will not be deceived good christian people hearken,
Saint Augustine says not, says M. Harding, the word which we preach. And to
prove this true he alleges many lines out of the same place, in which lines
it is not. But, o singularem impudentiam. Antonie out of doubt was never so
past shame. He says, Saint Augustine has not, which we preach, and thus he
alleges Augustines words, verbo dei sine dubio, vt mundare possit,
consecratur, and baptismus, if it were no otherwise, yet this word of God must
be preached, for how else should it be heard, To. 10.
and so engraffe faith. But now Saint Augustines words are otherwise, hoc est
verbum fidei, quod praedicamus, says he, this is the word of faith, which we
do preach, with which word doubtless baptism is consecrated, that it may
purify us. That which Saint Augustine says hoc est etc. this is the word of
faith, which we preach, Master Harding turns thus verbo fidei, by the word
of faith. What clipping, what nipping, what altering is this? O if master
Harding had such a vauntage, how would he turn his phrases? How would he sport
himself, with reperitions of corrupting the fathers? Well thou see this is no
untruth. Read his Reioinder, and confer it with Saint Augustine, thou shall
soon discrie his behavior. Here have thou christian reader to note, that
Saint Augustine says the word does consecrate, non quia dicitur, sed quia
creditur, not because it is spoken, but because it is believed. Therefore
according to Saint Augustine, this popish consecration is gone, they need not
fear that by common use the words should be contemned, or unawares they should
work strange miracles. Without faith they have no virtue. What these words
be, I told thee in the.60. untruth, out of S. Ambrose, in the Eucharist,
accipite, comedite, hoc est corpus meu^, take, eat, this is my body. In
baptism, baptize them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the
holy ghost.


The B. of Saris. And whereas he says further, that we have no manner oblation
in our communion, he should not himself speak manifest untruth, having taken
upon him, as he says, to reform falsched.


Harding. The.63. vnt. I say not that you have no manner of oblation.

The.64. vnt. I say not I have taken upon me to reform falshed.


Dering. Here are two untruths, the one shameless, the other witless. First
says he, I say not, you have no manner of oblation, yet these are his own very
words. Where as in Christ's institution concerning this sacrament, three
things are contained, Art. 1. diui: 8
the sacrament, the oblation, and the participation, wherein consists the
substance of the Mass, they have quite abrogate the other two, and left a bare
communion. Now these being his words, sure this untruth is shameless. The
second untruth is, in denying, that he says, he does reform falshed, and this
is it, which I said is witless.


The B. of Saris. We offer up unto God our selves, our souls, our bodies, and
alms for the poor, praises, and thanks giving* etc. which the old fathers
say, is the sacrifice of the new testament. We offer up as much, as Christ
commanded us to offer.


Harding. The.65. untruth. They say not so. The.66. untruth. You offer not up
the body, and blood of Christ.


Dering. Were not master Hardings behavior always notable: in these
untruths he might else seem to pass himself. For proof that the old
fathers said this spiritual sacrifice was the sacrifice of the new testament,
Master Iuell alleges Tertullian thus. Cont. Iudeos.
The pure sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, that should be offered up in
every place, est predicatio Eua^gelii vsque ad finem mundi, is the preaching of
the Gospel, until the end of the world. Contra Mar. lib. 4.
Again, that sacrifice is simplex oration de conscientia pura, and a devout
prayer of a pure conscience, Then he alleges Eusebius, De demo^st. li.
that ye same sacrifice is (...), the sacrifice and incence of prayer. Last of
all he alleges Ierom, expounding the same place, dicit orationes sanctorum
domino offerendas esse in omni loco. The prophet means hereby, that the
prayers of holy people should be offered unto God in all places, to these
places Master Harding brings but his bare nay, and answers not one word,
but for proof of his untruth concludes thus, you should have done well to
have named these old fathers, Reioin. fo. 83.
and to have alleged their own words for your credit sake, who could speak
thus shamelessely that had any shame in him. Master Iuell here names both
Tertullian, and Eusebius, and quoteth the places where these sayings are to be
found. And in the 559. leaf of his Reply, recites their very words. Yet
says M. Harding this is false, he should have alleged some doctors, by like
his head was so full with the number of these untruths, that he could not see
their names. If these three doctors seem to master Harding to be but few, or
if therefore he could not see them: a little to help his eye sight, it shall
not be tedious to allege mo. Justinius Martyr says, Ad tripbone^.
these sacrifices of christians are only perfect, and acceptable unto God,
preces, and gratiarum actiones, prayers, and thanksgiving. And again, the
prophets do not promise that the bloody sacrifices shall be renewed, but they
promise us, veras ac spirituales oblationes, laudis, atque gratiarum actionis,
true, and spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving. Clemens
Alexandrinus says, Strom. li. 7.
speaking of prayer, that, that is optimum, and sanctiss. sacrificium, the best
and most holy sacrifice. Again, Strom. li. 5.
Sacrificium Deo acceptum est, corporis, eiusque vitioru^ seperatio. Is est
verus re vera dei cultus, the sacrifice that God accepts is to set a part all
vice from our body, that is in deed, the very true worshipping of God.
Tertullian says, we do sacrifice: but so as God has commanded, that is,
pura prece, In apologetico.
with a pure prayer. Athenagoras an old writer says thus, In Apolog. pro
christia.
quid ego sacrificia, and holocausta curem. etc. what should I care for
sacrifice, or burnt offerings, of which God has no need, he requires for him
an unbloody sacrifice, that is, that we offer, and give a reasonable soul
unto him. These are ynowe for M. Harding to see, or he will see none, be they
never so many. It all should be alleged, that witness this only to be
sacryfice of christian men, it would fill a whole volume, but if M. Harding can
show but one to prove, that the priest offers up Christ unto his father, this
shall not only go for untrue, but we will all subscribe unto his religion. For
this other untruth, that we offer not up the body, and blood of Christ, when
M. Harding can prove that Christ has so commanded us, this shall be untrue.
Here mark master Harding for all his narrow search for untruths, yet
ouerskippeth a couple, that M. Stapleton has espied one of Saint Basil, an
other of Saint Cyril. Believe them both if thou will swim in errors.


The B. of Saris. But says master Harding, we make no mention of the
sacrifice^


Harding. The.67. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. What means master Harding by this untruth? Is there any distinction
to be brought between oblation, Art. 1. diui. 8.
and sacrifice? He says expressly we do not so much as once name the
oblation, and oblation, and sacrifice differ no more, then ensis, and gladius,
then a brake, and a fearne bush, or any two words, which express one thing.
Then if M. Hard. say we name not the oblation, he says we name not the
sacrifice, and this he must needs confess, except he will wrangle about the
word. Sure as the common saying is, in this untruth, is neither rhyme, nor
reason.


The.B. of Saris. He calls Christ's ordinance a bare communion.


Harding. The.68. untruth. Your Communion is not Christ's ordinance.


Dering. Before Master Harding note this untruth any more, I would wish after
so many Master Iuels requests he should at last bring some scripture, or
doctor, or general counsel, or some example of the primitive Church to prove
it. His word weyeth over light, in so great a matter. For our discharge we
do, and say even as Christ did, and said, and more we dare not, because that
is perfect. They make many apishe toys of their own, neither can the
reverence of that high mystery bring them to any obedience.


The.B. of Saris. Even now master Harding said, there were three things in
Christ's institution, consecration, oblation, participation, now he says, the
number of communicants is no part of Christ's institution, thus he falls out
with himself.


Harding The.69. untruth. I fall not out with my self.


Dering. What can be more contrary, than to say participation is of Christ's
institution, and again, partakers, that is number of communicants, are not of
Christ's institution? In the lords cause, we will speak as the lord speaks,
heaven, and earth we call to witness, whether this be not contrariety. Yet M.
Harding, and I trow even only master Harding, is so bold to note this for an
untruth. But the untruth is sufficientlye answered in that the indifferent
reader may see the words.


The B. of Saris. I may not now dissemble the value of master Hardings
argument. Christ, says he, ordained the sacrament after consecration, and
oblation done, to be received, and eaten, ergo the number of communicants in
one place, is no part of Christ's institution.


Harding. The.70. untruth. This is not my argument.


Dering. Here Master Harding and his friend Stapleton do not well accord.
For Master Harding skippeth one untruth concerning the number of communicants,
Reply. fo. 20. diuis. 3. which master Stapleton makes the.22. untruth. And
least we should think it little worth, he makes the same again the.23
untruth, and for a full conclusion shuts also the.24. untruth in it. Yea,
and though it stand here for.3. untruths, yet as if al they were not
sufficient, he made it once before the.19. untruth. So much master Stapleton
makes of one untruth, which master Harding accounts not worth numbering. But
the matter is not great, he loses nothing here, that he will not find in an
other place. As touching this untruth, these are M. Hardings very words.
Concerning the number of communicants in one place, Diuis 8.
that they iangle so much of, it is no part of Christ's institution. For Christ
ordained the sacrament after consecration. etc. Now turn these words in
form of argument, and they stand even as master Iuel places them, Christ did
ordeine the sacrament after consecration. etc. ergo the number of communicants
is no part of Christ's institution. If these be Master Hardings own words,
as see the book, and thou thy self shall judge, thou can not be so simple,
but thou must needs see this argument is no worse than himself has made it.
But because in this place he also fashioneth one: and in great confidence of
his own cunning, writes in the Margent of his book (an argument proponed to
M. Iuell to be considered,) I will do him no wrong in changing his words,
but for that love which I have to M. Iuels profession, in his behalf I will as
I can consider of it after his own making. But first I must advertise thee
before he sets up his misshapen building, he lays the foundation of an ill
favored stomach: and says by M. Iuel, that it is easy for a scoffer, to
scoff at arguments framed of his own scoffing head. And so it is easy for an
evil speaker in defense of his wicked Doctrine, to report unchristianly of
Gods minister, where such unquiet passions do lead away understanding. It may
be, he may find favorers: but where the God of peace has engraffed more
moderation, truth shall not be prejudiced with such untrue behauior. Much
other frothe ensues in great plenty, before we come to the proposed reason,
even as a rotten wound defiles many clothes that are about it, but let it be
trodden out with silence, that cannot be remembered without much loath somnesse.
At the last he comes to his argument, and after his own grave
considerations, thus it is fourmed. What so ever is beside Consecration,
Oblation, Reioinder. Fol. 96.
and Participation, is beside Christ's institution. The number of Communicants
in one place, is beside these three. Ergo, the number in one place is no part
of Christ's institution.

Of this argument M. Harding boasts much, and in any case will have M. Iuel
yield unto the Conclusion. But soft M. Harding, extorcion is no conclusion. If
you will enforce a grant, whether it be made or no, you can by that be never
the near your purpose. Therefore for as much as you have set forth your
argument, (as you say) to be considered, you seem very unconstant, so soon
again to claim the conc^usion. But you s^y, if we will not yield unto the
reason, we must deny the Minor or second proposition. True it is the Minor is
false, but we are not yet come at it. The Mayor that you think so sure, is
made of false and unlawful stuffing, as by this consideration, that you
require, shall well appear. The proposition is this. What so ever is beside
Consecration, Oblation, and Participation, is beside Christ's institution,
first this is false, and teaches wicked doctrine. For preaching out of the
Lords death until he come, 1. Co. 11.26. Luc. 22.
is a part of Christ's institution. And our savior bids, do this in the
remembrance of me, that is with due celebration of all my benefits bestowed
upon mankind, which must then be preached unto the people. And if it be not so
done, then Christ's institution, notwtstanding M. Hardings argument, is flatly
broken. Now as this preaching out the Lords death, is of Christ's institution,
and yet not rehearsed in this first proposition, whereby this prosition is showed
false: so those other things, which are rehearsed in it, as M. Harding means
them, are none of them of Christ's institution. By consecration he means the
pronou^cing of these words, this is my body, which must be done as ye Mass
book straightly charge, Rubrica. in can. miss.
both secretly, and with one breath. By oblation he means Christ's real
body to be offered up unto the father. By Participation, he means that the
priest alone may take it at the Altar, and no one of these is of Christ's
institution. Nay they all are contrary unto it. So that this proposition whereon
he groundeth his argument, wants somewhat, and therefore is not true, that
which it has is altogether corrupt, and therefore it contains much
pernicious doctrine. First as touching Consecration, S. Augustine says, as is
alleged in the.56. untruth, y^ it is wrought verbo fidei, by the word of
faith, which we preach. So says Justinius martyr, Just. mar. Apol. 2. Ire.
lib. 5.
that it is sanctified, per verbum precationis, and gratiarum actionis, by the
word of prayer, and thanks giving. Irenaeus says, quando mixtus calix, and
fractus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia corporis, and sanguinis
Christi, when the cup mingled with wine and water, and the bread being
broken, has the preaching of the word of God joined unto it, then it is the
Eucharist, and this was the only Consecration.200. years after Christ, neither
any where any other mentioned: except in M. Hardings Decretal Epistles, which
neither are of credit, nor yet teach good religion. This same manner of
Consecration is taught us by Cyprian, Dyonisius, Alexandrinus, Ambrose,
Augustine, and such other, Cyp. li. 3. ep. 1 Dyon. ep. ad. ixistum. Amb. de
sacra. lib. 4. cap. 5.
as lived within the first.600. years after Christ. Although I grant (as
appears by diverse records) many solemnities of the Mass were far spread
through superstition, yet this exact kind of close Consecration is much
younger. This Oblation likewise, as it was then unknown, so now it is of all
Christians to be detested, that a mortal man should offer up the immortal
God, as I have already showed in the Epistle. For Participation because master
Harding can not prove his Private Mass, within the six hundredth years, and
the word does enforce, that it is no Participation, except there be a number
to take their parts, I think it appears sufficiently, that in a Popish
Mass they have no manner Participation, or Communion, so we see this Mayor is
all together false, before we come at the Minor. Now if we will further examine
the Minor, we shall find it false also, altogether without salt or savor, for
thus it is in effect. The number of Communicantes is no part of the
Communion, which is both a very childishe, and gross absurdity. For how is
there a Communion, where is no Communicantes? Thus thou see good Reader, this
argument is not yet good. But the better to consider of it, because master
Harding will needs have it considered: let us take the view of it once again.
This is the argument. What so ever is beside Oblation, Consecration, and
Participation, is no part of Christ's institution. But the number of
Communicantes in one place, is beside these three. Ergo, the number is not of
Christ's instition.

What may be said of this whole argument, I have already forewarned thee. Now
let us hear what M. Harding says to it him self. There is nothing here says
he to be denied, but the Minor, what, if it were so? What is now the Minor?
Read the Reioinder, thus he says. It is denied in the Minor, that the number
of Communicantes together in one place is of Christ's institution. Reioinder.
Fol. 97.
Why? how now M. Harding? is this the best argument you can make? Mark good
Reader, this must be the Minor. The number of Communicants together is no part
of Christ's institution. Lay now the Mayor to it, and the argument arises
thus. What so ever is beside Consecration, Oblation, and Participation, is no
part of Christ's Institution. The number of Communicants is no part of Christ's
institution. The Conclusion is as before. Ergo, the number of Co^municants is
no part of Christ's institution.

Did ever M. Jewel father upon M. Harding such a misshapen argument? This is
his own, or else he belieth him self, when he says that this is his Minor.
But such sleights he can use to unwind him self out of danger. A pretty
conueyaunce of a little forgerie among the ignorant, might have escaped blame.
But I will not judge M. Harding, God knows whether he did it of purpose or no.
This in deed should have been his Minor. But the Communion of many together, is
beside these three, so the Communion might have been without Communicants,
which is a great absurdity, and so consequently M. Hardings argument very
evil. As touching further trial of this untruth, his wrangling is not worth
the consideration. Only as he has set forth his argument, to prove a number
of Communicants no part of Christ's institution, so he shall give me leave to
propone likewise some arguments, for proof that the Lords supper may not be
celebrate by one alone. First thus we argue. Math. 26.
Christ said, take ye, eat ye, drink ye all, do ye this. But this is spoken to
many. Ergo, there must be a number.

To this argument M. Harding makes this answer. You must get you better
proof, Reioinder. Fol. 97.
or else admit the Conclusion of my argument. A man would think he were a
craking soldier, that is thus well pleased with his own doing, but if with
this craking custom, Ter. in Eunuch. Act. 5. scae. vlt. Exodus 12 4. 1. Co. 5.7.
he have not gotten the craking qualities, he shall hear other arguments,
though there can be none better. It was not among the Jews, lawful to eat
the Pascall Lamb without a sufficient number. Ergo, the flesh of our savior
Christ, who is our Passover, must not be eaten by the Priest alone.

Likewise it may be said of the gathering of Manna in the morning, and of the
drinking of the rock. I doubt not, Exodus 16 21.
but here M. Harding can make a spedy answer, with many comparisons between the
figure, and the truth, but the good conscience may easily judge. Beside this
S. Paul him self does give us in this case a very good argument, he says.
My brethren. When you come together to eat, tarry one for another. 1. Co. 11.33.
Ergo, we must not receive alone.

The bread which we break, 1. Co. 10.16.
is the Communion of the body of Christ. Ergo, there must be a number at the
breaking of it.



And for a full proof of this matter, Christ says. I have earnestly desired
to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. Ergo, Luke 22.15.
the Priest must not eat it alone.

Thus we see what we are taught by the scriptures concerning the number of
Communicants, and of what value M. Hardings argument is, which he himself has
made after his own fashion. Whereby thou may the better judge, what is to be
thought of all those other which M. Jewel ascribes unto him.


The B. of Saris. There is not one piece hereof, that either is true in it
self, or agrees with other.


Harding. The.71. untruth. Some part of it is proved to be true.


Dering. The argument which M. Iuel says, has no piece either true, or
hanging of an other. Is thus before alleged. The Sacrament must be received
after Consecration. Ergo, a number is not necessary.

Here says M. Harding. This is true y^ the sacrament must be received after
Consecration. But how does he prove it. Sure with no reason, but a great deal
of railing, saying that M. Iuel is led with the sprite of malice, and that he
will revoke this, Reioinder. Fol. 96.
when he is in his right mind. Or if he will not, let him take manducate and
bibite, eat ye and drink ye, out of the gospel. As touching M. Hardings
railing, because his mouth is no sla^der, I will let it pass. His reason is
this, if consecration must not be before ye Communion, then let manducate and
bibite, be taken out of the gospel. One that had so long disputed of good
arguments should now have taken heed how he had made one so ill. This will in
no wise hold, except you turn him contrary and so ouerturne M. Hardings cause
with his own proof. For before ye Evangelists speak the words of
Consecration, this is my body, they say all take and eat, so that this
follows very well, if Consecration must be before receiving: then take
manducate and bibite out of the Gospel. For in the Gospel they are placed
before. How M. Hardings argument hangs, if Consecration be not before the
Communion, then take manducate and bibite out of the Gospel, neither M.
Harding him self, nor all his Doctors are able to tell us. And this did Gabriel
Biel see well inoughe, who considering this place of the Evangelists, that they
were bid take and eat before the words of Consecration pronounced, he does
not as M. Harding does, Biel in can. mis. lec. 36.
speak neither rhyme, nor reason, only to mock the people. But he says
plainly that the common opinion is, Christ spoke not as the Evangelists report,
take, eat, this is my body, but quite contrary, this is my body, take eat,
thus has Biel found a figure (...) to set the cart before the horse, and so
makes his religion to agree with the gospel. Now as touching this untruth,
where M. Harding says so boldly, that the bread must have these words, this
is my body, pronounced over it before it be received, first he has Matthew,
Mark, Luke and Paul against him, who all bid first eat and then pronounce
these words. Again it is confessed by Gabriel Biel, that we must think
Christ spoke otherwise than the Evangelists report his words, or else they
could not agree with their Mass, this is a sufficient discharge of this
untruth. A good Christian before he see better authority, will believe as the
Gospel teaches, that we must first take it and eat it, before it be Christ's
body, so shall he sone see the Idolatry of a Popish Mass.


The B. of Saris. If Christ instituted the Sacrament, to the intent it should
be first consecrate, and then received of a company. etc.


Harding. The.72. untruth. This is a very gross falsifying of my words.


Dering. These are M. Hardings own words in this Division. Christ ordained ye
Sacrament after Consecration done, to be received and eaten. Of these words
says M. Iuel, as is before alleged, if Christ. etc. if I should here ask of
the indifferent Reader, wherein is this gross falsifying, sure he could easily
epsy it. But somewhat to help the Readers understanding, this it is, where M.
Harding has to be received and eaten, M. Iuell says to be received of a
company, if this be as it is in deed, no fault, whereto is this unseasonable
crying out of falsifying? But if it shall seem to be a fault, then know, that
where M. Iuel alleges M. Hardings own words, he printeth them in a distinct
letter: but this saying which so grieueth M. Harding, is in the common letter
of M. Iuels words, whereby master Harding might have well understand, had he not
been disposed to wrangle, that master Iuel alleged them not as his express
words, but rather shows how he should have made his saying plain, and this
he proves by authority of Bessarion and Gabriel Biel, that after Consecration
the sacrament be not received only, as master Harding says, but received of
a company, which word, as it must, so being expressly written, master Harding
did directly reason against himself.


The B. of Sarisb. The.9. division. Here unawares he seemed to confess that
his Mass, whatsoever substance it bear, it is void both of good order, and
also of congruence.


Harding. The.73. untruth. I confess no such thing.


Dering. You seem to confess it* says M. Iuel. Whether you do or no, let
your words witness. You say you are not bound to follow Christ's example in
order and congruence. Now we may infer Christ's order is only good, therefore
you follow no good order, or congruence. This is but a single untruth.


The B. of Saris. The matter being so weighty, and not yet thoroughly believed.
etc.


Harding. The.74. untruth. It has been believed.


Dering. When you prove this, sure M. Iuel will subscribe, you may make every
word in his book as untrue as this. For he has not one word, that sounds
toward your religion, if this may be noted for untrue, to say your Massing
worshippings have never been thoroughly believed, you may note many more untruths
in this Reply. For there is not one line that allows the Mass. Read the
next untruth.


The B. of Sarish. The old fathers call that the daily Sacrifice, that Christ
made once for all upon the Cross.


Harding. The.75. untruth. The old fathers call not the Sacrifice of the
Cross the daily Sacrifice.


Dering. M. Iuel does allege Aug. secund. Luc. sermon. 28. Ierom. in. 1. Co. ca.
5. Germanus in Eccle. rerum theoria. Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 34. Tertul. aduer.
Iudaeos. Amb. in. 1. ad Tim. cap. 2. Examine the aucthorities, and see M.
Hardings answer, so thou shall best judge. If I should enter into it, it would
require a long answer, and nothing necessary. What the Doctors write, M. Iuel
is thought to know, as well as M. Harding. First read and then judge. This is
again the.132. untruth. And because we are again fallen into mention of this
Sacrifice, which M. Harding said even now, has been thoroughly believed, let us
examine that untruth, and try if M. Harding be found true in his workmanship.
It has been thoroughly believed says he, that the Priest does offer up to God
the body and blood of Christ vnbloudely, in the remembrance of that one bloody
Sacrifice of Christ. Read of this in the Epistle the.31. leaf, thou shall
have it fully discussed: only in this untruth, because the question lies
rather, whether it has been believed, than whether the saying be true, let us a
little consider of Christ him self, and his Apostles, whether they have
believed it. First Christ in no one word did give unto his Church any
commission of such manner sacrifycing. Christ says often, I give up my soul,
I Sa^rifice my self, no man does it but I: but unto his Disciples he says,
Joh. 10. Ioh. 7. Ioh. 13.
quo ego vado, vos non potestis venire. Whither I go, ye can not come. By
which words he takes from them all power to Sacrifice him, even as it was
before told by Daniel, that after Christ was once offered, the Sacrifice and the
Oblation should cease. Dan. 9.27.
Not a word written whereby it may be gathered that we may offer up Christ. And
does M. Harding think, that in so weighty a matter as the remission of our
sins, that any thing is required of us, which is not commanded us? It
appears then in the time of Christ this was not believed. Did the Apostles
believe it after Christ? S. Paul says: in that he died unto sin, he died but
once: To. 6. Heb. 10.
again: by one Oblation he made his perfect for ever: and again, where is
remission of sin, there is no more sacrifice for sin. Then by S. Paul
there is now no daily sacrifice for sin, except by Christ's death we will
that our sins be not forgiven. 1. Co. 11.
Again, S. Paul will have us follow Christ's example in the administration of
Christ's supper, who teaches us of no Oblation for quick and dead. Again,
the sacrifice cannot be made without a special priesthode, but the Apostles
do teach us that all such Priesthode is abrogate. Heb. 1. Peter. 2. Apo. 1.5.
If at any time the name of Oblation be mentioned in this age, it is ever meant
spiritually. As is plain To. 12. and.16. Phil. 2. 1. Peter.2. for the real
Sacrifice S. Peter is plain. Christ has carried our sins in his body upon the
wood, 1. Peter.2.
and by his stripes we be healed, and the effects of that one Sacrifice once
made, are purging of the sins of the whole world. 1. Pe. 2. and.3 1. Ioh. 2.
and. 3. To. 4. Ephe. 1. eternal redemption. Gal. 2. Ephe. 1. Righteousness.
To. 3.4.8. 2. Cor. 5. Sa^ctificatio^. Eb. 10. Peace. To. 5. Joy of the spirit.
To. 4. Gal. 5. Newness of life. Romans 6. 1. Co 5. Love of our neighbor. 1.
Ioh. 3. Eternal life. 1. Ioh. 5. To. 6. then neither Christ nor his Apostles
ever believed it: for the estate of the primative Church how it believed, M.
Harding has nothing to say, but refers us to the.xvij. Article of his
former book, here good Reader my labor is well eased: for seeing my Lord of
Sarisburie has answered all that matter, who so will be confirmed in that
truth, he can go I think, to no mortal man to be more strengthened.


The B. of Saris. It pleases M. Hard. to allege the one end, and conceal the
other.


Harding. The.76. untruth. The.10. diuis. I conceal not the other.


Dering. If M. Harding do allege both these ends of the Sacraments, that is.
To join us unto God, and to join us one with an other, then let this be
untrue, if he do not, then for my pore skill me thinks he concealeth it.


The B. of Saris. M. Harding says the Communion signifies not the
Communicating of many together.


Harding. The.77. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. Here M. Harding and M. Stapleton do agree so iumpe in one untruth,
that it appears evidently their religion is either very uniform, or at least
they have been both instructed in one schole. Thus says M. Harding. Diuis. 10.
The Communion is not so called, because many, or as M. Iuel teaches, the
whole congregation received together in one place. These words M. Iuel
reports thus. He says, the Communion is not so called of the Communicating
of many together. This is untrue says M. Har. I say not so: this is untruth
says M. Sta. he says not so. Stap. the.27. untruth.
I require here of thee, good Christian Reader, to view the words well, and
find out any fault if thou can. Surely I think, thou can find none, like
as sure it is M. Iuel did think of none. But these two pair of Egles eyes,
what have they espied? Forsothe where M. Harding says, it is not called the
Communion of Communicating together in one place, M. Iuel thus reports it, it
is not called the Communion of Communicating together, and leaves quite out in
one place which makes all the matter, this distinction of Communicating
together, and Communicating together in one place, because it is somewhat
strange, these men should have done well to have proved it by some Doctor.
Sure M. Harding if he may go for a Doctor, he teaches us plainly in an other
place, that to Communicate together, is to Communicate in one place. For thus
he writes, but that they should Communicate together, Reioinder. Fol. 97.
that is to say, in one place, that we deny. By this Doctor it appears, that
together, and in one place is all one, and then this can be no untruth.


The B. of Saris. How be it in plain speech, it is not the receiving of the
Sacrament, that works our joining with God.


Harding. The.78. untruth. The worthy receiving works this effect.


Dering. Does it so? Are we not joined to God before we eat the Sacrament?
Ephe. ^.
S. Paul says, Elegit nos in ipso. He has chosen us in Christ, before the
foundations of the world were laid, much more are we his before we receive
the sacrament. Concerning sacraments, the same Apostle says of Abraham. Signum
accepit circumcisionis. etc. After he received the sign of Circumcision, Romans
2.4.
as the seal of the righteousness of ye faith, which he had when he was
uncircumcised. And shall we be taught now, that they be no more seals, and
witnesses, but causes of our justification? God keep us from such spiders,
that gather poison of so sweet flowers. And that thou may take the more
heed of this man's doctrine, I must first tell thee, that for proof of it,
he brings not one word of Scripture, but pretends the aucthority of
Chrysostom and Cyril. I would answer the authority for such Doctors, save
that the labor were long, and not necessary. For I will declare out of the
Scripture, that the doctrine is heretical, and thereby thou shall be
satisfied, and may further imagine that these holy Fathers names are too
much abused. In this untruth of M. Hardings, he teaches two points of
Doctrine, the one, that by, and through the worthy receiving of the Sacrament,
we be joined unto God, the other, that the Sacraments are not only seals and
pledges, but also they contain grace. Now let us see how these two Articles
agree with the word of God. And first, whither the receiving of the Sacrament
do join us unto God, and as M, Harding says, puts also into us life
immortal. Our Savior Christ in the Gospel after S. John, does often tell his
Disciples, how they are made one with God, yet in that holy Gospel, as in all
other scriptures, there is not one word that tells us we be made one with
him by receiving the Sacrament. But contrarily by plain words we be taught,
what virtue this Sacrament has, that it is only a sign of that grace, which
we have received, as shall appear hereafter. In the sixthe chapter of John,
where Christ reproves the fleshly hearers of his word, and calls them to a
true belief in him, the Jews make this answer. What sign show thou then,
that we may see it? Our Fathers did eat Manna. etc. Here is first showed what
the Jews thought of Manna, not that by it they were joined to God, or received
grace, but that it was a sign, a token, and a pledge of their free election,
how they were a peculiar people unto God. This Manna being a figure of this
Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ, now lest unto the Church. Christ
makes this answer, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not
hunger, Ioh. 6.35.
and he that believes in me, shall not thirst for ever. By this we learn, that
to believe in Christ is to have everlasting life, and as Manna was a sign to
the Israelites, so the Communion of the body and blood of Christ is a sign to
us, that this promise shall be made sure. It is written in the Prophet: Esaias.
54.13.
and all thy children shall be taught of the Lord: of this saying our savior
Christ teaches us how we be joined unto him, and says. No man can come to me,
except the father which sent me draw him. Ioh. 6.44.
And to this end it is written by the Prophet Jeremy. After those days
says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, Ier. 31.33.
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Of this we learn, that if
we come unto Christ, the Father must draw us: if we be his people, he must be
our inward teacher: if we be united unto him, he must first come and dwell in
our hearts: whereby it is plain, that we must be first engrafted in Christ,
before we can worthily receive his holy Sacraments. Furthermore it follows in
S. John, he that eats my flesh, Ioh. 6.36.
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Therefore we must dwell
in him, and he in us, or we can not eat his body, and drink his blood. And the
wicked which dwell not in him, can not receive him. Again, where our Savior
Christ does teach very largely how we be joined unto him, and become one with
him, even as his Father and he is one, he shows that this society does come
upon us of his Fathers free mercy apprehended by Faith of his word. And for
declaration of this free mercy, he reports it oftentimes, that we are given
unto him of his Father, as: manifestaui nomen tuum ijs quos dedisti mihi, I
have made known thy name unto those which thou have given me, Ioh. 17.6.
and: tui erant and mihi dedisti eos, and: omnia quae dedisti mihi a te sunt,
and: serua eos quos dedisti mihi. All things that thou have given me, are from
thee. Keep them that thou have given me. They were thine, and thou have given
them me. And that we should know that to be given to Christ, is to be joined
unto him, he adds vt sint vnum sicut nos, that they may be one as we are one.
This is also proved by all such places of Scripture, as show that we be saved
by grace. Thus we see our joining unto God, is first to be given unto Jesus
Christ of his Fathers own good will. And this is on Gods behalf, the
eternal secret purpose whereby we be made his. The other way whereby we be
made his, is Faith of his word, when by inspiration of the holy Ghost, we
apprehend in Christ the free love of his Father, and that hereby we be joined
unto God: it is in like manner often declared by the Scripture. Now are you
clean (says Christ) through the word which I have spoken unto you. Ioh. 15.3.
Ioh. 17.8.
And in an other place I have given unto them the words which thou gave me,
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee,
and have believed that thou have sent me. Likewise Ioh. 16.27. and Ioh. 17.14.
I have given them thy word. Again sanctify them with thy truth, thy word
is the truth. And to the end we should all know this instruction were ours,
our Savior says further, I pray not for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe in me through their word. And now for proof that this is our
joining unto God, it follows that they all may be one, as thou, O Father, art
in me, and I in thee, even that they may be also one in us. This manner of
joining us unto God, was showed unto Jacob in that vision where he saw a ladder
reaching from the earth to heaven, and Angels going up and down, Genesis 28.12.
teaching us that Christ was likewise the ladder by whom we climed up, and
were joined to his Father. This was likewise showed in the third of Mathevve,
where the Heavens are opened, Math. 3.
and the holy Ghost descended upon Christ, signifying that he has reconciled
heaven and earth, and joined us again unto God, and we by faith made partakers
of that benefit. Thus we see the manner of our joining unto God, first in his
eternal secret purpose, after apprehended of us by faith. Now this standing
thus, that the promise might be certain unto all the seed, God has sealed
this hope with the body and blood of Christ, that we being partakers of those
heavenly mysteries, might assure our conscience of his eternal mercy, that the
gates of Hell should no more prevail against us. Thus are our Sacraments,
signs, tokens, warrantes, gages, pledges of our salvation, and do not, as M.
Harding teaches, join us unto God, but he says further, they pour into us
life immortal, and does boldly affirm it, yet we may not believe him, without
great prejudice to Christ himself. I tell you plain says M. Harding, they
put into us eternal life, but Christ says, I know that Gods commandment is
everlasting life, and to put it out of doubt what commandment he means, he
says in an other place, this is eternal life, that they know thee to be the
only very God, John. 12.50.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Then faith ioineth us unto God, faith
puts in to us life. John. 17.3.
Not in all Gods word there is one line, whereby it may appear this is wrought
by the Sacrament. Now rests the second point to be considered, whether the
Sacraments contain grace, and in deed, hinc illae lachrymae. Hereof master
Harding complaining, came as the common Proverb is, (...). When he heard ye
name of Sacraments, he could not but gape after this Popish heresy. This is a
religious article in the Popes kingdom, that Sacraments do give grace, but
what they do, it is sufficiently already declared, beside that their names do
sufficiently bear witness of their efficacy. They be called Testaments, or
couenaunts, which cannot be the thing it self, but the pledge of our
justification. In Baptism, if Christ do not baptize with fire, and with the
holy Ghost, the water of regeneration does not avail. Therefore S. Paul says:
ye that are baptized into Christ, Math. 3.11.
have put on Christ. By which one sentence all M. Hardings doctrine is
overthrown. For neither the water joins us unto God, Gal. 3.27.
neither yet gives us grace, but that is wrought only by our faith in Christ.
And therefore S. Paul writes of Circumcision, that Abraham was first
justified, and after received the sign of Circumcision, Romans 2.4.
as this seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had when he was
uncircumcised. By all this it is manifest, that grace is first given us freely
from above, and then the Sacrament is left unto us as a warrant that Gods
promise shall be fulfilled. Thus we see, that touching the Sacraments M. Iuel
says nothing otherwise than the Scripture teaches, and the untruth that M.
Harding would so feign note, is nothing else but his own heresy. And now, for
as much as M. Harding has called us into so long a discourse of Gods
Sacraments, I desire of thee good Christian reader, to mark indifferently the
great difference in this behalf, between the Christian and the papal Religion,
and thou will soon, as I doubt not, abhor their great deprauing of Christ's
institution, which in that sinagoge is so miserably rent in pieces, that scarce
any part of it is kept inuiolate. Christ did institute his supper for this
Luc. 22.15.
They appoint their Masses, that they may receive alone. Christ in may not thus
be framed to man's fancy, so in the latter day when they shall be accomptable
for their doings, they may be unblameable in the sight of the highest.


The B. of Saris. He says Communion is so called, of that we Communicate
together.


Harding. The.79. untruth. He says not together.


Dering. It is a very strange property, not to be ashamed to speak manifestly
against the known signification of any word, it is much more strange to
speak against it, placed in such a sentence where of force the signification
must be granted, but it is most strange of all, and in manner a singular
impudency to note it for any untruth in one, that will not so shamelesly
speak without reason as an other does. Such an untruth as this, is it which
now we have in hand: (...) is well known to signify to Communicate together
in the same time and place. And in this sentence (...). Here to say it can
signify any other thing, it is very ignorant boldness. But to note it for an
untruth as master Harding does, it is both to be past shame and past grace.
The word is well known, that (...) and (...) do signify a co^munitie of any
thing together, and therefore they be called (...), which may have fellowship
with the Congregation and (...) to be in fellowship with any man. And because
that Mercury is said to be the messenger of the Pagane gods to tell their
errandes from them to any man, therefore he is called (...) having a proper
name of his proper office, in that by him the Ethnikes did think they were
made partakers of their gods counsel, by which the property of this word
appears. And consider good Reader what manner of Communion it is that M.
Harding would make when the Priest says Mass in the Church, and calls no
body unto him, yet he says that all the Priests in the world which say Mass
at the same time do Communicate with him, and be made one body of Christ
together. Here I ask of M. Harding how he agrees with S. Paul yt says we
are one bread and one body, 1. Cor. 10.
because we all are partakers of one bread. Mark reader because we eat of one
bread, we become one body says S. Paul. Because we say Mass at one time, we
become one body says M. Harding, though we eat not at all of the same bread.
Sure these two Doctoures do not agree. S. Paul says moreover the bread which
we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ, M. Harding says,
though we break not the same bread, but be each one of us by our selves at our
altares, yet it is the Communion of the body of Christ. Thus we see S. Paul
and M. Harding teach not both one Doctrine. But it is no marvel they are
not guided both with one spirit. S. Paul speaks truth, and M. Harding
falshead, S. Paul the word of God, and master Harding his own fancies, as
for this Communion of M. Hardings, it was never known in the Church of God. I
remember there is a great bragger in Martial, makes even such an other, he
had ever in his mouth (...). All things are common among friends: but saying
thus so often when he would never bestow any thing among his neighbors, the
Poet says this is a very strange Communion. Das nihil and dicis Candide,
(...). So it goes with M. Harding, he ever says of his Mass it is common, it
is common, but he says it only, he calls no man unto him. Sure say what he
will, this is but craking Candidus his Communion, God be praised that we are
delivered from it. And thus it appears it is no untruth, to say (...), is to
Communicate together* as well because the word it self is plain, as for that
the scripture teaches that the Communion must be so administered.


The B. of Saris. Basil reports an Ecclesiastical Decree or Canon, that at
the receiving of the holy Communion, which he called mysticum Pascha, there
ought to be.xij. persons at the least, and never under.


Harding. The.80. untruth. It is no Ecclesiastical decree.


Dering. M. Harding in this place is far gone. He is wont to control very
curiously false quotation in this place unless my book deceive me he is much
ouerseene. For I think it is in asceticis sermon primo. Whether it bewell
quoted or no, it is truly reported. S. Basils words are these. Quemadmodum
spiritualis lex non vult eos esse infra numerum duodenarium qui mysticum pascha
edere debeant. etc. Even as the spiritual or Ecclesiastical decree will not
have under twelve that should eat the mystical passover. etc. Lo. S. Basil
says it is an Ecclesiastical Decree. Yet M. Harding says it is no Decree.
Believe him not henceforth before thou try him. And the Doctors words were as
sone changed, as he is ready to deny, or affirm at adventures, thou could be
sure of nothing, but it is well, the truth does not hang upon his report. Let
him say while he will, it is no decree, S. Basils words are plain, it is
spiritualis lex. If M. Harding had not made wrangling, his hope in these
untruths, this had not been numbered. He may as well blame the Evangelists,
for alleging the Prophets. And no doubt if M. Iuell should follow the
faithful sense as the Evangelists do and let pass words, Master Harding
would find five lies in one line. Such truth he uses in these untruths.


The B. of Saris^. It appears by S. Augustine, and certain old Canons, that
in the Primative church the Priest, and people sometime did Communicate after
supper.


Harding. The.81. untruth. The.11. division. It appears not.


Dering. This untruth is sone answered. For M. Harding grants that it
appears by s. Augustine, some received on Mau^die thursday after supper, but
says he, that is not sometime. For says he, he that says sometime, Reioinder.
Fol. 125.
means oftener than once a year. Now if it were possible that once a year
might be sometime, then were it necessary that M. Harding did wrangle. But
because once a year is no time, let us see if it may be proved, that it was
done oftener. First, whether it be or no, S. Augustine is at a point, and says,
Ad Ianua. Ep. 118.
faciat quisque quod in ea Ecclesia in quam venerit, inuenit. Let every one do
after the custom of that Church, in which he comes, it appertains neither
unto faith, nor unto good manners, therefore whether a man receive the
Communion, fasting or no, so he receive in the Lord, it skilleth not much. Now
what they have done in the primative Church, let us, as I have said, enquire.
Act. 20.7.
It appears in the scripture, that on a day when the Disciples came together
to break bread, Paul disputed among them, and prolonged his talk until
midnight. Of this if I should conclude, that they came in the after none. M.
Harding perhaps would say it were but a guess, therefore I leave it. 1. Co. 11.
S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, if any man be hungry, let him eat at
home. Therefore it follows necessarily, that they may receive after other
meat, and if it be so, M. Harding him self will grant they might receive at
night, unless as he does in the.8. division so here he will deny that this
place is meant of the Communion, and if he do, the Doctors are then against
him. S. Augustine shall stand in stead of many, who says plainly, Ad Ianua.
Ep. 118.
de hoc ipso sacramento loquitur. He speaks of this very sacrament. Now this
being lawful to be done, and the Church of God being so oppressed, could not
meet when they would, no doubt sometime they met at night. And further that
this may be no bare guess, that some received at night. It appears by S.
Luke, Act. 2.
where he writes that they did continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
in breaking bread, and that continuance in the same Chapter, he mentions
again by these words, (...), which words signify a continuance from morning
till night, and by this above all conjecture, it is manifest they received
sometimes at night. Act. 5.
Then except M. Harding will use here his former distinction of the Thursday
before Easter, and say that quotidie is every Maundie thursday, it is true that
M. Iuel says that sometime they received at night. Now that some part of the
use of the primative church may appear to agree with this doing of the
Apostles, we will a little examine their doings. Bas. in Psalm. 114.
S. Basil writes that they were accustomed at the dedication of Temples to
meet at midnight, but at the same assemblies they may well seem to have
ministered the Communion, and therefore at after supper. Theod. lib. 2 cap. 13.
We read the same of Athanasius, that he did usually gather together the
Christian congregation at Alexandria in the night time. And of this night
meeting in all the congregations that were in Europe, Lactantius makes
express mention. Lib. 7. ca. 19 de diuino primo.
Ierom makes mention of the same in his Epistle to Sabinjanus, and against
Vigilantius. And that these meetings were in the foreparte of the night, it may
appear, for that they had commonly other meetings in the morning, which they
called Antelucanos coetus, the morning assemblies. And yet if M. Harding would
stick in it, I may refuse all these and many such aucthorities. And for the
justifying of these untruths, stand to the plain words of Sozomene, who
writes that in many Cities and Towns among the Egiptians, Sozo. lib. 7. cap.
19.
they had their meetings on Saturday at night, and in like plain words
Primasius says, that in certain places of Syria and Egypt, 1. Cor. 11.
men came together on Saturday night, and that after. Now I trust though the
Thursday before Easter with master Harding be no time, yet all these
saterdayes joined with it, I trust do make sometimes. Here is nothing can be
replied but if M. Harding will say, that in such meetings they did not minister
the sacrament. And if he will say so, may it please him then to here what
Eusebius says, that in such meetings they had Orationes, Psalmodiam,
participationem de mysterijs. etc. Lib. 10. ca. 2
They had prayers, singing psalms, the Communion. etc. And S. Augustine says,
they did celebrate Dominicam coenam, De ciuit. dei lib. 22. ca. 8.
the Lords supper, but except M. Harding have some distinction in store, which
yet now he has not told us of, we shall not need greatly to prove this
matter, in the.182. untruth, where M. Iuel alleges the counsel of Cabilon,
De consecr. dis. 1. solent. plures.
to prove that Mass does sometime signify common prayer, because there it is
recorded that they had Mass at evening, circa noctis initium, about the
beginning of night, there M. Harding makes this answer, why sir think you
that Missa is taken for any kind of prayer, because in that place it is
required to be done in ye evening? As though the Mass might not at any time be
celebrate, Reioinder. Fol. 255.
but only before noone? if you so think you are deceived. etc. and there fully
he concludes that sometime it was said at night, naming both maundy thursday
and other times also. Then I trust this untruth is justified expressly by sundry
other aucthorities, and probably by M. Hardings own. He tells us in deed,
that though it were at night, yet it was not after supper nor yet dinner, but
that saying rests upon M. Hardings credit, which to prove an untruth, wayeth
over light.


The B. of Saris. In the primative Church this order was thought expedient, not
for the sick, for they in their health received daily.


Harding. The.82. untruth. It was for the sick.

The.83. untruth. They received not daily.


Dering. If I went about to answer M. Hardings Reioinder in this one
Paragraph, through lying, and fond speaking, he has ministered sufficient
matter to fill many leaves. But I leave that to the godly Reader to consider.
For this present purpose, thus says master Iuel, the receipt of the Communion,
when men lay on their death bed, was instituted in the primative Church,
especially not for the sick, but for them that were excommunicate. This saying
M. Harding does turn, as if M. Iuel said, Reioinder. Fol. 127.
that it was not expedient for the sick to receive, and so makes that untrue,
which in deed is untrue, and never spoken by M. Iuel. But without such shifts,
master Hardings number of untruths could not grow. For master Iuels saying,
that this receiving was especially for the excommunicate, it may be
sufficiently proved. And M. Harding in his Reioinder says nothing to the
contrary, for this untruth, because M. Iuel says no such thing. Let it stand
as a slander not worthy answer. An other untruth here is brought, that the
people received not daily, and M. Harding has such a confidence in this
untruth, that he is not contented with once noting it, but as his manner is,
in many other untruths, when his number comes slowly forward, he reconeth up
one.4. or.5. times. so he uses this, and makes it the 83.133.145.156.213.
untruth. Now because it is so often reckened, by like it stands upon some
good ground. Read the.133. untruth, and thou see what it is.


The B. of Saris. At last it grew to such superstition, that it was thruste
into men's mouths after they were dead, as we may see by the council of
Carthage, forbidding the same.


Harding. The.84. untruth. It was not thrust in their mouths.

The.85. untruth. It is not to be seen.


Dering. What means M. Harding? would he have children witnesses of his folly.
The words of the Council are these, Item placuit vt mortuis (...) non detur.
It has likewise pleased us that the Sacrament be not given unto dead men,
hereby says he it appears it was given to dead men, not that it was thrust
in their mouths. But I pray M. Harding, can a thing be given to a dead man to
eat, and not thrust into his mouth? This vain contention about words proves
M. Harding to be a very wrangler. This appears to be true by the Canon M.
Iuel recites, and further we read that it was commanded if the person were
dying, infundatur ori eius Eucharistia, that the Sacrament should be poured
into his mouth. Here by the way note, that in that time the people received
the cup. As touching the.85. untruth, M. Hardings Reioinder does confute it
self in the next untruth, before he said the Council did forbid it, now he
says it did not so, whether it did or no, M. Harding has made a lie, and
except the destruction of thrusting it in their mouths, and putting it in,
there is no color to shadow the lie.


The B. of Saris. The members of these arguments hang together like a sick
man's dream.


Harding. The.86. untruth. I make no arguments in this place.


Dering. No good arguments in deed I grant, but yet such as they are, you
encombre us with them.


The B. of Sarisb. Here would M. Harding feign find a Mass. etc.


Harding. The.87. untruth. Here I seek not for the Mass.


Dering. But to seek after your Mass, is your only purpose. Therefore here you
speak nothing to the purpose, and consequently as it was said before, your
writings hang together like a sick man's dream.


The B. of Saris. Here these words, every other christian man, or woman, that
he has in by the way, are an overplus, and quite from the purpose.


Harding. The.88. untruth. The.12. Division. These words are quite from the
purpose.


Dering. The question is, whether there were private Mass within.600. year
after Christ, that is, whether the Priests received alone in the congregation:
Master Harding answers, sick men, and women received at home. The
controversy lies whether this be from the purpose.


The B. of Saris. For the question is moved not of any other man, or woman, but
of the Mass, and only of the Priest, that says the Mass.


Dering. The.89. untruth.

Before there was an untruth quoted, and not numbered, here is one numbered, and
not quoted. When M. Harding tells what this untruth is, we will answer it,
in the mean season we may mark the value of these untruths. Some not worth
numbering, some not worth naming, but all is good enough for this Reioinder.


The B. of Saris. S. Jerome in his exposition is as homely, calling it vilem
intelligentiam traditionum.


Harding. The.90. untruth. S. Jerome calls not Moses law so.


Dering. Here M. Harding makes two gesses. One at S. Ieroms meaning, an other
at master Iuels, if either fail, this untruth, that is risen by chance must
sal of necessity. But M. Harding here, as his whole religion is, makes very
much of outward shows. For except a little carnal pleasure of the outward
sense, there is nothing in their sinagogue, but mourning, and lamentation of
the spirit. (...) in no wise he will have beggarly Ceremonies. (...) says he,
is poor or nedy, not beggarly. What great ignorance in singular impudency?
This exact defining of Greek words may breed some where some opinion of
learning. But alas here is nothing but in deed (...) beggarly wrangling
without other learning, or good religion, (...) says master Harding is not
beggarly but poor. Yet Aristophanes says, (...) is not pore but beggarly.
Now whether were better Grecian master Harding or Aristophanes, Aristop. in
Pluto.
I think it may be sone judged, Aristophanes words are these, (...), he is
(...), that is a beggar and has nothing, he is (...) that lives by his labor.
The^ by this it seems that (...) is beggarly. And Master Harding, that
sacred interpretation, that trident covent, does so much enforce, does it not
call them egena elementa? And I pray you M. Harding, whether is egena poor or
beggarly? Surely Ovid says, ( de rem. amor. lib. 2.) of Hecate and Irus, why
they are not beloved. Nempe quod alter ege^s, altera pauper erat. because
Hecate was but poor, and Irus was a very beggar, but thus it is: Master
Harding cares neither for Aristophanes, nor yet for Ovid, neither yet for
Greek, nor yet for Latin. He is so ielous over his untruths, that some time
he speaks he knows not what. Again (...), says master Harding is rather
Elements, than Ceremonies. In deed I grant the word signifies the four
elements, but I trow he will not have S. Paul speak thus: now you know God,
why turn you again to the fire, air, water, and earth, that were a beggarly
sense made of the holy Ghosts words. Then why does he not confess that S.
Paul means the Ceremonies of the law? and thus much as concerning master
Hardings Greek. As touching his religion it is very choler, if in respect of
Christ, he may not suffer the ceremonies of the law to be called beggarly. But
it is no marvel though this interpretation offend them, Gal. 4.10.
for what is it that Paul calls beggarly Ceremonies? It follows. You
observe days and months, times, and years. Hinc illae lachrimae, for this
cause M. Harding is so much offended, such observations are great principles in
Papistrie, and to call them beggarly, is to make all that Religion nothing
worth. But we see such a one is Paul, he was chosen to preach among the
gentiles, and God have the glory, Gal. 1.6.
he has converted us from al popish Idolatry. For this authority of Ierom,
which M. Harding blames, and in which he seeks for his untruth, Lib. 2.
co^m. ad Gal. ca. 4
read the place thou shall find the words: or else let this be untrue.


The B. of Saris. Of mingling water with wine, superstition only except, no man
makes any great account.


Harding. The.91. untruth. The old fathers make great account of it.


Dering. If M. Harding will press upon these words, no man makes any great
account, then he might have said, I and my fellows make great account of it,
therefore some body does it, and by this means he might have had many
witnesses of his saying, and so his untruth had been the surer. If he will not
so force the words, why does he apply them unto the old fathers? By this it
appears he writes, not always with the best aduisement. But now he does M.
Iuel great wrong, and racketh his words to that, he never meant. He speaks of
him self, and other, that at this day profess Gods religion, and says that
were it not for fear of superstition, we would not greatly stick to mingle
water with the wine, and for proof that M. Iuel meant thus, let his book be
judge. He alleges Cyprian, and Iustine, and farther says that certain old
Fathers force it much, which words follow immediately. Read his Reply. Reply.
Fo. 34.
Then what shame is it to ascribe that to M. Iuel for an untruth, which him
self did never speak nor mean. Belike these untruths go slowly forward,
when M. Harding is enforced to challenge that, which was never said.


The B. of Saris. Neither Christ nor any of his Disciples ever gave
commandment of it, neither was it at any time universally received.


Harding. The.92. untruth. Christ commanded it.

The.93. untruth. It has been universally received.


Dering. Note good reader this hasty quoting of untruths, and the slender
proof, and, thou shall soon epsy, that M. Harding has more desire of his
number, than regard of any substance. Here are two untruths in a line. The
first: Christ, says he, commanded that water should be mingled with the wine.
This bold asseueration concerning Christ's doing, does ask a sure proof. For
both we were unthankful, if we would not follow his doing, and the danger were
great, in leaving his example. But in all the Evangelists it is plain, that
our Savior Christ commanded no such thing. Then how does M. Harding prove
this? Forsooth says he, Cyprian and the sixth general council seem to say
it came from the Apostles. But because this is but a guess, and little worth,
he alleges Clement, who says plainly Christ did it, and this begins to
describe his ministration of the cup. Constit. apo. lib. 8. ca. 17.
Likewise mingling the cup of wine, and water, and Consecrating it, he gave it
unto them. etc. Now if this Clement be of good authority, the matter is
clear. But M. Iuel has already showed that his authority is no more worth
than Abdias, Hippolytus, Amphilochius and his other fellows, and here himself
does quite confound himself, in that otherwise then all the Evangelists, and S.
Paul do, he describes a new fashion of the Lords supper. S. Paul says,
Gal. 1.
he that preaches any other Gospel than this, let him be accursed. This of
Clements is an other Gospel tha^ Paul preached, and therefore in this great
light of the true Gospel that now shines) accursed be he, that will follow all
Clements doctrine. Since therefore this is the proof of this untruth, Clement
says it, this shall be our answer for the discharge of it. Master Iuel says
nay a man of more learning, better religion, godlier life, and greater credit,
than ever ye bastard Clement was. The second untruth here noted is, that it
has been generally received to pour water in the wine. Yet Scotus says it is
not necessary, 3. Par. Init. q. 74.
as M. Iuel has showed. And likewise so says Thomas and certain other. Also
Mary cou^ter^et Pope Alexander in his first Decretall Epistle, says it must be
done, Ius. Ap. 2. ad Ant. Ire. lib. 5. Cypri. ad Cornel.
because both came out of Christ's side. But let these doctors go. This I
grant that Justinius Martyr, Iraeneus, and Cyprian, who above other in this are
most earnest, do all seem to enforce it, but because the scripture has not
expressed it, we must beware how we make it necessary, and for that occasion,
though in the Latin church it be very ancient, yet in our Church we do not
use it. But for this untruth where M. Harding says it has been generally
received, that is more rashly affirmed, than sufficiently proved. Scotus
says, that in his time the Greeks used it not, In. 4. sent. dis. 11. q. 6.
Can. 33.
long before him the people of Armenia used it not, as appears in this sixth
general council alleged by M. Harding, and by sundry other records, and
further many years before that time, Chrysostom said of those words of our
savior Christ, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine. Math 26.
etc. that he would with those words, take away the pernicious heresy of such
as used water in the mysteries. Yet says M. Harding it has been generally
received. With as good a ^orage, and as much truth as Pope Eugenius says the
same, but he must pardon us, In decretis Eugen. papae.
he may not score up untruths upon his own credit, we will neither believe the
Pope, nor him neither, except they bring their proofs. And thus much of this
untruth.


The B. of Saris. M. Harding says this mixture is necessary to the sacrament.


Harding. The.94. untruth. I say not it is necessary.


Dering. Even now he said it was commanded by Christ, now he says it is not
necessary. Mark well his sayings and lay them together, and thou shall easily
consider of these untruths, if we likewise thought Christ's commandment not
necessary to be observed, when he says, accipite, edite. We might aforde M.
Harding his private Mass.


The B. of Saris. Scotus says it is not necessary.


Harding. The.95. untruth. Scotus says not so.


Dering. Well said yet Anaxagoras, snow is not white. Scotus has the very
words, see the place in. 4. sent. did. 11. q. 6. Now concerning this mingling
of wine and water, because so many untruths are made about it, it shall not be
amiss to speak somewhat of it. First as touching these me^ themselves, how
they are affected, we may partly gather by these untruths in the.94. untruth,
M. Iuel says, that M. Harding makes this mixture necessary. It is not so
says M. Harding. I say not it is necessary. In this untruth M. Iuel says, yt
Scotus makes this mixture not necessary. It is not so says M. Hard, he makes
it necessary. By this it is plain, yt Scotus and M. Harding do not agree. But
it may be that these hasty untruths want some consideration. Let that
advantage go, and let us consider the thing. We have no express
commandment for it. That Christ gave only wine, it may well appear by that
is written. I will drink no more of this fruit of the vine. Math. 26.
etc. for the usage of it, if it were left free, it might be had, but when they
made it a matter of such weight, it was necessary to stop ye great outrage. But
let us see how they prove that this mixture should be made of wine and water,
Quia vtrumque ex Christi latere profluxisse dicitur, De conse. did. 2. can.
Alexand. pap. Epist. 1.
because both issued out of Christ's side. True it is water and blood issued
out of Christ side, but this is a poor reason to mingle water and wine in this
Sacrament, when Christ did celebrate his supper, before his precious side was
pierced. That which S. John testifies here, that water and blood issued out
of his side, John. 19.34. John. 15.
the same he writes in his Epistle, that Christ came with water and blood.
Teaching us hereby that Christ is the true satisfaction for our sins, and
the true water of regeneration to make us clean, and without spot before his
father. For the forgiveness of our sins, and the purifying of our souls
were figured in the law by sacrifices, and by washings. In ye sacrifices the
blood did purge sins, and was the atonement appointed to pacify Gods
wrath. The washings were testimonies of the true cleanenesse of the mind, and
remedies to do away the filthiness of our flesh. Now least our faith should
abide still in those Elements. S. John does witness, that in Christ it is
accomplished, what so ever was wanting in those outward Ceremonies. And for a
token of that fullness of grace in Christ, that in him is found, all that
reconciliation figured in the law, either by blood or water, he writes that
out of his side issued both blood and water. By the blood he has purged us
from our sins, and done out the handwriting of ordinance, Col 2.14. Ebr.
9.13.
that was against us, and fastened it upon the Cross. And that as Paul says,
not by the blood of Goats, and calves, but by his own precious blood gushing
out of his side, by which he is entered into the holy place, which is heaven,
and is become the tabernacle, the sacrifice, and the priest, and has obtained
eternal redemption for us. By the water we are assured that this benefit does
come unto us, both because by water we be regenerate, and also because it
signifies the people, Apoc. 17.13.
so that this miracle of blood, and water in the death of our savior Christ, is
the performance of that, which God had promised by his Prophet, saying. In that
day shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness. And thus by this water, Zach. 15.1.
and blood gushing out of the side of our Savior, we are taught two especial
points of the Christian faith, the one, that by Christ alone all sins are
purged, the other, that in the new Testament we have but two Sacraments, the
one of the Lords death, the other of Baptism, which two resembled in this
blood, and water, have in them the whole mystery of our full redemption. And
thus the remembrance of this same place is the greatest comfort, that a
Christian soul can have in the world. But Lord those Papists, which pervert
Gods scriptures, what Doctrine have they gathered of this comfortable saying?
First that we must have water mingled with ye wine in the Chalice, which in
this place, be it never so ancient, yet it has no ground at all. But they go
farther than this, they say that the soldiers name was Lungis, because it is
written (...). And least there should want any thing to make up the tale, they
say, that he was stroke^ blind, and then by this blood and water he received
his sight again, Lege vince^t. lib. 7. cap. 47
and so was converted, whereupon they have made him a Saint, and so now we may
keep the feast of S. Lungis the blind Knight. Yet sure such canonising is
worth as little money, as these untruths had much idle labor.


The B. of Saris. Now to reveal the secrets of M. Hardings mysteries,
touching the same, that one drop, or two must be poured on the ground.


Harding. The.96. untruth. The pouring of the water on the ground, is no part
of our mysteries.


Dering. When M. Harding cannot defend their too beastly usage of Gods holy
sacraments: he thinks he can salve the whole matter with Hick scorner, and
saying that we belie their mysteries, and I pray M. Hue railer, that please
your self so well with Hicke scorner, is this no part of your mysteries? Can
you now deny them? Be ye ashamed of them? It skilleth not greatly what you
think of this. The mystery of iniquity, that so long has wrought in your
sinagoge, has brought many more abominations into the Church of God, all
which the Lord shall abolishe with the brightness of his word. Whether you
make great a do about these things here alleged, let your Doctors be the
judges. Read Scotus in sent. 4. did. 11. qu. 6. Biel in. 4. sent. did. 11.
qu. 2. and in can. miss. lect. 35. and all your other Doctors entreating the
same matter. Yet whether one, or two drops, and no more, must be poured down or
no, I confess I do not know. But why do you stand so in this point? It is a
very learned doubt in respect of their other folish questions. Biel disputes
whether the Priest at Mass do consecrate all the bread in the market, In Can.
lec. 35.
and all the wine in the sellers, and concludes, that if he stand so as he
may see it, and means to do it, he does no doubt consecrate every whit. But
now ask Gabriel Biel an other question, how shall the Priest do to take all
the bread in the market in his hand, as the Mass book requires of that,
which shall be consecrate. This is an other doubt, which M. Hardings Doctors
would surely have discussed, if they had heard it. In. 4. sent. dis 8. q. 2.
Scotus asks what if the priest die before he speak all the words, how shall
then consecration go forewarde? Other ask what if a drop of wine hang on
the outside of the Chalice, whether is that consecrate? and what if the wine
do freese in the Chalice, and what if the Priest at Mass do remember, that
when he washed his mouth in the morning, a drop of water went down his throat,
whether should he receive none, since he had broken his fast, or whether should
he let all alone. Other ask whether Christ be in the Pix, even as he was on
the Cross, with his clothes and crown of thorns about his head. And what
should I recite all, which are almost infinite. A thousand such vnreuerent
questions, they have disputed in whole volumes. Yet now says M. Harding, they
be none of our mysteries. Belike he does yet but hobbe, and roue, he will not
go roundly with his Lord God the Pope. But happy were he, if as he refuses
these vain questions, so he would renounce that whole adulterous religion.


The B. of Saris. Now it appears, that the Church is not yet resolved upon
one intention. For the intention of the Church of Rome, is to work
transubstantiation of bread, and wine: the Greek Church had never that
intention, as is plain by the Council of Florence. The intention of the
Church of Rome is to Consecrate with Christ's words. The intention of the
Greek Church, is to Consecrate with prayers.


Harding. The.97. untruth. The Church is resolved upon one intention.

The.98. untruth. The church of Rome intends not Transubstantiation.

The.99. untruth. This is not plain by the Council of Florence.

The.100. untruth. The Greek church does not consecrate with prayers.


Dering. Now M. Hardings untruths go roundly forward. If this haste may have
good speed, I warrant him his number. But if this haste do make waste, he is
never a whit the near. Let us see then how these untruths are gathered. The
first is this. The Church is agreed upon the Priests intent. But this can not
be so, if the Greek Church, and the Church of Rome do not agree, which is
the.2. untruth. And they can not agree, if the one will have
transubstantiation, the other will not have it, which is the third untruth.
And they will have the one Transubstantiation, the other not, if the one do
consecrate with these words, this is my body, the other with prayers, which is
the.4. untruth. Then thus hang these untruths. If this last be true, that the
Greek Church does consecrate with prayers, the third is true, that it
intends not Transubstantiation. And the second is true, that it has no such
intent, as the Church of Rome has, and the first is true, that these churches
are not resolved in this intent. Now consider I beseech thee, good Reader,
what manner of untruths these are, that notwithstanding their great number,
are yet so small in value, that if but one be proved true, all.iiij. must be
granted. Sure thou must needs confess that M. Harding, who in his Epistle
would so feign shoot at hobs, and rouers, yet at this mark he has had so
good delivery, that he has far ouershot him self, and his whole
commendation is no more worth, than that praise in Horace of a babbling Poet,
Hor. in art. Poet.
qui variare potest rem prodigialiter vnam, which ca^ turn a true sentence
into a great many lies. For proof of this last untruth, on which the other
hang, we have the plain words of the Council of Florence alleged by M. Iuel,
where it is showed, that in the Greeks mynisterie after the words of Christ
pronounced, this is my body, they make this prayer, Conc. Flore^t. sess. vlt.
fac panem hunc honorabile corpus Christi tui. etc. make this bread the
honorable body of thy Christ. By this prayer it is manifest, that these
words, this is my body, being pronounced before, did not work
Transubstantiation. But because it has pleased M. Harding in to great a zeal
of his number, to score up untruths thus unwisely, least his friends should
think the matter insufficiently answered, we will say somewhat of them in order,
even as M. Harding notes them, and I doubt not but to the indifferent reader,
they shall one of them sufficiently confute an other. First says M. Harding,
the Church is resolved on the Priests intent. But that is very false. For the
Greek Church, and the Church of Rome have not one intent. The Greek Church, as
is said, does consecrate with prayers. The Church of Rome with hoc est enim
corpus meum. The Greek Church makes more account of the worthy receiving,
than of Consecration. Conc. Flo. sess. vlt. De consec. did. 2. quiae corpus.
Chrysostom. in. 6. Ioh. Biel in. 4. sent. did. 9. q. 2. d.
The Church of Rome thinks we ought to have more regard of Consecration,
than of the worthy receiving. I leave out other differences which are almost
infinite. This is enough to prove our purpose. Secondarily says M. Harding,
the Church of Rome entendeth not Transubstantiation. What he intended in this
untruth, I know not. For my part would God M. Iuel said here untrue and that
that Romish Church would leave of that presumptuous intent. Thirdly says M.
Harding, the Greek Church means transubstantiation. And this is very
strange for a learned man to speak such repugnances. First yt the church of
Rome intends not transubstantiation. Again, that the Greek Church does
intend transubstantiation. And thirdly, yt they two intend one thing, when M.
Harding with all his wrangling, can make these untruths agree, sure we will
subscribe. Now rests a little to be considered of the Council of Florence,
whether it may appear by it, that the Church of the Grecians acknowledge no
transubstantiation. Thus it stood. When the Latins in that assembly, required
that they might entreat of transubstantiation. Conc. Flore^t. Ann. 1439.
The Greeks made answer, sine totius orientalis ecclesiae authoritate
quaestionem aliam tractare non possimus, without the consent of all the East
Church, we can meddle with no other question. etc. Here be the Reader never so
simple, he must think thus much. If this article of transubstantiation were
so Catholic, as they will make us believe, how comes it to be called so often
in controversy in general Council. And again, if the Grecians did account
it as Catholic, and were resolved in it, what meant they, that they would not
subscribe to so high a point of Christian religion, sure this was their
meaning, they knew this transubstantiation was but a Romish devise, and
therefore they would* not yield unto it. And thus much of these hasty
untruths.


The B. of Saris. The.13. Division. But if Cyril never spoke word of the Mass,
how is he here brought in to prove the Mass?


Harding. The.101. untruth. Cyril is not brought to prove the Mass.


Dering. But he should prove private Mass, or else what makes he here. For
of that the question is moved. And this is a very hard case, that M. Harding
must lose his untruth, or else confess he speaks not to the purpose.


The B. of Saris. Neither may we think that Christ's body, must grossly, and
bodily be received into our bodies.


Harding. The.102. untruth. We must believe it.


Dering. As master Harding has forsaken Gods Religion, and is fallen again
to Popery, so it seems also he has forsaken his learning, and begins to
make untruths with his folly. This is one of the chiefest articles, for which
we have forsaken their unfaithful Church. As often as we repeat this, we
conclude the thing, which lies in controversy between us. This is our
professed opinion, and upon the trial of it by good and sufficient authority,
if it be proved against us, Master Iuel is ready to subscribe. Then what
means master Harding? Or what manner of untruth is this? Or who can account
it for true, and plain dealing, when upon good ground we show forth our
opinion, and he scoreth up the question for an untruth? He shall do well to
reprove it, before he make anymoe untruths of this. Read the.104. untruth.


The B. of Saris. S. Cyprian says, it is meat not for the belly, but for the
mind.


Harding. The.103. untruth. S. Cyprian says not so.


Dering. If M. Harding and his Popish fellows had falsified the Doctors, no
otherwise than M. Iuel here falsifieth S. Cyprian, then in a little change of
words, we should have had their meaning faithfully delivered unto us, and
bastard books such as they knew not, had never been ascribed unto them. But
thanks be to God, who has now lightened us, least such ungodly writings under
godly names should deceive us, as touching this untruth, I grant the words
are not in that treatise entitled de coena domini. But whether the author say
the same thing in sense, let him self witness. M. Iuel alleging no Latin
words, but following the sense, says thus, it is meat not for the belly, but
for the mind. The words in Cyprian are these. Sicut panis communis, quem
quotidie edimus, De coena domini.
vita est corporis: ita panis iste supersubstantialis, vita est animae, and
sanitas mentis. As the common bread, which we eat daily, is the life of the
body: so this bread supersubstantiall is the life of the soul, and the health
of the mind, and what is here falsified by M. Iuel? Or what is worthy blame
in this allegation? Yet M. Harding takes this small occasion to find fault
with his printed sermon, with his reply, and with them, that, as he says,
patched together the Apology. For the printed sermon, it is well confirmed by
the Reply, and the Reply is not yet found blameable, notwithstanding this
Reioinder, the Apology, that he likes to term patched, now after the time,
that God had appointed, it does not want my defense, the book is precious, and
is defended by such a Iuell, that all the treasuries in the world, God make
him thankful, will not buy his gifts, and therefore M. Hardings words ca^ not
hurt him.


The B. of Sarisb. Christ is set forth, not to be received with the mouth, for
that as Cyrill says, were a gross imagination.


Harding. The.104. untruth. Christ must be received with the mouth.

The.105. untruth. Cyrill says not so.


Dering. This is one with the.102. untruth. Master Hardings transubstantiation
stands him in very good stead to multiply his untruths. And yet if he had
well considered it, it had not been worth his doubling. I have spoken somewhat
hereof in the Epistle. Concerning this other untruth, M. Harding, says he
knows not what he grants. These are Cyrillus words, but he gesseth at an
other sense, and upon that surmise quoteth a new untruth. Does he claim so
much to his own understanding, that if he say it, it must be so, though ye
words be contrary? Before we build of his saying, it shall be needeful for him to
win some better credit. See the place and thou will bear witness, that it is
truly alleged.


The B. of Saris. The.14. Division. For the party excommunicate being a
priest, might say he would say Mass, and so receive the Communion, even with
the bishop, of whom he were excommunicate.


Harding. The.106. untruth. The Priest excommunicate, might not say Mass
lawfully.


Dering. No sure, whether he were excommunicate, or no, he might not say it
lawfully, neither by Gods law, nor his holy Euangelies, when M. Iuel says
this, I will subscribe.


The B. of Sarisb. Now if M. Hardings principle stand for good, that the
priest, saying his private Mass, may receive the Communion with all others in
other places. etc.


Harding. The.107. untruth. I say not he may receive with others.


Dering. M. Harding is past shame, would God, as I have said often, he were not
past grace, if these be not his words. Therefore that one may Communicate with
an other, Hard. diuis. 14
though they be not together in one place, it may be proved by good authority,
then will I subscribe, if they be his words, then judge thou of his doing.


The B. of Saris. Here mark good Christian reader, then they Communicated,
says Irenaeus, when they met in the Church.


Harding. The.108. untruth. Irenaeus says not so, read it again, and mark
it better.


Dering. These are Irenaeus words, (...). These words, if as M. Harding
requesteth, we read them again, and mark them better, then no doubt they are
thus in English. These things being thus, they Communicated together, and in
the Church Anicetus gave to Polycarpus the Eucharist. Here says M. Iuel, by
this it appears, they communicated, when they met in ye church. That is not
so says M. Hard. Read it once again, and mark it better. If often reading,
and better marking may serve the turn, then gentle reader I crave also thy
labor, read it yet once again and mark it better. Yea read it while thou will, and mark it how thou can, if this fancy of M. Hardings do but once
come in thy mind, I may boldly make thee this large offer, let these all be
untruths. His fancy is so full of folly, his imagination so vain, his
interpretation so childish, that if thou of thy self can find it out, I say,
as I said before, let all these untruths stand. Read it I beseech thee once
again, and mark it better. Is not this a strange untruth, that no man can
epsy it but M. Harding? But since it is so, that here can be no untruth
without M. Hardings good instruction, let us ask of him, how it may be
falsified. He tells us of two faults, the first in the word (...) they
communicated, the second in Englishing Eucharistia the sacrament. Mary says
he, yet I will define nothing, that is, Reioinder. Fol. 157.
I will stand to neither of them. Is not this a strange dealing, that he will
first find fault, then will not bide by it, and yet notwithstanding will score
up his untruth. If this untruth be untruth, why will he not abide by it? Or
if he will not abide by it, why does he say it is untrue? must his private
Mass, his half communion, his outlandishe prayers, his Popes supremacy, yea
his untruths, and all be proved by paraduenture? But let it be so, what is it
at the last, that here may chance be false? this it is in the first fault
about communion: peradventure forsooth they communicated before they met. This
blind peradventure, were it in Cambridge or Oxford, no doubt it would be hissed
out of the schools. The second fault found in translating, Eucharistia, ye
sacrament is this: peradventure Eucharistia here does signify sacerdotale
mynisterium, the priestly office. Now sure good reader this is a strange
adventure. Eucharistia, Reioinder. Fol. 157.
the priests office? Fie on such a chance, except a man had a privilege, to
make words sound, what him listed. No man, I trow, would have made this
adventure. But here I must desire the reader to look a little back, to take
the better view of M. Hardings dealing, in the Epistle, where M. Harding
sporteth him self with his good artillery, he says, he could never shote at
this mark, that Eucharistia might be taken, not for the Sacrament, but for
common bread. Now either by means of lighter arowes, or a better loose, he
shootes a great way beyond it, and says with a good countenance, y^
Eucharistia is no bread at al, but ye priests office. Sure this is very
uncertain shooting, and can never stand with a good archer. A man may shoot
long at the Etymology of ye word, ere he bring it to this signification,
Though he have determined to say little truly: yet he should have taken heed,
how he had spoken so unwisely. That other tragical exclamation, that
Eucharistia must be taken simply for bread consecrate, bewrays this close
dealing, that it may be taken for the Priests office. And here again for a
good note of M. Hardings falls dealing, we have to mark, that in this place,
where M. Iuell says Eucharistia may be taken for common bread, but yet
appointed for the Communion, M. Harding does not quote it for an untruth, yet
in the Epistle he noted it for a great heresy. And why does he thus? As it
may be thought, because he foresawe, that to deny the Eucharist at any time to
note bread, not yet consecrate, were a great prejudice to his gross
distinction, that it might signify the Priests office, and therefore for the
better conueyaunce of this absurdity, he would not quote that an untruth, which
he had so greatly impugned before. More true dealing, and less vain speaking,
would better beseem a Doctor of Divinity.


The B. of Saris. Anicetus as Irenaeus says, received the sacrament with
Policarpus in the Church, and not, as M. Harding seems to say in his Inn, or
hosterie.


Harding. The.109. untruth. Irenaeus says not that Polycarpus, and Anicetus
communicated in the Church.


Dering. (...) says Orestes, forgetfulness of unfortunate things is to be
reverenced. But M. Harding for all his wonted hobbing, has here far
ouershot him self, to note two untruths together, that are both one, if
there be any distinction that may salve this matter, it were good we were
informed. I think simple wits, without long instruction, will not find it.


Harding. The.110. untruth. I seem not to say it.


Dering. M. Harding grants, that he may say they Communicated together
before they met, but not that they received the Sacrament, and herein says
he, Reioinder. Fol. 158.
M. Iuel deceives his reader. This distinction, as it is somewhat strange, so
no doubt it has some hid understanding, one had need of Apollo, that should
well interpret it. For my part except M. Harding expound it, I know not what
he means. For M. Iuel says, it seems to me very probable. For if M.
Harding do deny that they received in the Church, or in Anicetus house, or in
the streat, then if they did receive, it is most like he says they received
in their Inn, if they received not, what is master Harding the nearer to his
Private Mass.


The B. of Saris. The.16. Division. The Priest prays, and gives thanks in
the vulgar tongue.


Harding. The.111. untruth. He prays not in the vulgar tongue of the
Country.


Dering. The Canon law does give license to answer one cavil with an other.
If either that law were worth following, or we would use that liberty, is given
us, Sexti. tit. 6. cupientes in glossa.
we would appoint some play maker to answer this Reioinder, for such men with
their great leisure, and selfpleasing wit, would find M. Harding wrangling
work enough. Iustine in describing the order of their service, among other
things, In Apol. 2.
he tells how the people give thanks, and say Amen to the ministers prayer,
and so them selves must make their prayers in their vulgar tongue. This says
M. Harding is not true, if he mean by ye vulgar tongue, the common speech of
the country. But if he mean the one of the three learned tongues, Latin,
Greek, or Hebrew, then M. Harding grants they had service in the vulgar
tongue. Here I crave of the reader but indifferent judgment, to think of this
untruth, as occasion is ministered. For proof that it is untrue, here is
nothing brought but this distinction, that the vulgar tongue signifies either
that, which every Country speaks, or else the Greek, Latin, or Hebrew
tongue. And what a miserable distinction is this? who ever hard that the vulgar
tongue did signify any other than the mother tongue of every country? Sure
this book is a book of distinctions, it is no reioinder. Let him show in any
book in the world, where vulgar has this signification, that he dreameth of,
and let him have all his untruths.


The B. of Saris. He said before, that every private Mass was common.


Harding. The.112. untruth. I say no where, that every private Mass is
common, but that every Mass is common.


Dering. This is one of those untruths, which M. Hard. says is very
manifest, and can by no means be colored. But good reader be not dismaide, it
is soon justified how so ever M. Harding misliketh of it. Mark but only this
grant, which he makes, and to quite that reason, which in the.70. untruth,
he would have considered, I will make an other here for him to consider: ye
proposition shall be his own: the assumpsion shall be confessed of al men. The
conclusion shall follow in good mood, and figure. M. Harding says every Mass
is common. But every private Mass is a Mass. Ergo, he says every Private
Mass is common.

I do think M. Harding did not orderly consider of this untruth, when he made
it. Sure I am, this argument is good, and by no distinction ca^ be answered.
Therefore this untruth, saving only the necessity of his number, might well have
been spared. Read more of this untruth in the third untruth.


The B. of Saris. I alleged all these in my sermon.


Harding. The.113. untruth. He alleged not all.


Dering. In very many places to make up these untruths, M. Harding says of
sundry aucthorities, he alleged them not for his Mass. Now he will needs take
in all for his purpose, when I shall better understand which places be brought
for his Mass, and which in vain, then I will examine the sermon. In the mean
season understand thus much. M. Iuel says, I alleged al these witnesses for
private Mass. That is an impudent untruth says M. Harding, he alleges not
all, that I allege for sole receiving. M. Hardings privilege serves both
ways, either to make one word to signify diverse things, or diverse words to
signify but one thing. We have heard before of his distinctions, now he
comes in with his conjunctions, private Mass, and sole receiving, by this
untruth are both one. But as M. Hardings distinctions, are in deed
distinctions, that is, as I interpreate it lies, so these conjunctions are his
own conjunctions, that is, a coupling of lies together.


The B. of Saris. This manner of Private receiving at home, was not lawful for
the lay men. For it was abolished by godly Bishops in general Council.


Harding. The.114. untruth. The.17. Division. It was not abolished.

The.115. untruth. That council was not general, but provincial.


Dering. These untruths come more fast, than truly forward. It was not,
says M. Harding, abolished. Lay men might receive at home. The council of
Caesar Augusta, which M. Iuel says thus. Ca. 3.
He that receives the Sacrament, and does not eat it in the Church, let him
be accursed for ever. The like Canon is also decreed in the first council of
Toledo, if any man having received the Sacrament, do not presently eat it,
velut sacrilegus propellatur, let him be driven away as a most wicked person.
Can. 14. and Conc. tol. 11. cap. 11.
Of this M. Iuel says, the lay man might not receive it at home. And shall we
think, because M. Harding says nay, that notwithstanding these cursings, yet
the lay man might carry it home to receive it? Master Hardings wrangling here
about sick men, is not worth the answer. M. Iuel speaks of those, that may
go to Church. It was an idle matter here to talk of sick folks. If M.
Harding for these untruths, be feign to wrest plain words into a violent
sense, then the untruths are his own. For this second untruth, me thinks
M. Harding is a very partial man. In the.108. untruth he will have
Eucharistia so large in signification, as no man, I trow, but him self could
imagine. In this he so presses the word general, that he aloweth not that
which common sense teaches. He denies that council to be general, because
there was not gathered together, I know not how many Bishops out of
christendom. But if M. Harding had marked it better, he should have known it
well enough, that general might be applied only to those twelve, which he
says were there gathered together. If they did all well agree, sure that
council was more general, than their Chapter of Trident. If he will force the
word Oecumenicall, there is no Counsel that ever was so general. If he will
any thing restrain it, why may he not bring it down, yea even to twelve. This
untruth is but a cauil, and if it were granted, yet were M. Harding never the
near his private Mass. But because he says so constantly, that that Counsel
was but of.xij. Bishops in Spain, as Peter Crab also notes out of Isidorus,
it is more, I think, than he is able to prove, for it is known that the
Church of Caesar Augusta, and Asturica Augusta, an other City in Spain, and
Emerica Augusta a City in Portingall, joined in all matters, and were of one
fellowship, so that counsel of the other xij. Bishops, had more over the
consent of their great Cities. This Caesar Augusta it self, otherwise called
Numantia, Volat. geogr. lib. 2.
was so populous a City, that it kept war.xiiij. year with the Empire of
Rome. It was a City of so much worthiness for religion, that what so ever
had been determined, there the consent might well have been called general.
Prudentius does seem to glory, that it was his Country. In Hymno 18. mart.
Vinc. lib. 12. cap. 123. and alibi.
In the time of Dioclesian, and Valerian, a great many of Martyrs were there
put to death. This is a very pore wrangling, when sundry forain Bishops met in
such a City, to deny their Decrees to be agreed on in general Counsel.


The B. of Saris. He says, the thing, that we receive, is no bread, but so
Tertullian says not. His words be these, thy husband will think it only
bread, and not that bread, that it is called.


Harding. The.116. untruth. I say it not, look better on my words.

The.117. untruth. These are not Tertullians words.


Dering. If looking better on M. Hardings words will help the matter, we will
not let for that. Mark good Reader, and look diligently, these are his words.
The thing reverently, and devoutly received, Hard. diuis. 17
before other meats, is not bread as the infidels then, and the Sacramentaries
now believe. Look well good reader, and for M. Hardings pleasure look again,
does he not say it is not bread. How is this then untrue? Now must I desire
thee again, to look diligently, and if thou mark well, thou shall now hear of
such a distinction, as in all this book of distinctions there is none such.
I say says master Harding, Reioinder. Fol. 163.
it is not bread, I say not it is no bread: there is great difference between
not bread, and no bread. Sure if thou look not marvelous narowly, thou will
never understand this distinction. For my part I would surely have said it,
that which was not bread, had been no bread, and that which was no bread, had
sure been not bread, and if it were not bread, it could not be any bread, and
if it were some bread, then were it not no bread. But let not bread be some
bread, and no bread be not bread, and nothing be not any thing, and not any
thing be some thing. As touching master Iuell that good simple Bishop, I dare
swear for him he never knew of this distinction, and so he is wrongfully
charged with this untruth. Yet least master Harding should please him self
too well, I must forwarne him that I can not allow well of this distinction. If
he be well advised this is a Logike rule. Aientia and negantia acerrime inter
se pugnant. No things are so contrary as the affirming and denial of the same
thing. But panis non panis, bread not bread, are contradictorie, not panis,
nullus panis, bread no bread. Therefore master Hardings saying, that no bread
does signify more than not bread, may seem to have no Logike, and to speak
not very wisely. And sure I muse how he could be ouerseene in this, considering
the substance of it, is in supposition, about which his friends have wasted
many good hours. If he have forgotten their Doctrine, let him remember the
verse. Particulare prius facit o generale secundum. But it may be that master
Harding, and his friends, as they have strange devises, so they go about to
make new Logike, no doubt they are at some conspiracy. For master Nicholas
Saunders, whom his friends think some body, makes this very distinction in
his fourth book, of the Sacrament, and with this common conceit of not bread,
and no bread, would feign have an untruth against master Iuell. And is it
possible that these men should agree in so great a folly, if they laid not
their heads together? Well God be thanked their general councels conclude
very unwisely.

Now rests this other untruth, about Tertullians words, which as master
Harding says, are falsified, because bread is not in the latter end of the
sentence, as master Iuell does allege them. Tertullians words are these.
Lib. 2. ad vxor.
Non sciet maritus quid secreto ante omnes cibum gustes, and si scierit, panem,
non illum credet esse qui dicitur. Here says master Harding, illum must not
be referred to panem, and thereupon he quoteth his untruth. Even as he did
before for want of Logike, so it may be thought he does here, through want of
Latin. Illum says he, is not referred to panem, and yet the Grammarian says
the adjective must be always referred to a substantive, except it be put
substantiuely in the Neutre gender. Now if master Harding can not make illum,
the Neuter gender, nor yet find any other substantive in the sentence, than
panem, then his Grammar has as evil hap as his Logike, and this is no
untruth.


The B. of Saris. The translating illum, him, means that it was the very
person of a man, which the woman had in her hand.


Harding. The.118. untruth. It was the person of Christ, God, and man.


Dering. What means M. Harding to wrangle? When M. Iuel says, he means
the person of a man to be in the form of bread, can M. Harding understand it
of a mortal man? Or is the controversy between us, whether in the sacrament
be any earthly man's body? If M. Harding would have let escape this untruth,
no man would have gathered this absurd sense of M. Iuels saying. And yet if we
would examine it, what manner of untruth is this, where it is said, it is a
man's body, to note it as untrue, and say it is Christ's body both God, and
man. If it be so, yet is it a man's body, unless we deny our savior Christ to
be perfect man, such untruths are sone answered.


The B. of Saris. The story that S. Cyprian reports, as it shows the manner
of keeping the Sacrament, so it seems also to show, that God was offended with
the same.


Harding. The.119. untruth. God was not offended with keeping the sacrament,
but with the presumption of the woman, which opened the cheast with unworthy
hands.


Dering. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 17.
M. Iuel shows out of Nicephorus, that by like examples it may appear, God
was offended with that reserving of the Sacrament. M. Harding without reason,
without authority, without example of Gods word, does boldly pronounce upon
Gods meaning, and says, the example was showed, because she opened her cheast
with unworthy hands. Such pronouncing of Gods doing should be grounded in Gods
scriptures, or else such noting of untruths are rash, and wicked. I grant it
is in S. Cyprian, cum manibus indignis tentasset aperire, when she assayed to
open it with unworthy hands. But whether for her unworthiness God shows ye
miracle, that M. Harding adds of his own. But what if Cyprian had said this,
we must not therefore have believed it. He was a good member of the Church of
God, but yet he was a man, and sometime deceived. In sermon. de elemosyna. De
duplici. martyris. Lib. 1. Ep. 12
He taught that Christ made satisfaction for original sin only, yet we know,
that was a wicked opinion. He writes that it was in his time.6000. years since
the Devil did assault man, which is a gross error. And in some places he
thought not reverently of the Majesty of the holy Ghost. God forbid we should
yield to any thing, what so ever a good man does write. But it is well in this
place, Cyprian says no such thing, as M. Harding would have him, and therefore
his rash untruth, is not yet proved. But to prove the contrary, and that M.
Iuel says true: we have the authority of many. Our savior Christ bad do
that, which he did, in his remembrance. But he said unto his disciples, take,
and eat, he said not lay up in your chests. And so Cyprian him self, De coena
domini. Orig. in leui.
if it be Cyprian, says likewise, recipitur, non includitur, the Sacrament is
received, it is not shut up. So likewise says Origin, panis, quem dominus
dedit discipulis suis, iussit accipi, and manducari, non differri, aut seruari
in crastinum. The bread, which the Lord God gave to his Disciples, he bad them
take it, and eat it. He bad them not defer it, and keep it till to morrow. Thus
we see M. Iuels saying may be sufficiently proved, and master Hardings bold
untruth is without any reason.


The B. of Sarisb. The thing which our bodily mouth receives, is very bread.
Both the scriptures, and also the old Catholic fathers put it out of doubt.


Harding. The.120. untruth. It is the very body of Christ.

The.121. untruth. The holy fathers say not that the substance of bread
remains.


Dering. This first untruth is all one with the.74. the.102. the 104. But
such must be had, or how shall untruths rise. Yet reason would, as I have said,
that he should prove his transubstanciation, before he quote so fast these
untruths. Concerning this other untruth, though it be one with this former,
and is now.v. times repeated, that no wise man would think well of master
Hardings doing, yet because he is so well pleased with it, through his
importunity, I must needs say somewhat, both for trial of his truth, and
satisfying the christian reader. First our savior Christ, after consecration
calls it the fruit of the vine, Math. 26.28. 1. Co. 11. Act. 2.20.
and a testament, S. Paul v. times bread, and the table of the Lord, S. Luke
calls the whole Communion the breaking of bread. Theodoretus an ancient
father says. Theod. dia. 1
Qui se ipsum appellauit vitem, illa Symbola and signa quae videntur
appellatione corporis and sanguinis honorauit, naturam non mutans, sed naturae
adijcit gratiam. He that called himself a vine, did vouchsafe to honor those
tokens and signs, which are seen, with the name of his own body, not
changing their natures, but joining grace unto it. And again he says, signa
mystica post sanctificationem non recedunt a natura sua, Theod. dia. 2
sed manent in priori substa^tia. The mystical signs after sanctification,
do not go from their own nature, but keep the same substance that they had
before, that denies transubstantiation. Gelasius says, non desinit esse
substantia vel natura panis and vini, Contra Eutichen.
the substance or nature of bread and wine cease not. Vigilius says of
Christ's humanity, Lib. 4. cont. Eutich.
quando in terra fuit non erat vtique in caelo, nunc quia in caelo est non est
vtique in terra, when he was on earth, he was not in heaven, now he is in
heaven, he is not therefore in earth: and in his first book against Eutiches,
he likewise says, abstulit de hoc mundo naturam quam susceperat a nobis, he
has taken from the world, that nature which he received of us. Chrysostom
says, natura panis in sacramento remanet. Ad Caesar. Mon. Aug. sermon. ad
infantes. Ori. in Mat. cap. 15. Cyr. in Ioh. lib. 4. cap. 14 Iraen. lib. 4.
cap. 34.
The nature of bread abides in the Sacrament. Augustine says, quod videtis
panis est, that which you see is bread. Origin says, Non materia panis sed
super illum dictus sermo est qui prodest. Not the matter of bread, but the
word which is spoken over it, does help. Cyril says, Christus credentibus
discipulis fragmenta panis dedit. Christ gave unto his believing disciples, the
breakings of bread. Irenaeus says, Eucharistia ex duabus naturis constat,
terrena and caelesti, the Eucharist consists of two natures, the one earthly,
which is bread, the other heavenly, which is by faith the feeding of our
souls with the body of Christ. Read master Iuels books, thou shall see
such other aucthorities in great number. Thus thou see Christian reader,
that the Doctors bear witness there is the nature of bread in the sacrament:
when M. Harding is able to answer these, or bring any for himself, then let the
untruth stand.


The B. of Saris. The.18. Division. This sole receiving was an abuse, and
therefore abolished.


Harding. The.122. untruth. Sole receiving in the time of persecution, was no
abuse.


Dering. Here M. Harding does freely grant, that sole receiving is an abuse,
when the people may freely resort unto the church. Where is then the private
Mass of our time? This untruth though it be worth no answer, yet for want of
better, it was once noted before.


The B. of Saris. In M. Hardings Mass, the whole people eats by the mouth
of the priest.


Harding. The.123. untruth. They eat not by the mouth of the priest, as M.
Iuel means.


Dering. M. Harding is driven to narowe straightes, that makes such raw
untruths, with so many unripe distinctions. In the former untruth he puts
in, in the time of persecution. In this untruth as M. Iuel means. His
helping hand must come to, or there is no untruth to be found. This is M.
Hard. plain doctrine, the people do receive by the mouth of the priest. If
he can make two senses of these words, his doubtful speaking is full of
deceitful meaning. But this is too shameless wrangling. No man in the world
does think the people stand in the priests mouth. We know he means some
spiritual manner of communicating. Be his doctrine never so wicked, yet we do see
what is his ungodly meaning, and every child sees this can be no untruth,
there can be but one meaning of these words.


The B. of Saris. The.19. Division. Here M. Harding interlaceth other matter, of
the office of wedlock.


Harding. The.124. untruth. It is S. Jerome that interlaceth it, it is not I.


Dering. Mark gentle reader this untruth, M. Iuel says M. Harding
interlaceth it. M. Harding says no, they are S. Ieromes words. He is so far
gone in strange distinctions, he has forgotten plain English, what though
the words be S. Ieromes, yet this interlacing of them in his treatise, is
either his own, or else some of his friends, that might help out with his
book.


The B. of Saris. Thus says M. Harding, Erasmus gathers private Mass out of
the scriptures.


Harding. The.125. untruth. I say it not.


Dering. M. Harding can quote no untruth, but if he either wrangle, or make a
lie, and in this place he does both. His words are these, read them who will.
Thus does Erasmus gather private, or as M. Iuel iesteth, Hard. diuis. 16
single Communion out of the Scriptures. If M. Harding deny this, he lies. If
he say he means not by the Communion the Mass, he wra^gleth, and reproves
his own doing of folly. For why makes he this conclusion, if it prove not his
Mass. So what ever he means, this untruth is a wrangling lie.


The B. of Saris. The.22. Division. Master Harding uses a strange kind of
Logic, he pretends private Mass, and concludes single Communion.


Harding. The.126. untruth. I pretend not to prove private Mass, here
principally.


Dering. Here principally must help one untruth, but because M. Iuel does
not say principally, let master Harding put it in his bosom, and then it is
no untruth. He says nothing else for proof of this untruth, but falls out
with master Iuel, for rebuking the slothful Cardinals, and Priests of Rome.
How be it he need not greatly be offended. For the Pope has provided well
for them, as is already showed. Say what we will, an accusation may hardly
pass against a Cardinal without three score and four witnesses, nor against
a Deacon without seven and twenty, if they will keep any modesty, or come not
on the market hill, I warrant them for other places, they be safe enough.


The B. of Saris. The.24. Division. Master Harding gathers this conclusion.


Harding. The.127. untruth. I gather not this conclusion.


Dering. Master Harding would feign shift off this argument, and his poor
friend master Rastell has done for him in this behalf, what he can, but it
will not be. For answer to this untruth, a long discourse is needelesse. For
the simple can not conceive it, and the learned do see it well enough. All
manner of arguments what so ever the propositions be, they may be reduced to
the first figure. But this can be none otherwise reduced. Therefore this is
master Hardings argument, and let him never deny it. For being in the
Hypothetical form of propositions, it may argue a will to deceive, but it can
not empaire the credit of his learning. This is sooner diminished by denying
this argument, than by making it. What the argument is, read the Reply. Fol.
58.


The B. of Saris. These examples master Harding has brought, to prove his
Mass.


Harding. The.128. untruth. I brought them not to prove the Mass directly.


Dering. In the.126. untruth, he said he brought not these aucthorities to
prove the Mass principally: now he says they prove it not directly. Had
it been for espying, he might have made many untruths of this, he might have
said, they prove not the Mass immediately, orderly, especially, chiefly,
only, effectually, purposedly, and so made many lies, as well as principally,
and directly, and so make of none a double lie. But here by the way we may
note, that master Hardings reasons are little better than master Iuel makes
them, when he himself does so often say they prove not his purpose.


The B. of Saris. That it might seem lawful for a priest to say private
Mass, he has brought in example of lay men, women, sick folk, and boys.


Harding. The.129. untruth. It is not so, I brought them not to prove the
Mass.


Dering. Now good reader mark these three untruths, and see how thou likest
them, the.126. they prove not the Mass principally, the.128. they prove it not
directly, and this untruth they prove it not at all. Now to give him one
untruth more, and make up a mess, sure what so ever M. Iuel say, they prove
it but a little, and therefore M. Hardings answer, is worthy little
commendations.


The B. of Saris. The.25. Division. He defaceth the holy Communion.


Harding. The.130. untruth. I deface not the Communion, but the Geneuian
Communion.


Dering. M. Harding has now gotten the habit, he can say nothing without a
distinction. But all avails not, God have the praise. Master Iuel means
that Communion, which is ministered as well at Geneua, as in other godly places,
where the adulterous and Romish sacraments are banished. Therefore this is no
untruth, it is our open profession. That Communion which M. Harding blames, is
the holy Communion of the Lords body and blood, and the effectual
representation of his death.


The B. of Sarisb. Christ's example in doing, and commanndement to do the
same, may not be taken for a show, or accident, but for the effect, and
substance of his supper.


Harding. The.131. untruth. Christ's whole example is not of the substance of
the Sacrament.


Dering. Mark well M. Iuels words, and M. Hardings untruths, and thou will
think the Cocatrice, does no more infecte each thing that she breaths on,
than master Harding does those words, which he would confute. Master Iuel
says, Christ's example in doing, and commandment to do the same, is of the
substance of the supper. And who will not say, that that is necessary, which
Christ has both done, and commanded to be done. Then how is this untrue?
Master Harding puts in (whole,) and takes out (commandment to do the
same) and makes master Iuel say thus: Christ's whole example is of the
substance of the supper, and in deed this is false. For Christ ministered after
supper, and sitting, and with common bread, and in an usual drinking cup, and
in an house, which is neither necessary, nor al convenient for our time. Thus
we see what these untruths are, altogether forced with master Hardings lies,
sometime he adds, sometime he detracteth, that of all these untruths we may
well say it still, the number is so great, the substance cannot be good.


The B. of Saris. The sacrifice of the cross, is called the daily sacrifice.


Harding. The.132. untruth. It is not called so, as you mean.


Dering. This untruth is all one with the.75. and there master Harding says
simply, that the fathers call not the sacrifice of the cross, the daily
sacrifice. Here upon better advise, he reuoketh his absolute assertion, and
does qualify it with master Iuels meaning. So if master Harding do not
truly gather master Iuels meaning upon a false surmise, he has made two
untruths. But because we are come again, to mention of this Sacrifice, I will
show thee, what is our Sacrifice for the purging of our sins. First, for thy
better instruction, thou must learn wherein stands the controversy betwixt
the Papists, and us. They say, they do daily in their Mass offer up Christ
unto his father, a propitiation for our sins. We say, that Christ has purged
us from our sins, and that with the Sacrifice of his own precious body, and
blood, but that sacrifice Christ himself did once make upon the Cross, neither
can any mortal man, offer him any more. Now if we can show, that Christ's
real body is no more offered unto his father, then is not only this no
untruth, but all master Hardings religion is deuelishe, and wicked. Let us
see then, what the scriptures do teach us, until the time that our savior
Christ did die. This Sacrifice is often mentioned, that it should be made when
he had once died, it is never mentioned, but as already done. Before he was
conceived in his mothers womb, the angel said his name should be Jesus. Math.
1.21.
For he should save his people from their sins. When he was born, he was
called the salvation, which God had prepared before the face of all people.
Luke 2.32.
When he was Christened, John said of him, behold the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.29.
which takes away the sins of the world. The Lamb in this place, after the
Hebrew phrase, does signify the sacrifice, or the offering. And Christ him
self: When I shall be exalted, I will draw all unto my self. By these and all
those other places, which are of the Passion of Christ, it is manifest, that
the time was appointed, when this sacrifice should be once made. But when this
sacrifice was done: Christ said upon the cross, consummatum est, all was
finished, and in token, that there was no more sacrifice to be made for sin,
the bail of the temple did rende from the top to the foot. Now after this
sacrifice once finished, not one title in the whole scriptures of any
propiciatorie sacrifice to come, but upon this one, and once made repentance,
must be preached to all the world, Luke. 24. Mat. 16.
and forgiveness of sin, with this promise annexed, that whosoever does
believe, and is Baptized, shall be saved. Thus we see from the beginning of our
journey, until we come to the place, which our savior has prepared for us in
heaven, we have no sacrifice to pass by, but that alone, which Christ made
upon the Cross, that alone is called daily, because it is an everlasting
intercession for us unto his father. What soever Sacrifices the papacy has
invented, they are beside this, and they are nothing else but snares, which the
Devil has laid to entrappe our souls, and call us from the only trust in
Christ's merits. An other proof that the sacrifice of the Cross may only be
called daily, is well declared in all the wrytings of the Apostles, where no
one time either priest, or altar, or sacrifice, or oblation is mentioned, but
only in a spiritual understanding. You be made a spiritual house, 1. Pet. ^.5.
a holy priesthode to offer up spiritual sacrifice unto God, says S. Peter.
Apo. 1.6.5.10 Romans 12.1.
He has made us kings and priests unto God, even his Father, says S. Ihon,
and S. Paul does call our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable
unto God. And again, Christ our passover is Sacrificed for us, 1. Cor. 5.8
therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither in the leaven
of malitiousnesse, or wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity,
and truth. And to the Hebrews we have an altar, Hebr. 13.20. Ibidem. 15.
of which it is not lawful for them to eat that serve in the tabernacle. And
again, let us offer the sacrifice of praise always unto God, that is the
fruit of our lips, which confess his name. In diverse other places both by
the prophets and apostles, we be taught that these are the only Sacrifices
left unto us in the New Testament. Then what desperate boldness is it, for us
to make our selves new sacrifices without the word of God, the instruction of
the holy Ghost, or any color of sufficient authority. I need not add how
it fights directly with the Scriptures. They say the priest does offer up
Christ. But Christ never says, he is offered up by any other, but by himself.
I do sanctify my self for them, and I do give my life for my sheep. Ioh.
17. Ioh. 10.
And again. I do give my life, and again, I will take it, no man does take
it from me, but I will give it of mine own will. And Paul says, he that
loved me, and gave himself for me. Galat. 2. Hebru. 10.
And to the Hebrews in the beginning of this book, it is written of me that I
should do thy will O God, this same is often showed in the.5.9. and.10. Chapters
to the Hebrews, but in all the scripture not one word, that ever Christ is
offered by other. They say he is offered daily, but in all the scriptures he is
said to be offered but once. In that he died says Paul, Romans 6.10. Hebr. 10.
he died once, and to the Hebrews with one oblation he made them perfect for
ever. And in the same Epistle the vij. Chapter, Christ is said to be such a
priest, as needed not to make more sacrifices for sins, or offer himself
daily. For he did once sanctify us. And again, by his own blood, he entered
once into the holy place. Hebr. 9.12.
And again, in the end of the world, he appeared once to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself. And again, Christ has once suffered to take away
sins. Hebr. 10.
And again, having made one Sacrifice for sin, he sittes for ever at the
right hand of his father. And in conclusion, the scripture takes away all
other sacrifice, and says, where remission of sin is, there is no more
Oblation for sin. Yet will they needs have a daily sacrifice. What a
miserable religion is that, which in matters of the greatest weight, has not
one word to uphold it in the scriptures. But as the thing it self is the sink
of Idolatry, so mark it well, and thou shall see how wickedly they use it. Our
sacrifice say they, is the applying of that sacrifice which Christ made upon
the cross. And hereupon M. Harding does often say, that no Mass is private,
because it is made for all the people, but examine this by the word of God,
and see how it agrees. The scripture says, the benefits purchased by
Christ's sacrifice, is offered unto us by the word, 1, Pet. 1.23.
not by the Mass. You are borne a new by the word of God, 1. Ioh. 1.3.
who lives, and indureth for ever. And we have fellowship with God, and with
his son Jesus Christ, by the word, which is declared unto us. And he that
knows God, hears us, and the word, whereby the righteousness of God is
known, is the word of faith, Romans 10.8. 2. Cor. 5.19.
which we preach. And plainly S. Paul calls it the word of reconciliation.
And the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to al them, that believe. 1.
Pet. 4.6.
And Peter witnesses that the Gospel is preached, to the end men might live
unto God, and Christ sanctified his Church, by the washing of water through
the word. Not one place in the scripture, Ephesians. 5 26.
that we be sanctified by private Mass, or daily sacrifice. But let us let
these sacrificers alone. They be blind leaders of the blind. Read more of
this in the epistle, and in the.75. untruth.


The B. of Saris. The.26. Division. S. Augustine says, the people received
every day.


Harding. The.133. untruth. He says not so.


Dering. Note this is all one untruth with the.83. and.145. These are S.
Augustines words: De sermon. in mo^te. lib. 2 cap. 12.
the daily bread may be taken for the sacrifice of Christ's body, which we
receive every day. Master Harding says, he meant this of himself only, and of
other priests, and he says it only, and does not prove it, and upon credit
of his own words, does quote an untruth. With like facility I could make
answer it were not untrue, but words without reason I will leave unto master
Harding, to prove that S. Augustine meant the daily use of their open Church,
and that some did evermore receive, it may appear, as we read in the Acts,
that those, which came unto the Church of Christ, continued daily in breaking
of bread, and prayers, Act. 2.42.
by breaking of bread, meaning the Communion. And in an other place, when the
Disciples came together, they brake bread, and Paul preached. Act. 20.7.
And we read in the.1. to the Corinthians the.11. Chapter. When they came
together, they did eat the Lords supper. Hereby it appears, that in the
Apostles time, this daily receiving was in use, though of Massing for the
quick, and dead, of shutting the bread in a box, of worshipping it, of
carrying about, there be not one word immediately after. etc. De cor. mili.
About.200. years after this, Tertullian writes Eucharistia sacrame^tum. etc.
and iam antelucanis sumimus temporibus. Lib. 1. ad vxore^. and Basil. ep.
adcler. noe o coes. and ephre^ in ser. ad monach, Cyp. 1. ep. 2.
We receive the Eucharist ever before day. And in an other place, thy husband
shall not know, what thou tastest secretly before other meats. By this it
appears, the Christians did usually receive every morning. S. Cyprian about
50. years after, writes. How shall we make them meet for the cup of
martyrdom, if first, we do not give unto them the cup of the Lords blood,
noting, that in that great persecution, they received daily in the morning.
Again, he writes. Grauior nu^c, and ferocior pugna imminet, ad quam fide
incorrupta, and virtute robusta, Lib. 4. ep. 6.
parare se debent milites Christi. And it follows. Considering therefore they
daily receive the cup of the blood of Christ, they also for Christ may shed
their blood. He says further: we require that this bread may be given us
daily, least we, that are in Christ, and Eucharistiam quotidie ad cibum salutis
accipimus, Sermon. 6. de orat. domini.
and daily receive the Eucharist, which is the meat of our salvation, should
be by any great offense, separated from Christ. Thus it appears in plain
words, that in Cyprians time, they received daily. The like appears by
Eusebius lib. 1. de demonst. Euangelica, cap. 10. Diverse other places may be
brought, which all prove M. Hardings answer to be vain, and do well expound
the meaning of S. Augustine. Lib. 26. in. 8 cap. Math. Chrysostom. ad heb. ho.
17. Aug Ep. 23.
Chrysostom says, semper communicabant, they did always Communicate. And
master Harding does allege both him and Augustine himself for proof of
the daily sacrifice. Now where they say, that we offer daily, and yet confute
sufficiently this new fansied transubstantiation, it is plain they meant of
this daily Communion, and of the often use of it, master Hardings Ignatius in
like manner writes, when this is done continually, Ad ephesios.
the powers of Satan are driven away. These, and diverse such proofs may be
had out of Jerome, Ambrose, Iustine, Irenaeus, and other many, for this daily
receiving, and therefore these untruths must needs be little worth, that are
so plentifully challenged, and may so easily be answered. But whose
authority should I rather use in this case, than master Hardings own
Doctors, they write it often, and teach very plainly, that in the primative
Church, they received daily. Thomas Aquinas writes thus: In the primative
church, when the people were very devout in the Christian faith, it was
decreed, vt fideles quotidie communicarent, that the faithful people should
receive daily. Durandus says in the primative Church, omnes fideles quotidie
communicabant, all the faithful received daily. Lib. 4. ca. 55
Lo here are master Hardings own Doctors, which do sufficiently answer
his untruth. Here by the way of this one thing, I must moreover warn the good
Christian reader, that M. Harding is not able to show any one sufficient
proof, whereby it may appear, that the Church in any place within.CCC.
years after Christ, did appoint any one day, especially for that purpose, as
their confederacy at Trident, have of late straightly charged. It appears by
S. Luke, they met daily, Act. 2.5.
and it appears by Paul to the Ephesians, yt they had their meetings both
day, and night, and in this use they confirmed their doctrine, which Paul
teaches the Colossians. Let no man condemn you in meat, and drink, nor in
respect of an holy day, Col. 2.16.
or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbothe days. And no doubt to take away this
popish superstition of days, and times, it was gods good will, and pleasure
then so to ordain it. And for a full proof that the Churches used some
saturday, some sunday, it is well showed by that hot contention, that was
raised by Victor, and Anicetus, against ye greek church. After ye Apostles
time about the year of our Lord.115. under ye Emperor Traiane, it appears
that the Christians usual meeting, was in the mornings, as is showed by
Pliny, in an epistle written to the Emperor of the same matter. After
this.30. or.40. year, Justinius does record, that in his time they used the
sunday, and any other day when there was baptizing of children. After this it
is declared by Origin, that the Christians of his time did not meet only on
sundays, In genesis ho. 10 In number. ho. 2
and holidayes, but on other days also. And Sozomene seems to deny of the
Roman Church, that they had any meetings on the Saboth day, as all other
Churches had. Lib. 7. ca. 19 De prepar. Euang. lib. 1. cap, 3. Ath. lib. de
interp. Psalm.
Eusebius says, quotidie ferme, ad percipiendam disciplinam christi constuunt,
almost every day they came to hear the doctrine of Christ. Athanasius names
expressly these days, sabbatum, diem dominicum, secundum sabbati, parasceuen,
and quartum sabbati. Now if it can not be proved, that any one Church made a
special observation of the sunday, but that on other days also, they used like
service unto god, on the other part seeing the testimonies are so plain, and
many: what means master Harding to make this any untruth? But what dares
he not do, to make up his number, that affirms this one untruth five times?
Now by the way, least I should seem to speak against the use of the sunday, I
say and profess, that we ca^ not use it too reverently. Anathasius says, that
the sabbath of the Jews, Hom. de semente.
was by Christ turned into our sunday, but whether that were so, or no, it
rests upon Athasius authority, it may be well thought that it is true,
Christ will have us gather together in his name. And S. John calls it the
Lords day, Apo. 1.10. Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.1.
S. Luke and S Paul the first day of the weke, in which the Apostles assembled
the people, therefore thou art bound to give all obedience and holiness unto
the Lord on that day. But take heed now thou deceive not thy self. Look not
after any licentiousness on the monday, think not that God more accompteth of
one day, than other. As on sunday thou come into the congregation, and
show thy self thankful unto the Lord for his benefits, so on every day
thou must show thy self thankful, and show the same obedience in testimony of
thy conscience, which on the sunday thou show in open usage, and thus thou
shall keep holy the sabbath day.


The B. of Saris. S. Ambrose says every week, we must celebrate the oblation,
although not every day unto strangers, yet unto the inhabitants at least
twice a week.


Harding. The.134. untruth. This place is altogether falsified.


Dering. This untruth may be hardly verified, if the place be altogether
falsified. But master Harding does so often speak untruly, that now we may
not believe him without good proof. Let us see then what he says. S. Ambrose:
In. 1. ad Tim. cap. 3.
Omni hebdomada offerendum est, etiam si non quotidie peregrinis, incolis tamen
vel bis in hebdomada. These words M. Iuel does English, as before appears.
This translation says master Harding, is altogether false. But why says he
so? Let him bar distinctions, and prove it if he can. Undoubtedly if snow be
not black, this interpretation is true, but why does master Harding find
fault wiih it? Thus he says, offerre peregrinis is to offer for strangers,
not to strangers, and why is it so? forsoothe by this rule, all manner of
verbes put acquisitiuely, that is to say, with this sign for after them, will
have a dative case, Reioinder. Fol. 201.
it might have pleased him to have alleged his rule truly, then it should
have been thus, having this sign to or for, after them, so notwithstanding
this rule, yet the interpretation had been good, but grant the rule, what a
reason is this, all verbes that have this sign, for, after them, require a
dative case, Ergo, offerre peregrinis, is to offer for strangers. He might as
well conclude, Ergo, loquor tibi, is to speak for thee, or dare tibi to give
it for thee. But M. Harding, why would not this rule have served here, verbes
compounded with these propositions, prae, con, sub, ob, in and inter, will have
a dative case. Well may we have some opinion of our Louanists English, but sure
their Logic, and their Latin is but very base. M. Dorman alleging in his
book, this text of S. John. Diabolus est mendax, and pater eius, does English
it thus, the devil is a lier, and so was his father before him. Was he well in
his wit? or was he yet a dreaming? or is his Divinity so slender, that he
knows not, who is the Devils father? Sure ignorance may not excuse a man,
that speaks blasphemy, the Devil has no father, only God created him an
Angel. Erasmus fearing such sleeping Divines, does turn it thus, and eius rei
pater, and father of that thing. If M. Dorman had consulted with him, and not
so suddenly become of a iangling lawyer, an ungodly Divine, he would have written
more advisedly, but (as has been heretofore aptly objected to him) he gate
upon the bridge, and was made a bacheler, and so by much haste ouershot
himself, much like as master Harding does here, who Englisheth offerre
peregrinis, to offer for strangers. Allow this for good Latin, and his
distinctions for good reason, and then go yoke Foxes, and milk he Goats,
his untruth shall rise at his own pleasure.


The B. of Saris. The.28. Division. Here Master Harding notably, betrayeth him
self, laying forth for a countenance, a five of Chrysostoms words, and the
same nothing to the matter, hewing and mangling them, as he lists best.


Harding. The.135. untruth. Those words be to the matter.

The.136. untruth. I mangle them not.


Dering. What M. Harding means by this untruth, I know not, unless it be, as
M. Iuel says, notably to betray himself. His purpose is to prove private
Mass, as all men do know, but these words do not prove it, as he himself
confesses, Reioind. fol. 206. the conclusion of these is plain, therefore
these words are not to the purpose. Neither shall this other untruth, need any
long answer. He can do little yt cannot say nay. M. Iuels Reply does well, and
sufficiently prove it. M. Hardings gainsaying is not sufficient for an
untruth. Read the Reply. Fo. 65.


The B. of Saris. Chrysostom says this sacrifice is but one, because it has
relation unto that one sacrifice of Christ.


Harding. The.137. untruth. He renders no such cause.


Dering. Because M. Hard. ca^ not blame the allegation, he finds fault with M.
Iuels meaning, and says S. Chrysostom gives no such cause. But whether he
gives any such or no, not M. Hardi^gs understanding, but Chrysostoms words,
must be the judge: Ad heb. ho. 17.
thus he writes: Quo modo vna est hostia and non multae? Quia semel oblata
est, oblata est in sancta sa^ctoru^. Hoc aute^ sacrificiu^ exemplar est illius.
How is it one oblation and not many? He answers, because it was once offered,
it was offered into ye holy place but this sacrifice is an example of that.
These are his very words, and here he speaks plain, the cause why we
sacrificing, or communicating in sundry places, have but one sacrifice, or
communion, is because our sacrifice is an example of ye one sacrifice of
Christ. If M. Harding can find any other understanding of these words, then
sure his manner of understanding, is to make words sound, what him list. But
understand he how, and what he will, Chrysostoms words are plain. There are many
places in the old doctors, which teach the very same, but it is needelesse to
rehearse them, when our savior Christ says: Do this in my remembrance. Except
M. Harding will have no relation between the thing, and the remembrance of the
thing, what means he to make this untruth?


The B. of Saris. Chrysostom says, this sacrifice is an example of that.


Harding. The.138. untruth. Chrysostom says not so, that this is an example
of that, this place is fowly corrupt.


Dering. In the 134. untruth master Harding said this is all to gether
falsified, in this he says, it is fowly corrupt. But ye falshod of that has
appeared to be so little, that this false report of corruption can have no
great credit, and no dout this untruth upon sufficient trial shall apeare a
very wrangling. Ad Heb. ho. 17.
Chrisostomes own words are these, hoc autem sacrificium examplar est illius.
Read the place. These words as I think are thus much in English. But this
sacrifice is an example of that. Not so says master Harding, this place is
foully corrupt. Peradventure here is some verb put acquisitiuely, as in
the.134. untruth. If it be so, here may be strange Latin, but whether there
be, or no, gessing is not necessary where there may be had other good proof.
Let us hear why this place is corrupt? Reioinder. Fol. 207.
What says M. Harding? Thus he says. It is exemplar, a samplar or pattern, of
that, I grant. Mark good reader, what master Harding grants. And see
whether master Iuel do say any more. If he do not, how are the same words
true, when master Harding speaks them, and not true, when master Iuel
speaks them? unless as we had of late a distinction of not bread, and no
bread, so now we have an other between an example, and a sampler? But how so
ever it is without example or, sampler, he makes mo distinctions, and gives
such a sampler of singular impudence, that no man that fears God, will take
example by him.


The B. of Sarisb. Gracian shows that the decretall epistles have been
doubted of among the learned.


Harding. The.139. untruth. Gracian shows no such thing.


Dering. Gracians words are these. De Epistolis decretalibus quaeritur, an vim
authoritatis habeant, of the decretall Epistles, there is doubt, whether they
have authority. How then is this an untruth? The word says M. Harding, that
Gracian does use, is quaeritur, not dubitatur. The question is moved, not it is
doubted, Offerre peregrinis, to offer for strangers is very good latin, where
this is any reason. What means this man, does he so feed his affectioned
vain, that he spares not to discredit his own learning? that he fears not
to blot his own honesty? Fie upon such fa^sies. Quaeritur is a latin word,
dubitatur is very barbarous. But such as use them both, who knows not, yt it
is common to them all, to say sometime quaeritur, sometime dubitatur, meaning
by either word, there is doubt moved, and the Greek phrase (...) is commonly
translated. Sed quaerat aliquis. But one will ask, or dout. The latins do al
use it. Si quaeris if you doubt. In his primis naturalibus voluptas insit, nec
ne, magna quaestio est. In these first natural abilities, whether there be any
pleasure, or no, there is no great doubt. Romani augures in magna quaestione
habent, The Romain Augurs do much dout, what the bird Sanqualis is. So immensa
quaestio, an infinite doubt, perdifficilis, et perobscura quaestio, a very
difficult, and obscure doubt, and such one as this of M. Hardings is, redicula
quaestio a folish doubt. The barbarous writers, such as Gracian is, and the
other rabble of M. Hardings friends, they want commonly both good words, and
godly matter, and they say sometime dubitatur, but to be short, there is
neither question, nor doubt, but this untruth is very childish. But what
means M. Harding to stand thus in defense of these decretall epistles? He
only can bring for them a little testimony of Leo, and Gelasius. The epistles
by no means can commend them selves. Read the Reply, thou shall see them
sufficiently reproved. But read the Epistles, and thou shall see them more
reproved. The latin is so barbarous, that neither gentile, nor Christian of
that age, did ever write the like. The style is so childish, it is far
unmeet, for the gravity of those learned Bishops, whose names they bear,
the metaphors are so gross, as no countryman would use the like. Among all
other, this is one. Ostium circumstantiae eorum oribus imponere, Ephe. epi. 2.
To put the door of circumstaunce upon their mouths. And what scholar would
write this latin, In epist. Vrb.
Eas inde abstrahere vbi traditae sunt, to take them thence, where they were
laid. Promere vltionem, to revenge, Exilium deportationis, for banishment,
Pontia. epi. 1.
pleniter, fully, Haec nobis bona operanda sunt, We must do these good things,
Inthronizare, to enstall, and porto, Luc. epist. 1.
stands them in very good stead. Portare causas sacerdotum* Subleuare, et
portare cadentes, portare persecutiones, every one a porter like phrase, and
moderna tempora, and charitatiue, and abbatissa, and sanctae moniales. And I
wot not what. There is nothing in them, does so excede, as ignorance. And
where is the like title ever found, Zeph. 1. et. 2. Calixt. 1. Steph 2. Dion.
1.
Archiepisc. romans vrbis, and Archiepisc. cath. ecclesiae Romanae vrbis. And
primates metropolitani, and fideles sancti Petri. Beside this, that poor
stuff, that they have, does hang so yllfauouredly together, that Master
Harding him self, can make of it no sense. They allege the scriptures without
order, or fashion, and sometime they deprave them, the Sodomites say unto Lot,
Genesis 19. Ana. epist. 1.
thou came into us, as a stranger. Anterus says, that God spoke it. In the
first to Timothe the fifth Chapter, where Paul has vidua, Vrbanus has anima:
Christ says, Ioh. 1. epist. 3.
Cephas, is a stone, Anacletus says, it is caput, or principium, the head, or
fountain. And besides this, sundry of those Epistles, have word for word,
the one, which an other has. As Steph. 1. et. 2. And Fab. 2. Luc. 1. And
Faelix.3. the Epistle of Gaius, and Leon.1. And how could this have happened,
if diverse men did write them. But what need we seek arguments against them,
look upon their doctrine. Lucius forbids marriage of Priests, Did. 18.
ministri.
and if a Priest go in unto his own wife, he must not communicate, he must
not so much as bring the cup to the alter, they may not come within the church
doors, not withstanding, Saint Paul says, to forbid marriage is the doctrine
of devils. Calixtus does forbid meats, Calix. epi. 1.
and says, he that observes not the fast, four times in a year, the same
is a scismatike. Anterus and Zepherius teaches, that we may not reprehende,
accuse, judge, or condemn a Bishop of Rome. Yet Saint Paul says: Let a
Bishop be unblameable, whereby it appears, he may be blamed, and again he
writes: Receive not an accusation against an elder under two* or three
witnesses. Then by like, he will have their faults accused. They iangle much
of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, Calixtus, and Lucius, do seem to
say, that he can not err. Yet David says, every man is a lier. Stephan
says, Steph. epi. 1.
he deserves great vengeance, that presumes to touch the holy vestures. Yet
Christ says, that which is without a man defiles him not. Pontianus, does
end his first Epistle, with a clause of idolatry, ascribing unto Peter, the
opening of heaven gate. Vrbanus says, that the sentence of a Bishop, is
greatly to be feared, yea, though he (...) wrongfully, and so consequently,
would mak^ God, an unrighteous Judge, that should ratify an unjust sentence.
Such wicked doctrine these epistles do contain, so unlearnedly they be
written, so unwisely the same words are fathered upon diverse men, and, which
is a sure token that they be cou^terfet, they are not mentioned by any ancient
writers: Yet says Master Harding, these Epistles are authentical. But let him
say so still. Did. 19. Si Romans
As that saying is untrue, so this untruth is impudent, where he says that
Gracian does not witness, that these Epistles have been doubted on.


The B. of Saris. The decretall epistles manifestly deprave, and abuse the
scriptures.


Harding. The.140. untruth. They do not so.


Dering. Now M. Harding is in his biasse. He makes untruths at adventure, and
for want of good proof he falls to railing. This pelf, says he, may serve
for your pulpit, when you want better stuff. This to disprove ye decretall
epistles is to minister like. But thus to stand railing, when one has no
reason, is to like a Louanist. More modest behavior in so mean learning would
better stand with honesty. This untruth is sufficiently proved before.


The B. of Saris. Anacletus commands that all bishops once in the year, do
visit the entry of S. Peter's church in Rome, which they call limina Petri.


Harding. The.141. untruth. He commands no such thing, concerning Peter's
Church.


Dering. This untruth does rise upon these words, limina Petri whether they
signified Peter's church. For Master Harding grants, that now they signify
the Church, but then they signified his grave. Here it were reason before we
believe him, he should tell us how long limina Petri did signify the burial
place, and when it left his grave, and became the name of his church, who gave
it to the grave, and who took it from it. Undouted proves must be had for so
incredible a matter. It is a strange case for things to lose their names, and
if it be done, as sometime it chances, it is by the consent of whole
countries, regestred by diverse authors. If in this case we see like authority,
we will allow the better of M. Hardings saying. Graves as it may be thought,
were never called so, churches had that name long before Peter's time. Religiosa
deorum limina, says Virgill, the holy temples of the Gods, and Calixtus the
Pope says, Ecclesiastica limina, meaning the church. Hereby it appears that
limina Petri was Peter's Church. Chronol. V^. 2. Genesis 19.
And Nauclerus writing of Totilas more than a thousand year agon says, Cum ad
beati Petri limina peruenisset, meaning when he came to Peter's Church. Now let
Master Harding show that it signified the grave, ere he require credit. Yet
what if it did so? Is it not al one superstition to visit ye graves of godly
men, and to visit their temples? Is either of both commanded by the Lord God?
In this untruth Master Harding shows little matter against Master Iuel, and
less good divinity in him self.


The B. of Saris. Fabianus writes of the coming of Nouatus into Italy. And
it is clear by S. Cyprian, and by Eusebius, that Nouatus came first into Italy
in the time of Cornelius, which was next after him.


Harding. The.142. untruth. It is not clear.


Dering. To an Owls eyes the clear Sun brings darkness, to one that will
not understand, there is no sentence plain. When God shall open Master Hardings
eyes, he will then see better. Lib. 1. epi. 1.
These are Cyprians words, unto Cornelius speaking of Nouatus. A te illinc
prohibitu^ ab ecclesia, cum venisset etc. Of thee he was forbidden the Church,
when he came etc. And it follows, with such spirit, as became a Bishop,
whereby it appears, he was then also Bishop. What can be said more plain? It
follows further. Cum animaduertis^em te minis, atque terroribus eorum, qui
venerant, esse commotum etc. When I perceived, that thou weart moved with the
fears, and threatenings, of those that came with him. Then belike Cornelius was
there before. And Eusebius speaks at the same time, Lib. 6. ca. 33.
of Cornelius, and calls him, Vrbis Romae Episcopus, the Bishop of the city
of Rome, and this also appears by Sozomenus, that the first conflict of
Nouatus, Lib. 1. ca. 22 et. 23.
was with Cornelius. Therefore Master Harding might easily have seen this,
had not either his eyes ben anointed, or he disposed to wrangle.


The B* of. Saris. Neither S. Jerome, nor Gennadius, nor Damasus ever made any
mention, either of such epistles, or of any such decrees.


Harding. The.143. untruth. Damasus makes express mention of such decrees.


Dering. This is an express untruth, as many other are, which Master Harding
frames. Damasus does speak of certain decrees, which were made by these
Popes, and that we may easily grant, but that he mencioneth these epistles, or
recites the decrees in those words, that is not showed. And it may easily be,
that he, who made these epistles, would gather some decrees, found in other
books. This is a small proof, against so many manifest arguments.


The B. of Saris. By Soters decree, it is lawful to say Mass, having only
two in his company.


Harding. The.144. untruth. This decree, speaks not of company present, but
of two to make aunsvvere.


Dering. There is belike some subtle distinction in this untruth. For as the
words lie, they are somewhat obscure. Of this I am sure, seeing Master Iuel
says, that Soters decree requires only the company of two, and Master
Harding says, it requires two to make answer: if it may any way be proved,
that they that answer the Priest, be in his company, then this untruth is
sone discharged. As touching Soters own decree, the words are plain, that no
man shall say Mass without two persons, and to take away this cavil about two
to answer, and to verify Master Iuels words, the title of the decree is
this. De co^secratione did. 1. hoc etc.
Except he have two present, let no Priest presume to say Mass. Now what
needs this wrangling about the aunswering, if there be two present, they must
needs answer.


The B. of Saris. S. Augustine, and S. Jerome, have recovered that, that the
people of Rome even in their time, used to receive the Communion together,
every day.


Harding. The.145. untruth. Saint Augustine, and Saint Jerome do not report so.


Dering. Epist. 118. et 23. tract. in Ioh. 26. Ier. in apol. aduersus lo^ini.
This untruth has been made now three times by Master Harding. It is the.83.
the.133. and this the third. Augustine says, some receive every day, some
certain days. Jerome says the like. Read the place thou shall not be
deceived. Read more of this untruth in the places alleged. The 83. and.133.
untruths. and.155. untruth.


The B. of Saris. This word, solennia, which is here used, seems to import a
solemn company, or resort of the people. And yet this Soter requiring to this
action only the company of three persons, nevertheless calls it Missarum
solennia.


Harding. The.146. untruth. Solennia does not import a solemn company.


Dering. Yet it seems so Master Harding to as well learned, as you are. But
this is your common fashion to belie Master Iuels words, and then to say they
be untrue. Yt seems, says he, to import a solemn company. What if it be
not so? yet it seems so. But what if it do import a great company? What if
it can not stand with your private Mass? Sure then is Soters decree not worth
alleging, as your untruth is not worth the quoting. The reason, that you
bring out of Tullie, were it not in your book, yet by the value I would guess
it yours. Solemn, say you, does signify sometime a custom, Ergo when it is
attributed to an action, it does not import a company. This is very like one
of your own arguments, it hangs so losely. For the antecedent is false, and
the argument does not follow. But why speaks Master Harding against his own
knowledge, he is assured it is not named in matters of religion, but it
signifies a great company of persons, and much sumptuousness of the things
so ill, may his private Mass be solennis. Mos solennis sacrarum says
Lucretius, the solemn, and sumptuous manner of the sacrifices. And Virgil
calls them arae solennes, many and costly altares, so pompae solennes,
burials in solemn order, vota solennia, vows made solemnly in the company of
many, and Tullie, Solenne and statutum sacrificium, a sacrifice done
sumptuously, and appointed times, and in M. Hardings Portuise, sacris solennijs
iuncta sunt gaudia, to solemn service there is annexed joys. This authority
is sufficient against master Harding. He will say nothing I trow against his
Portuise. If he will, we will then charge him with the Popes own authority.
Innocentius tertius showing the cause, why in their single holidays they say
not the Creed, Profestis. ide^ procul a fest. glossa. ib. Decret. de miss.
celeb. consilium.
nor Gloria in excelsis, as well as they do on their double feasts, writes
thus, vt inter commemorationem and solennitatem differentiam ostendatur, that
there may be a difference between a commemoration, and a solemnity. Lo here
is Pope Innocent, flat against master Harding, concerning the nature of the
word, and yet he is content to speak, even as Soter does, and say of the other
Masses, missarum solennia. Thus we see these untruths sometime can not agree,
nether with their holy father the Pope, neither yet with the Portuise.


The B. of Saris. Soter requires to this action, only the company of three.


Harding. The.147. untruth. He requires not.iij. but.ij. at the least.


Dering. Note good reader, this untruth is now twice made in the 144.
untruth, and again here. Yet if thou way it well, thou shall see, it was not
worth repetition. In the other place, the sense was very obscure, and here the
words are very strange. To make this solemn Mass says M. Iuel, iii. are
required. Not so says M. Harding, the priest requires but two to make
answer. But what if it happen that these two have a third priest to say the
Mass, Soter seems to mean so when he says, vt sit ipse tertius, that the
priest may be the third. I can not tell all their mysteries. It may be they
have a custom, that two may make answer, when no man says the Mass. Or if
they have not, then this is not untrue.


The B. of Saris. It may be doubted whether dominus vobiscum were part of the
Liturgy in Soters time.


Harding. The.148. untruth. This cannot be well, and reasonably doubted.


Dering. If well, and reasonably, do not help out this untruth, it has
then neither goodness, nor show of probability. Now what well, and
reasonably, may do in this matter, it shall well, In Epist. ad Hiero.
and reasonably appear, if you mark Damasus words, he says there was
nothing red in the Church on sundays, saving some Epistle of the Apostle, and
some chapter of the Gospel. If Damasus say true, then it may be doubted both
well, and reasonably, whether Dominus vobiscum were red or not. This saying of
Damasus master Iuel does allege, and upon little search, it will easily
appear by all Ecclesiastical records, that in Soters time, and many years
after, there was no other solemnity in their ministration, saving reading, or
expounding the scriptures, and some prayers, which the whole congregation did
make together: some say that Peter used to celebrate with the Lords prayer
only. Paul did preach unto them, as appears in the Acts. Act 20. Mart. in
chron. de Petro. Justin. apol. 2
Iustine speaking of the Communion in his time* says: Post precationem, nos
salutamus osculo mutuo, deinde affertur precipuo fratri panis, and ca^ix aqua
dilutus etc. After our prayers, we salute one an other with a kiss, then the
bread is brought to the chiefest brother, and the cup of wine, and water.
Then the mynister gives thanks unto God, in the name of the Son, and of the
holy ghost, and the whole people do answer Amen. And if these words are not
yet plain enough, by which we may doubt whether Dominus vobiscum were then in
the Liturgy, Iustine says again. Die solis vrbanorum, and rusticorum coetus
fiunt, vbi apostolorum, Justin. apol. 2
prophetarumque litera quoad fieri potest preleguntur. etc. On sunday we have
our metings both of the town and the country, where the Apost^es and
prophets wrytings are red unto us, so long as time will serve: then our mynister
does make an ex^ortation, willing us to follow the virtue and goodness whereof
we read. Then we rise altogether, and make our prayers. L^e here is a full
description of the Communion, in Justinius Martyr, who lived in Soters time. And
yet in all this, not one word making mention of Dominus vobiscum, yet is
master Harding so importune in his untruths, that he dares boldly affirm,
and yet has no ground, that Dominus vobiscum was then part of their service.
Let him show but one sufficient record for proof of that, he writes, and
let him have his untruth. I know our decretall Epistles would be of this age,
and they defile Gods sacraments, as becomes that adulterous generation. But
those epistles, as I have sufficiently already showed, are far unworthy those
godly fathers, whose names they bear.


The B. of Saris. Further this same Soter requires, that both these two and
as many others, as be present, make answer unto the priest.


Harding. The.149. untruth. He requires it not, this is utterly false.


Dering. Note good reader, master Hardings impudency, and take heed of his
lying spirit, he says very censoure like this is utterly false, and in his
Reioinder raileth much at M. Iuel, for falsifying the Doctors, and yet most
impudently he does utterly belie him. Read his book, he does not bring one
letter to prove that he says. Belike he is well persuaded: his friends will
believe him, if he do but say the word: but to bring some proof against
master Hardings bare word, upon these words of Soter, let him have two at the
least to answer, if they be more, says master Iuel, then by Soters will they
must all answer. Upon this, master Harding falls in his railing vain, and
says it is utterly false. But let him say so, his mouth is no slander. The
gloser on this Decree, moves a doubt, whether these two should be ministers or
lay men, or of what sort else. And he answers, that it is plain enough, they
should be mynisters. Yet says he again, that is not certain quia and populus
respondent Amen. De co^s. did. 1 hoc quoque in glossa.
For all the people, must, likewise answer Amen. Lo he^re ye gloss does flatly
verify this untruth. And in an other place, Gracian speaking of the people,
which hear their common prayer, says thus: populus ad^d quod plane intelligit
respondeat Amen, let the people say Amen to that they do plainly understand.
Did. 38. sed.
Here beside, that the service must be in a known tongue. Gracian says
plainly, all the people must say Amen. In this next untruth before, the like is
showed out of Justinius, that all the people must say Amen, the same may be
proved by all the writers of that age: notwithstanding M. Harding to keep tale
of his vntru^hes against Gracian, against the gloss, against Justinius M^rtyr,
against al records, says it is utterly false. But examine the places, and so
try his credit.


The B. of Saris. By M. Hardings mind, the Priests devotion ought not to stay
for lack of company.


Harding. The.150. untruth. There can no such meaning be gathered of my words.


Dering. This, as it may be thought, is a very plain untruth, master Iuel
reporting that of master Harding, which him self says, can not be gathered
of his words. But because he has been often found faulty, in as bold
asseuerations as this is, it shall not be amiss to see his words. Thus he
says: Well, none comes: this is not a sufficient cause, why the godly
priest, enflamed with the love of God, feeling him self hungry and thirsty,
after the heavenly food, and drink, should be kept from it. And have not these
words a good plain meaning? May not one report of these words, that a priest
may say Mass alone? Why then does he score up this untruth? Forsoothe here
is a distinction of no bodies coming: either no body may come to answer, or no
body may come to receive, and M. Harding means, yt the priest may go
forward, though no body come to receive. After this sort I think, spoke
Heraclitus, when he would have no body to understand him. But this is no plain
dealing, to speak first so doubtfully, and then score up an untruth if one
understand it not. And thus much grau^ting this distinction of no body. If thou
require further discharge of this untruth, I will show thee good proof why
M. Iuels saying, ought not to be blamed, notwithstanding this distinction. L^ke
on Soters decree, and thou shall see the gloss alleges his Canon law, De
co^s. dis. 1. hoc quoque in glossa.
to prove that the priest may sometime celebrate, if he have but one present,
sometime, if there be no m^ but him self. This then being established by their
law, that the Priest may say Mass alone, master Hardings untruth may
control the Pope, it makes little against master Iuel.


The B. of Saris. By this decree, these two were bound to receive, or to
depart.


Harding. The.151. untruth. That decree, binds only the clergy.


Dering. Before we had a distinction of no body, now to quite that barren
matter, here is a distinction of all men. Let all men receive, De co^s. did.
1 Peracta.
says Calixtus, or go out of the Church, that is, says master Harding, all
men of the clergy, not all men of the laity. Thus neither all thing, nor
nothing, nor something, nor any thing shall want a distinction, if by plain
dealing the matter be not good. But O master Harding, Eurip.
(...), true speech is plain. Now for the Christian Reader, least these
distinctions should deceive thee, I must now, and then admonish, ^^ee, that
they be but false stuff, and this shall well appear in this present matter,
if I teach thee, that in the primative Church, there did none abide, that did
not Communicate.

When Christ did first institute his supper, it was so, all that were present,
did Communicate. He gave commandment, Math. 26.27.
that it should be so used, and said. Drink ye all of this. And that the
Apostles, and those other, who bebeloued, did th^s, it appears in the Acts,
where without excepti^n, Act. 2.42.
S. Luke says, they continued daily in breaking of bread. And again, they
met together to break bread. This was after observed among the Corinthians, as
appears by S. Paul, who plainly teaches, Act. 20.7.
that they come together to eat the Lords supper, and least we should think
any excepted, in the verses following, he adds every one. And for a further
proof of his meaning, he bids them one tarry for an other. By all this it is
certain, that all that were present, received. Upon this, 1. Cor 11.33.
says Calixtus, let all receive that will not depart out of the Church. And he
brings a reason to this Decree. Sic enim apostoli statuerunt. For so the
Apostles have appointed from the Apostles time through all ages, till iniquity
began to have the upper hand it was always an holy law. For all that were
present, to Communicate. And it is condemned of the fathers, as great
presumption, and impudency, to look on, and be no partaker, as it is other
where sufficiently declared. And were not master Harding set on evil
understanding, he would learn by that use of the primative Church, when they
sent away Catechumeni, those that were beginners in Christianity, that it was
not lawful for any to be an idle looker on. Sure in his private Mass, they
may look on that list. For this untruth, because Calixtus him self does
refer us to the Apostles example, when master Harding can prove by the
Apostles, that those, whom S. Luke mentions to have daily met, and the
Corinthians, to whom S. Paul writes, to have been all ministers, then these
distinctions of all men, and no body, shall go for good. Read the.221. untruth.


The B. of Saris. It is determined by the gloss, that these two were Priests,
or Deacons, and so this decree of Soter, agrees with an other of Anacletus.


Harding. The.152. untruth. It is not assuredly determined by the gloss.

The.153. untruth. It agrees not.


Dering. If this assuredly, do not help out with an untruth, then assuredly
this is no untruth: but for as much, as assuredly is put in by master
Harding, assuredly this is no plain dealing: and sure it is, if such unsure
demeanor were taken from master Hardings assured untruths, the surety of good
religion should in deed appear, and this unsavory wrangling should be
contemned, for this untruth it is altogether shameless. The gloss moves this
question: whether these two should be of the clergy, or of the laity, or of
either one, and it makes this answer, satis videtur quod debent esse duo
clerici, it is plain enough, De co^s. dis. 2. paracta in glossa.
they should be two of the clergy. Now judge whether master Iuel may say thus,
the gloss has determined it. As touching the allegation of these aucthorities
out of master Hardings Doctors, seeing he does so unwisely reprehend it,
because master Iuel alleges their sayings, yet aloweth not their religion.
May it please him to be answered, as Tullie said to Antonie, testimonium tuum
quod in aliena re leave debet esse, in tua tamen quia contra te est, debet esse
grauissimum, this their witness, which in an other matter were of no value,
yet in their own, because it is against the^ selves, it must needs be very
weighty. This other untruth, as touching Anacletus, is like the residue: upon
examination of the words, De co^s. dis. 1. vt illud.
let the reader judge. Thus says Anacletus, Episcopus deo sacrificans, testes
secum habeat, in solennioribus quippe diebus, aut. 7. aut. 5. aut. 3. diaconos.
etc. By this it is showed, that at every ministration he should have some of the
clergy. Now the gloss of that other Decree, determining that those two should
be of the clergy, let the indifferent reader judge whether it does agree with
this decree of Anacletus, and so he shall see the better, what manner of
untruths these are.


The B. of Saris. M. Harding knows well, that these decrees, which are here
rehearsed, could never be found written.


Harding. The.154. untruth. I know it not.


Dering. The councels are extant, and the thing is plain, these decrees are
not in them. But says Master Harding, peradventure three hundred year a
gone, Gratian did see them, though they never came to our hands: Now sure this
is a strange paraduenture. Gratian lived 800. years after the council was
holden at Agatha, and if those decrees had remained so long, peradventure they
might have bidden.300. years mo, and so we should have known of them. But
seeing the matter is but at peradventure, at all adventures let us grant it.
What, troweth Master Harding, because that by guess he proves his private
Mass, therefore shall gesses be of value to make untruths? He had need show
better evidence, that would take away Master Iuels good name.


The B. of Saris. It is decreed, that they, which receive not at Christmas,
Easter, and Whitsontide, be accounted as no catholics. Then except a few
massing priests, there is not one catholic in the church of Rome.


Harding. The.155. untruth. This is a slanderous lie.


Dering. The council holden at Agatha, has decreed thus, the seculer men, De
co^s. did. 2. seculares.
that receive not the Communion at Christmasse, Easter, and Whitsuntide, let
them not be taken, or reckned for catholic people. Hereupon Master Iuel
says, if it be so in the holy church of Rome, saving a few Massing Priests,
there is not one catholic. The reason is. For they receive but every Easter,
and whether they have used it, or no, let all the world witness. I do appeal
herein, to the conscience of the rankest papists, whosoever they be, let the
usage of that time be a trial, whether they used then only to receive, or no.
What holy fashions were then used, above other times? What shriuing? What
dispeling? What curteine drawing? What primerose gathering? What cleckclacking?
What roode sweating? What crossecreping? What Jack an apes walking from the
altar to the idol house? What wickedness was there used against that one time
of their sinful receiving? Who knows it not, that this is true? Yet says
Master Harding, it is a slanderous lie, it is an impudent tale, a false
slander, Reioind. fo. 223.
an impudent surmise, a manifest untruth, such one, as may be seen, the nouice
of him, that is the father of lies. If this may be believed, we see how against
all certain truth, he will spew out his venom. But God have the glory, that
has given his children virtue, against such poison, For the untruth, I say, as
before, let the world judge.


The B. of Saris. I have already proved, by Saint Augustine, and Saint Jerome,
that Communion was ministered in Rome every day.


Harding. The.155. untruth. This is proved by neither of them.


Dering. Double on Master Harding. Your number shall grow the better. This is
now the fourth time, that this untruth is reconed: that the thing is true, I
have sufficiently declared before. Now because the matter so falls out, that
M. Iuel alleging four times these things of Augustine, and Jerome, M. Harding
notes them for four untruths, I must crave of thee a little to consider them.
Ieromes words are these, I know this custom is at Rome, In Apolog. cont.
Iouinia Reioind fol. 216.
that christian folk receive the body of Christ daily, which I do neither
reprove, nor allow. These words, it seems, are meetely plain. Master
Harding answers thus. Here mention is made only of daily receiving, but
that they received together in one place, that is not avouched. If any man can
see any reason in this answer, let the untruth go. Now as touching Augustine,
he says thus. Christ, Epist. 23. Reioinder. fol. 197.
by way of sacrament is offered every day unto the people, not at Easter only,
but every day. This authority, because it is somewhat plain, Master Harding
skippeth it over, and answers not at all. Augustine says again, the daily
bread may be taken pro sacramento corporis christi, quod quotidie accipimus,
for the sacrament of Christ's body, which we receive daily. De sermon. domini in
most. li. 2. Reioinder. fol. 199.
To this authority Master Harding does answer thus. Saint Augustine might
mean that of him self, and other Priests, or which is more likely he spoke
indefinitely, of all beleuers. Thus with might mean, and more likely, M.
Harding would warrant this one untruth to be.v. But he him self might mean
more simply, and then it were more likely, these untruths had been fewer, but
let us see more. S. Augustine says again, De sermon. domini in most. li. 2. ca.
12.
many in the East do not daily communicate. Of this M. Iuel infers.
Therefore some in the East did communicate daily. To this, M. Harding
answers somewhat shamefully: Of ye thing I contend not, Reioinder. fo. 200.
but yet M. Iuels argument is not good. Mark good Reader, M. Hard* says, of
ye thing he will not contend, and yet he makes v. untruths of it. But let this
go. S. Augustine says again, the sacrament of this thing is prepared, or
consecrate in the church, In Johan. tract. 26.
Alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis interuallis dierum, somewhere every day,
and somewhere but on certain days. To this Master Harding answers thus,
the sacrament in some places is prepared every day by priests, Reioind. fol.
^01.
and by the same priests is every day received, these are the proofs which
Master Iuel says here, that he has brought. Master Harding notes his
untruth, and says, they prove it not, whether they do, or no. Now let the
Reader judge. Except Master Hardings aunsweres had been better, this untruth
needs no longer justifying.


The B. of Saris. Fabian says, we decree that every sondaie the oblation of
the altar be made both of bread, and wine, as well by men, as women: Here
besides that in these words is included, the receiving of the Communion every
sunday, may be noted also by the way, that by this authority of Fabian, men,
and women made the sacrifice of the alter, even as S. Barnard says: Not only
the priest, but also all the faithful sacrifice do.


Harding. The.157. untruth. It is not included, that they receive every
sunday.

The.158. untruth. Fabian does not attribute the making of the sacrifice to
men, and women.

The.159. untruth. S. Barnard says it not.


Dering. This first untruth is, that though they offered every sunday bread,
and wine, yet it follows not, that they received. But this Master Harding
says, only, and beside gesses, has no sufficient proof for it. In fine,
thus he resolves the matter. This bread, and wine was partly for the priest
alone to receive, Reioind. fol. 127.
partly for the clergy, partly for the poor, and partly to make holy bread
of, so this is become a very beneficial untruth unto Master Harding, it has
not only increased his number, but it has brought in an other article of his
religion, and that is, at all a very venture, holy bread. Here were good room
for one of Master Hardings aunsweres, this pelf will not serve, you must go
seek better stuff. The second untruth, here brought, is this, that men, and
women do not make this sacrifice. Fabians words are these: Haec altaris
oblatio ab omnibus viris, et mu^eribus fiat, let this sacrifice of the alter be
made of all, men and women. These words I trow, are meetely plain, but Master
Harding answers thus. There is difference between an oblation, and a
sacrifice, oblation is it, when any thing is offered unto the Lord, and
nothing done unto it, or in it. A sacrifice is, Reioind. fo. 225.
when a thing offered unto God, is by the priest altered, by some thing don in
it, or unto it, for religion sake: so the common people made the oblation of
the alter, but they made not the sacrifice of the alter. It were to be wished,
good christian Reader, that these distinctions, were barred, then we should
have less wrangling, and fewer untruths. But, they say, all is well, that
ends well, if by examination this distinction be found good, why should not
Master Harding use it? Theophilacte, says he, Chrysostom and Paul him
self, have so distinguished these words. First though they had done so, yet
this were but a mean reason, to prove they were in like sort used in Fabian.
The proof of Fabians meaning, may not well be showed but by Fabian him self.
But let us see what these Doctors say, on whom Master Harding will* ground
this distinction. Theophilactus words are these, Inter donum, sieve munus, et
hostiam, sieve victimam, si exactam spectes rationem, aliquid est discriminis,
quia victimae, vel hostiae, sunt per sanguine^, In. 8. ca. ad Hebr.
et carnem oblationes, vel quae per ignem sacrificantur, dona sunt quaecunque
alia incruenta, et igni carentia. Between (...) and (...) that is gifts and
sacrifices, this is the difference, that (...), a sacrifice, is an oblation
made with flesh and blood, or by fire, (...) a gift, is that which is offered
unbloody, and without fire. Of this place M. Harding does conclude, that an
oblation is a thing offered unto God without any thing done unto it, but this
argument hangs as losely, as any other commonly in M. Hardings book. A gift
whereof Theophilacte speaks, is is in Greek, (...), an oblation, whereof M.
Harding speaks, is in Greek (...). So his reason hangs thus. A gift is
that, which without fire, or blood, is offered unto God, as an oblation is that,
which has nothing done unto it. This argument, Christian Reader, this is his
own reason, neither better, nor worse, than he has made it. His second
authority, is out of Chrysostom, his words likewise are these, Ad hebr. ho.
18.
Oblatio erat quicquid extra sacrificium erat, that was the oblation, what so
ever was beside the sacrifice, and more than this, he says not now of these
words how M. Hard. can frame his answer to this authority of Fabian,
doutlesse no man that means plainly, can epsy. This is Chrisostomes meaning,
y^ dona were all those sacrifices, or offerings prescribed, save only, such as
were sin offerings. But M. Harding goes further, and for^eth S. Paul, as if
of him he had learned his distinction, how be it, he never spoke one word of
it. Yea the places by M. Hard* alleged, do not so much as once name oblation,
then how does he make this exact difference of oblations? Surely no authority
had been much better, than these three, nothing to the purpose. In the mean
season by M. Hardings good skill, we may change our common use of speaking, and
say no more burnt offering, meat offering, peace offering, sin offering, etc. but
rather thus, burnt sacrifice, meat sacrifice, peace sacrifice, sin
sacrifice, and so forth. A proper distinction, and meet to interpret Fabian,
that co^trolleth thus the phrase of the scripture. Here follows yet an other
untruth, and that is about these words, Non solus sacerdos sacrificat, sed
etiam totus conuentus fidelium. Not only the priest sacrifices, but also all
the company of the faithful. This says M. Harding, is not true in M. Iuels
sense. For, says he, that every one of the people, both men, and women in
their own person do outwardly, and ministerially consecrate ye body and blood
of Christ, and so offer, and make the sacrifice of the alter, after the order
of Melchisedech, Reioind. fol. 227.
neither is it signified by the blessed martyr S. Fabian, neither was it ever
before M. Iuels Reply came forth, with such impudency reported. Better had it
ben for M. Harding, and more credit for his untruth, if he had rested here, yt
M.I. named Bernard, in stead of Guerricus. For this report of M. Iuels meaning
is nothing else, but impudent folly. For who would ever say, that M. Iuels
meaning is, ye men, and women said Mass, such untruth can be no better
reproved, than by showing Master Hardings proves.


The B. of Saris. But what if the very words of these councels, where upon M.
Harding has found the Mass, make manifest proof against his Mass? The words
be these; All secular christian folk be bound to receive the communion at the
least, thrice in the year. This relaxation, or privilege is granted only to
the secular christians. whereof it follows necessarily, that all
ecclesiastical persons, as Priests, Deacons, Clerks, and others, whatsoever
of that sort, were not excepted, but stood still bound to receive orderly, as
they had done before, and that was at all times, whenever there was any
ministration.


Harding. The.160. untruth. These be not the words of the council.

The.161. untruth. This is no relaxation, or privilege.

The.162. untruth. The ecclesiastical persons were not bound to receive,
whenever there was any ministration.


Dering. This sentence of M. Iuel, no doubt, pleases M. Harding well. For
considering ye number of untruths, yt he must find, he sees some way must be
found to bring his purpose to effect, upon this occasion, here he has
noted.iij. untruths together. But it is welu^. Nber may be no prejudice to ye
truth, let us examine the sayings. First says Master Iuel, the councels words
are these. All secular folk are bound to receive the Communion, at the least,
thrice a year. These are not the words, says Master Harding, and it is true.
These are not the words in deed. But way yet well the whole matter, and thou
shall see Master Harding a very wrangler. Master Iuel a little before does
recite the latin, even as it is red in Gracian, and does english it word for
word, having occasion again here to repeat the decree, he alleges the true
meaning, and makes only this change, in stead of Christmasse, Easter, and
whitsontide, he says, thrice in the year, and in doing so, what blame
deserves he? Look in this same division, Master Iuel alleges the words
thus. Qui in natali domini, De co^s. disc. 2. seculares.
Pascate, et Pentecoste non communicant, catholici non credantur, nec inter
catholicos habeantur. These very words are found in Gracian, they, that
receive not the Communion at Christmasse, Easter, and Whitsontide, let them not
be taken nor reconed for catholic people. Here is the place truly alleged,
and word for word interpreted, then how can he be blamed for falsifying the
councels words? In this place which follows, within one leaf, he alleges
the sense of this decree thus. All secular christian folk be bound to receive
the Communion, at the least, thrice in the year. There he names ye times,
Christmasse, Easter, Whitsontide, here he says, thrice in the year, and is
this any untrue dealing? This it is, that I said, mark well Master Harding,
and thou shall find him a very wrangler. For this other untruth, about a
relaxation, and privilege, except Master Harding think he have a privilege
to wrangle, what does it here? It is a relaxation to those that received,
either every day, or every sunday, it was a restrainte of those that would
receive but once a year. Now this third untruth, whether the ecclesiastical
persons were bound to receive, when soever there was any ministration, or no,
in that master Harding may well disclose his own untruth. He can not blame
master Iuel. I require of the Christian reader, to mark diligently what is
spoken, and then judge as God shall move thee. Ecclesiastical persons were
bound daily to receive says M. Iuel. They were not says M. Harding, and for
proof of that, he says only thus much, that master Iuel has not proved the
contrary. Now whether he has, or not, let his Replye be judge. He alleges in
the.29. Division, Cano. apost. Canon. 9.
a Canon of the Apostles, which is this, if any Bishop or priest, or Deacon, or
any other of the clerks after the Oblation is made, do not Communicate, either
let him show cause thereof, that if it be found reasonable, he may be excused,
or let him be excommunicate. I trow this be a law, and a straight law that is
enforced under the pain of excommunication. They were bound so sure, that
they might not be losed, but upon just occasion, and necessity, has no law.
Yet says master Harding, it is not proved. Now thou see he will not say
always true. And to prove that this proof was good, Council. Elib. Cap. 180.
it is decreed by the council holden at Eliberis in Spain, in sundry Canons,
that upon diverse faults, the priests, deacons, and clerks, should not in the
end of service receive the Communion, whereby it appears, that it was their
duty to receive at every ministration. And this may well appear, if we be not
obstinate by the council of Carthage, saying. Co^c. Carth. 4. ca. 41.
Diaconus tempore oblationis tantum, vel lectionis, alba induatur, let the
Deacon wear on his albe, only in the time that the scripture is a reading, or
else in the time of the Communion. By this it may appear, that in their
service the clergy had their Communion, so in the.73. canon of the same
council, it is said: qui communicauerit.l. orauerit, where by that joining, it
may appear that in their common prayers, they had also a Communion, and it was
then especially provided that no spiritual man should be present, and not
Communicate. And surely, who so shall well consider the diligence of the
mynisters in the primative Church, shall not, nor can not doubt, except
private Mass have blinded him, but that themselves receiceiued at every
assembly, and exhorted other to do the like. Then this is no untruth.


The B. of Saris. Those decrees were not made for the greatest part of the
people, which in their days used to communicate in all their assemblies. etc.
as appears by the Ecclesiastical records of that time.


Harding. The.163. untruth. The greatest part used not to Communicate in all
their assemblies at that time.

The.164. untruth. The Ecclesiastical records of that time show the contrary.


Dering. These untruths stand upon master Hardings computation of times. And
if you will not allow his own reckening, neither are all the other untruths of
any value, nor this worth the numbering. At this time, says master Harding,
that is, when the council of Agatha was holden, the greatest part did not
Communicate in all their assemblies, and this he proves by the testimonies of
Ambrose, Augustine, and Chrysostom. Lib. 5. de sa. ca. 4. de ser. domini in
mo.l. 2. cap. 120. Ad po. A. ho. 61.
To those fathers I answer, that they spoke only unto some, that were very
negligent, and would but seldom receive. Master Hardings surmise, that thereof
gesseth at a private Mass, is very slender. What if one hundred, or two? or
what if the greater part came seldom to the congregation, and therefore these
good pastors did so often rebuke them? Yet most of them, that came, did
Communicate, and master Harding shall never show the contrary. These self
same Doctors are very plain, that usually, many of them did receive, and if it
were so, where is the private Mass? Chrysostom speaks plainly, In. 4. ad
to. ser. 8.
contremiscite, contremiscite ad mensam hanc, de qua communicamus simul omnes,
tremble, tremble at this table, at which we do all Communicate together. And
that we may know how often this was done, he writes in an other place, prece^
illic perpetuae propter te, synaxis propter te, oblatio per singulos dies
dominicos, there are, In acta. ca. ^ hom 18.
meaning of the Church, continual prayers for thee, assemblies for thee, and
the Communion every sunday. And if master Harding will except again, that
Oblatio is not the Communion, let him remember here is also Synaxis, by which
word is also meant the Communion, so whether word he will have to signify
this Sacrament, he must confess, that it was used at the least every sunday,
and that of the people. And in an other place, Chrysostom says: Ad pop. Ant.
hom. 61.
Omnis qui astat and ministerioru^ participio non fruitur, impudens est, and
procax. Whosoever is present, and does not Communicate, he is shameless and
malapert. And in diverse places he warns them to cease their evil doing, with
often repetition of the dreadful mysteries. And to what purpose were that, if
they received not commonly. The authority that is alleged out of Augustine,
is taken out of Ambrose, and it may well be answered with the authority again
of Augustine, taken out of Cyprian. Hunc panem dari nobis quotidie postulamus.
etc. This bread says he, we desire that it may be daily given unto us. etc.
Least while we be denied that heavenly bread, we be separate from the body of
Christ. Hereby it appears, in their assemblies, the most of them received,
and to this effect master Iuel does allege, Conc. Matisc. 2 cap. 40.
Council. Antisiodor. Can. 42. Car. mag. lib. 6. cap. 162. Now how so ever it
likes master Harding to accept it, all this must needs stand for sufficient
proof. For this second untruth here brought, that the contrary is showed
by sundry records of this, that we have said, it appears that this show, as
it is again showed, is nothing worth. Therefore the use of receiving in those
days was, as it is recorded, every sunday at the least, but the receiving in
the Popes days, is every Easter, and so both these untruths are become none.


The B. of Saris. It was decreed by a council holden at Gerunda in Spain,
that all little Churches in the country, should confourme them selves unto the
great cathedral churches, that were in cities, and towns, as well for order
of the Communion, as also for singing, and other ministration. But by M.
Hardings own grant, there was no private Mass in the cathedral Churches.


Harding. The.165. untruth. That council speaks never a word, in that
canon of the Communion.

The.166. untruth. I never made any such grant.


Dering. Believe not this man's saying, gentle reader, if thou love thine own
soul. Mark first the aucthorities ere thou credit his report. The words of
the council, are these, vt institutio missarum, sicut in Metropolitana ecclesia
agitur, ita in dei nomine in omni Terraconensi prouincia, tam ipsius missae
ordo quam psallendo, vel ministrando consuetudo seruetur. That the institution
of Masses, even as it is done in the Metropolitan Churches, so in the name of
God we will, that in all the province of Terraconia, the same custom be kept, in
order, in singing, and in mynistration. This canon is reported by Gracian, who
in stead of Terraconia, puts in all provinces, least master Harding should
make exception of any one country. De consec. did. 2. instit.
But says he, this decree speaks never a word of the Communion. Yet this
decree has these express words. The institution of the Mass, the order, the
manner of singing, and the mynistration. And the title of this decree in
Gracian, is this: as in the cathedral Churches, sic vbique missarum solennia
celebrentur, so every where let the solemnity of the Mass be kept: and the
gloss says, Ostendit quod missa non debet aliter celebrari, Ibi. in glossa.
quam in Metropolitana ecclesia, he shows that the Mass must be celebrated
no otherwise, than in the cathedral Churches. If the Communion in the Mass,
be no part of the institution, nor order, nor ministration, it is a strange
Communion, and it is a strange Mass, that may be instituted, and ministered
without it. But be it, that this were so, is master Harding so discourteous to
his close Communion, that he will have it no part of the solemnity of his
Mass? He does the^ deserve very ill of it. For it has more pretty gestures,
than all the Mass beside. But what if master Harding will deny all this?
What if he care neither for council, nor yet for Gracian? What if he say it is
no part of the institution, order, ministration, nor yet of the solemnity? yet
he cannot avoid ye gloss, that speaks expressly, without naming any
circumstaunce, that the Mass must be celebrate no otherwise in small Churches,
than it is in the Metropolitan church. Now except M. Harding do mean to
teach us, by these distinctions, that the Communion is no part of the Mass,
it must be ministered in all Churches alike. This is a miserable cause that M.
Harding has, that to defend it, must either fall into this absurdity, that
the Communion is no part, neither of the institution of the Mass, nor of the
manner of singing, nor of the order, nor of the ministration, nor of the
solemnity, nor of the Mass it self, or else he must confess, this is no
untruth. Now where he says further, for this other untruth, that he made no
such grant, that in cathedral Churches there was no private Mass, if it be
true, what a vain argument made he, when he gessed at private Mass in little
villages, by the use of Cathedral churches. Reasoning after this sort, that
seeing there were so few Communicants in the great city of Antioche, what was
to be thought of small parishes? Hard. diuis. 30
Here may well appear a secret grant, that private Masses must be had in
small towns in the country, or else no where.


The B. of Saris. It appears by most certain, and undoubted proofs, that
the people did receive then every sunday.


Harding. The.167. vnt. It appears not, by ought that here is brought.


Dering. In the.157. untruth, master Harding said, this was a foul untruth.
Here he says, it is untrue, for ought that here is brought, so he somewhat
qualifieth his former saying. But yet this doing is strange, because the thing
is certain, to make exception against the proof, more modesty might well
have yielded unto the truth. How be it, considering it is M. Hardings doing, it
is ye more sufferable. Poets, and painters may not be limited in their
inuentio^s. But least the christian reader should be deceived, and have some
confidence of this untruth, because it is twice reckened: let us see these
proofs, which master Harding says are so insufficient. The one is,
Decernimus, vt omnibus dominicis diebus. etc. We decree that every sunday the
oblation of the altar, Co^c. matisc. cap. 4.
be made of every man, and woman. This aucthority seems very sufficient, if
ye time do prejudice it, in that thi^ council was holden more than and C.
years after the council of Agatha, master Harding must understand it is an
argument, Minorae. They received every sunday in the time of the council holden
at Matiscona. Ergo, much rather when the council was at Agatha. And in deed,
from that time our savior Christ ascended, until the Pope sat aloft in the
Church of God, every age, as it was nearer unto Christ's time, so they had more
commonly their Communions. The second proof yt M. Iuel brings, is this,
vnaquaeque mulier. Co^c. antis. Cap. 42.
etc. Every woman when she does communicate, let her have her Dominical. If she
have it not, let her not Communicate, vsque in alium diem dominicum, until the
next sunday. Then of like they received every sunday. This argument says M.
Harding, is slender, and a learned man will be ashamed of it. And he answers
it with an other argument, and if thou will have a pattern of a good one, mark
it well. The words are says he, quando communicate, when she does
communicate. Ergo, she did not communicate every sunday. Reioinder. fol. 231.
He that will reprehend M. Iuels argument, it is reason himself should have
made a better. By such reasons we may conclude what we will. When she did
communicate, therefore she did it not every sunday. Then when we go to dinner,
we sit down. Therefore we go not to dinner every day. Such proves may be
soon made. Biside this, M. Harding chalengeth the translation, but that is not
worth answering. Alias is commonly used for the next, fallacia alia aliam
trudit. Nos alia ex alijs in fata vocamur. Aliud ex alio malum. Ex alio in
aliud vicissitudo. And if we say in English, we must tarry for another term,
every wise man does understand it, we must tarry til the next term. Thus hear
appears no insufficiency in M. Iuels proof, but much following M. Hardings
untruth.


The B. of Saris. Likewise Socrates writes thus in Greek, (...), that is to
say, to have a congregation, or assembly by themselves.


Harding. The.168. There are no such words in that place in Socrates.


Dering. False quotation needs no great excuse.


The B. of Saris. Let Missa be taken for the Mass, that is, for the
ministration of the Sacraments.


Harding. The.169. It does not signify the ministration of the sacraments.


Dering. Between M. Stapleton, and M. Harding, master Iuel can say nothing
without blame. The sixth untruth noted by master Iuel out of master Hardings
answer, is this. S. Andrew said the Communion, and not the Mass. In the
return of this untruth, says master Stapleton: you speak fondly, the Mass,
and the Communion is al one. Here says master Iuel, let the Mass be taken
for the Communion. That is an untruth says master Harding, it can not be so
taken. Thus we see these men are at a point, speak master Iuel, what he will,
so long as he speaks truth, he shall not escape blame. Whether Missa may
signify the Communion, or no. Read more in the.17. untruth.


The B. of Sarisb. Verily it is provided by the decree it self, that in
private Chapels, there should be a lawful, and an ordnarie company.


Harding. The.170. untruth. It was not provided.


Dering. To make this untruth perfect, M. Harding has bound it with a double
asseueration, verily, verily, this is a false lie. But surely, surely, there is
little honesty, to use so much wrangling, where the matter it self is plain.
The words of the decree are these, vt ibi missas teneat propter fatigationem
familiae, Conc. Agat. cap. 21.
iusta ordinatione permittimus, we permit that in due order for the weariness
of his household, he may have Mass in his private Oratorie. Now though master
Harding go not the right way to prove his private Mass, that goes to seek
it out in private chapels, yet let us way well what this permission is. The
decree says, iusta ordinatione, or iusto ordine, De consecr. did. 1. si quis.
so without due order it might not be, not in private Oratories, and to have it
with order, was to have a number of Communicantes. So this permission yet makes
no private Mass. Again the decree says, propter fatigatiouem familiae, for
the weariness of the household, whereby it appears the householde must
communicate. For if they should not have gone to church, how should they have been werie of going? and the^ was there not yet private Mass. Thirdly it was
gra^^ted in those parishes, in which, beside that householde, there was
legittimus, ordinariusque conuentus, in which there was beside a sufficient
company. What neded this exception, if the Priest might have said Mass, and
received a^one? Little company will serve to make one communicate. Thus we see
Master Harding, does no where speak more advisedly, than where he makes
most constant asseueration.


The B. of Saris. Vincentius writes, after Gregorius was dead, Bonifacius
ruled the church of Rome. This Boniface obtained of the Emperor, Phocas, that
the church of Rome should be the head of all churches, and that because the
church of Constantinople wrote it self by that title. The next year after
that, Augustine, that was called the English men's bishop, died. The year
following, John the Almonar, was in great fame, at which time also Mahomet first
spread his religion in Arabia.


Harding. The.171. untruth. Vincentius vvriteth not so.


Dering. If thou know not what wrangling is, now learn. Master Harding
finds here diverse faults. The first, that Bonifacius was not next Gregory,
and true I think it be. Sauinianus was one year between, and what skilleth that
to private Mass? Or why should Master Iuel of purpose, speak here untruly?
It is very probable he might forget the order of the Popes, that was so
occupied to set out Gods religion. This was not worth the noting. Another fault
is, where Vincentius says, Augustine the first^ English Bishop. Master Iuel
says thus, Augustine that was called the English bishop. What contention
about words is this* Another fault is, by cause he alleges not one sent^nce,
where Vincentius does commend the Almonars lib^ralitie Except Master Iuell
would have filled his book with idle words, this was nothing necessary. He
searches (...) what I kills it then, to allege hi^ co^^^^dations. We read
in Plato, that a (...) was ever won^ to make such a^nswer^s* when Cherephon
asks Polus, what science Gorgias professes, Polus always is up with a
special commendation of it, Plato in Gorgia.
and never tells what it is. But Socrates said, that was nothing to the purpose,
there was no man dispraised it, so what helps it, when we ask of the
Almonars age, to allege Vincentius commendation, of him. No man disprayseth
him, we seek for his age, we enquire not of his qualities, let the man
alone. The fourth fault is, that he parts this saying: What time Mahomet
spread his religion in Arabia, in the distinct letter of the Doctors
allegations. This doing helps Master Iuell never a whit. For if it be true,
what skilleth it, who says it? Again, if the Printer make not his letters
well, Master Iuell is not to blame. Here are four faulte^ found without
salt or ^auoure, yet there is an other, and that is, that about this time,
Mahomet spread not his religion. For he began, says Master Harding, in the
latter time of Heraclitus the Emperor. Master Harding is very supersticious
in computation of times, or this would seem to be a very ^ender (...).
Phocas began his reign, in the year of our Lord.604. three years after that
Bonifacius was made Pope* 607. it was four years after, Nauclerus in chron.
genesis 21. et. ^2.
that John the Almonar, should say this Mass. Anno.610. within.xix. yeare^
after, in the ninetene year of Heraclitus, Mahomet did sprede his heresy. And
may we not say of things done nighe a thousand years paste, tha^ they were
done about one time, if the^ were done within nintene years compass? But what
means Master Harding, to cavil about times? The writers them selves do
not agree* by some computation, they (...) very little. Mahomet is said to
have begone, Anno Domini *621. so there was but nine years difference* (...).
temp. Fo. 41. pa. 2.
and may not then Master Iuell say, they were done about the same time.
Master Harding has little to ^aye, when he stays at such trifles. But
because Master Harding takes it in by the way, that Augustine was our first
Bishop, read more of that in the Epistle.


The B. of Saris. To break the holy Canons, Damasus says, i^ blasphemy
against the holy ghost.


Harding. The.72. untruth. Damasus says not so.


Dering. This is one of Master Hardings poor untruths, which, beside the
assertion, has neither color, nor show. Damasus words are these. Tali^
praesumptio manifest vnum genus est blasphem^^tis in spiritual factum. 25. q.
1. viola tores.
Such presumpsion is manifestly one kind of blasphemy, against the holy
ghost. If these be not the words, then I lie. If these be the words, then
Master Harding makes shameless untruths. And if those words of the decree
are not plain enough, then Gracian speaks more plainly in the title, he
speaks, even as Master Iuell does, In spiritum sanctum blasphemant, qui
sacros canones violant, it is blasphemy against the holy ghost, to break the
sacred canons. Yea and the gloss says further, Eo ipso videtur excommunicatus,
et hereticus, even by the very face, he is excommunicate, Ibid. in glosa
and he is an heretic. And Gregory says, exors esto a nostro ministerio. Let
him have no part of our ministratio^. Did. 19. nulli.
Read these places, and examine M. I. saying, thou can not but marvel, at
Master Hardings impudency.


The B. of Saris. Soters decree commands, that no Priest dare minister
without the company of some other Priest.


Harding. The.173. untruth. Soters decree is not so general, it is limited.


Dering. How so ever Soters decree be limited, he were a wise man could limit
al M. Hardinges wrangling. The canon is plain, Summopere cauendum est* And
necessarium duximus, we must especially provide, and we have thought it
necessary, to have an other Priest in company, and for the better credit of
this decree, Soter brings forth this scripture, Ve soli, woe be to him that is
alone. But says Master Harding, this decree was not general, and it was
grown out of use: and how proves he, that it was not general. Forsooth
Gregory says so, he might as well have said, I say so, for if Gregory might
guess at Soters meaning.400. years after Soter was dead, why may not M. Hard.
guess too. I am sure he is as good at a guess as ever Gregory was, and has as
good practice in them. But this is strange dealing which Master Harding uses
to guess so at untruths, then to aduouch them so boldly. But because the matter
shall not go all by aim, here is another shift for John Almonars Mass. This
canon, says Master Harding, was grown out of use. But this answer was
scarce worth bringing. For if the breach of those canons were blasphemy
against the holy ghost, as Pope Damasus says, what me^t Master Hardings church
to let them grow out of use. But I think, the church was not so ouerseene,
peradventure Master Hardings saying is false, peradventure the decree, neither
had any limitation, nor yet was out of use. Uerely the Pope him self,
straightly commands them, De co^s. did. 1. apostolica. 25. q. 1. viola
toris in glosa.
with apostolical authority, and in no case will have them broken under pain
of excommunication. Then since it is so, this untruth was neither wisely
numbered, nor yet well prouid.


The B. of Saris. The council of Laudicea says, it is not lawful for
bishops, or priests, to minister the communion at home.


Harding. The.174. untruth. The Council says not at home, but in their houses.


Dering. We have heard before many new distinctions, here is yet an other, as
new as the best. There is, says M. Harding, a difference between at home, and
in their houses, and upon this distinction, it likes him so well, he
aduentureth this untruth, and the two next, ensuing also. But I think, it will
be long ear this distinction get any credit. Sure I am, in my country, to say
he is at home, or he is at his house, is all a matter, and I dare say, M. Iuel
thought of no difference between them. Seeing then Master Harding does see so
clear, too epsy ambiguities, where none are. Let us see how that decree, and
this distinction may stand. Conc. laodic. can. 58.
Let no Bishop, or Priest, says the council, minister the Communion in their
houses. Yet says Master Harding, they may minister it at home. So this decree
stands thus. Let no Bishop, or Priest minister the Communion to any man in
his house, except he be at home. If so many Bishops made so senseless a
decree, they had small matters to think on.


The B. of Saris. The same order was taken at the Council of Acon.


Harding. The.176. untruth. It was not taken.


Dering. The same order, says Master Harding, was not taken by them. Yet
the.58. canon of the council of Laodicea, and 80. canon of the council of
Acon, are the same words, and how should the same words not have the same
meaning? No distinction can make this matter whole, but M. Harding must needs
here say, he can not tell what he said.


The B. of Saris. Likewise, Pope Foelix: It is not lawful to minister the
communion at home, but upon exceeding great necessity.


Harding. The.175. untruth. Foelix, speaks neither of the Communion, nor of
home.


Dering. If M. Harding did either fear God, or reverence the truth, he would
not deal thus unfaithfully. Thou see, good Reader, how boldly he says,
Foelix names neither ye Communion, nor home, and who would not think, that
such assertions should have some color, or show of truth? yet sure in this
there is none. But mark his untrue behavior, he alleges for his proof,
certain words of Foelix, in which in deed these terms are not expressed,
but how wickedly he does it, let the book be judge. It follows in the same
decree, within less than five lines. De consec. did. 1. sicut non alij.
In domibus ab episcopis, sieve presbyteris oblationes celebrari nullatenus
licet, yet in houses, either by Bishops, or Priests, it is by no means
lawefull, that the Communion be celebrate. Lo here is mention both of house,
and Communion, yet says Master Harding, there is mention of neither. The best
excuse that in this place may be had, is to say, he was deceived: there is
no exception against the words, for they are plain. No distinction of
oblation. For the gloss has interpreted it. Oblationes. s. eucharistiae. The
sacrifice, Ibid. in glosa
to wit, of the Lords supper. Now a little further, to view these untruths,
M. Harding to prove his private Mass, has sought for John Almonar in a
private Chapple, but the question is moved of the open church. This John
Almonar, lived at the least.610. years after Christ. The question is of.600.
years only. So this fable may be well rejected, both for that it is nothing
to the purpose, and if it were, yet it is without the compass of.600. years.
Yet Master Iuel admitting the proof, does prove that it is a very fable.
His reason is, because no man might say Mass at home. Here let us make the
best of Master Hardings answer, and it is thus. They might not say Mass in
their houses, but they might say them in their Chapels. This answer is very
absurd. For who would say mass in his parlour, or hall, or kitchen, having a
Chapple? And it is known to be false, and taken away by Gracian, saying.
Vnicuique fidelium in domo sua oratorium habere licet, et ibi orare, missas
autem ibi concelebrare non licet, De co^s. did. 1. vnicuique.
every man may have a Chapple in his house, and pray there, but he may not have
Mass in it. Thus appears, how vain Master Hardings exception is, against
these former authorities, for that they have in Domibus in their houses, when
Gracian alleging the council of Auleria uses this word, oratorium, a Chaple,
notwithstanding, Master Harding concludes thus, we must seek for better
stuff, this is nothing worth, so much security have these men promised them
selves, that whatsoever they speak, they think it shall be believed.


The B. of* Saris. Master Harding translateth fals^ly, cum benedixisset
sancta* when he had consecrate the Sacrament. Likewise, post finem orationum,
after the prayer of consecration.


Harding. The.177. untruth. That translation is true.

The.178. untruth. That translation is true.


Dering. Now that this Apostata, has vomited up a little poisoned affection,
against the blessed bishop of Sarisburie, he is laid down again, like a
swine, to wallow in his former mire, and as blind bayard, running forth he
knows not whether, quoteth mo untruths of his own making. My translation,
Ambros. de ijs qui etc. cap. 9. Thom. in. 1. cor. cap. 10. lec. 4.
says he, is true. His reason is this, some doctors do expound benedicere,
for consecrare, therefore that is so. And the Grecians said, (...), sancta
sanctis, therefore sancta is the Sacrament. If Master Harding, that in his long
epistle would so feign have been Appelles, could with all his cunning picture
out these arguments, we should have the right shape of a fools babble.
Benedicere, says he, is construed of S. Ambrose by consecrare, ergo, it is so.
But it is construed otherwise, by the Evangelists, therefore it is not so.
Where S. Matthew, and S. Mark say, Math. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Co. 11.
(...), when he had blessed, he brake, S. Luke and S. Paul say, (...), when he
had given thanks, he brake. Yea both Mathewe, and Mark them selves say of
the cup (...), when he had given thanks, he gave it. Then if Benedixit be, he
did consecrate, then Gratias egit is also, he did consecrate, and so the.180.
untruth is verified, that master Harding calls some things, that are not as
if they were. And I would feign know why master Harding cleaves so to this
word (...), it makes nothing for his transubstantiation. It is written in the
Scripture, (...), God blessed the seventh day, yet he turned not the nature of
it. So God speaks unto Abraham, (...). Surely, in blessing I will bless
thee, yet God used no manner of consecration: so says S. Paul, (...). Ephe. 1.
Who has blessed us in all manner of spiritual blessing. In diverse other
places of holy scripture, thisword is used, yet no where for this strange
manner of transubstantiation, or other consecration, than which we say in
Latin consecrare, which is, to give up, to ordain, to appoint to an holy use,
though it may be well said of the sacrament, yet it is not in Greek (...), but
rather (...) or (...) or (...), so that why he should translate (...), to
consecrate, there is no cause, except such cause as will have (...) after
(...), signify nothing. But says master Harding, some Doctors have
translated Benedicere by Consecrare. Let us grant it, such is the liberty of
speech, that some word is used in an impropre signification. Does it follow,
because Benedicere may be to consecrate, therefore Benedicere sancta, is to
consecrate the sacrament? This gathering is very childishe. Extruo is to build
up. Therefore is extruere mensam, to build or make a table? Interpello, is to
disturb, or interrupt, therefore is interpellare debitore^ to interrupt or
disturb your debtour? Expendere, is to consider, therefore is expendere poenas,
to consider punishment? Sure this is a very idle proof, though Benedicere were
to consecrate, and sancta were the sacrament. But now it is showed, that
Benedicere is not to consecrate, and (...) is not the sacrament, as Master
Iuel shows out of Chrysostom. And in da de what reason is it, that (...),
sancta sanctis, should be the sacrament, and not (...), sancta sanctorum,
should be likewise the sacrament? Now for as much as master Harding cleaves
so unto the Doctors, that what so ever they say, he straight takes it for an
Oracle: we may say unto him, as our Savior said unto the Jews: Even Moses, in
whom you trust, shall be a witness against you, so the Doctors shall be
witnesses against master Harding, and his fellows, that when the Doctors do
require to be judged by the scriptures, yet they without scriptures will ground
their faith upon them. Cursed be he, says the Prophet, that trusts in man,
and makes flesh to be his arm. For my part I reverence the Doctors, and
praise God for them, they were good stewards, and dispensed faithfully the
goods, that were committed unto them, they were men of excellent learning,
great diligence, and godly life, and have sufficiently confuted master
Hardings religion, Aduersus praxea^. De gene. ad litter. lib. 10.
but yet they were men, and had all their erroures. Tertullian said God had a
body, and therefore he was reprehended of Augustine. He thought not well in all
points of our savior Christ, as appears in his books de Trinitate, and
aduersus Hermogenem, and Praxeam, where he teaches that Christ is a portion
of his father. Origin in diverse places writes very wickedly, as appears by
Epiphanius, annumbring him among heretics, Lib. 2. Co. 1. haer. 64 In sermon. de
Elemos. In sermon. de resurrect.
Cyprian said, that Christ did satisfy only for Original sin. Methodius
said, we are justified by fulfilling the law of nature, as Epiphanius
reports. These were wicked heresies. The doctors that followed after, had also
many, and great faults. I need not reckon master Hardings Doctors, Clemens,
Abdias, Martialis, Dyonisius, Hyppolitus, and such other, they confute
themselves: these others are the most ancient of any credit. And as they have
these, and sundry other erroures, so from age to age in all writers erroures
did still grow, great controversies were between the Greeks and Latin
church. The matter is too plain, it needs no further proof, and no doubt
the spirit of God foreseeing these dangerous times, that should ensue, when
men should make Gods of those holy Fathers, grounding their faith on them, as
on the true foundation, the holy Ghost I say, did leave them to their own
fancies, and suffered them to err, to declare that they were but men, and that
we should build no further on them, than they did build upon Christ, but
examine all sayings, both theirs, and ours by the everlasting word of God,
the only lantern unto our fee^e, and the only light unto our steps, which
thing God for his Christ's sake grant us evermore to do, Amen. For this
other translation, post finem orationum, after the prayer of consecration,
which is the 178. untruth, it is as soon proved to be ill, as master Harding
has aduenturously said, it is good. He says, they are Orationes, that are
after Consecration, and precationes, which are before, and for this distinction
he alleges S. Augustine. Here, christian reader, thou have to note two
things. First the distinction, then master Hardings argument. As touching the
distinction, that there are no Orationes till consecration is past, that is
very false, the Mass book it self has Oremus, I wot not how many times
before they are at their saccaring, and I trow he that made the Mass book,
knew what was in the Mass. Now for the argument, see how it hangs.

This it is, Prayers after consecration, are called Orationes, Ergo, Post finem
orationum, is when consecration is done, I may with as good a reason as that,
argue thus. Pomeridianum tempus, is the after noone: Ergo, Peracto pomeridiano
tempore, is immediately after.xij. of the clock. This is even such an other
argument, and master Hardings hangs as losely, as it. Thus if we will grant
M. Harding all his proofs, he will both make his Massebooke a lier, and frame
again as evil arguments, as he makes in his answer.


The B. of Sarisb. In these words, cum benedixisset sancta, there is no mention
of any sacrament.


Harding. The.179. untruth. It is necessarily implied, though not in precise
words.


Dering. Is not this a strange kind of dealing? The word is not there says
M. Iuel, that is untrue says master Harding, the meaning is necessarily
implied. What need any answer, to such untruths, as have nether shame, nor
understanding? Likewise the next untruth, which is the.180. whether master
Harding call things, that are not, as though they are, because it is once
mentioned in the.177. untruth, I reckon it not here worth the touching.


The B. of Saris. I have already proved by sundry aucthorities, that Missa is
often times used for any kind of prayer. etc. and it further appears also by
the council of Cabilon.


Harding. The.181. untruth. It is not yet proved.

The.182. untruth. It appears not by the council of Cabilon.


Dering. Master Harding shall do well, to deny M. Iuels proofe^, when he has
reproved them, and till that be done, he were best say nothing. Men may not now
be led with his bare word. What master Iuels proofs are, let the Reply be
judge. For the other untruth about the council of Cabilon, master Harding
uses a great deal of wra^gling, and little learning. For master Iuel does
allege Gratians own words, as he reports it out of the council. O says
master Harding, the council has it not. If it be so, then the untruth is
Gratians, and not master Iuels, and so M. Harding falls out with his friends.
But to cloak the matter again, where the words as Gratian reports them, are,
and auditis missarum solennibus, and vespertinis officijs. De consec. did. 1.
solent plures.
He says it is meant of the feast of the four times, when it was lawful to say
Mass at night. Those times were, as I suppose, the first week of March, the
second of June, the third of September, and the fourth week of December, but
these first times liked not Vrbanus, Did. 76. co^stituimus. Did. vt sup.
statuimus. Capdines mundi. Did. 76. huius.
therefore he turned them into the first week of Lent, and into Whitsuntide,
and so we had the spring fast, the summer fast, the harvest fast, and the
winter fast, that by these.iiij. books, or hingels of the world, we might be
taught, even as with the four Euangelies, both what to preach, and what to
do. Thus have master Hardings holy Popes pulled out of Gods Church, Gods
eternal gospels, and made us new gospels of their own, and of those times
says master Harding, that decree is meant, at which times Mass might be said
at night. But yet, as I remember, in Lent we had not many Masses at night, but
in the forenoone we had Euensong, and all least the Evening prayer should be to
long. Then if it be so, what do these fasts here to make answer, for their
Mass, notwithstanding such observation of days and months, and times, yet
Mass in this place must signify common prayer, and so this is no untruth. Or
Mass was celebrate at night, and then what means the.81. untruth? Read it.


The B. of Saris. M. Harding seeks for his Mass at Alexandria, a thousand
miles out of Christendom.


Harding. The.183. untruth. Alexandria is not a thousand miles out of
Christendom.


Dering. In the.171. untruth, where master Iuel says, about which time
Mahomet spread his religion in Arabia, master Harding quoteth his untruth,
and says, Mahomet was not about that time, and yet he was at the utmost
within.xix. years of that time, now almost.1000. years past. And this is
strange dealing, that of things done.1000. years past, within. xix. years
compass, we may not say, they were done about one time. Yet as though master
Harding there had done very well, he does again the like in this place, says
he, Alexandria is not a thousand mile out of Christendom, and because he will
appear constant, he makes this again, the.218. untruth, so little is he
ashamed of his own folly. And now what skilleth it whether it be just a
thousand mile off, or else want a mile or two of it? Is master Harding ever
the near his private Mass? Yet take away two poor Islands, Cyprus and Creta,
a.1000. mile a sunder, and either of them.500. miles from christendom. And M.
Harding cannot prove yt any part of Alexandria is not a.1000. mile from
christendom, then this exact computation of miles in so needelesse a matter,
may rather argue wranglyng, than prove an untruth.


The B. of Saris. In the Tripartite history, it is written thus, Gregory
Nazianzene in a little Oratorie at Constantinople (...) made assemblies of
people.


Harding. The.184. untruth. It is not written so.


Dering. This curious inquisition about words, which prejudice no party, which
way so ever you interpret them, declares a great want of good matter to prove
the thing it self, which lies in controversy. If these words be not in the
same place, yet the very allegation of the greek text is a sufficient proof,
they are found in the author. And therefore if false quoting the place, be the
greatest fault, let it go for me, it is not worthy no answer.


The B. of Saris. It was forbidden by many decrees, to mynister the sacrament
in private houses.


Harding. The.185. untruth. It was not forbidden.


Dering. Untruthes may well grow in number, where one may be reckened so many
times. Read the.176. untruth.


The B. of Saris. M. Harding has violently, and of purpose falsified the
translation.


Harding. The.186. untruth. My translation is true.


Dering. Tell on in a circle M. Harding, and then your untruths shall never
have end. Read the.177. untruth.


The B. of Saris. The life of S. Basil has been set for the fully, and
faithfully, by Gregory Nissene, Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Presbyter,
Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and Nicephorus.


Harding. The.187. untruth. His life is not set out fully by them.


Dering. God be merciful unto us, and when his good will, and pleasure is,
deliver us from such wranglers. Is not a man's life set out fully, when it is
showed what he has done openly in the congregation? How he has removed from
place to place? What doctrine he has taught? What diligence he has used?
What trouble he has suffered? What enemies he has had? Whose company he has
frequented? What learning he has studied? What promotion he has gotten? How
many years he has lived? And what ever else he has from time to time openly
done, or suffered? All this is declared only by Gregory Nazianzene in his
Monodia, in his Oration De laudibus Basilij, and in sundry his Epistles, so
that what soever master Iuel says, he alone has done it, and that he meant so
to do, it is plain enough, for as much as he entituleth his book De vita
Basilij, and yet though Nazianzene had not done so much, but all these among
them, had written this so fully, master Iuels words had been true. So there
is nothing here to be said for master Harding, but either he wrangleth, or
miss understands.


The B. of Saris. None of them was so impudent, once to make any mention of
this pieuishe tale of M. Hardings Mass.


Harding. The.188. untruth. Vincentius makes mention of it.


Dering. Read this tale of Amphilochius and Vincentius his words, and thou
may hardly think, that Vincentius, being so full of old wives fables, as he
is, would so lightly have passed over this wondrous matter of S. Basil.
Master Harding him self, who is much more temperate in such manner of
miracles, than Vincentius is, by no means could let it pass without much
practice of his eloquence. By this it may be thought, that Vincentius never
knew it, or if he knew it, he was ashamed to write it, being so manifest a lie,
least he should have discredited his whole fardle of news. Thus much yet he
says, that may sound toward it, that God did teach Basil in a vision, Vinc. in
speculo. Lib. 16. cap. 94.
to offer up sacrifice with his own words. And upon this saying, Master
Harding aduentureth the quoting of his untruth. To discharge this, it were
unnecessary labor, considering the tale is so foolish, yet for Amphilochius
and Vincentius sakes, that one of them may be found a lier, I will a little
lay these authors together. Amphilochius says, the next day after this Mass
was done, Basil made a golden dove to hang over the altar, and he put the third
part of the host into it: Vincentius says, Basil being at that miraculous
Mass, Columba aurea, In speculo. li. 14. ca. 44.
quae cum sacramento domini super altar pendebat etc. the golden pigeon, which
did hang over the altar with the sacrament of the Lord, did not move three
times, as it was wont to do. etc. Because a certain deacon was talking with a
woman. Here we see Amphilochius says, the pigeon was made the next day,
Vincentius says, if hong long before, over the altar. And that the tale may
have one (...) of Vincentius office, he says, at every sataring, the pigeon
was wont to move thrice. Again Amphilochius says, there was no body but
Eubulus, that looked in at a creuise. Vincentius says, there was a deacon
talking with a woman, and therefore the pigeon could not move: and so either
one of these two Doctors make a lie, and then Master Harding proves his
private Mass, with a lie, or else Basil said Mass twice after his own
fashion, and then this is no untruth. But says Master Harding, Antonius does
also report this Mass, Par. 2. tit. 1. ca. 4.
saying. I grant he does so. And so does Aesope, that apes, and asses spoke.
But I trow Master Harding does not believe him, no more does any wise man his
Antonius. He yt list to have ye fabler reproved, let him read the book.


The B. of Saris. Master Hardings Amphilochius says, that after Basils
return from Pontus, Ensebius knew him not.


Harding. The.189. untruth. I assure you, my book has it not.


Dering. Belike Master Hardings Amphilochius, is but a patched book. But if he
will go to that other at Verona in Italy, which is fair written in velem,
there sure he shall find it.


The B. of Saris. Nazianzen says, that Basil was not Bishop of Caesarea in
Iulianus time.


Harding. The.190. untruth. Nazianzen says not so.


Dering. Master Harding in his Reioinder, says thus. Perhaps it is true, that
Nazianzen was not then Bishop of Caesarea, but yet Nazianzen ^aith it not. Now
sure, good Reader, without all perhaps Master Harding is a very wrangler,
that when he can not deny the thing, yet will stick so dainely upon the words.
But say M. Har. what he say will, both Nazianzen, and al other writers, which do
speak of Basils doing, do bear witness of this matter. Nazianz. in oratione
de vita. Baesilij.
Nazianzen reports, how upon dissension between him, and Eusebius, he went
into Pontus. And when Valens for ye furthera^ce of Arrian heresy, came to
Caesarea, and vexed much the faithful; Nazianzen was sent to Basil, to call
him home, for the aid of the church, upon which return, he was reconciled to
Eusebius, and in like authority governed the church. Now this being done, in
the time of Valens, who was after Iouinian, and Basil, yet no Bishop, is it not
then plain, that Amphilochius is a lier, which says, Basil was Bishop in
Iulians time, which was Emperor next before Iouinian? If there were no more to
say, but this, yet this would prove Master Harding were impudent in this
untruth. But Nazianzen speaks yet more plain, he says, Basil was made
bishop in Eusebius room, after the death of Valens, In Monodia
about the year of our Lord.380. And for an undoubted proof, that he was no
Bishop in Iulianus time, Basil him self writes, that he was made chief of
the church of Caesarea, when the Arrian heresy was in the greatest rage, Bas.
ep. 61. et 69.
which was after that Valens had raised the great persecution, for it. And
this also thou shall find written in Socrates. Li. 4. ca.. 26.
Now these authorities standing thus, as thou shall find them by examination,
what will Master Hardings perhaps, excuse him? Sure, that these many
untruths stand upon no ground, but his impudent facings.


The B. of. Saris. Master Hardings Amphilochius says, that Basil foretold
the death of Julian, Theodoretus says, it was one Iulianus Sabba, and not S.
Basil.


Harding. The.190. un. Theodoretus says not that Sabba foretold it.

The.192. un* He says not that Basil did not tell it.


Dering. Master Harding has but a little way to go, and has yet a great
many untruths to make. Therefore taking good hold in time, in these words
Sabba foretold it, and not Basil, he picketh it two untruths. One that Sabba
told it not, the other, that Basil told it. He might with as much facility
have made the third that and is a conjunction, and should couple two words
and sentences together. But here by the way note, that Amphilochius tells a
foul popish tale and an ilfauored untruth, which Master Harding thinks good
to skip over for shame, and with a good courage, goes forward, making the
reader believe, al is well. Read the Reply. Fol. 83. Now to these untruths. If
Sabba did foretell the death of Julian: then notwithstanding Master Hardings
numbering, yet Basil foretold it not. Then here is the controversy, whether
Theodorete says, that Iulianus Sabba, did tell it first. Then read the place,
and thou shall find it thus. When Libanius does ask of Sabba what the
Carpenters son was now a doing, Theodoretus li. 3. ca. 24.
Sabba answers, that the maker of the world, whom he in mockage did call
the Carpenters son, was making sandapilam, a here to carry dead bodies, and
sone after the Emperor dyed. Then it follows in ye next chapter, that the
same day that Julian died, Resciuit cecidisse, Sabba knew he was dead, and
told it unto his fellows. Now judge who was the first teller of these news,
before the Emperor was dead, Sabba told Libanius his bear was a making, and
the same day that he died, he told it abroad. Now Basil being then not
present with the Emperor, as likewise Sabba was not, but did know it
miraculouslie, how could S. Basil tell it before him. No doubt, good Reader,
when Master Harding made two untruths of this, he had either slender
judgment or very ill choice.


The B. of Saris. Master Hardings Amphilochius says, Nazianzen was present at
Basils death. Nazianzen him self says, he came afterward.


Harding. The.193. untruth. Nazianzen says not so in his Monodia.


Dering. Master Harding says in his reioinder, he will not deny, that this
is true. Read his book, and is not this a strange matter, yt he notes that
for an untruth, which he will not deny, but it is a truth. If he have no thing
to say, but that it is not in his Monodia, what skilleth it, so the thing be
truly reported, whether the place be noted at all or no? I do easily grant,
that Master Iuel may be well deceived in keeping just reconing of books, and
chapters, but that is a slender fault, when he reports all, that is written,
truly: Now to prove that this is true, and that Nazianzen was not at Basils
death, it is manifest that he was at Arianzum, his own patrimony, and made
his Epitaphe, and oration upon Basil, one whole year after Basil was dead. And
when he had done, he went home again, as it is sufficiently proved by
Grigorie Nissene. And Gregorius Presbiter does witness the same, Grego.
presb. in vita Nazianzen.
that Nazianzen came long after that Basil was dead, thus granting that it be
not found in Nazianzens Monodia, yet by other good witness, Amphilochius is
proved a lier. Now for misnaming the place, alleging the authority truly, I
shall need to make no long answer. The fault is so small, that it does
excuse it self.


The B. of Saris. Master Hardings, Amphilochius is so impudent, to say
Nazianzen came in all have, and saw the blessed body, and fell upon it, when
it was buried.


Harding. The.194. untruth. Amphilochius says not, he fell upon him when he
was buried.


Dering. In this untruth is nothing but a little wrangling, about this saying,
when he was buried. Which words whether they be in Amphilochius or no, I mean
not yet to go to Verona and look. Sure it is, he could not fall on him, when
he was covered with moulde, and since the matter is no weightier, let it rest
for me. Now Master Harding skippeth over one other lie, and makes no defense
of Amphilochius writing it, but leaves that altogether untouched, for a
testimony, what him self thinks of Amphilochius. After all this a do about
him, he gives him over, with this round conclusion, Reioind. fol. 267.
be he as he is, I neither defend him, nor condemn him, he is ashamed any
further to defend him, because he is a shameless lier, and yet he will not
condemn him, because he makes a tale for Master Hardings Mass. In the mean
season, we have some guess what the author is, when his great friends dare not
defend him. Now Master Harding skippeth over two leaves at once, and so
draws to an end.


The B. of Saris. Chrysostom says, some are called, and some are brought to
receive with the Priest. diuis. 34.


Harding. The.195. untruth. Chrysostom says not so.


Dering. If M. Harding did now begin his wrangling, it were peradventure
requisite more at large to blame it, but because it is common, ye reader I
trust, is alredie forewarned to believe nothing that he says, without some
other witness. Therefore his credit being thus broken, and the proof of this
untruth being so slender, there is no great danger least any man should take
hurt by it. I will omit therefore further proof of Master Iuels saying, and I
only require to consider this manner of untruth. Thus Master Iuel alleges
Chrisostoms words. Some are called, some brought to receive with ye priest.
That is not so, says Master Harding, they are not called to receive with the
Priest. This then must be judged by Chrysostom, he writes thus. The Deacon
standing upright in the sight of all the people. Ad pop. Ant. hom. 61.
etc. Some he calls, to communicate, and some he puts off. Now how can any
indifferent man say* that Master Iuell misreporteth these words? But so it
is, Master Harding has shut from him all indifferency, and does let
affection miserably blind his understanding, and by that means, has espied
this untruth, and the untruth is, that Chrysostom has not these words, with
the Priest, Reioind. ^o. 281.
but they are Master Iuels own addition. But what means he? Does he think
the people did receive without ye priest? or if they did not, when Chrysostom
says, they were called to receive, how is it untrue to report his saying, they
were called to receive with the priest? Do these untruths need many words to
justify them? or were not silence the best answer to so great folies? Let
the Reader judge.


The B. of Saris. If no body received, then is it not true, that some
received.


Harding. The.196. untruth. Chrysostom says not that, some received.


Dering. If the last untruth, were not worth the noting, then what store has
he, that is feign to number it twice? Yet so it is, this purposed number has
driven M. Harding to such inconvenience. The former untruth was, Chrysostom
said not, some received with the priest, this is, he says not some receive, if
he would make the third, that some receive not with, it had even as good reason
as either of these. But let these untruths alone, they cannot do much harm.
Only I must admonish thee, that after this long ado with Master Iuel, Master
Harding for his exercise, will fights little with him self. Here he says,
that Chrysostom says not, that some receive, yet out of this same place of
Chrysostom alleging these words, Hard. diuis. 34 et reioind. fol. 290.
Cum timore dei, et fide, et dilectione accedite, he does english them thus,
come you up to receive, with the fear of God etc. These contrary sayings
without one untruth, cannot be reconciled. If there he well translated it, come
up to receive, then this is no untruth. If this be untrue, then that was a
false translation. One of these can not be denied.


The B. of Saris. He says, the people in the Cities were daily taught by
sermons.


Harding. The.197. untruth. I say not so, let my book be judge.


Dering. Master Harding by like, does say, and unsay, and cares not, what he
say. These are his very words. Now if Chrysostom had cause to complain of
the peoples slacknesse in that great, and populous city of Antioche, where the
scriptures were daily expounded, Diuis 34.
and preached. etc. And here I say as Master Harding says, let his book be
judge. And why then is this untruth scored up with other? Would he have us
think, that this preaching were only in Antioche, and no where else? This
might well be, if papistrie had been then in ure, and preaching not regarded.
But to think it of that world, in which good religion flourished, and Gods word
was plentiful, it is an uncharitable gessing. Thus much I speak, granting
Master Hardings words, that in Antioche, the people were daily taught. And
then if it were so, the same use had been likewise kept in other cities, so
Master Hardings own words going for true, this can be no untruth, but how
true those words are, Master Iuel does sufficiently prove, read his Reply,
he does allege Chrysostomes own words, to prove, that in Antioche they had
sermons but once a week, and thereupon he says further, thus.


The B. of Saris. I note this, not for that I mislike of daily preaching, but
for that untruth so boldly presumed, should not pass untouched.


Harding. The.198. untruth. It is no untruth.


Dering. I am sorry to trouble the reader, with aunswering to so vain
untruths, but so it is, if nothing should be said, they would be thought of
some force. Master Harding uses this reason, to prove his private Mass. In
Antiochie there was but a very few to communicate sometime. Therefore in the
country belike there was private Mass. Of this argument, Master Iuel says
thus, to advance the city, and to abase the country, he says, in cities
they had daily sermons, but this is untrue. For in Antioche, they had not so.
Now rise M. Hardings two untruths. 1. I say not they were taught so in cities.
2. They were taught so in Antioche. Who could have scraped out these untruths,
but he? Or what force is there in them? For this second untruth, where he still
affirms, they had daily preaching in Antioche, that is a very false lie, and
yet how impudently does be persist in it.


The B. of Saris. Yet says Master Harding, in small country churches, either
the Priest let cease the daily sacrifice, or else he received alone.


Harding. The.199. untruth. I say not so. This is altogether falsified.


Dering. I pray God, Master Harding be not altogether without grace. He so
irreverently speaks evil of authority, so boldly denies his own sayings,
that his cause is much to be feared. Mark here Master Iuels words, I will
lay M. Hardings words with them, then judge whether here be any untruth. Thus
he writes, of such country churches, Diuis. 34.
it must be said, that either the sacrifice ceased. etc. Or that the memory of
our Lords death was oftentimes celebrated of the Priests in the daily
oblation, without tarying for others to communicate with them. Mark now how
Master Iuel changes these words, either the daily sacrifice ceased, says
Master Harding, either the priest let cease the daily sacrifice, says Master
Iuell. What is here falsified? If it did cease, the Priest ceased it. For, I
trow, the lay man might not say Mass, if he would. The other piece of Master
Hardings saying is this, or else the memory of our Lords death was often times
celebrated of the priests, in the daily oblation without tarying for other to
communicate with them. These many words, because oftedious writing, Master
Iuell reports this, or the priest received alone. Now judge of this place,
which Master Harding says is altogether falsified, and pray that Master
Harding may once have eyes to see. The.200. untruth. Here Master Harding
notes an untruth in the margin, that is not in the text. When he tells us
what it is, we will better examine it.


The B. of Saris. The Mass, that is so glorious, can neither be found in
churches, nor chapels.


Harding. It is found both in churches, and chapels.


Dering. It is not yet found, neither in church, nor chapel, within.600.
years of Christ.


The B. of. Saris. Thus says Chrysostom, if thou stand by, and not receive,
thou art malapert, thou art shameless, thou art impudent. 2. thine eyes be
unworthy the sight hereof, unworthy be thine ears. 3. O thou will say, I am
unworthy to be partaker of the holy mysteries: then art thou unworthy to be
partaker of the prayers. 4. Thou may no more stay here, than an heathen, that
ueuer was christened.


Harding. The.202. untruth. Chysostome does not say these words.

The.203. untruth. Chrysostom says not then an heathen unchristened.


Dering. Sure good Reader, the numbering of these untruths, is very strange,
here is one. Chrysostom says not these words, an other he says not, then an
heathen. etc. I would feign know here in the first untruth, what Master
Harding means by these words. If he mean the whole sentence, why makes he
an other truth? If he mean all the sentence going before this latter untruth,
why does he not make of it three several untruths. For it is distinguished
into three several sentences, or if he think, but one of those sentences is
false, why does he not tell us which it is? Certain it is, Master Harding
did know, that these former parts of this allegation, were all true. Yet
because they had so many members, he thought he might convey one untruth very
well amongst them. For the truth of this allegation, read S. Chrysostom. hom.
3. ad Ephe. and thou shall believe thine own senses. I will allege for thee
certain words. Read ye place, thou shall find more. Thus be says of those,
that are by, and will not receive. 1. Tu vero impudenter astas, thou stand
by very impudently. 2. quisquis mysteriorum particeps non est, impudens est,
et improbus si adstat, he that is present, and will not communicate, he is
impudent, and wicked. 3. Indigni sunt videntium oculi, indignae aures, thine
eyes are not worthy to see it, thine ears are not worthy to hear it. 4.
Nihil hic tibi qua^, cathecumeno, plus licet. Thou have no more to do here,
the^ cathecumeni, they that are unchristened, and not yet brought to the
perfect faith of Christ, and here is this second untruth also proved. Mark now
these words, and see whether Master Iuel report any thing that Chrysostom
says not. The^ Master Harding with shame enough, has noted these untruths,
and, for his these words, except he mean his own words, here can be none
found that are not in the author. Ad. Ephesians. hom. 3. and make but little for his
Mass.


The B. of Saris. Chrysostom says, in vain do we come to offer the daily
sacrifice, in vain do we stand at the alter, meaning thereby as may appear,
that if he said private Mass for lack of company, it was in vain.


Harding. The.140. untruth. These are not Chrysostomes words, nor this his
meaning.


Dering. Here M. Hard. seems to be somewhat more liberal in numbering his
untruths, he might well have made two untruths of this, one, these are not
Chrysostomes words, an other, this is not his mening. Sure he is not wont to
let go such advantage, but peradventure he saw here so little hope, that he
would be content with one untruth, quietly. Yet because we defend the truth,
we may not allow him that. First, for Chrysostomes words, thus they are,
Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, frustra stamus ad altar. Hom. ^. ad. Ephesians.
In vain do we offer the daily sacrifice, in vain do we stand at the
altar? Here is this untruth verified concerning the words, say Master Harding
what he say will. If these be not the words, then account me for a lier. If
they be the words, then judge of the untruth, as touching ye meaning of these
words, were it not for Master Hardings faultfinding, it should sure have
escaped without blame, he says, Reioind. fo. 289.
ye meaning is this, it is in vain, as touching the people, not as touching
the Priest, this meaning is untrue, for Chrysostom says, Frustra stamus, we
that be the ministers stand there in vain. But for my part, I would this
distinction were good, then we should know thoroughly, what merchandise these
Masses were. Says M. Haridng they are in vain for the people except they come
and receive. Good Lord, how do they then mock the people that teach them to
come daily, and gase upon their Masses, blessed be truth, that breaks out.
All private Mass is ill, and all Mass gasers do wickedlie, the fruit of Gods
sacraments are not applied, to those, that will not come, and be partakers of
them. If Master Harding have lost so much of his cause by noting one untruth
in this place, what would he have done, if he had noted a couple?


The B. of Saris. Here Master Hardyng seeing that his Mass, even by his own
testimony, is shreudly cracked, assayeth to salve it as well, as he may.


Harding. The.205. untruth. I see not, that the Mass is cracked.


Dering. In this untruth, we have two things to note, Master Hardings sight,
and the cracking of his Mass. As touching his sight, I can say little. But I
do easily believe it is not very good. There are a great many authorities in
this first article, which he can not see to answer one whit, sometime two, or
three leaves together, in which he can not see to confute one word. His own
writings are so full of darkness, and clouds of errors, that he can not see
to come nigh the truth, and yet in this great shadow of his eyes, he proves
effectually the common proverb, who is so bold as blind bayard? For the
cracking of his Mass, he can say but little, only in defense of that misshapen
strumpet, he uses uncomely language against the Bishop of Sarisburie. But how
can a wicked cause be better defended, than with evil speaking. For his Lady
Missa, she is as she is. Thanks be to God for the victory, she is well cracked
of late, she has glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, she has been full
of triu^phes, and signs of victory, she has dwelt careless in her fensed
cities, she has said in her heart, I am, and none else, I am no widow, and I
shall see no morning. Now whether this glory be yet cracked, or no, and these
proud pecocks feathers fallen down, her own heavy looks do sufficiently
witness. Her widowhed comes fast upon her, and many of her lovers are run
away, her own barrenness increases daily, and her children wax few in
number, the multitude of her diuinations have brought evil upon her, her
fornications, and idolatries have separated between God, and her. And can
Master Harding yet think, that his Mass is still vncracked, her dominions
were very large, and wide, and her kingdoms plentiful, her buildings were
costly, and very sumptuous, and her cofers rich, her apparel was gorgious,
and of nedel work, set out in most pleasant colors, her ornaments of inameled
gold, bewtifull with many iewlls, and precious stones, and for the full
measure of her accomplished glory, she had the Princes of the earth to
minister her cups unto her, Kings to be her waiting servants, and Emperors
to hold her fotestoole. If this estate were yet in her wou^ted royalty, then
might Master Harding well say, that his Mass were not cracked. Now seeing all
is lost, her buildings are pulled down, her fortresses batered, her treasuries
spoiled, her estimation lost, and she her self set without the quire, we give
thanks unto God, that has given this victory, and we are sorry for Master
Hardings blindness, that can not yet see how his Mass is cracked.


The B. of Saris. If none communicate, yet says he, the Mass is not vain in
it self, but only as touching the people, that will not come.


Harding. The.206. untruth. I say not so.


Dering. Here M. Hard. willing to stop that great inconvenience, that rises of
his.204. untruth, makes a flat denial of his own words, and lest this
contrariety should breed any piece of discredit, he goes about with a
distinction to salve the whole matter, whereby he has got this double
commodity, a plaster for his Mass, which before he had wounded, and an
untruth to make up his proposed number. And his distinction is this. I say not
yt the Mass is in vain, but that the oblation is in vain, Reioind. fol. 260.
making a great difference between his Mass and oblation. But this matter does
not so well thrive, as Master Harding weeneth his Mass and oblation must
needs be both one, else how could his Mass be said to be a sacrifice
propitiatory for quick, and dead, since the sacrifice can only be meant by the
oblation. But let us take Master Hardings words, as they are. The oblatio^,
says he, is in vain to the people, that will not come. Here he speaks not
only against his companions, but against the Pope, and against his Mass
book. The decree says the oblation is good, that is offered for Judah and
Jerusalem, that is for them that confess the Lord. Did. 50. et purgabit.
And the mass book says, Hanc oblationem offerimus pro ecclesia tua sancta
catholica. We offer this oblation for the whole catholic church. Yet says
Master Harding, In canone.
this oblation is in vain. If he him self will thus speak against Pope, and
portus, he may peradventure, crack his Mass, ere he be ware. But it is well.
We take that Master Harding grants, except the people receive, the
celebration, or sacrifice made by ye priest is in vain, so his private Mass
is quit^ condemned.


The B. of Saris. If Master Harding will stand unto the authority of
Chrysostom, let him not dissemble, but speak plain unto the people, as
Chrysostom spoke. Let him say to the^ that come to hear his mass, if ye
receive not, ye are shameless, ye are impudent, you are not worthy to be
partakers of the common prayers. Depart you from the Church: ye have no more
place here than Turks and heathens: your eyes be unworthy to see these things,
unworthy be your ears, our Masses can not profit you, they are not
meritorious for you, they please not God: they provoke his anger, they are all
in vain, This is Chrysostomes sense, and plain meaning.


Harding. The.207. untruth. These are not his words.

The.208. untruth. Nor his meaning.


Dering. Here I must crave of the indifferent Reader, to note this manner of
quoting untruths. Of these very words of Chrysostom, before he made two
untruths the.202. and.203. Here of them all he makes but one. Yet if there be
but one, now there was but one before, and so one untruth is made three.
Again, before he made no untruth as touching the meaning: now he makes one.
Yet if there be one now, there was one before, and so of two untruths, which is
very unlike, he will number but one, again in the.204. untruth, he makes but
one untruth both of the words, and meaning, here severally he makes one of
either: this diversity of gathering must needs show a matter of little
weight. Now as touching these two untruths, and the words here said of
master Iuel, he neither says, nor means that they are al in Chrysostom.
But alleging certain, as is showed in the.202. untruth, he here adds more.
For example to show the Massing priests how they should speak unto the
people? What, troweth master Harding to persuade the people, that master Iuel
makes Chrysostom to speak of their Masses? Here in these words the Mass is
plainly named, yet ye good father did never know what such spiritual
whoredoms did mean. And yet here M. Harding to carry away the readers
understanding, in his railing spirit he speaks great blasphemies against
Gods elect, and calls him the forerunner of Antichrist, whom God has
appointed one to be an over runner of the Romish Idolatries. But God be praised
in all his saints.


The B. of Saris. Now let us examine this invincible argument, wherewith every
child, as Master Harding says, is able to prove the private Mass.


Harding. The.209. untruth. I say not so, let my book be judge.


Dering. These are his words of this most evident place of Chrysostom: Diuis
34.
every child is able to make an invincible argument against master Iuel for
the private Mass: these are his very w^ords, I say, as he says, let the book
be judge, and he that is found a lier, let him have the blame.


The B. of Saris. This is M. Hardings argument. The sacrifice in Chrysostomes
time, was daily offered. But many times none came to Communicate. Ergo, there
was private Mass. Here the Mayor is apparent false, the Minor is proved at
adventure.


Harding. The.210. untruth The Mayor is true.

The.211. untruth. The Minor is well proved.


Dering. In the.133. untruth master Iuel proved by S. Augustine* that in some
place the people received every day, there master Harding does note that for
untrue, here master Iuel proves by S. Augustine, that in some place they
received not every day. H^ere likewise master Harding notes this for untrue.
And yet how can both these be untrue? More circumspect behauioure in so false
dealing had been necessary. Now as touching both these sayings of master
Iuel, that somewhere the people did receive every day, somewhere only on
certain days, let S. Augustines words be witnesses. Thus he writes. The
Sacrament of the body of Christ, is received somewhere every day, Aug. in Ioh.
tract. ^^
alicubi certis inter^allis dierum, somewhere on certain days only. As long
as this authority may stand for good, master Iuels saying has a good
warrant. And though it were not good, yet master Hardings two untruths must
needs one overthrow an other. As touching this other untruth, that none came
to receive with the priest, see whether it be proved at adventure or no. Thus
master Harding says, if there were but few to Communicate in that great, and
famous Church of Antioche, what may be thought of a thousand lesser churches.
Diuis. 34.
etc. Now whether this proof be at all adventures, and a bare guess, it is
soon judged. Concerning Chrysostomes aucthority here, read the Reply. Fol. ^^.



The B. of Saris. As for the Mayor it is plain by the.6. council of
Constantinople, by S. Augustine upon S. John, by S. Basil, ad Caesariam
patritiam, by the Epistle of the council of Alexandria in defense of Macarius,
and by the council of Laodicea, and by sundry other aucthorities to that
purpose before al^eaged, that the sacrifice was not daily offered.


Harding. The.212. untruth. S. Augustine has the contrary.


Dering. If S. August. speak contraries, he is sure the more to blame, but who
sees not by S. Augustines plain words in this former untruth alleged,
that where he says the sacrifice is daily offered, it is to be meant of certain
places, not of all. This untruth is directly contrary to the.83.133.14-5.156.
untruths. But what skilleth that, where M. Harding may be believed? Here note
that all these other aucthorities are co^trolled, and yet notwithstanding M.
Harding presumes upon his untruths. Sure the number was appointed too large,
that could not be made up, without such foul shifts.


The B. of Sarisb. Master Harding saw that this is but a slender proof:
Chrysostom ministered every day, therefore he received alone.


Harding. The.213. untruth. Master Harding could not see that in Chrysostom,
which Chrysostom has not.


Dering. What M. Harding sees only, M. Harding knows. But what a fond
untruth here is quoted, that I trow every man may witness. Thus says M.
Iuel, M. Harding sees this is but a slender proof, master Harding says, he
can not see it in Chrysostom. In deed that is true, who says it is in
Chrysostom? He was too well learned to make such lose arguments. I would feign
hear of some of M. Hardings friends, how he could excuse this untruth, and
what it means.


The B. of Saris. M. Harding has devised a way how two priests, saying their
Masses in diverse countries, may yet Communicate together in breaking bread.


Harding. The.214 untruth. I do not say they can communicate in breaking
bread.


Dering. This untruth was numbered once before. Read the.107. untruth. There
are M. Hardings plain words. What he means here again to reckon this
untruth, save only for numbers sake, no man I trow knows. And yet how
fondly, and with what a blind distinction he does it, it shall not be a miss
to tell thee. He says here, they do not break bread together. But says he,
they participate of one bread, Reioinder. fo. 300.
and communicate together, be the distaunce between them never so great. This
plain saying he has in his Reioinder, intermingled with a few other words.
Read the place. Now if master Harding do thus understand M. Iuel, as if he
meant that two priests many miles a sunder might break the same loaf: that
imagination is too gross, and no wise man will allow it. If he mean any
spiritual breaking, then his own words allow the saying for good, then this
untruth proves nothing against M. Iuel, but reproves M. Harding either of
folly, or else of falshoode.


The B. of Saris. Lay people, women, sick folks, and boys, are brought in to
prove his Mass.


Harding. The.215. untruth. They are not brought to prove the Mass.


Dering. Master Harding is very nigh at an end, and his number is not yet
full. Therefore being enforced to take untruths as he may, he is lighted on
such a place, as he could not light on a worse. This untruth is reckened.v.
times before, the.87.101.126.128.129. and now the.215. It had been requisite to
have been better, that should serve so many turns.


The B. of Saris. Here be brought in a company of petie Doctors, all of
doubtful credit.


Harding. The.216. untruth. They be not of doubtful credit.


Dering. Now we be at the bottom of these untruths, M. Harding is feign to
draw out dregs, and all. There was enough said before of Amphilochius, and
his fellows, and some of them M. Harding had quite turned, and that he would
neither defend them, Reioinder. Fol. 267. The.194. untruth.
nor condemn them. But now necessity does make him break his promise, rather
than he should lose an untruth, they must be all of good credit again. They
that list, let them so account them.


The B. of Saris. This matter is made good by visions, dreams, and fables.


Harding. The.217. untruth. I prove it not by dreams.


Dering. Here says M. Harding this tale of Amphilochius is neither dream,
Reioinder. Fol. 300. Reioinder. Fol. 262.
nor fable, but it appeared unto him good authority. Yet he says before,
that whether it be a vain fable, or a true story, he will not determine well,
let this contrariety go. Whether it be a fable or no, judge thou. Here
further as touching master Hardings Philosophy in so exact defining of
dreams and visions, because he takes upon him to control a better Philosopher
than him self. And in this word, dream, will have the force of his untruth,
saying it was a vision, and no dream which S. Basil saw, that distinction is
more curious than learned, for the two Greek words (...) and (...), that is a
dream, and a vision, do both signify those things which be true, unless he
will say, that a dream does signify more largely, then (...) or somnium, and
yet if it do, a vision must needs be a dream, though every dream be not a
vision, so this untruth by no means can be justified.


The B. of Saris. He has made search for his Mass at Alexandria in Aegipt,
at Antioche in Syria, at Caesarea in Cappadocia, a thousand miles beyond
Chrystendome.


Harding. The.218. untruth. These cities are not a thousand miles beyond
Christendom.


Dering. This untruth was not worth twice numbering. Read the 183. untruth.


The B. of Saris. Because he had no hope to speed in towns, he has sought
out little churches in the country.


Harding. The.219. untruth. I have proved that the Mass was celebrated in
towns.


Dering. This untruth is soon gathered, but when M. Harding does prove it,
not only master Iuel, but all other, that impugn their superstitious
vanities, will soon subscribe. In the mean season he must not build up his
untruths with such sayings, as we openly maintain both in word, and
writing.


The B. of Saris. Likewise S. Paul willed one to wait for an other in the
holy ministration.


Harding. The.220. untruth. These words are not meant of the ministration of
the Sacrament.


Dering. These words of S. Paul go very nighe M. Hardings private Mass, and
therefore it behooves him for his Masses sake, to stand stiffely in it, that
they belong not unto the ministration of the Lords supper. For if they do
belong unto it, then no doubt M. Hardings Mass is a sink of iniquity, that
is so contrary unto S. Paul's words. 1. Co. 11.33.
Now for better discussing of this, because in trying it this private Mass
shall be better known, let us examine. S. Paul's words. Thus he says.
Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for an other.
This says M. Harding, is to be understand of certain Church feasts, which
they had, called (...), and not of the Communion, and as though this were not
said with shame inoughe, he says in an other place, that in that chapter, S.
Paul does not rebuke them for the manner of ministering this Sacrament, but
for their abusing of their church feasts. Reioinder. fol. 99.
Now for proof of this interpretation, he only alleges the bare names of
Chrysostom and Theodoretus, and this is al he can bring. Read Reioinder. fol.
306. Now let us see again what on the other side may be said to prove that S.
Paul means of the ministration of the Sacrament. And this we may see both
by the testimony of all the old Doctors, and most undoubtedly by examination
of the place it self. Athanasius applies all that place to the Communion in
plain words, Occumenius says only the Lords supper is there spoken of, and
upon this place inuicem expectate, tarry one for an other. Thus he writes.
Itaque: Quamobrem. Ne indigne corpus domini, and sanguinem participare
probemini. Therefore says the Apostle. Wherefore: Least you should be proved
to participate the Lords body, and blood unworthily. By this Doctor he
receives unworthily, that in the congregation receives alone. Theophylacte a
later writer upon the same place, says: Why should we pray our selves? Quia
haudquaquam merito id mysterium sumunt multi, because many do receive that
mystery nothing worthily. By all these Doctors this place is meant of the
Communion. S. Ambrose says: It any man be impacient, domi terreno pane
pascatur, Let him eat earthly bread at home. And again, we come to gether, vt
multorum oblatio simul celebretur, that the Oblation of many might be made
together. But S. Ambrose calls not profane meats, such as their common
feasts were, either heavenly bread, or our oblation. S. Chrysostom says, qui
hoc non faciunt, indigne communicant, they that tarry not one for an other, do
communicate unworthily. And here again, we see this Doctors mind of private
Mass, or as M. Harding will have it, of the priests sole receiving. Beda says
likewise, alleging S. Augustine. Ad Ianuar. Epist. 1. that this, Aug. de sal.
docu. cap. 33. Bas in reg. co^t. q. 310. Greg. exposi. in. 1. Sacu. lib. 2. ca.
10.
which the Apostle writes in this place, is meant of the Communion. S. Jerome
also does so enterprete it. Read all these upon the xj. chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. Of the same mind are also Augustine, Basil,
Gregorius Romanus. And if thou rest upon the authority of men, examine all
the old Doctors, that have written upon the same place, and not them only, but
such as are of younger age, as Thomas, Scotus, Lyra, Hugo, gloss. ordinaria,
and such other. They all agree: this saying of S. Paul, tarry one for an
other, is meant of the Communion, Dionysius Carthusianus on the same place
speaks very plain, when ye come together to eat, says S. Paul. Panem
coelestem, says Dionysius the heavenly bread, videlicet corpus Domini, that is
to say, the body of the Lord. And Nicholas of Gorram upon these words, tarry
one for an other, writes thus. Docet modum in hora communionis ordinate
accedendo, he teaches how to come orderly in the time of Communion. What
plainer authority can there be, than these? Who sees not that all antiquity
have understand S. Paul's words of the Communion? If thou search them, thine
eyes shall be thy witness. Yet says master Harding, (as he were
privileged, without blame or discredit to speak what he would,) that Martyr,
Calvin, Cranmer, and such other, have deceived master Iuel: Reioinder. Fol.
92.
but it is wonderful to see how he speaks against the truth, the Lord
knows whether against his own conscience. Read the Reply. Fol. 94. thou
shall further see* how in the Communion, the people came together. But as
touching this place, because the spirit of God is not tied to any man, or age,
we will leave our witnesses, and examine the place. First, S. Paul blames
them, because they come together, not with profit, but with hurt. And then
teaching how they ought to come together, and in what sort to have their
meetings, he teaches them by the example of our savior Christ, and his
doctrine: saying* that which I have received of the Lord, ^. Cor. 11.18.
that I have delivered unto you, that Jesus Christ in ye same night yt he was
betrayed, took bread. etc. making a full description of the Lords supper:
whereunto be adioyneth for this cause, many of you are weak. etc. (...) For
this cause, which is the unorderly receiving the communion. Yet says M.
Harding, it is meant of their feasts. After this it does follow in Paul:
Wherefore my brethren, when you come together to eat, tarry one for an other.
Now if this be not yet plain enough, that he means of the Sacrament, then
look what follows, an undoubted proof of the whole matter. Least says S.
Paul, you come together to your condemnation. Is this at any time pronounced
of any manner eating, but of the unworthy eating of that blessed sacrament? Yet
for the private Mass sake, this plain scripture must be denied, and
impudently wrested into a strange sense. And mark here how master Harding
would have S. Paul reason, the words before are plain of the Lords supper.
Of those words S. Paul concludes: wherefore my brethren. etc. Then by master
Hardings meaning, S. Paul should reason thus: A man must prepare him self to
receive the Communion, Ergo, they must tarry one for an other, at their common
feasts: such lose arguments, the spirit of truth does not utter. But such is
M. Hardings fashion, he does not consider how he wresteth Gods scripture,
while he thus defends his ungodly Mass.


The B. of Saris. The like decrees are found under the names of Calixtus,
Anacletus, Martinus, Hyllarius, and others: by which it is certain that the
whole church then received together.


Harding. The.221. untruth. It is not certain by those decrees.


Dering. See the.151. untruth. It is the same in effect, that this is. But
let us see here also, how truly M. Harding speaks. It does not appear by
these decrees, says he, that all received together: this shall be best tried
by the words of the Decrees. Calixtus says thus. When consecration is done, De
co^s. dis 2. peracta. De co^s. dis. 1. Episcopus. De co^s. dis. 2. Si non. De
co^s. dis 2. Si quis. Lu^^uria, vide glossam.
let all communicate, which will not be excluded out of the Church. Anacletus
has the very self same words, but how it comes to pass, let the Decretal
epistles see, that have this agreement very often, and yet it is very strange,
that diverse men should speak the same words. Hylarius says, if thy
sins be not so great, that thou must be excommunicate, thou must not separate
thy self, from the body and blood of the Lord. Martinus says. If any man
hear the scriptures readen, and of a superstitious mind, do think he should
not Communicate, set him be excommunicate: now judge whether these decrees
teach, that the whole church should receive together. M. Harding can answer
nothing, but brings two distinctions, one old, one, which we had before in
the.151. untruth, an other he makes more to answer Pope Hilarie, and that is
this, where Hilarie says: If he be not excommunicate, let him not abstain
from the sacrament. We may abstain, says M. Harding, sacramentally, though
not spiritually. If these distinctions may be allowed, there is no authority so
good, but let M. Harding slip, and he will answer it. But S. Paul says, take
heed yt no man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit.


The B. of Sarisb. Chrysostom says, we are all of one worthiness to receive
the mysteries.


Harding. The.222. untruth. He says not so.


Dering. These are Chrysostomes words. Est autem vbi, nihil differt sacerdos a
subdito, vt qua^do fruendum est horrendis mysterijs. Similiter enim omnes, vt
illa percipiamus, digni habemur, there is a time says he, when the priest
does differ nothing from the lay man, as when they must enjoy the dreadful
mysteries. For we are al accounted of like worthiness to receive them. And
that we should not doubt of his meaning, he makes afterward along discourse to
prove this same. Yet says master Harding, it is false, it is untrue,
Chrysostom says not, we are all of like worthiness to receive the mysteries.
And what says he else? How does M. Harding otherwise interpret him? Forsooth
says he, these words, similiter omnes, vt illa percipiamus, digni habemur,
must be thus Englished: We are accounted worthy of the self same things in
like sort, not we are all of one worthiness to receive them. Who has heard
one in so grave a matter, speak so childishly, the very words of Chrysostom,
vt percipiamus, he will not have Englished as they lie. And because M. Iuel does
so English them, (such is his impudency) he notes it for an untruth. But
such to whom God has given the spirit of knowledge, and truth, they will
confess how he does wrangle: and if he have any grace himself, as often as he
remembers these untruths, he wishes they were again under his file.


The B. of Saris. Missa in the time of Tertullian, and Cyprian, was especially
applied unto the Communion.


Harding. The.223. untruth. It is not so, as you mean.


Dering. M. Hard. harpeth much on M. Iuels meaning. But untruths must not be
built upon gesses. Read the.169. untruth.


The B. of Saris. Cataechumeni were present at the Communion, till the Gospel
was done.


Harding. The.224. It was not the Communion, they were present at.


Dering. I grant it, wrangle on: M. Iuel confesses when the Gospel was done,
they were bid depart, what a single untruth is this? What troweth M. Harding
we do not know, that that part of service, which they heard, was called Missa
cathechumenorum? Or does he think that the gospel was not red in that
service? This untruth arises, because he will not understand, not because he
does not. M. Iuel calls that the Communion, which was the whole service
appointed for the celebration of the Lords supper. At the beginning whereof,
the Nouices in the faith of Christ, might be present, till the deacon cried,
Exeunto catechumeni, which was after the gospel was red.


The B. of Saris. We pray not aid of sick folks for the proof of our holy
Communion, as M. Harding is driven to do for his Mass.


Harding. The.225. untruth. I prove not the Mass by them.


Dering. This untruth is before six times, Read the.215. untruth. Thus are
we come to an end of this weary Reioinder, wherein we see to what issue M.
Hardings great vaunts are come: his tragical exclamations in how small matters
there be ended: and his multitude of untruths, how without truth they be
gathered. He told us that this Reply was altogether corrupt and false, yet
are there a great many leaves in this first article, of which he has not
confuted one word: what he would have done in case it had been blameable, this
Reioinder does sufficiently witness. He cried out of corruptions,
alterations, manglings, and I wot not what of the old fathers, but quid
dignum tulit hic tanto promissor hiatu, what has he brought forth, worthy of
so wide gaping? These untruths that were so many in number, are now proved
none. The controlling of so many aucthorities, is found nothing but wrangling.
The often blaming of diverse interpretations is tried either childishe or wilful
ignorance. And some of his own Doctors, on whom with much boasting, he had
grounded his private Mass, in the end he has turned to their own defense.
With so ill success he has impugned truth: And with so slender proof, he
has defended falsehood. Of these 225. untruths which he has brought, some he
says may be colored, some be shameless lies. And in deed his testimony
well applied, is true. For most of them, without shame, are impudently
gathered. Some as he has used them, may bring suspicion of oversight. But
what they are, and how void of deserved blame, it shall appear if thou read
this Confutation, in the which for thy contentation, good Christian Reader, I
must assure thee, that I have not alleged one authority, wherein I either
abridge the authors words, or enterlace any other of mine own, either else
misconstrue his meaning. Only sometime, because the writing is tedious, I
allege the sense, and refer thee unto the place, where thou may examine
the words. If any one of all the land of Louanists be able to reprove me, I
will not let openly to preach it that I have offended. God give them and us
both grace to consider, that it is now no time to dally. The matter is not
such, that it may abide any wrangling. The cause is Gods, and he needs not
to be defended with lies. If in his cause we go about deceit, by uttering
falshoode, or by concealing truth: by making more distinctions, or by framing
Latin as we list, God is not mocked.

How so ever we will paint our doings, or what clokes of shame so ever we will
use, it is true that the Poet says: Ille dolum ridens, quo vincula nectitis
inquit? He laughing at our deceitfulness, shall ask to what purpose we have
tied such devises? He is truth, and he will be defended by truth, and he
hates all those, that do speak lies. Therefore good Christian Reader
persuade thy self, that as we have our accomptes to make unto him, that
judges truly, so wittingly, and willingly, we will speak nothing that shall
burden our own Consciences before his judgment seat. True it is we be
men: and as men we may be deceived. The Prophet has pronounced the
universal sentence, and we be all borne under the law of it, that every manne
is a lier, therefore, to challenge unto my doing any such absolute verity, as
though no piece of it might be blamed, it were great arroga^cie, and extreme
folly: this is sufficient to the indifferent man, and a full contentation unto
mine own conscience, that the Lord is witness, I know not of any one untruth,
I have vttred. And for this great number wherewith M. Iuel is charged, better
it had been for M. Harding to have made them fewer, and more it might have
hindered M. Iuels cause. To deny, that any where he might be deceived, were to
exempt him out of the condition of man. But these.225. untruths in one
article, while they must be multiplied, M. Harding tells one many times,
makes strange interpretations, diuiseth new distinctions, in such sort, that
every man may epsy his folly. God for his mercyes sake lighten once his heart,
yt yet again he may see, whether he goes, and lead them the way back^ again
unto righteousness, before whom he has run so long toward the kingdom of
iniquity, that in the day of anger, when every one shall give account of his
doings, we may be all found together in the way of obedience, and by grace
receive that eternal kingdom, which is not due unto our works. Which kingdom
God grant us, through the death and passion of his son, our savior Jesus
Christ, to whom with the father, and the holy ghost, be al honor and glory,
world without end. Amen.


Ierem. 8.9. The wise men as ashamed, they are afraid and taken: Lo, they
have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?

FINIS.

