The will of the Devil, With his ten detestable Commandments: Directed to
his obedient and accursed Children, and the Reward promised to all such as
obediently will endeuer themselves to fulfill them. Whereunto is adjoined, a Diet
for diverse of the Deuylles dearlinges, commonly called, daily Dronkardes. Very
necessary to be read, and well considered of all Christians.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones.

An Exhortation unto the Deuyls Adherents.
PAMACHIVS, Bishop of ROME, bewaylinge the death of Belzeebub his Father, does
cause all his Auernals, forked types, and anointed Gentlemen, to come to the
reading of the Deuylles Testament and last Will, which he his own self,
trusting no body in so high matters, he does read out alowde openly, saying:
as hereafter follows.

The will of the Devil.
IN mine own name, Amen: I Belseebub chief of Hell, Prince of Darckenesse,
Father of the Unbeleeuers, and Governor of the universal Sinagogue
papisticall, being sick in body and Soul, make this my Testament and last
Will, in manner and form following, that is to say: First, I bequeath my
spiteful soul and body, to my son Antichriste, together to be buried in
Saint Peter's Church at Room, underneath the high Altar and Canape: or in
the stony and carnal hearts of my Dearlynges, the Mass mongers and Papists.
Also all my Ceremonies which in the Churches be used here within this Region.
I give them to the makers and inuenters thereof, and to their posterity, to
bestow them where they will, that is to say: First, I give and bequeath to
Pope Phelix, all such superstitious and idle Holidays as he invented: And to
Honorius the Jew and coniurer, I give the Offeringes, which were given to
Idols and Images: And I give Constantine, all the whole Images of my Churches:
My Belles to Sabianus: my Popish Hympnes, to Pope Leo: my Mattens and Organs,
to Vrbanus and Vitalyanus: my Synging, to Pope Stephanus: my Procession, to
Agabitus: to Pope Alexander, my coniured Waters: to Paschalis, my relics: to
Honorius, my Letany: my supersticion of Lent, to Thelesphorus: the vygill
Saturdaye, to Pope Innocent: and the Fridaye fysh, to Pope Leo: The Imbre days
to Pope Calixtus: to Theodorus, the Paschal at Easter: to Gregory the.vii. the
Saints vygils and Rogation week: my Lent service, to Auela the first: my
shrynes and dedication, to Sergius and Phelix: All Hallowes and all souls day,
to Johan the.xix: and to Pope Boniface the fowrth: My yearly confession* to
the Council of Laternense: and all other my Ceremonies, to the inuenters
thereof, as precisely as I rehearsed them particulatly by name.

And I give and bequeathe to the Userers of all Towns and places, twenty
millions of Gold, to be divided equally between them, as they would part my
blessing, and that they leande to no manner of person any part thereof,
without great lucre and gains, yea, and without bearing any adventure at all.

Item, I give my Chastity to the Clargie. Also I give to the best part of
them, eueryche a red bloody Gown, and every other of them, a long green
Gown, or a fine black Gown with euerych their typpettes of velvet and
sarcenete, down to the ground, to be known from other men, followinge me to
my burial, if I dye, and none other persons. Item, I give to the mean sort
of people, a.M. loaves of bread to be given to the Dogs, rather then to poor
men.

Item, to the Mercers, and Grocers, and other reteylers of wares, euerych of
them, a cloathe to hang before their windows, and eueryche of them a subtyle
light, to make all their wares show fine.

Item, I give to the Uinteners, all my rotten Wines, to apparel the rest of
their Wines.

Item, I give to every Tailor, a Banner, wherein shall be contained all the
parcelles of cloth and Sylkes, etc. as he has cast them into Hell.

Item, I give to eueryche of the cheifest men of Law, a Moyle, to bring him
to Hell, and two right hands to help himself withal, to take money of both
parties: And to every of these Pety bouget men of Law and Tearmers, a couple
of Geldynges for him and his man, to ride up and down, and a Bouget to put
their Suppenas in, to a crack the poor men with all in the country. Item, I
give to all Women, Souereignty, which they most desire, and that they never
lack excuse.

Item, I give to every Single Woman, and Unchaste Wife in London, a covered
baskette, to bear in their hands, and to the finest sort of them, an
Aplesquyer to go before euerych of them to cover their follyes.

Item, I give to all Whoremongers, Fornicatours and adulterers, a crafty
wit, to wrest the Scriptures, and to make them serve for fylthie purposes,
thereby to ercuse and prove them selves faultlesse. Wherein, I will all our
Sodomiticall Clergy, which for their own ease, do abhor painful Wedlock,
and replenishe the world with incestuous whoredom, to help and aid them
with unshamefast railing against our enemies, the ministers of Gods word.

Item, I give unto him, which under the Title of Heresies Testament, did as a
Ualyaunt Champion of ours, most trayterouslie defame, and sclaunder the true
doctrine of my great foe and enemy Jesus Christ, a stubburne, styffe, and
rebellious heart therewith, stoutly through my special diuelishe grace, to
withstand and resyst, as much as in him lies, to let his Princes proceedinges,
and to intoxicate and poison the simple, least they fall and swerve from me,
and after his deceasse, if he continue faithfully, to the end in my service, a
place in Hell, next to Satan my eldest son.

And because that with the invincible swoorde of my mortal enemy, which most
victoriously reigns now, our kingdom being almost subverted, saving that
yet some of our Marked Monsters do boldly and unshamefastly against their own
conscience and knowledge maintain and uphold it, fyghting with tooth and
nail for our honor and right. I feel my self wounded to death, without any
hope of recovery. For all Physicians, to whom I had given leave to kill,
boldlye without any fear of enditement or hanging, and to mynister poison to
the patientes, in steed of wholesome Phisycke, have with the crafty and
theeuish Surgeons all forsaken me, I do hear, in my ragious mind, give my
ample and l^rge banner and standarde the Mass, under the which, all false
Christians, have with me stubburnly, and much more blasphemouslye fought
against the price of their own Soul health and redemption, that is to say:
the death and blood of my most deadlye enemy Jesus Christ, unto my good,
especial and trusty friends, Emserus, Echius, Faber, Constanciensis, and
Stephen Gardenerus, with many other, unto whom, if they will persyst still in
my decent and comely Camp of blasphemy, I have prepared a place meet for
such Champions and worthy Knights. Reserved always, that my Son the
Antichriste, with his shauelynges, and anointed Sodomites shall be
participante thereof: that so with the daily Offering of a new made GOD, they
may purchase unto them selves, my Satanicall blessing, and Helly rest.

I do give to Vrbanus the first, the Silver and golden Chalices: and unto
Sixtus the first, all my syne Corporaces: And the holy Deuyllish hallowed
vestmentes, or Parlyament roabes, which my S^andard b^arers do use to wear in
my battayles and wars, I do bequeathe unto Stephen the first.

Item, I give the rablement of my other feyned and domme Ceremonies wherewith
my Standerd is patched and made, to the Popish Massemongers, to comfort their
^ory hearts withal, lyc^nsing them, wi^h the mysunderstanded Gospel and
Epistle, to cloak their blasphemous mass, as I my self did bring against mine
enemy Christ, plain scriptures, to blind them with all: these be the domme
and blasphemous Ceremonies that I do mean: the Confiteor, wherein is the
puddle of all blasphemy: the Office: the mysused Kyrye eleeson: their
blasmemous Collectes: their covetous Offertory, to spoil the poor Laity with
all, and fill their own purses: their stynkyng Canon, with their Suscipe
sancta Trinitas, wherewith they rob my great enemy Christ, of his honor and
glory. Item, I will them* under the color of the Communion, set forth by
their godly Prince, boldly and unshamefastly to keep, mayntaine and uphold my
blasphemous Mass, which is an injury to the right institution of the Lords
Supper.

Item, I give to all them that keep whores beside their wives a baudy house of
their own, and the saying of the retchlesse Woman in Solomon (St^ll^n waters
are sweet, and the bread that is privily eaten, has a good taste) to defend
their baudery.

Item, I give to all Priests Lemondes, that will not marie, but persevere in
their Sodomyticall, and abominable chastity, that they shall pysse Holywater
all the days of their life, even chattering against the true wives of the
ministers.

Item, I give to all them that profess the Gospel, and with their fylthie
living, do give occasion to blaspheme the same, a fair tongue to talk of it,
an hippocriticall face, and a New Testament, or other Book in their hands,
to hide their feigned holiness, and hippocrisie withal.

Item, I give to all Ruffians, a Sword and a buckler, a shyrt of mayle, and
hosen of the same, a pair of chained buskens, a theeuish look, and a whore.

Item, I give to all myydle huswyues: a small huswyfe or two to keep them
company with all, and to love other men's houses better then their own, and to
pass as much for their honesty, as they do for their cobled shoes, and also a
love to go gaye on the holydaye, and to do nothing another of the working day,
to keep them occupied still.

Item, I bequeath, to all Dycers, otherwise called wyndeshaken Gentlemen, to
every one a thousand pair of false Dyce, a copper Chain or two, twenty
copper ryngs plated with Gold, a glosyng tongue, a fair dyssembled
countenance, to deceive plain men withal, and an acre of land upon shoters
Hill, worth an hundredth pound a year, therewith to maintain his estate, and
his amorous Ladies.

Item, I bequeathe to every honest Woman, being a furtherer of Love, the
keeping of some great man's house, that in the owners absence, fair Wives may
resort thither, to banquet, and make merry with their Frannians. Item, I
bequeath to every young Woman, maydenlyke, when she shall go to the market, a
poor Woman, to bye her meat, that she in the mean time may go to a baudie
house for her recreation, or else to a dancing school, to learn fashions.
etc. Item, I bequethe to every apprentise that is willing to deceive his
master, a receauer of his masters goods, a house to set his chest in with
his apparel, that he may go cleanly: a Ruffian for his companion to help him
to spend his money, and to bring him acquainted with with whores. etc.

Item, I bequeath to all couettous executors, a false and an unfaithful heart,
and loath to depart from that which is not their own, not bestowing the goods
of the poor flock of Jesus Christ, which causes us much to rejoice together
in hell, to see the multitude that comes thither daily for that dreadful
offense commytting.

Item, I give to all hateful haters of the poor Christians, a proud, crafty,
and unmerciful wit, against the provision ^or the r^liefe and mayntenaunce
of the same.

Item, I give to certain Cities, Towns, and Countries, neglygent Rulers,
deuyllish, unchaste, covetous, and insatiable mynisters, poll^rs, and guydes to
have the governance thereof: Keeping the goods bequeathed to the maintenance
of the same, to their own lucre and vantage, and to make merchandise of the
same, to oppress the poor laboringe flock of my enemy Jesus Christ, that
they enjoy not those goods, lands and rentes, according to the will and
mind of the bequ^athers, but maintain usury, and make Leases of the rents
thereof, to to the utter undoing of all Artifyeers, for the which usurpers is
provided a place with me in our internal Cities and Palaces, where they shall
reign with Dives Epulo, world without end.

Item, I give to the faithful servants of my Son Mammonna, a proud,
covetous, and an uncharitable heart, therewith boldly and without mercy to
oppress the poor, to spoil the fatherless and wyddowes, and to put the
commons of the country from their farms, Houses, commodities and lyuinges:
and all to mayntaine their Pride, and enryche them, which after their decease
will spend all those evil gotten goods merylie, with carding, dycing, and
whorehunting.

Item, I give to all Crafts men that fight under my Standarde, a lying tongue
and swearing. Item, I give to the Butchers, new fresh blood to ouersprinkle
their stale meat, that it may seem to the eye of the unware byer, newly
killed, and pricks enough to set up their thin meat that it may appear
thick and well fed.

Item, I give to the Fyshmongers, free lyberty, to sell their rotten Lings, and
stinking Saltfish to breed and engender diseases among the people, to the
Physicians advantage and profit.

Item, I give to the Cooks and Pie bakers, good leave to shreade moldy meat,
and ready run away for quick ware, and to mengle it together with new fresh
flesh, therewith to make pyes and pastyes, to furnish their neighbors Tables
withal.

Item, I give to the Goldsmithes, brass and copper enough to myngle with their
Rings and plate, to make them to weye for advantage. Item, I give to the
Peuterers, and all other that occupy weyghtes and measures, to have false and
contrary weyghtes, to bye with one, and sell by another. Item, to the
Apothicaries I give leave, that when a man asks them a thing, and have it
not, to bring them another thing and say it is that.

Item, I give to my Darelings, the privy Papists, images, Crucifyxes, and
other like puppette maumettry, to worship secretly in their Oratories and Bed
Chambers, because they may not worship them openly abroad in Temples and
Churches.

Over this my Testament and last Will, which I have here made, in my ragious
mind and spightfull deuyllish memory, in the presence of my great
cou^saylours, Minos, and Radamanthus: I do make the Furies of H^ll Executors,
that is to say: Megero, Alecto and Tisiphone: all Massemongers and Papists,
with the Author of Heresies Will and Testament, being faithful Overseers of the
same.

Written to our faithful Secretaries, Hobgoblin, Rawheade, and Bloody bone: in
the spightfull Audience of all the Court of Hell. TEST MEIPSO.

The Court Auernall, after the rehersall of the Deu^ls last Will and Testament.
WOE, woe, to our insatiable paunches, which through our Sovereign Lord
Belzeebub, had been to long fed with the Labors of the Laytie: O our Belly
c^^^^^, our Belly cheer, farewell: that mi^chie^^ may come upon these new
Gospellers, by whom we shall b^ driven to Plough and to Cart, and to keep
sheep.

O Belseebub, our sweet Maz^n.
Masses of Requiem thou shall lack none.
These be the ten detestable Commandments of Belz^^bub, to his obedient and
accursed Children.
WHo so will do my commandments,
and keep them well and sure:
Shall have in Hell great torments,
that ever more shall endure.
Thou shall not fear God,
nor think of his goodness,
To dampne thy soul, blaspheme God and his Saints,
Evermore th^ne own will be fast doing.
Deceive men and women, and be ever swearing,
Be d^unken hardly upon the Sabbath day:
And cause other to sin if thou may.
Father nor Mother, look thou love nor dred,
Neither help them though they have need.
Hate thy neighbor, and hurt him by envy,
M^rder and shed man's blood hardely.
Forbear no man, but be all vengeable,
Be lecherous, and in touching delectable.
Break thy Wedlock, and spare not,
And to deceive other by falsehed, care not.
The ^oodes of other, thou shall hold falsely,
And yield it no more,
though he speak courteously.
Company often with Women,
and tempt them to sin:
Desire thy neighbors Wife,
and his goods to be thine.
Do thus hardly, and care not therefore,
And you shall dwell with me in hell evermore.
Thou shall lie in Frost and fire,
with sickness and hunger:
And in a thousand pieces,
thou shall be torn a sunder.
Yet thou shall dye ever and never be dead,
Thy meat shall be Toadee,
and thy drink boiling Lead.
Take no thought for the Floode,
that Christ for the shed:
And straight to my kingdom,
thou shall be led.
FINIS.

