THE ANSWERS OF SOME BRETHREN OF THE MINISTRY. TO THE REPLIES OF THE
MINISTERS and Professors of Divinity in ABERDEENE: CONCERNING THE LATE
COVENANT.

2: CHRON. 15. 15. And all IVDA rejoiced at the Oath: For they had sworn with
all their heart, and sought Him with their whole desire: and He was found of
them.

Printed the year of God, 1638.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THat you may know our Proceedings, how we are brought upon the Stage, and
con^rie to our expectation, are put in print. Coming to Abe^dede on Friday the
afternoon, we received, the Demands of our Reverend Brethren that night late:
and, for the greater expedition, without delay, we returned our summarie
Answers on Saturday at night. On the Lords Day following, we desired to
express our-selves to the People in presence of the Ministry, but the
Pulpits and Kirks were altogether refused; and therefore in the most convenient
place we could have, sub dio, and at such hours as were vacant from the
ordinary exercises of public Worship; we delivered our Message in the
Audience of many. After our last Sermon, toward Evening, we found that our
labor was not in vain in the LORD, for diverse persons, of special note,
both for place and wisdom, with willing heart, and great readiness of mind
did publicly put their hands to the COVENANT. Having the week following seen
some parts of the Country, (where besides the Presbyteries Alford and Dear,
who had subscribed before, the Moderator, and diverse of the Presbytery of
Aberdene, the Presbytery of Turreff, after they were satisfied in some
scruples, did also subscribe) we returned the next Saturday to Aberdene; where
finding that some others had subscribed that week, we resolved to preach upon
the morn. That night we received a Reply, unto which before our return home,
we have made an Answer. All these we desire may be unpartially considered:
and if it shall please the LODD, that any light shall come from our labor unto
thy mind, let it be ascribed not unto us, (who neither had time nor helps for
such a task) but to the brightness of the Truth, and Cause it self, and to
the Father of Lights: to whom be all Glory.

What did prodeed from our Pen in our Answ^ to the D. D. of Aberdeene,
concerning the late Declaration given to his Majesty's Commissioner, did flow
from minds filled with a zeal to the peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, and from
our earnest desires of a perfect harmony, betwixt the King and his Subjects
against all Mistakings. This zeal of ours we confess made us study more,
how to decline and to keep our selves from touching such of the D. D. demands
as were thornie, than how to walk safely through them. And likewise to make
manifest to his Majesty's good Subjects in all places whether the D. D.
demands, and our answers should happen to come. That matters inclined to
pacification, and were in a fair way off settling: for which peaceable
intentions we could conceive nothing to be more behovefull, than by word and
write to make known to all men the forsaid declaration, which his Majesty's
loyal Subjects presented to his Majesty's Commissionar, for clearing their
Covenant of all unlawful Combination against Authority. And by so doing, to
stop the mouths of our Adversaries, and to stay all their obloquies. In
using of this mean, it was far from our thoughts to wound any man, or to
write any word, which might give the smallest offense to the meanest of his
Majesty's Subjects, Hoping rather that these our proceedings should have been
more acceptable to Authority, more approven of the wife and men of
understanding, and more aggreable unto the minds of such as are for peace; than
rashly and unadvisedly to have gone on in a Dispute of State questions, which
hardly at any time has been profitable for peace, and which at this time
seemed to us (to say no further) most unseasonable and impertinent. Yet knowing
that it were not only base and shameful, but in our persons, and in our
proceedings in this cause, a very great incongruitie, and in it self sinful,
to speak wickedly for GOD, and to talk deceitfullie for him, for that were as
one man mocketh another so to mock him. Job. 13. 7. 9. and to make iniquity a
mean to promove piet^e, (a policy which we have not learned,) as if GOD
could be served with our sins. We have made here a brief relation of the
reasons and grounds, where-upon we have in our answers confidently affirmed,
that his Majesty's Commissionar did accept, and was well pleased with the late
Declaration.

1. His G. was most earnest to have the late Covenant so solemnly sworn, and
so universally subscribed to be rendered, or rescinded, and did propone
plausible reasons for that effect. But this by such strong impediments as were
at that time represented, and are now extant in print, being impossible to us
to do, except we would sin highly against God. His G. afterward declared that
the Kings Majesty was most willing to indict an Assembly and call a Parliament,
but that our Covenant in the clause of mutual defense, was a combination
against Authority, and that we had sworn to defend one another in our own
private quarrels, as well as in the cause of Religion. This his G. desired to
be removed, as a maine hinderance of the obtaining of our desires, and without
the removal whereof an Assembly, and Parliament could not be indicted. When
this motion of a Declaration was first proponed to the several meetings the
greater part was against it: because no Declaration, containing ^ye thing
contrary to the Covenant could be granted, and an explanation of the
Covenant, the meaning whereof seemed to be plain enough, would no more please
than the Covenant it self: but by the earnest dealing of some Noblemen of his
Majesty's Counsel sent from the Commissioner, with some Commissioners sent
from every meeting, It was thought meet in end, that a Supplication containing
a Declaration should be formed, which at last his G. did receive at the hands
of the Supplicants, and upon the receiving thereof promised to deal with the
Kings Majesty for obtaining a free Assembly and Parliament, which he refused
to undertake without this Declaration. Thus by the very nature and course of
our Proceedings about this point, it is manifest that the Declaration was, at
least in this far satisfactorie to the Commissioner himself, that he did
promise to mediate for an Assembly and Parliament, which was both the sum of
our desires, and the only end of this Declaration. So that no man could in any
reason think that we should have wronged him in affirming that his G. did
accept, and was well pleased with that Declaration since upon the sight,
receiving, and hearing thereof, he promised to do his best endeavors with his
Majesty for obtaining what was petitioned by us, which before and without it,
his G. had utterly refused to do.

2. The three Noblemen of his Majesty's Counsel who were employed by his G.
about this Declaration, did repare ordinarily to him for advysing what form of
Declaration would best please, and give best satisfaction. And we had great
reason to think that the form which pleased their Lorships should not be
displeasing, or unacceptable to his G.

3. After that diverse forms of Declaration were drawn up, and none of them
was found to give satisfaction: at last it was thought good, that one should
be formed by way of Supplication for a general Assembly and Parliament.

And because the maine hinderance of obtaining thereof, was that our Covenant
was suspect to be a combination against Authority, it was found necessare that
this impediment should be removed by declaring that no such thing was intended
in the Covenant. This form of Supplication did first please the three
Noblemen, and thereafter, diverse parts and expressions of it were corrected
by his G. particular direction, which are still kept in remembrance, and in
the notes of the Noblemen and others at that time employed about this work from
their several meetings. This made us to think that his G. was well pleased with
so much as was corrected by himself, and that his G. would have also corrected
other parts and expressions thereof, if he had not been well pleased with
them: and therefore made us secure that his G. would no have offended that we or
any other, should have affi^ so much.

4. We have reason to think that the first Declaration which was shown to the
Petitioners by the three Noblemen sent from his G. to negotiate with them,
would have given satisfaction; why then shall we not think, that the
Supplication mended by his own particular direction, not in the Petitorie
part, but in the Declaration which it contained, might in like manner satisfy.

5. Among other parts of the Declaration which were mended by the
Commissioners direction, One was in the beginning thereof, where, in place of
that which was first written That the Kings Majesty bad conceived the
Confession of Faith and Covenant lately renewed by us his Majesty's Subjects to
be an unlawful combination against Authority: His G. would have it changed
thus, That his Majesty's Commissioner has conceived the Confession of Faith,
etc. We might therefore have imagined that the Kings Majesty possibly would
not have been pleased with our Declaration, but it could not so much as enter
in our minds that his Majesty's Commissioner, who would have the words to
express his own dislike, and not the Kings, should not for his own part
been pleased with it, or be offended with us, for affirming so much.

6. There was some reasoning between the three Counselors and the Petitioners,
whether the words of the Declaration should be thus conceived, amain
Hinderance, or, the mains Hinderance, for which later conception the
Petitioners did plead, That this which was the maine hinderance being removed
by their declaration, for which end they were moved to make it, there might be
no more hindrances afterward, or at lest so small ones, that they might easily
be put out of the way; and the truth is, that since the removal of that main
hinderance, we have heard of no particulare hinderance from the contents of the
Covenant. This also did make us to say with the greater confidence that the
Declaration did please.

7. When the Declaration was received by his Majesty's Commissioner, was read
openly, and was confirmed heartily by the oath of the petitioner. His G.
declared that he verily believed that they meaned what they spoke, that he
hoped what they had written should prove satisfactorie to his Majesty, and
that he would against the time appointed do his best endeavors with his
Majesty for obtaining our desires, which could not but make us conceive that
his G. was satisfied with it himself.

8. Although all the companies of petitioners could not be present to hear
with their own ears, the words that were spoken, yet all of them had so much
as we have written, reported unto them, not by uncertain rumor, but by the
faithfulness of their Commissioners; and upon the certainty of this report,
and certain evidences of the truth, they rested satisfied, and were put in
hope of a general Assembly at the Commissioner his return. Which has made
them also now in their answers to the last of the late propositions made unto
them by his Majesty's Commissioner after his return, to affirm, that his G.
accepted their Declaration as the most ready and powerful mean, which could
come within the compass of their thoughts, for clearing them of that objected
Combination, lykeas they have testified no less in their letters to others. So
that if we have erred in our affirmation, we have not erred alone, but have
been carried away with the common error of so many as were here conveened,
without exception of any one.

9. As it is very unbeseeming our profession and calling, so was it very far
from our mind and desire, in our answers to touch the honorable Lords of
Counsel, or any in authority under his sacred Majesty. If the Act of
approbation with the Subscriptions thereof, (the ground of the missive) was
torn and rescinded and the missive it self, once thought fit to be sent,
was returned and promise given, that it should not be sent, there was no less
done than was assevered by us. What reason we had to affirm that this was
done upon the Supplication and complaint of the lieges, may appear, if it be
remembered, First, that some of the honorable Lords of ^unsell after they were
informed by the supplicants what p^udices were done to their cause by the Act
approving the Proclamation, were passionatly desirous to have the Act
rescinded, and did declare that they would not spare to deal with the
Commissioner for that effect. 2. When it was required by the Supplicants, that
another Act should be made bearing, that by their subscribing the Proclamation
they had not given their Approbation to it, It was often and at large answered,
that they did not by their Subscription approve the Proclamation, but only
gave warrant thereby to the Clerk for registration, and to the Herald for
publishing the same. And thirdly the Supplicants presented a petition
containing the reasons of their desires, and could not be satisfied, except
upon these reasons the Act were rescinded, and the missive stayed. This
Supplication was received by the Commissioner, was openly read, and answer
was given by his G. that their desire should be satisfied. All this in
substance was known to many thousands before any word was seen from our
pen, neither had any thing written by us come to the sight of the world, if
it had not been put to the Press by the D. D.

So much have we been constrained to say for vindicating our selves, who
esteem it to be our chiefest comfort and greatest glory, that we plead for
the cause of God, and truth of Religion and desire neither in our plea nor in
our preaching for the defense of the truth to allege any un^ueth. We have
written nothing before, or at this time, from an humor to contradict any man,
or to wrong the meanest far less any of the honorable Lords of his Majestices
Counsel, and least of all his Majesty's high Commissioner But do confess
that there was much insisting great working on both sides; and many meetings*
before the form of Declaration could be agreed upon, and received: And we
do believe also that the rescinding of the Covenant, so vehemently urged, was
that which would have given him, as his Majesty's Commissioner, greatest
satisfaction, Neither are we ignorant that Partly through the malignancie of
Sycophants watching all opportunities to promove their own projects; Partly
through the rubs and difficulties which occur in working of great matters to
their wished ends; and Partly through the busy and overweaning conceit of some
who would seem to be somewhat that they may warm themselves at a combustion,
and who are ready to raise suspicions against the wisest and best affected to
Authority; much must beewritten and spoken per ragioni di stato, which
otherwise would not be thought so necessary. Yet cannot we conceive but the
acceptance of the Declaration of the loyalty of his Majesty's subjects set
down in writ, and seconded by oath, was good service to the King, and that
laboring with his Majesty to possess his royal heart with the best
conceptions and constructions of the actions of his well meaning, and honest
hearted Subjects, deser^eth from them the increase of that respect, and honor
which they owe to all whom God honors to be instruments of good and
happiness to this Kirk and Kingdom, which the LORD establish under his
Majesty's long and prosperous reign.

TO THE READER.
GOod Reader, what could not be performed by us in Printing or Answers
severally after their own Replies, let it be supplied by thy self in
reading. And if there be any part of our Answers which seems not to be
relative to the Replies, let it be imputed to the D. D. whose printed Copy
agrieth not with that, which in wr^t was sent unto us under their hands, and
unto which our Answers were made. Neither is it our fault that our answers
have not come to light before this time, we having sent the same, without the
changing of one word to be printed at Aberdene, before our coming from that
part of the Country: This must be ascribed to the ordinary difficulties and
hindrances, which use to oppose the Truth and a good cause in the World, and
which, it is not meet now to specify.

TO OUR REVEREND BRETHREN, The Doctors and Ministers of Aberdeene.
THat our Answers (Reverend and beloved Brethren) have not given you full
satisfaction, as it may be imputed to our weakness, in the defense of so good
a Cause, so may it proceed also from your own prejudice against what could be
said by us, which we have some reason to suspect for two causes, one is, that
your Demands which we conceived to have been intended merely for us, and were
sent unto us from you in write, were published before our coming in print,
like as you have now printed and published your Replies before you had seen
our Answers unto that which we received from you last in write; we having
promised to the bearer, to return an Answer shortly ere we departed the
Country. This may seem rather to be a seeking of victory from praejudice,
than a search of verity for satisfaction.

The other cause of our suspicion, is, that the grounds of our Answers to
you, have proven satisfactorie to others, who for Age, and gifts of Learning
and Understanding, are pryme men in this Kirk and Kingdom, and to whom
modesty will not suffer you to prefer your selves. But whether our
weakness, or your prejudice be the cause, must be now judged by others, to
whose view ye have brought us: Whom therefore we with you heartily desire
unpartiallie to considder our first and second Answers; wishing and hoping
that partiality, prejudice, and all worldly respects and fears, laid aside,
the naked Truth shall be seen of all her lovers. Concerning your confidence
of us, as we in love judge, that ye think not your selves to be striving
against the Truth; so may ye conceive, that we can no more be^ brought to
your mind, than we can be drawn from the profession of our Religion, as it
has been reformed, sworn, and confirmed by the late and preceding Covenants,
and from following the example of our religious Reformers, and the many
Worthies succeeding them in this Kirk, who would have been glad to have seen
the days which we now do see: and for which we pray, that both ye and we
may be thankful; so shall it not be imputed unto us, that we have not
discerned, and used the day of the Lords visitation: so shall we all rejoice
together in the Day of the LORD.

To the first Reply.
YOUR experience in your Disputes against the common Adversary, wherein you
say ye are so frequent, has (no doubt) taught you, how easy a matter it is
to multiply Objections against the Tr^th, and Cause of GOD: and your selves
know, that your Objection against our Calling, and the Warrant of our coming
to you, was framed, and published in print, before it was propounded unto us:
and ere our Answer could be had; but so soon as we did hear your Demands,
we answered incontinent, in the humility and truth of our minds, that we
were to obtrude nothing upon you, or your flock, by any particular Authority,
Civil or Ecclesiastic, but that we did come in all meekness, to represent
unto you the present case of this Kirk, and in love to entreat you, to join
with us, for the peace thereof; for which we trust, without wronging any
lawful Authority, we may claim the Warrant of the highest and greatest
Authority, although we had not been sent from almost the whole Kirk and
Kingdom, lawfully conveened at this time, for preservation of Religion, and of
the Liberties and Laws of this Kingdom, so sore shaken, by the usurpation of
the Prelates, and their Favorers. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto
love, and to good works, etc. says the Apostle, Heb. 10. 24. And where ye
object, that without your leave we preached within your Congregation; which is
aggravated by you, as a heinous fault, both against Scripture, and against the
Canons of ancient Counsels, which ye have laboriously quoted against us, we
entreat you, to be more sparing, lest the guiltiness, if there be any, reflex
upon your selves: For your Pulpits and Kirks being denied us, (not from any
injury done by us, but by your own determination, before our coming) a
necessity was laid upon us, to deliver our message in such places, as your
courtesy did permit; wherein no man will find, that we have failed, if he
consider, first, That there is as wide difference betwixt Ecclesia turbata and
pacata, the troubled and peaceable estate of a Kirk, as is betwixt Ecclesia
constituenda and constituta, and many things are necessary in the one, which
perhaps are not expedient in the other. Ye speak of the Constitution of the
Kirk this year, as if ye had been speaking thereof many years before this
time. 2. That the word of God, and the Canons of Councels, will have Pastors so
to care for their own flocks that they forbid them not, to care for the
whole Kirk, especially in the time af a common Combustion. When the house is
on fire every man ought to run to all rowmes, where he may quench it: when
a laik strikes up in a Ship, every Mariner, yea, every Passinger ought to
labor to stop it. Even he who is not universal Pastor of the Kirk, is
Pastor of the universal Kirk: and the Apostle has taught us, That we are
members one of another, Romans 12. 4. As all the members of one body being
many, are one body; so also is Christ. 1. Cor. 12. 12. That the members should
have the same care one of another, verse. 25. If some members of this Kirk had
not cared more kindly, in this time of common danger: than other some have
done, the whole body had been ere now dangerously, if not desperately
diseased. 3. That we made choice of such ho^res, for delivering our Message,
that the people might attend your ordinary times of public worship; which
makes your charge, of the peoples contempt, or ours, of your Ministry, to be
most unjust.

In the second part of your Reply to our Answer to your first Demand, ye
might have made choice of words witnessing more respect to the most part of the
Kingdom now, and to the Kirk in former times, than of a Confederation, and
Negative Confession: we know no other Confederation at this time, but this same
laudable Covenant which our Progenitors, and many yet living, made with God,
and amongst themselves, at the commandment of Authority, and according to the
example of the people of God in former times. Neither is that short Confession
merely Negative, since the beginning thereof is Affirmative, and does
virtuallie contain the first large Confession ratifyed in Parliament, 1567. 2.
No Pastors, in our knowledge, have either been forced to flee to foreign
Countries, or have been threatened with the want of their stipends, for the
refusing their Subscription: but this we have heard, that some of them have of
their own accord, gone to Court, for procuring of Protections against their
Creditours, and against the Laws, and Duty of good Subjects, have made Lies
between the King and his people. Others we know have wilfully refused, to
abide with their flock: and being eranestly entreated by them, to attend their
Charge, have left them, and have gone out of the Country, for no reason, but
because the people had subscribed, and as ye know, that Arguments have been
taken from augmentation of stipends, to hinder Subscription: so ye may know,
That fear of worldy loss, rather hinders men to subscribe, than scruple of
conscience. The Prelates flight, seems rather to have proceeded from inward
furies of accusing consciences, or for fear of a storm, (which being
procured by their own doing, may be easily prognosticated by them) than from
the enforcing of Subscription of the Covenant, which in our knowledge was never
required of any of the Prelates, although they be grosslie guilty of the
breach of the Covenant, which they did swear, and subscribe before. 3. Your
help, by your prayers, and other means, for extinguishing of the present
Combustion, we still desire, but withal entreat, that you would both ioyn
with the rest of the kirks of the Kingdom, in public humiliation and fasting,
which the Lord himself does proclaim, and call for at this time; so should
your prayers be the more effectual, and also ye be good instruments,
according to your power, with your own people, and the country about, to
join in the Covenant, so should ye find the work of Pacification the more
easy. 4. The Reasons which we touched in our Answer, for proving, that ye
might, without just offense to any, join with us in subscribing, are not yet
answered for, first, a sound Interpretation of the Covenant, although
proceeding from a private person, and altogether void of external Authority,
can not make a substantial difference: and if the Interpretation be unsound,
although it were confirmed with Authority, it makes not a substantial
co-incidence. 2. Why is it denied, that the former Covenant contains Mutual
defense, since all are obliedged thereby to defend Religion, according to their
vocation and power, and the King's person and authority, which can not
possibly be done without Mutual Defense: and since that clause of the
Covenant, is so expo^ded, and applied upon grounds of perpetual reason, in the
general Band drawn up, and printed by Authority, anno 1590. 3. Ye must
either prove this Covenant to be sub stantially different from the former,
which is impossible, or ye must acknowledge this to have the same Authority
with the former, since we are reallie obliedged in the former Covenant, and
virtuallie the same warrant of King, Counsel, and Assembly, remains, and was
never yet discharged: by virtue whereof the Covenant might have been renewed
yearly by all the Subjects of the Kingdom, no less than it has been
subscribed yearly by such as pass Degries in Colleges, and such as were
suspect of Papistrie from time to time. 4. What was done by his Majesty's
Commissionar, was not done in a corner, that it needs to be pryed into, or
doubted of, and what was allowed by his grace, who had so great power from his
Majesty, to declare his Majesty's will, and to receive Declarations from his
Subjects, and who was in every point so zealous, and tender of his Majesty's
service and honor: who are ye, that it should be disallowed by you? Ye will
have the kingdom guilty of Combination against Authority, and will not have
the King to be satisfied. when they have declared themselves to the contrary,
and their Declaration is accepted by his Majesty's Commissionar. This manner of
dealing, is more suitable to Papists, and such In^ndiaries, than for you, who
desire to prove good Patriots, in using all means of Pacification. 5. We are
sorry that ye should be the first, who have accounted our Covenant to be a
Confedearcie, against the Truth, since some of your selves, and all every
where have been constrained; to acknowledge, that they aim at the same end
with us, to maintain the Truth. And for that which displeases you in our
way, that we deal after such a manner with people, to come in, we answer,
that we have seen in this Land, The day of the Lords power, wherein His
people have most willingly offered themselves in multitudes, like the dew of
the morning: that others of no small Note, have offered their Subscriptions,
and have been refused, till time should try, that they join in sincerity,
from love to the Cause, and not from the fear of men: and that no Threatenings
have been used, except of the deserved judgment of God; nor force, except the
force of Reason, from the high respects which we owe to Religion, to our King,
to our Native Country, to our selves, and to the posterity: which has been
to some a greater constraint, than any external violence; and we wish, may
also prevail with you.

To the second*
WE perceive, that you pass in silence, that which we answered concerning
the preventing of trouble, which by all appearance had been too sensible to
many before this time, if the Conventions censured by you, had not been kept;
we desire that ye would here declare your selves, whether ye would have
rather received the Service book Book of Canons, and other Trash of that
kind, tending to the subversion of Religion, and to the prejudice of the
Liberties of the Kingdom^, than to have conveened in a peaceable manner, to
present Supplications to his Majesty, for averting of so great evilis. Neither
do ye speak a word of the saying of K. James, which ought to be regarded;
both for the witness sake, who is of so great authority, and for the
testimony which contains so great reason. For, shall not the whole body of a
Kingdom stir pro aris and (...) or shall our Religion be ruined, and our
light be put out, and all men hold their peace? We told you also, that the
first part of the Act of Parliament, 1585, is relative to another Act in Queen
Mary's time, which specifieth, what sort of Leagues and Bands are forbiddin,
and sets us free from the breach of the Act; but ye have answered nothing
to this, and still dispute from the Act of Parliament, rather than from
othergrounds, better beseeming your (...) and Ours; and in this will so
precilelit adhere to the Letter of the Law, that you will have no Meetings,
withhout the Kings consent, even in Case of the preservation of Religion, of
his Majesty's Authority, and of the Liberties of the Kingdom, which we are
sure must be contrary to the reason and life of the Law, since the safety of
the People is, the sovereign Law. Although it be true also that for our
Covenant, we have the consent of Authority pressing upon all the Subjects in
the General Band, and Confession of Faith, formerly subscribed for maintenance
of the Religion, their Subscription and Oath as a note of their soundness in
Religion, and of their loyalty and fidelity to the King, and his Crown,
wherein Iuris-Consults, more skilled in this kind, than we need to be, have
given their Responses, and verdicts, in favor of us, and our Cause.

2. The point touching Authority, is so full of Thorns and Rocks, uses to
be so vehemently urged, to pro cure envye against the Gospel of CHRIST, and
can so hardly be disputed and discussed except in a large Treatise, to the
satisfaction of King's and Kingdoms; and all having interest, that for the
present we only wish you to hear the testimonies of two great Divines, the
one is Whitaker, in his Answer to Master Reynolds preface, page 6. Stirs and
tumults for matters of Religion, Reynold rehearses, that have been in
Germany, France, Bohemia, as though it were sufficient for their condemnation,
that they once resisted, and did not by and by admit what-so-ever violence was
offered either to GOD'S Truth, or to them-selves, contrary to Promise, to
Oath, to public Edicts, to Law, whereby they were warranted to do as they
did: more of this matter, will I not answer, being of another nature, and
cleared long since from the crime of Rebellion, not only by just just defense
of their doing: but also by the Pro clamations and Edicts of Princes
themselves. The other is Bilson, in his Book of Christian subjection, in
defense of the Protestants in other Countries, against the objection of the
Jesuit, page 332, affirming, that subjects may defend their Ancient and
Christian Liberties, covenanted and agreed upon by those Princes to whom they
first submitted themselves, and were ever since confirmed and allowed by the
Kings that have succeeded, they may require their own right, save their own
lyves, beseech, that they be not used as slaves, but like Subjects; like men,
not like beasts; that they may be convented by Laws, before Judges, not
murdered in Corners, by Inquisitors. This is also the judgment of Rivetus, in
his Commentary, PSALM. 68 Which being looked upon by you, will furnish a full
answer to what ye have cited at length from his Iesuita vapulans. For betwixt
Jesuitical treasonabe and pernicious doctrine, and practices against Princes,
and Magistrates, refuted by him, and the loyal and sound doctrine of
Protestants: your selves know the difference and opposition, like as it is
clear as the Sun, by that short Confession, by the Application thereof, to
the times in this present Confession, by our public Protestation, and by the
Declaration exhibited to his Majesty's Commissioner, that we mean not only
mutual concurrence, and assistance in the cause of Religion, but also to the
uttermost of our power, to defend the King's Majesty, his Person and
Authority. We would be glad, that ye and others were witnesses to our
private prayers, nd the most secret of our thoughts. and affections concerning
our loyalty to our dread Sovereign: so should ye either cease to write in
this against us, or be forced to write against your own Consciences.

5, When we justify our Conventions and Covenants, from their purposed ends,
we mean not only the last and most remote ends: but the nearest and immediate,
and if nothing in these can merit just censure, the Conventions and Covenants
no more in that which ye call the Object, nor in their ends, can be culpable:
what Aspersions have been put upon our Reformation, and Reformers, by the
malice of our Adversaries, can not be unknown to you. But we wish, that your
ingynes and pens may be better employed, than to join with them in so
badde a Cause, which we expect also from your prudence, considering the people
and place where ye live.

To the third.
Y^E do well and wisely, that you search not curiously into the minds of
Princes, and Reasons of State: but whether all his Majesty's Subjects be
satisfied with the last Proclamation, needs no deep search. For although
possibly some had been more pleased with a Proclamation, commanding the
Service Book, such especially, who either will see no errors in it, or have
publicly prosessed, that they have been groaning for it, yet the
Protestation of the Supplicants against it, as it gives most humble and
hearty thanks to his gracious Majesty, for what is granted: so it restifieth
upon undeniable evidences, that the Proclamation is not a satisfaction of our
just desi^es: for, first, the Proclamation supposes the Service Book to be
no Innovation of Religion. 2. That it is not contrare to Pro testant-Religion.
3. That the Proclamation gives not or^r for discharging all the Acts made in
favors of the Service Book, especially that of the 19 of February, which
gives unto it so great Approbation, as serving for maintaining the true
Religion, and to beat out all Superstition, and no ways to be contrary to
the Laws of this Kingdom, but to be compyled, and approved for the
universal use and edification of all his Majesty's Subjects. 4. It is so far
from disallowing the said Book, that it puts us in fear, that it shall
be pressed in a fair and legal way, and therefore, notwithstanding the
Proclamation, the necessity of Covenanting, which contains nothing contrary
to the Acts of Parliament, nor to the duty of good Subjects, but is the
largest Testimony of our Fidelity to GOD, and loyalty to our King,
(whatsoever it may seemeto you to import) does yet continue, that his
Majesty may be pleased, to grant the full satisfaction of our reasonable
Petitions, and that our Religion, and Liberties, may be preserved for
afterward. Who-so-ever profess themselves to be perfectly satisfied with the
Proclamation, do proclaim in the ears of all the Kingdom, that they are
better pleased with the Service book and (anons, than with the Religion, as it
has been prosessed in this Land since the Reformation.

To the fourth.
WE were assured that your Demand proceeded from a Mistaking, and therefore,
according to our knowledge, did ingenuously, for your satisfaction, expound
unto you the mind of the Subscribers, but find now, that we have labored in
vain at your hands, from which we have received this Reply: unto which,
concerning the first. Missinterpretation, we answer: 1. That although we do
neither use threatenings, nor obtrude our Interpretation, upon you, as bearing
any obligatorie power, yet pardon us, that we match you not, and put you not
in the Balance with the greatest part of the Kingdom both Ministers, and
others, in whose name we reco^mended this Interpretation unto you, by all fair
means, and force of Reason: and in so doing, we are so far from the breach
of our solemn Uow, and Promise, that we esteem this to be no small proof
of that godliness and righteousness, wherein we are bound by our Covenant,
to walk. 2. The authoritative judgment of our Reformers and Predecessors, is
evidenced not only by the Confession of Faith, ratified in Parliament, but
also by the books of Discipline, Acts of general Assembllies, and their own
Writs; wherein if ye will, ye may find warant for this Interpretation: and in
respect whereof, it is public, ratione medij, besides these midses of
Scripture of Antiquity, and of the Consent of the reformed Kirks, which are
named for midses by you.

Concerning the 2 Missconstruction, it is no marvel that Prejudices, and
pre-conceived opinions, poss^ssing the mind, make men to fall upon
interpretations of their own; but in the South parts of the Kingdom, where
many learned and judicious men, both Pastors. and Professors were assembled at
the first subscribing thereof, we remember of none that did fall into that
Misstake. And the two sorts of Novations, such as are already introduced, and
such as are supplicated against, are so punctually distinguished, that there is
no place left to Ambiguitie: but o^ the contrary, the Novations which we
promise to forbear for a time only, can not be supposed in the following
words, to be abjured, for ever, as Popish novations.

2. Upon a new examination of the words, ye perceive, that the Articles of
Pearth, and Episcopacie, are condemned as erroneous corruptions, because we
promise, to labor, to recover the former purity and liberty of the Gospel,
unto which our Answer is, that it appears, that you will have all the
Covenanters against their intention, and whether they will or not, to disallow,
and condemn the Articles of Pearth, and Episcopal Governament, lest they be
tried in a general Assembly But it is known to many hundreths, that the
words were purposely conceived, for satisfaction of such as were of your
judgment, that we might all join in one heart, and Covenant for establishi^g
Religion, and opposing errors. And for your Argument, whether the Articles of
Perth and Episcopacie, be against the purity and liberty of the Gospel or
not, which is not determined by these words of the Covenant. But it cannot be
denied, first, That if in a free Assembly, they be found to be against the
purity and liberty of the Gospel, ^hey ought to be abolished: in the mean
time, it being left free, by the words of the Covenant to all, who will, to
stand to the defense of their lawfulness. Secondly, how can it be denied, that
many corruptions, contrary to the purity and liberty of the Gospel, were
they never so innocent in themselves, have accompanied these Novations, such as
the superstitious observing of Days, ^eriation and cessation from work, on
those Days, Feasting guysing. etc. many gross abuses have entered in the
Sacrament, upon kneeling before the elements, and upon the lawless usurpation
of Prelates: in respect whereof, even they who allow Pearth Articles, and
Episcopacie, may swear to recover the purity of the Gospel. And thirdly, who
can be so great a stranger at home, as to deny, that many corruptions of
Popery and Arminianisme, have entered in the Kirk, and have been vented, and
defended, in Schools, and pulpits: by reason whereof we are bound, every one
of us, according to the measure of our light, to labor for recovery of our
former Purity? And therefore, if you had cast your eyes upon the condition of
this (...) Kirk, as ye have pryed narrowly, into the Expressions of the
Covenant, ye might have spared both your own labor and ours, and not
labored to skarre both your selves and others, with this shadow.

In your Argument, ad hominem, you should have considered, that whatsoever be
our judgment, as we are particular persons, yet, at this time we were to be
taken, as Commissionars, from the whole companio of Subscribers, who, about
this point, are of different judgments, and if some of your own judgment, had
either come alone in our place, or had been joined in Commission with us, we
had anticipate your Objection: and this ye have been forced to see: and so
yourselves, in propnunding your Objection; have answered, your own Syllogism,
in making us to say, that ye may swear and subscribe, seeing ye think not
these things to be abjured in that Oath made Ann^ 15^1 neither was it for
you, to inquire in our private Opini^, nor necessary for us, to make it
known, but to have conceived of our minds, according to our Commission, and
the will of those that sent us. Your Arguments need to be no impediments unto
your swearing of the Covenant. For upon your grounds, you would not have sworn
the Short Confession, any time by past: yea. ye can not swear the Confession
of any Kirk: nay, not the Articles of the Cr^d, because of the diverse
Interpretations of the Article of Christ's descen^ into Hell; or swearing them
in Scotland and England, ye behoved to swear them in diverse senses. There be
some words of the Lord's prayer as, Give us this day our daily bread: and of
the x Commands as the words of the 4 Command, which are diversely understood;
must Christians, therefore, forbear to join in saying the Prayer, or swearing
Obedience to the Commandments? Neither for this do we admit any ambiguitie,
or aequivocation: the words certainly have but one true sense and
signification., but diverse persons conceave and understand them, according to
the different measures of their light. Since then your Disputation, is builded
upon such a S^pposition, it must either fall to the ground, or hardly can any
Confession of Faith, or Religious Covenant be sworn. Offend not therefore if
we in modesty present unto you, A Dis^ of your own dressing: we mean, the
like Argument, adhominem.

The Rites and Ceremonies which are not abjured in the negative Conf^ssion, are
not abjured in this late Covenant.

But the Rites and Ceremonies, which were concluded in Perth Assembly, are not
abjured as you say, in the negative Confession made, 158^.

Therefore, they are not abjured in this late Covenant, as ye think.

The first Proposition is evident, because in the late Covenant we are bound no
farther, concerning the negative Confeffion, but to keep it inviolable: and
therefore, what Rites are not abjured there, are not abjured here? The second
Proposition cannot be denied by you; for these twenty years by gone ye have
thought your selves free of perj^rie, notwithstanding of the Oath in 1581. and
of your conforming your selves to the ordinances of Perth. And whereas ye
allege, afterward, as before, that our Supplications are satisfied, the
contrary is known, by our public Protestution, and by our last Supplication
and complaint presented to his Majesty's Comissioner. And the urging of the
Service book was a sufficient Reason, for for be arance of Perth articles, till
an assembly; at which time it may be determined, whether it be expedient,
that this Kirk be any more troubled with them. Neither needs your conscience
to subscribe the forbearance of these Novations, as if swearing of forbearance,
were a swearing of disobedience to Authority: first, because the swearing of
forboarance of a thing in your opinion, indifferent, in the case of soandall,
and of sensible fear in others, of Superstition, is the swearing of Obedience
to the Commandment of God. which sorbiddeth us, to destroy him, for whom
Christ dyed, although man should command the contrary. 2. Because the articles of
Perth were concluded, for satisfying, and not to press any man with the
practice of them, as was openly professed unto the Opponents. before the face
of the whole Assembly, and because the Act it self gives warrant, to forbear
the practice at this time, when the memory of Superstition is revived, which
makes us to think, that they who have for borne the practice of these
Articles, since the superstitious Service book was complaned upon, make most
truly conscience of Obedience of the Act of Perth, and Parliament, ratilying
the same, and are most conform to the Confession of says, ratifyed in
Patliament, declaring that Ceremonies ought to be changed; when they rather
soster Superstition, than edify the Kirk, using the same. Last of all, You
say, ye can not swear Forbearance, because ye can not abstain from private
Baptism, and priva^e Communion: where we perceave, that, in your judgment,
private Baptism and Communion, are not any more things indifferent but
necessary, necessitate praecepti, in so far, that the not using them, is a
contempt of the Means, and a tempting of God. By this your doctrine, first,
The state of the Question anent Perth artieles, is quite altered: for ye, and
your Associats, did ever to this time, allege the Question, to be of things
indifferent: but now ye find some of them so necessary, that although the
general Assembly of the Kirk, should discharge them: yet ye behoved still,
for conseience of the Commandment of God to practice them. If ye have the
same judgment of Kneeling before the Elements, and of festival Days, it
comes to pass amongst us, which has been incident to the Kirk in former
ages that things have been first brought in, as indifferent, their urged as
necessary. If Confirmation also in your judgment, be not indifferent, but
necessary, we desire to understand, with what conscience it has been
slighted, and utterly neglected by the Prelates these 20 years past? and how
it is, that ye have carried so small regard to the Canon of the Kirk, and Act
of Parliament, and to the benefit of young Children, as not to require, urge,
and press the practice thereof, both in your own Charge and throughout the
whole Kirk? This would seem to be partial dealing, to press some
Ceremonies, and neglect other some; while both by the same Canon of the Kirk
and Act of Parliament are appointed. 2. Ye do hereby coudemne the practice of
the Kirk of Scotland; from the time of Reformation; till Perths Assembly; and
put no small guiltiness upon other reformed Kirks, who use not that at all,
but rather abstain from it; as dangerous, which ye now do prof^sse, to be so
necessary, 3. We wish you wisely to consider, whence (...) is, and what can
be the true cause, that ye living in that part of the Kingdom, should be
more pressed by the people, with the practice of private Baptism, and
Communion, than all the Kirks in the Kingdom beside, where these 20 years
past, rarely any such motion has been made: it is not because that Popery
prevails there, and the people have a superstitious conceate of Baptism and
Communion, as absolutely necessary to Salvation; as it GOD had tied his grace
to the Sacraments; and children dying without Baptism, and others without
their last Vi^ticum did perish? Thus ye minister the Sacraments in private, as
necessary necessitate praecepti; and the people seem to desire, and receive
them, as necessary, necessitate medij; an Evil very curable, in that City
where the Assemblyes of the people, for public worship are frequent, wherein
the Sacraments might be ministered frequently enough, with great solemnity and
edification. 4. And though we do not deny, but Baptism privately ministered,
by the Minister of CHRIST, according to the institution, be true Baptism, and,
that a child thus privately baptized, be not to be baptized again, (although
it be true also, that private Baptism makes way to the Error of
re-baptizing,) yet we hold that the necessity of the Commandment, stands
only for Baptism in public, since no Precept requires Baptism, but when
the ministration thereof can be had orderly, with all the circumstances
requisite; whereof this is one, That it be ministered in the presence of that
visible Kirk, whereof the children are to be members: for not only the
minister of Baptism, and the Parents of the children, but the Congregation
also has interest in the baptism of every member that enters in their
Communion; which therefore, ought to be a public actio^, no less than the
cutting off of a rotten member, by Excommunication, ought to be done
publicly. 5. It is known that ptivat baptism has bred, and fostered the
opinion of absolute necessity of Baptism, of Baptism of women, and private
persons, of Baptism by supposition, etc. and, that the ministration of the
Sacraments in private places, has been, and is, the ready way to bring
people to the contempt, and neglect of the Sacraments in public, and to the
profanation thereof in private. 6. When all the forms of ministration of
Baptism; shall be compared, both that of the ancient Kirk, keeping Easter
and Pent^st, for the solemn times of Baptism, and the other of the Popish
kirk, and other Kirks, not well purged of the dregs of Popery; ministering
Baptism and Communion at all times, in private places, and before few persons;
it shall be found, that no better course could be taken, than that which has
been wyselie appointed and observed, in the Kirk of Scotland, since the
Reformation, that the Sacraments be ministered in the ordinary meetings of
GOD'S people; unto which they had regard, and not unto the places of material
kirkes: which we add, lest any should think, that we entertain any
superstitious conceat of places.

To the fifth.
TO the first Exception, we have even now answered, and need to add no
farther, concerning private Baptism and Communion. 2. We looked that your
argument, ad hominem, had been closed in the fourth reply and wish, what ye
had to say against the Dispute of Popish English Ceremonies, or any other
Treatise: of that kind, or any of us in particular, had been kept to another
time: for, would any of us, refuse to swear the short Confession, because ye
^ave expounded some articles thereof, contrary to our mind? Our desire is,
that ye keep your own meaning of the negative Confession, and we keep ours,
according to our diverse measures of light: and, that both sides promise
forbearance, as is required in the Covenant, which may very well stand both
with your meaning, and ours: of ours, there is no question: and of yours, there
needs none to be moved by you, since ye think them indifferent and
therefore, in such a case, may promise, to forbear them. From this ground, and
from the different use of the word Discipline, and Policy, it is easy to
answer, both your Sorites and Dilemma: for the late Covenant, binds you to
keep the forme^, according to the common meaning of the Subscribers, and not
according to your interpretation or ours, in particulare: and the horues of
your Dilemma, may be turned against your selves: for we ask of you, Unto
which of the members of the Distinction do you refer Episcopacie, and the
Articles of Perth? if they were abjured for ever, before Perths Assembly, how
is it that ye have admitted and practiced them, since that time; for this was
perjurie? And if they were not abjured, but by the short Confession were left
indifferent, why may ye not, for any impediment ye have from that Confession,
forbear now the practice of them? We looked not for velitations of this sort,
which the change of Commissioners sent unto you mighthave prevented, but for
some solid and grave reasons, why ye could notsubscribe the Covenant, whether
presented from our hands, or the hands of others, our Learned and Reverend
Brethren, of your practice and judgment, who might have been sent unto you in
our place. In the mean time, because many are entangled with the word of
Discipline, and Policy, we desire the Reader to remember, that sometime the
word is taken for the Rule of Givernement of the Kirk, and censure of Manners,
by Office-bearers appointed by Christ; and thus it was unchangeable: sometimes
for the Constitution of Counsels and Acts of Parliament, about matters of
Religion, and thus it is alterable or constant according to the nature of
particular Objects: and thirdly, it is taken for the ordering of the
circumstances, to be observed in all actions Divine, and Humane: and thus it
is variable. We appeal with you, to the indifferent Reader, who is judicious,
whether it be necessary for your Subscription, to know our Opinion of such
Rites and Ceremonies, as are not of divine institution. We have reason, (for
any thing that, ever we heard to the contrary, these 20 years past) to eleave
unto the words of the Covenant, concerning such Rites as are brought into the
Kirk, without or against the word of GOD. The blessing of Marriage (now the
second time instanced) we conceive neither to be circumstance, it being
neither time, place, order of doing, nor any such thing, nor a Ceremony
properly so called, more than the blessing of the people, commanded in the Law,
and practiced before the Law, or praying for a Blessing upon the Ordinance of
God that it may be sanctified unto His people: we neither exalt Marriage so
high, as with the Papists to think it a Sacrament; nor do we abase it so
low, as to think it a paction or Contract, merely civil, it being the
Covenant of God, which cannot be dissolved by consent of the parties, as other
civil Contracts may be: and therefore, as we will not use it
superstitiously, according to the praescript of the Service book, so will we
not for the abuse of Popery, although it were a Paction merely civil, it
being so important, withold Ecclesiastic Benediction from it.

To the sixth.
SIlence carries sometimes the appearance of Consent, sometime it is from
weakness; and sinee you know also, that it may at sometimes come from
wisdom, and moderation; why do ye not rather keep silence your selves,
than make such an interpretation of ours? We deny not, but Divines both
ancient, and modern, are against us, concerning the lawfulness of the things
contraverted: but we withal affirm, first, That Divines both ancient and
modern, are against you also, and both may be true, for both are Propositions
indefinite, in a matter contingent. 2. That almost all Divines universally are
for us, and for the forbearance of things indifferent, in such a case, which is
the point urged by us, and cleared before. Secondly, we deny not, but the Oath
contains many other Articles: but concerning that of the Novations already
introduced, if you could have believed us, and so many thousands as have
subscribed, it contains no more, but the forbearance of them, for a time,
neither can any farther be extorted from the tenor of the Covenant it self,
according to your grounds. If you will interpret it according to the meaning
which ye thought it had the last year, and which we urge you not to change:
and to promise forbearance, can neither be contrary to that duty which yeow
to your flock, nor be disobedience to Authority, but a means to edify God's
people, and obedience to God.

To the seventh.
FIrst, The Reason propounded in the 7. Demand, for refusing your Subscription,
because ye supposed Perth Articles to have been abjured, as Popish, is
answered to the full, and the impediment put out of your way. This other that
ye propound concerning our conception and meaning of the short Confession, may
be as easily removed, if ye will once believe; that we urge not upon you
our meaning, but leave you to your own, till the matter be examined in an
Assembly. 2. Ye call some of those novations, necessary: but without warrant
of that Assembly, which concluded them, as indifferent, and all the rest ye
will have to be laudable: thus by progress of time, things formerly
indifferent, become necessary: and what was but lawful before, and had much
ado to gain that reputation, is now become laudable: where ye plainly
discover the cause of your unwillingnesse to subscribe, not so much to be the
commandment of Authority, as the necessity and excellency of the things
commanded. Till ye, therefore, change this opinion, ye cannot promise
forbearance neither upon our dealing, nor at the commandment of Authority,
although forbearance should serve for the peace of the Kirk, and Kingdom.

To the eight.
FIrst, We remit the Reader to our Answer, and your Reply, which, we hope,
shall be fouud no Confutation. 2. We observe. That ye have not answered our
argument, for our swearing the Defense of the King and his Authority, with a
specification, which ye call a limitation, wherein we have followed the
Confession of Faith, ratified in Parliament, the King's Confession, and Act of
Parliament, upon which yeewill not do well, to fasten so foul imputations,
and put so hard Constructions, as ye do upon us, for inserting in our
Covenant, what they have said before us. If our specification be right, why
censure you it? If it be wrong, why fasten you not your censures upon the
Fountain from which it is derived? The Loyalty of our intentions to maintain
the Kings person, and honor, is fully expressed, that it has given content to
those who are nearest his Majesty: and we should wrong, not only them, but
also the Covenant, and the Subscribers thereof, if we should make new
Declarations to others of greater distance, who wrong both the King, and
them-selves, in craving them.

3. To do with a doubting Conscience, is a grievous sin but to make and
multiply doubts, for hindering a good work, and to oppose against a shyning
Light, is no less grievous. Ye spoke before of a limitation, and now ye have
added Precislie, as if the naming of our Duty, were the excluding of all
other Duties. We all by our Oath of Alleadgeance, by his Majesty's Laws and
by other Obligations acknowledge, that we owe many other duties to the King,
which were very impertinent to express in this Covenant. 4. What kind of
Conference ye mean; whether by word or writ: we know not, but while we were
amongst you; ye know what notice ye were pleased to to take of us, and we
have no delight, to resent it.

To the nynth.
FIrst, We are ashamed to draw the Rug-saw of Contention, to and fro, in a
continual Reciprocation, concerning the serbearance of Pearth Articles and
therefore forbearing to do so any more, we refer the Reader to our former
Answers. 2. We do not affirm that the only Reason, why Kn^eling was
appointed, was because all memory of Superstition was past. There be indeed
other Reasons expressed in the Act, but such as the authors thereof may be
ashamed of, as both perverting the Text. Psalm. 93, as making Kneeling to be
necessary, in every part of GOD's Worship, and as giving matter to many
Treatise^, proving kneeling before the Elements, to be idolatry, according to
the Act, unto which we now refer you: but this we say, (which is manifest
by the Act it self) that in the case of present Superstition, or fear
thereof, all other Reasons had not been forcible, to enforce knee^ing then,
nor can have force to continue kneeling now, This fear has been great, this
year by past, throughout the kingdom, by reason of the many Superstitions of
the Service book, which it may be ye no more acknowledge, than ye do the
superstitious disposition of the people, because they are not that which they
were at the time of Reformation. 3. We would hear what Malice it self can say
against the words of the Protestation, That it shall be lawful uno us, to
defend Religion, and the King^ A^ritie, in defense thereof, and every one of
(...) of anot^, (...) that cause of maintaining Religion, and the Kings forsaid
Authority, and to appoint and hold Meetings to that end: like as our
Proceedings have been in themselves most necessary, and orderly means,
agreeable to the Laws and p^ise of this Kirk and Kingdom, to be commended as
Rea^ Duties of faithful Christians, loyal Subjects, and sensible members of
the body of the Kirk and Kingdom, and tend to no other end, but to the
preservation of Religion, and maintenance of the King's Authority.

To your Interrogator (which ye seem to propone, rather to be snares to us,
than for satisfaction to your selves) we an swear once for all in general,
That if this were the opportunity to that Disputation, we shall be found to
deny nothing unto Authority of that which the word of GOD, the Law of Nature,
and Nations, the Acts of Parliament, chief Royalists, sound Divines, and
loyal Subj^s give unto Kings and Princes, GOD'S Vi^ (...) earth; and that not
from respect to our selves, ^t to ^e Ordinance of GOD, by whom Kings reign^.
But seeing so often, and so instanly, you press us in this point, yet force us
mutually to propone to you such Questi^, (...) it may be, ye will have no
great delight to answere^ We desire to understand of you, Whether ye allow, or
disallow the Service book, and book of Canons? If ye disallow them as an
innovation of Religion, why have ye not either joined in Supplication with the
rest of the Kingdom, or made a Supplication of your own, against them, or
some other way testified your dislyke? Next; Whether it be pertinent for men
of your Place and Quality, to move Questions of State, touching the Power of
Princes, and liberties of Subjects; after his Majesty's Commissioner, and wise
Statesmen have received satisfaction of the Subjects, for suppressing such
motions as yours? 3. Whether do the Subscribers more tender, his Majesty's
Honor, by supposing his constancy, in profession of Religion, and equitable
disposition, in ministration of Justice: or ye who suppose he shall fall upon
his religious and loyal Subjects, with force of Arms, contrary to both? 4.
Whether the joining of the whole Kingdom, in the subscription of the Covenant,
or the intertaining division, by your wrytting, preaching, and threatening of
your people, otherwise willing to join, be a more ready Mean to settle the
present Co^tions of the Kirk, and Kingdom?. 5. If the Prelates and their
Followers laboring to introduce Popery in the Land, make a Faction by
themselves, or as the Guisians in France, did abuse his Majesty's name, in
execution of the bloody Decrees of Trent. (which GOD forbid) we ask, Whether
in such a Case, the lawful defense of the body of the Kingdom, against such
a Faction, be (...) (...) of the M^rate, and a taking A^ (...) (...) ^g? If ye
^firme it to be is not this to take p^t with a ^tion; seeking their own ends,
against the Commonwealth of ^he Ki^ke, and Kingdom, and Honor of the ^ing? If
ye say (...), Why then find you fault with our Pr^ (...) of defending the
Religion, Liberties, and (...) of the Kingdom, of the Kings Authority, in
defense th^of, and every one of us of another, in that cause, as if it were an
unlawful combination against Authority? 6. Whether do ye think Christian
Magistrates to be of so absolute and undoubted power, notwithstanding of the
Promise, or paction made with the Subjects at their Co^ion, or of any law made
for the establishing their Religion, and Liberties, that there is nothing left
but ^ering of Martyrd^, in the c^se of public (...), of their Religion, and
Liberties? If ye think, that any Defense, is lawful, why ^isconstrue ye the
Subscribers of the Covenant? If not, how can you be free of flattery, and of
stirring up Princes against their loyal Subjects, for such ends as yourselves
know be^? We ^lie believe, that ye (...) (...) thanks, either of so good and
just a King, or of so ^uetiefull Subjects, for entering within these Lists. It
is enough, that such Questions be agit^ed in the Schools, and that with as
great prudencie, and ^s circumspectly as may be.

To the tenth.
FIrst, ye take us in our 4 Rep^ to be the penners of the Covenant, and yet
will rather wrest the words of it, to your own meaning, than receive the
Interpretation thereof from us: for we prejudge not your liberty of
conception of that short Confession; but permit it to your selves; whatsoever
may be the private meaning of some who have subscribed; yet their is nothing
in the late interpretation that condemns the Articles of Pearth, and
Episcopacie, as Popish Novations. Ye may voice and reason in an Assembly as
freely concerning them; and give your judgment of them, without prejudice,
notwithstanding of your Oath, according to your own grounds, as you would have
done at the Assembly of Perth. 2. We hope ye be not so ignorant of the estate
of the Kirk, neither will we judge so uncharitablie; as to think you so
corrupt, that in your opinion there is no thing has entered in the Kirk, since
that time designed by you, beside Episcopacie, and Articles of Pearth, which
can be thought prejudicial to the liberty, and purity of the Gospel.

To the eleaventh.
FIrst, ye find fault with us, that we have not upon this occasion, given
you that testimony which we owe to you, of your sincerity; and professing
the Truth, and therefore, to supply our defects, have taken an ample
Testimony to your selves, of pains in Disputing, in writing, and preaching
against Popery, in processing of Papists, and in doing all things which can
be expected from the (...) (...) of frequent prayer to GOD, of humbling your
selves before Him, of your holiness of Life, and Conversation, etc. which have
made us who were desirous to hear that Testimony, rather at the mouths of
others, that we might be no more challenged as deficient in that kind, but
give unto you your deserved praise, to inquyre in matters; where upon, if we
would believe the report of others, we hear, that for all your pains,
Papists, and persons popishly affected, are multiplied, and Papistrie increased
in your town, more than, in any other town of the Kingdom, and no less
under your Ministry, than any time before, since the Reformation; that there
be in private houses Mosses, Crucifixes, and other monuments of Idolatry; that
ye had not many convers from Popery, that Jesuits, and Priests; are
countenanced there, that your People at home, and your Magistrates abroad,
complain; that ye are but too sparing of your pains in preaching, and often
fill your places with Novices: but this we are sparing to believe, and wish,
that the not employing of your Tongues and Pens, in defense of the Service
book, and Canons, which are so pestred with Popery, (if the seeds of Romish
Heresy Superstition, Ido latrie, and Papal tyranny come under that censure)
and your willingness to join with the Kirk and Kingdom, in Fasting an
Humiliation, had been also Testimonies of your sincerity against Popery. 2.
The laudable means of preaching, praying, etc. which we wish may be still in
all faythfulnesse used by you, may very well agree with the renewing of our
Covenant with God, aod both beeiug joined, have, in a short time past, produced
more powerful effects, to the comfort of many thousandss, than all our
prayers and preaching have done for a long time before: which testify, That as
it is warranted by the Word of GOD; so the motion has proceeded from GOD. All
the Arguments and subtilities that can be devised, will never make a People,
(who at this time have found GOD dwelling, and working in their hearts) to
think the contrary. 3. The natural inclination of people to Popery, and the
persuasion of others of their disposition, may make the people to conceive
other ways of the Service book, and Canons, that ere it be long, they may be
brought in, in a fair and legal way: and therefore, it is necessary, for
preventing of those, and other Evils of that kind, that the Subjects join in
a Covenant, both for themselves, and their Posterity.

To the twelfth.
FIrst, We have ever preached according to our measure, and have given example
of Reverence to Authority, and the LORDS Service; but we neither acknowledge
the usurped authority of Prelates, for lawful Authority, nor the Service
Book, for the LORDS Service. And therefore, it was so much the more
intolerable for the Prelates, without Authority from the Kirk, or Parliament,
to bring in the Service book into GOD'S own House, upon the LORD'S own Day.
Which makes it nothing strange, that people zealous of the Truth, and of the
Service of GOD, were stirred up to oppose: and we are very confident that
those that have opposed, do bear as loyal respect to the Kings Majesty, and
will be as loath to provoke him to just wrath, as their Opposites are. In the
mean time, why do ye not acknowledge, that the children were higher provoked
to wrath, by the Prelates, whom ye account Reverend and holy Fathers? 2. As
the preservation of our own private Possession, from invasion of others,
belongs to our selves, under the Kings protection; so the keeping of GODS
House, from pollution and Superstition, belongs to Authority, to the
Community of the Faithful, and to every one in his own Place and Order. 3.
We told you before, That we did no more allow Violence of that kind, nor we
did allow the foul Aspersions of Rebellion, ^eresie, Schism and Perjurie, put
upon the Noblemen, and remnant Covenanters. And where ye ask of us, Why
these tumults are not publicly by us condemned, and rebuked? We ask again
of you, why ye did not condemn and rebuke such dealing, since that it is no
less Transgression, both against the sixth, and nynt Command, than the other
is against the sixth? And whereas ye are now so peremptory, in drawing a
Declaration from us, answerable to that which ye have given concerning the
foresaid aspersions and Calumnies, we having no Commission, to declare the
minds of others in this point, or to give Documents, for our own private
judgment, do heartily disallow every Wrong of that kind. As for the
Apology of Doctor John Forbes of Corse, seeing the Wrong has been done not
unto some few particulare persons, such as ye say have been wronged by some of
the people; but unto the body of the Kingdom, consisting of Noblemen,
Barons, etc. who are highly offended thereby, it were in us Presumption, and
without the bounds of our Calling, to take upon us, to receive any Declaration
of that kind, especially wherein so many things are reprooveable; as first,
That his bitter speeches were occasioned by some printed books, affirming,
that Episcopacie and Perth Articles, were antichristian and abominable.
Supposing it were true, did he think the Noblemen and whole Covenanters, to be
the Authors of those Books? And was this dealing agreeable to that Christian
meekness so much required of us before? The Writers of those printed Books,
are not the first who have spoken so. For Master Knox spared not, (in a Letter
of his) to call this Kneeling, A Diabolical invention. Secoudly; The swearing
of forbearance of the practice of Perth articles and the confirmation of the
said doctrine which we neither deny, nor affirm, to be imported in the old
Covenant, but only in the interpretation thereof, we de clare. That Promise
is only made, to forbear for a tyms does not deserve so bitter a censure, as
this Apology bears upon us. 3. If the King's Majesty, Council, or the
subjects of Scotland, had asked his opinion and advice, he he might have used
the greater liberty. 4. It is ill apologized, to call it an holy indignation;
and worse defended; since it is such a wrath as works not the righteousness
of GOD. 5. Whereas he desires to be accounted in the number of these, qui
proficiendo scribunt and scribendo proficium, we could wish that he had
profited better by writing, than he has done by writing his Irenicum first,
and now this his Warning, after his Irenicum; for which if he make no better
Apology, than confessing asperitis of words, proceeding from an holy
indignation, it will come to pass of his Apology, as it fared with his
Irenicum, unto which was applied fitly, what was spoken in the like case, Aut
fabrum forceps, aut ars ignara fefellit.
(...) voluit cudere cudit (...).
6. Whereas ye desire us, to do the like, if ye mean of us personally, we
have declared our judgment, and shall be careful to approve our selves to
GOD, and the consciences of all men, in every such duty: and if ye mean
us, and those that sent us, we shall not fail to to report unto them, what
ye desire, although our Commission from you had been more acceptable, if ye had
spoken more reverently of our Confession and Covenant, than ye have been
pleased to do, in the words of your desire, and had put your hand unto the
Covenant; which would presently have joined us in a greater Affection, and made
way for union in judgment, and perfect peace, which is the desire of our
Souls.

To the thirteenth.
Ye pretended a threefolde Scandal, which should follow upon your
Subscription. 1. The scandal of dissenting from other reformed Kirkes, and
famous Divines. 2. The scandal of dissenting from Anthoritie. 3. The Scandal
of Perjurie,. We answered, That the controverted words of the Covenant being
rightly conceived, and interpreted according to their true meaning, and not
after the gloss which ye have put upon them, do put you out of danger of all
the three Scandalls, which ye seem to acknowledge of the first two, and may
by the like reason acknowledge of the third, of Perjurie. We dispute not of the
lawfulness of the Oath given at your Admission, by what Authority it was
exacted, with what conscience it was given, nor how ye can answer for the
scandal risen thereupon: but conceaving it according to your own grounds,
none of you will say, that ye have sworn the perpetual Approbation and
Practice of those things which ye esteem to be indifferent, what-soever bad
consequent of Popery, Idolatry, Superstition, or scandal should follow
thereupon: we speak here only of things Indifferent, in your own
judgment; for ye have declared before. that ye think the Ministration of
the Sacraments in piivate places, no more indifferent: and therefore, cannot
forbear the practice of these, although your Ordinary, and other lawful
Superiors, should will you to do so; wherein Pearths Assembly for which you
stand, is wronged by you two ways: 1. That ye differ in judgment from them,
about the indifferenc^e of the five Articles; and next, that at the will of
your Ordinary, and we know not what other lawful Superiors, ye are ready
to forbear the practice of these things which the Assembly has appointed to
be observed. What Oaths you have given at your admission, we know not,
because their is no ordinance made, Civil or Ecclesiasticke, appointing any
such oath, and because the Prelates, who arrogated that power, presented to the
intrants diverse models of Articles, to be subscribed, dealing with some more
hardly, and with others more favorably, according to their own diverse
motives, and considerations.

For some immediately after P^rth Assembly, without any warrant from the Kirk
or Parliament, were made to swear at their admission, that they should both in
private and public maintain Episcopal Jurisdiction, and in their private
and public prayers, commend the Prelates to Gods merciful Protection; that
they should subject themselves to the Orders that presently were in the Kirk,
or by the consent of the said Kirk, should be lawfully established, The word
lawfully; was not in the Principal first subscribed, (as we have learned) and
if it had been expressed, it is all one, for the Superiors were Judges to this
lawfulness and unlawfulness. We will not labor to reconcile every Oath
given by Ministers, at their entry with the present Covenant; but wish, and
exhort rather, that they may be recalled, and repented of, as things for
which they cannot answer before a general Assembly,

To the fourteenth.
IF the words of the Covenant be plain, concerning the mere forbearance, and
speak nothing of the unlawfulness, no man's thoughts can make a change. 2. By
this Reply ye wrong your selves, in forging from the words of the Covenant,
impediments, and drawing stumbling blocks in your own way to hinder your
Subscription; ye wrong the subscribers, in changing the state of the question,
and in making a divorce betwixt Religion and the Kings Authority, which the
Covenant joyneth together. hand in hand: and, most of all, ye wrong the Kings
Majesty, in bringing him upon the Stage, before his subjects, in whose minds
ye would beget, and breed susspitions, of opposing the Truth, of making
innovation of Religion, and of dealing with his subjects contrary to his laws
and Proclamations and contrary to the Oath at his Coronation. We are not here
seeking inscitiae (...), or a starting hole of ignorance, or the smalllest
disloyalty of affection; but would willingly decline that for the present,
which neither his Majesty's wisdom, nor the prudence of Statesmen: nor the
modesty of good Subjects, will allow you or us to dispute. The Crowns and
Scepters of Kings would be more tenderly tonched, than the ordinary Subjects
of School Disputes. The naked naming, and bare rpoposall of certain
suppositions, such (as some are made by you) cannot but reflex upon Authority,
and sound harsh in the ears of all his Majesty's good Subjects who wish, he
may long and prosperously reign over us. 3. His Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel, has proven more favorable to this cause, of maintaining the
reformed Religion, than many Pastors, whom by reason of their place and
Calling, it beeseemed to go before others; and although according to their wonted
custom, they gave warrant, to make his Majesty's Proclamation, yet on good
grounds remonstrated unto them by the Supplicants, they willingly refused
their Approbation, thereof; hoping that his Majesty should be moved to give
greater satisfaction thereafter: and this is not our saying, but a public
doing, before many honorable witnesses; of which number, some were directed
unto you, whose report ye have no reason to call in question. 4, It becomes
us, to judge charitably of the intentions of our Superiors; but most of all, of
the Intentions of our dread Sovereign. Yet if that hold good which the
Supplicants have offered to prove, that the Service book, and Canons, contain
a real innovation of Religion we must judge otherwise, de condition operis,
of the matters contained in the book than de intention operant is, of his
Majesty's intention; although the inten tion of the Prelates and their associats,
the Authors and Contrivers of the Books be most justly suspected by us. 5. It
is no delight to us, and can be but small comfort to you, to mention the
wrongs, which by you are done to us all who have joined in this Covenant, and
do adhere to the Religion as it was reformed in this Land; in your estimation
and wrytings, we are rebellious perjured, heretics. schismatics, blind
guides, seducers, miserable interpreters, ignorants: shall such men as these
be your reverend Brethren? Is this your meekness and charity? Is this the
duty ye expect from us? But setting these aside, ye have wronged us, in
withholding your hand and help from so good a Cause, of purging Religion, and
reforming the Kirk from so many gross Abuses, and opposing all those who have
modestly labored for Reformation Your speeches in private, in your chambers,
beds of sickness, and in your missives, and in public, at tables and in
Synods, which are come to our knowledge; we wish rather should be remembered,
and repented of, by your selves, than be recited by us, who desire not to work
you any trouble. 6. Although there be a perpotuall harmony betwixt the Word and
Works of GOD, sarre contrary to that which we find to be amongst the
children of men; yet often it comes to pass, that the Word and Warnings of
GOD, which we hear with our ears, are not believed, till we behold with our
eyes, the plain Commentaries thereof, in his Works. Many Proofs and notable
Documents have been observed of the Finger of GOD, in the Work in hand, the
Characters of the gaeat Works of GOD'S, more than ordinary Providence, since
the beginning, are legible here. Then did the LORD bgin this work, when the
Adversaries were raised to a great hight, and become intolerably insolent. The
beginnings were small, and in the eyes of the world contemptible; such as use
to be the beginnings not of the works of men, but of the magnificke Works of
GOD: the power of GOD sensible in the hearts of many, and manifested by the
joy; the tearesand cries of many thousands, at the solemn renewing of this
Covenant, has been a matter of admiration and amazement, never to be
forgotten, to many wise and ancient Pastors and Professors, who did also find
an unwonted flame, warming their own breasts; the plots and workings of the
adversary, have wroug^ against their own projects, and have served ^or our
ends, m^e than all that have been thought, or done by our selves, that we
may justly say, what they devysed, for evil, the LORD has turned to good:
many thousands conveened, diverse times, in one place, have been kept in such
order and quietness, without the smallest trouble, in such soberness and
temperance, without excess or riot, that hardly can History furnish a
Parallel, and what effects there be already throughout the Land, of Piety in
domestic worship, in observing the exercises of Religion. in public, of
soberness in diet and appatrell, and of righteousness and concord, we trust
shall be sensible by the Blessings of GOD upon us, and shall be examplarie to
the Posterity, These we present unto you, and unto all, as a Commentary,
written by the LORD'S own hand; wishing again, that neither ye nor others,
be sound fighting against GOD, Who so is wise, and will observe these things,
even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm 107. 43. Lord;
when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see but they shall see, and he
ashamed for their envy at the people. Is. 26. 11.

Master Alexander Henderson, Minister at Leuchars.
Master David Dickson, Minister at Irwin.


