A lamentable new Ballad upon the Earl of Essex his death.
To the tune of, Essex last goodnight.


ALL you that cry, O hone O, hone,
come now and sing, O Lord with me,
For why our Jewel is from us gone,
the valiant Knight of Chivalry:
Of rich and poor beloved was he,
in time an honorable Knight:
When by our Laws condemned was he,
and lately took his last goodnight.
Count him not like to Campion,
(these traitorous men) or Babington,
Nor like the Eale of Westmerland,
by whom a number were undone:
He never yet hurt mothers son*
his quarrel still maintained the right,
Which makes the tears my cheeks down run
when I think on his last goodnight.
The Portingals can witness be.
his Dagger at Lisbone gate he flung:
And like a Knight of Chivalry,
his Chain upon the same he hung:
Would God that he would thither come,
^o fetch them both in honor right,
Which thing was by his honor done,
yet lately took his last goodnight.
The Frenchmen they can testify,
the Town of Gourney h^ took in,
And marched to Roane immediately.
not caring for his foes a pin:
With bullets then he pierced their skin,
and made them flee far from his sight,
He at that time did credit win*
and now has taken his last goodnight.
And stately Cales can witness well,
even by his Proclamation right:
He did command them all straightly,
to have a care of Infants lives:
That none should ravish Maid nor Wife,
which was against their order right,
Therefore they prayed for his long life,
which lately took his last goodnight.
Would God he had nere Ireland known,
nor set his feet on Flaunders ground:
Then might we well enjoy our own,
where now our Jewel will not be found,
Which makes our woes still to abound,
trickling with salt tears in our sight,
To hear his name in our ears to sound,
Lord Deverevx took his last goodnight,
Ashwensday on that dismal day,
when he came forth of his chamber door
Upon a Scaffold there he saw.
his headsman standing him before,
The Nobles all they did deplore,
shedding their salt tears in his sight,
He said farewell to rich and poor,
at his good morrow and goodnight.
My Lords, quoth he, you stand but by,
to see perform^nce of the Law,
It Is I that have deserved to die,
and yield my life unto the blow*
I have deserved to die* I know,
but nere against my Countries right,
Nor to my Queen was never foe*
upon my death at my goodnight.
Farewell Elizabeth my gracious Queen,
God bless thee and thy Council all:
Farewell you Knights of Chivalry,
farewell my Soldiers stout and tall,
Farewell the Co^^^^^ great and small,
into the hands of men I light,
My life shall make amends for all,
for Essex bids the world goodnight.
Farewell dear wife and children three,
farewell my young and tender son,
Comfort your selves, mourn not for me,
although your fall be now begun:
My time is come the glass is run
comfort your selves in former light,
Seeing by my fall you are undone,
your father bids the world good night.
Derick, thou know, at Cales I saved
thy life, lost for a Rape there done,
Which thou thy self can testify,
thine own hand three and twenty hung,
But now thou see my life is come,
by chance into thy hands I light,
Strike out the blow that I may know,
thou Essex loved at his goodnight.
When England counted me a Papist,
the works of Papists I defy,
I nere worshipped Saint, nor Angel in heaven
nor to the Virgin Mary I,
But to Christ, which for my sins did die,
trickling with sad tears in his sight,
Spreading my arms to God on high,
Lord Jesus receive my soul this night.
FINIS.
Printed at London For Cuthb^^^ Wright.


