A short description of Antichrist unto the Nobility of England, and to all
my brethren and contreymen borne and dwelling therein, with a warning to see
to, that they be not deceived by the hypocrisy and crafty conueyaunce of the
Clergy.

Ioh. 10. He that is of God, hears the word of God.

OH Lord God / although such lords have dominion over us / as know the not
/ yet grant that we may hope only in the / and keep thy name in remembrance.
For behold the Lord will go out of his habitation and visit the wickedness of
them that dwell upon the earth. Esa. 26.
He will discover the blood that she has devoured / she shall never hyde them
that she has murdered. Muster you and gather you / muster you and gather you?
Take your counsel together. Yet must your counsel come to naught. Go in
hand withal / yet shall it it not prosper / except Emanuel / Esa. 8.
that is / God be with us. For there is no prudence / there is no wisdom / there
is no counsel against the LORD.

THere is nothing more perilouse (right honorable Lords) ne yet more
pernicious and evil to the Christian man's religion, then so to be corrupted,
poisoned, and blinded in his understanding and judgment, that he estemeth and
judges euel in the stead of good, error in the stead of verity, cloked
superstition in the stead of Christ's true religion, painted hypocrisy in the
stead of godly virtue, manifest and open ydolatry in the stead of true
worshipping of God, men's dreams and traditions in the stead of Gods most holy
laws and ordinances, a common custom (long time used of our forfathers) instead of a sure ground and firm foundation of our christen faith, And finally
to accept and take Antichrist, the Man of sin, and child of perdition (as
Paul names him) in the stead of God and of Christ. Who nevertheless is most
contrary to God, and most hateful enemy to Christ, in all his doctrines,
works and conditions. Such erroneous, blind, and corrupt judgments, God
(by his Prophet Esaias) pronounces accursed saying: Esa. 5.
Woe be to you that say good is evil, and evil is good: light is darkness,
and darkness is light. etc. Also the Apostle S. Paul fearing like error and
corruption in judgment, to come to the Corinthes, thorough the wicked doctrine
of subtle and false preachers, 2. Cor. 11.
exorteth the Corinthes to beware of deceauers, saying: I fear that it come to
pass, that as the serpente deceived Eua thorough his subtlety, even so your
wits should be corrupted from the singleness that you had toward Christ.
For false Apostles (says he) are deceatfull workers, and fashion them selves
like unto the Apostles of Christ. And no merueil for Satan him self is
changed into the fashion of an Angel of light? Therefore it is no great thing,
though his ministres fashion them selves like as they were the ministers of
righteousness. Whose end shall be according to their works.

Even so (right honorable lords) I can not but fear lest your understandings
and judgments, be now corrupted drawn and carried away from the simplicity
and pureness of sincere understanding and godly judgment which late you had
of Christ, through the crafty persuasions, deceatefull and false illusions of
Antichrist, that has transfigured him self in to the fashion of an Angel of
light. For I am not ignorante that now the monstrouse beast Antichriste,
Satha^s vicar general in earth and all his adulterous generation of vipers,
that be his false Apostles, most subtle and crafty deceauours, and the most
malicious enemies of God and Christ, cease not day nor night with false lies,
colored with cloked hypocrisy, and deceatfull and flatteringe persuasions, to
deceive the Queen's magestie and all you, my lords, of her most honorable
counsel, whereby they might draw her highness and all you, from the godly and
most pure knowleage, which you had in little time past, received of Christ, in
to their fylthy Puddels and vain inue^tions, that they of their own brains
(without any authority of holy scriptures, have invented, to revive and to
stablish the usurped power and bloody kyngedome of Antichrist in this realm.
By whose false doctrines, all the people of this realm shall be drawn from
God, and from our savior Christ to trust in most vain and deceatefull
vanity.

But if, your lordships would both way and ponder, that not only God by his
holy prophets, and Apostles, but also Christ himself admonishes and warns
you and all men, to beware of false preachers and of craftye and subtle
deceauers: your Lordships would be much more circumspecte and well ware, because
that not only the Prophets and Apostles, but also Christ him self, (to who^
you ought to give credence) has warned you to beware of soch deceauers.

And namely because this deceate is not a manifest and plain deceate easily
to be perceived, and known of al men, but so craftly colored and subtylie
painted with dessebled persuasions, and of soch as shall come even in the name
of Christ, and of his holy church. And therefore they shall deceive many, says
Christ. Saint Paul also says: 1. Tim. 4.
In the later times some shall depart from the faith, geuinge ear to the
spirits of error and doctrines of deuylles. 1. Cor. 11.
And the same says that heresies must neades be, that the proved and godly
may be known. Saint Peter also says: that there were wicked Prophets, 2.
Pet. 2
as there shall be false masters among you that shall bring in sects of
perdition, that shall deny the Lord that has boughte them. Also S. Johan
says. 2. Ioh. 4
Antichriste is come, and that there be many Antichrists. Consideringe that the
Prophets of God, Christ, and his Apostles, have this certenly-and diligently
admonisshed and warned you and all men, of false preachers and of leenge
masters that depart from the faith / and bring in sects of perdicion / and
of soch that will come in the name of Christ / Math. 24
like as they did preach his true doctrine / which nevertheless preach their
own dreams and the doctrines of devils, denyeng the lord that brought them /
and in all things follow the spirits of error. 1. Tim. 4.
It behooves your Lordships, and it is the part and most bounden duty of
every Christen man, diligently to search out these false Prophets, lyenge
masters, and to labor studiously, to know which be the doctrines of devils,
and spirits of error, according to the admonition and warninge of the
Prophets, of Christ / and of the Apostles given to them, that they may
circumspectly eschew and avoid them that they be not deceived by them and
their doctrines.

And because in the reign of Edward the sixte of famous memory, by the
consent of his honorable counsel, there was a doctrine preached and religion
received in this realm of England, which now is rejected and banisshed as a
doctrine of the devil, and as heresye, and false religion: And a another
doctrine and religion received, to the former religion and doctrine, direct
and manifest contrary: some me^ therefore will doubt, whether the first doctrine
and religion be godly, or the later doctrine and religion received be the truer
and better to be followed. I will commend unto your godly remembraunces (right
honorable lords) not such doctrines as any new writers call, of their own
heedes, false doctrines, and doctrines of deuyls, or the doctrines of lyenge
masters. But the same doctrines that Christ and his Apostles expressly call
false doctrines, and the doctrines of Deuyls. So that your lordships nor any
other shall have any just cause to be ignorante what be the doctrines of
deuyls, and who be wicked preachers, and lyenge masters, the wicked sect of
Antichrist, and who also is the heed Antichrist. The people serve Antichrist
and yet do not know him.
Although doubtless right honorable lords) I well perceive the multitude of
the worldly people so plaged of God with blindness and hardness of heart, that
all though they with all dyligence study and obedience, daily do serve
Antichriste, the greatest adversary of God and of Christ: yet do they not
know nor understand him to be Antichriste christ, nor do perceive his crafty
illusio^s, his hypocrisy, and disguysed fashons. So that except a man consider
and behold him assuredlye by the light of Gods word, he shall never
understand, epsy, nor perceive him, although he had a subtyle and pregnant
wit, as clear and well seeing eyes, and as craftye a brain as ever had man. He
comes in so disguysed under the color of holiness: Yea and that in the name
of Christ, and under the pretense to condemn al false and erroneous doctrines
and heresies. Which thing all Christen princes, and all other good men, will be
most diligent and glad to do. But herin he most subtilie and shamefully
begileth al men. For he and his adulterouse generation will challenge to him and
to them authority and power only given to determe, discern, and to judge what
is heresy, error, Antichrist in the name of heresy, conde^neth the truth
and what is false doctrine. And by that means, be the doctrine never so true
and godly (if it sou^de any thing against his usurped power, his pride, his
profit, his ungodly decrees and laws made in general Counseils, and other
his false and wicked determinations, and judgments) he will condemn it for
heresy.

And he that preaches it, him will he accurse, calling him the enemy of God,
and of all the holy church, a seditious person, not worthy to dwell in any
comen wealth. But if Emperors, Kings and other civil governors and rulers,
would examine his doctrines, and try them by the light of Gods heavenly word,
and prove all his other procedinges, how they agree with the same. They should
then sone perceive, understand, and know, that he himself (although he
calls him self the head of the church and Christ's vicar upon earth, the
successor of the Apostles) yet should they find and prove him, to be the head
Antichrist, the Archheretique, the man of Sin, and child of perdition: And
al his sects, to be the sects of perdition, that depart from the faith, that
also attend to the spirits of error, denyeng the Lord that bought them.

But for as much (right honorable lords) as no man can well put any diversity
betwixt two extreme co^traries, except he perfitly understand and know both
the contraries, I will first describe and set forth unto your good lordships,
Christ (who is contrary to that wicked Antichrist) according as the holy
scriptures, Ioh. 5.
which (as Christ says) bear true witness of him. And then I will also
paynt in his lively colors, that Arch heretic Antichriste, that extreme
contrary to Christ. But no another wise, then Christ and his Apostles in the
holy scriptures have reveled and evidently expressed and declared him. So that
the one contrary compared and set nere to the other contrary, shall express,
declare and set forth the other, more evidently, plainly, and more aparauntly.

First, Christ is as much to say, Christ.
as anointed, (as Iesues Christ was of God the father) not with oil and
cream coniured of our Bishops, but with the holy Ghost, who in the holy
scriptures, Psalm. 44 and. 88.
is called the oil of gladness: by whom God enlighteneth, enstructeth and
teaches his holy Church, of the which he has appointed and authorized,
Christ to be the Supreme head, King, Phil. 2.
Hyghbisshop, and everlasting Priest. Who being equal with God his father, did
vouchsafe of his mere mercy and good will, to descend from heaven, and took on
him our vile nature: not forsaking his divine nature, but joining them
together, (both natures remaining not diminished, hurt or altered) and became a
perfect man, in all natural miseries like unto us except only sin. To. 5.8
Col. 2.
And even then when we were his enemies he reuyued us, and offered himself to
God his father upon the cross, as a sacrifice to be slain for the redemption
of our sins. Heb. 10
By which this his only one sacrifice ones performed for us, (not for a little
season, but for ever) he has made holy and perfect them that be and shall be
made holy and perfect. And by this means he has reconcyled us to God his
father, Ephesians. 2.
pacifienge his fathers wrath, that then was against us, thorough his
bloodshedinge, and paynfull death. And he that was without sin, became a full,
2. Cor. 5.
just, and perfect satisfaction for our sins. Ephesians. 2. Col. 2.
And has taken away the curse and condemnation of the law, delyueringe us
from the cruel curse and judgment thereof. And after through his own power,
he overcame death, and ascended to heaven, where he continues our advocate,
mediatoure, and only savior from our sins. Joan. 10.
Our only way and door by the which we must enter into eternal joys. To
whom only, we be bound to give the honor and thanks for our redemption from
sin, hell, Ezech. 43 Luke 2.
and death everlasting: And therefore to obey and serve him all the days of
our life in holiness and righteousness, according to our calling. Herin have
I described and declared to your honorable lordships our redemer and only
savior Jesus Christ, and his only office and benefits most mercifully
exhibeted and done to us. By the which description, your Lordships may / with
much more facility and ease, have certain and sure understanding and knowledge
of Antichrist, the other extreme contrary to Christ.

This Antichriste must not be understood and taken (right honorable Lords)
for one natural man, what is Antichrist.
that by nature is as all other be, a miserable sinner, or that he should be a
certain wicked person, that should be begotten betwixt a Freere and a Nonne, or
betwixt a Monk and a Nonne, according to old wives fables and winter tales.
But this name Antichriste, is the name of a mystery and office perteininge to
a mystical body, whereof the principal minister is called the chief
Antichriste, as all the other members of the same faction, mystery and office,
be also Antichrists. All which receive power, authority, and office, from
their heed Antichriste, that in all his doctrines, manners, and lyuinge, is mere
contrary to Christ. For even as that congregation is the mystical body of
Christ, whereof he is the supreme heed, that has received the true and sincere
preachinge of the law and of the gospel, and live according to the preachinge
of the same, and also have the sacraments duly administered unto them,
according to Christ's institution of the same: The description of Antichriste.
Even so is that malignaunt church and congregation the mystical body of
Antichriste, that has not amongst them the true and sincere preaching of the
Law and of the Gospel, ne yet the sacraments duly administered unto them,
according to Christ's institution of them, ne yet according to the practice
of the Apostles, nor of the primative church, nor the same can be content to
live according to the rule and doctrine of Gods heavenly word: nor suffer any
other to live according to the same: but will compel the^ with torments to
receive a new religion, that must consiste other in vain things which be of
no commodity or profit to any man either spiritual or temporal: or else it is
manifest wicked and repugnau^t to Gods holy word. And first touching their
vain things, and deed ceremonies of their religion, that be of no commodity
or profit to any man except only to the sluttishe sect of perdition. I note
all their popish traditions of confirmacion of young children with oyntinge of
oil and cream, and with a ragge knitte about the neck of the young babe,
the christeninge of belles, the halowinge of oil and cream, ye halowinge of
churches of churchyardes, of chalices, of vestime^tes, of aultares, of aultare
clothes, of salt, of bread, of fiere, of ashes, of water, of candles, of
palm sticks, Judas bells with candels blowe^ out at the end of every Psalm
and lesson, crepinge to the cross with eggs and apples, dispelinge with a
white rod, wasshinge of aultares. Of all which things the holy scriptures
command not one to be done, although in this church of Antichrist they be
straytly commanded to be used. And yet I know no wise man yt will or can praise
the comoditie or profit that comes thereof to any man, but only to the priest
yt has ye ca^dles eggs. etc. yt be offered unto him. And although there rises
not any commodity or profit other spiritual or temporal to any man: yet as I
have said, they be straytly commanded to be observed / contrary to Gods
co^maun^deme^t yt says: Deuteronomy. 12
That which I commau^de you, yt only take heed do to the Lord, Putth on naught
thereto.

Not withstandinge which commandment / because Antichriste would partly set
forth his own nature and property, that is, to be contrary and disobedient to
God and Christ, he has erected these new holy things, never of God
commanded. And therefore as they be not of God, so be they of no commodity or
profit to any of the people of God.

why Antichrist commands vanities.
But yet there is some consideration wherefore Antichriste has commanded these
vain things to be done. One is, that he would have his filthy generation to be
had in estimation of the worldly babes, because that they have received soch
holiness from his holy fatherhood, that they may sanctify and make holy, that
God has hallowed already, like as the things of Gods creation were not
sufficientlye hallowed through his eternal word whereby he created them.
Exalts not he himself above God, honorable lords, that takes upon him to
add holiness to that which God has sufficiently hallowed? Be not these his
halowinges of Gods creatures a necessary point perteininge to the vocation of a
spiritual pastoure / that has cure and charge of souls? Or be they not
necessary things to be done of a Christen man / towchinge his vocation and
duty to be done toward God and toward his neighbor And although they be
worthy rather to be laghed at and mocked / yet by these his vanities he
occupies the time hat should be spente in the instruction and teachinge the
people in the law and the Gospel.

Moreover by these, as also by many other their doings / they declare their
diligente cure and study that they have to obey Gods commandment given to
them to instruct and to teach the people Gods word, that leave the gospel
vnpreached and occupy the hearts and minds of the people with soch trifles
and vanities. But because these vain things do not sufficiently reuele this
wicked Antichriste and his sect. That he may be known of all men, I will
commend to your memories (honorable lords) some of his false doctrines: Not
soch as I of mine own brain, call false doctrines and the doctrines of
deuels, and of soch as depart from the faith, and be lyeng masters, and give
ear to the spirits of error: But soch doctrines as Christ and his Apostles
note to be the doctrines of deuels, and of soch as by the same doctrines shall
deceive (...), and shall cause many to follow the sp^tes of error. So that
every man that hears soch doctrines preached, may boldlye say, that the
preachers thereof be false preachers and sects of perdition, that they be the
adulterouse generation of Antichrist, that these many years have deceived and
bewitched the world.

And although Christ and his Apostles have manifestly declared, and evidently
set forth to the world the said doctrines to be the doctrines of deuels and of
them that depart from the faith, and the very self same doctrines whereby
Antichriste and his filthy sect should deceive many Yet soch has been the
blindness of the world, that they can not understand nor perceive those
doctrines, to be the same wicked doctrines, whereof, Christ and his Apostles
admonished the^ and al men to beware: not only because he colors his
doctrines with false painted gloses, Joan. 3.
but also because the world loves darkness moare the^ the light, And also to
verify Christ's words of prophecy to be truly fulfilled in them saying: I
am come in my fathers name and you receive me not. Iaon. 5.
But if a another shall come in his own name, him will you receive.

Now touching the false doctrines of Antichriste Saint Paul says: 1. Tim. 4
The spirit manifestly shows that in the last times, certain men shall depart
or go away from the faith, attending or giving ear to the spirits of error
and doctrines of deuels, prohibitinge to mary, and commanding to absteyne from
meats, that God has created to be received of them that believe and know the
truth, with thanks geuinge. By this doctrine of saint Paul manifestlye
appears (honorable Lords) that the forbiddinge of marriage is the doctrine of
deuels. For God in paradise first ordained marriage, saying: It is not good for
man to be by himself alone. Let us make to him a helper to bear him company,
and so forth as it appears in the text. Genesis 2.
Consideringe that God said: It is not good for man to be alone, doutles it is
not good generally, for man to be alone without his help. Esa. 45
And the Prophet Esaias curses all them that speak against their maker. Noma^
therefore durst be so bold to forbid marriage to any people except only
Antichrist and his fluttish and shameless sect, which ever be against God and
Christ. Also because it was not good for man to be alone without his wife in
the state of innoce^cie: It is not now good but much worse to be without a
wife, when man is fallen by sin, being ye flesh more frail and prone to
sin. And therefore that man that has not the especial gift of chastity and
will live alone, and not take a wife. The same not only contemns Gods
merciful ordinance made for man in the state of innocence, but also
despises Gods louinge benefit and remedy provided for the infirmity of man,
whereby he might avoid fornication, and other wicked lusts forbidden by God:
according to Saint Paul's doctrine saying: 1. Cor. 7.
To avoid fornication, let every man (exceptinge not priests) have his wife,
and every woman (exceptinge not vowasses) have her husband. And because
marriage is Gods ordinance and merciful remedy provided for all men, that
have not the gift of chastity: It is therefore good for every man, that have
not received the gift of chastity to have a wife, namely because it is Gods
merciful provision and ordinance provided for the help of man, and
commanded in the holy scriptures by Gods holy spirit, where no evil thing
can be commanded.

And also the same state of matrimony in Christ's religion is praised of the
Apostle, saying: Marriage is honorable, Heb. 13.
and the bed not defiled. Christ also approuinge the same estate in that he was
borne of a virgin in marriage, Luc. 1.
and not of a virgin out of marriage. Joan. 2.
And also Christ him self in his godly presence honored matrimony with a
great miracle done in Cana, where he turned water in to wine. Abraham the
father of all beleuers, and other the patriarchs and Prophets had lawful wives
that were not disproued of God, nor was no impedimente unto them, but that they
had the spirit of prophecy and ye faruoure of God. Wherefore then should our
unlearned priests refuse to marye wives specially because all men perceive by
their lyuinge, that they have not the gift of chastity? But for so much as
Paul says, honorable lords, Tit. 3
that all thing (namely of Gods creation and ordinance) is pure and good to
them whose consciences be pure and good. All me^ that know any thing in the
holy scriptures know and certainly believe, that if our Antichristian priests
were pure and clean toward God, his ordinance of matrimony would not be
forsaken of them. But for as much as by the residew of their conditions and
qualities, many think them to be soch as Peter writes of, 2. Pet. 2.
that have eyes full of adultery and of the insatiable lust and offense, and
so defiled with filthy lusts. To our English priests, godly matrimony is
another pure nor clean, and therefore are they unworthy of chaste matrimony,
because their consciences be nether pure nor clean. And then be they so cast
of from God that they can not judge chaste matrimony good for the^, although
they can not deny, matrimony to be Gods ordinance, which can not be evil to
a good man. And also they know that as good men, as any that the holy
scriptures praise, were married, and had both wives and childerne.

An objection.
But to this they say, that matrimony is godly so that it be by soch as may
laufully mary. But because they have made vows to live sole and unmarried, they
say, they may not take any wives of their own. But I desire them to show me
whether God requires of the^ any soch vows to be made by the^? Esa. 1.
And also I require of them to show me without any dissimulatio^, hell / by his
most wicked decrees has ordened that every Priest that should be apt to
receive ecclesiastical promotion should be with in soch orders,

But for a conlusion (right honorable lords) there is no prohibition nor for
biddinge of marriage made to any persons but only to priests and vowesses.
Doutelesse therefore that prohibition of marriage made to them, is the self same
doctrine of deuels that Paul speaks of. And their vows be wicked, because
the vows that they make be proud vows, that they can not render to God, and
soch as they ought rather to ask of God, if he would give them. And therefore
folish vows be they, that displease God, Eccl. 5.
as ye holy ghost says. And if, your Lordships, would well consider, way, and
po^der how much adultery, fornication, deflowringe of virgins, murder of
infantes, and of married men, whoredom and the fylthie sin of buggery have be
committed through these folish and ungodly vows of sole lyuinge, and
prohibitio^ of matrimony made to priests and vowesses, I think, yt nether
your lordships, nor any christian man ca^ otherwise, other judge or say, but yt
this forbiddinge of marriage, is the self same doctrine of deuels whereof Paul
speaks As the same doctrine whereby the Deuel has greatly, and will
maynteyne and fill his kingedome. Beware therefore, my good Lords, of one of
Antichrists wicked doctrines. And note well whether ye have any in your
English clergy that teach that doctrine, and stobernly defend the same And
know ye them to be Antichrists disciples. And although all the heavens cry
out upon them, and all the earth wondereth at their abominable whoredom,
adulterye and fornication, yet be our priests permitted and suffered: nay
rather compelled, to make soch wicked and folishe vows, therewith to mock the
people, that they should not mistrust the^ with their wives, daughters, nor women
servants, because, they say, they will have no another wife but our Lady.

But England can not be ignorant of the multitude of their whores and
bastardes. 1. Cor. 5.
How this agrees with Paul's doctrine, that commands us not to eat with
soche, judge you, my Lords, that should se it reformed. And for your own
honors provide that adultery may be punished with the same punishment that
God ordened adulterye to be punished. Do you doubt whether God did err in
judgment? If you do not think iniquity in God, Wherefore do ye not follow him
in judgment, that can not err nor commau^de any unrighteous.

Saint Paul (right honorable lords) sets forth a another doctrine of
deuels, the abstinence from meats in certain times and days, and for
conscience sake: supposinge the meat to be profane, and ungodly, and against
Gods will and pleasure to be eaten. Soch abstinence from meats Paul calls the
doctrine of deuels, because it is mere contrary to Christ's words, and the
holy scriptures. For meat, says Paul, commends us not to God, 1. Cor. 8.
nether if we eat be we the better, nether if we eat not be we the worse.
Math. 15.
For that which enters in to the mouth defiles not the man: but that which
proceeds out of the heart, says Christ. Also Saint Paul exhorts all men
that they regard not soch ordinances made by men, like as the ordinances
made by God, saying: Collo. 2.
Let no man trouble your conscience about meat and drink. Wherefore, if you
be deed with Christ (says he) from the ordinances of the world, whic as
though ye yet lived in the world, are ye leed with man traditions? Touch not,
taste not, handle not. All which perish through the veraye abuse, after the
commandment and doctrines of men. Which things outwardlye have a similitude
of wisdom by superstition, and humblenes, and by hurting of the body, and in
that they do the flesh no worship to ye need thereof. S. Peter also thought it
not meet for him to eat certain meats that were forbidden in Moses law to be
eaten, as things that were unclean. Act. 10.
To whom in a vision was answer given, that he should not say that thing to
be comen and unclean that God had purified, through his eternal word. Hebr.
13.
It is therefore good, says Paul, to stablish our hearts in grace and not in
meats which profited not them that walked therein.

1. Cor. 10.
Doutles, honorable lords, Saint Paul would not have commanded generally yt we
should eat of all kind of meats yt come to be sold in ye shambles, askinge
no thing what they be, for conscience sake, if it had not ben lawful by Gods
laws to eat of all kinds of meats, and that in all times and days so yt
they be eaten temperatly, for the necessity of the body, and not for wanton
lust to please the flesh, and also eaten with out offense of the weak
brethren, and eaten with thanks geuyng for the same to God that feadeth al
things But who (right honorable lords) has forbode^ these flesh meats, and
whit meats to be eaten in Lent and other prescript times? Even he yt has
usurped power to make offenses and sin of yt which God nor his Apostles,
taught to be sin or offense. Of who^e S. Paul warns you to beware, and to
mark them, and decline from them. For soch says Paul, Romans 13.
sserue not our Lord but their belies. And by pleasant words and blessings
they seduce and begyle the hearts of innocents.

But wherefore has our holy father made restraint of meats to be eaten in
certain times for conscience sake, so manifest contrary to ye doctrine of them
that he bosteth to be his predecessors? Verily that he might set forth his
usurped power. And also that (as S. Peter says) he might make marchaundise
over us in covetousness. 2. Pet. 2.
For money he will give license to eat what you will, and to do what you will.
And therefore all his laws made of restrainte, and forbiddyng of those things
that God left free, are but a plain art and craft deuyse made to begyle the
people of their money. This, most honorable Lords, I have set forth two of
Antichrists false doctrines not after mine own fa^tesie, but as Paul names
them the doctrine of deuels, that you might not be any further deceived by the
preachers of them. And also that you may assuredly, certify your
consciences, that al they that preach and defend the same doctrines, ben
unfeignedly Antichrists disciples, which be spirits of error, that have
departed from the faith: or else the Apostles doctrine is erroneous and false:
But that ca^ not be true. Also our master Christ, admonishes us to beware
lest any mand deceive us. For many shall come, says Christ, in my name
saying: Mat. 24
I am Christ, and shall deceive many. Who is he that comes in Christ's name
saying, I am Christ? None doutles, who be they that say they be Christ.
but he yt usurps to him Christ's office, power, and holiness, which no man
does but the Romish Antichrist and his sluttish sect. Even they that usurp
absolute power given to them to remitte and to forgive sins to the people,
Against the^ that usurp Christ's power and place.
which is the only power, grace and office of Christ, and not of any man.
Wherefore that man that usurps upon him that office of Christ, is the very
same that says: I am Christ, that is, so anointed and authorized of God,
that I have absolute power given me from God, to forgive sins, as Christ
has. For eue^ in soch manner of speaking all his filthy sect, sittinge in
their whorish confessions, boost them selfs that they sit in Gods stydde and
rowme to forgive the sins of soch as confess their sins to them, saying
in their false absolutions in a tongue that the confessed understands not. By
the authority of Peter and Paul, and by the authority to me committed I
forgive the thy sins to me confessed? But nether Peter, ne yet Paul, did
forgive sins by their own authority, grace or power, but only by the
preaching of the gospel. Act. 4.
As Peter says: there is no another name under heaven given unto men, nether is
there any other by whom we must be saved, Act. 10
but the name of Jesus Christ. For to him all the prophets bear witness
(says Peter) remission of sin to be had through his name. Also, says
Paul, be it known unto you men and brethren, Act. 13.
that through this man (meaning Christ) remission of sins is preached, and
that by him all that believe are justified from all things from the which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses. For he is the lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the people / says Joan baptiste. Ioh. 1.
And eue^ so says the Angel to our lady, Math. 1.
that he shall save his people from their sins. Wherefore nether by the
authority of Peter / nor of Paul, ne yet by any absolute authority to them
committed, except by the authority of preachinge of the gospel to the people,
that truly repent, beleuinge constantly to have remission of their sins by
the deeth and bloodshedinge of Jesus Christ, has other bishop or priest any
authority to forgive sin.

Lamente therefore (my Lords) the miserable state of this realm, consideringe
that there can be no remission of sins given, but only through the preaching
of the gospel, which none of our priests through all the realm do practice
in their whorish confessions, nor yet know they what is a gospel, much less
ca^ they preach the gospel. Halas, by what means do these beasts of the belly
give remission of sins to the people, when they speak not one word of
Christ that the confessed does understand or perceive. But in their
absolutions they give penance to the confessed, fasting certain days,
lyplabour in saying of things they understand not, masses to be said, and
alms to be given for the satisfaction of their sins. Thus burye they
Christ's passion, and deeth, and bloodshedinge, which only be our satisfaction
for our sins. And no another can be. And although God, by his prophet Esai,
commands all pastors that have the spiritual charge of souls, Esai. 43.
to show unto his people their sins, saying: Cry and cease not. Lift up thy
voice as a trumpet, Esai. 58.
and show my people their sins. Notwithstanding this commandment of God
given to all them that have spiritual charge of souls, Antichriste myndinge
to show to the world, that he thinks him self wiser the^ God, and that he
can make more godly and wholesome provision for soul health then God, has made
a law that all people of every kind once in the year at ye leest, shall
confess and show their sins to their own Pastor or curate. God commands
that the pastoure shall show to the people their sins. But Antichriste
commands clean contrary, that the people shall show their sins to their
curates. By these means, the people for the most part believe that they have
remission of their sins, because they have nombred their sins in to the
ears of their confessoure. Or else for what cause should we confess the^ to
our curates? For every man knows what is sin, and that he shall be damned if
he forsake not his sin, if the priests execute the commandment of God
given by Esai. Esai 58.
But the simple people think verily that when the curate pronounces a certain
sownde and voice of words over their beedes which they think is an absolutio^
from their sins, although they understand not one word what he says, yet
believe they that the words that he speaks having his hand upon their
heedes have virtue and power, to forgive to them their sins: even because the
priest sitting in Gods stead (as they think, and as the priests boaste them
selfs to do) pronounces and speaks them. Wherein all be deceived lamentablye.

Assured means whereby every man may have remission of sins.
But doutles, he that earnestly repents his sinful life, fully minded never
after to return to ye same, and the^ trusts constantly to Gods promise made
of remission of sins to him, for the passion and deeth of our savior
Christ / the same has remission of his sin althouth he never nombre them in
to the ear of any priest. And then if he fealinge and perceauinge true,
repentance and faith in his heart, will resort to any priest to receive
absolution and remission of his sins, whereof he is assured by Gods promise,
ye same declares himself to mistrust Gods promise made to him of remission of
his sins, and then is he an infidele, that by no means can have remission of
his sins. And if he be not fully minded to forsake his former evil life, and
never to return to the same again, then can he not have any trust to have
remission of his sins, because that is promised to them only that for ever
forsake their sins. And therefore, if he minds not to forsake his sins, he
goes in vain to his curate to have remission of his sins. And if he
repents his sins and believes, as I have said, then does he evil to fatch
remission of his sins, whereof he is assured already by Gods promise to be
forgeuen. And therefore his goinge to his curate to be confessed is veraye vain
and a point of infidelity.

Oh that the curates of England, would theye and observe Gods commandment,
given to them by the mouth of his prophet Esaia. But that will they never
(...). But their master Antichrists commandments will they deligently
obey, although they bring no commodity spiritual or temporal to any man,
sauinge to their fylthie paunches. Every man may well perceive, wherefore they
be so gready to hold and to maynteyne this whorish confession, Th causes why
the clergy so earnestly maynteyne auriculer confession.
and authority to hear testamentary causes etc. Over and besides that they
provide for them selfs in their confessions, where they may be sped of a
whore or two, all the year after. Yet by these their co^fessio^s, the chief
Antichrist keeps his sluttish sect of perdition in estimation with the comen
people, in whose co^scie^ces they sit as God, and execute Antichrists
office, that is to fill hell with souls. And so in their confessions be ever
ready to work sedition and treason against both Emperor king, and al other
governors, of that Empire, realm, and dominion, that either co^tendeth or
strives with their holy father Antichriste, or speaks against his usurped
power, his false and crafty deceated wicked doctrines, whereby he seduceth and
begyleth all men for the most part: leading them with a false confidence and
faith, to have remission of their sins, because they declare them to his
filthy generation of serpents. And by these means innumerable souls be le^
(...) to hell. And much sedition and treason is wroughte, whereby much
bloodshedinge and murder is brought to pass to the utter subversion and
destruction of many Realms. As the last sedicion stirred up in ye North, in
Somerset shire, and Devonshire, and in other parts of this Realm, be most
miserable monime^tes and witnesses. And this is not their only comen practice
practiced with us in England: but also the like practice, was practiced with
the Princes of Germany, that will never suffer their treaso^s to be out of ma^s
memory.

Wherefore this whorish confession, whereof proceeds so much evil and mischefe
to all realms, which also brings no profit with it, but seduceth and
begyleth many, ought to be banished and abolished, although they say, that
they cannot well give medicine, or plaster, that shall be wholesome or
profitable, except they also know the particular disease and grief Which
answer our holy father himself desproueth. For he gives clean remission, a
prenaet a culpa, that is from pain and sin, to the^ that never showed their
offenses to him, and heals all sickenesses, and sores, with this one
plaster, that is, all that be truly sorry and penitente for their sins, and
be confessed to a priest have clean remission. As for faith in our savior
Jesus Christ, it forces not: so thou be confessed, it makes no matter
whether thou believe in Christ or no. And yet without Christ are we all for
ever: remidiles damned.

Why do ye, right honorable lords / admit this blasphemous doctrine, of
remission of sins without faith in Christ. All that be truly sorry for their
sins, entendinge through Gods help / never to return to the same, and put
their trust and faith in Christ's blood for the remission of their sins, have
a general pardon granted unto them by God him self, by his promise, though
they never come to priests ear, which is a sure bull, nor sealed with lead,
but with the bloodshedinge of Jesus Christ. And therefore, if our english
priests would truly preach the law to the people openly, the^ should they show
the people their sins, according to Gods commaundeme^te, and give them the
general plaster, that is, they must utterly forsake their sins, and trust
to Christ's satisfaction made for the same, This may they do without carish
confession. And this is the only true way to forgive sins, and of it self
sufficient. Away therefore with this blasphemous care confession, and compel
your priests to preach the law and the gospel. And so may, your lordships,
avoid many euyls and much wickedness that ensues this whorish confession.

And, good my Lords, beware of them that say, I am Christ, that is, so
anointed of God with grace that every man may have of me, the same benefit
that they may have of Christ. For they that come so in the name of Christ,
saying. Math. 24
I am Christ, shall deceive many says Christ, who can not speak untruly.

Beware therefore, my lords, of a another of Antichrists false doctrines and
practice. A another of Antichrists false doctrines.
A another false doctrine of Antichriste is that he has invented and erected
the new sacrifice to be made in the ydolotrous Mass for ye souls of the
quycke and of the deed. 2. Petr. 2
By the which sacrifice they make marchaundise of men's souls for money. But
for as much as Christ has offered him self upon the cross to God his father,
and become for us a perfect, He. 7. et. 9
whole and sufficient sacrifice for our sins, ones for ever, wherewith he
has taken away our sins. By what means can our false sacrificers / with
their false sacrifice made in their ydolotrose mass (never commanded of God
to be made, for the sins other of the quycke, or of the deed) take away our
sins. Co^sideringe that Paul says: Hebr. 10
where is remission of sins there neadeth no forther sacrifice to be made for
sins, but Christ with his only one sacrifice made to God his father for us
has taken away our sins, as all the holy scriptures bear manifest
witness. And in the articles of our creed we confess the same. Wherefore this
sacrifice made in the ydolotrouse mass, is most wicked and sinful, and can
not by any means take away our sins: but is one of Antichrists false
crafts and subtle devises thereby to maynteyn his sluttish generation of
infideles, to live ydly, proudly and lecherously. And by this their false
sacrifice made in their ydolotrouse mass, they rob Christ not only of his
honor of our redemption, and of the thanks dew for the same: But also they
make many to have a false confidence and trust, to have their sins to be
taken away through their false sacrifice made in their masses. Wherein they be
lame^tably deceived. And also they rob us of our money, and be the self
same robbers that Christ says do devour widows houses under the color of
long prayers, Mat. 23. Marc. 12.
and also yt make marcha^dice of our souls in covetousness. 2. Pet. 2
These be ye same Antichrists, yt confess not Christ to be come^ in the
flesh, and deny ye Lord that bought them. 1. Joan. 4


The self same sacrificers, right honorable lords, take upon them to be
mediators and advocates with God for the people: not for love, An other of
Antichrists false doctrines.
as one man is bound to pray for an other. But these holy mediators and
advocates will not pray but for money. That the common proverb may be
verified in them. Where is no pe^ny, there is no Pater noster. Prayer.
Prayer is of all things most spiritual. And no man can pray truly, except
God teach him, Math. 6
As it appears by the Apostles yt desired Christ to teach the^ to pray. And
also, Paul says: Romans 8.
we can not pray as we ought to pray. Therefore, if our clergies sacrifices
and prayers were spiritual, as in deed they be but veraye liplaboure and most
deceatful bablinges, they should commit Symonie, for taking for a spiritual
office a temporal reward. But money and all other things be spiritual when^
they meddle with them. They in them selfs be so spiritual. But mediators, and
aduocats, will they be, although ye holy scriptures say ye contrary And yt
Christ is our only mediator and aduocat as it appears Joan. 14* and. 17. and.
1. Tim. 2. and. 1. Iaan. 3 Yet will our wicked priests usurp unto them the
only office of Christ: to be mediators and advocates. And thereby, say that
they be Christ. But beware of them, honorable lords. For Christ bids you
beware of them. For they shall deceive many says Christ.

Beware therefore of a another of Antichrists false doctrines. All christen men
be bounden to believe that our savior Christ in his natural body is
ascended in to heaven, and there sits on the right hand of God the father,
acccordinge as both Peter and Paul have taughters. 1. Petr. 3. Coloss. 3.
And according to our come^ creed. But Antichriste, and his adulterous
generation of infideles have taught a another doctrine saying. Here is Christ
and there is Christ. But none say here is Christ and there is Christ but
these Masmongers, which say that they (through their speakinge of four words,
scz, this is my body) do make Christ's body of bred, there to be really and
bodily present upon every altar, in one insta^te, that they might offer him
once again for a sacrifice, made for money but not for sin. This doctrine is
to be much suspected to be a false doctrine, because that Christ commands
you not to believe them, that so teach or say. And Peter says that he is in
heaven, and that the heavens shall there reteyne him, until all things be
fulfilled. etc. Act. 3.


Consideringe that he in his bodily presence is in heaven, and his body is
like to our bodies in all natural things, except only sin. And our bodies
can not be in diverse places at one time therefore nor Chrifles body ca^ be in
diverse places at one time. Wherefore, good my lords, be not any more ignoraunte
who be false deceauers, wicked prophets, Christ's body is in secret places,
that is in every pixt.
and lienge masters the natural brood of Antichriste The same sect says,
that Christ is in secret places, which be all they that say, Christ's natural
body is in every pyxe, ha^ginge over every altar, beware of them. For Christ
says that by these words they shall deceive many, Which doctrines our
English priests daily do preach.

Now I will rehearse a another of his false and wicked doctrines, Yet a false
doctrine.
invented only thereby to maynteyne a number of idle harlottes, and to lead
innumerable souls through a false fayeth and vain trust, in to hell. This is
his doctrine of purgatory the pyke purse of all Christendom. And although the
holy gooste says / that by mercy and says sins be purged: Yet Yet has
this Antichrist found out a prison, Purgatory.
which he calls Purgatory, therein to punysh souls, until other he, or some
of his mark must make a sacrifice for his soul in his ydolotrous mass. But
it were no good policy to trust to much to their sacrifice because there is no
mention thereof made in any place of the holy scripture. Nor yet is it wisdom
to trust much to their prayers, because the prophet says, that the prayer of
the wicked is not well heard of God, Psa. 108.
but rather to sin. Wherefore it is best for a christen man to trust unto
Gods mercy, and not to popish sacrifices nor prayers, which be another mercy nor
faith. And we be sure that another the mercy of God nor faith in Christ, be in
the Popes hands to distribute where it pleases him. Wherefore he can not purge
souls, neither of their sins nor of the peynes dew for ye same, by Gods
judgment. It belongs only to God to purge souls from their sins. As the
prophet says. Psalm. 48.
No man can deliver his brother, nor make agreamente for him to God, for it
costeth more to redeem their souls, so yt ye must let yt alone for ever. Joan.
3. Joan. 1. To. 8.
Christ says, he yt believes, has now eternal life, and is ye son of God,
coheire with Christ, to whom God has promised remission of sins freely for
Christ's sake. Therefore ye Pope shall do him to much wrong, to ponish him for
his sins, to who^ God has forgiven the^. And if he were a true vicar to God
and Christ, he would not so cruelly ponish his masters childern nor louinge
servants.

But yt we may not trust unto this popish purgatory, whereof there is no mention
made in the scriptures. Let us resort unto ye holy scriptures wherein we may
heue a sure hope of a true purgation of our sins. S. Ioa^ says. 1. Ioh. 1.
If we walk in ye light eue^ as he is in ye light, the^ have we fellowship with
him: And the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from al sin. Here
may all Christian me^ have sure co^fide^ce, yt if they walk in ye light of
Gods word, yt the^ Christ's blood purges the^ from al their sins. But many
persons (ye more it is to be lamented) so walck in the darkness of sin, and
trust to have help through sacrifices made, and masses, yt they can never come
to Purgatory, but go assuredly to hell, where no purgatio^ of sin can be:
because Christ's sentence and judgment is given, yt he yt believes not, is
already condemned. And ye holy scriptures say: where ye tree falls there he
shall lie, whether it be at East, west, North, or South. Eccle. 11.


Be not therefore deceived, honorable lords, nor trust to this false doctrine
of purgatory, that sins should be purged with fire. A Christen man would not
put fire in the stead of Christ's blood, where with our sins be purged only,
As Paul says, Hebr. 1.
Christ is the brightness of the glory of his father, and very image of his
substance, bearinge up all things, with the word of his power, that has in
his own person purged our sins. Except, therefore, our holy father will
prove himself to be the natural son of God, even Christ himself, he
purges not our sins. Apo. 1.
It is Christ that so loved us, yt he washed us in his heart blood says
Saint John.

Considering, right honorable lords, that I have called to your memories
certain of Antichrists false doctrines, which I of mine own herd do not name
to be doctrines of deuels, doctrines of lyenge masters, and of subtle
deceauers, and of them that depart from the faith, but out master Christ and
his apostles (to whom all christen men (...) give credit) calls them so, and
the preachers of the same false Apostles, and soch as with their false
doctrines shall deceive many. Of who^ Christ admonishes you to beware, Mat.
24.
and the Apostle desires you to mark and well to take heed of them and to
decline or depart from them For they serve not Christ the Lord, but their
belly. To. 16.
And yet (notwithstanding these louinge admonitions and warninges given unto
you (not by light preachers) but by Christ himself, and by his Apostles)
the same doctrines be daily taught, preached / allowed, and malitiouslye
defended with you.

Therefore have I according to my bounde^ duty, set the^ forth, that you might
beware of them, and of the preachers of them. So that ye may avoid the plage
of God that hangs over us, for our departinge from Christ, and from his
true doctrines unto the service and obedience of Antichriste and of his false
doctrines / which be mere and plain contrary to Christ and his doctrines. By
the which condition and sure mark, your lordships may well know them ever.

And because I have rehearsed so many of Antichrists false doctrines, that al
men may well discern and judge the residue of his false doctrines by them that
I have here written. I will now direct my pen to express and declare, a
certain assured sign and token given by Daniel and also by Christ, of the time
wherein Antichrist should come and rage against Christ, Mat. 24.
Christ warns us to look for him when we shall se abomination of desolation
stand in the holy place. For the true declaration of the which text, it is to
be noted, honorable lords, that the Apostle calls us the temple of God
saying: 1. Cor. 3.
The temple of God is holy, which be you Consideringe that we be the temple of
God, and the holy place. What more abomination of desolation can there be in
the holy place, then to exile God out of his temple and holy place, not only by
ye workinge of manifold sins, fylthynes, and detestable wickedness, whereof
was never moare plenty used: but also in the stead of God to receive
Antichriste the men of sin, and child of perdition, as Paul names him? Is
not this to put man in Gods stead, when we trust to receive remission of sins
and eternal life of the Romish Antichriste, and that in perchmeyne s^^^nes,
co^sideringe that we hear not him preach any gospel to us, whereby our sins
should be forgeuen us, nor yet knows he any of our sins? If he can forgive
us our sins, without hearing our sins nombred unto him; and without
speakinge with us, wherefore will not our priests forgive us our sins except
they must hear them told in to their ears? Is not this abomination of
desolation standinge in the holy place? To give over our trust and confidence
that we oughe to have of remission of our sins, at Gods hands for Christ's
sake only, and now to have confidence to have it at Antichrists hands (for a
little money) that is most contrary to God and to Christ in all things? Oh
most abomination of desolation, sta^dinge in man's conscience, that should be
the temple of God, and the dwellinge place of the holy ghost. Is it not a foul
abomination of desolation sta^dinge in the holy place? In the stead of Christ's
only one sacrifice which he made of himself to God his father for us upon the
cross, now to set up a new sacrifice to be made to God for us of a piece of
bread and a cup of wine, and to lift up them to be showed to the people, to
be gased upon and to be worshipped, and not to be received, and to be eaten and
dro^ken, according to Christ's institution and commandment? Is it not
abomination of de^solation sta^dinge in the holy church of God in the stead of
the gospel to be preached and declared unto the people in soch manner that they
might receive comfort and hope thereby, to have the gospel and other parts
of the holy scriptures / to be read and song in a speech nether understood
not known of the hearers of them?

Romans 15.
Saint Paul says / what so ever was written, was written for our doctrine and
learning, that through patience and consolation of the holy scriptures we
might receive hope. But Antichrist has ordained a pain sownde, to occupy
the ears of the people calling it ye gospel, although therbe no
interpretation or declaration thereof made to the people. Ephe. 5.
For he and his filthy sect well know that the Apostle says, that all
things that be declared and opened bring light. Which Antichriste and his
filthy generation may not suffer nor abydes because their works, Joan. 3.
which be al wicked and done in darkness should by the light he made manifest
and openly known to the world. For even as Christ came an to the world to
give light to the world: Even so is Antichriste came in to the world, to take
away from the people ye light that Christ brought in to the world.

1. Cor. 14.
The Apostle commands that what so ever be done in the church, that it should
be done to the instruction and edificatio^ of the congregation. For says he,
if any man speak with tongues, let it be by two or three at the most, and that
by order, and let one interpretate or declare. And if there be no man there to
let him keep silence and speak not to the congregation. Do not your lordships
perceive plainly how Antichriste and his filthy generation study and labor
with policy to subuerte all godly and profitable ordinances made by Christ and
by his Apostles? Wherefore contrary to Paul's doctrine and the godly ordinances
received, do ye suffer our priests to read a sing the holy scriptures daily
in the churches to ye people, in a tongue that they understand not, nor
perceive that is spoken calling it Gods service, and co^pelling the people to
come to hear it? Who understands or is taught any thing thereby? They mock
the people with a vain sou^de, whereby they have no lust, nor commodity, nor
profit.

Is not this Antichrists ordinance of the holy scriptures to be read in a
tongue or speech nor understand nor perceived of the people, Collos. ^^.
contrary to the scripture that commands that the word of God should dwell in
us abundauntly, that we might teach the one the other: A wonderful crafty
abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, depriuinge the people of
the understanding of holy scriptures? And where Christ has ordened certain
Apostles, certain prophets, some Evangelists and doctors to fynish a number
of the elect, and to build the mystical body of Christ. In the stead of
which ministers of Christ by Antichriste are entered in thieves that receive and
take great reuenuwes and profits of the benefices: but they do no thing the
office that Christ appointed and assigned unto the office to be done. Even
raueninge wolfes that nether spare nor favor the flock of Christ. And no
meruayl it is, for in that they take the profits of their benefices, and do
not the office there unto belonginge, by Christ's sentence they be thieves by
day and by night. Joan. 10.
Whose office and cominge, is not to feed and to favor the flock (says
Christ) but to steal, to kill, and destroy, as your lordships have thereof to
much experience, and most certain proof.

Is it not therefore abomination of desolation standinge in the holy place, to
see a thief and a murderer stand in the church of God in the stead of a true
and diligente pastoure and godly feader or bishop? Is it not abomination of
deslation standinge in the chief city of England, to sea franked fat Boore
sittinge at every sermon preached at Paul's cross, and the same not be found
ones in the year in the same pulpet, feadinge the flock committed to his
spiritual charge? Is it not abominatio^ of desolation sta^dinge in the holy
place, to se the holy scriptures in our native English tongue written upon
every wall in the churches, now to be by commandment blotted out and in the
stead thereof erected kerued images of wood and of stone, by Gods own sentence
accursed, and all they that make the same? And how they that cause the^ to be
set up shall escape the same curse. I know not. They also upon palms sunday
lift up a cloth and say, hayle our king, to a Roode made of a wooden
block. Doutles, a worthy king for soch a people.

Now (right honorable Lords) I trust ye be not ignorante of the time wherein
Antichriste shall come, regne and rage against God and Christ. Even verily
now, when there was never moare abomination of desolation standing in ma^s
conscience, and erected and set up in the temple and church of God. Where as,
in the stead of a constante faith in Christ, is planted a most wicked faith and
trust in the man of sin. And in ye place of Christ's only one sacrifice made
unto for us for ever sufficiently, is erected and set up a sacrifice made of
bread and wine, daily to be made a sacrifice for us. And in the stead of the
holy scriptures to be declared, that the people might understand the sense and
meaning thereof, is erected and ordained the gospels and holy scriptures to be
read and spoken in a tongue and speech that the people which hear the voice
^a^e no profit or comfort thereby. By this point of abomination of
Desolation, all the clergy for forth them selfs that they abhor no thing
moare then the light of Gods word. Joan. 3.
Which no man does, but he that does evil, says Christ that lies not.

In the stead of pastors and spiritual teachers, be entered in thieves and most
cruel murderers. And in the stead of the holy scriptures written upon the
church walls in a speech that the people do understand and perceive, be
erected and set up ^erued images, accursed of God with the makers of them. So
that in the stead of light and knowledge, is brought in and traded darkness and
ignorancie which he the greatest policies and subtle crafts practiced by
Antichrifle and by all his filthy sect, whereby, he and they may bring souls
to hell.

Now it rests to be noted (right honorable lords (wherefore ye Apostle names
Antichrist the man of sin, rather then a sinner, as al men be conceived, and
borne in sin. Paul names him the man of sin, because from him, as from a
founteyne and heed well spring, flows and springs all notable and great
sins and wickedness: as false doctrines, wicked laws and decrees,
dispe^sations for buggery, fornication, and all kind of lust and lechery, for
Symony and usury. Whereby all men be drawn and lead from their faith in God
and in Christ, in to a false faith and trust in most vain tryfles and
vanities, whereby he practices to bring innumarable souls to hell.

Also right honorable lords, where as God has commanded all men to be
obediente to the higher powers, Romans 12. 1. Petr. 2
as to kings most excellent, or to soch as be set in authority.
Notwithstanding soch commandment given from God, yet Antichriste myndinge to
declare himself and his sect to be adversaries to God and Christ, has
resisted and circumuented many Emperors and also kings, whom through most
detestable treason, sedition and intestine war in their Empires, Realms and
dominions, he has deposed and deprived of their Empires and kingedomes, to the
great dishonor and disoledie^ce of God, and to ye effusio^ of much christen
blood, and the lamentable desolation of many wydowes, and miserable orbatinge
of many Orphans and fatherles childerne. As the deposition of Chelpericus
being French king from his kingdom, who was naturally borne, and descended
from the noble lynage and house of the kings of France, and in his stead the
erectinge and making king Pipinus, which was not borne of any noble house,
nor of the lynage of kings of France. The deposition and putting down the
Emperors Frederike from his Empire. The deposition also of Otho king of the
Longebardes, and of many other do manifestly bear wytnes

Amongst the which, I will co^me^de unto your lordships memories, one
lamentable history that is this. When Henrich the fourth Emperor of that
name, attempted to have the election of the Romish bishop, as his noble
progenitors before him had. One Hyldibra^de a monk being then the Romish
bishop, and named him self Gregory the seventh bishop there of that name, did
fearsly withstand the said Henrich and stered up soch intestine sedition and
wars in his dominion, that his people did seek means to chose a new
Emperor / which treason, being forsene of the said Emperor and of his
counsel, his enemies could not bring their wicked enterprise and purpose to
effect. Then the said Mo^kish pope Gregory (whose covetousness, ambition, and
pride, all the Italian writers can worthelie testify, Amongst whom Beno the
cardinal, most earnestly and plainly paynteth and sets forth the same)
excomunicated the said Henrich and as many as did either aid him with power
riches or vitailes, And did forther absolve and discharge all the subjects of
the said Henrich of their obedience toward him, which they by Gods laws did
owe unto the said Emperor. And then, in open proclamations made in all the
dominions of the said Henrich, he burdened and sclau^dered the said Henrich
with ye most odious and grievous title and name, Heretic* and schismatike,
enemy to God and to all holy church, whereby many of his friends and subjects
(even al they in whose consciences did sit Antichriste, occupienge Gods holy
place) did fly and depart from the said Emperor. Whereby the power of the
said Emperor was greatly decayed and minished. And the^ Hildibrande the
monkish Pope bestered him busylie, and caused one Rodulph duke of Sweuclande to
be elected Emperor: Who after great bloodshedinge lost his life and Empire.
After him, by Gregory's commandment one Herman Earl of Lucenburge was
chosen Emperor, who after great ma^slaghter was sleyne in the wars and lost
his life and Empire. And thridly through treason wrought by Gregory, was one
Marchio Echerte chosen to be Emperor, who after great slaghter of christen
me^ lost not only his Empire but also his life, which cruel wars finished,
with no little bloodsheding gave occasion to other princes, to fear to fight
against the said Henrich, because of the great murder and deeth of these three
noble princes. But yet the malice and cruel ambition of the heart of that
monkish pope Gregory, could not be pacified, but that for his private lucre
and honor he would maynteyne so blody wars, never being moved to mercy nor
pity with the destruction of so many cities and towns set a fire and
myserably wasted, nor with the destruction, treadinge down and utter waste
made of so many feldes of corn and grass, nor yet with the shedinge of so
much christen blood, nor with the lamentacion and mourninge of so many widows
for their husbands sleyne, nor with the grievous outerye of Orphans that dyed
for lack of bodylye food, nor for any evil that ensues the furious wars,
would this holy father leave of his workinge of sedition and treason.

Oh horrible monster? Against nature he stered up Henrich the only son of
Henrich the fourth to gather a great army against his own natural father, who
nether for public nor private wrong done by his father to him, noe any other
evil was provoked thereto. Nevertheless he did not only unnaturally forsake his
father, and wtdraw his aid from his father in ye time of neade, but through ye
treason wroughte by Gregory and by his help he circu^uented his father and
oppressed him with power, did take him prisoner in the wars, and leed him
captive to prison, where he put his own father myserablye to death.

Behold, right honorable Lords, a tragedy moare then cruel and bloody.
Behold the charity of our holy fathers of Rome: By this fact they have
setforth soch exemple of wickedness, as never was before seen or heard of. If
their sedition, treason, oppression, crafts and subtelties be well wayed and
pondered of all wicked men they may most justly be called, not only a wicked
sinner, but also the man of sin. From whom all the detestable and great
sins of the world proceed although there should not be had in remembrance all
their dispensations for the stews of whorish women and of fylthy and
abominable Sodomitical lusts, for Symonye, vsurye, and all other vices to
regne in the world.

Now, right honorable lords, I trust yt I have sufficiently set forth this
monstrus and furious beast Antichrist, as well by his false doctrines, yt I
have not feigned to be false of mine own brain and phantesye: but of the
manifest saye^ge of Christ and his Apostles, so plainly spoken yt they be
nether obscure, dark, nor hard to be understand. Who also have commanded all
me^ to beware of them, and of ye teachers of the^, Romans 16.
and so to depart and decline from them. I have also set forth his tyranny,
his sedition, his treason, his crafty and false deceates, wherewith he has
circumuented, oppressed and deceived, many Emperors, kings and other noble
rulers to whom Christ commanded him to obey, Mat. 17.
and gave him also a manifest and plain example when he paid tribute for
himself and Peter. And by his own obedience used and practiced unto the
higher powers and unto their laws. He never gave him exe^ple, authority or
power to depose other Emperor, king or any other cyuil rules. And therefore
for this his disobedience toward God, and for all his other iniquities, he is
justly called the man of sin, a child of eternal perdition. So that he is
worse the^ a beast, or ye most fra^tike mad man yt ever was mad, yt either
will say or think, yt he is other. Christ's vicare, or successoure to the
Apostle. But rather the deuels vicar and successoure, or clothe deuel himself.
For as by the fruit the tree is most certainly known, even so (...), your
lordships, by these his false doctrines and al other his wickedness, assuredly
known him to (...) man of sin veraye Antichriste himself: And all his
wicked generation to be the sects of perdition, the wicked brood of
Antichriste, most contrary to God and Christ.

Wherefore he most falsely usurps to him the title and name of holy father, or
of Christ's vicar in earth, or successoure of the Apostles. But much more
worthily and truly is called Antichrist the most malicious enemy and hateful
adversary of Christ, as both his doctrines, his decrees and wicked laws, his
pride exaltinge him self above al Emperors and kings, his dispensational for
sin to be used in the church of God, his vanities where with he deludeth and
bewytcheth the people* all his forged and feigned holiness, his hypocrisis,
dissimulation, sedition, treason, most severe cruelty, and all other his
wickedness and most detestable list of both him and all his fluttish generation
of serpents, and filthy sect of infideles do manifestly prove and testify
before all men. So that doubtless, the^ can not be any thing more contrary to
God and Christ, then he himself and his wicked broede do in all things.

Consideringe that your lordshipe be not now ignorance (as my trust is what
thing Antichrist is, but that you well understand and know that all they that
be come in to the church to occupy an mystery, office or vocation contrary to
Gods word and Christ's ordinance and appointementes, or abuse his sacraments
contrary to his ordinances, or that teach any false doctrine, or that take
upon them any of Christ's honor or power, be veraye Antichrists, which is as
much to say as against Christ.

Wherefore, right honorable lords, I hope that God will open the eyes of your
hearts that you may now at the last see and well perceive, by what craft,
falseed and subtle deuyses, you have been deceived, and entised to serve
Antichrist in the stead of Christ: the deuel in the stead of God: to follow
false superstition, in the stead of Christ's true religion: hypocrisy and
vanity, in the stead of the christen verity. And in conclusion, that you may
well understand, that you of al me^, have been most blinded in your
judgments, most fylthilie corrupted, and your understanding and senses most
shamfully deluded, begyled and bewitched.

Therefore, my good Lords, now renew your wits and understandings. And
know you certainly that all your lordly lord bisshops be of the natural
broede of Antichriste. Who with all subtlety policy and falsheed study and
labor to obscure the light of Gods word, why they make the nobles partakers.
and to subuerte the ordenaunces of Christ and of his Apostles and obstinatly
defend their errors and evil doings and make you their ministers to murder
your brethern for their faith, against your conscience to wrappe you and your
posterity in Gods displeasure with them.

And because your lordships shall not be deceived in them. I have given you the
common token sign and mark, whereby you and al men can not but know them to be
against Christ and his word. Where Christ said to Peter, feed, feed,
feed, Which is to say: teach, teach, teach. They take teachinge for no part
of their office, but only to multiply a sort of blind ceremonies, to bring
the people from knowleage of Christ, and to keep them under in ignorance with
cruelty, And that they may bring that to pass, they labor to be lords
and to have temporal offices contrary to Gods word saying. The kings of the
nations reign over them, Luc. 22
and they that bear rule over them be called gracious lords. But you shall
not be so. That is you shall not take upon you to have civil governance and
rule over the people, ne yet to be called gracious lords. S. Peter commands
all bishops and soch as have spiritual charge of souls committed to them, to
feed the flock of Christ willingly (as Christ commanded him) and not to be
lords over the parishes, but even as they were one of the flock.

Yet your lordships well perceive that our bishops, not only take to them
selfs the name of lord and gracious lord: but also procure to have both
cyuell governance and rule over the people, as to be Lord chaunceloure, Lord
presidente, and to have ye hearing of testamentary causes, of whoredo^e, of
dyuorses, of slau^ders, which be no spiritual matters Except a man will so
call them, because that they that boast to be spiritual only, do most use
them. And as for preachinge (where with Christ chiefly charge his ministers)
is the least point of their charge. But they must atte^de upon bysshoppinge of
childern, christeninge of belles, of churches and churchyardes, altares, and
soch other baggage and abominations as were never commanded of Christ, nor
yet practiced not known of his Apostles. Whereby they may easlye be known not
to be of Christ but against Christ and very Antichrists.

In like manner the persons, vicars, and curates, that are admitted by them to
have, enjoy and occupy, the commodity and profit of any spiritual benefice
whereunto perteyneth cure and charge of souls, do not diligently reach the
Law and the Gospel, but nosell the people with long Matenses, Masses and
Even songs in a strange tongue. And where rich parisshes be they rock them
with mirrye singinge and pipinge with soch guegawes to please them withal,
clean contrary to Gods word and Christ's commandment, which says. As my
Father sent me, (...). 20.
even so do I send you. But his Father did send him to preach as it is
plain Esaye. 61. Mark. 1. Luke. 4. with the which comau^deme^t of Christ,
given to all that have charge of souls, another Emperor, King, nor Queen
may lawfully dispense, or discharge. Wherefore as they be minisers contrary and
not according to Christ's commandment. Even so be they Antichrists, that be
ever against Christ, in all his doctrine and form of living. As Christ says*
he that is not with me, is against me. Matt. 12.
And how many so ever be come against me be s^s by day and night. Joan. 10.
And consequently. Christ myndinge to show unto you, the co^dicions whereby ye
may ever know, who be spiritual thieves says: the thief comes not but to
steal, to kill, and to destroy. Of their stealinges, your Lordships be not
ignorau^te. How many beneficed men be within this Realm as well bishops, as
deanes, Archedeacons, persons, uicars, and prebendaries which take the profits
from their benefices / and do not feed their flock with the word of God? Mat.
4.
with out the which the souls of the flock ca^ not live. Wherefore they steal
the profits that do not the office.

And of their cruel mortheringe (you have to much experience) and that another
of thief, mortherere, robber, or traitor: but of the best learned me^ of this
realm or that ever were in this realm: Even of soch as were hable to reprove
and co^trolle them in all things by Gods word. Wherein they deceive and mock
you, and all the people. And to prove the^ veraye thieves, And as, your
lordships have to much experience of their stealinge and of their mortheringe:
Even so shall your lordships not sail to have more certain and sure experience,
that they shall be most miserable destroyers of this realm of England, and
that at soch time, when your lordships nor any of your posterity, shall be
hable to provide any help or remedy to redress their destruction. For even
as Christ's words be unfeignedly true that ye thief comes not for any purpose
but to steal and to kill, so must the residew of his words, ever be found to
be true, most certain and sure, that is, that he shall also destroy.

And although you now do not regard nor believe Christ's words to be true, yet,
when you think least thereon, your infidelity shall be required with the
fealinge and peynful sufferinge the destruction of you, and of your
posterytie, and the most miserable change and alteration of the state of this
realm.

This miserable mischief ensues and comes of this misorder that the
governance of this realm, by your lordships consentes, has be committed and
done against God, in making a bishop (that by Gods word and appointeme^te was
assigned to feed the flock committed to his spiritual charge) to leave his
office, committed to him by God to be executed and done, to be a chauncelour
where by he was so occupied and busied in the hearing of the matters and
affairs of this realm, that he could not attend his flock to feade them
accorddinge to Christ's commandment. Whereby he was put out of that order and
rule that God had appointed to him. Being out of the which order and
appointemente of God, he could never be co^modietie or profit to this realm.
For he was entered into ye office not by ye door Christ, but ascended by a
another way, and therefore was a thief, from^ who^e no good counsel or any
other godliness can proceed, nor more then of thorns may grapes be gadered.
And yt his doings will prove to well. For in that office he has brought to
pass by his counsel and persuasion, and by your lordships sufferau^ces, soch
incurable evil, that all England shall lamente and bewail the same. Not only
in kyllinge the preachers and learned me^ of this realem, but also in the vtt^r
destruction of this Realm, and the alteration of the state and honor of the
same.

And although God has delivered you of that spiritual thief. Yet be your
lordships and all the Realm burdened with a another in the same office, that
shall do no less evil then the other has done. If so much evil may be done.
For as a ioynte ordained by God in the body, is appointed and set in a dew
order to help the body, which ioynte being out of that order that God has
set it in, can not be any commodity and help to the body, but great pain
and trouble to the body. Even in like manner, if a bishop, that is appointed
and ordained by God to teach his flock, be taken from that office where in God
had assigned and ordered him: he can never be profitable but great hurt and
pain to the body. For I think that there is no man that has any knowledge in
the holy scriptures or any good conscience toward God, but he well knows
that a bishop that feeds not his flock is a thief. Otherwise he believes
not Christ to be true in his words, And if he be a thief (as the truth
says he is) then is his cominge for no another purpose, then to steal, to
kill and to destroy. And who so ever doubts there of, doubts whether
Christ be true.

And I fear me yt because the governors have not believed Christ to be true,
that they shall prove it true by experience, to their great pain. Soch shall be
the fruits of a bishop set in authority to be a counselour for the temporal
affairs of the Realm, that he is one of them that is come to steal, to kill
and to destroy. Of whom God by his prophet Esai, complayneth saying: Esaias.
1.
Hear oh heavens, and harken oh earth, for the Lord speaks. I have noreshed
and brought up childerne, and they are fallen away from me. How happens it
that ye righteous city which was full of equity, is become unfaithful as an
whore? Righteousness dwelled in her, but now mortherers. In times past, it was
the office of Nero and of other tyrants to tormentt men to death for their
faith: but now our english bishops have taken upon them to put the tyra^tes
out of that office. For they them selfs condemn both learned and unlearned for
their faith, and make you, right honorable lords, to execute the office. That
they might set forth to all me^, that they be the veraye thieves, of whom Christ
(that can not lie) speaks. Whose cominge is for no another purpose then to
steal, to kill, and to destroy.

And yet to deceive the people, they be crepte in under the cloak of my lord
bishop, a reverend father. But to this my lord bisshops and their
accomplisshes say: that they kill none for their faith but for their heresy,
which ought of all Christen men to be abhorred and avoided, according to the
true saye^ge of the Apostle, that commands saying an heretic, after he is
twice reproved avoid him. 2. Tit. 3.
But yet says he not kill min, but avoid him. As al ye fathers of ye primative
church have showed manifest example in the exile of many that in veraye deed
were heretics approved by gods word to be heretics, and yet were not
persecuted to deeth for their heresies Until Antichrist of Rome the heed of al
heretics by craft, gyle and falsheed seduced and begyled the Emperors and
kings, and robbed them of their dominions and powers, whereby the has exalted
him self not only above them, but also above God.

And then became he a most cruel tyrant, and made laws of death, for all soch
as he and his fylthy sect did adiuge heretics, Thereby colourably to morther
and destroy, all soch as did ones speak or preach against his usurped power,
or by any means reueyle his iniquity for that calls he and all his filthye
generation of infideles heresy.

Which exemple of making of like laws our english bishops did compass and
bring to pass about the year of our Lord 1420. then being a bishop Lord
Chaunceloure and a another lord priuey Seal, whereby being in great authority
and high estimation amongst the nobles and counselours through flattery
circu^uented the king, and his counsel, and other of the nobles to make a
law in England to suppress heresy spronge up in this realm. But what that
heresy was that must only be adjudged, by the Antichrists laws and by his
sworen sect the generation of infideles, the enemies of God and adversaries of
Christ. For as it is reported by cronicles, it was the revelation of
Antichrists iniquity, that he calls heresye.

Forther to color their cruel tira^nie, they said with their forfathers the
Bishops, Priests, Scribes, and Phariseys, and ye rest of the Jewish clergy:
It is not lawful to us for to sley any man. And as for us, ye may trust well
enough, we be to holy to deceive you. You may freely without scrupulositie of
conscience, crucify whom so ever we commit in to voure hands. For if he be
not an evil doer, we will never deliver him unto you. Your honors neade never
to examine the cause, but boldly burn him. Our souls for youres. His blood
upon our heads. And by soch subtle means made all Kings, and Officers of
England, that have bin since, their tourmentours, and hang me^. A goodly
office that they have set all kings and you, right honorable lords, in. They
have made the king and you their hang men, and not a whit better. And yet for all their warrantyse and putti^ge their souls for youres, and though ye wash
never so clean your hand with Pylate. when ye thus morther the innocents for
their says in Jesus Christ, be assured yt Gods curse will not depart from you
and your howses excepce ye spedelye repent.

But how that law agrees with Gods word it shall appear. Even as God and the
deuel, Christ, and Antichrist, light, and darkness. First God by his Prophet
Esai says: Esai. 11.
they shall not hurt, nor shall they kill in all my holy hill. By this holy hill,
meani^g this his church. Wherefore if your lordly Lord bishops were true
ministres in this church, they would not morther any man for his faith / or for
want of a good faith, which he can not have of his own power and study. The
Prophet Hieremie says also: Iere. 7.
Behold these men say unto me, where is the word of the Lord. Let it come.
Where as I never the less leading the flock in thy ways, have compelled no
man by violence, for I never desired man's deeth. This know thou well. Here
Hieremie says yt he leading the flock in ye Lords ways, compelled none by
violence to walk therein. This doctrine and exemple given by Hieremie agrees
but sclenderlye with Antichrists canons, decrees, and laws, nor with ye law
newly reuyued by your lordships consentes, and last of all with your bishops
mortheringe and tormentinge of your learned men.

Also when Christ going unto Jerusalem, Joan and James entered in to a city
of the Samaritanes to make provision for Christ. But the citesins would not
receive Christ. Wherefore Joan and James returned to Christ, and showed to him
the unkindness of the citesins saying unto him: Master will thou that we
commaundye fire to come from heaven, and consume them? Jesus turned to the^ /
and rebuked them saying: You know not of what spirit ye be. The son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

If your lordly lord bisshops were Christ's true servants, then would they
follow his doctrine and example. As Christ says. He that serves me, let him
follow me. Ioh. 18. Joan. 12.
And he that follows me walks not in darkness. But all men may perceive that
this their mortheri^ge, is mere contrary to both Christ's doctrine and example,
and utterly bewrays them to be the servants of Antichriste. As Paul says:
1. Tim. 5.
Good deades be manifest, and they that be evil can not be hid.

The parable of Christ of the tares sowed by the enemy upon the good seed
which the master would not have drawn up until harueste (lest drawinge up the
tares, Math. 3.
the good wheat should also have been drawn up) declares manifestly, that
Christ would not any man of an evil faith, to be killed for his evil faith.
For if Paul had been tormented to deeth, for wa^te of a good faith, when he was
a persequuter of Christ's church. He the^ had never bin the Apostle of the
gentiles, ne yet the most laborious work man that ever wrought in Christ's
vinyard. And if Saint Augustine had found so cruel tyra^tes to have
persequuted him to deeth before he was converted by God at ye preachinge of S.
Ambrose: the^ ye church had wa^^ed at this day, as godly a doctor and writer
as ever wrote in Christ's church sense the Apostles.

But over and besides Christ's doctrine and exmple, which be not any errors or
vperfite doctrines, the Apostles doctrine is: that the seruante of God should
not strive, 2. Tim. 2
but to be gentle to al men apt to teach, and one that can suffer, the evil
with mekenes, and can inform them that resist the truth. He says not, can
kill them that resist the truth, but can inform them. For neither he nor nay
man can know when it shall please God to open the eyes of his heart, and to
give unto him a perfect faith, which now is holde^ captive in unbelief, at the
will of the Lord. This doctine of ye Apostle, although you will not give credit
thereto, yet proves it manifestly before all men that your lordly lord bishops
be not the servants of God, that should suffer the evil according to
Christ's doctrine and example. And also this doctrine of the Apostle proves,
that your law reuyued, is against the doctrine of Christ and of his Apostle,
And therefore is a wicked law invented by Antichriste, and his filthy genratio^,
and sluttish sect of infideles, to subvert and extinguish al godly knowleage
and faith.

Also the Apostle sayethrif there be any that obeys not our teachinges, 2.
These. 3
send us word of him by a letter and have no company with him that he may be
ashamed. And count him not as an enemy: but warn him as a brother. Perceive
ye not, honorable lords, how contrary your bishops be to Christ, and how
contrary they be to his doctrine, and to the doctrine of his Apostles, and
also how wicked your law lately by your conse^tes reuyued is, contrary to Gods
word?

But good my lords, think not yt you can gather grapes upon thorns. This
their mortheringe of their brethern for their faith, declares unto all men
(whose understanding is not taken away by God) that they be the thieves of
which Christ speaks, Ioh. 8.
of whom ca^ not come any good fruit. For morther is a work that proves them
to be the deuels servants, who was a mortherer from ye beginning, says
Christ that lies not. But as Abraham had two children, one borne after the
flesh called Ismael, Gal. 4.
and an other after the spirit called Isaac. As then he that was borne
carnally persecuted him that was borne spirituallye, eue^ so is it now says
Saint Paul

Did Christ, my good lords, compel any man to come to his religion, with
imprisonemente, or with fire? Did Christ kill the Jews, scribes, and
pharisees that hearing his doctrine, and saying also his wondrous miracles,
not withstandinge both would not believe in him? Is not faith, honorable lords,
ye only gift of God, liberally given to whom it pleases him? Can any man by
his own industry, study, and labor obtain faith? If you will suffer your
byteshepes so cruelly to morther men for want of soch faith as it has pleased
them to deuyse, by like equity and Reason may you suffer them to morther all
them that have not the lyberall gift of God to make whole the sick. And also
with moare equity you your selfs may hang up the bishop of London and all
your other bisshops and preistes as thieves and mortherers, that take charge of
souls and receive the profits of their benefices, which have not ye gift of
God to preach the gospel to the flock, according to Christ's commandment.
And by no less equity, all they must suffer deeth that have not the gift of
chastity, allthough to deceive the people, they say, they have auowed it.

And although, your lordships, as ye think, do not any violence against soch
as now suffer by force of that wicked law, that by your consentes is revived,
because your lordships have referred all the determination and iudgeme^te of
heresy unto your byteshepes. Yet, be your lordships and all they that have
consented to the reuiuinge and making in force and strength of the said law,
gyltie of the blood and deeth of all the^ that have suffered deeth, shall
suffer or do suffer, by force and s;tre^gth of the said law. For not only all
they that commit and do evil be worthy deeth (says Paul) but also all they
that consent thereto. Romans 1.
Not only because the law by force whereof many suffer deeth was reuyued by your
conse^tes. But also because ye same law is manifest wicked and unrighteous
because it is contrary to the word of God. Wherefore it ca^ not be but wicked.
And therefore the same law whereby all they suffer unjustly, and the blood of
the^ that suffer deeth, shall be a witness before God against you of their
torments and deeth. And then good, my lords, remember the sentence of God
pronounced against al them that shede innoce^te blood vnrightuously, not only
that they be mortherers, who shall never inheret ye kingedome of heaven. 1. Cor.
5. Gene. 9
But also the holy ghost says: he that shedeth innocente blood of men, his
blood shall be shed again by men.

If your lordships do not think God false in his promises, look most certe^ly
for your blood (if ye do not unfeignedly and spedely repent) to be shed of men
again.

And although you would, not believe the promises of God to be true. Yet way you
the late experience of that truth verefied in the late dukes of Somerset and
Northumberlande, whose doings to al them that did know them, do manifestly
prove the said promises of God to be most certainly and truly verefied in
them. As they can not be otherwise in all men.

And now, I trust your lordships do well understand and perceive, that this
law by your consentes lately revived, and made a law in force and stength, is
contrary both to the doctrine and example of Christ and of his Apostles and
Prophets. Wherefore it can not be but a wicked law. Esai. 10.
Woo therefore be unto you that make wicked laws, says God by his prophe
Esaias,

And if a another magistrate should (by the provision of God) be called to reign
oue us, who judges the form of religion last received of us, to be contrary
to Gods word, and therefore to be worthily abolished, then may he persecute
all your bishops and the^ that now have consented to morther christen men for
their faith, but nor because he perceaueth that they have no perfect faith, or
else a wicked faith (for then should he commit like iniquity) but because the
word of God says: The same measure that you have measured to other, the same
shall be measured to you again. By this sentence, that is no wicked law, al
your mortheringe bishops may justly be handles as they have handled them.

This law of late, by your consentes, reuyued and made in force and strength
as a perfect law, does not only reprove your lordships of your
inconstauncie, who not long time before upon reasonable and godly causes, well
wayed, freely disputed and reasoned, did dysanull, make frustrate and voyed the
same as a wicked law: but also this your sodeine reinuinge of the same,
declares, that you care not what you do, be it never so wicked and contrary to
God, so that you may avoid the displeasure of the magistrate and supreme
eyuill governor. Whereby it appears manifestly that you regard more the
displeasure of man then the displeasure of God. Does nor your lordships
consider that God says by the prophere: Psalm. 5.
The lord shall break the bones of them that do study to please men?

Halas, right honorable lords, who har^ so be witched you now, yt you so
suddenly aye fled from Gods truth? Gal. 3.
(Your own co^nscie^ces so long time) approui^g ye same. Before whose eyes
Jesus Christ was so lively preached, and so faithfully set forth. And
nevertheless now, not only his doctrine, and the true and profitable use of the
sacraments, be by your conse^tes repelled for heresy, but also Christ him
self in his holy members and mystical body most truelly tormented and slain.

Halas that foreyne nations shall obsecre this inconstantie to your dishonours:
namely to be so in constante and ^inge in the principal points concerning a
Christen man's religion and faith, consideringe that by your own consentes the
same religion now by you repelled as heresye, was by your commandemes set forth
and commanded thorough all the Realm and dominions of England to be taught,
and also to be received of the people.

To what truth and to what religion may the subjects of this realm here
after cleave, and assuredly without waueringe follow, which do perceive yt your
lordships (contrary to your owne^ commandments before made and directed to
them) do fly and retiere from the doctrine and true use of the Sacraments
that you in so little time past did most worthily approve to be most Godly and
necessary to be taught and followed. God grant that the come^s of this
Realm that now murmur and grudge at this inconstancy and other your evil
doings, do not hereafter burden you with the same. And especially for your
flieng from the true religion, which you did before all men approve to be most
godly* From the which ye be now fled to the great dishonor of God. Wherefore
God by his Prophet threatens you to bring you to dishonor saying. I will
give them honor that honor me. And they that dishonor me, 1. Reg. 2.
them will I bring to dishonor. This promise will God keep with you. God
therefore grant you grace truly to repent in season. Amen.

Hieremi. 5. Horrible and greuouse things be done in the land. The preachers
teach falsely, and ye priests follow them, and my people have pleasure therein.
What will come thereof at the last?

Hieremi. 7. From the least to the most, they hang all upon covetousness. And
from the prophet unto the priest they go all about wc falsheed and lie, and
besides that they heal the hurt of my people with sweet words saying:
peace, peace, when there is no peace at al. Therefore they must be ashamed, for
they have committed abomination.

Hieremie. 23. Hear not the words of the prophets that preach unto you, and
deceive you. For they speak the meaning of their own hearts, and not out of
the mouth of the Lord.

Hieremie. 23. Yea the way that men take is wicked and their governance is
nothing like the word of the Lord. For the preachers and the pristes them
selfs are polluted ypocrytes, and their wickedness have I found in my house,
says the Lord.

Hiere. 51. Babilo^ has benin the Lords hands a golden cup that makes all
lands dronke^, of her wine have al people dronken, therefore are they out of
their wits.

Hier. 51. Oh my people come out of Babylon, that every man may save his life
from the fear full wrath of the Lord

Esaias. ca. 10. Woo be to Assure that is a staff of my wrath, in whose hand
is the rod of my punishmente, for I shall se^de him among these ypocrites,
among the people that have deserved my displeasure shall I se^de him, That he
may utterly rob them, spoil them, and tread the^ down like the mire in
the street. How be it his pretense is not so, another thinks his heart in his
fashion. But he ymagineth only how to overthrow and to destroy much people.
For he says be not my princes all kings.

The contents of this treatise.
1 There is no thing moare perilous and heart to christen faith, then a
corrupt judgment. 2 The multitude of people serve Antichriste nor
understanding nor knowinge him to be Antichriste. 3 Antichrist comes in under
the pretense to condemn errors and hersye, whereof he and his sworen sect
will be judges, and therefore condemeneth veritiein the siede of heresy. 4 A
description of Christ and of his office. 5 The revelation of Antichrist and of
his condition. 6 The vain things that Antichrist has ordened. 7 Antichriste
erecteth a new religion wherein he breaks Gods commandment. 8 The world
receaueth Antichrist rather then Christ, and what is the cause. 9 Christ and
his Apostles call certain doctrines the doctrines of deuels. 10 Nether bishop
nor priest has any authority to forgive sins, but by preaching the gospel.
11. Anriculer confession is contrary to the doctrine of Esai. 12. The priests
absolution spoken in a spech not known of the confessed, can^ not profit
them. 13. Certain causes wherefore bishops and priests do maintain whorish
confession 14. A token given by Christ of the time when Antichrist shall come.
15. Diverse abominations stand now in the temple of God, And what is the temple
of God. 16. The causes wherefore Paul names Antichrist rather the man of sin
then a sinner. 17. How the Queen's majesty is circumuented to make a law to
stablish the Popes usurped power. 18. What bishops be thieves, mortherers and
destroyers. 19. No man should dye for his faith. 20. Who be gyltie of the deeth
of all them that have suffered deeth by the wicked law lately reuyued and made
in force.

