A DIALOGVE. VVHERIN IS PLAINLY LAID OPEN, the tyrannical dealing of L.
Bishopps against Gods children: with certain points of doctrine, wherein
they approve themselves (according to D. Bridges his judgment) to be truly
the Bishops of the Devil.

MA^^CH. 2.7, 8, 9. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts. But ye are gone out of the way: ye have caused many to fall by the
law, ye have broken the covenant of Leui. Therefore have I also made you to
be despised, and vile before all the people, because ye keep not my ways, but
have been partial in the law.

A Dialogue wherein is plainly laid open the tyrannical dealing of Lord Bb.
against Gods children.
The speakers are these, Puritan. Papist. Jacke of both sides. Idol minister.


Puritan. YOu are well overtaken sir, do you travel far this way I pray you?


Jacke Toward London sir.


Puritan I shall willingly bear you company if it please you?


Jacke With all my hearr, I shall be very glad of yours.


Puritan From whence came you this way?


Jacke I come out of France.


Puritan Out of what part of France came you I pray you? I came from Rochell
my self, which is a part of France.


Jacke It is so, but I came not near that place.


Puritan Out of what part of France came you then?


Jacke I came from Orleans.


Puritan I pray you what news from thence, is there any likelyhoode of peace
there?


Jacke Yes surely, there is some hope of peace, for where the Kings powers
come, they do commonly yield presently.


Puritan It is a good hearing.


Jacke What is he that comes after us so fast?


Puritan He seems to be some preacher or dumb minister, it may be he goes our
way, if he do I hope we shall have his company whereby we may pass away way
the time in some good conference, and also hear what news there is at home
here in England.


Jacke I am content Sir, for I shall be glad to hear some good news, me thinks
I have bin very long absent from hence.


Puritan Very well, we will go the softlier that he may overtake us: but by the
way, I pray you, if you came from Orleans, there they have the mass, for they
are of the league: and then I suppose you have bin partaker of their Idolatry?


Jacke Noe I assure you, I detest al Idolatry, even from my heart.


Puritan If you do so, I am very glad of it, but I pray you let me hear if
you can give me some proof out of the word of God, for the confirmation of this
your protestation against Idolatry?


Jacke I am well content to give you a taste thereof, whereby it shall appear
that I am far from it: For so deerly as I render the salvation of mine own
soul, so careful am I to shun and fly from all Idolatry. For it is written
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve: And the Apostle Paul to the Corinth. 1. Epist. cap. 10. verse 14.
commands us to Fly from Idolatry, for Idolatry is sin, and the wages of
sin is death, etc.


Puritan It is well applied, and somewhat to the purpose, I am very glad if it be
done in singleness of heart: For me thinks you could not possibly be in that
place but you must be forced to be present at their Idolatrous Mass.


Jacke I was never present at it in my life, I thank God: but the Papists
stick not to say that our service book in english is (a great part of it)
but a mere translation out of the mass book.


Puritan Indeed it is true, that some part of our book of common prayer (as
they say) is a mere translation out of the mass book, but yet there is no
such blasphemy and Idolatry tolerated in it, as is dyalie in the mass:
although it greatly derogate from the word, and is full of great and grievous
corruptions: But I pray you how long were you in Orleans Sir?


Jacke I was there about a fortnight.


Puritan Noe longer?


Jacke Noe Sir.


Puritan Here comes the minister now, we will hear what news he can tell
us, he semes to be but an Idol shepherd: we shall have some good conference
with him I hope, to pass away the time?


Minist. You are well overraken gentlemen, which way travel you, I pray you?


Puritan Toward London, and if it please God.


Minist. I shall be gladd of your company and if it please you?


Puritan We also shall be glad of yours Sir.


Jacke I pray you M. Vicker or parson, (for so you seem to be) what good news
is there here at home, in England, for we have bin both of us in France, and
we would gladly here some good news?


Minist. Indede I am a poor Vicker: truly we have no great good news here
Sir: for our Church is so sore pestered with sects and scismes, that the
reverend fathers, (and especially my Lords grace of Cant.) are so sore
troubled with them, that they have no leisure to recreate them selves for those
fellows, they are so bold and mallepert, that they prefer petitions to her
majesty, the Lords of the counsel, yea and in print to the high court of
parliament.


Puritan Why sir, what be they that do this, what do you call them, are they
papists?


Minist. No they are worse then papists, for they are fantastical puritans and
Brownists, and I can not tell what.


Puritan What be the points they hold, that are so scismatical, and erroneous?


Minist. Forsooth they would have no Lord Bb. but every minister to be of
equal authority one with an other, and so make a confusion in the whole state,
for they have set down a new platform of (Discipline sorsoth, as they call
it) they cannot tell what them selves.


Puritan I will tell you my opinion, of Lord Bb. it is but an human
constitution, and not warrantable by the word, but utterly forbidden:


Minist. O I perceue you are one of these fantastical puritanes or Brownists: I
pray you out of what place of France came you?


Puritan I came from Rochel.


Minist. I thought from Rochel, Geneua or Scotland, you seem to be a bird of
one of those nests.


Puritan Sir whatsoever I am, I do not dout but to be able to prove by the
word what I have said, and namely, the unlawfulness of Lord Bb.


Minist. Sir that point has bin handeled by your betters, and manifestly
confuted by my Lords grace, in his writings against Cartwright.


Puritan In deed he that will be blind, cannot see it, but he that looks in
both their works, with a single eye cannot but confess M. Cartwright to have
confuted him by unanswerable evidences: or else why would he not have answered
M. Cartwrights works, now a dozen years extant and more.


Minist. As you of the fantastical crew think, but he has done it, and that
so sufficiently already, that there needs noe more answers, and again his
grace is now otherwise troubled with matters of state, that he cannot intend
it, or if he could, yet it is not for him so to abase himself, in regard of
his high calling which he is now placed in.


Puritan. As though the cause of God were to be neglected in respect of his
high place, if he were lawfully called thereunto, as he does very vnlawefully
usurp the same: contrary to the law of God: for is it possible he can be the
true minister of God, and a temporal magistrate that is, to serve God and
Mammon to. As The Apostle says, Let him that has an office attend upon his
office, and not offices.


Minist. Why how dare you presume to say so? Were not L. Bb. established by
her Majesty and consent of the whole parliament?


Puritan I grant they were, but the Lord has said contray, in the
commandment he gave to his ministers Luke 22. saying, The kings of the
gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them are called
gracious Ll. but ye shall not be so, but let the greatest among you be as the
least, and the cheifest as him that serves, and 1. Pet. 5. Feed the flock of
God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constrainte, but willingly,
not for filthy luker, but of a ready mind: Not as though ye were Lords over
Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. And in the first
session of parliament, holden in the first year of her Majesty's reign, there
was never a Lord B. in the land.


Minist. If you will have noe L. Bb. how should the Church be governed then?


Puritan According as our Savior Christ has commanded, and as the holy
Ghost has set it down, vz. by pastors Doctors, Elders, and deacons, Romans 12.
Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 12.


Minist. You are very full of scripture, as though we have not the same offices
in effect, though not in the same titles: as for example, have not we Parsons
for Doctors, Vickers for Pastors, Churchwardens for Elders, and Sidemen for
Deacons to distribute to the poor.


Puritan And what for Archbishops, and Lord Bishops?


Jacke I will tell you for him, Archbishopps for Popes, and Lord Bishops for
Cardinals. Ha, ha, M. Vicker, I see you are a good Churchman, do not you use
the pulpit sometimes?


Minist. Noe indeed sir, but I read the Homiles sometimes, and the Queens
Injunctions, and do my duty as other ministers do.


Puritan Me thought so, by that fit comparison that you have made.


Jacke And have you no more but one benefice neither, and yet do all that?


Minister Yes in deed, I say service at two more, but I have little profit by
them, marie the best is, they are somewhat near, for they are all three within
four miles together.


Puritan And how can you serve them al upon the Sabbath day?


Jack Some of them are but small, and I can make quick dispatche with them
betimes, and take my Mare and r de to the other: and can make an end of all by
ten of the clock, and spend an hour with good fellows at home before dinner
to.


Puritan And Mast. Vicker, do you think herein, that you discharge your
duerie to God, and those congre gations, over whom you have taken this charge?


Minister Why sir, I discharge my duty better then those that take upon them
four or five.


Puritan Why? is there any that takes upon them the charge of so many?


Minister Yea a hundred in England.


Puritan Well I will cell you, the fearful judgments of God hangs over our
heads, and cannot be long deserred, but fall upon the whole land (where to
such dumb idols as you are, is committed the charge of souls) and to your
selves eternal destruction of body and soul: wherefore M. Vicker, as you
tender your own salvation, leave this your unlawful calling of the ministry,
and betake you to some occupation, or husbandry.


Minist. I care not what any of you spightfull Puritans say, so long as I can
have the favor of my Lord Bishop.


Jacke I pray you M. Vicker let me spur a question unto you, if I may be so
bold? where do you serve?


Minist. I serve in Middlesex Sir.


Jacke Who made you minister?


Minist. My good Lord of London.


Puritan Like enough, he has made a great many of blind guides in his time
besides you, for he made the Porter of his gate, minister of Paddington, being
blind.


Jacke O monstrous, is this true, did he so indeed?


Puritan It is most true, for the Bishop of Winchester has recorded it in a
book of his set forth in print.


Jacke Why what will our Bishops grow to in time if they be suffered? for me
thinks this is a fearful thing, to make such ministers, as can neirher see nor
speak, for it is like if he were his porter, (no doubt of it) he had not the
gift of teaching?


Puritan Very true, but because he could do him noe longer service, he was so
good to him, to provide for the poor blind man that he might live.


Jacke Sure I think when they come once to be Lords, they clean forget God
and al godliness, for I have heard that there was some good things in him
before he was Bishop of London, for he wrote a book called the Harborowe of
faithful subjects, against Bishops: wherein he says, Come down ye Bishops
with your thousands, and betake you to your hundreds, let your fare be
Priestlike and not Princelike, etc.


Puritan Indeed he wrote such a book, and the same words that you repeat, I
have read in the same: but alas, when he was at the best, he was but a
corrupt man, and the best things in it, savor but of earth: for there is many
things handled in it very immodestly, and unchristianly: but one thing
especially he setts down there, which himself practices clean contrary:
where he speaks of the ability that should be in every minister of the
word, that he should know his quarter strooks, to be able to convince the
adversary, etc.


Minist. Why? will you have none Ministers but such as can preach? I can tell
you, that the twentieth minister in the land cannot preach?


Puritan The more the worse, for you and the rest how many soever there be
stand without repentance in a most damnable state, for you are most notorious
murderers of souls, in taking upon you so high a calling, and being so far
unfit for it: so many as perish for want of teaching, in your charge, their
blood the Lord will require at your hands:


Minist. The Bishop knew my ability before he made me minister.


Puritan Well, he stands in the state of damnation as you do, and thus much I
say unto you, and to all Idol Ministers, and to him, and all usurping
Archbishops and Lord Bishops, leave your unlawful callings into which you have
intruded your selves, and with speed repent, and humble your selves before the
Majesty of God, confessing your horrible and grecuous sins with Peter's
tears, in that you are the cause, yea and also the very murderers of so many
souls, as perish in your charges: knowing that the Lord will in that great
and terrible day, require their blood at your hands.


Jacke O Lord, my heart quaketh to hear of so great and grievous sins as
are in our Bishops, and in the whole ministry: but our Bishops are the cause
of all.


Puritan I will tell you Sir, I am persuaded in my very conscience, that the
Lord has given many of our Bishops over into a reprobate sense, for they do
wilfully oppose them selves against the Lord his knoen truth, yea and persecute
it, (and I suppose them to be in the state of the sin against the holy Ghost)
for they have manifested in their published writings, yea and pressed forth by
authority, such horrible blasphemous, heretical, yea damnable doctrines,
which my very heart trembles to repeat, in sort as they have set them down:
which if those (whom they falsely call puritanes) should set down or hold
the like errors and dangerous points, I warrant you the should soon be cut of
from the face of the earth, and right well they were worthy.


Jacke Now Sir I pray you let me hear some of the points they hold, and
that are so dangerous as you say, that I may be able to justify it to our
dumb dogs teeth, at Austins gate in London when I come home.


Puritan First you shall understand, the Bishop of London has published in
print, and that in an Epistle or preface before Barnardeus de loques book of
the Church, published in english, that the puritanes may as well deny the son
of God to be consubstantiall with God the father, as they may deny the
superiority of Archbishops and Lord Bishops, flat contrary to the saying of
our Savior Christ, Luke 22.


Jack. O monstrous and blasphemous wretch, that to maintain his fleshly
pleasure, will make such an odious comparison.


Puritan Nay, what say you to a Bishop that has two wives and both now
living? Do you not think it is a thing tolerable in a christian common
wealth, where the Gospel is professed?


Jacke No indeed do I not, I hope our magistrates will not suffer such a Bishop
to live, it were monstrous among common Infidels, much more intolerable, that
a Bishop in such a land as ours is, where the Gospel is truly taught: But I
pray you is there any such now living?


Puritan Yes in deed is there, and the Bishop of Saint David's in Wales is the
man, he is now living and both his wives, and yet still remains a Bishop.


Jacke Is it possible that a Bishop should commit such an horrible act as
this, how far are our Bishopps from obeing the commandment of The Apostle
Peter: who says, Feed the flock, and be ensamples to the flock: what
ensample is this? And does not the same God which says, Thon shall do noe
murder, which is death by our laws, does he not also say, Thou shalt not
commit adultery: And yet a Bishop to have twoe wives at once, and live in a
Church professing the sincerity of the Gospel: What say you to this Master
Vicker, is not our Church well governed think you?


Minist. If it be true, it is (I must needs confess) a horrible thing and
worthy of death, but I do not believe it.


Puritan It is very true, for the cause was brought before the high
commissioners at Lambehith, and how it is smothered up among the Bishops, and
the rest of the commissioners, I know not yet, but I could tell you the whole
couclusion if I were at London but half an hour.


Jacke Why the suffering of this, and other like villainies, to be committed in
our nation, are causes to stir up the Lord to wrath, against the whole land,
whereby he may spedily bring his judgments upon us, yea even to our utter
destruction.


Minist. It is so if it be true? but I will not believe it.


Puritan Well for the truth of the matter, I refer you to the high
commissioners, where it is recorded, with his wives names, vz. Elizabeth Gigge
and Ales Prime.


Minist. Indeed I have heard of the like before, that you puritans have put
forth a book in print under the name of Martine Marprelate, wherein many such
things are mentioned:


Puritan There is nothing set down in it, but there is good proof of the
same, and the Bishop of Winchester, who took upon him to confute it, has
confirmed it for the most part, and that he denies is most true.


Jacke What did he undertake to confute it? Alas he is altogether unlearned,
(for I have heard of him in Oxford, and the papists say, they can make him
believe the moon is made of green cheese) marry to get him a name (forsooth)
being a correcter with a Printer in fleetstreete in London, who printed a
Dictionarie called Sir Thomas Eliotts dictionarye, Cooper translated a piece of
Robert Stephanus his Thesaurus and joined it to the same with a few phrases,
and so bereaved the famous Knight of his labor, and calls it by the name of
Coopers Dictionary: how say you Master Vicker, was not this a knauish trick
tell me?


Minist. I say you deal very irreverently with my Lord: for I cann say nothing
to the matter else, for I know it not to be true?


Puritan What say you to this then master Vicker did you never hear of your
Lord Bishop of London, who made the Dyars, in Thames street who were robbed,
by thieves that stoale their cloothe, and brought it within his liberties,
which when the poor diars hearing where their clooth was, and coming to the
Bishop to demand their own goods, he said: if they would hang the thieves,
he would then tell them more, which the dyars did, and at their deaths,
confessed that to be the dyars cloth which the Bishop had, but the pore men
were never the near for their cloth, nor cannot get it or any part of it to
this day: and this is confessed to be true, by the bishop of Winchester in his
answer to Martine Marprelate, published in print by authority: wherein he
says, it is the Bishop of Londons own, by the laws of the land, because it
was taken within his liberties, mary he speaks nothing of the law of God,
according to conscience, in keeping of thief stolen goods from their right
owners, for conscience is fled from them (it seems) so soon as they are
gotten to be Lord Bishops once.


Minist. Yes Sir I know there is such a book named Martin Marprelate, a most
vile and ssaunderous libel, but I do not think my Lord of Winchester does
approve any thing that is set do wne there in any of those books, for they
have put forth three or four books under that title.


Jack Why Master Vicker, how do they to get their books printed?


Minist. Tush they do well enough for that, there is a sedstious fellow one
Walde-graue, who commonly prints all such books, (I know him well enough) he
did keep a shop at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard: at which
time he had his press and letters taken away from him, and destroyed for the
same cause, by my Lords grace of Canterbury, and now he works in corners up
and down the Country like a vagabond.


Puritan With a seared conscience, did the Bishops that violence to him, in
regard both of the cause, and also for the great charge he has of wife and
six small children, and now to bereave his Poor family of him, whose labors
was their only comfort and maintenance.


Jack Master Vicker how long was it since Waldegraues gooods were destroyed, I
have heard of him before now, but I know him not?


Minist. Tushe you know him well enough I am sure, it is since his goods were
destroyed about Ester was a twelve month.


Jacke And has he been all this time absent from his family?


Minist. I Sir, and if he had bin there, he would easily have bin had, for he
has bin watched well enough for that?


Puritan I will tell you Sir how they deal with him, when they have any
suspicion that he is at home, although he durst never come home, they stick
not in the dead time of the night, to break down the maine wales of his
house, and enter in with constables and pursiuants, and this is a common thing
with them.


Jacke I am persuaded, the Bishops had bin better to have given him freely 2.
hundred pounds toward the setting up of a new printinge house for himself,
then to have destroyed his as they have done:


Minist. I think so, for it may be he would have followed his calling some
other way, then to be employed in those things?


Jacke Yonder comes a man plodding a pace after us whatsoever he be?


Minist. It may be our company will increase, and so we shall go the more
cheerful, for it begins to to be late, and it is dangerous going here abouts,
late I can tell you?


Puritan It may be he is one of your coat Master Vicker?


Minist. I cannot tell, but if he be, he shall be welcome to me.


Jacke Surely he comes a pace, whatsoever he be?


Minist. It may be he would be glad of company?


Jacke Well let us go on and continue our talk?


Puritan Master Vicker I think be weary of our communication, if you be let
us know?


Minist. Noe by my faith Sir not I, say what you will a Gods name?


Puritan Fie, Master Vicker, will you swear? I think you learned that of
your Lord Bishop of London, for he uses it often, when he is at boules.


Jacke What will Bishops swear?


Puritan Swear Sir, I that they will, and defend it to, when they have done?
For in the first book of Martin, there is mention made of the Bishop of
Londons swearing, when he is at bowls: And the Bishop of Winchester in
answering the same, says thus, in page. 62. of his book, That our Savior
Christ usually swear by his faith in his sermons, For he said Amen, Amen,
which is as much to say (says he) as by my faith, by my faith?


Jacke Why is that a Bishop of God, that will swear thus?


Minist. Fo, I have heard my Lords grace of Canterbury swear by his faith an
hundred times, yea and by God to sometimes, and what he does, I take it as a
good president for such as I am to follow?


Puritan I Will tell you Master Vicker, I am of doctor Bridges his mind of our
Bishops: for (says he) page 339.340. That all our Lord Bishops in England, are
the Bishops of the Devil: And I am sure of it by these two marks, vz. by their
tyranical dealing against Gods children, and by their wicked and unconscionable
lives, that they are not of God?


Jacke I pray you has Doctor Bridges written any book that is published to
this effect?


Puritan Yes indeed, and the Bishop of Canterbury has confirmed it by his
authorizing of the same, and also by his continual practice against. Gods
children?


Jacke But I pray you Sir, how wickedly has he wrested the Scripture, in
saying our Savior Christ continually swear in his sermons, when he said Amen,
Amen?


Puritan Why the Bishop of Winchester, is most impudent in all his actions, for
very blasphemously in his sermon, preached at Mary Overies at London, said that
a man might as well find fault with the holy Scripture, as with our corrupt
Common book of prayer?


Jack Our upon him blasphemous wretch, he is certainly the Bishop of the
Devil, as Doctor Bridges says.


Puritan Will you hear some more of his Divinity?


Jacke O Yes I pray you Sir? And yet my heart trembles to hear of such odious
blasphemies as these:


Puritan He says it the 49. page of his book against Martine Marprelate:
That the Creed of the Apostles, Athanasius, and the Nicene, etc. contain in
them many palpable lies: Now tell me your opinion of this, is it not sound and
substantial doctrine I pray you tell me?


Jack Doctrine yea indede, this may truly be said to be the doctrine of
Devils? Why whither will our Bishops run in time trow you, if the Magistrate
suffer them?


Puritan I will tell you, even to their father the Devil: For they have at no
time taken in hand to write in defense of their hierarchy, but it has made
their eyes so to dazzle, that they run into most dangerous and damnable errors,
(as in this book of the Bishopps will be proved near. 500. errors) yea in
correcting and controling the mighty word of God, and also have interlaced
their writings with such contrariety of matter, as one part of their own
books may serve to confute the other, with infinite absurdities: yea and by
your leave to, even flat treason?


Jack Many good men did never judge the bishop of Winchester, to be but an
hipocrite?


Puritan He is a most bitter man to all those that fear God, and have to
deal with him, for he may well be compared to a horse with a galde back that
has bin so rubd, that he winces, frets, and chafes, so, that he is ready to
throw himself to utter destruction, with purpose to hurt him that rubd him:
Even so, this Bishop takes to himself so much liberty in abusing and
profaning the holy word of God, (against those that write in the Lords cause,
against their unlawful callings) and that I fear me, to the endangering both
of body and soul.


Jack I have heard that when he was at Lincoln he dealt not so hardly with
the ministers as now he does, and that often in his Sermons at Northampton he
would confess, that the Discipline was used and practiced in the Primitive
Church, a long time after the Apostles.


Puritan It is very true, and yet he says in his book against Martin, that
the holy Discipline is a platform devised he knows not by whom: And in an
other place of the same book he confesses that it was practiced by the
Apostles, and long time after in the Primitive Church, and upon the words
where he says it is not denied, there is pasted, at the commandment of the
Bishop of Canterbury, It is not yet proved, so that there is some Iar,
between themselves, although these two are most conversant together, and join
in one to persecute sinceere and faithful preachers of the word, and others of
the Lords children.


Jacke I had thought they would not have dissented one from a another of them?


Puritan Why sir in the 49. page of the same book the Bishop of winchester
says, the Bishop of Canterbury is a giddy head, and to be brideled, because he
authorized Doctor Whitaker his readinges against Bellarmina, wherein the
Apocripha is defaced: And M. Doctor Some one of their affinite no we, and a
noureresident, he calls the Archbishop of Canterbury An absurd Heretic,
because he holds baptism administered by weomen, to be the seal of Gods
couenante: page 3. of his book against Master Penri, and many like things I
could cite to you, of their diffenting on from another.


Jacke How like you of these things Master Vicker, be not these good fathers
of the Church, think you?


Minist. I like never a whit the worse of them for your words, for I know they
are but slanders?


Puritan Master Vicker, you I know like well of them, although the proofs
that their adversaries do bring be never so manifest and plain aganst them,
because you are in the same state, or worse (and may be) in that you do
unlawfully usurp your place, and having noe fit gifts to discharge your duty
in any measure: Remember what The Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 6.19. Woe is to me
if J preach not the Gospel, this is rightly pronounced upon you, and all such
Idols as you are?


Minist. If I read sermons and homiles, is it not as much as if I preached:
for Master Doctor Bridges says, that reading is preaching?


Puritan The Lord has promised noe such blessing unto reading as preaching,
for the word preached is the only ordinary means to salvation: But I pray you
for your comfort, hear what the prophet Jeremy says to you, in the 48. Chap.
Cursed be that man, that does the work of the Lord negligently, and Mallac.
2.7. says, the priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth, but how can you shun this curse Master Vicker? I pray
God humble your heart that you may acknowledge your sin, and crave pardon at
his hands, and leave the ministry, lest the Lord with a strong hand throw you
out to your everlasting woe.


Jacke Master Vicker he gives you good counsel, it were good for you to
follow it, if you do not, it will be the worse for you?


Minist. Well Sir it is noe matter, there be as wise as he will give me other
council?


Jacke Why I see Master Vicker is obstinate, he will not be persuaded by you?


Puritan Even as he will, I speak my conscience to him, he may choose if he
will follow it or not?


Jack I marvel what good hospitallitie the Bishop of London keeps, I have
heard that he is very covetous?


Minist. Indeed he does keep a good house?


Jacke What does not the dogs run away out of his house with whole shoulders.
I think a man may as soon break his neck, as break his fast at his house?


Puritan Surely I can say thus much by report of one that was his Chaplain,
whose name is Haiwarde Vicker of Saint Martins, by Charing cross, that often
times when he has dined at his Palace in London, he has made his servants,
to take the fragments and carry them to Fulham, but if there be any dainty
morcel left, he will wrap it up in his handkerchefe, and carry it in his bosom
for fear lest his men should begile him.


Jacke O Master Vicker, you have a most bountiful Lord: he is so liberal,
that he will not suffer the scraps to be bestowed upon the poor, but to be
kept for his servants supper?


Minist. It is faulse, for I have often seen alms given at his gates, when he
has lien at London:


Puritan I Will tell you what I have heard him say at Paul's cross my self
upon a time, following his text very well: (you must think) he burst me out
with a great exclamation of him self, in that he was poor and had noe money,
protesting what charges he had bin at, and that Paul's Church can bear me
witness: (says he) that I have noe money: And shortly after some of his own
servants being there present, and heard him, (belike thought to make their good
Lord a liar) very shortly after, robbed him, of certain hundred of pounds, for
which offense, he was so good unto his men, as to hang them up three or four
in number, (although he had the most part of his money again) and some of the
parties executed, protested to their knoweledge, he had much more money at
usury, and that his servants lived only upon bribes.


Jacke A Bishop a liar and a vserer, nay surely M. Vicker, if your Lord have
those two faults, it cannot be but he has more, so that for mine own part, I
think him verily to be the Bishop of the Devil.


Puritan Nay Sir I can give you proof for the same more, that he is surely
the Bishop of the Devil, for Martin Marprelate has set down a pretty thing in
his Epistle to the terrible priests, that the Bishope of London when he throws
his bowl, (as he uses it commonly upon the sabbath day) he runs after it,
and if it be toe hard, he cries, rub, rub rub, and says the Devil go with
thee, when he goes himself with it: So that by those words, he names him
self the Bishop of the Devil: but by his practice of tiranicall dealing
against the Lords faithful ministers, not only calls, but proves himself
to be the Bishop of the Devil.


Jacke Ha, ha Master Vicker, you see your Lord Bishop is a Devil by his own
confession: so indeed, you are not the Lords Minister, but the Minister of the
Devil, as your Lord Bishop is the Bishop of the Devil.


Minister You use your speeches at pleasure of my Lord, it may be you will not
so easily answer them when you are called thereunto?


Jacke Yes Master Vicker I warraant you? Send a pursiuant when you will for us,
and we will answer it, if we can not make our parts good enough, we will send
the weomen of Hampsteed to him?


Minist. What mean you by that?


Jacke If you will needs have me, I will tell you, you shall understand Master
Vicker, that your good Lord, at his first coming to be the Devils Lord at
London, began to play Rexe, (as he has lately done at Fulham, in cutting down
the trees, there, to the great impouerishing of the town) to cut down the
woods at Hampsteed, and needs he would do it, and began pretily well with it,
the towns men became suitors to him that he would not, they could not
persuade him, for he was Lord of it, he said: Well seeing the men could do
noe good with him, the women took the matter in hand, and as the Devils men
came, (that is your Lords) to cut down their woods, the weomen fell a swaddling
of them, so that they durst come noe more to cut down any trees there. Thus
you see the women overcame the Devil, and so feared him, that thereby they
preserved their woods. For by very nature, these Devils Bishops ar given to
destroy both Church and commonwealth? But if we be not good enough for them,
we will entreat the weomen of Hampsteed to take the matter in hand.


Minist. Well I doubt not but you will for all this lustines, kiss the Clinke
or gatehouse for this gear, for my Lords grace shall know of it, if my Lord
do not?


Jacke Why Vicker of the Devil, let the whole convocation house of Devils know
of it and you will, for they dare not, noe not Beelzebub of Canterburye the
chief of the Devils, come to disputation, thereby to approve their Callings to
be lawefull, and other points in controversy against the discipline of God, as
they have bin often challenged, and offered by the puritans, even to adventure
their lives against their Bishoprics, and yet they durst not. And I pray you
tell me; if they were not the Bishops of the Devil indeed, would they refuse
this offer?


Minist. Why the puritans have been often disputed with?


Puritan Where? In the Bishops closet? For they are ashamed to have it tried
before any Magistrate, Let them if they dare procure a free disputation, where
by every man may freely speak, and be indifferently heard, and if the Bishops
and al their partakers be not overthrown, I will loose my life for it?


Minist. Have they not bin already by public writing, and otherwise, but
especially by my Lords grace, his works against Cartwright, sufficiently
confuted I pray you?


Puritan Noe indede, but I will tell you what a noble man professing the Gospel
said, he de maunded of the old Lord Henry Howard (the Earl of Arundels
uncle now living, being a professed papist) what he thought of Whitgifts
answer to Cartwright, who answered, there was no comparison to be made
between them, for Whitgift (says he) is not worthy to carry Cartwrights books
after him for learning: Mark here the opinion of a papist, you know a deadly
adversary to Master Cartwright: and yet the ambitious wretch will not stick
now he is an Archbishop, to call those that are able to teach him (and which
were in the Gospel before him) boys, and revile them far beyond all
christian modesty: and again, if a man apply any new writer his opinion of
the reformed Churches, in defense of the Lords truth, as Master Calvin, Beza
or others, he will not also stick to brag and tell him, that he is able to
teach Calvin and Beza, or any of them all: but the wretch nor his associates,
dares not dispute with Master Cartwright, Calvin, or Bezaes inferiors.


Jacke Tush, foe, he sites now upon his cogging stool, which may truly be
called the chaier of pestilence, little may he do if he cannot brag, Crake
and face it out: for the truth is, he wrote against the Discipline, for noe
other end, but to get a Bishoppricke, for he never wrote since he has caught
one I warrant you: And the pide faced fool Doctor Bridges imitating him,
hoping to leap like as he has done, but it will not be?


Puritan O you are greatly deceived, D. Bridges has utterly renounced the
Bishopps as I have heard, for that the Archbishop has broken his faith with
him?


Jack How comes that to pass I pray you?


Puritan I will tell you, at the beginning of the last parliament, there were
Bishops to be stalled, and his grace had promised him very confidently, that
he would not only speak for him, also assure him of a Bishoppricke? Upon
which the aspiring wretch did only rely, otherwise it may be he would have
bribed some courtier to have dealt for him, as he did for his Deanery: But her
Majesty lying at Richmond, and master Doctor repairing thither, upon the green
before Richmond house, met with Master Thornbie the Master of the Sauoy, who
told him that he hard he was a suter for the Bishoppricke of such a place:
Master Doctor Bridges answered and said, it was true, he had the grant of it
at his grace his hands: says master Thornby, I had a promise of it to: but it
is certain that his grace has got it for an other man, and he has finished
it, and al is past, I can assure you of it: With that the Doctor was in his
mad mood, and said, has he served me so, why then I will say, and may
speak it truly, there is noe faith in a Bishop. Have I wrote in their
defense, and have gotten the ignomie, shame, and reproache of it by public
writing, and now to be thus vildely dealte with: J will tell you master.
Thornby, J do protest, and always will affirm it: That it is better to have
one inche of policy, then all the Divinity in the world. If master
Thornebie will deny this to be true, there be both godly and worshipful will
justify it to his face.


Jacke Nay it is like enough that the B. of Cant. has served him so, it is not
the first like prancke he has played, for it is his manner, he will promise
much and perform nothing: but persecute Gods ministers, and glory in him
self: For if any godly minister, or any other that fear God, come before him,
he will offer them the oathe, either to accuse themselves, or their christian
brethren, or both, yea though no body be able to charge them with any
offense: and if they will not swear, then to the Clinke, Gatehouse or white
Lion they go roundly, and when suit is made unto him for their liberty: Then
except they will enter into bonds to perform this, or do that: why he will
say they shall lie til they rotte, with other bitter words. And he was wont to
use these words often, and had a great pride in speaking them (I can not tell
whether he has left them now or not,) As long as the Queen and I live, it
shall be this or that. Judge you of this man, whether he has an humble
spirit, or an aspiring mind, to join him self with his dread sovereign
the Queens majesty. He were best to remember his predicessor Cardinal
Wolsey, betimes, lest he have the same end Cardinal Wolsey had.


Minister I hope for these your taunting speeches to see you trunst, if I meet
you handsomlye in place where?


Jack Why Vicker of the Devil, (I think you to be one of the Vickers of
Hell, that Martine speaks of) it is noe marvel, though you take the Bishops of
the Devils part. For Winchester when he went his visitations last, told your
companions the dumb dogs, that if his grace of Canterbury, and him self had
not kneeled before her Majesty for you, you had been all of you thrust out of
the ministry?


Puritan Oh wicked act, it had been better that neither of them had had a
joint to bow, then to work such a villanny to Gods Church.


Jacke Herein they used great policy (you must think) for if we had a
learned Ministry once, they know their kingdom would sone fall to the ground.
Therefore they take order for that. For they will suspend and thrust all those
out of the Ministry, that have gifts fit for that high calling: and keep none
in, except nonresidence, such as gape after Bishoppricks, or dumb Idol
ministers?


Papist you are well overtaken my masters? Which way travel you I pray?


Jacke Toward London Sir.


Papist What good news is there abroad do you hear any?


Puritan I know none good, for the land is sore troubled with these
treacherous Papists, and filthy Atheists: and our church pestered with the
Bishopps of the Devil, nonresidents, Popish priests, and dumb dogs, that
there is noe place, nor being for a faithful minister of the word: for if there
be any in any charge, the Bishops have their John Avales, to fetch them up
before them, and then if they will not subscribe, out of the ministry he goes
roundly?


Papist It was never merry world since there was so many puritans, and such
running to Sermons as there is now.


Jack Why? Do not you love to hear Sermons?


Papist Noe, I care for none of these precise fellows, I will not come at any
of their Sermons.


Jacke I smell you already, I perceue you are a Papist.


Papist Whatsoever I be, you may be sure I am noe puritan, for a Papist, is
always better then a puritan, and more friends he shall find, both at home
and abroad. And I have heard my Lords grace of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
Winchester, speak it with mine own ears.


Minist. I can say thus much my self, my Lords grace is not so much troubled
with papists as with puritanes?


Jacke And I can say thus much to, the papists have more favor of his grace a
great deal, then the Puritanes?


Papist My lords grace you know, had a good master, and one that kept him far
enough from this precisenes, I warrant you?


Jacke Who was his master I pray you?


Papist Mary Master Doctor Pearne Sir.


Jacke What Doctor Pearne? why he is the notablest turnecoate in all this land,
there is none comparable to him? Why every boy has him in his mouth, for it is
made a proverb, both of old and young, that if one have a coat or cloak
that is turned, they say it is Pearnd.


Puritan And do you think the Bishop of Canterbury will be as good a turner,
as his Master Doctor Pearne is?


Jacke Nay, he will exceed his Master, I am persuaded?


Puritan Me thinks there should be others as expert, and likely to make as
good workmen in that art, as his grace or his master Doctor Pearne himself is?


Jacke Who should they be?


Puritan What say you to John of Gloucester, Doctor Kennolde, Doctor Bancroft,
Doctor Goodman, the Abot that now is of Westminster, Doctor Sprent of
Bristowe, and Master Doctor Bridges Deane of Sarum.


Jacke Yea and I may say to you, all the Bishops of the Devil and nonresidence,
are likely to say pretly well to the matter to?


Puritan I had forgotten one that I should have ^ominated to, that is Doctor
Culpepper of Oxforde, who has the name to be a notable hunter?


Jacke What Doctor Culpepper, I Will tell you there is many good things in him that
way, but I will tell you one or two notes of his single gifts. For he is an
Archdeacon, and going in his visitation, not far from Oxford: It is an
ordinarye thing with them, to have a Sermon before the keep court, and always
the court is kept in the Ghurch? The preacher somewhat troubling him, (in
telling the spiritual fathers their duties) did sometimes nod at the preacher
so as he did perceive him, to the end he should make an end of his Sermon. The
preacher notwithstanding went forward with his text, which troubled Master
Doctor sore. Then he fell a beckoning to the preacher, the precher would not see
his signs, although the audience greatly marueled at him, then Master Doctor
(being soar galled you must think,) spoke to him and bad him come down: the
precher thought it not long (though Master Doctor were weary to hear his duty
told him in so plain a manner) and seeing he could use no means to get him
out of the pulpit, caled the cryar to him, and bad him cry, Ho yes, and so he
did. Then went he very reverently about his business, and left the preacher in
the pulpit: Now tell me I pray you, whether he had more mind to hear the
word preached, or to be with his kenell of hounds.


Puritan Is this Doctor Culpepper of Oxforde I pray you?


Jack I mary is it Sir, it is the same man, and very well known to love a
hound a hawk and, etc.


Puritan I pray you can you tell me, I have heard that D. Bond is made master
of Magdalins in Oxford, contrary to the statutes of the University: Whereas
one Master Smith was first elected, according to the orders of the house before
him, he being one that stands for reformation in our corrupt Church government.
Therefore as I have heard, the Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester, to
prevent him, labored to her Majesty, that she would give commandment, that
the house should accept of Doctor Bond in his steed, which by the Bishops
great labor, it was accomplished.


Jacke It is very true Sir, I can assure you of that, and he may well be called
the Bond of iniquity for any goodness is in him, he looks I can tell you to be
a Lord Bishop of the Devil shortly, besides he is a good daunser: I have
heard how he ere now, has come to a house in Oxforde, (it shall be
namelesse,) where certain weomen of the town, were ready to go dance, (it
may be a match made of him before hand) comes me in the same house very
plesauntly to them: saying, you are well met, and makes him ready for them:
First put of his Cappe, saying lie thou there Cap, then his tipper, lie thou
there tippet, then his gown, lie thou there gown: And last of all his book
(says he) lie thou there Divinity and all: Then about the house he goes with
the weomen: now tell me I pray you, if he do not draw in the bond of
iniquity or not?


Puritan Surely I see that noe good men are left almost in any place, where
they may be a help to increase or comfort those that fear God. For the
Bishops have laid so many plotts, that they have prevented all means
whatsoever. Is not this a Devilish policy of the Bishop of Canterbury, to
place such heads in the university: That none shall proceed, or be preferred
but such as will subscribe. Well though the admonition which the Archbishop of
York gave him in a letter before his death, do not work that effect in him,
which the Bishop wished: Yet our hope is, that the Lord will soon bring him to
the same end, at the which, he may with the same Bishop confess his sin, in
usurping that unlawful calling he is now in: that is a Pope or Pastor of
pastors, with all other his injurious and tirannical dealing with Gods ministers
and other his children. For of all the Bishops that ever were in that place, I
mean in the Sea of Canterbury, did never so much hurt unto the church of God,
as he has done since his coming. No Bishop that ever had such an aspiring
and ambitious a mind as he, no not Cardinal Wolsey: none so proud as he, no
not Steven Gardener of Winchester: none so tirannical as he, noe not Bonner.


Jacke How say you Master Vicker, were it not a good thing if al Bishops, and
such Idol shepherds as you are were a dying, then you would be in better
minds then all the days of your life before?


Minist. You say your pleasure, but I care not what you say, that's the best of
it.


Papist Master Vicker the gentlemen are disposed to move your patience,
therefore you must bear with them.


Jacke Master Parson thinks I am in good earnest, but he is deceived, for I
assure you I do nothing but to see what this puritan will say: and the
puritan thinks I am one of his fraternity.


Papist But are you not so indeed?


Jacke Noe truly, I came from Orleans, where I heard Mass every day: see see
how hard the, Vicker and he are in talk, let them alone we will go on.


Papist I can hardly believe that you heard Mass at Orleans?


Jack if I had not bin present at the Mass, I should have been taken for a
Hugonot, and so I should hardly escaped with my life.


Papist I am the gladder of your company.


Jacke And I of yours, for I perceue you are a Catholic.


Papist Yea indeed, and I will not deny it: look, I think the puritan and
the Vicker will go by the ears?


Jack He shall do the Vicker no wrong for all my speeches to him: and he will
be ruled by me, we will have him before my Lords grace, for we will give him
the slip, when we come in the City, and one of us will fetch a pursiuant and
the other twoe shall dog him.


Papist Content sir, if you please, let it be so?


Jacke How now my masters can you not agree?


Minist. I will deal well enoughe with him, if he durst stand to his words.


Puritan I will justify any thing that I have spoken, if not let me loose my
life, but to conclude, it is late, and because we must depart, I will tell you
one thing, and I would wish you to make use of it and hear what the Prophet
Esaias says cap. 59. 10 verse. Their watchmen are all blind, they have noe
knowledge, they are all dumb dogs they cannot bark, they lie and fleepe, and
delight in sleeping. And these greedy dogs can never have enough, all these
shepheardes cannot understand, and Zach arie 11.17. O Jdole shepherde that
leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye:
his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.
And so fare ye well.


FINIS.

