All the statutes of the Stannary. 1562.


HEre follows the Confirmation of the Charter, perteynynge to all the Tynners
within the county of Deuonshyre, with their Statutes also made at
Crockerentorre by the hole assent and concent of all the said Tynners, In the
year of the reign of our sovereign Lord king Henry the eyghte. The. ii. year.

HEnry by the grace of god king of England and France, lord of Irelande, To
al and singular to whom these present letters shall come gretyng. We understand
by the letters patentes of the late sovereign lord Edward the fourth king of
England, a confirmation was made by these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England, and France, lord of Irelande,
To all to whom these presents shall come greting. We understand by these
letters patentes of the sovereign lord Edward the third, late king of England
our progenitour made in these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England and France, lord of Irelande, To
all to whom these present letters shall come gretyng. We understand by our
letter late caused to be made under our seal at our retournyng into England
by these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England lord of Irland and Duke of
Aquitaine. To al archbishops, bishops, abbots, priours, earls, barons,
Justices, shyrifes, governors, and mynisters, and to all bayliffes, and other
his faithful gretinge. We understand by a writing confirmed, which lord
Edward late king of England our father caused to be made to the tynworkers
of the cou^ty of Deuonshyre, in these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England and France, lord of Irlande and
Duke of Aquitaine, to al archebishoppes, bishops, abbottes, priours, Earls,
barons, justices, shiriffes, governors, ministers, and to all bayliffes and
other his faithefull gretinge. We understand by wrytinge, which the lord
Edward of noble memory, sometime king of England our father, made to the
Tinworkers of the county of Devonshire, in these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England, lord of Irelande, and Duke of
Aquitaine. To all archebyshophes, bishops, abbottes, prioures, earls, barons,
justices, governors, ministers, and to all bailifes and other his faithful,
gretynge.

Of the Charter.
SCiatis nos ad emendationem Stannarioru^ nostrorum in Com^. Deuon^, et ad
tranquillitatem, et vtilitatem Stannatoru^ nostrorum eorundem concessisse pro
nobis et heredibus nostris quam omnes Stannatores predicti opera^tes in
stannariis illis que sunt dominica nostra du^ operantur in eisdem Stannariis
sint liberi et quieti de placitis natiuorum et de omnibus placitis et querelis
curiam nostra^ et heredum nostroru^ qualitercumque tangentibus. Ita quod non
respondea^t coram aliquibus iusticiariis vel ministris nostris seu heredum
nostroru^ de aliquo placito seu querela infra predicta Sta^naria emargente,
nisi coram custod nostro Stannariorum nostroru^ predictorum qui pro tempore
fuerit exceptis placitis terre and vite et membroru^ nec recedant ab
operationibus suis per summonicione^ alicuius ministroru^ nostrorum seu heredum
nostrorum nisi per summonicionem dicti custodis nostri. Et quam quieti sint de
omnibus tallagiis theoloniis stallagiis auxiliis et aliis custumis quibuscumque
in villis portubus feriis et marcatis infra Com^ predictum, de bonis suis
propriis. Concessimus etia^ eisdem sta^natoribus quam fodere possint stannu^
and turbas ad stannu^ fodendu^ vbique in terris moris et vastis nostris et
alioru^ quoru^cumque in Com^ predicto, et aquas and cursus aquarum ad
operationes Sta^narioru^ predictoru^ diuertere, vbi et quocie^s opus fuerit et
emere busca^ ad funtura^ Sta^ni sicut antiquitus fieri co^sueuit sine
impedimento nostri vell heredum nostrorum. Episcopum abbatum priorum comitum
baronu^ ceu aliorum quorumcumque, et quam custos noster predictus vel eius
locum tenens teneat omnia placita inter Stannatores predictos emergencia et
etiam inter ipsos and alios forinsecos de omnibus transgressionibus querelis et
co^tractibus factis in locis in quibus operantur infra stannaria predicta
similiter emergentia et quam idem custos habeat plenam potestatem Stannatoribus
predictis, and aliis forinsecis in huiusmodi placitis iusticiandi, et iustitiam
faciendi prout iustum et hactenus in stannariis illis fuerit vsitatum. Et si
qui Stannatorum predittorum in aliquo de liquerint per quod incarcerari debeant
per custodem predictu^ arestentur et in prisona nostra de Lidforde et non alibi
custodiantur and detinea^tur quousque secundu^ legem et consuetudinem regni
nostri de liberentur. Et si aliqui Stannatoru^ predictoru^ super aliquo facto
infra Com^ predictum, non tangente stannaria predicta, se posuerint in
inquisitionem patrie, vna medietas iuratorum inquisitionis huiusmodi, sit de
sta^natoribus predictis and alia medietas de forinsecis. Et de facto totaliter
tangente Stannaria predicta, fiant inquisitiones sicut hactenus fieri
consueueru^t et si quis eorundem Stannatoru^ fugitiuus fuerit vel vtlagatus vel
aliquod delictu^ fecerit pro quo catalla sua amittere debz. catalla illa per
custodem predictum et coronatorem nostru^ Com^ predicti apprecie^tur, and per
ipsos prorimis villatis liberentur ad repondendum inde nobis et heredibus
nostris cora^ iusticiariis itenera^tibus in com^ predicto, Volumus insuper et
firmiter precipimus quam to tum Stannum tam album quam nigrum vbicumque
inue^tum et operatu^ fuerit in Comitatu predicio ponderetur apud Cauistocke
Asperton vel Chaggforde per po^dera nostra ad hoc ordinata and signata sub
forisfactura stanni predicti et quod totum illud Stannum coignetur in eisdem
villis singulis annis coram custode predicto ante die^ sancti Michaelis in
mense septembris sub foru^ co^cessimus etia^ pro nobis et heredibus nostris
quod omnes sta^natores nostri predicti totu^ stannu^ suu^ sic po^d ratulicite
vendere possiut cuicumque voluerint in villis predictis faciendo nobis et
heredibus nostris coignagium, et alias consuetudines debitas and vsitatas nisi
nos et he redes nostri Stannum illud emere voluerimus. Quare volumus et
firmiter precipimus pro nobis et heredibus nostris quam Stannatores nostri
predicti habe a^t omnes libertates and liberas co^suetudines et quietancias
suprascriptas et quam eis sine occasio^e vel impedime^to nostri vel heredu^
nostroru^ Justiciarioru^. Escaetoru^ vicecomitu^ aut alioru^ balliuoru^ seu
ministroru^ nostroru^ quoru^cu^que racionabiliter gaudea^t et vtantur in forma
predicta hiis testibus venerabilibus patribus W. Cou^n^ et Lich felden. S.
Saru^ et I karlion Epreis He^rico de lacer Comite Lincolu^ Radul de mo^te
Hermeri Comite Gloucester et Herford, Humfred de Bohun Comite Hereford et essex
adomaro de valencia. Hugone le despe^ser. Johe^ de Hastinges et aliis. Datum
per manu^ nostram apud Westmonasterium de cimo die April, Anno regui nostri
tricesimo tertio. Nes aute^ co^cessiones predictas ratas and gratas habe^tes,
easde^ pro nobis et heredibus nostris quantum in nobis est concedimus et
confirmamus, sicut carta predicta rationabiliter testatur, hiis testibus
venerabilibus. w. Archiepiscopo Eboru^ Anglie primate. w. Wigoru^ episco.
Ca^cellario nostro, Gilberto de clare comite Glocestrie and Herefordie, Joha^ne
de Warenna comite Surre, Roberto de Clifforde Pagano Tibetoti, Roberto filio
pagani senescallo hospicii nostri et aliis. Datu^ per manu nostra^ apud Eboru^
quarto decimo die Augusti, anno regni nostri quarto. Nos aute^ concessiones
predictas ratas et gratas habe^tes easde^ pro nobis et heredibus nostris
qua^tum in nobis est predictis sta^natoribus concedimus et co^firmamus sicut
carta nostra predicta rationabiliter testater Propterea volentes eisde^
Sannatoribus graciam facere vberiorem in hac part co^cedimus eis pronobis et
heredibus nostris quod ipsidu^ operantur in Stannariis illis quieti sint de
muragiis stallagiis taxationib et contributionibus quibuscu^que de propriis
bonis suis in Com^. predicto hiis testibus veneralibus patrib. w. Archiepiscopo
Eborum Anglie primate. I. Elien episcopo Cancellario nostro, H. Lincoln epis.
The saurario nostro. Thoma Comite Norfolk, et Marescallo Anglie Auunclo nostro
car. Jo hanne de warenna comite Surre. et Thoma Wake, Johanne de Boos.
Senescallo hospitii mostri and aliis, Datum per manum nostrum apud Stanhope
sexto die Augusti. Anno regni nostri Primo.

Nos autem tenore Carte nostre sub sigillo quo nunc vtimur in Anglia tenore
presentiu^ duximus exemplificandum. In cuius rei testimoniu^ has litteras
nostras fieri fecimus pate^tes, Test me ipso apud Langle duodecimo die
Noue^bris, anno regni nostri Anglie decimo septimo regni vero nostri Frauncie
quarto. Nos aute^ litteras predictas ac omnia et singula in eisdem co^tentarata
et grata habe^tes, easde^ pro nobis et heredib nostris qua^tum in nobis est
acceptamus et approbamus ac nu^c Stannatoribus stannarioru^ predictorum et
eorum successorib ratificamus et confirmamus prout littere predicte
rationabiliter testa^tur. In cuius rei testimonium has litteras nostras fieri
fecimus patentes. Test me ipso apud Westmonasteriu^ vicesimo septimo die
Noue^. anno regni nostri primo. Nos aute^ cartas et litteras predictas ac omnia
et singula in eisdem conte^ta rata et grata habentes, easdem pro nobis et
heredibus nostris qua^tu^ in nobis est acceptamus et approbamus ac dilectis
nobis nunc Stannatoribus Stannarioru^ predictoru^ et eorum successoribus tenore
presentiu^ ratificamus et confirmamus prout carte et littere supradicte
rationabiliter testantur, In cuius rei testimoniu^ has litteras nostras fieri
fecimus pate^tes. Test me ipso apud West monasteriu^ duodecimo die Februarii.
Anno regni nostri Tercio.

Pro quatuor marcis solut in Hanaperio.
DEuon^, Magna Curia domini regis Ducatus sui Cornubie tenta apud
Crockerentorre in comitatu Deuon^, coram Thoma Deneys armigero, locum tenente
Henrici Merney militis Custod, Stannarie domini regis in Comitatu Deuonie
Vicesimo quarto die mensis Septembris, Anno regni Regis Henrici octaui Secundo.

The names of the Jurates.
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Chaggeforde.
John Wolcot of chudlegh John Brabon Thomas Staplehyll Wyllyam Rise John Wyddon
Robart Foxforde Robart Wanell Wyllyam Fu^selande Robart Windeyate Richard
Wratt John Nucombe. Jun^, Wyllyam Nose worthey Thomas Myller Wyllyam Caselegh
Wyllyam Fursse Wyllyam D^nbolde Alexander W^kes Thomas Bat(...)ill Thomas
Tomlyn John Aysshe Richard Crote Wyllyam Mowry Galfridus Loskey John Smyth
corser
xxiiii. Jurats of the sta^narie court of Aysberton.
Richard Hamlyn John Vele John Bonycombe John Maddocke Wyllyam Myller John
Baron Wyllyam King of Hole John Air Rychard Langworthy Thomas Mathue John
Eexte of Bre^ston Rychard Foxforde Richard Baker John Wydecombe Rychard Heart
Wyllyam Wydecombe John Clyffe Wyllyam Edward John Saunder Thomas Gauerocke
Mychell Sperkewyll John Baker Robart Tomlyn Wyllyam Berde.
xxiiii. Jurats of the sta^narie court of Plymton.
Wyllyam at Hele. Wyllyam Read John Bear Nycolas Brugge Robarte Batyn Nycolas
Comb John Head Water Adam Wyllyam Odymer John Peake at Hele Wyllyam Tyllam
Wyllyam Forde Wyllyam Brusey John Elberton. Roger Eggecombe Wylliam Chreston
Jurdan Brugge Elias Elforde Androw Wattis Robart Hamme John Scobell Richard
Rose Richard Pomery William Wyett
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^naries court of Tauistocke.
Steven Toker Richard Langesforde John Chreston John Leywod John Glubbe John
Horewyll. John Cholwyll John Gye John Peke of Way Thomas Forde John Draper
Thomas Adam. William Soped John Hyllan Wyllyam Gyll John Eston Robert Borne
Robert Heyne Henry Humfrey Roger Langesforde Wyllyam Stephen John Tanner Henry
Haly John Heart.
The Statutes.
THat every chosen, sworn and tried by the assente and consent of all the
Stanners in the county aforsayd, Enact, ordeine, and constitute, that every
statute of the Sta^ners before this time than made to be void, broken, and of
none efecte, and those done a new to be in this court affirmed as hereafter
follows.

First be it affirmed and enacted at this present court, that al manner of
plees be pledeable in the Tynne court, and al manner of matters, before the
Warden or his deputye or Steward for the time being, except.iii. that is to
say, plee concerning land, life, and maime, as it is expressed in our Charter.

And also be it enacted, that no deliverance nor wythername be delivered by
the Warden, under warden, or steward, to any person or persons for any Tyn,
nor for any matter touching Tynne or Tynworkes.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that it shall be lawful for every man to dig
tynne in every place within the county of Devonshire, where as Tyn may be
found, and also to carry water to their works, without any let or trouble of
any person or persons, according to the old usage and confirmation of our
Charter, and according to our custom out of time that no mind is has been
used. And if any person or persons, let, trouble, or vex any man, to dig
Tyn, or to carye water for the same, contrary to our custom and usage, if it
be found by verdicte of.xii. men at the law day. He that so lets, vexes,
or troubles any such person or persons, shall fall in the penalty of.xl. li.
as often as he so lets, vexes, or troubles, the one half thereof to my
Lord Prince, and the other half to him that was so let, vexed, or
troubled, and a Fieri facias to be warded as well for my Lord Prince, as for
the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that all Tyn gathered, washed, and made
clean within the jurisdiction of the said Stannarie, be fined and made white
Tynne, before the feast of Michaelmas, and so brought to the coynage, and there
coined before the same feast, upon peine of forfaiture of the same tynne to my
lord Prince, and every person that so coyneth white tynne, shall pay for the
coynage of every. C. of Tyn so coined.xviii. d. ob. quam. and also yearly at
Myghelmas.viii. d. called white rent.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no action from henseforth shall be sued
nor taken against any spalyar, for workyng in any tynneworke, but against him
or them that claims the free hold.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person or persons being tinners,
voluntarily appear before any man (except it be before the Warden or his
deputy, for any matter determinable before the said warden) if it be found by
verdite of.xii. men at the lawdaie, that then he to make fine with the warden
or his deputy after his or their discrecion. And if it be found by verdite of
xii. men, at the suite of the party, then he shall lose.x. li. the one half to
my lord Prince, and the other half to him that will sue it, and a Fieri facias
to be awarded as well for my lord Prince, as for the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that from henseforth no tynner sue none other
tinner, for any tin or tinworkes, but only in the tynne court. And also that
not inner sue none other tinner for any other cause (except ple concerning
land, life, and mayhim) but in the ti^ court, the court of Lidforde, orels in
the court of whom he holds, after the custom and manner, upon peine of a
reasonable fine to be ceased by the warden or his deputy, if it be found by
verdite of.xii. men at the law court. And if it be found by verdict of.xii.
men at the suite of him that was so sued, he shall fall in the penalty of.x. li.
the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to him that was so sued,
and a Fieri facias, to be awarded as well for my lord Prince as for the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no tinner nor spalier fet any warrant,
nor supersedias of peace against any tinner or spaliar, but only with the
warden or his deputy: And if it be found by verdite of.xii. men at a laweday,
he shall make fine with the warden or his deputy. and if it be found by
verdite of.xii. men, at the suite of the party, he shall lose.C. ^. The one
half to my lord Prince, and the other half to him that was so grieved, and a
Fieri facias to be awarded, as well for my lord Prince, as for the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person or persons enter into any
tin work with force, or so take away any tyn out of any tynne work, if it be
found by verdite of.xii. men at a lawday for my lord Prince, he shall be
committed to Lydford, and there to remain til he make fine with the warden or
his deputy: and if the said entree or taking away of tynne be found by
verdicte of.xii. men, before the warden his deputy, or his steward, at the
suite of the party that is so disseased, or has his tyn so taken away, he
that so enters or takes away any such tynne, shall fall in the penalty of
xl. li. the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to the party that
is so grieved, and a Fieri facias to be awarded, as well for my lord Prince as
for the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no person ne persons being tinners,
shall not be returned in any Jurye for the king, nor between party in no court
of the stannarie, but only in the court where he dwells.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person or persons give or promise
any tynworke or part of any tynworke that is in variaunce or debate between
party and party to any gentilman or other person, to have lordship or
maintenance for the same, the said work or part of the said work so given
or promised, shall remain to the elder owners, and he that so gives or
promises, and he that so takes, if it be found at a law court by verdite
of.xii. men, they both shall make fine with the warden or his deputy, and if
it be found by verdite of.xii. m^n at the suit of the party, in an action of
meintenaunce, every of them shall fall in the penlltie of.xx. li. The one half
to my lord Prince, and the other half to him that will sue, and a Fieri facias
to be awarded as well for my lord Prince as for the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no person or persons make no synder
tynne after it is watered, be it alaide with other tyn or not, or make any
hard Tynne without it be marked with this letter. H. upon pain of forfaiture
of the same tynne, the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to him
that so finds it.

Also be it enacted that the owners of every blowing house shall enter their
house, mark of his house, at the law court next after such a house is made,
in the stewards books, and also every man that blows and coyneth white tynne,
shall enter his hot mark in the stewardes books before he coin his tynne,
upon peine of for fayture of the same tynne that is so coined.

Also be it enacted, that no tin be not retained with no person or persons, by
sign, badge, token, liuerey, promise, or otherwise: but such as be manuell
servants, and other as the law does permit, but only with my lord Prince,
the warden or his deputy, or with such as my said lord Prince shall assign,
upon peine of for faiture to every man for every month so retained.xl s. if it
be found by verdite of.xii. men, or otherwise by due examination, or by
sufficient proves had before the said warden or his deputy.

Also be it enacted, that if any merchant or other person bie any tyn, and
afterward the said ti^ be found not marchantable, that then if he that bought
the said tyn come to the court and bring the said tyn or part thereof and the
owners mark, and the house mark not melted nor broken, that then the said
tyn shall be melted openly in the court: and if there be any sinder tyn therein
or not marchauntable, that then the owner of the said tin and he that blue the
said tynne, by the oversight of the warden, his deputy or steward, shall
recompense the said marchaunte for his costs and charges, and also to for fayt
the same tyn to my lord Prince, and to make fine with the warden or his deputy
for the same. And if the said tynne be found good and marchantable before the
said warden or his deputy, then the said marcha^t shall fall in the penalty of
a.C. s. half to my Lord Prince, and the other half to him that is so grieved,
and a Fieri facias to be awarded vt supra.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that where as diverse owners be in one work
parteners, and if any of them will defraude his parteners, and so suffers the
said work to be a lay, and by covenant between a stranger and him, suffers
the said stranger to pitche the said work, orels is awarned of the said
pitche of the said work, and does not his partener or partnars to ware of the
said pitche, and so defraudeth his parteners, that then he that so defraudeth
his party shall lose his part of the said work to his fellows, and he that so
pitcheth and he that so defraudeth, every of them shall fall in the penalty
of.xx. li. the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to them that
were so defrauded, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men at the suite of the
party, that was so defrauded, and a Fieri facias to be awarded as well for my
lord Prince as for the party.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any spaliers yt has the keeping of
any man's work, and suffers the said work to be alaye, by covenant between
him and a stranger, and causes the said stranger to pitche the said work and
so defraudeth him and his parteners that took him the work to keep, that the^
he that so pitcheth shall lose his pitche, and he that so defrauded, and he
that so pitched, every of them shall lose.x. li. the one half to my lord
Prince, and the other half to the party, if it be found by verdite of.xii.
men, at the suite of the party, and a Fieri facias to be awarded as well for my
Lord Prince as for the party.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that a Nichil shall be returned as it has been
used, and the baylie be duly examined in the court, that the defendant may not
be attached, and that the said defendaunt has no goods ne cattle whereby he
may be attached.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that al bargains and sales hereafter to be
made by any person or persons being within the age of.xvi. years, to any
person or persons, to be void and of none effect.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any man or woman die seized of any
tynworkes, their heir or heirs being within the age of.xvi. years, that then
he or she that is next of kin, to whom the right of the said work shall not
desce^d, or such as his father or mother puts in trust shall have the rule of
the said tynworkes, and to yield account to the said heir or heirs, when he
or they comes to the age of.xvi. years, and to have reasonable for his costs
and charges.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that from hensforthe al manner of bargains
and sale made of al tinworkes, whereof any man is seized of, as in the right of
his wif continue no longer but duringe the couerture, and after the said
couerture determined, all such bargains and sales to be utterly void and of
none effect, and that it shall be lawful to every such wife or their heirs to
enter into the (...) (...) so holden by their said husebande^ (...) of the
penalty of any statute, and (...) or claim further therefore to be made. (...)
enacted and ordained, that from hense (...) nor warning made by any person or
persons to any person or persons being within the age of xvi. years, of any
tynneworke or tynworkes, be in any wise to them prejudicial, but utterly to be
void and of none effect, except it be given in open court, to his garden in
the behalf of the said enfante, and thereupon the said garden to make defense
lawful without couin, fraud or color, so that the possession of the said
enfant be not los^, nor reuouered in the defaute of the said garden upon peine
of for fayture of.xx. li. if it be found against the garden, by verdicte
of.xii. men, at the suite of the party, and thereupon al such recouers to be
void and of none effect.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any person or persons being Tynners
or Spaliers, refuse to pay or hereafter refuse to pay any part of such sum
or sommes of money as is or hereafter shall be cessed upon any of them by the
ordinance and assent of.iiii. substanciall Customers of every of the.iiii.
courts, chosen and appointed by the warden or his deputy, for the ceassing of
the same, for the confirmation of our charter, and for such other charges and
business as has be done, or here after shall be done for the wealth of the
Stannary, shall fall in the penalty of a.C. s. if it be found by verdicte
of.xii. men at the law day, or otherwise by sufficient proves had before the
Warden or his deputy, the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to
the^ that shall be so assigned by the said warden or his deputy for the leuieng
of the said money so ceased, to the use of the hole body of the sta^nary, and
a Fieri facias to be awarded.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that no person ne persons make no wash but
he warn his parteners that have borne the charge with him of the workinge of
the Tin, and none other, upon peine of for fayture of.x. li. the one half to
my lord Prince, and the other half to his parteners that have borne the
charge with him, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men, at the suit of the
party grieved, and a Fieri facias to be awarded as well for my lord Prince as
for the party.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any person or persons being leased
of any tynworke, or part of any work now at this court holden at
Crockerentory, and so seized, hereafter peasably continue.ii. Mighelmas washes
without claim made in open court to the same and entered into a book that
shall hereafter remain in the said court of record, where as the said
tynworke lies in, he or they that so have continued peasably any such work
or works, shall have the said work or part of the work to him and to their
heirs in fee, according to the custom of the Stannarie. Provided always that
this act extend not nor be prejudicial to any woman covert, infant, within
the age of. ^vi. year, men out of the realm, and men being in prison, having
no space nor liberty to make his claim, nor to the heirs of any lunatike man.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any action of trespass be brought by
any tynner for any trespass done in his ground, and then the defendaunt comes
into the court and says that the place where as the trespass is supposed is his
freholde, and prays to be dismissed for as much as it is concerning land,
that then the steward shall give day at the next court to bring in his deed,
whereby the freholde may appear in him, and then he to be dismissed, and if not,
he to make answer to the trespass at his peril.

Also be it enacted and ordained, as it has been used in times paste, that.iii.
manner of gifts of tynworkes to be good, that is to say, by Testament, letter
of Attorney, and hand lyuery.

Also be it ordained, where as a man has diverse tin works, and will depart
from them by hand lyuerye, or otherwise, by letter of attorney, it requires
lyuery to pass in every work.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any person or persons sell and
deliver any white Tyn or it be coined, whereby my lord Prince shall lose his
coynage, he shall forfayte the said tynne to my lord Prince, and to make fine
for his untrue demeanor.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any man coin any other man's tyn in
his own name, the same tyn shall be forfayte to my lord Prince, and he that so
coined it to make fine for his untrue demeanynge.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that where as diverse parteners be in one
work, it shall be laufull for every of them to work in his own part, without
any let or danger to his fellows, and that his fellows to take no tynne at
wash, but for as much as they have wrought, or as they have leyde spale for.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that if any tynner be wronged, that then he
to complain to the Steward at the court, and if they will not do him
Justice, but be parshial, then he to complain to the under warden and if he
will do him no Justice, that then he to complain to the chief warden, and if
he do no justice, that then he to complain to my lord Princes counsel at
his liberty, and if any tynner do contrary to this act, he shall fall in the
penalty of.xx. li. the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to
him that he complayneth upon, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men, at a law
day.

Also be it enacted and ordained that if any shireffe eschetour, bailey arrant,
or any other person arrest, trouble, or vex any tinner going to his work,
being in his work, or coming from his work, as it is expressed in our
charter, except it be by the co^maundme^t of the warden, his deputy, or
steward, that then he shall fa^ in the penalty of.xx. li. half to my lord
Prince and the other half to him that was so grieved, and a Fieri facias to be
awarded if it be found by verdite of.xii. men.

Also be it enacted and ordained, that where as in times paste, al tynners have been customefree of all manner of Tollage, Toll, Stallage aid, and al other
manner of customs, in towns, Ports, Feres, and marketes, of their own proper
goods, as it is expressed in our said Charter, and that if any customer,
controller, mayour baylife, waterbailife, steward of fra^ches, or any other
person take any money of any tynner for any of the articles above rehearsed,
except it be the kings custom, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men, at the
law day, he shall make fine with the warden, or his deputye, and if it be
found by verdite of.xii. men at the suyte of the party, he shall lose ten
pound, the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to him that was
so grieved, and a Fieri facias to be warded as well for my lord Prince as for
the party.

Also be it enacted that no man being a tynner, at the suite of any man shall
not apere nor pass in any assizes, neither Nisi prius against no tinner or
tinners for working or digginge for tin in any man's freholde, according to
the custom of the Stannarie, upon peine of forfayture of.xx. li. the one half
to my lord prince, and the other half to the profit, use, and behalf of the
Sta^uary, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men at the laweday.

Also be it enacted, that it shall be lawefull from henseforth to every learned
man to plead in every of the. ^iii. tin courts, so that they plead there in
english, and he that does the contrary, his ple to be void and no more to be
admitted to plead any ple in any of the said courts

Also be it ordained that a Scire facias shall be awarded upon every statute where
the party is put to his action.

IN the high court of our sovereign lord the king, in his duchy of Cornwall,
holden at Crockerentory in the county aforesaid, before Phillip Champernon
knight, in the stead of Henry Marquis of Exester, warden of the Tynners under
our sovereign the king, in the foresaid county of Devonshire, the.xxviii.
day of October, in the.xxiiii. year of the reign of king Henry the.viii.

The names of the.xii. Jurates.
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Chaggeforde.
John Southcote Willyam Burgrn John Atyshyll Richard Wanell Phillip Furse John
Newcombe
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Ayssheberton.
John Vele Wyllyam Smyth Robert Hamlen John Ferres Wyllyam Myller John
Horsehame Wylliam Noseworthy John Shere of Bon^hill Godfrey Los^ey Wyllyam
Knapman Wyllyam Hoar John ^ndecote John Gray John Roo of Beridon Thomas Elberde
John Mayor John Bowdo^ of doccombe Thomas Hereys John French Harry Erose John
yoldon of midilcote Wyllyam Benet Wyllyam Coming John Langworthy
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Plimton.
Richard Chalons John Mason Richard Willing John Foot Thomas Berman Wyllyam
Brende Nycolas Leteltor Nicolas Thorninge Baldewine Hele John Hutchyn Wyllyam
Clarke Harry Caunterell John La^gworthy of bokeland Thomas Phyllyp Richard
Coyshe Richard King Walterus Row Nycolas Brende John Pethybrygge John
Wydecombe Wyllyam Baron Wyllyam Elys Thomas Predyaux John Voyse Richard Tailor
John Forforde John Maddock of Husshe Thomas ^amlyn Elyas Heart Wyllyam Snowdon
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Tauystocke.
Thomas Cole Armiger. Robert Cruys Henry Langesford. John Heart John B(...)de^^
Nycolas Lugger John Eston John Burneford John Chubbe of Hill John Atwyll John
Horwyll of Lidford John Scotworthy Richard brown de Meuy Nicolas Compe Thomas
Brownisdon Richard Abbot of Cadley John Pomery of Mewy John Baron of Heath Ri.
fosterd of Cornewode. Willya^ Chapel of Chapellegh John Head Thomas Ford of
Brixton Thomas Am^ Rychard Brownsdon. Thomas Toudon Henry Creyshe John Cole
Phillip Foot John Stephin of Gnatha^ Walter Burgh Will. Prior of Marytauy John
Gee of Horrebrigge Richard Drak Walter Knyghton John Hope^ of witchu^ch
Stephyn Toker.
That certain Jurates as is aforesaid, the elect, sworn, and tried men,
with the assent and consent of all the tynners in the foresaid county of
Devonshire, have enacted, affyrmed, ordained and statute, and by these
presents stablishe, that as well al statutes now of late made as al other
statutes here before time there made and affirmed before these statutes does at
the last court, there they adnichilate and set as void, other thereafter made
to remain and stand in full strength and effect as before more plainly
appears.

First be it affirmed and enacted, from henceforth by authority of this
present court, that al Tynners keep their tynworkes as hereafter follows,
that is to say, yearly between the feast of saint Peter the aduincula and the
feast of saint Mighell tharchangel now next following, to renew or caused
their hedweres Sydebondes waterlettes and tail of every tynworke, that now is
or hereafter shall be, and if there be any tinwork or tynworkes, that hereafter
be not kept according to this act, as is before rehearsed, it shall be lefull
to every man to pytche them as works aleye, so that the pitcher which shall
fortune to pytche any such tynneworke or tynworkes, for defaute of renuinge of
them, as is above said, pitche the tynworke or tynworkes before the feast of
all saynctes next folowinge after the said feast of sayncte Myghel, and also
give warning to the owner or owners of the pitche of the said tynneworke or
tinworkes, before the said feast of al saints in the presence of.iii. or*
(...)ne of the said warnyng, the said pitcher sh(...)ak^ the said owner or
owners that he so warns of the said pitche of his said Tynneworke or
tynworkes, by the arm, she winge to him with a loud voice, that he may here
him, the cause of his pitche, and the day when he pitched the said tinworke
or tynneworkes, and also the said pitcher at the next Tynne Court holden
where such tynneworke lyethe in, next after the said warning given to the
said owner or owners, at the beginning of the said Court, shall cause the
steward of the same court or his deputy for the time being to enter into his
book that shall remain in the Court at all times of record the name of his
pitche, that is to wete, his own name, and all his fellows names named to be
pitchers of the said tynneworke, the tynneworkes name, the owner or owners
names that he so warned, and the day and place when he gave them such
warning, and thereupon the said steward or his deputy for the time being in
the same court, and in the other stannary courts next folowinge, wherein the
said tynworke sieth not: when the Steward or his deputy shall think most
people to be present, shall make proclamation of the said pitche, and warning
of the said old owner or owners of the said tynneworke or tynworkes, orels
the said pitche to be void and of none effect, taking of the said pitche for
his labor.viii. d. and then after the last proclamation of the said iiii.
Courts, the said owner or owners of the said tynworke or tynworkes shall have
liberty by the space of iii. months, to prove his or their said tinworke or
tinworkes to be truly kept, according to this act, at the said tynworkes
head, that the said owner or owners, or one of their parteners within the
said.iii. months set one lefull day to the said pitche, when the said owner
or owners or there kepr will prove his or their said tinworke or tynworkes, and
at that day so appointed by the said owner or owners, the said pitcher shall
give attendaunce at the said tinworke, from the son rising till the going
down of the son, to here when the said owner or owners, or kept according
to this act, and if the said owner or owners of the said tynworke or
tynworkes nor their kept do not prove his or their said tynworke kept
according to this act, within the said three months, and at the day by him or
them to the pitcher so appointed (if the said pitcher be there ready to here
their prove) as is above said, that then the said pitcher to have the said
tinworke to him and to his heirs for ever, according to the custom of the
Stannarie.

And it is further enacted and ordained, that if the said pitcher at the said
day appointed by the said owner or owners, to prove their said tinworke or
tinworkes do worn or let the said owner or owners or their keeper to prove
their said tinworke or tinworkes, or absent him self, and will not here their
prove as is above specifyed, that then the said owner or owners shall com to the
next tincourt holden, where their tinneworke so pitched lies in and enter
their sarmise of the letting of their prove, against the said pitcher, whereupon
a scire facias shall be awarded against the said pitcher to appear at the next
court, and at the next court or at such court when the scire facias shall be
returned, sued by the baylife of the same court, or by any other person by the
steward auctorised for the same, that if the said pitcher nor no person for him
do not appear, that then the said owner or owners or their keeper, at the court
shall be admitted to prove their said tynworke or tinworkes in the court, and
the said pitcher shall lose his pitche and for fayte.xx. li. The one half
thereof to our soueraygne lord the king, having no prince, and when god shall
send us a prince to the lord prince, and the other half to the said owner or
owners, and process for the leuieng thereof to be awarded as it has been used
upon other penalties, and if the said pitcher do appear upon the suynge of the
said scire facias, then the said pitcher shall have a day over to make
answer to the said owner or owners to their byll of surmise till the next
court, if he will pray the same, and at which court if the said pitcher can
nothing say, but he pitched the said tynworke of the said owner or owners, and
gave them or any of them warning according, which matter will appear of
record in the Stewardes book, as is above specifyed, whereupon the said owner
or owners set him a day of prove, as is above specifyed, that then if the said
owner or owners bring into the court or the next court following.iiii. or.v.
tynners, proving sufficiently that the said owner or owners or their keeper
were at the day by them assigned to the said pitcher at the tynworkes head,
ready to prove their said tynworke lefully kept, according to this statute, and
that the said pytcher warned him or them, or absent him self to the said
owner or owners or their keeper could prove their said tinwork or tynworkes,
then the said owner or owners, or the keeper shall be admitted to prove their
said tinworke or tinworkes in the same court by the steward, or his deputy
for the time being, without delay, and there to recover their work, and the
said pitcher shall fall in the penalty of.xx. li. the half thereof to our
sovereign lord the king, having no prince, and when god shall send us a
Prince, then to the lord Prince, and the other half to the said owner or
owners, and process for the leuiynge thereof to be awarded as it has been used
upon other penalties.

Provided that if the said pitcher do lefully prove by iiii. or.v. Tynners
before the Steward or his deputy at the said court, that he shall have day
over to emparal, that at the day of prove appointed by the same owner or owners,
that he gave attendaunce to the hedweare of the said tinworke that he pitched,
supposinge to be the hedwere of the same tinworke that he pitched and the said
owner or owners or their keeper come to a another hedweare, which parteyneth to
the same tynworke that the said pitcher pitched, and gave warning of that, that
then the old owner or owners or their keeper shall prove their said tinworke or
tinworkes in the tincourte or at the next court there holden, and thereby the
said pitcher to lose no penalty but only his pitche, and the said owner
owners to recover but only the tynworke or tynworkes.

Provided also that after such pitchyng and warning given of any tynworke or
tynworkes by any person or persons, that if the said pitcher be not known by
the party that warned of a pitche, or else he aboyde the country, so that the
said owner or owners of the said tynworke or tynworkes can not come by him, to
set him a day of proof of his said tynworke or tynworkes by him so pitched,
that then the said owner or owners shall enter or cause to be entered in the
said tyncourt with in the said.iii. months next after the last proclamation
of the said courts, that will prove their said tynworke or tynworkes at a
certain day by the owner or owners to be lymitted within the said.iii.
months, that they or their keeper at their said works head and thereupon at the
same court, and at the.iii. other stannarie courts, where as the said
tynworke lyethe not, then next folowinge the Steward shall cause the bayliffe
to make open proclamation of the day that the said owner or owners will prove
their said tynworke or tinworkes at their tynworkes head, at which day if the
said pitcher come not at their said tinworkes head to have their prove as is
above said, he shall lose his pitche, and the said owner or owners shall
recover there said tinworke or tynworkes, and the said pitcher to fall in the
penalty of.x. li. the one half thereof as is above specified, and for the same
proclamations to be made the said owner or owners shall give the steward.viii. d

And also be it affirmed and enacted, that the act made at Crockerentorre
aforesaid, the.xxiiii. day of September, in the second year of the reign of
our sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. of and for the keeping of all tinworkes
within the said stannarie, and every thing contained in the same act, be from
henceforthe utterly void and of none effect.

Also that where out of time (that no mind is) it has been used within all the
stannarie of Deuonshyre, that every person working many stremeworkes should keep
their grauel, robel, and sand, under the swerd of grass and by force of the
water to convey it to the great river because it should hurt no man's pasture
nor quirte any tinworke. And now it is supposed by certain inhabitauntes of
the haven towns of Dertmouth and Plimmouth within the said county, that the
said robel, gravel, and sands, decendeth by reason of the great fluddes to
the said haven towns, whereby in continuance it should greatly hurt and
quyrte the said havens, which god forbede. Wherefore be it enacted and
ordained, by authority of this present court, that every person or persons
that hereafter shall work in any st^emeworke, or cause any stremeworke to be
wrought, that they and every of them conueye and carry or cause to be conveyed
and carried, the gravel, robell, sands, in old atches, tippettes, miry
places, or other convenient places, from the said great rivers, so that the
said grauel robel and sands, be not conveyed to the said havens of Dertmouth
and Plymmouth, or any of them hereafter shall be decayed or hurted upon peine of
such fine and fines, as hereafter shall be by the lord warden or his deputy,
sessed or set upon every person or persons, for every defaut so offendyng
contrary to the provision of this statute, to the use of our sovereign lord
the king. etc. if any such defaute be found by verdicte of.xii. men at the
laweday, at any of the said.iiii. Stannarie courts.

Provided always that no person or persons convey or bring their gravel,
robel, or sands into any hatches ties, or waterlettes of any tynworke, while
the said tynworke is in workyng, and if any person or persons do, the party
grieved shall have like remedy by actyon as it has been hertofore ever used for
the same offenses this act not withstanding.

Also be it enacted and affirmed, that every person or persons, that hereafter
shall work in any hatche works, nygh the river of Dert, Tamer, or any other
great river, that descends to the said havens of Dertmouth and Plimmouth or
any of them shall turn or cause to be turned their lake waters into their
hatches that they have wrought, and thereon convey their grauel, robell, and
sands from the great river, so that it be not conveyed to the said havens,
or any of them, whereby the said haue^s or any of them hereafter, shall be
decayed or hurted, upon like pain as is next above specifyed.

Also that where at the great court holden at Crocke rentorre the.xxiiii. day
of September, the.ii. year of the reign of our said sovereign lord king
Henry the viii. that it was enacted and ordained, that if any person or persons
being warned of the pitche of any tynneworke or tynworkes, and did not prove
their said tinworke or tynworkes, within.iii. months next folowinge, and
after that, if the said owner or owners did sue, vex, or trouble the said
pitcher after the said.iii. months, or enter into the said tinworke, should
fall in the penalty of.xx. li. if it were found by verdite of.xii* men at the
suite of the party, by force of which statute many and diverse subtle persons
have craftly pitched diverse tynworkes, and have given crafty warnings of their
pitche to the owners of the said tinworkes, which warning the said owners have
not perceived nor hard and sometime the said owner or owners have continued
daily working in the said tinworkes, at the time of the said warninge, and
so till after the said.iii months expired and sometimes the said pitches
after they have given such warning of the pitche of their said tinworke to
the said owner or owners have absent themself, so that the said owner or
owners could not mete with them to set a day to prove their said tinworkes,
within the said.iii. months, according to an other statute thereof made and
provided, so after the said.iii. months were expired, the said owner or
owners had no remedy to sue the said pitcher for their lefull remedy but they
should fall in the penalty above specifyed, whereby the said owners have lost
many of their tinworkes, and also forfayted the said penalties in the same
statute above specified, to their utter undoing.

Wherefore be it enacted and ordained by virtue of this great court, that the
said act made in the.ii. year of our souerain lord the king, and every thing in
the same act contained be fromhenseforth utterly void and of none effect.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that fromhenseforth no bailiffes of the
stannarie shall take of any person or persons, that hereafter shall be arrested
upon any nichil, or for suertie of peace, above.vi. d. and that the keeper of
Lidforde nor his deputy shall take of any person or persons that hereafter
shall be arrested upon a nichil, or for suertie of peace any fees unless the
parties so arested be brought to the prison of Lydford, and that the keeper shall
take of every such prisoner for his fees but.ii. s. vi. d. and for his meat
and drink according to the old custom heretofore used, upon peine of.xx. s.
for every time that the said keeper or baliffe does contrary to this statute,
if it be found at the lawday in any of the said.iiii. stannary courts, the
one half to our sovereign lord the king, and the other half to the party
grieved.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no bayliffe ne bayliffes bring no
person ne persons to the prison of Lydforde that hereafter shall be arrested by a
nichil, except it be upon an execucion of a condempnacion: if the person or
persons that so shall be arrested, find or bring to the said bailiffe or
bailyffes sure and sufficient suerties to answer the party plaintiff at the
next court after the said arrest, upon peine of.xx. s. for every time so
offendynge the one half thereof to our sovereign lord the king, and the other
half to the party grieved if it be found by ^^^dite of xii. me^ at a lawday in
any of the.iiii. Stannarie courts. Also be it affirmed and enacted, that the
steward or his deputy for the time being, shall take for the crowning of any
person, not above.ii. s. and the bathe for his return of the jury for the
same, not above.vi. d. upon peine of every such defaut xx. s. the one half.
etc.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no person ne persons from henseforthe be
admytted to any essoyne upon any issue to be tried after.xii. men have appeared,
and that it shall be leful to the party playntife or plaintiffes upon every
issue to be tried after the jury returned, one time to be assoyned, according
to our old custom, and in likewise the defendante or defendantes, so the
said essoyne be laid before.xii. men have appeared. etc.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that every Tinner or Tynners within the said
stannarie shall make or cause to be made before the said feast of saint
Mighell the archaungell next coming their hedweares and tails, like a broad
hoked arrowe in all dry tynworkes, and half hokes in all tynneworkes
adioyninge to any River, upon peine of a reasonable fine to be ceased by the
lord warden or his deputy, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men at a law
day in any of the said.iiii. Stannarie courts.

Finis secundi libri.
IN the high court of our sovereign lord the King in his Duchery of
Cornewal, holden at Crockerentorre, in the county aforesaid before Phillipp
Champernon Knight, in the stead of Henry Marquis of Excester, warde^ of the
tinners under our sovereign the king in the foresaid county of Devonshire,
the.xxv. day of September, the xxv. year of the reign of king Henry the.viii.

The names of the Jurates.
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Chaggoforde.
John Batishyll Wylliam Noseworthy John Newecombe Wylliam Hoar Godfrey Loskey
Wylliam Rugge John Shyre John Endecote Thomas Ilbert John Frey of Manaton John
Parre of Heanocke William voyse John Frenshe John La^gworthy of Hattishil John
Row of Berydon Thomas Caselegh John Coysshe Richard Abraham John windyate of
Grendo^ Alexander Drayton James Benet Simon Tauerner Richard Crote John
Glanfylde xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Aissheberton Thomas
Predyaux Wylliam Cowarde John Bery senior John Veal John Voyse Robert Hamlyn
Richard Tailor John Maddok of blakeal Thomas Hamlyn John Dolbeare Ri.
langworthy of lesewel John Horsham Jo. la^gworthy of Bukla^d Wylliam Smith Jo.
widecombe of bukela^d Wylliam Bouicombe John Stiddeston Thomas Wodde Thomas
Phillipp Richard Quoysshe William Leer John Dybell Hary Paty Robert Hanworthy
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Plimton.
Richard Chalons Nicolas Thorney John Mason Thomas Forde John Luscombe Walter
Stondon John Foot Rychard Abbot Wyllyam Chapel Water Elforde John Brown John
Med of Shitstor John Hedde Edmond Lange John Meyeow Andrew Walker Wyllyam
Towsen John Stert Hary Canterell Wyllyam Martyn Thomas Brounsdon John Bacer
Roger Bond Wyllyam Bendr
xxiiii. Jurats in the sta^narie court of Tauistocke
Roger Langysforde John Cole of Peterstau^ Richard Dark John Atwyll John
Stutworthy Hary Crees Water Borrowe John Redeclyffe John Wyllyams John
Brounsdon John Wattes John Gie of Horebr^g Rafe Eston Roger Pagge Roger Gyll
John ^at^oke Water Langisford Water Knygton Marten Edward John Hopar John
Godyng sen^. Water Gladfylde Wyllyam Pryor Thomas Stondon.
That certain Jurates, as is aforesaid, the elect sworn and tried men with
the assent and consent of all the Tynners in the foresaid county of
Devonshire, have enacted, affirmed, ordained and statute, and by these
presents stablishe that as well all statutes now of late made, as al other
statutes hereafore time there made and affirmed before these statutes does at
the last court there they adnichylate and set as void, other there after
made to remain and stand in full strength and effect as more plainly
appears.

WHere before this time diverse and many Tynners in the said county of
Devonshire have given away all their tinworkes, some of them to their children
and some of them to other persons of their kin and friends, and some of them
have suffered recoueres to be had against them to that intent they would be from
henseforth reputed and taken as no tinners, by mean whereof they have by that
couin and craft, discharged them self as well of their appearance in the
stannarie courts, as also of al other contributions and charges which by
reason of the said tinworkes ought to support and bear with other tinners,
according to the old custom of the said stannarie: and yet that not
withstanding the said geuers and other persons against who^ such recouers were
had of the said tinworkes, have all times after such gifts and recouers had
and made taken thereof the issues and profits to their own use.

Wherefore be it affirmed and enacted from henseforth, by authority of this
present court, that as well al such person or persons that before this or now
be seized or that hereafter shall be seized of and in any tinworke or part of
any tinworke, be it of a state in fee simple, feetaile, or for term of life or
lives, that have made or hereafter shall make any gift or lease of all his or
their whole tinworke or tinworkes to any of their said children, or to any
other person or persons to his or their use, or have or hereafter shall suffer
any such recouers to their use, or to the use of the said geuers hereafter do
of the said tinworke or tinworkes, or of any part of the^ take any issues and
profits or any other annuel rent and profit, by any such color to his own
use, from hensforth to be reputed and taken for tinners, as though no such
gift, recovery, or leasse had be made, and to bear their contributio^s and
charges amongst other tinners of the said sta^narie, according to the old
custom of the same and if any surmise or complaint be made to the lord warden
of the said stannary for the time being or to his deputy or steward of the
same stannary other knowledge be had or ministered to the officers of any such
person or persons that so does take the issues and profits of any such tinworke
or tinworkes or part thereof, or thereof has the use, and denies him to be
taken and reputed as a tinner that then the said lord warde^, his deputy, or
steward of the said sta^narie courts, shall have authority to ward a precept
of scire facias against the party, upon whom any such surmise, co^playnte or
other knowledge shall be had or made, commanding him by the same to appear at
the next tincourt, wherein the party then shall dwell, before the lord warde^,
his deputy or steward, then to be holden, at which day if he do appear in the
one ti^coure, the trothe thereof to be tried by the other, or other of the said
person or persons that shall be called in by the said scire facias, whether he
or they so called do take the issues and profits of the same tinneworke or
tinworks or any other person or persons to his or their use, or of any part
of them, or else that any other person or persons do thereof stand and be
seized to his or their use, and if the said party after he is returned
warned, do make defaute, that then his or their defaute i^ the same Court to
be recorded, and (...) that, the same same party or parties shall be still
accepted and taken for a tinner or tinners, till any such person or persons
will of his or their own frewyll come into the said court and discharge them
self by his or their oaths, in form aforesaid, and if any person from
henseforth after any such oath made, do again accept and take any issues and
profytes of any such tynworke or tinworkes, then upon due information, proof,
or knowledge had to the said officers in form before said, in any court of
the Stannarie, within the jurisdiction whereof any such tinworkes lie or shall be,
that they or any of them does or so shall take any issues and profit, that
like process be eftsone made against the said parties and like order and
oath to be had in form before said.

Provided always that if it happen any such tinner or tinners, which has or
will give away his or their said tinworke or tinworkes, and says or deposes
that he or they takes no profit to his or their own use, nor that any other
person or persons stands seized to his or their use, and be and will be
reputed and taken as no tinner nor tinners, as before is mencyoned that then
it shall be leful to al other tinners to sue and be at liberty against any such
person or persons that so denies to be a tinner or tinners, in fourm
aforesaid, in any other place out of the.iiii. Stannarie courts, unto such
time that al such person or persons which so denies to be tinner or tinners,
in form aforesaid, happen to be a tinner again, and also enter his or their
name or names into the stewardes rolls or book of record in the same
sta^narie court where as any such person then shall happen to dwell, and at the
same tin court to cause the steward or his deputy for the time being to
proclayme him or them as a tinner or tinners again, any such custom or
statute made, used, or provided to the contrary in any wise, not withstandinge.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no person ne persons from henseforth
take away any tyn gathered in any tinworke, where so ever it be be found from
the owner or owners or other occupiers of the said tinworke or tinworks, which
have borne or hereafter shall bear the costs and charge for the gatheringe and
workinge of the same, but the said person or persons so claiming the said tin
or tynworke, may lefully cause the said owner or owners, or occupier or
occupiers to be attached by the said tin so gathered, where so ever it be
found upon a plainte by the said claim to be affirmed against the said
person or persons that so has gathered the said tin in the same Stannarie
court, wherein the said tinwork or tinworkes, and the same tin so to be gathered
liethe or shall lie, and thereupon the said owner or owners or other occupier or
occupiers of the same tinworke or tynworkes, that be so attached by their said
tin, shall find sufficient suerties to the bailife or his deputy, by who^ the
sa^de attachement shall be so made, or by his deputy or any other, by the
steward of the same court being lymitted where as the said tin is gathered,
according to the law and custom of the said stannarie, to answer the said
claimer at the next tin court holden, next after the said attacheme^t so had
and made, within the which court where as the said tinworke or tinworkes so
in variaunce lies or shall lie, and after the said suertie found, the said
tinner so attached to be delivered to the said person or persons so attached.
And if any person or persons from henseforth with force or otherwise take a
way any tin so gathered, and has borne no charges for the working thereof, as
is about (...)* (...)* that th^^ the said person or persons so taking away the
said tin after due profession of the party or parties so offendinge before
the said lord warden, his deputy or Steward, he or they so offendynge shall
be committed to the prison of Lydforde, and there to remain till he make fine
with the lord warden or his deputy or steward, and the said taking away
of any such tynne be found, as before is expressed by verdite of.xii. men at
any law court there holden after, at the suite or complaynte of the party
grieved, then he that so takes away any such tynne shall fall in the penalty
of.xl. li. the half there of to our sovereign lord the king or Prince, when
it shall please god to send us a Prince, and the other to the party so grieved,
and for execution thereof a prcepte of a Fiery facias to be awarded, as well
for our sovereign lord the king or the Prince, as for the party
complainaunte and grieved. Provided always that if there be from hensforth any
action co^menced against any person or persons by virtue of this present act
and statute, that then the defendant or defendantes to have one court day over
to imparle, to make his or their answer. And if the said defendant and
defendantes will pitche to have it, and there at the next court after to make
him or them answer at his or their peril with out delay.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person or persons be taken by his
body at the suite of any party, upon any plainte or plaintes commenced in any
of the said.iiii. stannarie courts, and the said party at whose suite he or
they which shall be so taken and imprisoned at Lidford, be after ward none
suite in his or their said action or actions, that then the said party or
parties so being nonsutie in his or their said action or actions, shall yield
and pay such costs and damages to the said person or persons so taken and
imprisoned as shall be adjudged and demed by the lord warden, his deputy or
steward for the time being, and a fieri facias to be awarded for the leuyeng
of the same, to the use of the party so to be imprisoned upon a precept of
return made by the baylife at the day of return of the same, that the party
so being nonsuted had no goods ne cattle where of he might or shall make
execution by the said fieri facias, as that then a precepte of a capias to be
awarded by the court to attache the body of the said person so being
nonsued, and the day of return, where if the same party by the said Capias
be brought into the court, or other wise in propre person do appear, then he
to pay the said costs and damages, or else to be committed to the prison of
Lydforde, there to remain till he or they have paid it.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person or persons from hensforthe
take away any black tyn, or tinstones out of any tynne work or any other
place by night or by day, without he or they which takes away any such tin or
tinstones, do the owner or owners or his or their parteners, or his or their
workemanne which have borne the charges of the working of the same, being
owners of the same tinworke to knowledge thereof, which have borne the costs
and charges for the working of the same tin with him or them, or their spaliers
of the same tinworke, which hereafter shall work and gather the same tin, that
t^en he or they so offending, if it may be duly proved before the lord warde^
his deputy or steward for the time being, by examination in open court, or by
way of actio^ tried and condemned, or by prese^tmente and verdite of.xii. men
at the law court of the Stannarie, wherein the said tinworke lies, that then
the said offender or offenders by the said lord Warden his deputy, or
steward to be committed to the prison of Lydforde: unless he or they so
offending can find sufficient suerties to pay or recompense the party or
parties grieved for his or their Tin so taken away, and also to make fine with
the lord warden his deputy or Steward, for his or their untrue demeanoure and
offense whereof the one half shall be to our sovereign lord the king or prince,
and the other half to the use of the whole body of the Stannarie being
Tinners.

Also be it affirmed and enacted from henseforth that if any person or persons
do make any unlawful labor to any enquest sworn in any of the.iiii Stannarie
courts, or do manasse or threten them or any of the^ to pass with the one
party or the other, or promise the^ any money or other reward, to give their
verdite, that then the said person or persons so making the said unlawful
labor, or manasing or thretening the said enquest, or promising them any
money or reward vnlefully for geuinge of their said verdite of.xii. men at the
lawday by the great enquest, or by verdite of.xii. men at the suite of the
party grieved, that then the said enbracers or offenders so offendyng, shall be
committed to the prison of Lidforde, there to remain unto such time that he
or they so offending contrary to the prouysion of this statute, have made fine
for the same with the lord warde^ or his deputy, or steward for the time
being, and besides that, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men at the suite of
the party grieved, by accion of the same imbracery and (...) full labor, and
that process of a capias for his body, or a Fieri facias for his goods to be
awarded, at the election of the party that shall be so grieved, as well for
satisfaction of the king or Prince ^s for satisfaction of the same party
grieved.

Provided always that al such persons as be or hereafter shall be parties to any
action sued by the^ or any of them, or against them or any of them in any of
the said stannarie courts, whereupon the said parties be or shall be at issue,
and all such other persons as then have any interest, right, or title to the
thing in demand or variaunce, or their leful solicitours may well and lefully
labor the said inquestes to appear and to give their verdite according to
such evidence as shall be given unto them, according to their conscience and
not otherwise.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that where as diverse persons being owners and
parteners, or hereafter shall be owners and parteners, which be now seized or
hereafter shall be seized jointly together, of and in any tinneworke or
tinworkes, and if the whole title of the same tinworke or tinworkes be or
shall be in varyaunce, and if any of the said owners and partners from hensforth
do refuse to supporte and bear such manner of charges and expenses in the law,
with his or their pateners of the same tinworke so in variaunce according to
their portion and parts, as they and every of them have or hereafter shall have
in the same tinworke or tinworkes of for and about the suite and trial of the
title of the same tinworke or tinworkes so being in variaunce, or herafter
shall be in varyaunce, if he or they be required thereto by his partener or
parteners of the same tin work, that then he or they that so will refuse to
bear and pay his or their part or parts, according to his or their portion
or portio^s of the same tinworke indifferently charged to receive or take any
profit of his or their part or parts of the same work so being in varyaunce
unto such time he or they have paid him or their said costs and charges for
the harm to him or their said fellow now ^e^g or herafter shall be owner or
owners, partner or partners with him or them of the same Tinwork or tinworkes,
which is or shall be in variaunce, according to the old custom of the Stannarie.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person or persons being now
peaseably seized of and in any tynworke or part of any tynworke in the county
of Devonshire at this present great court holden at Crockerentorre, and so
continued to Mighelmas coynage peasably seized without claim or title made in
open court, by any person or persons to the same, and entered in a book or roll
that shall hereafter be appointed and remain in the said court of record,
within the jurisdiction of which court the said tinwork is or lies, he or
they that so have continued peaseably their possession in any such tinwork or
tinworkes, shall have the said tinworke or part of the tinworkes to them and
to their heirs in fee forever, according to the custom of the stannarie.

Provided always that this act extend not nor be prejudicial to any woman
count infant within the age of.xvi. years, any person being out of the
realm, or being in prison or being lunatike or out of his mind, so that any
of the said persons, that is to say, that women covert, after the deceasse of
their husband, within ye space of.ii. years, and their heirs and the said
persons so imprisoned within the space of* ii. years after they be at their
liberty of their said impriso^ment, and the said persons being out of this
realm, and having no knowledge of this act within like space of.ii. years, or
lacking knowledge thereof, within the space of one year after his or their
coming into England, or any of the heirs of the said person or persons,
after tyt^^ to him or them given by the death of his or their auncetours within
one year then next following, if any of the said persons before excepted dye
within the said two years do make their claim by action in any of the said
stannary courts, whereas any of the said tynworkes lie.

Also for as much by occasion of evidence given by corrupt and vntreue
witness to inquestes sworn within the.iiii. stannarie courts between party
and party, untrue verdites have be given to the great hurt and prejudice of
many tinners, wherefore be it enacted and affirmed that from henseforth if any
person or persons give any false evidence, and commit perjury in his evidence
given in any of the said stannarie court to enquest or enquestes sworn
between party and party, and if he or they that shall give any such false
evidence and commit p(...)rye, be found coulpable and guilty by verdite of.xii.
men at a law court in the same stannary court where as the same false evidence
and perjury shall be committed, that then he or they that so shall offend shall be
committed to the prison of Lidford, there to remain unto such time that he or
they can find sufficient suerties to make fine with the lord warden his
deputy or steward for the time, to the use of our sovereign lord the king,
having no prince, and when it shall please god to send us a Prince to the
lord Prince.

Also be it affirmed and enacted that al statutes and a^tes made at this great
present court before this time, and not adnulled to stand in their full grength
and force, and that a fieri facias shall be awarded as well upon every of the said
statutes now standing in their force, as also upon all such statutes and acts
as now be made at this present great court or parliament holden and kept at
Crockerentorre aforesaid.

Finis.
The confirmation of the Charter in English with the Satutes made in the syxth
year of the raygne of king Edward the.vi.
Here follows the confirmation of the Charter parteyning to all the Tinners
within the county of Devonshire with their statutes also made at
Crockerentorre, by the whole assent and consent of all the said tinners, in
the year of the reign of our soueraygne lord king Henry the.viii. the.ii.
year.

HEnry by the grace of god king of England and France, lord of Irelande, To
all and singular to who^ these presents letters shall come greting. We
understand by the letters patentes of the late sovereign lord Edward the
fourth king of England a Confirmation made by these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England and France, lord of Ireland, To
all to whom these presents shall come greting. We understand by these letters
patentes of the sovereign lord Edward the.iii. late king of England our
progenitour made in these words Edward by the grace of god king of England
and France, and lord of Ireland, To al to whom these present letters shall
come gretyng. We understand by our letter late caused to be made under our
seal at our retournyng into England by these words.

Edward by the grace of god king of England lord of Irelande, and Duke of
Aquitaine, To all Archebyshops, bishops, abbots, priours, Earls, Barons,
Justices, shereffes, governors, and ministers, and to all bayliffes and other
his faithful greting. We understand by a writing confirmed which lord
Edward late king of England our father caused to be made to the tinworkes of
the cou^ty of Deuon. in these words. Edward by the grace of god king of
England and France, lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitaine, To all
archbishoppes, bishops, abbottes, Priours, ^^ries Barons, Justices, shireffes,
gouernous, ministers, and to all bailiues and other his faithful gretinge. We
understand by wrytinge which the lord Edward of noble memory so^time king of
England our father made to the tinworkers of the cou^tie of deuo^shire in these
words. Edward by the grace of god king of England lord of Irelande, and Duke
of Aquitaine. To all Achebysshops, bishops, abbottes, priours, earls, barons,
justices, governors, ministers, and to all bayliffes and other his faithful
gretynge.

BE it known for the amendment of our ti^^iners within the county of Deuone,
and for the quietness and profit of the workmen thereof, to grant for us and
our heirs, that all the miners before said labouringe in these mines which be
of our dominion or patronage, so long as there work in those mines, that
they be free and quite from all plees quarellinge touching our court or any of
our heirs, in what manner so ever it be, so that they shall not be bound to
apere before any Justice or minister of ours or of our heirs, for any plee or
quarrel commenced within the said work of tinnage, but only before the
warden of our mines aforesaid for the time being, except it be in plea of
land, life, and lym, nor they shall not depart from their works by any sommon
of any officer of ours or of our successors, but only by the arrest of our
said warden: and also that they be quite and free from Tallages, Stallages,
with customs and such charges what so ever they be, within town, port, (...)e
or market within the said county, of any goods they have. Also we grant
unto the said miners for the digginge of tyn and for the fynding thereof, that
they may break any ground within any part of our open land, moore, or
waste, or of any other man's, who so ever it be, within the county aforesaid.
Also that they may change the course of waters and waters standinge, for the
furtherance of their works, when and as often as it ^^lb^ ^^de. Also to bye
bushement for the meltinge of the tin, according to the old custom, without
impedy(...) either of us or of any of our successors, or yet of bishops,
abbottes, priours, earls, barons or any other who so ever they be. And that
our foresaid warden or his vicegerent do keep and have before him al plees that
shall arise or may be entered betwixt any of the said miners amongst them
selves or any other with them, he to have full power to give judgment, and
decise the matter according to ancient custom, and if it chance any of the
minours so to offend, that for the said offense our warde^ have arested him and
apoint him to prison, we will that he be in prison in Lydford and none other
place, until he be discharged by process of the law of our Realm. And if it
happen any of the miners aforesaid for any fact committed within the said
cou^tie, not apperteining to the said miners, and puts himself to the
enquerie of the country: we will that the one half of the quest of inquery be
of the company of the miners, and the other half not of the^ but of forreners
in that work: and if any fact committed towching his or their mineworke, that
the^ querie be made wholly after the custo^e in the miners, and if it happen
any of the said miners to be fugitife or else outlawed, or have don such
offense, for the which he shall lose or (...) his cattle, the said cattle to be
praised by the (...) ^^^den and ou^ (...) within the said country, and so by
him the party or parties brought forth to answer us or our heirs belore the
justices appointed for the said count next assizes following. Moreover we will and
straightly command that al miners of tin as well wh^t as black, where so ever
it be find or wronght within the said cou^tie be weyed at Tauestocke,
Ayss(...), ^^ Chagforde, by our weightes ordained and sealed for that purpose,
under the forfayture of the said tyn, and that all the tin be coined or receive
coining in the foresaid towns yearly before our said warden, and before the
feast of sai^ct Mighell in September in the markette place.

And we grant for us and for our heirs, that al tin reyners which has so
lawfully w^ied there tin may (...) the same to who^ so ever it shall chance
after coynage with other customs due and usual in the said towns for us and
our successors, if we mid not to bie the said tin our seifes Wherefore we will
and command for us and for our heirs, that our miners aforesaid have and
mioye all their liberties and fre customs prescribed, and this to have without
any let or impediment of us our heirs, or any officer under us, what so ever
they be, these being witnesses of our will. W. bishop Couentre and Litchefield
S. bishop of Salsbury, I. bishop of Kerl^l, Henry La^y Earl of Lincole, Ralfe
of mount Hermor, Earl of Gloucester, Humfrey of Behem Earl of Essere Adomere
deuale^tia, Hughe Spe^sar, Jo. Hastinges and other, Dated by our hand at
Westminster the. r. of Aprell, the.xxxiii. year of our reign. We grant and
confirm for us and for our eyres so much as in our power is, that all these
confessions and liberties be ratified and had fre as our foresaid charter
reasonable witnesses these honorable being present record, W. bishop of york
prymate of England, W. bishop of worce^er our (...), Gilbert clare. ^ar^e of
Glo(...). and Hardford, I. (...) Earl of Surrey, Rob^rt Clifforde pagan tybot,
To. Pagare Senescallo, husher of our household with other dated by our hand at
York, the.xiiii. day of August in the.iiii. year of our reign.

We by the same do ratify these grauntes for us and for our heirs as much as
our authority will unto the said miners confirmed as our Charter reasonable
bears record. Therefore we willing to show the more favor unto the said
miners, do grant for us and our heirs that the same miners so long as they
be under labor in the mines, be quitte free and clearly discharged from all
tallages, taskes, contributions and other such paymentes in their goods within
the county before said, witnesses W. Archbishop of york, primate of England,
I. bishop of Ely our chaunceler, H. bishop of Lincoln our treasorer, the Earl
of Norfolk and marshal of England, our uncle, Jo. Warrenna Earl of Surrey
and the wake, Jo. Bays vssher of our household, with other dated by our hand at
Stanhope, the.vi. of Auguste, the first year of our reign.

We by the tenor of our charter under our seal which we now use, and
having willed by these present to be enlarged. In witness whereof we caused
this letter patentes to be made my self, bearing witness at Langley, the. ^vii.
year of our reign of England, and of our reign of France the.iiii. year. We
do allow and appro^^ the said letters patentes, and ratify all things in
th(...) confirmed, for us for our heirs, to the behofe of the said miners, as
our letters aforesaid, sufficiently witness, and for further confirmation we
caused this letters patents to be made, witnessing my self at westminster
the.xxvii. day of November, in the first year of our r^^gne. When and where we
confirmed, allowed, and ratified al things in the said letters comprysed by
our whole power and authority for us and for our heirs, in friendship of our
laborers in the mines aforesaid, as our charter and letters patentes do
record, and for certainty thereof we have caused these our letters to be
made, witnessinge my self at westminster the.xii. day of February, in the
third year of our reign.

The statutes of the Stannarie. Londini, Anno a Salutifero virginis partu. M.
D. LII.
DEuon^ Magna Curia Domini regis Ducatus sui Cornub. tenta apud Crockerentorre
in cornit^ Deuon^ predicto cora^ Johe^ Charles armigero locu^ tenente Joha^nis
Comitis Bedford custod. Stannarij dicti domini Regis in predicto comit^ Deuon^.
vicesimo sexto die Martij. Anno regni Edvvardi sexti, dei gratia Angliae,
Francie, et Hibernie Regis, fidei defensoris a^ in terra Ecclesie Anglicane and
Hibernice supremi capitis Sexto.

The names of the Jurates.
xxiiii Jurats of the sta^narie court of Chaggoforde.
George Burgin Richard Wauerell William knapman senior John Newcombe John
Pyncent William knapman Juni. Harry Will. Robart Foxforde Augustus Noseworthy
John wauerel alias voisei John Estbroke alias* shylston John Martyn Nicolas
Cleyff Richard Loskey Andrew Smardon John Periman Wylliam Treud John Smyth John
westcote Wylliam Aysshe John Balle John Coysshe Galfridus Christopher
Pancaratius Shere
xxiiii. Jurats of the sta^narie court of Plimpton.
Phillipp Hawton Walter Elforde John Lu^combe John Aduent*
xxiiii. Jurats of the sta^narie court of Aysheberton.
Wyllyam Burgyn Richard Langworthy Christofer Warrin Thomas hamlyn Richard
Tailor John Foxforde John Stydson John Horseham John Widecombe John Debyll John
Seyger Laurence Withecombe Wylliam Hole Thomas Bickeforde James Maddicke Edward
Hanworthy Walter Stephen Peter King Thomas Pers Richard Hamlyn William Wotton
alias Byle Quirinus Rowge Willyam yolla^^e Richard May^
xxiiii. Jurats of the sta^narie court of Tauistocke.
Henry Lang^forde John Furlong of tamerto^ John Badge Wylliam Burges Thomas
Forde Walter Row John Worth Phillipp Forde Wylliam Hengston Mighell Edgecombe
Hughe Crocker William Stiddeston Frauncis Chapel John Rosedewe Richard
Brokyn Juni. Richard Holberton John wyndeal John Foster Richard Abbot John
Baker de Torre Henry Hanger John Elforde Richard Brokyn senior Robert wynston
John Tucker Randall Eston Robert Ebbisworthy John Peterfielde Thomas Alwyll
Roger Gyll Henry wylley Richard Lansford de bratto^ Wylliam Geye John
brouerdson de surton John Fotte Junio^ John Tal^ot de walk(...) John Hanworthy
John horewill de lid^ord^ John Sleman John Row de cholewill John Wattes de
Bear John Richard Nicolas Lugger Junior John Fot senior de bucla^d*
QVi quide^ iurati sic vt prefert^ electi iurati and triat^ ex assensu and
consensu omniu^ Stannatoru^ in predicto comit^ Deuon^, enactant affirma^t
ordina^t statuunt and per presents stabiliunt quod tam omnia statuta nunc de
nouo facta, qua^ omnia alia statuta ante he tempora ibidem facta et affi^mata,
preter illa statuta qu^ nunc in ista curia and in alijs curijs ibidem antea
te^tis adnihilantur and euacua^tur, omnino imposteru^ permaneant in vigoribus
suis et effectis vt before inferius patebit*

WHere much hard and evil Tynne has been here to fore sundry times made
coined within the Stannarie of Deuon without the letter H. set upon the same,
notwithstanding the statute thereof provided not only to the great slander of
the Stannarie, but also to the great loss and hinderaunce of merchants and
other persons that have boughte and occupied the same, which is manifestlye
known to rise and grow by crafty and subtle blowinge of sinder tin with Pite
and Colom without the which kind of blowing of sinder tyn, no hard or evil
tin can be made, nor the owners thereof might have of such sinder but littell
or no fruit of advantage.

For redress and reformation whereof be it affirmed enacted and ordained, at
this present court, that all tynne hereafter blown, or to be blown, upon
the flote after the customable course and manner of blowynge of black Tyn being
not mixte with hard tin, be alwaie reputed and taken to all intendmentes for
good and pure tin. And that all tin hereafter blown or to be blown, with a
pite or a short flote, after the customable course and manner of blowing of
sinder ti^, whether it be mixed with other tyn or not, be always reputed and
taken to al intendmentes for hard tyn, and that the letter H. be set upon the
same before it be coined, upon pain of for faiture of the same to the lord
Prince, and in defaute of a prince to our sovereign lord the king, if it be
found by verdite of. ^ii. men at a laweday. And further if it happen hereafter
any such hard tynne to be coined before the letter H. be set upon the same,
and so put to sale, or worse metal to be covered and hid within the same
hard tyn, other then the kind or nature of the same (...)al cast and bear in
himself, or worse metal then good tyn to be covered and hyd by falshed and
deceipte with in any other piece of tyn having not the letter H. and so coigned
and put to sale, then if upon complaynte of the buier thereof it be found by
verdite of. ^ii. men at a law day, and proved by the view and melting of the
same tynne, or part thereof in open court, being brought before the great
inquest, then and there sworn for the king with all the marks of the same
upon one piece not melted nor broken, within the jurisdiction of which court
the same tynne was made, that then the first owner or owners of the same tyn
shall not only forfayte the value of the same tyn to the lord Prince, for the
time being, and for lack of a Prince then to our sovereign lord the king, but
also shall forfaite for every such false piece of tyn.x. li. the one half
thereof to the lord prince, and the other half to such person or persons being
the buier or buiers of the same as shall complain or make suite at a laweday
for the same, be it by byll, information, or otherwise, and a Fieri facias to
be awarded for the same, as upon other penal statutes. And also the blower or
blowers of the same tyn to be set openly in the pillorie in a market day or
a lawedaye, by the space of sy^e hours for his or their untrue demeanor, in
attempting any thing contrary to this act. And if the said blower or blowers
do after that again likewise offend contrary to this act: that then the said
blower or blowers to incur such punishment as shall seem to the lord warden
or his deputy most mete or conuemente. And upon co^plainte made by the
marchaunte or buier of any piece of tyn, to be hard tin, and the same
afterward in open court, and in the presence of the great enquest melted, and
proved good, then the said merchant or buier shall forfaite for every such piece
found good.x. li. The one m^i tie thereof to the lord prince, and for lack of a
prince to the kings majesty, and the other moytie to him that does sue for
it, and process thereof to be made as aforesaid.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any marchauut or other person
hereafter buie any tyn, and after that the said tin be found to be falsely
made, contrary to the said act, and that not with standing the merchant or
buier and the first owner of the same by privy contractes, paymentes, or
otherwise between the^ conceal the untrue making thereof, whereby condign
punishment can not be done and ministered to such offenders, according to the
said statute, if it be found by verdite of.xii. men, at a law day: that then
they both shall fall every of them in the penalty of.x. pounds for every
piece of tin so concealed, the one half thereof to our sovereign lord the
king, and to the lord prince, when god shall send us a prince, and the other
half to him that will complain or sue for the same, by bil information or
otherwise.

Also be it affirmed and enacted that the act made at Crockerentorre
the.xxiiii. day of September, in the second year of the famous king, king
Henry the eight of for and concerning synder tyn and hard tyn. And also that
the act made at Crockerentorre aforsaid, the same xxiiii. of September, the
year above written, of for and concerning tyn not marchauntable, every of the
said two acts, and all thing and things in every of them contained be from
hense for the utterly void and of no force nor strength.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no person or persons shall sell or put to
sale any manner of white tyn made and cast in slabbes bloges or shockes before
it be coigned, upon pain of forfayture of the said tyn, in manner and form
above said, any act heretofore made to the contrary not withstanding, and
both the sellar and the buiar to forfaite every of the^.xl. s. for every
slabbe cloge and shocke so bought and sold, if it be found by verdicte
of.xii. men of a lawdaye. The one half thereof to the lord prince, when god
shall send us a prince, and for lack of a prince then to our sovereign lord
the king, in manner and form as is aforesaid: and the other half to the
party that will sue or make complaint for the same by byll, information, or
other wise. Item where it has been heretofore of late days used in every of
the iiii. Stannary courts, after issue joined in any actio^ or suite between
party and party, that the plaintiff shall nominate.xii. of the jurors whom he
list, and the defendaunt other.xii. to try that issue, whereby poor men be not
only oppressed by rich, but also the officers can not do justice, according
to right and equity, by reason of the said evil usage.

Wherefore be it affirmed and enacted that from hence for the upon every Venire
facias awarded after issue joined in any of the said Stannarie courts, that
the bayliffe of the court for the time being, or the foster of the quarter,
if the bayliffe be challenged by his oath, then and there in open court taken,
shall immediately return and nominate to the steward.xxiiii. honest and
indifferente tynners, according to the tenor and effect of his wryt or precept
taken of the playntife, for every return for his fee so made.iii. s. iiii. d.
and no more, which.xxiiii. persons so returned, the bayliffe of the court or
foster, that so make the return, shall sommon and warn to appear at the next
tyn court there to be holden, at which court, if any of the jurors do make
default being warned, then he to for fayte to our sovereign lord the king and
to the lord prince, when god shall send us a Pr(...) xii. d. issues. And at the
same court if a full jury do not a pere, orels after apparaunce of a full jury
by challenge of any of the parties the jury is like to remain vntake^ for
default of jurors: that then the lord warden his deputy or steward of the
court for the time being, upon request made by the party plaintiff, or by the
defendau^te in the default of the plaintiff shall have auctorite by virtue of
this act, to command the baylife or the foster as aforesaid of the sta^narie
court for the time being, by his oath, then and there to be taken, to return
name and apoint as often as need shall require, so many of such other hable and
indifferent tinners then being present in the said stannarie court, as shall
make up a full jury, which persons so to be named and impaneled by such bailife
or foster shall be added to the former panel, and their names annexed to the
same. And the lord warde^ his deputy or steward of the court for the time
being, shall and may proceed to the trial of every such issue, with those
persons that were before impanelled, and with those newely added to the said
former panel, by virtue of this act, in such wise as they might or ought to
have done, if all the iuroures had been empanelled upon the Venire facias awarded
to try the said issue. And that every such trial had after the making of
this act shall be as good and effectual to al intentes constructions and
purposes, as if such trial had been had and tried by.xii. of the jurors
empaneled and returned upon the Venire facias awarded to try such issue. And
in case such persons as the said baylyffe or foster shall name and appoint, as
is aforesaid, or any of them, after they shall be called be present and do not
apere, or after his or their apparau^ce don wilfully withdraw him or the^
selves from the presence of the court, that then the lord warden his deputy
or steward, for the time being shall and may set.C. iii. s. iiii. d. fine
upon every such iurour making defaulte, or wilfully withdrawing him self as is
aforesaid, the said fine to be leauied in such manner and form by the bailife
of the Stannarie court as other amerciamentes of the said court have been
heretofore levied: and so the issue shall be tried at the same court without
further delay, and every of the.xii. men that be sworn shall have.xii. d. a
piece of the parties for and toward his journey for that days labor, ye
same money to be levied and parted openly in the face of the court to the
jurors, immediately when they have given their verdit, or before their verdit,
if the matter or actio^ shall be otherwise ended, or else for default of payment
of the same money to be committed to Lidforde, there to remain until he has
paid the jurors their said money and if the bailif of the said court or
foster, as aforesaid do not give warning to the.xxiiii. that has first
returned, and to every of them then he to pay his or their issues, that so
make default being not warned. And that by virtue of this act, it shall be
lawful for both plaintiff and defenda^t to take their challenge to the array and
to the polles as well of them that be first returned, as of them that be so
named, added and annexed, to the former panell, by the said Baylif or Foster,
and that from henceforth, after issue joined, the plaintiff, nor the defendant,
shall cast no essoine, any act heretofore made, or custom in the Stannary,
used to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it affirmed and enacted, that if it happen the bailife
and the array to be challenged by any of the parties, and there upon the array
be quaished that then the bailif to repay unto the plaintiff, the su^me of.iii.
s. iiii. d. which he before received for the making of the return of the said
jury, as is aforesaid, and that at the same court there be a Venire facias,
directed to the Foster of the same quarter, to make return for the said
matter, as aforesaid, at the next court then following, and then to proceed
there in, as before. Also be it affirmed and e^acted that if any person or
persons at any time hereafter make any unlawful labor to any bailif of the
Stannary court, or Foster: for or concerning any return by him to be made and
impaneled between party and party, or give or promise him or any other person
or persons to his use and behou^e, any manner of gift reward or portion of
money for the same, or to be left out of any return hereafter to be made in
the Stannary court, or give or promise any manner of gift, reward, or portion of
money to any man that by the Baylife or Foster shall be returned in any jury,
whether it be before the making of the said return or after, for to have
friendship or favor in his or their mattier, other then such portion of money
as to the^ is limited for their labor at this present court, or if any
person or persons at any time hereafter commit any wilful perjury, or procure
any wilful perjury to be committed in any of the.iiii. Sta^narie courts:
that then he yt so labors the said baylife or foster or so gives or
promises, as before is said: and the bailif foster, or iurour, that so takes
any such gift, reward, promise, or portion of money, and he that so
commits or procures wilful perjury, as is aforesaid, every of them so
offending, if it be found by verdit of.xii. men at a law court shall be
committed to the prison of Lidford, their to remain till such time as he or
they can find sufficient suerties to make fine with the Lord warden, his
deputy or steward, to the use of our sovereign lord ye king having no
prince, and to the lord prince when God shall send us a prince. And besides
that if it be found by verdict of twelve men at the suit of the party
grieved, that then every of them so offendyng shall fall in the penalty of.xx.
li. the one half thereof to our sovereign lord the king or prince when god
shall send us a prince, and the other to the party grieved, and a Fieri facias
for his or their goods, or a capias for his or their bodies to be awarded as
well for satisfaction of our said sovereign lord the king or prince, as for
the party grieved.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that where sundry tinworkes and sundry parts
of tinworkes within the stannarie of Deuon. herafter be named or contained upon
one letter of attorney if livery pass in one of the said tin works or
part of the same tinworkes, it shall from hense for the enure and be a good sure
and sufficient liuerie for all the residue named or to be named or contained in
the same letter of attorney, in as large and ample manner as though livery had
passed in every one of the said Tinworks or in every part so named or to be
named or contained, so that the very owner of the said part and parts at the
time of the said liuerie, any act heretofore made to the contrary not
withstanding. And that where any person is or shall be seized of diverse and
sundry tinworkes or parts of tinworkes, and will depart from them al by letter
of attorney, if rehearsal be made upon the letter of attorney of name of one or
certain of his said works, and the rest by general words of al his
tinworkes, or parts of tinworkes in the county of Devonshire, it shall be as
good sure and effectual in the law, to all intentis constructions and
purposes, as though special resital of every tinwork or part of every such
tinwork had been made upon the same. And that likewise on lyuery made of and in
any part or parcel of the same, to be as good, sufficyent, and effectual in
the law for the whole, as though liuerie had passed severally in every part
and parcel thereof as above is said. And that al gifts and bequestes of sundry
tinworke or tinworkes, be it by general words as is aforesaid, or otherwise by
testament hereafter made or to be made to any person or persons, although the
executoure or executoures of the same testamente refuse to prove the same be
always good, sure, sufficient and auaylable in the law, according to the said
testamente: any statute, law, or custom heretofore had or made to the
contrary not withstanding. Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no demurrer in
the law upon any cause action or demand, from henseforth be allowed or
admitted in any of the.iiii. stannarie courts in the county of Deuo^.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that no person or persons from henseforth
co^mence any action in any of the.iiii. sta^narie courts, except it be for the
entering into any tynworke or tynworkes, but only within such court, with in
the jurisdiction of which court the party playntife or plaintifes and
defendant or defendauntes, or one of the^ shall inhabit and dwell at the time
of the commencemente of the same action upon peine to forfaite and pay to the
party defendau^t or defendauntes.x. s. of lawful money of England for every
such action co^menced or to be commenced, if the party defendante or
defendantes at his or their apparau^ce, will demand and sue for the same, and
execution to be awarded for the same, according to the laws and customs of
the stannarie, and the plaintiffes to lose his or their said action or actions,
any law or custom heretofore used to the contrary not withstandyng.

Also where before this time diverse faygned actions have been prosecuted in the
stannarie courts, whereunto the defendantes have been forced to appear, and
join the same to a country, and the said actions so joined to a country,
the plaintiffes have suffered the same to be and depend in the courts, not
continued of a long space, until such time as the said plaintiff has watched
his advantage, or the absence of the said defendaunt and then proceeded in the
same, in the defaulte of the said defenda^t, not being warned thereof, contrary
to all right, equity and good conscience. Wherefore be it affirmed and enacted
that if any person or persons from henceforth shall commence any manner of action
in any of the.iiii. stannarye courts, whereunto the defendaunt appears, and
does join unto a country, if the said plaintiff suffer the said matter so
pleaded to a country to remain, and do not proceed and set for the his suite
within.iiii. courts next so lowing: that then his said action utterly to be
void and disco^tinued, as though it had never ben before pleaded.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that in all actions ^ommenced in any of
the.iiii. Stannary courts, whereupon the damages is not declared above the
sum of v. li. except it be in an action of trespass, for entering into any
tinworke or tinworkes, and the party defendaunt will put the same to the
trial of the country, then there shall be at the next court then following.iiii
honest indifferente tynners returned appointed and taken up in the face of the
court, by the bailiffe for the time being, by an oath openly in the said court
to him to be ministered to try the said issue, and there to be charged upon an
oath by the steward, for the trial of the same matter, and to give verdicte
therein, and assesse damages and costs, according to the order of the laws of
the sta^narie, whereupon al principal chalenges are to be allowed, and other to
be returned, as before in their stead, by the bayliffe. And if he be challenged,
then by the steward for the time being, and the steward to have for his
precept to the bailiffe.iiii. d. and the bayliffe for his return.iiii. d.
Also for as much as many pitches of sondrye tynworkes have been heretofore
entered into the court rolls or books of record, not withstanding that many
of the^ have been some time laufully proved by their old owners or the kepers
according to the statute thereof provided, yet always the same pitches remain in
the said books, as matter of record and no record of writing to the contrary,
which in process of time may be a great occasion of much controversy and
strife. Be it therefore affirmed and enacted that if there be any tynworke or
tynworkes hereafter pight by any person or persons as a work alay, and the
owner or owners or keeper of every such tinneworke so pight, do prove the same
work kept according to the statute thereof made and provided, or yt the pitcher
of any work pitched do release his said pitche, that then the said owner or
owners, or their kepers, or one of them shall cause the steward for the time
being, within six months next after the day of the entering of the said
pitche, to enter the said proof or release into his book directly next under
the place of entry of the said pitch of the said work so proved or released,
whereby it may there likewise appear and remain as matter of record: so that
it be approved sufficiently before the steward in open court, by ii. or.iii.
witnesses sworn for the same, or by confession of the pitcher, or else the
said proof and release to be void and the said pitche to be good and
auaylable, and the steward in the day of entering thereof, to proclaim the proof
or release in open court, and to have for his labor in that behalf.iiii. d.
and no more. And that it shall be lauful for every such principal pitcher to
release every such pitche to the old owner or owners, within.iii. months next
after the day of the last proclamation of the said pitch, and not after, and at
any place as well by word as by writing.

Also be it affirmed and enacted, that if any person o^ persons hereafter
shall be attached by his goods or cattals by virtue of any attachement directed
out of any of the four Stannary courts, and thereupon do find suerties and
do not appear at the next court after suerties so found that the^ it shall be
lauful to the bayliffe of the same court where such attacheme^t shall be made, to
return the same person or persons so attached to a nichill. Any act or custom
hertofore used in the sta^nary to the contrary notwithstanding. For as much as
it is most requisite that the fees of al manner of process, and the pleadinge of
actions within the stannarie courts, ought to be appara^te to all suitors
there, whereof they have tofore ben in great ambiguitie and doubt, some payinge
more and some less.

Wherefore be it affirmed and enacted by thauctority of this present court,
that the steward or his deputy for the time being, shall have from henseforth
for every attachement sued out.vi. d. and not above. And for every capias for
the body.vi. d. and not above, for every scire facias to call in proves or
witnessis, wherein is but one name vi. d. and not above. For every warrant of
the peace supersedias and recognisaunce of the peace, every of the^.vi. d. And
if there be any more names in a Scire facias, for calling of proves, or warrant
of the peace, supersedias, or recognisa^ce, the^ the suer thereof to pay for
every name vi. d. for every deliverance but.vi. d. for every Scire facias upon
the statute of lettinge of proof.ii. s. that is to say.vi. d. for the scire
facias, how many names so ever they be, and.xviii. d for the byl of the same
statute to be made by the steward for every scire facias, upon all other penal
statutes.xviii. d. that is.vi. d. for every scire facias, how many names so
ever there be, and xi^. d. for the byll of the same statute, for every
execution.vi. d. And for all other process but.vi. d. for the declaration of any
manner of action laid into the court.iiii. d. in proper person, and by
attorney, the party not being present v. d. and for taking of a day to
impleade being in proper person.ii. d. And if there be more defendantes in the
said actio^ being absent, to pay attorney penny for every of the defendau^tes
being abse^t, and for the answer of any defenda^t or defenda^tes being jointly
pleaded, and in proper person.iiii. d. and by attorney the party not
present.v. d. The replication and the reioynder laid into the court in proper
person or by attorney, every of them.iiii. d. for entringe of every
conde^pnation and judgment, every of them.iiii. d for every deposition
written.iiii. d. For every intergatory ministered in the court in writing.iiii.
d. For entering of every surmise upon the statute of lettyng of proves.vi. d.
for the law gage of every defendaunte vi. d. For the essoine of every playnt
not pleded, i. d. for ye continuance of every plainte not pleaded.i. d. for
the continuance of every action pleaded.ii. d. For every recognisaunce
entering.viii. d. for the copy of the byl of surmise.xviii. d. For the copy of
every byll upon any other statute.xii. d. For the copy of a declaration of
trespass upon the case.viii. d. For the copy of al other pleas.iiii. d. and not
above, for any of the matters before mentioned.

Imprinted at London by William Seres, dwelling at the west end of Paul's
church at the sign of the Hedgehogge.

Anno post Christum natum. 1562.

Mense Maij.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


