ARIANA
ARIANA

Melintus

Ariana

depiction of Melintus and Ariana

ARIANA.

IN Two Parts.

AS IT WAS TRANSLATED OUT OF THE FRENCH, and presented to my LORD CHAMBERLAIN.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed by John Haviland, for Thomas Walkley. 1636.

To the LADIES.
Fair sex, to whom Nature has given what she had most rich and lovely, spring
of most agreeable delights, that hold in your fair hands the Empire of the
Universe, since you command over men, and distribute to them at your pleasures,
either good or bad fortune; it is to you alone I present this work; I address
it to the most delicate objects of the earth; and as you are that which most
pleases in the world, so is it you also I desire most to please. If the very
power of love depends not but on yours, whatsoever appertains to it, owes no
homage but to you; and these adventures that are effects of Ladies beauty, are
not to be offered but to those that may produce the like. I hope there is not
one amongst you that will not find here how to pass away some hours with
pleasure. The severest will not be offended that this book speaks to them of
love, and will not fear, as they read it, to tell themselves that they would
be loath to hear from the mouths of men. Those that suffer only to be loved
without loving, and will have much respect and ceremony, shall here find such
Lovers as they desire: And those that are softer, and who to ease the flames of
their servants are willing to take a part of them, shall have some satisfaction
to see their own passions here authorized by examples. But because amongst
those that love, there are some constant, and some wanderers, and this book
altogether takes part with the first, I should fear lest the other side might
not take offense to see their humor ill entreated, if I did not give them
reasons to defend themselves against those that are alleged in this work. The
most severest Judges would find it a hard matter to resolve which is more
commendable, either to know how to keep a passion in spite of fortunes
traverses, or to change it to good purpose. It is indeed a very glorious thing
to make an invincible love appear, that fears neither heaven nor earth, that
is the stronger for very opposition, and that would not be shaken by the ruin
of the whole world. Such affections as these cannot be so perfect, but that
they are founded upon virtue; and reason having bred them, they must of
necessity last always, it being impossible that what was once reason, should
be so no more. There is none but must confess this kind of loving admirable,
but it is as rare withal. The most part of loves grow of light causes, a
little charm surprises the eyes, and takes from them the knowledge of many
defects. Constancy in these affections in without doubt more vicious than
change; and very often they call inconstancy, that which in effect is but a
judicious retrait. Change is sometimes a virtue more strong, and more
courageous than Constancy it self. It Is by it one tames a passion of many
years, and repaires all the disorder that was in the soul. Men that have
always more cause to love, fall least into inconstancy; and Ladies that find
in us so many defaults, do oftentimes by reason, and by a generous striving,
that they are thought to do but out of weakness. The law that forbids change,
is only more rigorous for us: for it seems we are obliged to suffer to the
very extremity, rather than be unfaithful; and women are excusable for
changing the least unquietness love gives them. Constancy is a quality too
serious, and too melancholic, for so agreeable and delightful a sex. That
which destroys beauty, ought to be detested amongst you, as much as old age or
sickness. This same Constancy would appear valiant in you, and capable to
support vexations, at the charge of your richest treasures. It Is she that
extinguishes that lively brightness of the eyes, that effaces the color, that
ruins the good look; and that to gain you the glory of loving well, makes
you lose the other of being loved. Lightness has much more jollity and
charms; and if by some cruel accident in love there must happen one of these
two changes, either of the wit, or of the beauty, you may very well be
pardoned, if you chose that which preserves the thing in the world you account
dearest. And these are the reasons the inconstant may allege; they that follow
the laws of fidelity shall find enough in the book to answer them. I counsel
every one of you to continue in the opinion that is most conformable to her
humor; and demand of you this grace only, that those that are pleased to be
unfaithful, blame not the austere fidelities they shall find here described,
and that those that love constancy, accuse not the inconstant. But I stay you,
while peradventure you are impatient to entertain Ariana. I leave you then
with her; and yet before quitting of you, I must advertise you that she is
something bashful, because she has always bin shut up, and never yet seen
the world; and that if you desire her entertainment should divert you, you must
not address you to her altogether, to learn her adventures. She could not
then tell which of you to satisfy, and in the tumult would lose many of her
graces. Take her each of you apart into some retired place, and then giving her
attention and silence, she will freely recount to you all her life, and tell the
very least of her thoughts. She cannot love noise, or assemblies, since repose
and solitude gave birth to her.

ARIANA.
THE FIRST PART.
ROme began to resent with grief the violences and furies of Nero, after
having suffered with patience the first debauches of his youth: and the people
that was proud with the spoils of all the world, groned under the cruelties of
that Prince; when Fortune was pleased to bring forth accidents to cross the
most virtuous affections of the earth, and suffered that the Cirque, where
Combats were made only for pomp and recreation, should be watered with blood
by a detestable treason. But that baseness could not have its full effect, and
was not left unrevenged, for that by a prosperous foresight of heaven, those
who were appointed to assault, were prevented by a terror, which taking from
them their courage and judgment, preserved the lives of those that were
ordained to destruction. Two young Sicilians going by night through the City,
one of them carried by love, the other out of compla^sance only for his
friend, and passing near the Cirque with four or five of their train, after
they had made a noise with their swords upon some design they had, were set
upon by a troop of men at Arms, whose disorder made them rather seem persons
affrighted, than resolute for the lives of those strangers: Nevertheless,
their number was such, that had it not been for the extreme valor they
encountered, they would soon have made themselves free passage: But they that
were assailed, being ignorant of their purpose, showed such dexterity and
valor, that after a great fight, the other party was constrained to say, It
was the Emperor.

At that name the strangers gave the day over, when they had done a thousand
actions too brave to have had no other light but the Moons; and let their
enemies retire: But they remained so charged with wounds, that one of them fell
down presently in a sown for loss of blood, and the other going to help his
friend, was surpised with a like faintness.

Their servants, who melted into tears to see their valiant Masters in that
extremity, were preparing to lift them up from the place to carry them to their
houses, when two Ladies richly clothed, and whose beauty received a luster from
the Torches that two young boys carried before them, came thither with their
servants to learn the cause of the noise they had heard before their lodging;
but seeing those that lay along upon the place, and knowing them to be the
brave Melintus, and the generous Palamedes; the love Emilia had to Melintus put
her into an extreme sorrow to see him for her occasion in so deplorable an
estate; and Camilla gave some tears to Palamedes misfortune, of whom she knew
she was so passionately loved.

These two Sisters after they had a long time expressed their grief, caused
the bodies to be carried home to their house, to make trial of remedies that
might make them come to themselves again, and put them in several places into
beds becoming the richesse and luxuriousness of that age.

And there Melintus by the assistance of Emilia returning as it were from a
profound sleep, and at last opening his eyes, asked where Palamede was. Emilia
that knew well their friendship, told him he was not far off, and that he
was hurt as well as himself; but if it pleased the gods, they were both in no
great danger. Then he entreated Emilia that she would let him go see him: But
she would in no wise suffer him, because he might not yet rise for his wounds;
and was satisfied in this to assure him that he was in the next Chamber in as
great need of rest as he. Leave me then, said he, to my rest, I pray you; and
not able to endure the sight of her, he turned himself to the other side of
the bed.

Emilia being gone, he began thus to complain to himself: Ah, Palamed, what
faults do I incur by your friendship, against the pureness of my love! Was
not my feining to love Emilia, at your request, insupportable enough to me, but
it must still draw on more disasters! What could thou expect but vengeance
from the gods, after thou had so often betrayed my soul, forcing my words to
be contrary to all my thoughts? In stead of ordering all that is in me by a
common consent to adore but one thing, I have permitted a division within my
self, my mouth and actions sacrificing to false Deities, while my thoughts
adored but one most pure and holy one. But for all this could I deny Palamede
any thing? or could my love refuse to be forced thus for his sake, that was
Author of it? And when he desired my help, should I have alleag'd the
severity of our Laws, to brand my self with ingratitude? Alas! how hard is it
to live exempt from blame; and how often for satisfying one duty, do men quit
the consideration of another? At least thou my Soul wilt witness for me, and
thou Divinity that art present to my remembrance, that if my words have given a
respect to any other thing, my thoughts have still disavow'd them, and despised
such subjects unworthy of their consideration, and far differing from the
perfect cause of my affection.

He stayed himself some while upon that conceit that gave him comfort: then
seeing in how many places he was hurt, he continued thus thinking: Must the
wounds of that true affection I labor under be invisible, while for a
disguised love, I bear so true and visible hurts? hurts sometimes marks of
glory, but to me shameful; how shall I conceal you from my offended love?
Fortune that my constancy despised, has not lost the occasion at what time my
actions might well be blamed for infidelity: and after she had graven on me by
these wounds the eternal remembrance of that same encounter, in spite of my
designs has brought me to these beds I so carefully avoided. But, Fortune
do what thou can, thou shall never make my soul consent to lose the quality
of loving well. I am revenged of thee by despising thy favors so desired of
others: one while thou presentst me them under the charms of sweetness and
facility: another while thou lead'st me to them by the force of thy inevitable
accidents, for to ruin in me a perfection that scorns thy Empire: And I have
nothing to oppose them with, but the memory of the beauty I love, for to render
all their devices unprofitable. No, no, deceiver, never hope to have me
forsake this constancy thou art enemy to; thou may well make my affection
unfortunate, but thou shall never be able to make it decline so much as one
degree from that height it has attained.

Such different thoughts tormented or comforted his Spirit as it received each
kind of them, and entertained him till the next day, when he found himself
constrained to keep his bed because of his wounds, although there was none of
them mortal. But Palamede was a great while longer without showing any sign
of life, but that his heart did yet beat: Nevertheless, by force of medicines
they made his sight return at last, and his wounds being searched were found
very dangerous.

These two friends had a great estimation at Rome for their Nobility
accompanied with many admirable qualities, and acquired the friendship of all
that loved virtue, since their honest desire to see the seat of the Empire had
caused them to follow an Embassy which the Syracusians sent to Nero, to be
eased of certain new impositions. They had made themselves recommendable in
that employment, and gained the glory to be accounted the most accomplished
men in the world, but yet by differing qualities; Melintus that had a wise, and
perfectly discreet spirit, was the more reserved, and more opportunely
manifested his natural virtues, and those Sciences he had learned: But
Palamede was the prompter and more undertaking, yet with such grace, that for
the most part his designs ended in a prosperous and glorious issue.

They were both of them exceedingly fair and handsome: Melintus was the
higher, and of a freer making; his hair, which he wore long and curled, was
something brown, and besides he had certain Charms in his face, with such a
pleasing Majesty, that made him loved and respected of all that beheld him.
Palamede was flaxen hair'd, his face and body of more fullness, with a fashion
always cheerely* and who seemed but seldom to entertain his mind with care
or troubles.

Otho a Knight of Rome, that was afterward Emperor, was at that time the most
powerful in credit with Nero, and he above all others esteemed their
friendship, and had favored the beginning of their reputation at Rome by
making it appear that they were the two famous Sycilians of whom there was
ever report made in the news that came thither of the victories of Corbulo,
Lieutenant of the Emperor, against the Parthians; under whose conduct they had
given proofs of a most excellent valor. Many times were they the first that
mounted at assaults, and leapt down together from the top of walls into
besieged Towns, to show the way to the Soldiers: many times were they the
cause of winning battles, by opening the thickest Squadrons with furious blows
of their Javelins and Swords which nothing was able to resist: In such sort
that they were endeared to all Gentlemen, and admired by the people, being
known to be of the most ancient houses of Greece, adorned with many rare
qualities, and amongst the rest with a valor that did alike render them lovely
and redoubted.

But Fortune jealous of a virtue so high that she feared it might sometime
have the mastery of her, was pleased to cross their lives by her most cruel
rancontres; for not content to have reduced them so near their end, she
provoked the fury of Nero against them, and made him resolve to send to kill
them in their lodging, so to revenge himself for the accident happened to him
the night before. They scarce began to open their eyes to see the day light,
when some came to advertise Melintus of that cruel purpose, which would give
them no long time to enjoy their life. But all was concealed from Palamede, who
was in a state sufficiently miserable, without adding to it the fear of that
evil that must presently give him so unfortunate a cure. Melintus knew besides
that the night combat happened by an Ambuscado that was laid for them by Nero
himself under the direction of Marcellin, and that the Emperor had been hurt
in the hand, and Marcellin in the arm.

This man was one of the chiefest Ministers of the passions of that young
Prince, whose love to Camilla, and jealousy of Palamede, made him attempt the
dispatch of him and Melintus, and so give pastime to Nero, who was delighted to
walk up and down by night, fighting with, and killing all he met. Marcellin
having faild that first bout, and seeing the Emperor animated to revenge
himself of his wound, sufferd not his rage to be cooled, but resolved on this,
that a Tribune by night should go with guards to massacre them in Maximus his
house, whither they thought them retired, because that was the place where they
lived.

This news that might have daunted the boldest spirits, wrought no
astonishment in Melintus, who being too courageous to fear death, prepared
himself to receive it, being incapable for his wounds either to resist, or
fly: for although the Emperor at that time knew not where they were, yet that
must needs quickly come to his knowledge. That heap of deadly mishaps filled
the house with sorrow: some were dumb with amazement, others desperate to see
their loss inevitable: Emilia and Camilla would not be comforted, and could
not dissemble before all to express the excess of their grief. Only
Melintus continued invincible against so many misfortunes, admired of by all
that saw him so well prepared to suffer without dread the blows of Fortune.

Arcas, Melintus slave, who never forsook his Master from his youth, and had
always been a witness of his extreme virtue, and valiant actions, seemed to
have drawn profit from so fair an example, for he was very courageous, and
had formed in him so great an affection toward Melintus, that nothing could
parallel the care he had to his service.

This slave could not consider the constant face of his Master, and the
extremity of his misery, but that his heart overprest must needs send forth
tears into his eyes. In the end, inspired by some God, or carried away by his
own courage, he was bold to propose, that if the place where they were could
be for a while conceald, he would assure their lives, and that no more search
should be made for them. They would know of him what means he had invented;
but he bade them only be careful of that he had declared, and they should
presently know the effect of his resolution. He went instantly out of Emilia's
house, toward Maximus his, having along with him another slave only that
belonged to Palamede, called Nisus, whom he was assured was as affectionate as
he for the safety of his Master. When they were come thither, and shut close
within Melintus and Palamed's Chamber, Arcas says to him; Nisus, I have made
choice of thee to assist me in the design I have thought on for the saving
our Masters lives: I am resolved to dye for Melintus, and if thou have courage
enough, thou shall dye too for Palamede. Nisus without being amazed, asked him
what was to be done? Arcas answers, We will each of us take a suit of clothes
of theirs, and for fear we be discovered by those that shall come from Nero,
we will have Helmets on our heads, and we will arm our selves with swords and
poynards as of set purpose either to defend our selves, or else to fell our
lives dear, when they shall enter the Chamber: after we have resisted a while,
we may disfigure our face with blows of our poynards as we receive our
deaths, and so soul it with blood and wounds, that we shall be taken for our
Masters, and so appease the Emperors vengeance, who will no more think of the
matter. Nisus standing mute, and musing on the order of this invention, Arcas
believed he had not resolution enough for so brave a deed, and said to him;
What, Nisus, doubtst thou to dye for a cause that shall make us the fairest
examples of courage and fidelity in the world? Had thou rather live in the
basest condition of men, than dye as the most renowned of the age? having so
virtuous and valiant Masters, have we not so much learned as to do an action
wherein they may be imitated by us? Nisus interrupted him, saying, Arcas leave
off persuading me, I am as resolute to dye as you. In vain have I expressed so
continued affection to Palamede, if I should not show it now in the most
important occasion of his life: thou shall see with what joy I will entertain
death: and my soul should go her way with more content, if before her depart,
she might know that our Masters were in safety. The gods, replied Arcas, will
do the rest, let but us do our duty: we cannot but dye well satisfied; for if
they be to dye, our surviving them would be impossible; and if we preserve
them, what glory will it be, to be commended by them as long as they live?
Nisus, let us do a deed in our life time that has nothing of the slave in it,
and declare that fortune at the least has not taken from us the liberty of
dying.

Hereupon the two faithful servants embraced one another, and being provided
of clothes, helmes and swords, they resolved to attend death in that Chamber
where they should be sought for.

Though the night was not yet very near, yet for all that their courage abated
not, but entertaining themselves with the admirable parts of their Masters,
they were the more animated to dye for them, and conceived their end glorious.
At the length the house was encompassed with Soldiers, the Tribune enters with
fifty of the Emperors guard, and speaks to Maximus, who told them, the two
Sycilian friends were not in his house, yet for all that he obeyed the
Commission for breaking open the Chambers. Into Melintus his they enter, and
find the two slaves, worthy eternal memory, each of them with a sword and a
poynard, and their helmets on, whom they took to be Melintus and Palamede,
that resolved to dye, their Arms in their hands. The Tribune that came in but
with three soldiers only, seeing that he was stayed by them; What, says he,
dare you resist Nero? But they answering nothing, set upon them, and showed
themselves along time worthy servants of so valiant Masters: Nevertheless,
their design being to dye, and not to defend themselves, they gave them no
more blows but what they judged sufficient to make their dissimulation the
more probable. The Roman soldiers who increased in number, and wanted neither
Art nor Courage, had easily the better of them; and in the end Nisus being
borne to the ground by many strokes, and making as though he opposed himself
to those that were assaulting Arcas, to represent the dearness of their
Masters, gave himself three or four blows with his poynard on the face, not
being perceived. In the mean while they heard a voice crying from without, to
save their lives, and that Nero commanded it. That cry stayed the Soldiers,
and presently Otho entering the Chamber, made himself known, and said, he
brought the grace that the Emperor gave them. He embraced Arcas in Melintus
clothes, and rejoiced he had escaped that danger: But at the same time Nisus
dyed, which made him extremely sorrowful that he came no sooner: Arcas prayed
him to cause the Soldiers retire, that they might speak in secret together;
and when they were alone, he puts off his head-peece, which surpised Otho in a
great amazement* but he soon eased him of it, by declaring who he was, and
the plot that he had laid with Nisus. Otho admiring such resolution, gave a
thousand praises to so great loyalty, and made as many wishes that the soul of
Nisus might meet with a place worthy of so brave an action. After care had
been taken of Nisus his body, he prayed Arcas to carry him where Melintus was,
and that he would wear the same clothes still. So they went presently out of
the house, but in stead of re-assuring those of Emilia's house, they put them
all into a terror at their first entry, for that Otho brought a great train
with him, and they were taken to be Nero's Soldiers that had found where the
two friends were; yet after that Otho and Arcas had declared themselves, the
trouble was a little appeased till they had spoken with Melintus. Otho first of
all presented to him Arcas, and seeing him in a wonder to behold him in that
attire, he made a relation to him of his generous resolution that was admired
of all. Then Melintus bade him come near his bed, and embraced him a good
while, the poor slave not being able to pronounce one word, so much joy had
he, rather to see his Master out of danger, than that he himself was left
alive. After that, Otho told how happily he came to understand toward night
the command that was given out against them by the instigation of Marcelline,
without his knowledge, as he was also ignorant of the night combat: and how he
had presently gone to Nero, and represented to him the merits of those he would
destroy: that he had known them well to be more discreet than to have offended
his Majesty: that Marcelline was to be suspected that perhaps for some
difference betwixt them* had designed their destruction; and that he was more
in fault than they to make the Emperor serve his passions, without dreaming
that the glory of so great a Prince might be stained with the reproach of
having put so valiant men to death. That in the end having caused the command
to be revoked, he would come thither himself in haste for fear the
execution should have been too sudden. He told him next the grief he had at
his first coming into the Chamber, to see one of them already dead upon the
place: after that his mistake, going to embrace Arcas for Melintus: yet he
vowed withal, that his action deserved well other respects. Melintus after he
had given him thanks for all the cares he was beholding to him for,
enfranchised Arcas in his presence, and promised him greater rewards at his
return into Sicily. That change of accidents set joy into the place of
preceding apprehensions, Otho having assured him, that as long as he should
have any power, they should live securely at Rome. Melintus oblieg'd by so
great favors, being more satisfied for his friends safety than his own,
testified by the most affectionate words he could make choice of, in what sort
he had gaind them to himself. Otho that was of the most noble and courteous
among the Romans, made an honest reply to his civilities, and for fear of
troubling him any more, because he spoke with pain, took leave of him,
without seeing Palamede, who was in no state to be visited.

When he was gone away, Melintus impatient of seeing his friend, and telling
him all had passed, rose up, did Emilia what she could to hinder him, who very
carefully assisted: but being in the Chamber* he was forbid to speak with him
by the advice of the Chirurgions, signifying what danger he was in. Melintus
began inwardly to curse those unfortunate women that lost him so dear a
person, and with grief beheld the fair Camilla near his bed, who spared no
pains to ease him: But yet Palamede drawing the Curtain perceived Melintus,
and desired him to come near; afterward entreating Camilla to leave them
alone together, she withdrew her self: Then Melintus being set, with a very
feeble voice he spoke thus: I was never able to think I could apprehend death,
yet never was there any man more loath to dye than I: I find that I am far off
from the best father, and the sweetest sister in the world, and I dye for a
cause that will ever be disapproved of my dear Melintus. It is the greatest
displeasure that can accompany me to my grave, that I followed not the
counsel of so virtuous a friend, but constraind his prudence to obey the
transports of my youthful fancies. If the gods are resolved rather to take my
life from me, than make me wise by these accidents, I submit to their justice,
praying them to give you another friend as affectionate, but more moderate than
I: Yet if your friendship cannot easily change the subject of it, I have
another my self whom I may well call more deserving than I: I leave behind me
a sister whom I desire you to love, if already, as I believe, you have not
esteemed her worthy your affection. I know your merits be above hers, but yet I
am assured, she will never give her self to any man of less worth than you.
This consolation I shall have at least after my death, when I shall know that
with the goods I am to leave her, she is to possess the greatest I was able to
procure. The first words of Palamede had possessed with sadness the soul of
Melintus, and his eyes with tears; but the last surpised him with
astonishment; not thinking that Palamede had ever had knowledge of the secret
love he had to the fair Ariana his sister, and not willing to avow it, seeing
she her self would not have it discovered at all to any, he contented
himself to give him this answer.

It were not possible for me to have more joy, receiving so dear witnesses of
your friendship, if the occasion thereof were not so unfortunate: But I cannot
choose but give you thanks for the first, and regret the other: and I will yet
hope, that the gods will not so soon separate us; but that the occasion of my
discontent shall cease, and I long time enjoy the affection of so perfect a
friend. If the estate wherein you are, suffered me to accuse you, I might
complain of you for believing that I could ever blame your actions: If at any
time I have disliked them, it was rather because my humor was contrary to them
than my reason. Cure your self only, and imagine not of giving me any person
that may hold your place. I would not conceive the like thought of you, that
after me you could love any thing. Melintus concealed so violent and
respectfull a passion for Ariana. that he durst not pronounce her name, nor
speak one word of her, and so left off his discourse. Palamede when he had
stayed a while, said to him, And what say you to my sister? This, replied
Melintus, is a matter that I find so far above my merits, that I cannot
thin^e upon it without presumption; and besides that, Aristides your father
has his designs more high in all reason; wherefore I content my self to
honor her with all the respect I may. Palamede would have answered this, but
Melintus told him, that he could no longer endure to hear him speak with so
much pain, and desired he would remit that discourse to another time, and
rest himself for fear of some greater danger. I will make but one request to
you, said Palamede, to send into Sicily as speedily as you can to my father: it
may be I shall be alive yet some days, in which time he may be here with my
sister, or at least render me the last duties of a friend, if my death prevent
their arrive: I have no greater wish than this, that I may see them before I
dye. Melintus took that occasion to leave him, after telling him that he went
instantly to dispatch one of his men; and that he hoped for all that, when
they should be come to Rome, they would have more cause to rejoice for his
cure, than to mourn his loss. Then studying how he should write for putting
Aristides and Ariana into too much fear, he determined to dissemble his grief
as much as might be, and wrote these Letters.

Melintus to Aristides.
I Was not able to refuse Palamede this service he desired of me, to advertise
you of some wounds he received in a combat, and to beseech you by the affection
you bear him, to come to Rome to him with his sister. The fear he has to dye
without seeing you, was stronger than all the prayers I could make, that he
would not give you so much apprehension and pain. But in satisfying of his
desire, diminish your own fears, and believe that your son defying all
remedies, will not be beholding for his cure, but to your sight.


He put this other apart to be delivered in secret to Ariana.

Melintus to Ariana.
IT is with sorrow that I make you understand news that will a little trouble
your mind: Nevertheless when you shall know that the brother that is so dear
to you fears to dye for any wounds, and desires to see you, think not this
misfortune so near; but rather that your happy destiny has brought forth this
accident, to have the fairest person of the earth appear in the chief City of
the world. You are not to think it strange that he will have you gain this
glory with the prejudice of a little fear: you shall there find men to whom
love cannot be favorable far off from Syracusa, and that wait but for your
presence to cure them. In the mean time I mistrust no ill fortune, nor can I
judge the cause ill, that shall produce so fair an effect, as the happiness
to see you.


Melintus that had not yet dared to make a full discovery of his passion to the
fair Ariana, had taken this liberty to write to her since his depart from
Syracuse, and for this reason was he permitted to do it, because Palamede was
over negligent, and that she might hear often from them: so as he spoke but
insensibly of his affection to her, intermingling covertly that which nearest
touched him in the things that passed, without giving her any cause to accuse
him of unadvisednesse. And she her self was very well pleased to receive
testimonies of his passion without the engaging of her honor, by feigning
ignorance of his design: and so they did both deceive one another willingly,
if we may call deceit, the secret knowledge they mutually gave of a virtuous
and inviolable affection.

After Melintus had closed these Letters, he gave them into the hand of Arcas
his faithful Freeman; and instructing him what was to be done, gave him charge
to make all haste, to report Palamedes disaster in such a sort, that they might
not be too much affrighted, and to say, that he would have written himself but
for a hurt in his hand: then he went back again to his friend, and
dispatched this bearer in his presence to let him see how he obeyed his
request, and to give him this content at least.

Marcellin that had always before made esteem of Palamede and Melintus
because of their merits, and had not declared himself against them, his
jealousy having not yet burst forth, full of despite that they had twice
escaped the death he had prepared them, and not thinking that he was known
the Author of those treacheries, counterfeited himself to be fallen sick, and
sent to know how they did, and that he was in pain till he heard from them.
When he had learned that his chiefest enemy was in the worst condition, he sent
him an ointment as an excellent remedy for his wounds* but Melintus having
received it, would not have his friend make trial of the Drug, coming from a
place so suspect. The fair Camilla sent for a Dog that they presently struck
with a knife, then she made the Ointment be applied to the wound, and four
hours after the Dog was found dead, this composition having envenomed the
sore, and penetrated in a small time to the very heart.

The knowledge of this treason made Marcellin be as much hated of Camilla, as
he had before time been loved; and when he came to see her after his
sickness, she showed such displeasure at him, that he well perceived he was
lost with her. Melintus afflicted with his friends evil, though it was not
then judged mortal, and seeing himself constrained to feign a passion for a
Lady he loved not, passed a very troublesome life in that house. Emilia that
could not believe these coldnesses and distasts of his proceeded from the small
affection he had to her, but rather imputed the cause of them, one while to the
misfortune had arrived to them, another to his desire of being revenged on
Marcellin, never ceased rendering him her most passionate cares. One day when he
was in bed, she said to him; Melintus, It grieves me to see you so sad in a
place where it is desired you should be most content. Madam, answered he, the
greatest discontent I have, is, to put you to so much trouble, and I could wish
you would be pleased to remit the pains you take to them that serve us, so I
should be eased of the half of my evil. No, no, Melintus, replied she, hide
not your self from me, this is not the cause of your grief, for if you love
me, you desire to be loved of me; and you cannot receive at this time other
testimonies of this, than my assistance, so as my pains must rather be
agreeable than troublesome to you. But in good truth, dream you not of
revenging you on Marcellin for the villainies by which he pursues the life of
Palamede? Melintus, who was glad to conceal the principal subject of his
sorrow, was very well pleased at her abuse, and that he might entertain her
still in it, he says, Madam, It Is true, his treasons possess me with horror
and fear, for I see that he will not leave practicing against us, and it will
be more difficult for us to warrant our selves from a coward and traitor, than
an open and valiant enemy. Leave that care to me, answered she, we must by
little and little banish him our company, and afterward we shall know how to
preserve our selves from his designs: my sister already hates him, and this
have I gained of her, representing to her how much this fellow is to be
detested. There is no doubt, replied he, but his company is very dangerous, and
that sometime or other, those that are of so mischievous a disposition will
make others that converse with them partakers of the miseries of their own
lives.

I begin, though late, said Emilia, to see the truth of this you say; for I
took him for a man capable of doing a mischief, yet seeing he did us so many
good offices, I could not believe he would attempt any thing that might
occasion our displeasure. I will not, proceeded she, reproach you with the
service I did you in the person of Palamede, making him accepted with my
sister: yet I must needs let you see what affection I bear you, and what power
I have with her, by estranging Marcellin from her heart, to whom we cannot
deny, but we had singular obligations. Whereof, if you have leisure, I will
make a short relation to you. Melintus who was well content to let her have the
talk, desired her to take the pains, and she replied thus:

Three years ago my sister and I married on one day two Knights of Rome, my
sister Decius, and I Antonine: But scarce had six months passed, but Decius
quitting the affection he had to my sister, fell in love with me, at least he
would make me believe so: I discreetly resisted him, because I would not have
his intention come to my husbands or my sisters knowledge for indangering the
friendship that was amongst us, and I hoped also that he would retire himself
from it of his own accord. This mildness made him believe that in the end I
would let my self be gained, and that nothing retained me but the affection I
had to my husband. On the other side, judging of others by himself, he thought
Antonine was in love with my sister, and was again loved of her, because they
entertained one another familiarly enough without any great occasion; whereupon
he conceived so furious a jealousy, that he resolved to make them both away,
this rage of his being useful also for the love he made to me, for he
pretended to marry me after he had dispatched those two persons. One day when
we dined with him, I was amazed to be held back by him, taking me by the
arm, as I was going to eat of a dish of meat whereof there was but little in
it, and well seasoned to appearance, he feigning to remember me of something he
had to say to me, entertained me till Antonine and Camilla had eaten the most
of that was in the dish, then he made it be taken away. At that time I
perceived nothing at all, but presently after dinner, my sisters young stomach
began to work, and was strong enough to expel the poison she vomited.
Antonine that was more in years, and had eaten the most of it, finding in like
manner some gripings, did what he could to cast out that he had taken in, but
he could never do it whatsoever remedies were given him, and dyed the day
after. The crime and designs of Decius being apparent enough, you may conceive
how I was transported to lose a husband I honored, and with what fury I
attempted to revenge me on him: and he above all this would have had me
attributed his action to the excess of love he had to me, and that I was
beholding to him for it. But this mad man being not yet satisfied, but desirous
to have my sister dye what ever happened, I could then devise of nothing but
the preserving of her life by taking her home to me, where I was resolved to
live free without ever marrying again. In that time Marcellin fell in love
with Camilla with so violent passions, that there was nothing he would not have
enterpriz'd for her sake: and seeing us ever in tears, my sister and I, she
because Decius sought by all means to put her to death, and I for the loss I
endured; he took in hand to revenge us both, and to free us for ever from so
cruel an enemy. A little while after we understood that Decius had been
slain in the Appian highways, and Marcellin confessed to us he had caused it
to be done for our sakes, which gave me a great satisfaction, and brought so
much ease to my sister, that for recompense she dissembled not to give her
self to him. Since that there has been no kind of assistances wherewith he
has not pleasur'd us, and for which we account our selves much obliged to
him. But to his misfortune went she on smiling, Melintus is come from
Syracuse, who furnished with merits that cannot be refused any thing, has made
me endeavor to pull out of my sisters affection a man that she was much engaged
to, and to set Palamede there in his place. I tell you not these things, to let
you see that you are beholding to me, nor yet to entreat you to pardon
Marcellin in consideration of us, but that it may appear to you, that having
had so much power over my sister, as to put that person so far out of her
heart, I may be able also to put him as far out of her sight.

Melintus who heard this discourse with much attention, and in the mean time
gave his censure to himself of the lives of these women that had caused all
those tragedies; not believing that all such jealousies happened without cause;
and knowing that women that live with honor, have not such disordered
fortunes, dissembled nevertheless those thoughts, to give her this answer:
Madam, you always give me so great testimonies of your friendship, that I
shall remember them every day of my life: but it is not reasonable that for our
occasion you should be ingrate toward Marcelline: I had rather for your sakes
pardon him, than you should detest him for mine; one fear have I only,
knowing Marcelline, by your discourse, to be a man of blood, that we be not
forced to go from Rome, or deprived of your sight to avoid the effects of his
hate, and you may judge how unpleasing these two things will be to us.
Melintus, said Emilia, do not think of leaving us: I had rather lose
Marcelline for ever, than the sight of you one moment. It may be, replide
Melintus, Camilla had not the same desire. Assure your self, said she, that
she for the most part does what I persuade her to. Madam, answered Melintus,
what ever we do, it will be the most expedient to dissemble on your part, as
well as ours, and in the mean time to keep us to our guards. I beseech you
therefore, continued he, to entreat Camilla, that she would not use him so
hardly, for making him declare against us, and then we must needs depart this
City where he is too powerful, and lose you for ever. Emilia taking him by
the hand, answered, we will do all you desire, do you but something in our
favor, and love us but as much as we desire to be loved of you. Madam, replied
he, it is impossible for me to love you more than I do, and this I call the
gods to witness, that know the secret of my soul. I will believe this, said
she, for my own satisfaction; then she left him to go tell her sister what they
had devised together, to keep them a longwhile with them.

Melintus seeing himself alone, began to entertain his thoughts thus: Fair
Ariana, what would you say if you were present? Would you accuse me for
feigning an affection to Emilia? or would you rather pity me for the
constraint I endure? To accuse me would be but injustice in you, for
dissimulation is here too necessary: and why should you refuse me your pity,
knowing that I suffer so much pain, but for loving you well? But seeing she is
not present, how unnecessary are these discourses? This fair creature is now
in Sicily, who knows not my griefs; or if she imagines I am not exempt from
them for her love, she thinks I am not vexed but with the cares of absence,
not being able to fancy this cruel burden that is come upon me. Yet for all
this why should she not know my troubles? If I love her, is she not in my
soul? and if she be there, is she not witness of all the torments that accrue
to me, for not failing of my fidelity to her? This beauty that always forbade
me to discover my passion to her, does not for all that despise it; but
desirous to judge with more certainty of it, she has lodged her self in my
very soul, where finding she was loved with so much ardencie, and adored with
so much respect, she leaves not that place, but beholds with joy the crosses
which afflict me, as faithful proofs of my love, and her deserts. What
consolation could I have, if my memory did not let me see as often as I please,
this divine image, without which my life would be insupportable? Upon this
meditation he rested him, and shutting his eyes, to have Ariana's beauties the
better represented to him, with all the graces and lights that accompanied them
in his imagination, in this pleasing trance he made these Verses:

REmembrance dear as my desire,
Sweet entertainment of my fire,
Do not confine me to this place:
But for thee, surely life had left me
Even from the time I left that face,
Which of my liberties bereft me.
Grief for an absence importunate,
Horror of being unfortunate,
That intercepts all hope of ever her espying
My violent desires, where no effects are gained,
My cares, my furies bar my life to be sustained;
But thy lovely object does forbid me dying,
Dress thy self then with all thy charms,
And glister in thy fairest Arms,
Happy subject of my torment:
Reign alone within my memory,
And sustain my days extent
For my love only and thy glory.
Divinest imge of my fair one,
A trusty consort, and rare one.
Who still to follow me had dreaded no distress;
Who take not in disdain my lot of misery,
Cast from thy splendor but one beam to comfort me,
And dissipate the cares that vex my quietness,
Then my Soul in part relieved
Of the evils she was grieved,
Shall live content with thy decree:
Thou shall be securely feared,
And in a place pure like to thee,
Please thy self to be adored.
I perceive my cloud to separate,
Already, this same heavenly pourtrait
Dispels my troubles with her Soveraigne-ruling eye;
Shall I e're well endure the brightness of her light?
Now I see her, now she comes entirely to my sight,
As fair as Phoebus seems within the elearest sky.
Victorious of all my pains,
Heavenly Bewty that ordaines
Such happiness for all my woe,
Now that such a rare delight
Makes me forget all my sorrow,
Let nothing take thee from my sight.
I care not much in this content
Though they prepare me punishment,
Although they do conspire besides my life to take:
Full of repose, my thoughts I Will have in order placed,
While they consider thee, and hold thee still embraced,
Since that is the only good my passion can partake.
While Melintus was carried away with the sweetness of his imaginations,
Emilia was come to her sister into Palamedes Chamber, and had interrupted a
discourse that was very agreeable to them: Camilla already overcome with the
love and good grace of Palamede, and finding moreover that she was transported
with pity to see him so ill for hersake, had thus addressed her self to him:
Palamede, what thing can be capable at this time to give satisfaction to your
mind, and comfort to your griefs? Your presence, says he, Madam, which causes
in me these two effects: for although Fortune has handled me cruelly enough,
I know not how to be angry with her, in what case soever she has led me hither
to give me the happiness of seeing you at all times. But I would not, answered
she, have you buy my favors at this price often, for then my good will would
be far more cruel than all the rigours you could receive: Well, see what it
is you desire of me: your affection, says he, which I demand but of grace,
though it may seem I have purchased it with my blood. You should not be here,
replies she, if this affection were not yours already: but I will assure you
besides by an oath I make you, to banish from me what ever you would have me,
to love but you only. Palamede willing to thank her, took her hand, and lift
up his head from the bolster in pain to kiss it. Camilla making as though she
would have placed him right again as he was, for fear he might take harm,
came near him with her head, and kissed him; and because that, at the same
time he gave a strain that made him feel a shooting in all his wounds; Oh
gods, said he, what envious Demon thus intermingles pain with joy? Then
Camilla bowed down, and kissing him again, said; I will not have you be the
last in pain. Madam, says he, I am ashamed to let you go all the way, but if
I were cured, you should not thus prevent me. We must, says she, take pity
of the sick, and do for them what they would willingly do themselves in
another season. Madam, answers he, if it please you sometimes to take this
pains for me, I promise to return you four times as much when I am in
health. I will not engage you, replies she, in so great debts, that you shall
never be able afterward to pay me. I swear to you, says he, that as soon
as I am well, these scores shall the first be acquitted. Emilia surpised them
in this loving entertainment, and after some common discourse, she advertised
them what Melintus and she had consulted of concerning Marcelline: but just as
they were speaking together, there came a messenger to Palamede from his father
with these Letters.

Aristides to Palamede.
MY Son, I doubt not but Rome has wonders enough to stay you there all your
life: but consider that you have a father that loves you, and would be glad to
see you again; and a sister whose marriage is but now resolved on with
Amyntas, and who waits but your return to deliberate upon the happiness and
repose of her life: leave therefore all things, for our sakes, and come home to
enjoy our friendship, if it be still at least dear to you.


Ariana that loved Melintus, though she would not he should know it, had
foreseen that this Letter might produce great perturbations in his mind; and
therefore she accompanied it with this other which she wrote to her brother,
knowing well, he would not fail to show him either of them. Palamede, when he
had read the first, opened his sisters Letter, which was thus:

Ariana to Palamede.
MY dear Brother; you will much wonder that my designs should be differing
from my fathers: but I will tell you thus much, that you need not hasten your
return for the news he sends you: for I attend you but for this, to declare
that I will never marry Amyntas for some reasons I shall let you know
hereafter. It is therefore in your choice to come, or not to come, as it will
be one day in mine to determine with whom I am to live.


Palamede was of opinion that the reasons of his sister, which made her assume
this liberty of speech, and leave her accustomed modesty, must needs be
important. Then he sent for Melintus to communicate the Letters with him. And
he presently rose from his bed, and came to him; and the sisters leaving them
alone, Melintus took the letters out of Palamedes hand, and could not choose
but change color sometimes as he read them: which Palamede observed well
enough, but knowing he desired to keep secret his affection, he was well
content to favor this discretion of his, since he loved to live after that
fashion and so was resolved never to enquire for any knowledge in that matter,
but at what time Melintus should think it seasonable; so much respect had he to
this virtuous friend of his: When he perceived he had done reading, that he
might keep him from suspecting of his regarding of any thing, he prevented him
thus: The letters you sent them since the dispatch of these* will make our
excuses, if we should so suddenly go to them. The excuses, answered Melintus,
are very lawful, but yet they will not be very acceptable to them; and now I
find you past all danger, I repent me, that I obeyed you, and gave them so
much fear. My sister, replies Palamede, will not be angry, that I have given
her this occasion to see Italy: but that they may find us both in good estate,
return you to your bed again, for I am sure you have need of rest, for the
pains you have taken for me.

Melintus went back again to his Chamber, where being alone he thanked Ariana
in his mind, for the care she had taken to send this letter to secure him from
fear, well perceiving it was rather addressed to him than to her brother: and
judging more to his own advantage of the state of his loves, than he durst have
hoped heretofore, he was resolved to endure patiently the constraints wherein
he found himself obliged to Emilia: and his wounds being closed up ag^^ne, he
employed all his time with his friend. Wherein he was so careful, that
Palamede with the help of the Ladies was in case to be able to lift himself
up, though it were still not without much pain.

ARIANA. The Second Book.
WHen Melintus was most comforted for the health his friend recovered, he was
himself surpised with a fever. The loss of blood he had sustained, the
watchings, and labor he had endured during the extremity of Palamedes
sickness, had so weakened him, with the cares he was tormented with, that his
body was not able to resist so much pain. This accident renewed Emilia's fears
for his life, and she blamed her self for suffering him to be so carefully
diligent about Palamede: Nevertheless, with the remedies they applied, that
Fever was not very violent.

It was at that time that news was brought them, how Aristides and the fair
Ariana were arrived, and dyed for impatience of seeing them. Palamede could
hardly yet go, but was made to be carried to Melintus bed, and was desirous
his father should find him up, to remove fear from him at this first
enterview; yet for all this, he was very sorry the lot was fallen upon his
friend at that time. Emilia was sitting upon the bed, little thinking that
Melintus at that occasion saw her but with regret in the place, and Camilla was
entertaining Palamede, when Aristides came in, followed with the fair Ariana.

After he had embraced his son, and expressed to him the joy he conceived to
find him a great deal better than he looked for, Ariana took off the veil
that hid her face, and discovered such beauties that she dazell'd all those
that beheld her. She had a sweet Majesty, that filled men's minds with
admiration and astonishment: her complexion was delicate, and of a bright
whiteness: her eyes sent forth a lively and delicious light, and conspired
with the pleasing features of her face to compose a charm to amuse reason with
pleasure, while they took her captive. It seemed the center of her fair
cheeks was red by the nearenesse to the fire of her eyes, or else that the
blood was retired into so small a space, to offend as little as might be the
purity of her whiteness: her hair was flaxen, and curled into rings, her
shape slender, and her fashion grave and modest: and withal, her clothes after
the Sicilian fashion did so well accompany all these graces, that there was not
any one, but was ravished in seeing her. She was followed by a young
Gentlewoman called Epicharis, that waited on her, whose beauty had been
considered, but for Ariana's, and who had sometime been loved of Palamede.

This view caused very different effects in the place, for it possessed
Palamede with joy to see his dear sister: Melintus with admiration, and at the
same instant with shame to be found among those Ladies, who though handsome,
were most unworthy, as he thought them, of his love: and he feared that Ariana
gave a judgment of him, which would greatly wrong the opinion she had
conceived of him. Emilia and Camilla considered her rather with the eyes of
envy, than admiration; but Camilla having no cause to be jealous of her,
because she possessed her brother, gave up that pain wholly to Emilia, who
failed not to mark the changes of Melintus and Ariana, and from thence
gathered consequences which ruined her dearest hopes.

Ariana her self was not able to hinder the appearance of the trouble her
thoughts had brought her to, if she had not been assisted by the occasion of
going to kiss her brother, by whom she stayed the longer, to have her
redness past, whilst her father was speaking to Melintus: after that, being
reassur'd as much as was necessary, when Aristides had taken his son apart to
entertain him, she addressed her self to the sick man, who at her approach
felt the motions of a thousand differing passions. She thanked him for the
cares he had taken for her brother, and prayed him to suffer, that she might
give him the like assistances, for to satisfy so many obligations. Fair
Ariana, said Melintus, you are borne to command, and not to serve: your
presence is sufficient in a place to drive away from it all kinds of evil: and
since your arrive I find my self so eased, that I hope I shall not be any
longer trouble some to these Ladies I have received so many good offices from.
Although all these words were so many deadly blows to the designs of Emilia,
yet she would needs mingle her self at this discourse, and answer him, That
persons of their worth could never be importune: that there was much more
appearance, that he should be weary in being with her: that she well saw
Ariana came to deprive them of that they had so carefully conserved: But yet in
what place soever they were, they should never meet with hearts so affectionate
to their service. These last words she pronounced with some trouble, which
obliged Melintus to say to her; Be sure, Madam, you have not so ill an opinion
of us, to believe one may so easily escape out of your hands. Then seeing she
stood mute, as full of astonishment, and to give her respit to come to her
self again, he pursues; I am assured that Ariana, acknowledging here so much
brights, and beauties, and seeing us on all sides encompassed with fires, must
of necessity fear for our sakes, judging well how difficult it is to avoid the
fair desires you give birth to, and all those torments that accompany them.
Besides, the evil that retains us in this place, is the least of these we are
sensible of: you would not be so diligent in curing that you are the cause of,
and is the greatest: But for all that, I will not use reproaches against
persons we are so beholding to: it shall suffice me to tell you, that you are
too assured of our engagement, seeing that beside what we owe your merits,
fortune was willing to bind us for ever to you for so many careful
assistances.

These words restored a little the spirit of Emilia; and Melintus thought it
sitting so to dissemble, for not provoking her, and give themselves means to
retire from them: withal, he spoke those words in such a fashion, that Ariana
knew it was but feigned, for if the discourse had been true, he would not so
confidently have uttered it before her: Nevertheless she could not but fear,
and was preparing her self to hear Emilia's answer at the very time that
Aristides that was speaking to Palamede on the other side, interrupted them as
he returned to them.

This good father was very joyful to see his son out of danger; but yet he
was not over-well pleased to find him in that place with voluptuous and
magnificent women: though being discreet and of a good nature, he made no
appearance of it; and after he had inquired of his son the cause that brought
him to that house, he advertised him to go out as soon as he could from the
place where he had been so troublesome; then not to seem uncivil, he turned
^owards Camilla and Emilia, to witness to them how he had a heart that
acknowledged the favors he had received from them in the person of his son.
Ariana left him her place, and went to find her dear brother, whom she desired
passionately to have alone, to know all that had ha^ned to them during their
voyage. Palamede seeing that Melintus was preparing to make the same rehearsal
to Aristides, said to his sister, that if she desired to know all the
particulars of it, it were necessary for them to withdraw into the next
Chamber, because he could learn her many things that Melintus his discretion
would not permit him to tell, especially before those Ladies who made up a
great part of their adventures. And besides, he was not willing that Epicharis
should be present, for fear she might hear of his infidelities: and when they
were alone together, he began thus:

History of Palamede, Melintus, Emilia, and Camilla.
Dear sister, my humor being so welknown to you, I believe you are al in a
readiness to understand many follies, when you desire to know what my life has
been, since I left Sicily. And sometimes as I am considering upon my unruly
dispositions, I thank the gods for having given me a sister, whose virtue
oftentimes reclaimes me by her example, and a friend whose good counsels
correct my evil inclinations, and are remedies for those errors my pronenesse
makes me incur: I will tell you therefore that from Syracuse to Rome no very
remarkable thing arrived to us: nevertheless we wanted not recreation; for the
pleasant wit of Melintus produced such merry occurrences, that our Ambassadors
themselves could not live without us, and having had experience of his vivacity
and prudence, and some freedom in me, they deliberated of nothing, without
communicating it to us. So we came into this City, where Melintus delayed not
long to be made known, and to gain us the friendship of those that held an
estimation of honor and good birth. By little and little we put our selves
into the knowledge of the most powerful men, of whom there were but few that
were not pleased to be visited by us; yea, many times they came to seek us out
for to go together to the public exercises, and to enjoy our conversation:
wherein I admired the force of Melintus worth, that made homage to be given it
in an age so corrupted.

I vow to you, that the stately glory and magnificence of Rome began to
dazell me: I despised our Towns, and the rarest things I had ever seen in
Greece or Asia: I found nothing so majesticall as the Emperors Court, nothing
so grave as that August Senate, nothing so pompous as the Roman Ladies, which
appeared to me so many Princesses: In the end I forgot all that ever I had
heretofore accounted wonderful, to tie my self to these rich objects, and
admire them: but in stead of abasing me by the consideration of their
greatness, my courage was bold to advance it self close to them, and to
pretend to make me considerable even with the most illustrious.

Melintus regarded all these things with another eye, and in stead of advancing
himself to them by admiration and astonishment, he abased them under him, yet
not by too severe a wisdom, but by a wholesome knowledge of the vanity of
these grandeurs, which he could make no esteem of, but when they served for
ornaments to virtue.

You know that my heart cannot long time endure without passion, and having
left with the air of my Country, the affections also I had there, I thought
the time long, till I were already engaged in the search of some one of those
great Ladies, with whom I promised my self more felicity than the gods
themselves taste of.

One day when they carried us to the Theater to see the spectacles, I happened
to be very near to two Ladies, whose beauty presently drew my eyes that way,
and they were so fastened on that consideration, that Melintus being aware of
my great attention, passed his hand before my sight, and said to me laughing;
You are seeking to have your self hurt, believe me, and retire your self. I
was at that time engaged in the choice I was to make of one of these two, and
that surprise did something divert me from my thoughts, though not from my
design; I confessed to him that I found them very handsome, and that I would
be very desirous to be able to come near to them; but the prease was so great
about them, that that was impossible for me. They were set upon rich seats,
having cushions under their arms, and under their feet; and that delicateness
pleased me infinitely: they that were about them did their duties with such
respect to them, that this very honor added yet much more to the estimation I
began to have of them. She that was nearest me seemed to have more
sweetness, and more familiarly to treat those that spoke to her: The other
appeared more severe, and of an humor to usurp a great Empire over them that
sought to serve her. For me that desire not to employ so many days in the
pursuit, and when the quality of these Ladies, and the quantity of suitors
persuaded that I should but lose my labor, I was resolved for her I found most
easy, and that seemed also to have something in her more agreeable. I inquired
after their names, and learned how they were called Emilia and Camilla, two
sisters, widows, whose beauties were of a very high estimation at Rome; the
one of them, which was Emilia, had not any favorite in appearance, using
contemptuously all her lovers, and governing her self with much discretion:
and the other that was nearest, called Camilla, amongst those that served her,
had the rumor to be entirely possessed by Marcellin, one most powerful near
the Emperor.

The authority of this rival a little amazed me, but yet it made me not
discouraged, but contrary I believed I might more easily obtain a good that
was granted to another: and when I was at my lodging, I began to muse and
walk about a great pace: Melintus, that had observed how I had staid my self
long upon Camilla's face, set him also to walk up and down, and muse as I
did, and after many turns he came near me, and said, Hide not from me your
thoughts, and I will tell you mine: Never, said I to him, have I concealed any
thing from you. I will tell you then, says he, that within these three or
four hours I am extremely in love. And so am I also, answered I. Can that be
possible, replies he? But may I tell you the subject of my affection? As
freely, said I to him, as I shall tell you mine: I love, says he, one of those
Ladies that sat near us at the Theater: I answered him, and so do I; but
which of them pleases you best? She that shall please you least, said he to
me. But I assured him that I would always receive law from him, so far was I
from prescribing him any thing. I will tell you then, continued he, that I love
Camilla. I said to him, a little astonished, and I also; then recomforting me,
I added, but for a small matter you shall give me at my return, I quit her to
you, upon condition you will assist me to gain Emilia. And I, says he to me
laughing, give you both of them for the interest I pretend in them. Then,
coming to my self, and knowing he would mock me, I said to him, that he
would think himself wronged to have these Dames accounted worthy of him: But
for my part I was not so delicate, and would ever seek out pleasures
proportionable to my humor, and my power. I fear me, said he, lest your
humor carries you to a place where your power shall not be received: then
seriously he represented to me the troublesome encounters I should meet with in
that pursuit, that same Lady being pre-possest, and that rival too powerful,
and already in possession: but these difficulties rather increased my desire,
than his reasons diminished it.

Therefore I studied the means to have entrance into her house, and that was
not very hard for me, for the two sisters refused not persons of honest quality
the access to it, and so by the intercession of one of our friends, we were
soon received with honor. Melintus was not there any long time, but be made
himself be known for a most complete Gentleman, and beloved, as in all other
places he frequents.

I never envied at the esteem was made of him, but yet I was angry that he
that had the least design was best entertained: yet my free humor was not
very disagreeable to Camilla: She loved to laugh, and I am none of the
saddest: she was delighted to hear me play on the Harp, and many times
mingled her voice with my sounds, which thing got me a little familiarity with
her. When I would have opened the matter of my affection to her, she received
at first my words as coming from courtesy that obliged me to express the
particular estimation I had of her: but because I would not leave her in that
opinion, and desired she might be assured of the violence of my passion, I
said to her, Madam, you have not a beauty that will be loved only for good
fashion sake. I beseech you to believe for a truth, that as you are the
fairest, so I am the most passionate of the world, and that no consideration
shall ever hinder me to dye at your service. Camilla seeing she was to answer
these speeches otherwise than she had done the other, said coldly to me, that
it was but a very little while that she knew me, to be assured of my humor:
and that she would teach me hers, which was to know well how to punish those
that abused her freedom, and take away the favors she had granted them, when
they began to seek for other favors they ought not to pretend to. These
words which I understood not, a little amazed me, nevertheless I said to her
presently; And my humor also, Madam, shall be, never to love any but you,
what ever rigor it shall please you to declare. The coming in of Marcelin
brake off that discourse, yet as she rose up she said besides to me; If you be
wise you will change your speech and design, and so left me as much
confounded as I had been all my life time.

A little after I went out, leaving Marcelin with Camilla, and Melintus with
Emilia. She, as you have seen, exceeds not her sister in beauty, but much in
wit, and knowledge how to get credit and authority over them that ordinarily
see her, and Camilla too leaves her self wholly to be governed by her.

Melintus in the evening returning home where I was, found me studying the
ways to gain the good graces of Emilia, so to attain those of her sisters,
and casting upon a thousand fancies, one while on the condition of my fortune
which I found so broken down; another while on the means of relieving it.
Seeing me so sad and pensive, he came to tell me, little dreaming of my
displeasure, that he began to be of this mind, that one could not be happy
without loving. I said to him, that this happiness is often mixed with
bitterness: for all that, says he, I see you so well pleased, and pass such
sweet hours with Camilla; but to me that can find here no beauty to please me,
entertainments of women are but punishments. Then I looked upon him, and seeing
he could not hinder himself from laughing, I cried out, Ha! Melintus, mock
not at the afflicted: is this the care you ought to have of helping me, and one
of the effects of that friendship you promised me, for to please your self in
augmenting my grief? This is not my aim, says he to me, to torment you, but
to make you know, that you are to follow my advice another time. I confessed to
him that I had been faulty, but since I was entered into that straight, I must
either pass through it, or dye. And what help, says Melintus to me? Your
self, answered I. If this means, says he to me, be as profitable to you, as
it is sure, I account you already very happy: you are but to propose that you
desire I should do. Feign your self, says I to him, to be in love with
Emilia, and having acquired her good graces, oblige her to give me part in her
sisters. Do you believe, says he, that I can do that with Emilia, which you
cannot with Camilla? or that I may obtain by a fained, that which you cannot
by a real affection? Do but try to love her, said I, in deed, and you will
take pleasure to serve my turn and your own also. He answered me, if I be as
unfortunate as you, who shall comfort us then? I am assured, said I, you will
not be so, for already Emilia admires the good qualities are in you, and will
without doubt joyfully receive the offer of your service. I did never, says
he, observe any thing in me that might give me this presumption, yet I
confess that I cannot esteem of that is in her, nor love a thing that has so
many faults, as there are in those kind of women that give entertainment to all
comers, and whose vanity, avariciousnesse, and impudence are insufferable:
well for all that, after I had let him speak many things against these women,
I knew so well to work the forcing of his humor for my sake, that in the end
he promised me to feine a loving of her, since nothing but his pains
remained to serve me, without out fear to engage himself, and assured me that
he would employ all the advantages he could have, to favor my purposes, not
willing to pretend any other favor for his services.

It cannot be, Ariana interrupted him, but Melintus is a despiser of women, to
have had so much trouble to be resolved of sacrificing some hours for your
contentment. It is not, replied Palamede, that he despises them: for he never
is wanting to give that honor and esteem that is due to those he sees, but I
believe that to this day he has not found any thing that deserves to be
perfectly loved of him, and that a virtuous man as he is, is not pleased to
speak one thing, and mean another: and in that very thing I was assured of
the friendship he bare to me: for against his own mind he so counterfeited to
give himself to Emilia, that I thought he had been in love indeed. It may be,
replied Ariana, the counterfeiting turned into earnest, and this disdainful
man finding facility and sweetness would not contemn that good fortune was
presented to him. You shall hear, continues Palamede, in what sort he used his
advantages.

Emilia until then had made nothing appear to all her lovers, but contempt,
and indifferency, yea some had she handled with so much cruelty, that despair
had reduced them to extreme resolutions: for there is no doubt but she has
charms unavoydable to any other but Melintus, and is skilled in the managing
of wits with so much dexterity, that she acquires an absolute command over all
that approach her: among the rest she was more continually served by one called
Trebacius Captain of the Emperors guard, who for all the passionate duties a
lover could perform, had proved all the rigours that a Mistress could inflict:
But that woman that had brought forth so much love without receiving any, did
at this time take, without giving any.

At first meeting she received with joy Melintus offers, as a conquest she had
desired, having then no other plot, but to keep that acquisition, yea she
dissembled not to glory of it, and to signify her contentment to her other
lovers, the more to provoke them: she used them with more cruelty and contempt
than ever, in such sort that Trebacius not able to endure such sensible objects
of ill entreaty and jealousy, was in the end forced to resolve with himself
never to see her more. But love that would be revenged of all her disdaines,
made her observe so many perfections in Melintus, and sweetness in his
conversation, that she began to feel cares, and unquietness when he was
absent, and motions of joy (which were not ordinary with her) when she saw him.
She would have rejected those torments, which were not known to her but by the
complaints of them she had made suffer so much, but it was impossible for her;
and in the end she was brought to that pass, to comfort her self in this
belief that Melintus felt no less torment for her.

Melintus soon perceived the effect as well of his words, as of his duties,
and thought it fit for the good ordering of this advantage that he must faigne
not to seek out of discretion what he shunned out of design. He gave me
advice of all; and we had so ordered the matter, that for not provoking of
Marcelin, I was not before him to express any purpose for Camilla, but rather
to make him believe that we had too much respect to him for to enterprise upon
his loves. This assurance we gave him, and some good offices we did him,
gained us entirely his friendship, even so far, that he made report of us to
the Emperor, and made him desirous to see us.

Then lived I happy enough, because Melintus willing to avoid the occasions of
being alone with Emilia, that he might not have cause to press her, had found
out a device to deliver himself out of that pain, and give me much commodity
and content. For having observed that Marcelin made himself a states man, and
would seem able to speak upon any kind of subject, yet and sought his
entertainment, to make it appear that he loved no company to that of the
learned, at what time Melintus saw him most busy about Camilla, he entered in
his discourse with Emilia upon subjects that were very high; and Marcelin lest
he might seem to recule for ignorance, left Camilla to join himself to those
discourses which Melintus knew how to prolong, and then to begin others,
wherein Marcelin was so far engaged, that he lost the remembrance of Camilla,
and so left me the place free; while Melintus also delivered himself from the
discourses he had been obliged to hold with Emilia altogether contrary to his
thoughts.

Since the cruel answer Camilla gave me, I dared not take up that language
any more, fearing I might wholly ruin my self; only I rendered her little
devoires and complaisances, staying till Melintus might oblige Emilia to speak
something in my favor: in the end was this occasion presented.

Marcelin had spoken of us to the Emperor, and amongst other of Melintus
qualities, had commended him for making excellent Greek verses, and had said
of me that I could play on the Harp; nay more, that therein we had been
Victors in Greece at the Olympique games: these were then the dearest pastimes
of that Prince, to compose and repeat verses upon the Theater, and to play and
sing in presence of the people, to the envy of those that were acquainted with
such exercises. Melintus and I having saluted Nero, he commanded us to prepare
our selves two days after to ascend the Treatre with him, and dispute the
prizes appointed for the Conquerours.

It was against his will that Melintus resolved to obey, and appear in an
action so little becoming the greatness of his courage: But yet though it
were some shame to see so great a Prince so passionately to seek for honors
so vain, and so unworthy of his Majesty; when I saw my self upon the Theater
proudly clothed, with the chiefest men of the earth, upon cloth of gold and
purple; the Emperors guards about us, and an infinite number of people
showting with acclamations and applauses, my heart conceived joys my mouth is
not able to express. Only I will tell you that Melintus appeared in his rang
attired like Orpheus, when he went to hell to demand Euridice, and repeated
that Elegant Poem you have sometimes heard him speak of, with which he so
ravished the peoples ears, that the end of his repetition was followed with a
thousand acclamations of applause.

I was disguised into Apollo, and had a laurel near me to represent him when
Daphne whom he pursued was changed into that tree, and accommodating my voice
to the Music of my Harp, I sung these verses.

LOvely daughter of Peneus,
That had compelled me to thy lure,
And is thy life departed from us,
Into this wood a tree to endure!
Alas for to avoid my love,
Thou many cries to heaven did send:
Thy voice has moved the gods above;
A God could never make thee bend.
Less quick I wished thee to be;
Heavens smiling when I prayed,
Immovable by rendering thee,
More than I desired, have stayed.
Thy running did me much importune,
Thou were in dread of my embrace;
And our desires by this thy fortune,
Were heard, and turned to our disgrace.
O Daphne! what funest desire
Has made thee thus the light despise?
Sweet Daphne, or to life retire,
Or else restore my liberties.
Why do I tempt a thing impossible,
I lose my words that lost my way:
If when a Nymph she was insensible,
These branches hear not what I say.
Let thy leaves be green for ever
Laurel of my ill glorious:
Let them always my head cover,
And front of the victorious.
Camilla and Emilia were not very far off us, and I was more pleased that
Camilla approved, with a nod of her head, that I had sung, than with some
clapping of hands that followed in my favor. When all had been presented in
their turns, and they were to judge of the prizes, Nero was proclaimed
Conqueror: Yet the second honors were adjudg'd to us. Melintus received a
crown of gold enriched with diamants and pearls; and I a Harp adorned with a
thousand Emeralds, upon whose top is a Lions head with open jaws, and the
tongue that comes out of them made of an entire ruby. I wonder, said Ariana,
justice should be given to strangers, when in appearance it was not well kept
in the person of Nero. If the Judges, replies Palamede, were not so just as
they should have been, the Emperor himself corrected their judgment, which
thing got him less envy, and Melintus the more glory, for having received the
crown of laurel, he put it upon Melintus head, and to testify the pleasure
he had taken in hearing him recite, he offered him any suit he would make.
Melintus, after he had thank't him for so many favour^ without much considering
on the matter demanded of him, as you have heard, the exemption of customs for
the City of Syracuse. Nero admiring his generosity for preferring the good of
his country to his particular advantage, granted him his request, with other
privileges for our City, and gave him many presents besides; and more than
that, he gave us the title of Citizens of Rome, with all the honor he was able
to favor us with.

This Prince has good intermissions, and sometimes does actions worthy of his
greatness, but they are presently darkened by a number of prodigious crimes,
wherewith he nothing fears to stain the honor of his Majesty: and very often
he pleases himself, to exercise the greatest cruelties upon those he has made
most of, as but lately his Mother, Burrus, and many others serve for examples,
and we our selves a few days since were very near running the like fortune.
But let us leave these troublesome thoughts, to pursue the happy adventures
arrived to us in this famous journey.

When Palamede would have gone forward with his discourse, Ariana and he heard
a noise in Melintus chamber, as it had been of many persons coming to visit
him. By and by they were asked for, because it was Otho that came to take leave
of them, going to make a great voyage. And already was he speaking to Melintus
in secret, and Palamede being admitted, he learned them these sad news, that
he was in disgrace with Nero, that the Emperor was in love with Sabina his
wife, and would have her wholly to himself, and for that cause sent him to the
farthest of all Spain to govern Lusitania: That it much grieved him to leave
them to the mercy of Marcelin, whose favor augmenting with the spoils of his,
it was to be feared they fell not into his power: But that they might securely
serve themselves of those friends were left them in Rome, who were not unknown
to them. Melintus deplored his misfortune, and expressed to him how great a part
they took in his disgrace, that deprived them of a friend so earnest for their
safety. But he was constrained to give over that speech, because Otho regarding
nothing was said to him, was so attentive in considering Ariana's mavelous
beauty, that nothing could divert him. Palamede said to him, she you look on
is my sister, who is come hither from Sycily with my father, having understood
my sickness. Otho for all that, ceased not to study, having his eyes
continually fixed upon Ariana; then all on the sudden they saw him blush; and
a little after that blood which had dispearc't it self upon his cheeks was
forced to run toward his heart, that would have been gone to hinder his
departing, and left his face without color. Otho finding himself to faint,
prayed Palamede to carry him into his chamber, and that they might be there
alone. As soon as they were entered, he let himself fall backward upon the
bed. Palamede asked him what he ailed, but he could not answer. What effect
more sudden and more rare could an excellent beauty produce? But it ought not
to be found so strange, considering the divine aspects of Ariana, working on a
subject nourish't up in delights, and capable to receive easily those strong
impressions. Otho in the end after a great sigh, said to Palamede: Ah! dear
friend how dangerous was the sight of your sister to me, and what troubles
has she made me in so little a time. I did at first meeting receive this
sight with so much liking, as it had been a remedy happily sent from heaven
against the displeasures I endured: Me thought I entreated that fair face to
bring forth a passion in me, that might dispell the cares of my disgrace, and
the cruel regret for Sabina's loss: But wretched exchange, and cure that
brings me death! I lost all in one day, my delights, my honors and the most
aspiring hopes of the earth, and having found a subject to be admired that
might restore to me a thousand times more goods, that I must lose it again in
an instant. I came hither, having my foul troubled with griefs, and found
that they were dissipated by the joy that happened to me for the birth of so
fair an affection: but presently the consideration of my depart within an
hour came to attach this new love, and ordained it either to dye, or to be the
most unfortunate that ever entered into a heart: for to make it dye, I cannot so
much as will the destruction of it: and to conserve it, I know not so strongly
how to consent to my own misery, as to keep a remembrance that would be the
more cruel to me in my exile, the more amiable it appeared. And these are the
contrary thoughts, Palamede, that assaulted me all at once with such fury, that
they caused the disorder you saw me in: Excuse, I pray you, my transportation:
I believe that this day some star casts upon me his most malignant influences.

Palamede knew not what to say to him upon so strange an accident: he would
have condol'd his misfortune, had not the cause and remedy so nearely touched
him: To offer him his sister, she was not in his disposing: and to promise him
assistance near her, if he had had the will to it, the time was too short for
hope to get any advantage by it. In the end he resolved with himself to make
no overture to him, but to expect it from him, and asked him what he desired he
should do to serve him. No, no, Palamede, answered Otho, be not you in pain
to help me. I wish to your sister the greatest felicity of the world, so far
am I from willing to make her a companion of my misery: I am a miserable
banished man, the hatred of heaven, and castaway of the earth, which scarce
affords me one of her extremities to be sustained in: no other comfort have I
desired of you, than that I received in telling you the extremity of my misery,
which never shall be heard spoken of by any besides you. Adieu, dear Palamede,
enjoy a better fortune: I demand you no other favor but to show me the way to
get out of this lodging without passing by the Chamber where she is that I
have seen too much for my repose. I should fear lest the sight of me might
not offend the happiness of so many graces, by the contagion of my mishaps: or
else lest her regards which are more cruel to me, might not make my evil
incurable by new hurts. I will hope that the remembrance of that I have seen
but one moment, may in time be effaced; and I perceive well that I should make
it immortal, if I suffered it to acquire more strength. He besought him after
that to make his excuses to Melintus for going his way without seeing him.
Palamede protested to him, that he lamented his torment, and that he was
willing to ease him with the loss of his blood, in satisfaction for so many
favors wherewith he had obliged them. Otho gave him thanks for his good will,
and having learned a secret back way out, took leave of him, to carry with
him into Spain a memory of Ariana, which both made the way irksome to him, and
a great part of his staying there also; but in the end, his far remove, time,
and his ambition more than all things, cured that wound with much ado, so
powerfully does a rare beauty imprint her marks upon a soul that is noble and
delicate. Palamede being returned to Melintus, made relation to him of the
occasion of Otho's trouble, discourses, and resolution. Melintus in his heart
was not offended for his remove, seeing himself freed from a rival too
puissant, although he had sorrow to lose a friend so affectionate, and that had
heretofore so much credit: Nevertheless he dissembled what he thought, to
wonder at so sudden an affection: then after he had said, how it was not
needful to make that accident at all be known, Aristides, Emilia, and Camilla
came near, to whom Melintus conceived he might discover Otho's disgrace,
seeing it was already divulged at Rome: Every one bemoaned him, because he had
many excellent qualities, and among the rest, a liberality without example.

Palamede took his sister again to tell her what had come to pass, at that
time he saw the rest engaged in that discourse, and having led her into the
other chamber, he made her blush when he acquainted her with the sudden love
of Otho, which matter being not fitting for her to hear continued, she to
break it off, obliged him to finish the history he had bogun, whereof she was
impatient till she had learned the end. He consented to what she desired, and
thus reassumed his discourse.

I believe we were interrupted, when I was telling you, how we went out of the
Theater, where we had gotten honor enough, if it were honorable at all there
to appear. After we had left the Emperor, we were accompanied to our houses
by our friends, and a part of the people: but it was a very long while to me,
ere I was rid of so much company, to go see Camilla. We feined to be weary of
the tumult and crowd, which made them all take leave of us; and instantly I
prayed Melintus to go along with me to the sisters. They were then alone, for
Marcelin had waited upon Nero to the Palace; and at our coming, come, says
Emilia, let us go receive these Conquerours with the honor is due to them.
Melintus putting one knee to the ground, said to her; We come to present these
Conquests at your feet, seeing that we hold them of you. Yet did not I, replies
Emilia, compose the verses you recited; and for me, says Camilla, I cannot
play on the Harp. The love, said I to her, we have for you, is so powerful,
that it made us vanquish all that is in Rome. It was sufficient, added
Melintus, that you favorably looked upon us, because fortune can refuse
nothing to them that have that happiness. The pleasing Camilla replied with
her accustomed mirth, If our eyes obtained this victory, I find them to be
excellent Poets, and good players on the Harp. I said to her, they are far
more cunning than we, for they can make themselves be loved, which we have not
bin able to do yet. This is a difference, said Emilia, we must end in
particular, and drawing Melintus apart, left me with the fair Camilla.

When we were set, I was a little astonished, not daring yet to speak freely
of my affection to her: Nevertheless swollen with the good fortune of my
victory, and seeing her look with a very cheerful countenance, I said to
her, that there was no contentment that was not accompanied with displeasure,
and at that very time we are accounted most happy, we have often most occasion
to complain of Fortune. It is true, answered Camilla, but what cause have you
to speak this? Because, said I the people to day thought me well pleased, and
I find before you my condition very miserable. If that be so, replies she you
are to avoid my presence with great care, and seek for public assemblies
where Fortune is so favorable to you. But, said I to her, if I cannot wish for
happiness without you, it would be but an untoward way to be happy, to fly
from you. If you seek, said she, this good, to be esteemed of as much as it is
possible for a person of your merit to be, you ought not to think your self
miserable with me. The merit, continued I, is not great, when it cannot
prevail to make me beloved. Your merit, said she, is powerful enough, since
it makes it self beloved of me. And my person? said I then. I esteem it,
answered she. Nothing else, replide I. I honor it, added she. Oh the gods,
cried I out, what of honor, what of esteem, and no love! I know not, said
she, what you speak of. Of a thing, answered I, you are not ignorant of,
seeing you have learned it me so well. It Is then, says she, a want of will.
Wherefore, went I on, will a person of such perfection have this want? ha,
well, says she, I will have a will for you. But, answered I, I would have a
good one. And I will give you, says she, an ill one. I replide, Would you then
be so cruel? Will you, continued she, that we fall to an agreement? This, said
I, is the favor I demand. Let us part, says she, equally, you shall have an
indifferent one. I expected some more favorable answer, and replied to her,
that I would not have a thing she was so free of to all the world. Had you
rather, says she, have particular evils, than common goods? I assured her,
that I desired neither one, nor other: Nevertheless, answered she, you are to
choose: and I said to her, I had rather leave you both of them. I will, said
she, prevent you, and so she left me, going away toward Emilia, who being
angry because she interrupted her discourse with Melintus, asked her why she
had quitted me. Camilla answered her in laughing, and walking up and down the
chamber, he is a man that pretends to more than one victory in a day.

I could not tell then whether I should account my self happy, or unhappy,
having taken hold on no word that were to my advantage, and yet she spoke all
these things with a pleasantness, which gave me cause to hope well: and I
would have gone to entreat Emilia that she would be Judge of our difference,
when Marcelin came in to break our discourse. We gave place to him, and after
some speaking of what had been done that day, I left him with Camilla, and
making show as if I would have busied my self in the mean time upon
something, I took a Harp, and sung these verses, which I made heretofore when
I loved Epicharis.

WHat grace has she in refusing!
How are her rigours favorable?
And how her eyes by despising,
Produce such torments desirable:
If ever those fair ravishers
Would change their disdaines to pleasures,
What fortune would surmount my glory?
Since being now so full of rigor,
I scarcely think that in all story
There is found a happier lover.
Be gone, Despaires, at my command,
Spightfull enemies of my fire,
Give place, and leave to a gentler hand
The ruling of my souls Empire.
Fair eyes I like your tyranny,
It Is to you I yield me only;
I fear no more your sweet despights,
Since this you learned me I retain
To recompense as great delights,
The cruelties of your disdain.
Great God whom all Lovers adore,
How are thy goods unlimited?
Since being pleased, or punished,
They love thee never the less, nor more:
But though my heart well pleased is,
And seems to enjoy a perfect bliss,
Yet Love be not thou weary, or leave
The favourizing my desire,
If ills with graces I receive,
What would my pleasures then require?
Camilla perceived well they were addressed to her: yet seeing she was too much
employed with Marcelin, I set by the harp; and Melintus longing to tell me
what he had done for me, advertised me to go out. I took leave therefore
with satisfaction sufficient, for that I had made my entrance with Camilla: but
the condition of my affairs was yet in better terms on the other side; for
being retired at home, Melintus told me, how Emilia began to speak thus to
him: What think you of your fortune to day? That it is favorable, said he, in
what least concerns me, and contrary in what I most desire. And what can
Melintus wish for, replied Emilia, that he may not obtain with those
advantages he is possessed of? The honor of your good graces, said he, which I
seek for with such passion. I will not, said she, have it my fault, that this
day be not entirely happy to you, for I give you that place in my soul which
you can desire there. I receive, said he, this favor, with the submissions I
am bound to, acknowledging my self unworthy of it, and make an oath upon this
fair hand, never to abuse it. Are you content, replide she, with me? More,
answers Melintus, than I could ever have hoped. But I am not, said she,
satisfied with the present I have made you, but in imitation of the Emperors
magnificence, and acknowledgement to your deserts, that are better known to
me, than to him, I make offer to you also of what ever shall please you to
desire of me, my honor reserved. Melintus feigning a joy unhoped for, said to
her; Seeing it pleases you to grant me so much grace, I accept it, and to make
it appear that I perfectly love what I have undertaken to serve, I ask you no
other favor, but to order the matter so, that Palamedes service may be
accepted of Camilla, afterward I may think of making my self happy. I
believe, said Emilia, that this day you have forgot your self, to consider the
contentment of others: but seeing this is your request, you shall see in what
fashion I will employ me with her: yet for all that, I will not have this be to
you in stead of any obligation. Melintus thanked her for this assurance, and
represented her with the pain I was in, and the need I had of her succor,
when Camilla forsaking me, went to break off their entertainment.

Dear sister, you may imagine, how well pleased I was at these news: for
knowing that Emilia desired to give greater proofs of her love to Melintus, I
assured my self she would let her sister be quiet, until she had given her
good words for me: and I was not deceived with this hope: for I perceived,
Camilla began to make more esteem of me; besides, to believe these assurances
I gave her of my love, and to oblige me by her answers, and in the end to
express an affection to me: nay one day she told me I had a good friend of her
sister. You know me too well, to think I would lose these advantages: so I
urged her in such wise, that by little and little she engaged her self to me,
allowing me little favors, whose permission made me an easy way for greater;
In such sort, that serving my self with the occasion, one day as I found her
upon a bed. Ariana, blushing, interrupted him, and said, hold you there,
brother, I fear you will tell me things I would not hear. Then said Palamede
to her, Sister, I find it very pleasant, you should fear to hear tell of my
good fortunes, and be in no apprehension by and by to understand the misery
came upon us. I shall ever be glad, said she, to know that all good fortune
attends you, but you ought to be silent in these particulars. Palamede replide,
how he was not altogether ignorant how it became him to speak to her; and that
he was very sorry nothing had passed that might have obliged him to conceal it,
for that having found her upon that same bed, he could never obtain any thing
of her, with all his labor and entreaties, whereof he would make no relation,
because she was not pleased with it: then he went on; I vow, I have not
retention enough, long time to conceal a good fortune. I began to be weary of
my discretion that bound me to dissemble before the meanest of that house:
besides me thinks it were to show ones self unthankful to fortune, not to
publish her benefits, and if I were governed by my own humor, she should
never have cause to complain of me, because I would always make her favors
greater by my repetition of them, to confess my self the more beholding to
her. Nevertheless being to follow the advice of Melintus, and commands of
Camilla, who feared to have our intelligence known to Marcelin, because he
held her in an Imperious way, I was some while surmounting my self, and
admiring the discretion I observed: But in the end seeing that a chambermaid
named Cyane was for the most part about us, and made me lose the good hours I
had passed with more freedom, but for her, I resolved with my self to gain
her, to the end, that if she were an ordinary witness, she might also be a
complice. I kept me close from Melintus to practice this maid, which I have
since repented sufficiently, because without doubt, he had let me seen the
misery I went to engage me in. So I made her some presents, whereby I thought
her wholly mine, and discovered to her the good will her Mistress bare me.
She faign'd to understand this news with content, and promised me her service
in what ever I could desire of her. See how capable we are to forget our
selves: for thinking her more useful to me than any body, I retired more in
her confidence, than in Melintus his himself, and told her all had passed with
Camilla and I, whereof Marcelin failed not to be advertised, as we came
afterward to know. I perceived well he did no more salute me with that
freedom he was wont, but judging no other cause of it but his inequall humor,
I omitted not to pursue my fortune and designs. Hitherto had Camilla
intertain'd me with hopes, and Melintus had avoided the too-great expressions
of Emilia's love: But one morning when we were all four of us alone together,
my impatience prevailed with me to conjure Camilla, by my most ardent
affections to grant me a favor, which she from day to day deferred. Dare you,
says she, demand so unreasonable a thing, in the presence of my sister and
Melintus? I am assured, said I to her, she is of opinion, that a thing promised
must be paid; and Melintus destrous of the same favor with her, without
question will be of my mind: I was willing thus to engage him against his will,
because I knew Camilla would never make me happy, but after his sisters
example. Those words obliged Melintus to signify the same desire to Emilia,
and the repulse she gave, was rather an occasion to him to seek to vanquish
her, than to lose all hope. We left off speaking Camilla and I, to see what
they would resolve on, and referred to them the cause of all four, attending
eagerly the success of their dispute: and for all I perceived him to plead but
coldly, I would not be persuaded but he would carry it. Yet seeing that Emilia
would not wholly agree to a thing Camilla had altogether refused, I considered
there was need of some paines-taking on my part, and so in the end I obtained
this of her, to refer her self to her sisters judgment. I well perceive,
says Emilia, it is a hard matter to put you off: but that we may be assured
whether you shall persist in the same resolution, we give you the rest of the
day for term, and at midnight you shall come hither all alone by a door I
shall cause to be kept open: if then you shall give us assurance of the same
desires, we will give you that we shall resolve on for your advantage. That
favorable decree confirmed by the consent of the fair Camilla, was
entertained of me with exceeding joy, and of Melintus with thanks for us both.
Ariana taking the word from him, said to her brother, I doubt not, but in his
mind he was glad this good fortune offered it self, without costing him the
least unquietness. Whether he were scornful, or no, replied Palamede, you
shall know by the sequel: then he went on.

After many thanks we took our leaves of them, but before our going out I
advertised Cyane of our appointment, that she might take care for our entrance,
never dreaming that in one instant I lost what we had obtained with so much
labor, and words. The remnant of that day me thought hours never passed away
so slowly, so impatient was I, and seeing Melintus pensive on the other side, I
ask't him whether he thought not long till the night came, as well as I. We are
meditating, answers he, upon very differing matters. I ask't him the cause;
Because, says he, that you would already be at the place of assignation, and I
am thinking what to do, not to come there at all. I found him very disdainful
to shun that that others would with so many vows desire; he confessed to me,
he was of a contrary humor, and that he could not resolve to go to Emilia:
This resolution put me into a great wonder, and I began to curse that coldness
and continency that so crossed my happiness: for having had good success but
by his means, without him I would promise my self nothing: Nevertheless
seeing that surprise had taken my speech from me, with a fashion more remiss
he spoke to me thus: I believe you desire not to compel me to that I am most
sensible of; also it is not reason I deprive you of a benefit I have gained you
with so much ado, and you so ardently desire: A means must be invented to
content us both. And what means, said I, for my part, I cannot expect any
fortune, if I be not assisted by you: for think you that Emilia will suffer
her sister to favor me, when she sees her self despised of you? If your
passion, says he to me, blinded you not, you would consider how I would not
propose to find out a remedy that I had not thought on: do but hear at least,
if that I have devised be not possible. We will go at the hour assigned with
some of our men, and counterfeiting a rancounter at the door, we will take our
swords in our hands one against another; and after having made some noise with
our weapons, I will retire my self with the rest, as if I were pursued, and
you shall enter alone into the house, making as if you thought me to be there
already: then a while after I will send to tell you, that you be not in pain
for me, that I was releiv'd by some of my friends with whom I was, and who
would not suffer me to come. And to what end, said I, is all this labor? for
me I had much rather come to receive the kindnesses of a fair Lady. So should
I, says he to me, if I were Palamede: but since I am Melintus, suffer me to
live after my own fashion. I find, said I, that it is but an ill means of
secret entry into an house, to go make an uprore at the gate. Nay contrary,
said Melintus, if there be any spy there, he will fly away for fear; and
nothing will stay in the street, so I find, it needs not be despaired, that a
man may enter into a lodging by this means: But, said I to him, this will be
always to begin again: think you every night to use the same disguise? It is
well, says he, your foresight goes so far: Cannot you tell how to keep that
to your self, which I shall once have acquired you? Consider only for the
present, and I shall advise for us both for the time to come: Time will afford
us counsel. I agreed at last to what he would.

But consider, my Sister, how virtue, and good counsels are accompanied with
prosperity; if it had not been for this humor and resolution in Melintus, we
had been utterly lost, and yet we failed not to run into a very great
danger. That same Cyane having been acquainted with the hour of our coming,
presently advertised Marcelin of it, who provoked by jealousy and desire of
revenge, resolved our death, and would serve himself with the presence of the
Emperor to cover his assassinate. In the evening being at supper with Nero,
seeing that Prince somewhat inflamed with wine, and singing some verses he had
made, he said all alowd that some days ago, he was not able to endure the
insolence and ingratitude of that Sycilian, who mocked at the Emperors verses,
and every where vanted his own, for all acknowledgement of so many favors he
had received of him. Nero incensed at these words, for there was nothing that
so sensible pricked him as to be slighted in a thing where he affected the
greatest glory: In what places, says he, does this companion thus use me? I
heard him also, answered Marcelin, but two days since when he spoke of this
matter with a strange impudence at a Ladies house, that every night entertain's
him. Can we not, said Nero, entrappe this same gallant? This very night,
replies he, it will be very easy to be done: we need but go to wait for him,
and hide us some where there abouts, you may punish him your fill for the crime
he commits every day against the honor of your Majesty. This was instantly
resolved on, and Nero with those of his ordinary troup, went to put himself in
ambush at a place whither he was conducted by Marcelin, and stayed for us with
a purpose to sacrifice us to his vengeance.

We failed not to come at the hour, and presently, as we had ordered the
matter together, we began to draw our swords, in making a noise, and to cry,
kill, kill, the murderers. Nero and the rest thinking they had been
discovered, and fearing to be all massacred in their Ambuscado, if they issued
not out, showed themselves, and came to us, but so much astonished, as we were
surpised, not looking that our play should be turned into so true a combat: We
omitted not to receive them with much assurance, and hurt many of them:
Nevertheless because their number was the greater, we received many wounds,
which made us resolve to sell our lives dearly: but they considering we were
desperate, were in the end forced to cry out to us, It was the Emperor. Then
we drew our selves further off to let them pass, yet after they had retired
themselves, I fell down all along, being no longer sustaind by the heat of the
fight, and having four great wounds, out of which I lost all my blood.
Melintus came to help me, but, for all he was not so much hurt, he could not
but fall in a swoone also upon my body. In this state were we found by these
Ladies, who came out to see that which had passed before their house, and who
were greatly astonished to see us handled on that fashion: Then they caused us
to be brought hither to succor us with the affection they have made
demonstration to us; where being in despair of my life, I was willing to see
my father and you before I dyed: But the gods have showed me more favors than
my indiscreet youth deserved, and have spared my life it may be to serve you,
and that dear Melintus to whom I have so many obligations, whose sickness
that now keeps him in his bed, was not caused but by the daily cares he took
for me during mine.

Ariana fully pleased to have learned the extreme fidelity of Melintus,
dissembled that joy to answer her brother. It is true that in all that you have
told me, he has witnessed a most perfect friendship to you, which obliged us
to eternal acknowledgements. And I would have the occasion one day presented
to acquit us of them: then she spoke on; But to leave this business of
Melintus, you have not told me, how you came to know it was Cyane that
discovered all to Marcelin. This is the thing, replied Palamede, I forgot to
speak of: We knew it was he assisted by Nero, that made the Ambuscado for us,
and chiefly we gathered his ill will by an ointment he sent me, which was
poison, and then when we were in pain to discover from whence he could have
notice of our appointment by night, I went to aver before Melintus and
Camilla, that I had communicated it to Cyane, Camilla crying out then, told me,
we need not any more inquire for the original of this disaster: that this maid
was wholly Marcelin's; and causing her to be corrected, because she was now too
much enraged for all Marcelin's treasons, she made her in the end confess her
villainy. I make no report to you of the resolution of our faithful slaves, in
pursuing the design Nero had taken to put us to death, because you have heard
that of Arcas; It remains only that I tell you how Marcelin two or three
days since he was wholly cured, came to visitus, and show us much affection,
to remove the opinion we might have of him. But Camilla could not forbear to
give him so strange a reception, that he began to suspect the cause of that
usage.

I perceive, replide Ariana, that by the special favor of the gods, you have
been able to escape out of that adventure, for in that sort your destruction
was plotted; I tremble still to imagine how it was possible for you to avoid
it: Nevertheless you are not yet out of danger, having always for enemies the
Emperor and Marcelin whose revenge is unsatisfied, and whose fury shall be
increased by the cares Camilla has expressed to have of you. The gods, said
Palamede, that have hitherto preserved us, will not abandon us: yet we are not
to sleep, but employ the wisdom of yours and Melintus counsels to advise of
the means that may for ever secure us from those miseries that threaten us. I
believe, said Ariana, that a speedy retrait to Syracuse will be the most
expedient; this is that makes me wish the perfect cure of both of you, that we
may enjoy together the repose and sweetness of our Country, and fly from a
City where vice and insolence reign with such authority.

ARIANA. The third Book.
WHile they were entertaining themselves thus, Melintus satisfied what he could
the desire Aristides had to hear of all had passed, and employed the greatest
cunning of his discretion to find out causes of their misfortune, and conceal
the true and principal occasions of every thing that had happened; many times
when he was not well prepared to answer all the good old man's questions, he
feined a difficulty of speech by reason of his sickness, to have leisure to
consider: But when he had escaped that passage, and came to report Palamede's
extreme sickness that his wounds caused, and all the accidents that had put
him into such fear, he forgot not so much as one point thereof, that he might
spend the time in that discourse, and deliver himself from demands he was in
trouble to satisfy.

Emilia and Camilla sometimes laughed, seeing in what fashion he disguised the
truth, and did often divert the matter of the discourse to aid him. Aristides was
not so simple to be content with every thing they told; nevertheless he
believed part of it, and well knew how to excuse the rest. In the end, Palamede
and Ariana came back again into that Chamber, and the day being near spent,
Aristides and she took leave of all, with a promise to return the next day to
see them: They retired them to Maximus his house, their ancient host, with whom
Palamede and Melintus had been ever bold since they came to Rome: when they
were gone, Emilia and Camilla entered upon a discourse of Ariana's perfections
with great admiration; Palamede confessing himself very proud in having so
complete a sister. Melintus spoke but coldly of her, but Emilia observed a
great deal of constraint in all he said, and was persuaded, that if he might
freely have spoken of her, not any in the company would have done it more to
her advantage. The evening passed away in those discourses; and when Melintus
found himself alone, calling for those fair objects Ariana's presence had
renewed in him, he began thus to be entertained with himself: Ah! divine
Ariana, how dear is thy sight to me, and how every time I see thee, do thou
appear with new perfections? It seems you came hither to my reproach, that my
soul conceived not perfectly enough of you before, and that you will form in
it a new Idea more fair yet than that I have cherisht, beauties that shall
never find your equals, can I sufficiently affect you? nay rather can you be
more affected? No, considering the love I have for you cannot be greater than
it is; but why so, seeing I feel it to be every day augmented by the new
graces which are continually bred in you? Oh! the sight that so ravishes me! Ah
Ariana, how the glittering of your beauty replenishes my soul with light, and
how receiving you is my imagination possessed with joys! But confess too, dear
Idea, that thou art received into a very pure place, and regard with how much
ardour and respect thou art there adored.

These sweet thoughts hindered him pleasingly from sleeping all night, he was
vexed at nothing but that he was found in that house, whereupon he would feign
have satisfied Ariana's mind. The day after, she came in the morning with the
maid she loved so well, called Epicharis, having left her father at home to
repose him after the wearisomenesse of his journey. When she knew her brother
was not yet awake, she went into Melintus chamber, who received her with great
joy and respect, and Epicharis being away, when she was set down ready to
speak to him, and enquire of the state of his sickness, he prevented her
thus. I am much confounded for this honor you do me, Madam, but yet I am
more ashamed to see you in a place where virtue never entered but in your
attendance. Never will I, answered she, be of this belief, seeing you your
self are come hither before me. Ah! Madame, replies he, fly from this house
too unworthy to be honored by your footsteps: if I have ever been so happy
to be approved by you for any quality, I must needs lose that esteem being
found where I am: and I conjure you not to profane your self by the
conversation of these Ladies that are so far from the honor of your life. I
know well, answers she, what occasion has brought you hither against your
will, and so far is it from giving me cause to blame you, as I shall
therefore admire your virtue while I live. When I see you among ill company, I
should still believe it was but to correct them by your example, and not to
imitate them; I am assured how much your honor is dear to you, and am to
thank you for having care of mine, whereof I would not fear to give you the
direction, if I doubted of my own. He replide, To doubt of your wisdom,
Madam, never did so criminal a conceit enter into my heart: That were to call
in question the thing in the world I have the most perfect knowledge of: But
pardon me, if I desire to see you be gone from a place which even my honor
cannot endure, but with horror, and where my indisposition retain's me with
so much violence. The rules they here follow are so contrary to those you
observe, that I can express no contentment in the place, but in compelling my
mouth to contradict all my thoughts. Melintus, said Ariana, I would from this
very hour follow your advice, if it were not yet a greater offense to forsake
my brother, and that man that never yet forsook him. Palamede, replide
Melintus, is out of danger, and may go home to you, and since your arrive I
find my self too in estate to be able to be carried thither; but I beseech you
to retire you from hence, and to receive this prayer I make you for the
greatest service I shall ever be able to give.

Strange effects of a virtuous passion! Melintus in stead of favoring the
presence of his fair Ariana, could not endure to see her in a place where he
himself would not have been: his pure and perfect love taking offense at the
least approach of things vicious: and he did even seem to foresee the
mischief that was to come upon them by the stay she made in that lodging,
because that Marcelin came to visit Melintus, and entered into his chamber, when
Ariana and he were speaking together. This sight surpised them both, but much
more Melintus to see a person he had so much cause to hate: for Ariana not
knowing him, thought only Melintus had reason to wish her far from thence,
since the entrance to that house was permitted to all persons, and this man
might give a strange censure of her: Nevertheless Melintus dissembling,
received him with a countenance open enough, and Marcelin after he had inquired
of his health, began to regard Ariana with eyes of wonder and surprise: But
she, to avoid this curious viewing, and the birth of some desires in him, made
as if, for civilities sake, that they might be free together, she left them,
and went into Palamed's chamber, then presently she went out of the house,
after she had desired him to return that very day home to his fathers, where
she went to retire her. Marcelin failed not to demand of Melintus, who that
handsome stranger was: to which he was obliged to answer, that she was
Palamed's sister, that was come with her father from Sicily, upon the report of
her brothers sickness, and was to return speedily thither again finding him
whole. I did not believe, says he, that your Sicilian women had been so
fair, you would but wrong your selves to come to seek beauty at Rome. Things,
answered Melintus, that come from a far off, or that are sought in a far
country, seem ever the fairest: for as for me, I would quit all Sicilians for
one Roman Lady: And I, replies he, all the women of Rome for this Sicilian.
That discourse pleased not very well Melintus, and he would have been glad to
have been at Syracuse with Ariana, for that he suspected lest Marcelin losing
Camilla's favor might not make his addresses to her, and give them many
crosses that way. And so had he purposed; but that which confirmed Melintus in
that apprehension was, because Marcelin, impatient to see again at leisure her
that had so well touched him with love, in so little a time, staid not long to
counterfeit a desire to go see Palamede, and parted from Melintus to go into
the other chamber, where he found her no more, so as he was forced to
entertain her brother, thinking he might have need of his help, to see and be
well received by her; but they had strange plots, one upon the other. That
entertainment was not of continuance, because when there is question of
feigning, the discourses are not long-breathed, each fearing to discover
himself, and so the time passed away the greatest part of it in silence.

As soon as ever Melintus could come to speak to Palamede, he counseled him
to go out of that lodging, that very day, and told him, he had perceived the
displeasure Aristides took for finding them there, that it were better he went
his way alone, than stay for him: that they were to tell the Ladies, how
Aristides weary of the journey, was fallen sick: for him, that he would follow
him the day after, and so they ought to retire one by one, for fear the depart
of them both might not at one time too much surprise them. Palamede resisted
some time this advice, for the passion he had to Camilla, whose sight he
enjoyed with such commodity: Nevertheless it became him to give place to that
friends counsel he had too much neglected to his loss; and this resolution
taken, they were to take leave of the sisters.

Emilia, that had never observed in Melintus any strong passion, whatever
favor she had expressed to him, began to be in doubt of the cause of his coldness
to her since the arrive of Ariana. This stately woman who all her life time saw
her self adored, without having ever any love, died for despite to find her
self slighted; and when she heard the news of his retrait, at first she
gently replied to the courteous words of Melintus, but to his replies, she
used reproaches, and from reproaches she entered into fury. That rage brake all
the chains of discretion and modesty. What, said she, after I had disdained
the most powerful men at Rome, am I brought to this pass, to become suppliant
to a stranger, and a man unknown? This ungrateful man, this Traitor, after
receiving so much honor at my house, after having bin drawn by me out of the
hands of death, dares yet forsake me, and refuse a few days at my entreaty.

Melintus, to stop the current of those words, said to her; Madam, I am neither
traitor, nor ungrate, I have lost neither the respect I owe you, nor the
passion I had for you: it needs not to employ entreaties where you may command;
and that which makes me be accused for disacknowledgement, is that, should
rather let you see how well I can acknowledge the cares it pleased you to take
of me, since I desire to free you of them. Will you reduce me to that, never
to be able to satisfy the obligations I have to you, by never ending my
importunities? and that I suffer all my life to be served by you, without a
power to do you service? Believe you that when I am at home I shall have the
less affection to you? and, will you not so much as permit that I put my self
in the way to render you my duties? Although I honor your favors extremely,
the excess of them begins to be weighty upon me, seeing I no more obtain them
by my services. Madam, if you have hitherto taken pleasure to express so good*
will to me, envy me not, at my turn, the contentment of offering you my cares,
and obliging you by my submissions to continue this affection to me. I believe
that to a person of courage, there is no punishment comparable to this, without
ceasing to receive, and never give; and this is that you would have me
eternally endure. Emilia something stayed by these speeches, steadfastly
regarding him said; How happy should I be, Melintus, if you were true: but I
fear this fair language proceeds not from the heart, too much order has it to
express a passion: and you seem rather to affect to speak well, than to love
well: it is no matter, I will believe you so you will grant me yet two days more
stay, during which you may find your self in better health. Melintus not
willing to put her into desperation, answered her, that she might dispose not
only of two days, but all those of his life, without asking him leave. So
they were at accord together. And Camilla much better assured of Palamede's
affection, not being made to oblige her by any compulsion, suffered him to go
his way, well knowing she should ere long see him again.

The displeasure this stay brought to Melintus, came from hence, that he saw
himself deprived, in that time, of seeing Ariana, and knowing Palamede would
not fail to report to her the cause that retained him, he would write this
Letter to her:

Melintus to Ariana.
It Is not my sickness now, that retains me here, but another's, that is more
insupportable to me than my own, rather out of despite than pity I have of
it. It Is a cruel thing, to be unfortunate by too much good fortune, and not to
be able to escape out of that is in my own power. I believe I am destined to
contemn all my time the good things are offered me, and to consume my self by
desiring those I cannot possess. When Fortune uses me the most cruelly, she
makes me become cruel too: then ordaines a punishment for my disdaines, in
stead of rewarding them being so just. But since she is blind, I appeal from
her to your judgment, and ask of you not that which I refuse to take of
others, that were too great presumption, but that I even refuse them, which is
a little compassion, though it may seem I am unworthy of it, in that I deny to
give it.


Melintus gave this Letter in Tables to Arcas, his faithful Freeman, to whom
alone was the secret passion of his master disclosed, who would not hide
himself from him in many things he had occasion to employ him. This good
servant the day after that Palamede was returned to Maximus, with his father,
took the occasion to go see how he did from Melintus, and gave his letter
secretly to Ariana, who received with it so much content, that after she had
read it, she promised to give him an answer.

Never had she done him that favor, but having lately had intelligence of so
many virtues, and merits, by her brothers report; of the contempt he had made
of one of the fairest Ladies of Rome, for not giving offense to her love: of
the honors he had acquired for himself, and benefits he had procured for his
Country, with the respectfull cares he had witnessed for her, at the last
visit; she could not any longer time refuse him that grace. But going to write,
she was prevented by Marcelin, who feigned to make a visit to Palamede, which
courtesy obliged her to entertain him while her brother came where they were:
she knew well he sought to fall upon some words of affection; but she was wary
so finely to avoid his discourse by turning it to some other purpose, that he
perceived it would be a hard matter for him to enter in discourse with her upon
the subject of his passion: in such fashion, that Palamede being come, she left
him without having at all advanced, but that he had signified his desire only:
after that shutting her self up, she wrote, and came to give her tablets to
Arcas, who rejoicing to bear to his Master so dear a pledge, flew till he
came to Emilia's, and Melintus receiving them with excess of contentment read
therein these words:

Ariana to Melintus.
I Have a great desire to let you know, that I am sensible of your pain, and
to comfort you besides with this, that there is the like prepared for me. The
visit I received of Marcelin, makes me see that I shall be importuned also, as
well as you are: but the severity of my sex will easily know how to put off
that, which the honor of yours hardly permits you to refuse. Consider that the
courtesy which were in me a crime, is necessary in you: and that at least you
are to come out by an honest composition. But because dissimulation has put
you to all this pain, it must also draw you out of it, and you are permitted
to give for your ransom as many assurances of love, as you shall think
convenient. In the mean time, be confident, that when the desires of Ladies
are so earnestly addressed to you, there is nothing which your own may not
attain.


Those fair Characters were kissed a hundred times by Melintus: and although he
received no very open expressions of affection, he did not give over the good
assurance of it, knowing how dear those few words had cost Ariana which she
had added in the end of the letter. He was therefore resolved to follow her
counsel, and afterward ceased not to let Emilia see how much his affection
was augmented by the daily cares she had taken for him; and that he desired
nothing so much, as to be in perfect health, that by his services he might
recompense a part of so great pains. In conclusion, he was so cunning at
dissembling, that she believed him, and two days after she suffered him to be
gone, upon condition he would often come to see her. But when he was with
Aristides, he saw himself reduced to fainings of another nature; for in stead
of counterfetting an extreme passion, which it behooved him to do at Emilia's,
having none at all, here was he forced with much care to hide that he had
indeed, for Ariana. His discretion was very great, but the pain this
constraint put him to, was not less. Only he eased his griefs by some
Verses he let Ariana see, such as these are:

MY eyes, retain with care so fair a flame as this,
Whereof by fond regards you would deprived have bin:
Think of retiring all those lovely fires within,
That none of them escape, no not a spark amiss.
What? do you weep, my eyes, to hear a law so cruel?
Why should you be seeking for misfortunes evident?
Those fires though fair indeed, were not for that less ardent:
The sight of them was pleasing, but the taking mortal.
Hide, Hide, unfortunate, what ever you have taken:
Redoubt as well the anger, as the fierce disdain
Of those fair eyes that may correct your insolence.
But is not this beside to complain wrong fully?
When those you have robbed intend to force you only
Closely to keep your thefts for all their vengeance?
Alas, said he to himself, how is it possible this fire should continue thus
always? and not only not come forth, but not so much as be ever seen? Yet
she forbids me this; but to what purpose do I so respectfully obey the laws
of that defense: for if she loves me, why does she let me suffer so much?
and if she loves me not, why will I not comfort my self at least by expressing
the evil I endure? But again, if I love her, how should I disobey her? Durst
I oppose my self to her desires? Or having acquainted me once what her will
is, can I make a doubt whether I am to follow it? it may be she mean's to prove
by so cruel a constraint, the extremity of her power, and my affection: should
I cowardly lose so fair an occasion, to make the greatness of my love appear
to her? No, no, let us suffer, my soul; let us burn, my heart; and hold our
sufferings well rewarded, because she ordain's them us. It is enough, that she
knows the cruelty of our pains, and knowing them, she will know also to
acknowledge them. But while he fortified himself with resolutions, his fire
seemed to increase, in emulation, to ruin them, and this combat being within
him, he felt the whole torment of it: Nevertheless loving equally his love and
his discretion, he labored to make them both friends, to dwell together
peaceably within him, and not that one should be constrained to give place to
the other: his love impetuous and boiling never ceased to agitate him, and at
some time he addressed these verses to it.

APpease thy self, my flame, and cease thy sore complaint,
That I conceal thee in my bosom with such care:
Can thou be ignorant, what my intentions are?
It Is that I love thee dearly, not for thy constraint.
The eyes whose rigor do forbid thy being seen,
Are those that gave to thee thy being heretofore:
Thou art not to refuse this duty to their lore:
Obey them, without words, that have thy authors been.
Alas! in vain I pray to this rebellious flame,
That still my loving torment more does amplify
For having to her father a severe fair eye,
To be fair and cruel too she will get a name.
Ariana saw all those verses, and acknowledged the height both of his passion,
and of his constraint; but she thought it was not yet time to give comfort
either to one, or other, by avowing she would love none but him. She waited the
change that was to be in their fortunes, at their return in Sicily, and in the
mean time favored Melintus in whatsoever honesty might permit her. They would
gladly have been gone for Sicily, but Palamede could not yet abide traveling,
for a great hurt in his thigh that was not well healed; and Melintus was all
that while forced to keep his bed, waiting for a perfect cure in Palamede, for
fear of being obliged to wait upon Emilia, who never gave over sending to
hear from him.

This faigning gave him the commodity to entertain Ariana, for she assisted
him very carefully, yet so much respect had he to her, that there was nothing
but his eyes that durst make love to her, and of every thing else they
communicated one to another with much confidence. One morning she came to him,
and bringing a little table book with her, she prayed him to read what was
written in it, where he saw these words.

Marcelin to Ariana.
Fair Ariana, since your eyes forbid me speaking, pardon me if I have recourse
to this means, to make you know the affection which your perfections have
brought forth. If you be come hither, to begin the acquisition of all the
hearts of the Empire, I bless the fortune that has made me the first of your
conquests; and ranging me without reluctance under your obedience, I will be
bold to hope for some part in the honor of your good graces, if they may be
aspired to by services eternal, and a passion infinite.


These letters said Melintus, put us to no pain, in guessing to whom they are
addressed, nor who sends them: but, Madam, added he who gave you them. Epicharis,
said Ariana, found them on my table as I was rising, without being closed, for
fear, I believe, that I should leave them in the same state. But what would
you advise me to do? Madam? said Melintus, your heart is free, you may dispose
of it as you please. you may be deceived for all that, answered she, but this
is not the thing I ask you; what shall I do with these tables? if you desire,
says he, to answer them, you need but efface the wax, and then write what you
please. You laugh at me, replies she, and by whom shall I send them, when I
know not who brought them. You are but to put them says he, in the same place,
and who ever laid them there, will know where to take them again well enough.
And what if I will, replide Ariana, that they be never more spoke on? You may,
said he, cast them into the fire. I am very glad, says she, they have been
condemned by your mouth, and at the same time threw them in.

Melintus considering this action, said to her well enough satisfied, if he
means to write often to you, he must make great provision of tablets. It will
be as necessary for him, answered she, to be provided of patience, but if he be
opiniated, I shall not be without trouble neither: Yet our depart shall quickly
deliver us of all. Palamede thereupon coming in, and seeing the tables
burning, asked his sister why they were thrown into the fire: She a little
surpised, said she would no more make use of them. Is it long since you have
used, said he, such things? since I came to Rome, answered she. Ha! sister,
cried he out, why are you so secret to me? you had them but this morning: and
if I had been willing, you had never seen them at all. Ariana blushing told
him, I protest that if I had been able, I had hid them from my self, and I
thought not they had come to your knowledge: if there had been fire in my
chamber, I had not burnt them in this, where I found, that Melintus was not so
curious as you, for he never inquired as you have done, what the matter was.
But continued she, can you tell who brought me them? No, said he, but going
into your chamber, while you were yet sleeping, I saw them upon your table, and
put them as they were, since they were not directed to me. I find you, says
she, very discreet: but you had done well to have kept me from the sight of
them. See, replied Palamede, if I be not good to a man that has done me so much
ill, but I am assured, you will do him no great good. I wish only, said she,
for his punishment, that he may love me all his life, as much as I shall detest
him for your sake.

In the mean time, Melintus made himself very ignorant of those tables; and
in the end ask't them what it was. It Is a letter, replies she, Marcelin made me
receive by I know not what means, look if it be not directed to a good place,
for a very favorable reception. His desert, says Melintus, is very
considerable, but his misfortune is extreme to fall into your hands, to revenge
us of his. Aristides coming into the chamber, brake off this discourse, and
Ariana leaving them, went out of the house, to the next temple, coverd, as she
was accustomed, with a great veil that hindered her from being seen at all,
being not desirous to make her self known at Rome, for the small time she had
to stay there.

Marcelin that set a spy to watch her going out, failed not to follow her, and
approaching to her, when she seemed most attentive at her prayers, said: The
gods grant to your desires as much happiness, as you may give me. She as in
amazement, lift up her scarf to see who spoke to her, and let him see her
extreme beauty; but armed with so much severity, that the sight infinitely
astonished him, and he received from her eyes an answer more cruel than her
mouth had been possibly able to make him. That usage made him see, that she
was not accustomed to suffer such words: and he believed, that the fair
stranger would never satisfy his love, if he sought not out honester means to
possess her.

There remained a scruple in the soul of Ariana, for having entered Emilia's
house: She thought her self profaned, and that her honor might be stained
with that reproach. Every hour, the discourse Melintus had with her to make
her get out of that place, came into her mind, and seemed to accuse her, so as
she was resolved to be purified in Diana's temple. That very day she spoke of
it to the priestesse, who was called Virginia, and told the cause she had for
it. Virginia promised her the chamber of purifications for the day after, but
the next day she put her off to the eighth day, telling her for excuse, that
some Roman Ladies, whom she could not refuse, were to be purified during that
time. Ariana was forced to have patience till then, and when the eight days
were past, she was received into that chamber with Epicharis only to wait on
her. This place was as it were a second temple added to the first, but yet
lesser, and of a round figure, whose roof was big enough, and that without
appeared to end in a vault; but within at that time a heaven represented hid
the arches of the vauting.

Ariana brought in by the priest, was amazed to see so much riches in the
place. The hangings were, the ground of gold, and the figures imbrodery of
silk. In the midst of the chamber was a bed, whose valences were of purple
imbroyder'd with gold; of a most rich work, and the curtains of a carnation
stuff with little flowers of gold. Near the bed was a cisterne of white
marble next to the wall, out of which came two great pipes of gold, that were
to open and shut, from the one of which was drawn hot water, and from the
other cold. On one side of the chamber was a buffet charged with little vessels
of gold, and with great ones of the same, enriched with diamants, rubies, and
Emeralds: on the other side was a table covered with a tapistry of the stuff
the bed was on, suited with movables of the same, and upon it a great looking
glass with a border of the most curious goldsmiths work that was in Rome. On
the side of the cisterne, was a table charged with vessel of Crystal and
Agath, filled with sweet waters of all sorts, with basins of the same, and
great store of linen clothes to serve against coming forth of the bath: the
paving of the chamber was of quarries of marble, and porphry of several
fashions.

Ariana after having admired these sumptuous things, and been instructed by
Virginia about the ceremonies she was to observe, was left alone with
Epicharis. Presently she put off her clothes, in saying the prayers that were
appointed her, and when she had nothing on but her smock with a cloak that
covered her, she drew near to the cisterne, and from thence took water three
times, which she sprinkled about the chamber, then she discovered her foot and
leg naked, which she put into the water of the bath. Then was seen to be
disputed the whiteness of that fair leg, with the whiteness of the marble:
but the vivacitie which animated so delicate a flesh, soon gave the victory to
her, and the marble seemed to grow pale for being overcome. Ariana had hid
within the water that fair foot, whose little shape possessed such perfection,
and all her leg too; but presently she drew them out, feeling the water cold,
and restored again to the day that chief workmanship of nature: Then having
made the water lukewarm by means of the pipes, so as she might put her self
therein with assurance, she took off her smock in fear, as much ashamed to be
naked, as if so many inanimate things had had eyes, and going to put her self
into the cisterne, by chance she cast her eye upon the great glass, and was at
first in a wonder, thinking she saw there a picture of Diana going into the
bath, which she had not before regarded: but as soon perceiving her error,
she was astonished to see her self of so perfect a handsomeness. For whether
she considered her face, or beauty, pleasingnesse that charms hearts, and
sweet Majesty had spent all their riches upon her; or whether she looked upon
the just length of that neck of snow, the handsome proportion of it, and of
those two divine globes which seemed to be swelled with nothing but pride to be
so perfect, or whether she stayed to see the beauty of her arms, and delicate
hands, or the rest of her body so well proportioned, whose universal
whiteness dazel'd her very eyes, her mind equally satisfied could not judge
which part might give precedence to the other. She was some while overjoyed to
see her self so admirable, but suddenly a shame came upon her, and accused
her for commending her self so; then the consideration of that fair body,
where she found nothing amiss, made her again confident that she was the
handsomest woman in the world: and presently her modesty withdrew her from so
many pleasures, causing her to blush, so that she was not able to resolve of
any thing for the several motions of her mind. Happy those mortal eyes, that
with her see so many marvells, and which are the longer blessed, by these
uncertainties of Ariana. The love of her self and her modesty were a long time
disputing together, as she stood before that mirror, having already one foot
upon the cisterne, and holding but with one arm the robe that before covered
her: but at length not able to determine if she were fuller of satisfaction
than shame, she went into the water, and there drowned all these differences.

When she was at repose, discoursing with Epicharis of the rarities they saw,
she was in a strange wonder, that the windows began to be more obscure, as if
the heaven were prepared for a storm: and suddenly they perceived to fall upon
them a sweet rain of perfumed waters. The admiration that surpised them, of
an effect so strange in a place that was covered, was followed with a far
greater, when all at a time they saw the heaven, which was represented over
their heads, to open, and fill the Chamber full of lights. By and by they heard
a sweet consort of voices that sang Diana's praises, and after them, they saw
Diana her self by little and little to descend, having her hair trussed up
like a huntresse, a half Moon of Diamonds on her forehead, a robe of Azure
girt under her bosom, that covered her but to the knees, her legs and arms
naked, her feet covered with guilt busquins, her quiver in a scarf, and bow in
her hand: when she was at ground, the music ceased, and the Goddess
approaching to Ariana that was confounded with amazement, held her this
discourse: Fair Ariana, your devotion is infinitely pleasing to me; I commend
the pureness of your soul, that could not endure a simple reproach might fall
on you, though in it self excusable. And this also is my will, that those that
adore me, be not only Virgins in deed and thought, but that their virtue be
also above the aspersions of calumny. Nevertheless I forbid you so austere a
vow; you are borne to be a wife, and in that estate I shall ever love you, and
make you happy, since I do as much affect chaste marriages, as the vows of
perpetual virginity. I have chosen you a husband, that shall put you into the
greatest felicity the world can give, I will have you love him, if you mean to
make your self worthy the favors I am to do you. Farewell my dearly loved
Ariana, I go to send you messengers, that shall prepare you, not to oppose my
desires. In saying these last words she kissed her on the forehead, and presently
remounted up to the same heaven she came from.

Ariana was so troubled at these miracles, that she could not answer so much as
one word, the presence of a Divinity so great, her advice, and promises, with
the belief she had the goddess spoke of Melintus, possessed her soul, and kept
it from being at rest. Epicharis was standing in another place, far off
Diana, out of respect, all in admiration, and immovable. The heaven closed,
having received Diana, but opened again for the descent of six little flying
Cupids, who being sustaind in the air, shot their arrows into the bath, and
the arrows entering into the water, set it on fire, and made light flames come
out of it. This fire frighted Ariana a little, but was no way offensive, and a
while after the Cupids flew back again into heaven. Then began the heavenly
music again, singing the good fortune of Ariana, to be so favored of the
Goddess: And presently Diana came down the second time, bearing a man that
had the appearance of a god, all glittering in gold and precious stones. She
came near again to Ariana, and said, Virtuous Ariana, see here the husband I
present you with; I know the greatness of your mind and wisdom: you can never
satisfy the generosity which the nobleness of your blood gives you, but by
the great honors and riches he is possessed of, nor see your own virtue
contented, but by that which shall accompany him all his life long: Receive him
from my hand, and be assured that in obeying me, you shall in like manner enjoy
the greatest good fortune that has been ever tasted upon earth. Ariana filled
with a new amazement, and seeing a goddess whose brightness and discourse
confounded her senses, never thought how she was naked before a man: but when
her sight was more confirmed, and she knew him to be Marcelin, she then
recovered her senses, and having no respect to the Goddess, she came out of
the water, putting about her a great linen cloth, and all wet as she was hid
her self in the bed, so inwrapping her about, that she could neither be seen
nor touched. Diana ascended again into heaven, and left that which remained,
to be finished by Marcelin, who careful of Ariana's health, before he spoke
any thing to her, would have Epicharis dry her, and while she was busy at that
office, he aboorded his Mistress with these words: Why hide you your self
from me, divine Ariana? I am not so terrible: None in the world besides you
flies from me; I have Nobility and honors. Do not despise me, fair Ariana,
you see that men and the gods conspire to make me powerful and happy. I am
loved not only of the Emperor, but of the Divinity also you adore; how shall
you dare hereafter to address your prayers to her, if you refuse obedience to
her pleasure? You know in what sort she approves the violent passion wherewith
I love you: Abate, oh cruel one, the cruelty of your heart, and render you, if
not to the entreaties of men, yet at least to the counsel of the gods: can you
think to do amiss, following their advice, and hope to live content upon the
earth by not following them? The more Marcelin continued his discourse, the
more did she hide her in the bed: but he seeing his speeches were to no
purpose, went on speaking for all that: Alas! Ariana, I will not take advantage
from the succor of the gods, but be beholding for all my fortune to your
favor alone: give me but some hope to assuage the ardent affection that
torments me. After that, laying him down upon the bed, as dying for love, he
said, Help me, fair Ariana, and give me my life: I dye to see you so
hard-hearted, and am brought to this point, but for adoring you with too much
respect. But Ariana deaf to all those supplications, constraind him in the end
to cry out, O gods! Oh Cupids! aid me, and suffer me not to dye of the wound
you your selves have given me. Then the heaven opened again, and the six
Cupids descended, and three of them staid to hold Epicharis, while the other
three flew upon the bed, going to uncover Ariana, and give her up to the power
of Marcelin. This fair creature had no recourse but to her shriekings. Ah! ye
gods, said she, are you accessory to such a wickedness? she defended her
self as well as she might from Marcelins attempts, laboring to tear his very
face: but her forces had been all in vain, the Cupids holding already her
arms, had it not been for Virginia^ help, who opened the Chamber door, and
came in with some other Maids that had heard the voice of Ariana and Epicharis
crying out for help. She ran instantly toward Marcelin, and stopping him,
said, Ha! the gods, what fury is this? Is this the oath you swear to me? Go,
out from hence, profane man, I renounce your friendship for ever. Marcelin
answered the Priestesse: My design being lawful, and favored of the gods,
the effects of it could not be criminal: but since you are a hinderance to me,
let me return to the gods, that shall revenge my cause, and in spite of you
give me Ariana. Then he went up again into the heaven, which opened as before
time, and closed again. In the mean time Ariana that thought she had been
divinely succored, as she was before divinely surprised, knew not what Deity
to thank, nor what to detest, seeing that Diana her self was a complice of the
misery she was upon the point to suffer: and all in confusion, she let her
self be dressed by Epicharis, and those Maids whom she conceived to be so
many Nymphs, and made them many excuses for enduring the honor they did her.
In the end she gave them thanks for their help: and still full of disorder,
shame, and despite, she went out of the Temple to be in safety at Maximus
house, where she presently told her adventure to her brother and Melintus.
Every one made thereupon differing judgments: Ariana was so prepossest with
those deities and lights, that one while she feared she had offended Diana,
another while she was fully resolved not to obey her at all. Epicharis
persuaded them, that Diana and all the marvels of heaven did never appear more
visibly to any, than they had done to them. Palamede believed they had not
invented all those particulars, and was amazed with them, at a thing so
extraordinary. But Melintus that was of a more piercing wit, and could not
imagine Diana was so careful in Marcelins affairs, that was a Traitor, and
assasinate, desired them to believe, this was not the time of seeing deities
upon earth any more, and that there was some couzenage secretly practiced in
it. Ariana resisted his reasons a good while, saying she was neither asleep
then, nor Epicharis; and that it was impossible any artifice could be able to
sustain in the Air, without any supportation, a Diana and the Cupids:
Nevertheless she waver'd between the assurance she had in her eyes, and the
doubt Melintus considerations brought her to: but some days after she was
fully persuaded of the truth. It was found out that Virginia was sister to
Marcelin, who being unable to approve either his wicked desires, or his design
to marry Ariana, though she were very nobly borne, to the end he might at Rome
match himself into a Patrician family; and knowing the distaste this fair
Maid had to her brother, was resolved one day, as she saw her in the Temple,
to discover the whole plot of Marcelin to her, that on her side she might find
out some means to put him off his enterprise. She confessed to her, that the
first time they spoke together, Marcelin was in the Temple, and that when she
was gone out, he came to know of her what Ariana had to say to her, which she
presently declared to him; whereupon he mused sometime, then he desired her to
suffer him to see her in the bath: that, at first motion she told him it could
not be done; but being overcome by his entreaties and importunities, she had in
the end promised him: and the day after Marcelin having studied upon that
occasion, came to find her, and proposed how Ariana might be deceived, by
representing a false deity, that should persuade her to love him. Virginia
said, that at the beginning she approved not this device, being unwilling the
Temple should be profaned by a fraud: but that he was so skillful in conjuring
her by representing to her, to what extremity his passion was reduced, as at
last she permitted him to make ready all his engines: and how to give him time
she had remitted Ariana to the eight day after. Then she told her, how her
brother had dressed the Chamber with the riches that were his own, and chosen an
excellent Ingineere to set up stately Theaters, and make all manner of
representations, and they together had consulted to take in the vault of that
little Temple, and make a heaven of it; that within it they had set a music
with store of Torches which made that light, and that the darkness was caused
by means of certain clothes they had hung before the windows, to make the
place afterward more lightsome by the torches. That the Diana was the most
fair and famous Comedian that was at that time in Rome; the children were also
accustomed to the Theaters, and had their shafts rubbed with a composition that
kindled in water: that all this descended and ascended by means of little wire
threads untwist and strong, that were tied to their scarfes as it were
invisibly. Ariana was full of wonder to hear of a deceit so well carried; but
she was as full of shame when Virginia confessed that Marcelin saw her when she
went into the bath through holes he had made about the pipes of the cisterne,
and that she her self had been curious to see so many beauties which she
protested she had never seen the like. After that she assured her, that if she
had thought her brother would have used violence, the entrance into the temple
had never been permitted for his inventions. Whereupon she asked her pardon,
for having exposed her to that danger, being over-reach't by the prayers and
assurances her brother gave her. Ariana answered her, that she wondered not if
she had done some thing in favor of the friendship she had to her brother, and
pressed by his importunities: that she had a great obligation to her for
quitting the interests of a person so near, to have care of hers, and for
discovering this trick, that might have kept her in error and trouble all her
life. They parted asunder after some other discourse, and Ariana went out of
the temple with an oath never more to seek to purify her self in Rome, where
chastity was subject to be corrupted by so many artifices. She confessed to
Melintus, he had reason to suspect some couzenage, and after she had made this
relation, which he himself found strange, they gave their judgment how they
were to distrust that man, who would never rest there, since he sought out such
rare and powerful practices.

In the mean time Marcelin perceiving his designs, either discovered, or at
least made unusefull, was resolved to demand Ariana in marriage of Aristides,
being in no hope otherwise to assuage his passion. He communicated his purpose
to Martian his father, and told him she was daughter to Aristides one of the
chiefest men in Siracuse, niece to Dicearchus, who was the most powerful in
that City, and had no children, and that they both drew their pedigree from one
of the most noble houses in all Greece. His father would have put him off this,
because she was a stranger, but he could not do it, what ever remonstrances he
made him of the injury he did himself, that might pretend to any of the
nobiest maids in Rome. In the end Martian that was already accustomed to endure
all the vicious passions of his son, because he was of use to maintain him
with Nero, could well be pleased with this, that was an honest one, and consent
to that he desired. With this permission Marcelin addressed himself to Maximus,
having thought him fit to manage the affairs, and declared his design to
him, backed with his fathers consent, and entreated him to make the proposition
of it to Aristides, of whom he hoped to be received with contentment, being the
son of a Senator, if he could resolve to leave his daughter at Rome, or else
dwell there himself, and in that case, that he would obtain for him the
quality of a Citizen of Rome, that Palamede had obtained already: that if he
had any familiarity with Ariana, he besought him also earnestly to dispose her
to wish him well. Maximus considering of the quality of Marcelin, his credit
and authority about the Emperor, thought he might gain a great support to
himself, if he were able to do him any good office, and finding this
proposition honest, promised him all the assistance he could expect.

That very day he moved it to Aristides, who at the first could not consent to
quit his daughter: Nevertheless the greatness of that party dazeling his
judgment, he began a little to give way to the reasons of Maximus, and at last
promised to communicate the business with his son and daughter* and that
very hour he wrote of it into Sicily to his brother Dicearchus. Maximus
finding he was so fairly forward, advertised Marcelin of it, who seeing that
his good fortune partly depended on the good will of Ariana, failed not to
appear at the Temple proudly clothed with a great train, to make her see what
honor she should be mistress of, if she consented to his desire, and omitted
not to make great expressions of his respect to her, serving himself at the
same time, for diverse ends, both with pomp, and with humility.

On another side Aristides having made overture of it, to his children, Ariana
was in a great wonder to hear him mention it as a thing he desired: Yet she
continued mute to her fathers reasons, and left the taking of her part to her
brother, who not enduring to have any thing more spoken concerning a man he had
so much cause to abhor, and his sister also for his sake, was forced to say,
he believed not that so good a father would marry his sister to a man that had
twice attempted upon his life: that he could no longer hold from confessing to
him, that it was Marcelin that would have murdered him with a troop of men,
from which the gods only preserved him: that after that, feigning to send him
an ointment for his wounds, he had sent him poison, not ever thinking he was
advertised, that he had been the head of those that had assaulted him by
night: that he had been constrained to dissemble that treason, especially
knowing that the Emperor was of the party. But what cause said Aristides, had
he to wish you so much evil? only for a false report, answered Palamede.
Aristides remained very much astonished at these news, and found himself in a
great straight, seeing that if he had a desire to make that match, it would be
very hard for him to satisfy his sons spirit, and if he would be excused for
it to Maximus, he could not tell him the true reasons; having himself approved
Palamed's dissimulation of the injury offered him by Marcelin, for fear of
making him an open enemy, and drawing upon himself the displeasure of the
Emperor. So as he told his children, that the matter well deserved to be
thought of at more leisure. Ariana when she saw she was strengthened by
Palamede, prayed her father she might not be brought to that pass, to live
with one that had spilt the blood of her brother, and had been branded with so
cowardly a treachery, as to venture his poisoning too. If this you allege, said
Aristides, be true, never will I bring so much misery upon my house. But take
heed Palamede, that the fear of leaving your sister here, makes you coin
these things, for I should never pardon you while I live if it were so. He is a
party more exalted than we could ever have hoped for, and that shall place your
sister in an illustrious rank, in the glory whereof you are to participate. It
is not fitting, little considerations should turn you of this happiness,
since it so fairly presents it self; we may very well quit all we have in
Sicily, to dwell here in a fortune that may be envied of all our countrymen.
Father, said Palamede, I am not an enemy to the honor and advancement of our
house. I disguise not any thing to you; Melintus has been too true a witness
of what I tell you, and can certify the truth: Aristides promised them to
examine at leisure all those reasons, and to consider what was to be done for
their common good: in the mean time he bade them think also upon the
advantages that offered themselves, and not to neglect them. Palamede presently
acquainted Melintus with this discourse, and professed to him, he would oppose
that marriage as much as it were possible: Melintus set him on that way as much
as he could, and spoke of it to Ariana to know her resolution: but she assured
him she would sooner marry with death. Nevertheless, she was greatly troubled,
when her father said to her, that her brothers reasons ought not to remove them
from accepting such a party, that he knew but by light reports, that it was he
that would have murdered him, and that it might be some one that wished him
ill, had sent that same poison under Marcelin's name: That there was no
appearance he should be author of that villainy, having been twice to visit
him since, with sufficient testimonies of affection: and if that were so, that
the greatest enemies might become friends; and that the design he had for her,
as without all doubt it had extinguished his hatred, so ought it to make that
of Palamede dye also. Ariana saw well he was fully resolved for that marriage,
and that it would be very difficult to divert him from it, which she took so
impatiently, that she curs't without ceasing her voyage to Rome: Nevertheless,
she never dared to contradict her father openly; but then when he commanded her
to look kindly upon Marcelin in what place soever she met him, she began to
despair, not knowing how she might avoid that misfortune, because she could
not express her averseness to Marcelin, Aristides ever accompanying her to
the temple to see what reception she gave him. Melintus trouble was no less,
not knowing what remedy to find out, and if his wit furnished him of any one,
he could not make it prosper, but that his passion should break out. Palamede
seemed the most offended, and more openly expressed his displeasure. Ariana knew
well enough, her father would not compel her, if she declared her mind
absolutely to him; but her modesty would not permit her so much liberty.

At length Dice^rchus letters came, who being naturally ambitious, and desiring
to get himself support in Rome, entreated his brother not to let escape so
great a good fortune, and no more to think of Diocles riches, whose son he
had destined his daughter to; since the least quality of a Roman Senator was of
greater consideration than all the means of the most puissant man in a
province. Aristides heartned by this counsel, commanded Ariana to prepare her
to receive Marcelin the day after. This news so struck her, that she betook
her to her bed, and the palenesse of her face soon showed what compulsion she
resented. Aristides wondering at her sickness, she told him it was no great
matter, and besought him he would defer but one day this interview: which he
granted her, and in the mean time ceased not to be with her to encourage her
with reasons, and make her consent to the match. But the morning after,
considering on the ways to divert Marcelin, and finding none other but to let
him know her distate, she bethought her of this subtlety. Epicharis whom she
had about her, was a young maid about her age, that was very faithful to her
of a gentile spirit, and who being acquainted with her mistresses displeasures,
would have willingly comforted her with the loss of her own life. Thou
know, says Ariana to her, how it is impossible for me to tell my mind to
Marcelin, for that my father will ever be a witness of the usage I give him. I
prithee, whilst Aristides shall be about my bed, put on my ordinary gown, and
covering thee with the great scarffe I use to wear, go thy ways to the
Temple, where Marcelin will not fail to come to thee: thou may tell him in a
low voice, counterfetting mine, that he loses all hope of marrying me, that I
will rather choose to dye, what ever guise I make before my father, and if of
his own accord he will retire him from his suit, without bringing me to the
extremity, I shall have a great obligation to him for it. Epicharis very glad
to serve Ariana, promised to obey her, and after she had disguised her self,
went to the Temple, where she missed not to speak with Marcelin: and at her
return finding Ariana impatient to know what had passed, she told her he had
been abused very pleasantly: Nevertheless, her discourse having amazed him,
he had not omitted to ask her leave to come to see her at home, as it was
appointed; after that he would consider on the means to obey her, if her
rigor should continue. She prepared her therefore against that day, and in the
mean time the thoughts in that house were very diverse. Melintus and Palamede
meditated upon cruel tragedies, rather than they would consent this wretched
man should enjoy Ariana. Maximus never ceased representing the grandeurs of the
house of Martian, the favor of Marcelin with Nero, and within his mind
conceived fair hopes for the good office he rendered him. Aristides believed
already he saw his daughter wife to a Roman Senator, equalling the pomp and
glory of the chiefest of the Empire. But Ariana would not let her self be
won by these vanities, and more prized the least of Melintus qualities, than
all those honors that were accompanied with so many miseries: she therefore
dreamed only of the means that were capable to break off this blow. At last
the day came that Marcelin was to come to the house, where Maximus did what he
could to receive a person of so great worth, and prepared the rest to give him
the honors were worthy his order. They dined altogether with much silence,
every one meditating apart the designs he had in his mind; then they returned
into the Chamber where they must receive this lover. Aristides a while
entertained his daughter with the discourses she was to make him, wherein she
was not resolute to satisfy him altogether: then he gave Maximus his place to
set upon her with the same persuasions, and went to find Palamede to dispose
him to show a well pleased countenance. They were all thus busied, attending
Marcelin that was something tedious. Palamede said it became the Roman gravity
to be waited for. Some hours pass away more; at last, Maximus impatient that
he came not, sent to Martian's house; who sent word, that he had not seen his
son since the day before, and that he was in pain for him. Aristides begins
to wonder at this humor in Marcelin, to neglect a thing he had before so much
sought for. Yet for all that they could hear no news of him; every one
thereupon gave his different opinion: but not one of them could guess the
cause of that action. Marcelin's people appeared to be in great trouble for
him, and one of them said, that the night before he had accompanied him very
near to the Tyber, that there he had commanded him to return home, and how he
knew not but he might be drowned in the darkness of the night. His fathers
fear thereupon increased, and all the day after past also, and no body could
learn what should be become of him. Aristides had a suspicion that his son
willing to hinder the marriage, and revenge himself, had handled him the night
past in the same manner he had been used by him when he was left for dead, and
made him be cast into the Tyber: yet he durst not signify to him any thing of
this surmise.

About the evening Melintus, Palamede, Ariana, and Epicharis being together,
and not knowing to what they might impute the cause of Marcelin's absence; What
may we think, said Ariana, is become of him? For me, says Melintus, I think
in what place soever he be, he burns for love of Ariana. It suffices me, says
Palamede, he be drowned. It seems, replied Ariana, you know something of the
matter? have you indeed served him as he would have served you? They protested
both, they had not imagined to do him any harm. It Is true, says Palamede,
that before he had married you, some thing like this might have befallen him;
but I thought not it had been time yet for that. Ariana added, let him be
drowned, or burned, or let the earth have swallowed him, it little concerns
me, provided he appears no more. Epicharis having some while hearkened to
them, could not refrain from telling them; I am assured I can guess better
than you all three. And what think thou, said Ariana, is become of him? I
imagine, answered she, that he is neither burned, nor swallowed up, nor
drowned: but that at this present he is dying for hunger. Ariana thinking she
had but jested; and whereupon ground you, says she, that belief? rather call
it, says she, assurance: If you will give him any thing to eat, I will bring
you to the place where he has as much need of it, as ever he had in his life.
Ariana urged her to tell her what she knew. I fear, says she, you three will
be more gentle than I: for I have condemned him to dye, and if I discover to
you in what manner, it may be you will preserve his life, to destroy afterward
your own. That made them the more eager to know what she could say of the
matter: and they so pressed her, that at length she told them: You know that at
the end of the garden of this house, in a place remote enough, there stands a
little lodge near to the gate opens upon the Tyber. Marcelin waits for Ariana
in that place since before yesternight, and I can assure you, that never lover
was so impatient of seeing his Mistress. They were so astonished at this
news, that some while they spoke not a word: But Ariana desirous to know how
she had been able to draw him to that place; You know, said Epicharis, you
commanded me to go to the Temple in your habit and veil, which I did; and
Marcelin scarce daring to come near me, I lift up my veil a little, so as he
could not see me, and made him a sign with my hand to come to me; but in
stead of saying to him that you commanded me to say, I began thus, speaking
very low: Marcelin, hitherto I have professed to you nothing but coldness, not
but that I acknowledged the honor you do me, but in satisfaction to a brother
that cannot love you, and will never give his consent I be yours: wherefore I
will make to appear the affection I bear you; and you shall express yours to
me, if this night you come alone to our house by the gate that looks to the
Tyber; there you shall receive assurances of what I would do for you; and I
will make my brother resolve to consent to my desire, when I shall let him see
that you are already my husband. Marcelin gave me a thousand thanks for so many
graces, and promised me not to fail coming thither at the hour I had
appointed him. I came back from the Temple, and would not tell you what I had
done; yea, I feared me lest he might doubt some malice, and not come; but at
night stealing from you, I went to stay for him at that same gate, where I
missed not to find him; and after I had let him in, I told him, I had charge
from Ariana to put him into that lodge, while her father, and the rest were
asleep, where I so well shut him up, that he never got out since: besides I
took the key of the garden for fear any one going by that way should hear
him cry out, and I had resolved to let him die there for hunger to make him
pay for the conzening villainous tricks he had wrought in the temple, and
deliver you out of all pain, which I think you are to resolve on too; for
this man will be a cause of a thousand misfortunes to you in the end, and you
may revenge you all three of the mischiefs he has done you, it will be easy
for us afterward to cast him into the Tiber, and never shall any one know who
it was that used him so, if some of us do not discover it. They were amazed at
her invention, admiring her boldness, and the simplicity of Marcelin, but at
length they perceived too much rigor. Now said Epicharis, you may do with him
what you please; I have done the service which I ought to my mistress, and to
you, and at the least, I have broken that blow you so much apprehended. Then
they were in a great trouble to let Marcelin get out, and withal to content
him, being not willing to have him lost, and fearing also his fury, when he
should have escaped. I perceive well, said Epicharis, I must save you from the
danger I have put you to, and take all the envy upon my self, seeing you are
pleased he should live. Let me go then I will make up the matter well enough,
and make him suspect no body but my self, and never vex you more. Melintus was
of opinion they should leave to her the ordering of the business; because she
was of a most advised wit, and she went that very hour to the lodge where
having opened the door to Marcelin, and then conducted him out of the house
all pale and feeble for his fastings, holding the gate half open, she said to
him, know that it is Ariana that gives you your life, and that it is I alone
that resolved to take it from you, for all the trouble you have put her to by
your wooing. She was determined rather to dye, than marry you, and I had much
rather you should have dyed, than she: for it was I that spoke to you under the
veil without her knowledge of it and gave you the appointment to which you so
easily rendered your self: my purpose was never to have fetched you from
hence: but when I made her acquainted with my plot, she was willing to pardon
you, upon charge you would never more importune her; which you are to do, if
you love your life: for assure you self, I shall want neither invention nor
courage to destroy you, if you chance ever more to torment her. Marcelin full
of wonder and weakness, having let her speak a while, failed not to enter
into a fury against this maid, and would willingly have torn out her eyes,
and life also, if he had had more strength to shuffe open the door: but she
shut it with violence, leaving him without all in a rage, and came to advertize
Ariana what she had done; that she should never have any displeasure on that
side; and that all the hate was fallen upon her, which she very little
regarded. Palamede and Melintus saw well they were warranted from the search of
Marcelin, but not yet from his fury, suspecting well he was gone out from
thence with as great a desire of revenge, as hunger. Nevertheless the present
mischief, being avoided, they ought to keep themselves to their guards for
the time to come. The day after they knew he was returned to his house; but
when he was asked what voyage he had made in three days space, he answered
nothing, so much ashamed was he to have been so cruelly deceived by a wench.
Aristides nor Maximus heard not a word more from him, for all his wits were
employed in meditating what sudden and cruel vengeance, he might take of all
those strangers, before they returned into Sicily.

ARIANA. The fourth Book.
EMilia overcome with affliction for not seeing Melintus any more, and knowing
his sickness was but a pretext for not visiting her, began to have a sense of
her misfortune, and that he had not enterpris'd his suit to her, but in favor
of the search of Palamede: her affection ungratefully acknowledged, her beauty
contemned, so many commendable qualities neglected, and all her careful
assistances quite forgot, assailed her spirit with so much anguish, despite and
shame, that she was not able to make resistance to them. The feigned sickness
of Melintus caused in her a true one, and the news came to Maximus his house,
that she was at the extremity, and a few days after that she was dead.
Palamede would have gone to visit Camilla to comfort her, but that Melintus,
who was in sorrow for this accident, diverted him, for fear he should engage
himself again with her, and so bring a stay to the design they had of
departing, and he promised him to satisfy this duty to Camilla for them both
some days after.

But as they did innocently bring misfortune upon others, so were others
prepared to make their innocence most unfortunate. Marcelin not willing to let
them be gone without causing them to feel the effects of his rage, began to
vant before Nero the beauty of Ariana, and spoke so many marvells of it, that
he produced in him a desire to see her; then having let him know she was of an
humor too retentive to give up her self to the Emperor, and serve his
pleasures: on the other side that she never went abroad, and how it would be a
hard matter to take her away, he made him the more desirous by these
difficulties to have the possession of this fair creature: but when he told
him she was sister to Palamede, and that they were logded together with
Melintus, the Emperor remembers him of the cause he had to be revenged of
those two friends, for the offense he thought he had taken of Melintus, and the
wound he had the night of the combat, the mark whereof was yet to be seen
upon his hand. Marcelin seeing the Prince in those ressentments, told him, how
he had found out an excellent means to revenge him on Melintus and Palamede,
and to have Ariana to the bargain. He added that they were that very night to
set fire on all sides of the house they were in, and when they should think of
escaping, without dreaming of any thing besides saving them from the flame, it
would be easy to put them to the sword in the tumult, and to ravish Ariana.
Nero that affected nothing so much as such furious inventions, entertained this
with joy, and commended Marcelin highly for it, who that very hour took the
charge to dispose his men about the house, that not one of them might escape.
This resolution was very funest to the City of Rome: for the night being come,
when he thought every one was drowned in sleep, he himself holding a Torch in
his hand, set it under Maximus door, and gave example to the rest to do the
like every where else. Presently the fire kindled with such violence at that
house, and in order at the other houses of the street, that he believed never
any of them could get out from thence, but that they should be all burned. And
indeed when they awaked, all the Chambers were of a smoke; all that they were
to do, was to get out with their clothes, which they hastily took, and saved
themselves in the garden, expecting the remedy that might be given to this
accident. Palamede and Melintus took care to lead Aristides and the fair
Ariana; who in this fray let Melintus see beauties which his imagination could
never have so perfectly represented to him. The little Damis, a young slave of
Maximus, came to advertise his Master that was in their company, that looking
out at a window he had perceived a man that held a Torch in his hand, and set
fire to one side of the house: that made them doubt of Treason; and they had
besides greater assurance of it, when upon the Tibers side they heard two
slaves of Maximus crying out as they were killed, who were gone out to fetch
water at the River. Melintus and Palamede issued out to succor them, but they
were assaulted by ten or twelve Soldiers, with such fury, that the best course
they could take, was to retire into the house again, defending themselves as
they went* Melintus thought there was none but Marcelin could be Author of so
fearful a villainy: and could not tell what they should resolve on, seeing
they were environed with fires on all sides, and a certain death, whether they
stayed there, or whether they went out: He looked upon Ariana, the tears in
his eyes, and struck with grief that so excellent a beauty should dye so
cruel a death, came sadly to her, and said; Madam, into what misery are we
brought? and how have the heavens permitted, that all the furies together
should come to assail us, to make our loss inevitable? Is it possible that I
cannot by some enterprise, or yet by my own ruin preserve your life? And can
I not have at least this joy in dying, to see you out of danger? Melintus,
answered she, do not hope from me either counsel or consolation: this
accident so troubles me, that it leaves me nothing but tears and plaints; but
if it be true that Marcelin be chief of this conspiracy, I had much rather
dye with you, than survive and fall into his hands. Seeing the gods have
suffered this misfortune to come to pass, I beseech them it may have his full
course, rather than that I be reserved to live after you, to be exposed to the
insolence of these desperate people. Madam, replide he, I cannot believe we
are ordained to an end so miserable; and though the fire on all sides seems to
shut up the passage to all hope, the way of heaven, from whence succors may be
sent us, is yet free. Let us yet hope, Madam, and moderate your weepings and
complaints; whilst I go to see by what means we may be saved, and whether
some god may not inspire me what we are to do in this extremity. She answered
him not but with a sigh, and Melintus having kissed her hand, left her, hiding
his tears as well as he could, then he looked round on all sides, and after
having searched in vain a thousand inventions in his wits, at last passing by
the Stable, he advised with himself to get up upon the strongest and fleetest
of his horses. He advertised also Palamede and the rest to take what horses
there were, and after having covered Ariana's head with a cloth, for fear the
fire might offend her, he lift her gently into his arms, and making the gates
be opened, took his sword in his hand. Then putting spurs to his horse, he
went furiously away, and after he had struck off the arm of a Soldier that
would have got hold of his bridle, he saved himself by running, carrying away
his dear Ariana through the thickest of armed men, and flames that already
devoured the neighbor houses. Marcelin seeing Melintus pass that held Ariana,
and that he was not able to stay him, although he had cast himself in the way
before him, and encouraged the rest to kill him, was now in despair seeing
himself on foot not able to overtake him: and as he returned, he saw Palamede
his principal enemy, who after Melintus example would have got away, carrying
his father with him; but they so closed themselves together to hinder him, that
Palamede seeing how it was impossible for him to force them, being laden with
his fathers heavy body, entered in again and gave Aristides to Hermes, one of
his men; then having carefully recommended to Arcas the safety of Epicharis* he
gave them charge to follow him as soon as he should have made a passage with
his sword. He took a buckler, and going out again, set upon the boldest of
them that would have stayed him, and charged them with such fury, that with two
blows he gave, he struck down two of them at his feet; the rest sustained
him with much resolution, and he had much ado to ward all their blows; but in
the end mingling him amongst them, he put them in such disorder, as he gave
time to Hermes to get away and save Aristides; Arcas did likewise bear away
Epicharis, and the others taking the rest of the horses, saved with them that
that was most precious. Palamede seeing they were far enough off now,
dispatched him of his enemies, and went away in a gallop after them.

Marcelin enraged to see his wicked designs thus ruined, struck his own men
also, accusing them of cowardice, and seeing a slave of Aristides passing, that
went away later than the rest, getting at last a horse with much ado, he gave
him a blow on the head with his sword, and laid him dead upon the place. Then
mounting a horseback upon his own horse, he pursues those that saved
themselves, and gave order to his companions to find horses, and come presently
after him to aid him.

Melintus finding no security in the City which he saw all on fire, and full of
his enemies, was got out of the ports, and when he was in plain Champian, he
could not complain at this accident that gave him the favor of daring to
embrace his fair Ariana, who did as sweetly cleave close to him for fear of
falling. She was become so dazzled with the swiftness of the course, that
Melintus after he had put his sword into the scabberd, and taken away the cloth
that covered her head, found her seeming to have lost all remembrance; but
considering how this happened but by astonishment, and seeing her fair neck
bare, because the handkercher that covered it was fallen by the violent motion,
he used nothing to make her come again to her self, besides sweet and chaste
kisses which he gave, one while to this admirable neck, another to her divine
eyes, and sweet mouth. He was transported in these pleasures then full of
respect, he accused himself of rashness, to steal the favors which at
another time he would scarce presume to conceive a desire of: and presently
before he could resolve whether he had done amiss or no, carried away by the
power of those admirable objects, he kissed them again with so much ravishment,
that in this estate the loss of his judgment excused the loss of his
respect, and his senses busied about so pleasing a fault, mocked at his reason,
whose severity also being charmed gave consent to their thefts, and refused not
to take part in their delights.

Ariana after a great sigh at last opening her eyes, with one look only
banished all the liberties of Melintus, and remitted in place of them a respect
as great as ever: then she said to him; Alas, Melintus, where are we? We are,
answers he, in safety: I am only in pain for Aristides and Palamede, and but
that I am afraid to forsake you, I would return to help them. As he was thus
speaking he perceived by the light of the moon and flames, a man running after
him whom he took to be one of their troop. So as alighting from his horse,
and setting upon the green grass the sweet charge he carried, he prayed her
to rest her, while the rest of the company were come together. They began to
behold that great City on fire, and to be amazed at the accident, when seeing
to approach him that followed them, Melintus knew him to be Marcelin: suddenly
getting up a horseback for fear of being surprised which his enemy. Ah
traitor! says he, dare thou at length alone assault me? Marcelin not
answering him at all, came straight toward him, and gave him a blow with his
sword; Melintus avoided it, giving spurs to his horse, and soon gaining the
crouper, thought to have struck his sword into the very reins of Marcelin, but
it brake having met with arms under his casack. I was in a great wonder, said
he then, at thy valor, but this shall not hinder, but thou shall pay for thy
trecheries: and seeing that Marcelin could not manage his horse after his
mind, he set foot to ground, and at the same instant leaping up behind him got
hold of his arms with one of his, and with the other was going to strike into
his head, that which was left of his sword: But Marcelin striving hard,
Melintus was forced to let himself slide down in pulling him back-ward, and
having laid him along upon the ground, snatched from him his sword: He was
about to kill him, but at the very instant he heard Ariana crying out to him
for help.

This sweet Lady had seen the beginning of that combat, being but in a
desperate condition, yet although she judged that if Marcelin remained
conqueror, she should fall into his hands, nevertheless being confident in
Melintus valor, she could not resolve of going far away. But when she saw
his sword broke, she fell down in a soune, and was no sooner come to her self
again, but she saw she was in the arms of a soldier that was alighted from
his horse to carry her away. Then was it that she called Melintus, and this
name that demanded succors was at the same time succourable; for that Melintus
looking where she was, saw behind him two men a horseback that were about to
kill him. He lift up himself suddenly and sustained the first with Marcelin's
sword in one hand, and the rest of his own in the other.

Never had man so much choler and grief together. He desired to defend him
from these, and at the same time to help Ariana; but seeing he could not save
her, but by the death of those that set upon him, he gave one of them such a
blow, that if he had not been armed, he had divided his shoulder from the
body; and yet the sword entered a good way into the coat of arms. The second
came up to him, and thought to have stabbed him into the belly, but Melintuus
defended it with the guard he had in his left hand, and at the same time gave
him a blow under the curasse, which made him fall dead from his horse. He that
had been first struck by him, set on him behind, and Melintus was not so
skillful, but that he was a little hurt in the shoulder; but in turning about,
he gave a reverse blow upon the horses head, and making him caper, he took his
time, and thrust his sword under the thigh of this last man, and plunged it
even into his bowels: This wretch falling back-ward brake his neck, and the
fall stopped his breath which now on all sides dropped away with his blood.

Melintus seeing himself freed of these two men, and having about him none but
Marcelin living, which had much ado to return from the dazeling of his fall,
left off finishing his death, to run toward Ariana, who had till then hindered
by a thousand devices, this soldier from setting her upon his horse to carry
her away. Melintus cried out to him afar off, Insolent fellow, will thou let
alone that Lady thou art unworthy to touch? But he seeing him coming, and
willing to prevent him, left Ariana to get up a horseback, and presently
setting spurs pricked toward him thinking to overthrow him. Melintus lightly
turned him aside, and as he passed struck him on the left arm with so great a
wound, that he filled with blood all the place where about he ran.

At the same time Marcelin recovering force and courage, lift himself up, and
taking one of the dead men's swords, came to second him that Melintus hard hurt,
and rather filled with rage, than resolution rash't him upon him. Melintus
husbanding the forces and advantage he had, after warding of two or three
blows, gave him one in the thigh, and went to redouble it, when he that had
been hurt, came to put himself between for the safety of his Masters life:
but he paid his own for it, receiving the blow which Melintus struck so deep
in that he closed up his sword within his arms. This man dying let go the
reins of his horse that ran away, and Melintus unwilling to let his sword go
so follows him, and at last drew it out with pain, and with that violence,
and the amazedness wherein he was, he fell back-wards.

In the mean time Marcelin that felt his strength diminish, seeing Ariana
standing still, and troubled with so many fears, went toward her, his sword in
his hand for to kill her, to the end that if he dyed, another should not enjoy
his loves. The coming of this furious man, and brightness of the sword
awakened the lost senses of Ariana, and gave her wings to run to Melintus, whom
she called to her aid, and it was just then he was fallen, and Marcelin was in
good hope to vanquish him yet, thinking he was hurt: Nevertheless, Melintus
prepared himself getting up, and then they began the combat hand to hand, and
more equal, though Marcelin were armed, because the blood that ran out of his
wound lessened that advantage.

Until then Melintus had not fought but for saving his own life, but now he
revenged the injuries of Ariana, and that desire encouraging him, with the
presence of his fair Mistress, he made account he should soon see an end of
that adventure: so having warded some thrusts of Marcelins, he with one blow
from all the force he had, overthrew him, and therewith cleft his head. Another
Soldier came on running in all speed, and Melintus wearied with so many
travels, thought this combat would never have end, and he should have enough
to do to defend him from al those that came so thick upon him; yet he was
resolved to stay for him; but this last man seeing his courage, and so many
dead about him, ran away as fast as he came, and at the same time freed
Melintus of so many troubles, and Ariana of all her apprehensions. Melintus
would no more strike Marcelin, seeing he made no sign of life, and giving the
gods thanks for this victory, wiped Marcelins sword, and taking the scabberd,
wore it by his side.

Then Ariana breathing at her ease, considered Melintus, and admired him, that
after having run so many dangers, and acquired so much glory, he appeared
with a confidence so modest, and a face untroubled for any amazement. But all
on the sudden she saw him grow pale, and fearing he might have some deadly
hurt, for he was covered all over with blood, she held him up, and asked him
if he felt no wound about him. Madam, says he, fear not for seeing me all
bloody, it is not mine, but the blood of my enemies; yet for all this, as he
was speaking he found himself to faint, and with Ariana's help he laid him
softly down upon the ground.

The blood that ran from Melintus shoulder, made the blood retire out of the
cheeks of Ariana, who full of fear and care, presently undrest him in that
place, and found a wound that for the smalnesse of it cast out blood
sufficient: she tore her handkercher, and with much ado stayed the course of
it; then she so bound it up, as there was no more cause to fear.

While she was busy at this sad duty, which Melintus with all respect
received at her hands, they heard the noise of horses, and turning their heads,
saw ten or twelve horsemen coming still toward them. Melintus without being
astonished, said to her; Madam, leave this unprofitable care, and whereof I am
unworthy; I see there is no remedy but I must dye, but yet I will that it be in
defending you to the last breath. Only, Madam, remember your self. There his
speech failed him, not knowing how he might discover himself. Ariana lively
touched at so respectuous a passion, and unable to resist so sensible strokes
of misfortune, fainted for grief, and after she had said, Ah Melintus* lost
both her speech and sight.

This desolate lover thinking to give her his last kiss, approached his mouth
to Ariana's, then recollecting all the force and resolution was remaining in
him, left her in that miserable estate, to get up on horseback, which he did,
though with pain, and possessed with confusion and despair, went on with his
sword in his hand, to seek out a certain death amongst those that came near
him. His arrive no whit troubled them, and Melintus seeing they made not so
much as appearance of defending themselves, stayed him a while, and regarding
them with less trouble, perceived it was Aristides, Palamede, and the rest of
their troop,

The joy that came all at once to possess his soul, had a great strife at the
entry, with all the afflictions that had taken place in it before:
nevertheless, it had the mastery of them, and making him taste the sweetnesses
of it, gave him the liberty to embrace Palamede, to whom he told his error and
resolution. Then they ran toward Ariana, who of her self returning out of her
swouning, at the same time saw her grifes fading away at a sight so pleasing.

After the common rejoicing for being so happily found one of another, Palamede
was wondering to see all those dead men with their Arms, and Marcelin himself
in the number. Ariana made him a relation of the extreme valor of Melintus,
that had slain them all with admirable strength and dexterity; and when they
had given deserved commendations to the courage of Melintus, they were all of a
mind, how it was a just punishment of the gods, that Marcelin should come so
hastily to seek out his own destruction.

Aristides that knew not the cause of his rage, could not imagine what had
provoked him to all those villainies; and turning him toward the City that
seemed all over on a flame, ceased not bewailing this desolation, that appeared
yet more fearful in the horror of the night. But they thought it not safe
for them to stay in that place, but get the next Forest, for fear they were
taken for murderers: that in some desert place they might pass away all the
day, for fear of being pursued, and there expect the next night to gain the
port of Ostia, and from thence set sail for Sicily. They used the horses of
these dead men, and on one of them they set Aristides and Ariana, and they had
gone about three miles journey, whilst Melintus and Ariana were informed what
valor Palamede had shown, in favoring the going out of his father and the
rest; and the day approaching, they entered into the Forest, where getting into
a place far out of the way and obscure, they resolved there to pass away the
day.

Melintus, Palamede, and the rest accommodated certain places with cloaks and
boughs to rest in, and day light giving means to Ariana to consider the
company one by one, she perceived Epicharis had a^l her hair burned, which for
all she was sorry for, yet she could not choose but laugh at it. Epicharis was
easily comforted, being glad the misfortune went no further than that loss,
and thereupon every one began to tell his adventure. They found but one man
missing that Marcelin had killed: then they provided for their necessities, and
sent a slave to the port to stay a vessel for them, and Arcas with another to
the next village to buy meat.

About midday Melintus and Palamede advised to go see the paths of the Forest,
that they might with ease find the way to make their retrait by night, and not
be troubled with a continual error; because the Moon was to rise but late.
Arcas, that never had forsaken his Master, followed him, that they might the
better together observe the turnings of ways, and remember them: But when they
had gone through all, and were out of the wood, they spyed a troop of horsemen
that were coming to them, and returning again to Rome. They were forced to
put themselves again into the entrance of the wood to let them pass away, and
not be seen of them; and when they were very near, they heard one of them
saying loud enough; It must needs be we have not taken the way they are in,
for we had by this heard news of them: He that killed Marcelin and the rest is
a man remarkable enough, and has the woman with him we are to bring to the
Emperor, and when I would have revenged the death of Marcelin and my
companions, three or four men joined themselves to him, so I was feign to save
my self.

This man spoke too clear to make any doubt in Melintus if it were he they
sought or no. We are lost, says Palamede, it they find us. Melintus made a
sign to him to make no noise, and let them pass: But Palamede's horse
unfortunately took him to neighing, and some of this troop willing to know
what it meant, advanced them, and seeing they were three men a horseback that
would save themselves at their coming, they called up their companions to
pursue them.

Melintus in despair for being discovered, and brought to flying, said to
Palamede they were to go a way quite contrary to that wherein Aristides and
Ariana were, because she it was they sought. Their horses were better than
those that followed them, so as they were soon far off them: but the others
being in great number, divided into diverse troops to enclose them, if they
meant not to come out of the wood, and they were not deceived, for that these
friends encountering a way that separated into two branches, Melintus and Arcas
by chance took one path in running away, and Palamede another, who thinking
very soon to rejoyne him with Melintus, was surpised by four or five
soldiers that cut off his way from him; and after having sustaind his first
fury, put him out of all hope of escaping their hands. Melintus that was out of
all peril, hearing the noise afar off, doubted of his friends mischance, and
resolved to go help him, commanded Arcas to save himself while he went to
him, and to go advertise Aristides and Ariana that it was she they sought
for, and that they should have a care not to go from the place they were in,
but when the night came on* and then he charged him especially if he should
hear no news from them, to conduct them out of the wood by the ways they had
marked out, and from thence straight to the port, and to embarque with them as
soon as possible might be for Sicily. Master, said Arcas, command me not to
leave you, I cannot obey you with so much cowardnesse. Arcas, answered
Melintus, assure thy self, thou can not do me a greater service than this I
desire of thee: if we return not to them within a while, thou shall tell them,
how we were stayed by these soldiers that took us to deliver us into the
hands of Justice, from which our innocence shall well know how to preserve us:
and above all, abandon not Ariana. Adieu, my dear Arcas, said he, embracing
him; then he galloped away toward the side where he had heard the noise.

This poor servant could not find in his heart to quit his Master, and
followed him still, but Melintus turning his head and perceiving him, cried to
him; Art thou well advised, Arcas, how thou give me my death? and if thou
followest me any more, I shall not live an hour longer. Arcas was thus
constrained, the tears in his eyes, to leave his Master, who presently arrived
at the place where Palamede was environed with five or six horsemen, that cried
out to him to render himself, after seeing two of their comerades lying dead
upon the place by his hand. Palamede had put him into the thickest strength of
the wood, where he could not be taken behind, and defended himself before with
much courage. Melintus perceiving him in that danger, took his sword in his
hand, and entering in amongst them, joined to his friend, after having struck
off the shoulder of a soldier that hindered his approach to him: Palamede
seeing himself enforced by this succors, doubled his blows, and Melintus
having hurt two of them to death, and not thinking the rest were able to resist
them, had hope to be soon dispatched of them, had it not been for the arrive
often or twelve Soldiers that came to incompasse them on all sides.

Their forces diminisht, and their enemies increased, for the number of those
they had killed, was soon repaired by those that came in still upon them:
Nevertheless the great courage of Melintus suffered him not to despair, and
being animated with a just choler, he struck one down at his feet with a
reverse blow he gave him on the midst of his body, under the arm he had lift
up to strike him: from thence pursuing the first he met, he cleft his forhead,
and the blood that ran from him in abundance upon his eyes, blinded him, and
put him out of this combat. Palamede called up his forces, for to second
Melintus, and seeing a Soldier that with both hands had taken his sword to
cleave his head, he prevented him, and with one blow struck off his hands and
sword that went in vain to strike the ground. This man carried away by his
horse, and having nothing more left him to hold the bridle, was presently
thrown down, and falling upon his face, found those hands he wanted to save
him. Melintus on the other side seeing two of their enemies that most pressed
him, went between them both, and lifting up his arm to give him a full blow
that was on his left hand, and seeing him in defense, altered his design, and
letting go a strong back-blow cleft the head of him that was on his right
hand, with one stroke having sent fear to the one of them, and death to the
other. He that expected the blow shut his eyes, and put his sword before his
head, and his horse carrying him away at the same time he could not see a bough
of a tree that overthrew him: nevertheless getting up again, and seeing
Melintus returning to him, he pierced his sword into the flanks of his horse,
and laid him dead on the ground. Palamede would have helped him, but at the
same time a Soldier seeing what had happened to Melintus, killed his horse
inlike manner, having thought it the only way to end the fight: all they could
do was to keep themselves from being pressed down under the fall, and to
dis-ingage themselves that they might fight it out on foot: but what ever
vaillance was in them, the others had soon trodden upon them with their
horses, but that two came in crying, they should not kill them, and that they
were to be carried prisoners to Rome. This command stayed the fury of all those
men that were animated for revenge, and made Melintus and Palamede resolve to
yield themselves.

In the mean time Arcas went to bring Aristides the sad news of the
misfortune of his son and Melintus. Aristides set himself to weeping and
bewailing: but Ariana fell down for grief into the arms ofher dear
Epicharis, and when this desolate company had made a thousand complaints for
being reduced to hide themselves in stead of succouring them; in the end, some
were set to keep sentinel. Aristides weary of travail, overcome with sorrow,
and having had no repose the night before* fell asleep: but Ariana that had
taken a little sleep in the morning within that wood, and that had other cares
upon her, retiring her to the place where Melintus had himself fitted her with
branches, she laid her down upon Epicharis knees, and melting into tears,
could not receive any consolation.

This maid accused her of too great weakness, and praid her to take some rest:
but she said to her; Cease, my dear maid, to comfort me: if thou knew the
losses I sustain, thou would complain as much as I do my misfortune.
There is yet no cause, says Epicharis, to despair. Arcas has told you, how
they desired not to have their lives, but would only take them prisoners. And
do thou think, said Ariana, they would not revenge the deaths of them they
killed in their own defense? and then a torrent of tears stopped her speech. I
know well, said Epicharis, that you love nothing in the world so much as that
brother. Thou know that, interrupted she, but thou art ignorant how dear
the other person is to me that I lose with him; and this double loss makes
that I cannot have tears sufficient to represent to thee my sorrow. Epicharis
a little a mazed, let her weep some time, then replide thus: Madam, in your
affliction I have a certain kind of joy, to learn the truth of a thing which
I have all my life passionately desired: for I ever thought, that nothing but
you was worthy of Melintus, and that Melintus only was worthy of you. The gods
without doubt will favor so discreet and virtuous a friendship, and not permit
you be long time separated. Alas! Epicharis, said Ariana, what miseries do I
foresee if once I return without him into Sicily; and yet he ordaines me this,
desiring rather to dye, than see me in the hands of these in famous ravishers:
for assure thy self, Epicharis, never was there an affection so perfect, or so
full of respect, as this he has to me. He has ever had so much fear of
displeasing me, knowing how I have in horror all those fooleries of love,
that unless the gods had produced in me an affection like unto his, that gave
him leave to express something of it to me, I should scarce have had any
knowledge thereof yet. And I do not know also, whether he would be pleased
with me for discovering so much of it to thee as I have done. Madam* answered
Epicharis, you know what fidelity I have vowed to you: it would be an injury to
the passion I have for you, to conceal your secrets from me, knowing how much
I desire to serve you, and ease your troubles: I believe he would not be sorry
for my knowing it, if he knew the desire I had to see you both happy together.
Dear Epicharis, replies Ariana, knowing our humors, do thou believe ever
any enjoyed a like felicity, if this might come to pass? But thou know to
whom I am destined by my father, and this last disaster is of that nature, that
I can hardly hope ever again to see alive, either him, or my dear brother.
Ariana ever renewing her weeping; and Epicharis knowing how her sorrow was
diverted, when she spoke of the affection of Melintus, said to her, Madam, the
gods will preserve for you this lovely Melintus, and since they have given him
you will not suffer any dispositions of the earth contrary to their will. Live
at more repose, and be confident in their goodness: in the mean time because
you cannot sleep, I shall take it for a great favor, if you please to take
the pain to tell me, how you came to know the beginning of this affection. I
will then, said Ariana, spend in so dear an entertainment what remains of the
day, before we are to part: and having taken care that no body might over-heare
them, after she had wiped her eyes, she spoke thus.

History of Melintus and Ariana.
I Will believe what I sometimes have heard the wisest say, that the gods have
established certain Genies to rule the order of all things, who being just and
good, suffer not craft and oppression long to triumph over innocence; and bring
to light the most concealed secrets, to give in the end to nobility and virtue
the honors and recompenses they deserve: I believe also, they have given to
every one of us in particular other Genies, that inspire us with secret
knowledge of the qualities we are to acquire, and make us conceive desires
whereof we know not the cause, to guide us to the possession of that which is
most honest and most profitable for us.

Thou will find these very true observations, by that I shall tell thee of the
strange fortune of Melintus, of the perfections he has been careful to get,
and of the esteem we had each of other, even before ever we saw one another:
for you must know, that I knew him not before he went from Siracuse to Athens
for to learn all the sciences and exercises fitting for a person of his
condition. In all which he was so prosperous, that they that returned from
Greece spoke of nothing but his perfections, and the facility he had to have
good success in what ever he undertook. One day my brother in his letters
gave me notice of the friendship they had made sure to one another, with so
many advantageous words for Melintus, and expressions of joy for himself, that
I thought Melintus must be something above the common sort, since my brother
that was none of the least esteemed, conceived to have gained so great a good
fortune in his affection. I signified to him by my answer the part I took in
his contentment, and beside that the profit I should have by it, by hearing
news of him at Telephus house that was father to Melintus, when he were
careless of writing. Palamede showed him this letter, and he approved it, for
a certain thing he said pleased him, and afterward in those he writ to
Telephus he always mentioned something concerning Palamede and me: so as when
ever I was in pain for the health of my brother, I sent to Telephus, that made
no difficulty to let me see the whole letters of Melintus: But I protest to
you, I saw there a fashion of writing so sweet, and a respect he gave Telephus
so great, and yet mixed with an honest boldness, that I had a great desire to
be acquainted with him one day. On the other side I wrote to Palamede with more
care; that if it happened he showed my letters to Melintus, he might have a more
favorable opinion of me. I was not mistaken, for after that, he expressed to me,
when he had seen what I had writ, and known me by some relation my brother
made him, what great desire he had to accomplish the time that was prescribed
him by Telephus, that he might come home into Sicily, and see me.

During that time there passed occasions that augmented still the esteem we
began to have each of other, for he went away with the honor of horse races at
the Olympic games, and the glory of making the best verses, as my brother also
had the prize of the Harp: So happily that they made our City glorious above
all the towns that sent to those games the excellentest men they had for all
exercises. On the other side a prize having been propounded at Siracuse for
the fairest woman, in the favor of whom most lovers would present themselves,
and recite verses: all the women that pretended to beauty in the City dressed up
themselves to appear that day on the Theaters, and dispute this victory: but I
despising it, or else having no hope to carry it, shut up my self in the
house, what ever they could do to persuade me to go thither: nevertheless
some that recited, having complained at the absence of their Mistress, and
named me, the Judges (without seeing me) adjudged the crown of flowers that
was the prize, to be given me, and brought it to my lodging, when I was very
far off from that enterprise. Melintus having learned by the letter my father
wrote to Palamede the glory I had obtained, after the contempt I made of it,
conceived yet a greater estimation of me, and had no other thought now but to
be soon at Siracuse. At length Palamede sent us word, he prepared to come home
with Melintus: but I must tell thee, I did prepare my self with a far
greater care to receive them.

Nevertheless the encounter they made of Corbulo that was going against the
Parthians, greatly stayed this return; but it as much avanc't and rendered
glorious the reputation of Melintus, who following him into Asia with my
brother, did so memorable actions in that expedition, that there was no other
talk but of Melintus valor: which increased marvellously that opinion I had
of him, and made me judge that there was some sympathy between his courage and
mine.

When occasions were wanting to give other proofs of their valor, they parted
from Asia, and landing in Sicily, gave advice of their return, for to be
received as victors at the Olympique games, according to the purpose the
Siracusians had for them: but they had since added many other victories with
much more danger and glory, which ought to make their reception still more
honorable.

The news was received of all with a great joy, but of me with surprise,
considering I should see Melintus, whom I made so great account of by reason of
his renown. There was beaten down a pane of a wall, according to the custom
in all countries, to receive them that have gained the honor of the Olympique
games: and I said, that since the sieges they had been at, they were not used
to enter into Cities but by breaches, not by the gates of them.

Every thing was in a readiness to receive them, and those of the City were of
opinion to go out to meet them, and in exchange to render them the honor they
had gained to their country. I was chosen to give them the Cities presents; to
Melintus a white horse, and a sword hanging in a Carnation scarf imbroider'd
with silver; and to my brother a Casock of a most rich work, with a quiver
garnished with gilded shafts, and a bow of the same.

They had been advertised of the reception was to be given them: so as
Melintus and my brother still clothed after the Greek fashion, appeared
mounted on fair horses in the head of those of their train, and some other of
their friends, that had gone out before us. I was upon a pled nagge that had a
white foot-cloth, I my self was also clothed in white, with my hair hanging
down crowned with a garland of flowers, and went by my uncle Dicearchus side,
that was the chief of those of the town: The horse destined to Melintus was
lead near me by two footmen, that held him on both sides with great cords of
purple color that served for reins; then followed another man that carried
the sword and scarf; those that held the casack, the bow, and the quiver, went
in their order, and after them an infinite number of people.

At our meeting Melintus alighted from his horse; Dicearchus did the like:
presently two men help me also to descend; and Melintus having saluted us, I
prepared my self to speak to him: but I was so troubled to see the person
whose knowledge I had desired, go with such a grace, and so full of Iustre,
and honor, that I had much ado to reassure my self. I know not if he were
deceived in what he had fancied in him concerning me: yet he has sworn to me
since, that he was never so taken, as when he saw me in the height of all this
preparation and train. I thanked them in the name of all the people for the
honors they had procured to their Country, in acknowledgement of which I
prayed them to accept these presents; and then was given me one of the strings
that were in stead of reins to the horse, which I presented to Melintus: but
when I took the Sword and Scarf I had charge to put upon him, I do not
think that in all my life I ever blushed so much, or was seized with so
strange a trembling: And I was very glad of passing toward my brother, to put
me in countenance again, by making him the present was ordained him. I well
remember that Melintus spoke to me to give me thanks for the honor they did
him: but I took no heed to what he said, so confounded was I; and if I had
been to reply, I must have stood mute: He told me since, his answer was, that
his Country which had given him birth, might attribute to her self as her
own, all that ever he should be able to do, and that he was a debtor to her
for all the glory of it; nevertheless he received these presents, not as
recompenses, but as new obligations; as for Palamede, I cannot call to mind in
what manner he thanked me. After that, I was set a horseback again by
Melintus, who presently mounted upon that horse I had given him, and ever
accompanied me, in managing him with a great grace.

I ceased not admiring every thing he did, and I well perceived he was not
without trouble for his part: for he looked upon me sometimes with an eye that
showed astonishment, and a passion new coming on, but so modestly, that there
was none but my self that could observe it. We arrived in this manner at
Syracuse, and he waited on me to my lodging, where he left me with Palamede
and Dicearchus: his friends with the rest of the people brought him to Telephus
house.

All the night long I let my imagination wander upon every thing I had seen
perfect in Melintus. That sweet and assured face, that free making, the grace
and comeliness in all his actions, and his fashion of speech so full of
mildness and vivacity, made me avow that I had never seen any thing so
amiable: but as I was concluding something to his advantage, and was surpised
in that conceit, the disadinfull humor that is natural to me, filled me with
shame, and fortified me against all that merit. Then seeing how my father
inclined to marry me to Amyntas, son of Diocles, the richest in Syracuse, and
that Melintus possessed not so great an estate as was in our house, my stomach
could not then consent for his sake I should suffer so much unquietness in my
mind.

Diocles coming to be rich in a little time, as the rumor went then, by the
acquisition he had made of the goods of certain banished men, was willing to
stay himself upon the authority Dicearchus had in the City: but my uncle
opposed it, because Diocles had ever been of a faction contrary to his;
nevertheless Aristides did what he possibly could to persuade his brother,
seeing nothing more advantageous for me in Syracuse.

It was at that time thou were given me by Dicearchus, who having bought thee
very young upon the Sea coast, had bred thee still in hope that his wife
Acidalia might have children, that thou might serve for company and
entertainment too: but Acidalia being dead, he was resolved to give thee to me,
perceiving I had inclination to love thee. I shall never forget, interrupted
Epicharis, that happy change of my condition; for I may well say that I began
but to live since I was at your service, which I would prefer to the most
exalted estate that were upon earth: for I never had but vexation with
Dicearchus and his wife, though they brought me up with much care and honor:
but since I came to you, my life is become as happy as I could have desired. I
know well, replies Ariana, what contentment thou enjoyest, being certain of my
love to thee: but give me leave to go on, and thou shall see if I be not as
much assured in thine. Then she continues.

Melintus fearing to seem impatient, was four or five days without seeing
me, except one time at the Temple: but Palamede going to visit him, as he did
often, Melintus entreated him to bring him to our house, and present him to
me. He had then an esteem of me great enough, and I also thought there was
not in the world a spirit more sublimed than his: in such sort that we were
both fearful at this meeting; and for the good opinion that each had of
themselves, we desired also both of us to make our selves be feared. After I
understood he was come in, I collected all the confidence I had, and Palamede
bringing him to salute me, says to me; Sister, see here a man that as well
deserves you should receive him in private, as you have done in public, and
whom you must love, if you love me, for we are both but one and the same thing.
I answered him: Brother, I shall never be wanting to honor that which you
love; and if I esteemed not Melintus qualities, I should fear singularity, and
to be left alone of my party. Madam, said Melintus then, if you should be alone
in making small account of me, your party should at the least be the most just,
if not the greatest. Melintus, says my brother interrupting him, let us not
lose time in telling what your worth is; my sister knows it, by the report I
have made of it to her, and by your own reputation. She must of necessity
confess, there is not a man upon earth more accomplished than you; but
confess you too, that I have a sister very lovely. Brother, says I to him,
speak not of me, we may have better entertainment: besides, how would you have
Melintus give a judgment of that he has yet no knowledge of? Thereupon I
invited him to sit down; and Melintus replies; Madam, I already knew the
beauty of your mind, by the letters Palamede received from you, and since that
of the face is known as soon as it is seen, suffer me to judge of you at
this very hour, and that I tell you, that fame which is accustomed to increase
the desert of every thing it would commend, has been constrained to diminish
yours, being impossible to be published according to the greatness of it. I
answered him, I pray you leave there your praises, which civility obliges to
give, rather than truth: I did not think you could have resolved to flatter
any body, such an opinion had I conceived of your virtue. Praises, replies he,
are not flatteries, but when they are spent upon subjects unworthy of them: but
virtue it self refuses them not for her recompense. It is true, says I to
him, but they that know their own wants, as I do, ought to take praises as
reproaches for not having those qualities are attributed to them; and there are
no people love them, like those that believe they deserve them, which ^s a
vanity in supportable. He knew by this I endured not commendations, and that
he must treat with me otherwise than with many other women: which I observed
by the amazement appeared in him; and because, changing the tune of his voice,
he said to me; Pardon me, Madam, if I must still commend you, when I shall tell
you, it is a mark of great virtue, not to be able to endure to be commended:
and they that have a soul well ordered blush ordinarily at it, which restifies
a kind of anger, and that one takes offense. Neither had I ever attempted to
judge of you, if Palamede had not obliged me to confess that you were very
lovely. My brother then mingled his wild discourse to ours, and said, That
after he had a long time hearkened to us, he found my humor was very contrary
to that of all the women he had practiced with; and that the belief of
Melintus was very differing from his also, for he thought he could not do a
greater pleasure to women, than to tell them they are perfectly handsome: that
he never attaind to their good graces but by this entry; and how after he had
been willing to persuade them that they had no defect, in the end he was so
persuaded himself, and found them more lovely. It Is true, answers Melintus,
that many times one prospers that way, for that commonly there is some fault;
and this fashion is not to overcome, but to let ones self be vanquished on
either side: and this is rather out of weakness to be engaged one to other,
than by dexterity to engage that which one loves. It matters not, said my
brother, provided one be content. Be assured, replide Melintus, that you never
obtained a favor by those means, but that you found some remarkable defect in
her you sued to, by which she let her self be caught. It Is true, answered my
brother, but never would there be aconquest, if the defect were not found: and
I love those of that sort much better than those whom severity makes
inaccessible. They are more proper for you, said Melintus, for the favors you
desire of them, but confess if in your judgment you do not more esteem the
other. There is no doubt, answers my brother, but I give them over, because
they esteem not me sufficiently. I gave ear to this their discourse, and was
very glad that Melintus approved modesty, and expressed with such a grace, and
virtuous conceits, the same thoughts I had. The rest of the day past away in
such discourses as these, whereby I was persuaded that the spirit of Melintus
had a great sympathy with mine, and he considered also in what manner he was to
demean himself with me, and that there was no hope I could be gained by
flatteries.

After this visit he quite altered his discourse; for instead of speaking to me
either of my beauty, or his love, he seemed very far from all passion, and
all our entertainments were concerning the passions of others, wherein we
observed a thousand faults, and as many poorenesses of spirit: and insensibly
we taught one another, how we were to be according to our own desire, both to
love perfectly, and make us worthy to be loved. In the end it seemed that
speaking of others, we spoke thus to one another: Since you have such thoughts
as these, I can love you well so. He durst never tell me he loved me, but his
actions sufficiently did it; and then when he thought no body saw him but I,
his cares to please me were too intelligible. See how strange our humors are,
a thousand services he rendered me were very agreeable; yet for all that I
should be offended at the least expression of love he made me by his mouth, and
forbade him my sight. So as he was forced to discover himself by other means
were pleasing enough to me, as by many verses he gave me, a part whereof I
would repeat to thee, if my affliction permitted me to think of such
gentillesses. But I must needs at least tell thee the encounter I made of a
lover very differing in all manner of qualities; 'twas of the proud Garamant;
of whom thou have heard told pleasant tales enough, but yet never came to know
what passed betwixt us, because the affair was kept secret. He had his
original from Africa, and for this that we knew not his extraction, he
labored to make great additions thereby touching his birth; and upon that
ground he would not believe there was any body in all Sicily that durst dispute
pedigree with him: nay, he maintained the excellency of his arrogant humor
with certain reasons, whereby he would prove, that one could not have a good
spirit, unless he had as much pride as he. I was importuned with his visits;
nevertheless being acquainted with his proud and ridiculous humor, he
sometimes served to make me laugh, and I did often please my self in mocking
at him, feigning that I believed his vanities. He contrariwise thought I made
a very great estimation of him, and that I believed the greatest honor could
arrive to me, were, to see my self loved by a man of that importance.

One day when I was alone, he came to see me, and not willing to lose the
opportunity of speaking to me, he told me in a cold fashion, that he had news
to let me know, which would not be unacceptable. I desired him to tell me it.
It Is this, says he, that I have quite broke with Aspasia (that was one of the
handsomest in Syracuse.) And wherein, says I to him, may this business
concern me? Because, answers he, there was nothing but the trust I had in her
that hindered me giving my self to you. And this was the news that must be so
welcome to me. Is it possible, said Epicharis interrupting her, the man could
be so impertinent? Wonder not at that, replide Ariana, hear only that
remains; then she went on; I was willing to entertain him in this vain
humor, as I had accustomed, and told him; Truly, you could not have brought me
a more agreeable news, if it were to be believed; but I dare not hope you are
minded to do me so much honor, acknowledging my self unworthy of it. No,
continued he, I will have you believe it, although your modesty makes some
difficulty, and I hope our intelligence shall prove most perfect: for as I make
my self as contrary as may be to the humor of those cowards that lose the
advantages of our sex, submitting themselves to Ladies by a thousand
flatteries; so I perceive not in you the arrogance of these disdainful women,
that acknowledge not the defects of their sex; and by this I find that our
judgments are equally disabused of those ordinary errors, and are firm in the
true opinions that each of us both ought to have of himself. I smiled, looking
on him, and wondered to what end this poor wretch lost himself in his vain
ravings. He contrarily believed that I laughed for excess of joy, that he
would take the pains to love me, and had this foolish conceit that the more he
lessened me, the more I thought my self beholding to him. At last, because I
would see to what point his presumption would attain, I told him, that since
it was his will to make me so happy, I entreated him to instruct me how I
might please him by living with him, to the end I might never be wanting in the
respect was due to the greatness of his merit. My minion (said he taking me by
the hand, and thinking to oblige me much by this kind word) only love me, and
consider what my worth may be, and then you shall ever give me honor enough;
as for my friendship you may be assured of it, as long as you shall live after
this fashion; I will not abuse you with a thousand oaths, as others do, or
with crouchings that were unworthy of my self: you see how I am not disguised,
but what I speak must of necessity be that I think. Herein he had very good
reason. There are many, said he, that esteem that pride, which is in effect
but a good spirit, and a wholesome knowledge of ones self: It Is a sign a man
feels a want in himself, when he does abase him out of complaisance: and
amongst men, that which they call courtesy and honesty, I call cowardlinesse
and baseness: It is to testify that one cannot subfist by himself, when he
goes about seeking the good will and sustentation of others. It seems you
would be obliged to them for letting you alone in quiet, and submitting to
their mercy, you held not your own life but at their favor.

I made as if I approved all he said, and admired the good apprehensions he had
of all things. For me, goes he forward, I am determined to despise all the
world, as though I defied every one to hurt me, and were assured against so
many persons by my own strength alone: It seems that I oppose my self alone
to all the world together, and finding how those that approach me come with
respect and silence; I am pleased in my self to see how I thus triumph over
all, and that my only countenance makes me so dreadful. He made me a thousand
such like discourses, but the estate I am in that cannot suffer fooleries, will
not permit me to repeat them, no nor so much as to remember them. I confess to
thee, Epicharis, I had a great delight with my self at so strange a folly, but
I wanted a third person to laugh with, and mock him, and it was an extreme
displeasure to me to be alone at this fine entertainment; I did nothing but fix
my eyes upon him, not willing to spend a reply, either to disabuse him, or to
consent any more to his discourse. I began to be weary of him, and had in the
end shamefully sent him packing, but that for my quietness, Melintus and my
brother came in: then I could not contain my self, but as soon as they were
set, I conceived indeed an enterprise too bold for my wit to seem capable of.
I would impart to them Garamant's entertainment, without naming him in his own
presence, for my own ease and his confusion: and I said to them, I was in
great impatience till I saw you, to tell the great good fortune is happened to
me. Melintus asked me what it was. It Is this, say I, that I have got a servant I
am infinitely proud of. He expressed to me how he rejoiced at it for my sake, and
inquired if he might not by any means know his name. This is the thing, said I
to him, I cannot learn you: but I will tell you truly in what sort he made me
offer of his service. Then I began to report as faithfully as I could
Garamant's discourses, remarking all his sottishness and impertinencies:
whereupon he blush't, and he grew pale and I died with laughing to see how he
knew not what posture to put himself in. Melintus and my brother could not
believe there had been so great extravagancy of brain, and at every word
demanded if that were possible. I was willing to tell them at large all the
excellent reasonings of Garamont, and reserve nothing, so much recreated was I
in the story of it; and every fondness of his wanted not the qualification of
titles it deserved, and they were so many sensible blows to this honest man
that was present, and that suffered himself to be thus pricked, and never
cried out. At last Melintus asked me, if I had not invented so pleasant a
business. I told him, for to possess the other with desperation, and make
them understand of whom I had spoken. Garamant shall witness for me, if I say
any thing but what is true. Then they well conceived, that it was his
entertainment I had made the relation of, for as they looked upon him, they saw
in what sort he was abashed, and besides they were acquainted with his humor.
Garamant seeing he was discovered and enforced to speak, knew not what party
to take, whether he ought to be offended for their mocking him, or whether he
were to maintain that which had thus declared his affection: his cowardnesse
not permitting, the first, he was resolved for the second, because he might
then speak in a third person, and he said how he found not so much to be
blamed as they did, in the proceeding of that man, and that if every man
governed himself so, the Ladies would be constrained to banish this great
severity they observe, and confess that they have a great obligation to the
men for loving them. Melintus then began to speak finding himself offended in
my person, and to sustain my cause, asked him whereupon he grounded this
vanity: upon this, says he, that for one advantage women have above us, which
is beauty, men have a thousand above them, which are yet of a far greater
consequence: as the height of courage, prudence, force and address of the
body, with an infinite number of others. Melintus answered him; Although we
had these advantages, I find them very poor ones, since we are to submit them
all to the power of their beauty: but we are very far from having them, for
a Lady shows more courage in the conservation of her honor, and more prudence
in the carriage of her self, than we are able to do in any action: they have
more hard trials to endure than we, and more consequences to foresee. They are
incessantly to be upon their guard, and yet that in so great a circumspection,
there appear no constraint, and whether this be done with pain, or with
facility, they are to be commended either for their great carfulness, or else
for their great quickness of wit. We on the contrary let escape a thousand
speeches, and do a thousand actions, that would be as many crimes to Ladies,
which witnesses in them a nature much more perfect than ours, and a greater
purity of virtue, wherein the least fault would make a great spot. There
remains nothing in us but the strength of the body, which is but a very poor
advantage to prevail with: as if the Lion were to be more esteemed than a man,
because he is stronger. Wit ever triumphs over force. The strongest people of
the world are not the most renowned: the Greeks and the Romans have always
vanquished the Barbarians that surpassed them in strength of body. Besides there
is not a man so powerful, but a Lady rules him: there needs but a look or a
word, and we are struck down, and then we must come to prayers and
submissions, which is an infallible mark of their advantage; for he that sues
to another, without doubt finds himself the weakest. Garamant says to him,
you would allege far differing reasons against them, if Ariana were not
present, and it grieves me to see we are so poor spirited to employ the same
force of wit we excel them in, to make them believe they excel us. Nay
contrary, replide Melintus, if Ariana were not here, I would not content my
self with reasons, which I use for her satisfaction, and not yours; but the
respect of her keeps me from letting you see how far I disesteeme you, for
contesting this cause so to no purpose in her presence. Melintus modesty
suffered him not to make any more quarrelling with him before me, for fear of
giving me offense; but my brother could not endure this fool in my chamber,
and told him, You take upon you too much interest in this cause, not to be that
very impertinent and ridiculous fellow that made her all those discourses; I
counsel you to get you gone quickly hence, if you have not a mind to see your
self punished in her sight for your impudent follies. He was thus forced to
go his way, mocked of all, with the greatest shame a man could possibly
receive: and the arrogant fellow was such a coward, that he never durst
return a word, only he bit some speeches between his teeth we could not
understand.

We did nothing but laugh at him the rest of the day, but at night there had
like to have happened a great misfortune for it; for Melintus going from our
house very late with my brother, to go lie together, as many times they used
to do, they were set upon by twelve or fifteen men, against whom they so
valiantly defended them, being both a horseback, that after they had killed
four of them, the rest were put to flight. The dead men were the day after
known for soldiers of Toxaris that was Provost of Syracuse, and an intimate
friend of Garamant. This Toxaris had seemed to be a lover of Ergina, Melintus
sister, but he was expelled the house of Telephus by Melintus, especially
because he could not endure him for the robberies he did himself, in stead of
hindering others from committing them. Nevertheless, they could neither accuse
Toxaris nor Garamant for this attempt against my brothers and Melintus life,
for there was not left life enough in the men that remaind upon the place, to
get the truth out of them.

Two days after, Melintus and my brother received a challenge from these two
friends, who to revenge them for the affront they had received, would join
their quarrels together; and they knew they attended them alone out of the
Town, in a place whither a young boy, that brought the paper, was to conduct
them. Melintus mistrusted some treachery, and could not believe that such
cowards as they were, were minded to fight with them so freely, and without
advantage: and yet that they might not seem to recule, they resolved to go
thither with a design to guard themselves from foul play. This boy leads them
out of the City toward certain hollow places, whence stones were dug, and
showed them from a hill Toxaris and Garamant all alone, in a place where there
was no cause to fear there were any men hidden, for it was in a plain piece
of ground, and they might easily mark every thing that was far off round
about it. The youth said to them, that now they saw them, he had no more to do
with them, and retired himself. Melintus advancing himself a horseback as he
was, to go right to them, saw the ordinary way to be crossed with trees and
stones, and that there was but one path to pass by, that was very near to a
quarry of stone: he was in a wonder at that, but Palamede without any more
consideration, thrust forward his horse toward the path, and Melintus was
strangely taken to see him all at once sink, as if the earth had swallowed
him, and nothing more appeared to his sight but a great open gulf, into which
Palamede was fallen with his horse. Instantly Melintus ran to the descent of
the quarry, for one might freely go there being on horseback; and seeing
four soldiers that went to cut my brothers throat, he ran to them, his sword
in his hand, and by his cries made them turn toward him, whilst my brother
came out of the dazelling of his fall, which by good fortune did him no very
great hurt, and got quit of his horse that was dead of it. Already had Melintus
struck down two of them at his feet, and incenc'd with fury to see so great
treason, took him to the two other, when Toxaris and Garamant arrived, that
made him turn face toward them, and at the same time my brother found
himself ready to set upon the two soldiers that remained. I cannot relate all
the particulars of that combat, for they are both of them too modest to have
recited what proofs of their valor they gave: only I can tell thee that my
brother having defeated those soldiers, and Melintus pierced the two Traitors
with many wounds, they constrained them at last to take flight. Melintus would
not pursue them for leaving my brother that was afoot; and seeing one of those
four soldiers that still breathed, he made him confess that all the night
they had prepared that hole with hurdles that were not underpropt but with
little sticks, and that they had covered them over with earth, so as the trap
could not be discerned: that after that they had broken the ordinary way, to
oblige them to pass by that corner. Melintus thanking the gods for having
delivered them from that Ambush, took up my brother behind him, and leaving
this wretch to breathe his last, they returned into the City. My brother was a
while to be cured of a hurt he took of his fall, and since that we heard no
news of Garamant or Toxaris, but that one told us they were gone to a Country
house, where they hardly escaped dying of their wounds. Palamede made me the
relation of all had passed: and yet he signified how Melintus was not willing
it should be known, for fear the cause thereof should withal come to light
and I am sure his greatest fear was, lest I should be comprehended in the
discourse, well knowing how averse I was to be mingled in the City news.

It came to pass a while after that Diocles reviving his suit for his son,
oneday Palamede came to tell me in Melintus presence, that he thought my uncle
Dicearchus would at last agree to the marriage of me and Amyntas. This news
put me to blushing, and made Melintus mute for a time: yet not willing my
brother saw his amazedness, he told me, that he thought Amyntas very happy:
then he asked me, if I were well acquainted with him: I answered him, how I
never desired to enquire after him: being resolved to shut my eyes, and take
what husband should be given me. Palamede, that had a mind to laugh, told me,
you may by night well take him so, your eyes closed, but I can tell you that by
day he shall put you to no fear. Melintus that would nor contradict him, says
to me, that without doubt he was a very honest man: Nevertheless, this
discourse being ended, he went out, as I ghess'd, very much troubled: and since
that, he was a good while without seeing me. I concealed not my wondering at it
from my brother, and he told me, he had not seen him neither since I did; but
that he had heard say how Telephus and Diocles that were so great friends were
lately fallen out, and it might be Telephus had forbidden Melintus to come to
our house, because of the suit Diocles made for me with his son: yet to
enquire further into the truth, he went to see him. About night my brother
came to tell me, that Melintus had been stayed at home with a Fever, and for
no other cause besides. I presently imagined his sickness proceeded from
nothing but the resolution I had expressed to him for this match, for else he
would have sent to advertise my brother of it. Some days passed on still, in
which Palamede told me that he was better: and one afternoon he came to our
house, where he found no body but my brother and I; Palamede having some urgent
appointment, left us alone together, and then entering into discourse with
Melintus, he answered me but with certain words that well showed the pressures
of his spirit. I told him, without doubt something troubled him. Madam, says
he to me, I confess there is some confusion in my mind which I cannot be rid
of, but in telling you the cause of it; and yet there is something that forbids
me also the discovery of it to you. I was somewhat amazed, thinking he would
have declared his love to me: for without all question I had then banished him
my sight for ever: nevertheless I said thus to him; It Is with you to judge
whether you ought to tell it me, or not; you know my humor, and your own
discretion. I added these last words, to take from him the boldness of
discovering himself; then he answered me; I am constraind, Madam, to tell it
you, though peradventure, as much honor as you have done me, as much reason
may you have to wish evil to me. I was more afraid now than before, and angry
that he went about to oblige me never to see him more; which made me say to
him; Melintus, do not then put any thing to the hazard, but let us remain in
the state we are in. He was well aware of my fear, but yet he continues
speaking thus; I will now make an expression to you, Madam, how much I honor
you, for I am going to put my life into your hands, and after you shall know
what I have to tell you, you may make me happy, or destroy me when you please.
I thought he had a plot to put me thus into pain, and I would have wished he
had not entered into our house that day. I reparted to him, Melintus, I pray you
tell me nothing, lest it may cause some mischief to you, by this permission I
may grant you. Then to settle me, he said with a countenance more assured, I am
certain, Madam, I shall not do amiss in telling you it; nay, you will
confess, that I was bound to it, and I will believe for my part, that you will
do me no harm, although I give you power enough: I know my self too well,
and you also, to be ignorant of that that might displease you. Upon this
assurance I permitted him to speak, and he began thus; Madam, I believed I had
a father, but now I have none; or if I have one, I know not in what part of the
world he is at this time. Alas! says I to him, what is become of Telephus?
Madam, goes he on, he is well, but listen, if it please you, to what I have to
tell you. He has had sometime a difference with Diocles, wherein he was not
satisfied, and yesterday when he went to his house to obtain more reason at
his hands, he came back in a great chafe, and taking me apart said to me;
Melintus, I must of necessity reveal to you the greatest secret that concerns
me, and your self too: I will never quit the affection I have to you since you
came into the world, but it is time that I quit the name of your father, to
discover your birth to you. Those words, said he, much amazed me, but for my
assurance, he replied; Courage, Melintus, I bring you no illnewes; only hear
with patience my discourse: then he continues.

Know that upon the end of the reign of Claudius the Emperor, all the world
being at peace, the Siracusians enjoyed a full liberty: Nevertheless
Hermocrates and Dicearchus had the greatest authority in the City, being both
of them equal in power, and antiquity of their Noble families: Hermocrates
was descended of Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, that drew his original from
Achilles: for they say, that this Prince after many victories, having also
conquered Sicily, fell in love at Siracuse with Coronis the only daughter of
Parmenides, that came of the blood of the ancient Kings of Sicily, who having
understood that Antigone was dead, gave leave that Pyrrhus being a widower,
should secretly marry his daughter, until he were returned out of Italy,
because he would not have it known she was his wife, for leaving her to the
mercy of many enemies he left behind him in Sicily. But whilst he gained
battles against the Romans, he lost Sicily, whither he could not afterward
return; and having been forced after some losses to retire himself out of
Italy, he attempted other conquests, and was slain.

Coronis had a son by Pyrrhus, but Parmenides durst not let him be known,
because the Siracusians had rebelled against Pyrrhus, and chosen another King.
He took upon him no other care the rest of his days with Corenis, than to
breed this son, by putting him in mind of his royal birth; and this Prince
being come to age, was content to live a private life, because of the power of
the Romans, to whom his father had been so dangerous an enemy: and he would
not so much as speak to his brothers, fearing they might doubt his birth:
Nevertheless in the wars he did very brave actions; and his descendants, of
whom was Hermocrates, have all of them been inspired with a greatness of
courage worthy of that divine blood they came of.

Dicearchus on the other side was of the ancient race of that great Timeleon of
Corinth, that had in times past settled his dwelling at Siracuse with his wife
and children, whom he brought from Corinth, after he had expelled all the
Tyrants out of Sicily, and defeated the power of the Carthaginians in many
battles.

Dicearchus therefore and Hermocrates in all resolutions for the public were
ever of contrary opinions, and had their factions apart. Dicearchus was of a
turbulent disposition (pardon me, says he, Madam, if I use the same terms
Telephus used) and spared for no policy to maintain himself, and exceed
Hermocrates in credit. Hermocrates was more moderate, and more trusted in his
approved honesty, and the glory he had gained by his actions of war under
Germanicus, affecting no other advantage in the City, but what his
predecessors had acquired for him. But Dicearchus jealous of the reputation he
had, and not able to endure an equal, studied the means to ruin him. One day
having got together what arms he could find, he made them be carried by night
over the walls into Hermocrates garden, and disposed in rancks, as if they were
to serve upon an occasion. That same night he advertised the chief of the
City, that Hermocrates had some attempt. They purposed to enter his house
betimes in the morning, to see what was done there, where having found all
those arms, they attached him, and carried him into the fortress, then they
held a counsel, to resolve what they were to do with him. The greater part
knew well it was but a plot of Dicearchus, there being no color, that one
private man should make himself a tyrant of so great a City, that was at that
time under the government of Claudius, who reigned in the greatest strength and
tranquillity of the Roman Emperor. The people that loved Hermocrates began to
mutine against his accusers; which Dicearchus perceiving, he was of opinion to
send the knowledge of that supposed crime to the governor of the province: but
the Siracusians would never suffer that, for fear injustice might be offered
Hermocrates; and alleging the privileges they had maintained, to be Judges in
such affairs, they would themselves take knowledge of the cause: Nevertheless
not daring absolutely to absolve him, lest Dicearchus might complain of them
to the governor, they assembled in the afternoon, and were content to banish
him for five years according to their ancient law of Petalisme, that was made
against such as affected tyranny. Dicearchus not willing to provoke the people,
made as if he were satisfied to see him absent; and fifteen days after
Hermocrates was forced to depart the City with Enphrosine his wife, that was
near her time of delivery, and certain of his friends, in which number was
Diocles and I, says Telephus, to go to Lylibeum, and from thence to embarke
for Carthage. I have heard say indeed, says I to Melintus interrupting him,
that Diocles and Telephus were of a contrary party to my uncle Dicearchus. So
goes the report, says he and then replide; Telephus added, how Hermocrates
left his country he had so loved, with tears in his eyes: and carrying away
with him the best of his movables, bequeathed the administration of all the
goods he had in Sicily, to Diocles, and suffering him to go but one days
journey with him, they parted: but Telephus willing to accompany him as far as
Lylibeum, about evening Euphrosine fell into her pains of childbirth, and was
at night brought to bed of a son, which about the place of his heart, was
found to have the mark of another heart.

Hermocrates sent with joy the news to Diocles, and withal advertised him of
this mark; and not willing afterward to expose this infant to the
incommodities of the sea, prayed me, says Telephus, to carry him back to
Siracuse, and bring him up as my own, staying till the end of his banishment;
besides he said, he was very glad he was borne in Sicily, and should there also
be bred. I accepted, continues Telephus, this entreaty with joy. O gods, says
I, interrupting Melintus, what great suspicions do you put into me, concerning
Diocles, Telephus, and your self; and what a change of things are these news
likely to breed. Madam, says Melintus, you are not much amiss, then he goes
on. Telephus told me, that after he had stayed some time at Lylibeum, while
Euphrosine might endure the sea, he took this little infant, and returned to
Siraouse, where finding his wife Hyperia that in like manner was delivered, but
of a dead child, he supposed this in the stead, for fear he might dye with
grief, when her loss were told her; which thing she soon believed, and they
named him together Melintus. At that word, Ah the gods! Melintus, cried I out,
can it be possible? Madam, says Melintus, I wonder not at your surprise,
because mine was far greater than when Telephus pronounced this name to me;
and added: Since that, my wife has always bred you as her own son, and
your self can tell also, if I have spared any thing to have you be instructed
in what ever might adorn your birth. And what is become of Hermocrates, says
Melintus? Since his embarking, answered Telephus, we have heard no news of
him, nor did he then land at Carthage; and now Diocles thinking him dead, and
not knowing what you are, has usurped all your estate. I did often tell him,
how he ought not to make any such pretense, and yet never letting him know who
you were. And now a few days ago, seeing how by means of his riches, he
sought Dicearchus niece for his son, I went to advise him, not to dispose of
any thing to the prejudice of Hermocrates and his son that was living: but he
did but mock me, and demanded if I pretended not a part in that estate, for the
acquaintance I had of it: that he would keep it well all to himself, and that
I should not be credited, though I had a mind to reveal any thing. I went
away, said Telephus, calling him a dishonest man, and assuring him the truth
would come to light. To day, having heard how he advanced his affairs
continually, and taking no care of that I had told him, I returned to him, and
prayed him to believe, I was no liar, and that he would repent him of branding
himself with so great an infidelity. He continued his mockeries with so much
pride and scorn, that I was resolved to discover to you your fortune, that
together we might advise of the means how to oppose the enterprises of this
man, and the designs he has to retain what belongs to you. I was, said
Melintus, so confounded at so many strange accidents that I was incapable of
considering what counsel were best to be taken. Nevertheless I told him,
that if these things were true, I should never want a heart to challenge my
right; that he would give me some time to ^^^sider thereupon, for it was to be
proceeded in with as much prudence as resolution. Having approved my advice,
said Melintus, I told him, I would never leave calling him my father, and
honoring him as if he were so, for the great obligations I had to him; and he
did also confirm to me all the assurances I could desire of his friendship;
swearing to me, that if I could have no reason of Diocles, he would not fail
to divide his estate between his daughter and me, as before I believed he
would do: nevertheless, that with the care we were to use in the business,
he hoped the gods would do me justice. By this, continues he, Madam, you see
how I was obliged to advertise you of what I have been told. I hope I have not
offended you, unless it were in speaking of Dicearchus in the terms were used
by Telephus. And you see how I put my life into your hands: for if Dicearchus
comes to know that I am the son of him he loved not, it may be he will seek
my ruin; but you may dispose of me as you please. On the other side, if I be
to declare my self, I make me enemy not only to Dicearchus, but Diocles also,
and all those of their party: but I will not fear any of these difficulties,
if you shall think it fitting I declare my self. Hormocrates son, of whom
we have heard the people speak with so much sorrow, and appear to be
descended of that illustrious blood of Pyrrhus, and Achilles: and yet before I
express my resolution to Telephus, I desired to make a suit to you, that I
might know your purpose: for if you intend to marry Amyntas, never shall any
besides you hear more of my fortune: the estate I leave to him, will be but
the meanest loss I shall make in his prosperity. I demand your counsel
therefore, Madam, in what I am to do, and beseech you to let me know what you
resolve concerning that marriage, I promise you to satisfy what command you
shall ordain me, although it were a forbidding me to live any longer.
Epicharis, continued Ariana, I swear to thee I was confounded with
astonishment and joy, to see him advanced to a condition higher than I could
have believed; but withal I admired his generosity, with the love and respect
he had to me, and said to him, Melintus, if I find you true, you may assure
your self, I will never marry an usurper of your estate: Live in as great
assurance as ever; Dicearchus shall bear you no ill will, for that knowledge I
shall give him concerning you. I am too much obliged to your freedom, to hurt
you: I am but troubled with you, for the fashion you are to use in behaving you
in the midst of so many enemies. Madam, says he, that is the least care I have,
seeing you so favorably entertain my secret, and I hope it shall be one day so
well confirmed to you, that you will not repent you to have done so many favors
to a person of my condition. Melintus, says I to him, the knowledge you give
me of your illustrious birth, adds very little to the esteem I had of you
already: and you express so much confidence in me, as I am thereby obliged
from henceforth to have as much interest as you your self in all that may
concern you: especially I wish you to resolve of nothing without me,
concerning the carriage of your self, so much part will I take in all thing
shall arrive to you. He was so transported for this testimony of affection,
that he took the boldness to kiss my hand in stead of thanking me; that was
the first favor he obtaind of me, and the only I have since that permitted
him: then we advised to let some time pass, during which many things might be
cleared. To assure him, I swear to him, that I would never marry Amyntas; and
in the mean time we found it very expedient that Telephus should not discover
him, and that he should make what friends he could to strengthen himself,
which would be no difficult matter. Above all, that he sought the peoples good
will (wherein a few days since he had a very favorable occasion, having
obtaind of the Emperor the exemption of Tributes) and that when all things were
prepared, they might accuse Diocles, and verify the birth by those witnesses
Telephus should bring; then to demand of him the evidences of the goods he had
usurped, which would be impossible for him to show. He protested he would
follow my counsel, and gave me such passionate thanks for the care I took of
his fortune, that it was impossible for me to resist so much affection; and
from that time, without ever making love one to another, we were assured that
there was not so perfect a one as ours. We thought it best, not to let Palamede
know any thing, because of his too forward nature, that would with all violence
declare himself for Melintus against Diocles, which we judged unnecessary:
Melintus made Telephus consent, not to discover him yet, and told him he was
assured, that Palamede knew well how to hinder his sisters marriage: for me, I
let Amyntas know that I was not resolved to marry yet this year, and that he
should take heed he made no propositions thereof before; wherein he promised to
obey me. Afterward the occasion being presented of the Embassage to Rome from
Syracuse, Palamede had a mind to that voyage and I made Melintus resolve to
accompany him, upon the assurance I gave him privately, that in his absence
there should pass nothing to his prejudice: besides, I told him, he might find
occasion to serve his Country, and get a reputation with the Ambassadors by
his counsels and interpositions. In all which thou have heard what good
success befell him, and what honors he had received at his return into
Sicily, if fortune at this present had not been so contrary to him.

Thou see then, Epicharis, whether I trust thee or no, in revealing to thee
the secret of Melintus, and mine; but I desire the gods would send him no other
misfortune, but that I fear might happen to him by thy indiscretion. Epicharis
had bin so attentive to all this discourse, and so ravished with hearing so
many strange passages, that she seemed to have lost the use of her speech: but
then she began to say, Madam, I think I never received so much contentment as
in hearing your discourse, as well for having understood so pleasing relations,
as for the confidence you have in me. I assure my self, that such fair
fortunes as yours, and such virtuous affections, shall not have so unfortunate
an end, as that you fear: and the honor you do me, obliges me to undertake
any thing that may conduce to yours and Melintus service. Alas! Epicharis,
replide Ariana, I can hardly ever expect to see him in a place where I may
resolve of any thing to his advantage, or where thou might be able to serve
us. Madam, says Epicharis, raising up her self, I beseech you to suffer, that
this very hour I may express the passion I have for you. What can thou do,
answers Ariana? He has left you, says she, Arcas, and given him charge not to
abandon you: Give me him in exchange, and give me leave to stay in this
Country to learn what may become of them, to assist them, and send you news
of them. How, says Ariana, can thou be able to do any thing, being but a
wench, and besides that, all alone in the Country? Madam, replied she, the
disgrace that fell to me by the burning of my hair, shall much advantage my
design. I will disguise my self in a boy, and this night 'twill be easy for
me to escape from you in the wood, when you are upon parting. Epicharis, said
Ariana, thou art too courageous; I fear thy labor will be but unprofitable,
and in the mean time I shall be deprived of thy company and consolations.
Madam, says she, I have taken this resolution, and should remain here against
your will, if you would not think it fitting: but I beseech you to give your
consent. Ariana at last accorded to that device, and seeing there yet remained
day enough, before they could depart, they fell both of them asleep.

ARIANA. The fifth Book.
ARistides not knowing the design of Epicharis, after he had slept a while,
considered upon all the resolutions were to be taken in this disaster: one
while he would have returned to Rome, to defend his sons cause, if he were
in the hands of Justice, and to move compassion both with the Judges and the
Emperor. On the other side, he would not carry his daughter thither, nor yet
let her go alone into Sicily, seeing Nero had such desires to her. At last,
knowing it was necessary for him to follow Arcas his advice, and to go out of
Italy, where they should not fail to be always pursued, he could not be
comforted for abandoning his son in so great a hazard of his life: and yet he
determined to leave some one in the Country, that might advise of means to
assist Melintus and him, and keep them from any misfortune. He found none so
fit for this, as Arcas, and entreated him to take the employment on him: but he
assured him, he had no greater desire than to do this service, but that he had
obliged himself to Palamede by an oath, not to forsake them till they were in
Sicily; and therefore this commission must be given to another. Aristides chose
out the most advised of his servants, that was called Hermes, and having
instructed him concerning the ways he was to take, in case they were retained
by order of justice, he gave him as much money as he could spare: and when
the night came, they prepared to depart. Ariana in like manner gave in secret
to Epicharis some jewels she had, to serve her turn when she might have need
of money: and all of them taking their journey in the by-ways of the Forest,
under the conduct of Arcas that had taken view of the passages of it, in a
little time they soon found themselves in the Champaigne, from whence they
began to see and smell the smoke of the City that still burnt. In the midst of
this horror, they gave not over traveling on toward Ostia, and a while after
Aristides coming near his daughter, and missing Epicharis, asked her where
she was. Ariana answered him, she thought she followed them: they sought for
her amongst the company, and not finding her at all, Aristides imagined she
loved Hermes, and leaving the company had escaped to follow him. Ariana said,
she had not that opinion of Epicharis, but that she was wandered about the wood,
and making as though she were in gteat trouble for her, she desired they might
go back again to seek her. Aristides being in a rage, swore he would leave
her since she might easily have followed the company, if she had would; and
what ever displeasure Ariana showed, he would no longer delay the time, for
this maid. Some returned the way they had come, but not having found her, they
did all continue their journey together. Being happily arrived at Ostia, they
saw a man that brought news, how two Sicilians were taken, and accused for
setting Rome on fire, and that they were now prisoners; This a little eased
their minds, to know they were living: and yet they left not to have many
fears for them; but hoping in their innocence, and not able then to give them
any other remedy, they imbarck't in the ship that had been stayed for them,
recommending Palamede and Melintus to the gods, and passing the straight
betwixt Reggium and Messina, that separates Sicily from Italy, landed safely at
Syracuse.

When they were seen to arrive without Palamede and Melintus, and their
misfortune was known, there was a public mourning for it, for they were both
of them very well loved of the people: and the consideration of Dicearchus,
Aristides and Telephus, with the good will that all in particular bare to these
two friends, made the chief men of the City resolve to send in their favor an
Embassy express to Nero and the Senate, to make a representation of their
innocence, and obtain favor at their hands, endeavoring to restore to
Melintus the benefit they had received from him when he procured the
exemptions. Dicearchus desired to be chief of these Ambassadors, and they
hastened away because there was no time to lose; but when they had passed to
Reggium to go by land to Rome, they met there with Hermes that told them these
deadly news; how Palamede and Melintus having been examined a few days
since, and seeing how they were ready to be condemned by the express
commandment of Nero, were willing to prevent a shameful death, and had cast
themselves down into the Tyber from the top of the tower where they were
prisoners. This assurance he gave them, turned their journey back again, and
repassing to Messina, they arrived by the same way they came, at Syracuse,
where they possessed all with sadness and confusion.

Aristides tore his hair, and accused himself for having abandoned his son:
and his grief was such, that a very little while after it brought him to his
grave. Dicearchus resented this calamity in losing the dearest hopes of his
house. Telephus was touched with as great an affliction for Melintus, as if he
had been his own son, but nothing was able to equal Ariana's grief; who
under the pretext of her brothers death, lamented besides the death of Melintus
with the bitterest tears that love ever caused to be shed: so as all places
ecchoed with her plaints. Alas, said she, now is the time I am certain of my
misery. Miserable Rome, that servest for a monument to my dearest pledges, and
must thou again triumph over us? and must the injustice that reigns with thee
bring to ruin so virtuous an innocence? O gods I how long will you suffer this
cruel tyranny? why swallow not you up that wicked nation? or why these latter
days did you not let them be devoured in the flames they had prepared for us,
for to punish them by their own villainy? Alas! there was left enough of that
wretched people to destroy the goodliest friendship that ever was. Dear
brother, I shall never see you more, and not seeing you, I shall never more see
what I held most dear in the world. Woeful voyage, disastrous counsel I gave
my brother, to go see a City that subsists not, but for the ruin of all
things: for since the time he came near it, what a train of miseries have we
had experience of? and what blind fury lead us one after another, to go seek
out misfortunes at their fountain, and the place where vice and crimes are
reigning with so much power and insolency? at least, when I was there arrived,
just heavens, why did you not let me perish in the fire with them, without
making me survive the sole person of the world that made my life happy to me,
and desirable?

This fair Lady dissembled not such griefs as these in all companies, because
the cause of them was attributed to the great dearness that was betwixt her
brother and her: but her greatest sorrow was, for not having any body to
comfort her, and discover her most secret griefs to. She enjoyed not now
Epicharis, nor her sweet consolation: yet she had a little hope left still, as
long as she heard not the certainty of their death from the mouth of that
wench. She inquired privately of Hermes, if he had not seen her, and he told
her, how he had helped to disguise her, that they both went into Rome together,
that he had counseled her to go find out Maximus, and the rest of the friends
Melintus and Palamede had, and since that he had heard no news of her; and
this put her into more trouble for Epicharis, whose adventure had been thus.

Before Aristides and Ariana were gone out of the wood, she had acquainted
Hermes with her purpose, for being well assured of him, to the end he might
wait for her at the same place, when she should have withdrawn her self from
the rest, foreseeing what need she might have of him, both for getting out of
the forest, as to get clothes, and advise together of the means how to help
Palamede and Melintus: she absented her self a little from the troop, after
she had kissed her dear Mistress, and embraced her: then she went to find
Hermes, that cut the rest of her hair for her, and in the morning when they
were at the woods end, she bethought her to send him to buy her clothes at
Rome, and learn what they said there. She stayed a long time for him, and to
the middle of the day, for it was four miles journey from thence: in the end
he returned, and brought her clothes, which she fitted, and dressed her self in
as well as she could, and hid her own. He told her, the brute ran, they had
taken two strangers, that were accused for having set Rome on fire: they
imagined it was Palamede and Melintus, and the same hour mounted a horseback,
and went forward on the way. Epicharis arriving at Rome, was forced to stay at
the gates, for the multitude of those that came out, all in tears and
lamentations for their losses: Nevertheless taking resolution, she entered
amongst the confusion of so many wretched persons, some carrying what they were
able to save, others mourning their children and kindred burnt, and some there
were in the company also, that bare away what they had pillaged in that
disorder, and all was full of cries and tumult. It was no hard matter for her
to go unknown in that trouble: she desired Hermes to lead her horse to be
set up somewhere, then advised him to go to Maximus his and their Masters
friends to set them in employment for their deliverance. As for her, enquiring
after the prison, she went to see it, and about evening she saw coming out of
it an old man with a youth, and she knew they were the Jayler and his son.
She followed them, to see whither they went, and what they sought, then as the
night approach't, she discerned them to enter under Livia's porch, where there
were great store of people walking. This good man was speaking to his son, as
if he had his mind very fixed upon what he said, and the son staying to see
some controversy, as the town was then full of contention, Epicharis
perceived the Jayler went on his way, and ceased not his discourse, thinking he
still spoke to his son, (...) much did his business possess him. She
subtly joined her to him, and going the same pace, heard all the old man
spoke, who not thinking he had any other by his side, but his son, said in
continuing his discourse: Thou may well consider, that the men they brought
us yesterday, seem to be persons of quality, that we are carefully to look
to. We cannot both of us provide all things; I have need of one to call them
up, and to lie in their chamber. I will see, if the man I was told would sell
himself at the entry of Isis Temple, be fit for my turn, and will give
himself at a cheap rate. Epicharis had much ado to hold from laughing at the
Jaylers mistake, and was glad to know his design, then seeing his son
coming, she got away from him, without being perceived, because of the
darkness; and ran in all haste to the entry of the Temple, where she found a
young man sitting, whom she asked if he were to sell himself: he confessed to
her, that he was there for that purpose; she quickly agreed with him on the
price, and giving him a piece of money, said to him, go thy ways, and stay
for me near Minerva's Temple, from thence I will bring thee to my Masters
house: He went his way well satisfied, and presently came the Jayler, with his
son, who finding Epicharis set, disguised into a man, asked her if she were the
man that would sell himself. Epicharis told him, she waited there for no other
occasion. They looked well upon her, and finding her according to their mind,
began to cheapen her, and although they offered but little, she agreed to it,
upon condition she might redeem her self for the same sum. That was taken
very reasonable, and the Jailer willing to give her the money, she prayed him
to keep it, because she had no where to put it. The good man, pleased at her
freeness, brought her to the prison, and by the way instructed her of all she
had to do: wherein she promised to serve him faithfully; and she called her
self Eurylas.

They entered about the time Melintus and Palamedes supper was carrying in, and
presently they gave Eurylas a plate to serve with, who coming into the
chamber, and getting near Palamede, trod upon his foot, for fear he should be
surprised in seeing her; then he did as much to Melintus. They suspected,
advice was given them of something, but they knew her not for all that;
therefore she reserved the discovery of herself till the night, when she
should be alone in the chamber with them. The time being come that they were to
go to bed, she was left to wait on them, and locked into that chamber, with
lights: then beginning to look upon them, and smile: Ungrateful men, said
she, speaking but low, do you not vouchsafe to know those that run so much
hazard for your sakes? Alas! said Palamede, it is Epicharis: Melintus knew her
also. Dear Epicharis, replide Palamede, have I ever deserved, you should bring
your self into this danger for me, and would have embraced her: but she gently
thrusting him away, said to him, I pray you do not take a recompense in stead
of giving me one for the service I do you. Melintus advised to put out the
candell, for fear they were seen, and afterward he demanded her news of
Aristides and Ariana, and if they had saved themselves; she said she thought
they had: then reported the resolution she had taken, to disguise her self for
their service, in exchange of Arcas that would not be persuaded to quit Ariana;
that Hermes had been left by Aristides to assist them; but that she had lost
him, after giving him advice to employ Maximus and his friends for them: and
she told them after that how she had abused the Jailer to get into that prison.
They admired the prettiness of her wit, and the luck whereby the old man was
couzened, and resolved to husband well that good fortune: Above all they were
of opinion not to speak at all one to another by day, but to put their
conferences off till night, left she might chance to be discovered. She
inquired how they had escaped killing in the encounter of the Soldiers that
took them, since there were so many dead in the place. I swear to you, said
Melintus, that they had too much fear to put us into desperation, and that we
should not still kill some more of them: we were glad to yield us, after we
had fought it out to the very last, and since that they used us very
unworthily, till we came into this very prison, where we are to be kept while
the fire be wholly quenched, and the Senate may assemble to take knowledge of
the crimes we are accused of. We are, said she, to endeavor to get out from
hence before they have that leisure, and I for my part shall not be slow in
finding out the means: but, says Palamede, taking her by the hand, I have
cause to think well of my misfortune, that has given me this benefit, to make
her lie in the same chamber with me, for whom I have had so many longings.
Palamede, said Epicharis, if I have so freely put my self into your hands,
take no other advantage of it, besides the testimony I give you of an honest
desire to serve you, for if you abuse this my freedom, I shall know how to
punish you well enough, and my self too, for having obliged an indiscreet man.
She spoke these words something in passion: but Melintus said to her, No, no,
Epicharis, I shall be his surety, assure your self, Palamede has not so lost
his judgment as not to know what respect we are to bear to your sex, and
honor to your courage. She knows that well, replies Palamede, if I be not
deceived in her humor, and if I honor it. I have been sufficiently
instructed to my cost, how I ought to live with her, and learned more
discretion in her company, than my wit has seemed capable of: Nevertheless
she knows withal, that I must always be jesting. These occasions, says she,
permit no jesting; content your self, that I love you as my Master, and
Melintus as my brother. Melintus admired her virtue, and gentilenesse, and gave
her many thanks for the good will she had for him, without any obligation of
his part to have ever moved her to it. Melintus, said she, you are of more
worth than all my services, give me leave only to do for you what I am able,
and for this time do me the favor to let me sleep, for I had never so much
need of rest. Melintus entreated her to take their bed for her self alone,
because it was more commodious than her own; but she would never consent to
that, and went into another very little one that was made ready for her, after
she had prayed them to remember she was called Eurylas, and no more Epicharis.
They promised her to have care of it, and then they all three held their peaces
to go sleep.

The next day she arose before them, and went to make acquaintance with all of
that obscure house; then having understood there were some Romans come, that
desired to speak with the two friends, she went to them to know what their
desires were. They signified to her, they were come to offer them their goods
and services. Epicharis went to ask the Jailer if she should let them in, but
he said that was expressly forbidden, and she made answer to them, that it was
not possible to speak with them; but how they were best to employ themselves
with the Senators, to make their innocence appear to them, and what the
actions of their life past had been; which they promised to do, and went
their way, after she had known the lodging of some of them to make use thereof
if need were.

Melintus in the mean time, that waked long before Palamede, entered upon the
consideration of his good fortune, and commended this accident, for making him
receive so dear an expression of Ariana's affection, as to send her faithful
Epicharis to assist him with her brother, when she could give them no help
her self. He doubted not of escaping that danger, seeing himself strengthened
with such a helper, and spent all his thoughts in the remembrance of Ariana,
and the fortune of his loves, which he found to be in a very happy condition.
For although he might think she had not sent this maid but for her brothers
sake, yet he found this action to be too gentile, and too generous to proceed
from a simple friendship, and not rather to be a Love-invention: and then
resting him upon that meditation, he said within himself, And dare I also to
pretend to so much happiness? and can I without presumption believe that she
loves me? for if I believe her altogether perfect, I am to be persuaded that
she has an excellent judgment: and with what vanity can I hope she should
think me worthy of her? and yet because her judgment is so perfect, she
knows to what degree my passion has proceeded, and peradventure she will have
the perfection of my love be comparable to the greatness of her desert. Should
I then be so happy, that for this reason she had found nothing in the world,
besides me, worthy of her? that she had separated me out of the number of all
men to be made choice of? and that in her soul she had kept her to that
choice? Pleasing, but too ambitious thoughts, whither do you lead me? are you
so bold, to compare me to this Divinity, that nothing was ever yet comparable
to? where are your respects, and your fears? Let us continue in a submission,
and not expect her grace but by adoring her, and not in equalling our selves to
her. But is not this again to wrong the perfection of my love to abase it in
humility, in stead of acknowledging the beauty and greatness of it? Things
that are arrived to this degree, are of a glory too transcendent to suffer
contempt of us; they will be admired, and confessed to be as divine as they are
indeed. Pardon, my love, I had rather let thee alone than offend thee: equal
thy self, if thou be willing, to so many merits, it is by thee alone I have
hope: It may be this fair soul loves thee already, and embraces thee, taken
with thy perfection; and if we doubt of this, let us continue in the belief
that is more fitting for us, and at least not give over the contentment of hope.

These delightful fancies entertained him with great pleasure, when all on a
sudden he felt himself embraced of Palamede, who said to him* Pardon,
Epicharis; alas! Epicharis, I ask you pardon. Melintus embraced him in like
manner, and spoke to him that he might continue this discourse he made in his
sleep; but Palamede awaked, and confessed to Melintus, that he dreamt he was
taken by Epicharis making protestations of love to Camilla; and that he fell
down at her knees to cry her mercy. Then looking about in the chamber, and
seeing she was gone out, he continues, There is no doubt but the love of this
wench comes always to challenge the place it had in my soul, what ever
lightness may possess me: for I loved her before I went to Athens, where you
are a witness how many Mistresses I served: at our return from thence to
Syracuse, I had no sooner seen her, but I was more subjected to her than
before time: being come to Rome, I loved Camilla, and you have seen how coldly
I made use of those advantages you obtaind for me, since she arrived there with
my sister; now she covers my wound more than ever, by the care she takes of
us, and by a thousand pretty devices her wit is continually working. For my
part, said Melintus, I cannot think her borne of a servile condition; she has
too many fair qualities for so woeful a birth: and I vow to you, I shall never
blame your affection for being carried away with such perfections. I do not
believe you would so much injure those you come of, to pretend to marry her;
and you are not also to desire any thing of her, that might offend her honor;
but my opinion is, you will always love and honor what is remarkable in her,
being able to say with you, that I have seldom found a person more lovely. I
confess to you, answered Palamede, that I oftentimes have these very thoughts,
and I flatter them besides with a certain hope, that the time may come that
she may appear extracted from some family that might be no dishonor to me,
so much do I wish, that reason might accommodate her self to my desires. Is
it possible, said Melintus, that Dicearchus should not learn of the Pirates
where they had taken her? Never, said he, did my uncle tell us what he knew
concerning her; nevertheless he has ever made her be bred otherwise than a
slave, and as if he had known her to be come of free persons; nay, one day
when there was a speech of marrying her to Asylas a young slave borne in the
house, he could not refrain to say; The gods would never pardon me for mixing
her blood with one so unworthy of her. That speech more engaged me to love her,
and I shall make a relation to you how I let my self be taken. You cannot
imagine, answers Melintus, what interest I have in her fortune, and what
pleasure you shall do me in repeating a little of her life to me. I am going
then, says he, to tell you what has passed between us. And he proceeded thus:

History of Palamede and of Epicharis.
I Cannot tell if I be to account my self happy, or unhappy for the affection
I am engaged in for her, not finding any possibility of possessing her, neither
as a Mistress because of her virtue, nor as a lawful wife because of her
condition: but I will leave you to judge in this case, after I have made you
the history of our loves. You must know then, that Epicharis being brought up
very carefully under Acidalia wife to Dicearchus, and from day to day making
her self more considerable for her beauty and sweetness of humor, was loved
of this young Asylas, who was but of a simple and heavy constitution of wit:
but yet finding that he was of some credit in the house, because he was son
of Cromis and Menalippus, two slaves that had under them the whole government
of Dicearchus household affairs, and that Epicharis was very well beloved of
their Master and Mistress; he thought he could do no better deed than to
pretend to marry her, and first of all he resolved with himself to get her
good opinion of him: but she that had a sense of her noble heart, could not
endure such a wooing as that, and used him always very contemptuously.

One day I went into Dicearchus garden, and was ready to fall asleep in a
cabinet shadowed over with leaves, when I saw her coming very near that place
with a purpose to gather flowers. I was already sufficiently taken with her
affection, and had not failed to have gone to intercept her, but that I was
prevented by Asylas, who seeking opportunity to speak to her, had now made his
address; nevertheless with fear, and in a fashion simple enough, offered
himself to gather those flowers for her she desired. She thanked him, and said
she took pleasure in gathering them her self. It Is rather, said he, because
you refuse my service. Have you, answers she, a service to bestow? Yes, replies
he, which I make you present of. You give, says she, that is none of your
own, and I give it you again for fear I be accused of theft: And why so,
replies he? because, says she, your service belongs to the Master we serve,
and I will make no pretense to it. He stayed a while there, because he was not
so prompt at a return, and then answers, Although I am his, I can present you
with something that is mine own. With what, says she? with my heart, answers
he: and how will you do, replies she, to give it me? You demand strange
things, says he, what needs you know that? For all that, says she, it were
reason I knew it, and still gathered her flowers as she spoke. This young man
knew not where to have his heart come out, to make her a present of it; and I
perceived she would be going, having made her posie; which made me come out
from the place where I was, to stay her. She blushed for shame that she had
been heard all that discourse; and Asylas getting afar off us, out of
respect, I said to her, Gentle Epicharis, I love you, for thus using persons so
unworthy of you: She answered me, because we serve the same Master, he believes
all things are equal with us, but this difference there is, that he is a slave
by nature, and I by fortune; for nature can never be changed, but fortune may
give me the liberty she has taken from me. If there wants nothing, said I to
her, but a liberty to be given you to make you happy, I offer you mine: And
what would you be then, answered she? Your slave, said I. And what, replies
she, should cause that change? The love I bear you, answers I. I would be very
willing, says she laughing, to make this exchange, so you will tell me what I
am to do. You are to love me, said I to her. How is this, replies she; you say
love makes us lose our liberty, so I should be ever returning into my first
condition again. It were better, answered I, we parted all betwixt us, so we
should have but one liberty for us both, and one slavery only. We should,
says she, find it a great trouble, to know which of us were to be master. Let
us be serious, said I to her, Epicharis, I love you with a passion, and desire
you also to love me so. I will speak as seriously to you, says she; Palamede,
I honor you with a respect, and desire you to seek nothing else of me: then
leaving me, and having a mind to laugh, she added, I am going to Acidalia, if
you be willing to go on with this discourse, you are but to take it up again,
when I shall be with her. When she went her way, I continued some time
immovable, being rapt with the gentilenesse of her discourse, and resolute to
love her in earnest, having a good hope she would let her self be overcome. To
this end I never gave over making her what assurances of my affection I could,
until the time we were together in the Country one day at my uncles, when I
thought there required but an occasion that were found favorable, to have her
won at my entreaties, and the opportunity of the place. I went one morning to
take her in her bed, where I found her fast in a sweet sleep, lying with one
arm upon her head, which her smock without all care had left all naked to my
sight, and the other carelessly stretched upon the bed, but yet in such a
fashion that it kept her from being easy to be uncovered. Her bosom, that
this way of sleeping gave repose to, and breathing at ease, was not covered but
with the end of the sheet that by chance met there; the rest was very modestly
composed. I stood confounded to see her so handsome; for it seemed, her eyes in
despite that they were not open, for securing her from me, pierced through
their lids to wound me, so strangely did I feel my self moved. And yet not
satisfied with what I saw, I softly uncovered all her neck; but I vow to you,
Melintus, I never saw any thing so fair. I could no longer contain my self
then, but bringing my mouth thither, I pressed her a little more than I should
have done, and made her wake. That was a strange spring of hers she gave, when
she saw her self between my arms at her awakening, and with ease delivering
her from me, because I would not anger her at this first encounter, she
inveloped her self in her sheets; and after blaming my boldness for coming
into her chamber while she slept, prayed me to go out: then ashamed to lose
so fair an occasion, I put my self upon her bed, and embracing her, urged her
by all the prayers I could devise, to ease my affection; and in this while I
put her to a little pain, hoping to obtain what I desired by a sweet
violence: but she after some resistance, at last lift her self up, and said to
me with a confident look; Palamede, I believe you are not so unreasonable as
to have a thought to take that by force from me which is the dearest thing I
esteem in the world: it may be you hope I will be vanquished with your
importunities, but know this, that there is no punishment so cruel, as that I
shall make choice of for you, and then for my self too after the loss of my
honor; my condition has diminished nothing of my courage, let it satisfy you
therefore to have attempted this, the crime is great enough to go no further;
and I shall never pardon you while I live, if you leave me not now presently in
as much repose as I was in when you found me. If you go on in this vile
intent, your labors will be but all in vain, nor shall the difference of our
fortunes keep me from having your life, in revenge of your indiscretion. She
spoke these words with so severe a fashion, that I had no heart to press her
any more. I besought her to excuse the rapture of my love, and would not let
her alone, till she had pardoned me. Afterward, I had always a great opinion
of her virtue, and was not wanting to do her all the services I was able,
until I went my voyage to Athens.

I protest to you, says Melintus breaking him off, I am greatly delighted to
hear such generous demonstrations of a courage: do but consider a while, how
vice serves to advance virtue: for there is no doubt that without that wicked
desire in you to attempt upon her honor, you could never have known to what
height she had brought that honor. I will avow to you, replied Palamede, that
since that time I respected her as much as she had been the most noble of our
condition; and the more practice I had with her, the more I observed qualities
in her, that could not proceed but from a good birth, as you shall understand
by this that follows. Then he goes on.

Before my depart for Athens, I was aware that Epicharis seeing my over-free
humor changed into a respect, and my violent passion into a virtuous love, had
also somewhat moderated her too great rigor, to oblige me with an honest
friendship, and no occasion to serve me was presented, but she performed it
with a great deal of care; but so modestly withal, that I could not imagine
it were to gain me any way besides. It seemed only, that she expressed to have
some obligation to me for the affection I had to her: and during my voyage, I
continually received proofs from her, that she remembered me. At my return I
had a great contentment, when I knew my uncle meant to give her to my sister;
and the day she was to part out of his house, I went thither to see her: but at
my entrance I perceived in a corner the poor wretch Asylas busy at a great
reckoning, to which he was so attentive, that he saw me not; he had a little
book he was looking in: then he counted one while with his fingers, another
with casting counters, but I well saw he could not make his account right. At
last I had pity of him, and asked him what he did. He was ashamed to be
taken at that occupation: nevertheless, I offered my self in so good fashion
to help him, that he desired me to count for him. It was a number of years,
wherein there were many days to be added, and many also to be taken away: but
I had a mind to know what the meaning of it was. He confessed to me, that after
he had a long time sought the good graces of Epicharis, at length he could
obtain of her nothing else, but that after six years service she might
receive his affection; and how moreover they had put into the agreement, that
according to the quantity of the services, she might take away some of the
days, and in like manner she might add to them as she pleased, if he did any
thing to displease her, either wilfully or by misfortune; that for this purpose
he made use of the little book to keep a true account withal: and now
Epicharis was going to dwell out of the house, he would see in what estate
affairs were. I began to laugh within my self, seeing his simplicity, and
this device of Epicharis wit to mock him. When I had therefore comprehended
his meaning, I looked into the book, and saw how every day that passed was
taken away, and that sometimes there was writ, for one service four days to
be diminished: but by and by after was set down in another hand, for not
saluting with a good grace, ten days to be added; for speaking indiscreetly,
fifteen days; and all that was to be augmented so, was written with
Epicharis hand. I refrained from laughing as well as I could, and after a true
supputation, I found that he had still above eight years to serve, and there
were two past already, since they made the bargain. When I had stayed his
account, and he saw himself so far backward, he could not choose but weep:
I comforted him what I could, with a promise so to use the matter with
Epicharis, that she might oftentimes diminish the days for my sake. But he
ceased not weeping, and said he should not find out so many occasions more to
serve her; and I answered him, there should not be so many occasions neither to
displease her.

After I had somewhat restored him again, I went to tell this encounter to
Epicharis, with whom I laughed a good while at Asylas affliction, for finding
himself so backward in his account. She confessed she had invented this way to
rid her of him, and for merry pastime when she desired it. But in the end I
said to her, And for me, how many years will you ordain me? There needs
many, said she, because it may be you would often find the means to oblige me,
and I should fear you would never do any thing to displease me. If that were
so, answered I, you ought to wish the term might soon end, to possess him
that would not displease you. Look you then, says she, there must be some
other person besides me to make you happy; but I swear to you also, I should
never give my self to any less than you. And if fortune restores me not to a
higher condition, you may be assured no man shall ever enjoy me in that I am
now in. The greatest of my desires is come about, that I may live with the
divine Ariana your sister. It Is with her I will end my days in the height of
felicity. I swear to you, Melintus, that hearing her speak with so great a
heart, I knew not what it was kept me back from taking her by violence out of
my parents hands, to give her liberty, and marry her after: but knowing she her
self would never consent to that, for fear of angring Dicearchus, Aristides,
and Ariana, I did nothing but augment my love by the experience of her virtue.

Some time after, she pleased me again so well, that I was near upon the
losing of all respect or consideration. I believe you were then in the Country
with Telephus, when my sister made a dance of Egyptian women. I have heard,
said Melintus, of something there was done in my absence, which I shall be glad
to hear of. You know, replies Palamede, how Epicharis sings and plays on the
Lute very pleasantly. We were all assembled at my uncle Dicearchus his to
receive this Masque; I saw her enter with three other women, in the number of
whom was my sister, and when the noise was appeased, she recited these verses
in Music:

Four Sisters we be come from Egypt together,
To appear in these parts;
Unknown were the loves of Cypris our mother,
And Mercury, god of Arts.
Our father at our birth left us for portion
Dexterity of hand,
And Venus she gave us beauty in proportion,
Mankind for to command.
Now seen shall it be if any of this City
May easily escape;
If our hands he avoid, our eyes far more witty
Shall finely him entrap.
I was one of the nearest of the spectators, and so rapt with seeing and
hearing her, that I had lost the use of my other senses, to make happy those of
sight and hearing only; which made me I took no heed when one of these
Egyptians put her hand into my pocket in the mean time, and took away what I
had there.

When the recite was ended, and the dance following it, they that saw I was
robbed, made show to look if they had lost nothing by these she-robbers. I did
as much, and instantly cried out that I had been robbed, and ran to Epicharis
to entreat her to give me again what they had taken from me; then to my sister
and the rest of them: but they all denied the theft, and I had no news of it
till the next morning, when I saw coming into my Chamber a young boy I knew
not, that brought me what I had lost, with a little paper, wherein were writ
these words:

The Egyptians are content to let you see that they know how to get more than
they desire to keep; acknowledge their power, and thank their courtesy.

I urged this young child to tell me who sent him, but he would never be
known of it; and all I could get of him, was to give me leisure to make an
answer. And I went to write thus:

To the most Gentile of the Egyptians.
IF you had purposed to return me all you took from me, I should have found a
heart amongst the things it pleased you to restore: but if you think it
fitting, I consent it stay still with you, as earnest of the fidelity I swear
to you.


All these Gentilesses gave me entirely to her; and yet since that time I
served her with a great respect, because the commodity at our house being the
fitter to make attempts upon her, I perceived that she did the more refrain
expressing her good will toward me, for fear I might not take the more
boldness; but I confess to you, that what ever entreaty she made me, I never
left commending in my mind her carriage. My sister was very well pleased with
my affection, knowing this wench to be very discreet, and was persuaded she
would find the way to moderate my overhasty humor, if I took pleasure in
obeying her. She always therefore used me very seriously: but one time when I
assured her of the love I had to her; And may I, said she, have some proof to
confirm it? I was amazed, and glad withal she desired some service at my
hands, and made offer of all I was able to do to please her. Know, if it be
possible, said she to me, of Dicearchus what my birth is, for I believe
certainly he knows it: It Is not that I am weary of living as I do, for to
serve Ariana I would forsake the most free condition of the world: but I should
have cause to rejoice in waiting on her service purely out of good will, and
not out of necessity. I commended her desire, and promised to use all the
entreaties I could to that end: then I added, would to God, my fair maid, our
conditions might in some fashion meet one with another; I should have as much
cause to joy at that persuasion, as you your self: for I believe I shall never
have power to dispose of my self, until I see what fortune shall have
resolved of you. I will not, answered she, make any profession to you, how much
I am obliged to your affection, for that were unusefull; but if ever the state
of my life may change, you shall find I will not forget the least of your
respects. I prayed her to believe I would always serve her after that manner;
and proffered my self, in case my uncle gave me no light to know what she
were, to go to the farthest parts of the world, that I might learn the truth
of it. But when I had put Dicearchus upon that discourse, I could never draw
any clearing of the question from him. He told me indeed, that he had her of
the Pirates upon the Sea coast toward Camarine: but that made me never the
wiser, and I was very angry for having understood nothing else to satisfy
Epicharis desire. Presently after the occasion of going to Rome was presented,
and when I bade her adieu, she said; Take heed fortune upon the Sea make not
you of my condition, and by equalling you to me, separate not us both for ever.
I would willingly, said I to her, redeem your liberty and my contentment at
the charge of four years servitude; I could have no greater wish than that it
were my chance to serve your kindred in recompense of the services you have
rendered mine. Oh gods! how happy should I be, if in the end I might come to the
knowledge of them, and give them intelligence of the place you are in, for to
make us both free by a happy change: It would never grieve me to endure neither
yrons, nor the cruellest tortures of slaves, to obtain so great a good. These
are speeches, says Melintus interrupting him, very powerful and affectionate
for such an unfaithful man as you are; for you were no sooner here but you
forgot all those protestations to love Camilla. I beseech you, replies
Palamede, do not reproach me with that; for the affection I have for
Epicharis, seems to be a strong and sure passion that keeps ever one direct
course, letting pass a-crosse it those little lightnesses without being moved,
and I hope it shall also one day attain the end it has pretended to.

Palamede would have finished what remained to be told of that depart, when
Epicharis entering, brake off their discourse; and finding them still in bed,
she accused them of slothfulness: Palamede in laughing told her, they had but
too much time for the journey they were to make that day. Then she told them
what she had done with their friends: As for Maximus, although he had reason to
be ill satisfied with them, for the detriment he had suffered for their sakes,
having saved himself also from the fire after them, with much trouble, and
though he had enough to consider of his own affairs, yet he had not failed
to promise her all sorts of assistances for them: that the fire was not yet out
in the City, but yet they ought not to lose the occasions that were offered to
save themselves; that it would be easy for her to bring them a very small
cord, wherewith they might draw up a great rope she would have without the
Tower, which she now had all in a readiness of an excessive length, because
the height of the Tower was very great. There was no other difficulty but for
them to get to the top of that Tower, for being always close shut up in their
chambers. Three or four days passed on still in their deliberating upon some
means, whilst the burning continued always. But they were surpised one
morning, being sent for to appear before the Senate. Epicharis was in despair
for having delayed so long to invent a means for their delivery, and feared
they should be that very day condemned. Melintus and Palamede in less trouble,
were brought before the Senate, where entering with a modest assurance, they
were set upon seats very low to the ground: The Consul having commanded the
accusers to speak, Martian goes out from the company, because he was a party
in this cause: and then they were accused with much vehemence, for having by an
abominable practice set fire on Rome, and to be the cause of the greatest ruin
and desolation that City ever suffered; that not content with that horrible
impiety, they had added the murdering of Marcelin and many others, whereof
proof was made by Marcelins sword, that Melintus was found seized of, and for
that he was taken all bloody. For these crimes it was concluded by the accuser,
that they deserved the cruellest punishments that were. Melintus seeing that no
body presented himself for them, demanded permission to defend himself; and
having obtained it, he was a while looking down to the ground to think of
what he had to say; then lifting up his eyes toward the Senators, he spoke
thus:

MY Lords, if I were to speak before Judges that were less equitable than
you, I should have great cause to fear the oppression of our innocence. I
consider the authority of our accusers, all the City of Rome animated against
us, and (if the crimes they suppose us guilty of were true) you your selves, my
Lords, interessed by your losses to punish us. Against all these powers, may
two strangers, forsaken of all things, pretend to defend themselves?
Nevertheless, we do not esteem our selves altogether destitute, having in
heaven the gods for witnesses of our life, and upon earth the justice we are in
hope to find amongst you. We have nothing but the truth for our defense; and
this truth being naked and simple, I will also make you a simple relation of
our misfortune, whose causes may very easily be justified.

Being arrived at Rome, for no other end but to behold her glories, and make
our selves known for persons desirous of the best things, we entered, to our
misery, into the acquaintance of Marcelin, who after he had made us great
professions of friendship, in the end conceived a cruel jealousy against us
for a woman's sake, and resolved to kill us. Those that knew him can tell if he
were capable of such a practice. One night we were set upon by a number of men
that left us for dead, and had it not been for the succors of Emilia and
Camilla, before whose house the noise was heard, we should have had no mere
pain to defend our own lives. Camilla will be a witness of this truth, and
all her house, whither we were carried; who will tell also, how Marcelin not
believing we had known his treachery, sent Palamede an ointment that was found
to be rank poison. Nevertheless we advised to dissemble and absent us from
hence, having such an enemy. Since that, Aristides, father to Palamede, being
come hither with his daughter Ariana, upon the rumor of his sons danger,
Marcelin fell in love with Ariana, and had a purpose to marry her: But Palamede
having him in detestation as his mortal enemy, and Ariana shunning him as the
murderer of her brother, his love contemned turned into rage, and knowing we
were upon parting to return into Sicily, he plotted our death, but the
cruellest one that could be imagined by him. Because he would not let us be
gone without a revenge, he encompassed with armed men the house of Maximus
where we lived, and then set fire to it on all sides, having resolved either to
burn us there, or kill us at our coming out when we had no other thought but
how to save us from the flames. They of Maximus house can witness how they saw
these furious men setting fire with Torches in their hands, and that two slaves
were killed going to fetch water at the Tyber. For me, I determined with my
self to take a horse and save me by running through flames and swords.
Palamede did the like; but took another way than that I went. Marcelin seeing
himself on foot, and that I went far away, made a horse be given him to
pursue me, and overtooke me being all alone, where furiously assaulting me, I
had the good fortune to kill him, though he were armed. Two others came upon
me, that were left upon the place. After that Palamede rejoyning him to me, we
were taken, when we had a long time defended our selves; and now we are accused
for the death of these men, and for having set the City on fire.

They that have been here acquainted with us, know, if we could everso much as
have conceived so detestable an enterprise: what fury must we have been
possessed of? and what strange ingratitude had that of ours been, to have had
a mind to destroy this great City, whereof we have had the honor to be made
Citizens, and for whose glory we have so often fought? But besides, what
likelihood is there we would have begun at our own lodging, being shut up
within, with what we had most precious, and from whence we had much ado to
preserve us? For the murder, it is very true that I defended myself from a man
armed, that sought my life, which I secured after from two other men, and some
soldiers: There is nothing more just than to repel force with force: But in
all this, what has Palamede done? having been assailed by night, he was there
left for dead: he ran a danger of being poisoned: seeing the house on fire
where he was, he got out to save himself, and came to find me again, not
knowing what should become of him after the loss of his father and sister: and
he now is accused together with me for a murderer and fire-setter, in stead of
the justice we were to demand for having been fired and assassinated. All
these things being able to be justified, I implore, my Lords, not your pity,
but your justice: not that clemency that has made you so often pardon your
greatest enemies, but the integrity of this August Senate, that nothing could
ever yet weaken. Or if our misfortune deserves any punishment for having been
the cause, without our intention, of the disaster of Rome, be affected with the
compassion that is due to strangers, to our youth, to our innocence, and to so
many wounds received for the honor of the Roman Empire. And if there must
needs be some sacrifice offered to the peoples satisfaction, content your
selves with my life, and provoke not the gods against you by the condemnation
of Palamede, the most innocent of all men.

After he had left speaking, there was heard a little murmuring among the
Senators; some admiring the assurance and grace he had in speaking, others his
generousnesse and friendship toward Palamede. The greatest part of them said
there was no appearance they were guilty. There were none incensed against
them, but those that had been made by Martian. In the end the Consul made a
sign to Palamede that he should speak, and with a fearelesse fashion he said
thus:

MY Lords, Melintus having represented to the Senate all I am able to say, for
making our innocence appear, it is not against our accusers I am to defend me,
but against him. I complain of him in the first place, for that he betrays
our cause, by confessing us causes remote of the calamity of the City, and
speaking of sacrifices to offer up to the peoples desire for to deliver
himself alone to death, and preserve my life. I accuse him moreover for
gainsaying the laws of our friendship that made us inseparable: and he is
greatly in the wrong to affect by design our division, which could not be
excused but by disaster. If he were culpable, I should be so too; but since he
is innocent, I pretend also to be so. I have always so well labored to
imitate him, out of the knowledge I had of his virtue and perfection, that I
fear not to be accused of his faults, but think my self glorious to be found
faultlesse with him. There is nothing belongs to us both that can be divided:
our wills united make but one mind, which ruling all our actions, it seems we
are in like manner but one body, so as there is but one only person you are to
condemn or absolve. And yet, if for causes separate from us, and to which our
will has contributed nothing, we deserve some punishment; which of us can be
said to be more worthy of it but I? I am the sole object of the jealousy of
Marcelin, and of his hatred; Melintus had no controversy at all with him: To
me alone he sent the poison: I alone hindered his marriage with my sister, I
alone provoked his vengeance against us, which is the cause of all these
miseries. Only Melintus found himself engaged in his treasons, not thinking
any thing, and so has committed nothing, whether by mischance or by intention.
I demand therefore we be both of us sent away absolved as innocents; or that I
alone be exposed to the sentence: and you shall testify by this judgment, the
equity that makes you renowned throughout the world.

Melintus would have replied, but one of the Consuls imposed him silence. Then
all the Judges were in an admiration to see so perfect a friendship, and moved
with the consideration of so much virtue and innocence, began to advise for
their absolution. They had besides interrogatories given them apart, and all
their answers were found conformable: but upon these intermissions, Nero sent
to command them to surcease the judgment until he had written his mind to
them. So they were sent back again to the prison, where the disguised
Epicharis, longing to know the success of the judgment, inquired of them what
had passed. But having known for what cause they were sent back, she began to
appehend Nero's absolute power, and went presently out, to go enquire of one
of Melintus friends, if the Emperor had since writ his will to the Senate. He
told her, the tears in his eyes, that he came but now from a Senator that
told him the Prince would have them dye: Because Martian, during the judgment,
had gone to kneel down before him, and made him promise they should be
punished by his authority.

Epicharis in despair, returned to bring them that ill news: and being shut
close together, they consulted upon the danger they were in. She told them,
It Is a strange thing, that since I came in hither, I have not been able to
have this good fortune to find either invention, or occasion to bring you out.
For me, said Palamede, I will cast my self down from the top of this Tower
into the Tyber, rather than submit to so shameful a punishment. I would, said
Melintus, we were but in possibility to precipitate us, there were then no more
deliberation to be used: for we should soon find means to descend: the
difficulty of importance is, how to get to the top of the Tower. Melintus is in
the right, says Epicharis, for the rope is all in a readiness, and I would
quickly bring you wherewith all to draw it up to you: And now I think on it,
says Melintus, the height of this Chimney answers to the height of the Tower:
about midnight we may help one another, and get up to the Tower that way; I
believe we may save our selves, provided only none know of your going out, and
that they shut not up some body else here in stead of you: you must of
necessity go to buy a boat, with some other habits to disguise us in, and when
you return, you shall bring us this same small cord to draw up the other from
without to us. I find this, said Epicharis, to be very well devised; and to
make it sure, that none inquire for me or for you this night, as soon as I
shall be gone out of this Chamber in the evening, you are but to shut the door
with the bars, and they will lock you in, without looking whether I be there
or no. This being resolved on in this manner, Epicharis went instantly to
provide her of a boat, some clothes, and the rope she had caused to be made of
a thickness and length very strange; having committed all these things to the
keeping of a young youth she knew, and who little thought for what purpose she
was to use them; she came back to bring the small cord, and advertise them
how all was in a readiness. After she had seen them sup, she took her leave
to go to attend them at the foot of the Tower: presently they shut themselves
up, and about midnight when they might judge that every body was asleep,
Melintus took the sheet that served to their bed, and desired Palamede to get
up first into the chimney, because he might help him, and carry with him this
sheet wherewith afterward he might help to draw him up: Palamede was hardly
to be persuaded, and would have done him that office and stayed the last: But
Melintus told him, these contestations were not in season, and so used the
matter, that Palamede set his foot upon a stool, then upon his shoulder, and
from thence by little and little got him up to the top, carrying the sheet by
which he was to draw up his friend Melintus was not very long in getting to
him, though it were with some labor; then they threw down the little cord, to
which Epicharis tied the great one, and they drew it up to them, and having
bound it to a pinnacle of the Tower with the little one, so strong that it was
impossible it should slip, Palamede asked of Melintus where the honor was in
that occasion, to go before or after; Melintus answered him, they were rather
to consider of saving their honor and dispatching them: Do you then pass
first, replide Palamede, that your honor may be first saved. I will, said
Melintus, make the retreat. Never, replide Palamede, shall it be said I left
you in danger. Ha! answered Melintus, what ceremonies are these? we contested
before for getting up, and now we must lose time also in descending But, said
Palamede, why will you have me always give place to you in affection? I will
have you, continued Melintus, let your self go first, then you shall carry me
down upon your shoulders. Upon this condition, says Palamede, I will, and so
took the rope: but Melintus let him go, for it was impossible for Palamede to
stay himself; and Melintus was thus willing to deceive him, that he might see
him part and know that his friends life were in safety, before he thought of
saving his own. He had also received this contentment, but for the strange
accident that happened; for when Palamede entered into the boat, the pinnacle to
which the rope was tied, (whether it were for being so old, or for the weight
of Palamede's body, and the thickness of the very rope) was carried down
together with it; and if at the same instant the boat had not gone off of it
self, Palamede and Epicharis had been struck dead under the ruins of it.

It Is hard to judge who were the most astonished, either Palamede and Epicharis
that felt themselves quelled with the water this fall covered them with, and to
see the rope down without all hope of helping Melintus any more; or Melintus
himself that thought they had bin smitten dead, and saw that he was deprived
of all means to save himself. He was a while of the opinion that nothing
could now secure him from death, and he was absolutely minded rather to cast
himself down the Tower, than remain in the hands of his enemies. And yet
being of a courage that feared no danger, and wit that soon invented
preservatives, he looked about him, and perceiving the sheet, whereby he got up
thither, he considered if he might not cut it into many lengths, to be tied one
to another; but all of it would scarce have reached to the half part of the
Towers height; but for all that he purposed to launch himself into the water
from the extremity of it as far off as he should be, and took the end of
the sheet to begin to cut it; but a wind that arose very high, had almost
carried away his sheet, and with it all his hopes. That made him think of a
means very strange, and to seek his safety by that which had very near lost
him. Having heard tell of some that had been borne up in the air by means of
their clothes, and set down upon the ground lightly, he advised with
himself, since the wind favored him, to make a sail of his sheet; and after
he had made it swell with the wind to let himself go in it, by holding the
sheet by the ends, hoping that the wind would sustain him enough from falling
too fast downwards. The worst could befall him was to be drowned, and he had
rather lose his life so, than by the stroke of a hangman. Considering
therefore which way to accommodate himself, and turning his back to the
sheet, he took behind two of the corners, wherewith he made him as it were a
girdle, which he fastened before with that was left of the little cord, and
letting pass all the rest of the sheet over his head, he stretched out his
arms, and took the two other ends in his hands, which he tied also, for fear
they might not chance to slip away, but yet in such a fashion, that he might
easily undo them: then putting himself upon the pinacles in opposition to the
wind, he made it fill up the sheet, and this wind lifting him up almost by
force, he let himself go, recommending him to the gods, and felt that he
descended by little and little till he came below where Palamede and Epicharis
were, admiring by the light of the Moon this Engine, and not imagining what it
might be.

ARIANA. The sixth Book.
THe joy of Epicharis and Palamede was excessive, when Melintus being fallen
into the water, and rid of his sheet, they saw him come toward them swimming:
but that of Melintus was no less, when entering into the boat, and seeing
himself helped by them, he was assured that the fall of the pinnacle had
nothing offended them. After the common rejoycings for escaping so many
dangers, they were thinking how to avoid that which remained, and resolved to
depart the City by the same river, for not being apprehended. They went down
the stream very easily, till they came a good way off Rome, and about morning
they found themselves four or five miles distant from it. There they quitted
the clothes they had on, and having filled them with stones, cast them into the
water; then they were of opinion to go by land, and take a way quite contrary
to that wherein they were taken; for then following the Tyber they had gone
straight to Ostia; and if they were pursued, they would not fail to search
along the River. It was therefore decreed they should gain the haven of
Cajetta, because that of Reggium was too far remote, and that they should not
march but by night, for being in danger of taking the second time. Eurylas that
had washed him in the water, looked so lovely in the new clothes he was dressed
in, that Palamede was in pain to conceal the new wounds she gave him. And
then when no body saw them, he helped her to go, and sometimes Melintus lead
her; for Epicharis was not accustomed to so great journeyes; and their desire
was to advance to some place where they might pass away the day. And still as
they went, they entertained one another with their adventures, and took it for
a good fortune that the pinnacle fell, for else the rope had been left there,
which would have made them be followed; but now the world would think they had
precipitated them, their coming out by the chimney being to be discerned by
some stools they had used to get up with. After they had gone a good journey
in discoursing thus, they arrived at a village, where they took with them
something to eat, and for fear of being discovered, continued their voyage:
then they passed through a great field to get them far out of the way, and
found a very retired place, where there was a running brook, near to which
they sat down under the shade of sallowes.

After they had made their repast, they began again to recount their fortunes
together; and the fears Aristides, Ariana, Telephus, and all their friends at
Syracuse, were in for them; that for this occasion they must not lose time in
getting to Sicily, to lessen by so much their displeasures. That consideration
made them resolve to continue their march, which they did incommodiously
enough, because they kept them altogether in bypath, lest they might be
discovered upon the highways. At last, about evening they arrived near to a
house they judged very fair; Eurylas had a good mind to have been there
received to repose him that night, and not to be so ill provided for, as to
have nothing but the heaven for a Canopy: but they thought it best not to put
themselves to the hazard of falling into hands they could not afterward get
free of; and seeing very near that place a little wood, they purposed to enter
into it, and there to choose out some shady place; where when they were set,
Eurylas overcome with slumber and travel, presently fell asleep: the two
others fearing to wake him, made no kind of noise, and that silence insensibly
made them sleep also.

When they were in the depth of their sleep, a young Lady, Mistress of the
house they had seen, taking in the evening the fresh air of the wood, passed
very near them as she walked about. They could not be seen where they were,
of any that had been in the walks of that wood: But Eurylas turning him from
one side to another, removed some leaves that were about him, and made a little
noise. Corinna (this Lady was so called) curious to see if it were not some
beast, went softly forward, and found the fair Eurylas sleeping in a fashion
so agreeable, that the sight ravished her: the delicacy and whiteness of his
complexion, his vermillion mouth, his brown but fine and curled hair that
hung over his shoulders, and above all the amiable proportion of the features
in his face, gave her too sensible impressions to seem her self insensible of
them: for she stood without all motion, and so steadfast in regarding this fair
sleeper, that it might have seemed he had communicated his heaviness to her,
but that her eyes were still open: but she thought she had not eyesight enough
to consider him well, so many beauties saw she, the least of which was capable
to have the possession of her eyes, and fill them with admiration. She put one
knee to the ground, as it were to render him homage, and came softly near to
kiss him, that he might not awake; but Eurylas at the same time heaved
himself up, and fetched a deep sigh from his stomach; which constrained her
to retire, thinking he had bin about to wake, and gave her a sight of Melintus
and Palamede that were sleeping also there hard by, whom she had not before
been aware of, for being so much taken up with the sight of Eurylas. That
caused her to be a little fearful, seeing her self all alone between three
men: and yet considering them she took them for persons of honest quality; and
to see their equipage, judged they had suffered some injury. She advised to
go home, and return again with some of her people, that with her might
desire them to take covert at her house; and as she was going away, she could
not choose but cast her eye upon Eurylas beauty: yet at length she left him;
and being in the house, she persuaded her husband to go walk out with her
into the wood, that he might himself invite them home to him. A little while
after she went away, Epicharis awaked, and letting Melintus and Palamede sleep
on, would have risen, and perceived four or five coming to them; she took
them to be some of those that dwelt at the next house, and were now walking
toward the evening at their liberty. They waked Melintus and Palamede out of
their sleep at their first coming near, and inquired of her what they did
there; to which she answered, that they were three brothers who had lost in the
burning of Rome the best of their goods, and were robbed of that which was left
them, and now were brought to lie thus upon the ground, in getting by little
and little to Sicily where they should not want for conveniences. Corinna
seemed to be touched with pity for them, and prayed Curio her husband to take
them home with him for a night. This man that was of a sufficient good nature,
was well content therewith, and could not take them for thieves because of
their fashion, and especially to see they had no swords; so he told them, that
if they would come to his house they should be very welcome. Melintus and
Palamede agreed, seeing this free invitation, and thanked him as courteously as
they could. They went along with them thus for company. Melintus telling Curio
the news of Rome in his ordinary pleasing way of discourse: and when they were
come to the house, they all supped together. But it was impossible for Corinna
to dissemble the affection she had to Eurylas when her husbands eye were off;
and Palamede, that began to have a good mind to Corinna, seeing she was very
gentile, and of an humor free enough, did the more observe the looks she sent
to Eurylas, which made him wish this affection were rather addressed to him, that
he might make some use of the good fortune. That which perfected her dying for
him, was, that Eurylas finding a Lute, took it, and fitting his sweet voice to
it, sung these verses:

WHile amiable youthfulness
Inflames within us fair desires
Let us prove the dearest pleasures
Our fortune to us may address;
And suffer not a day remove,
Without some sweet delights of love.
The season of our borrowed light
Ought not to pass away in vain,
Wherein we do so freely gain
The power as well as appetite,
To suffer not one day remove,
Without some sweet delights of love.
Those that have ruder fantasies,
Reproach our happy times so spent;
Malicious, or malecontent
With their despite or jealousies;
But let not us one day remove,
Without some sweet delights of love.
There little wanted, that Corinna transported with love, had not gone to kiss
the delicate mouth that sang with so many charms, but the presence of her
husband and the company served for a bridle to her. 'Twas no difficult matter
for her to be persuaded by Eurylas song, into this humor, and to take the
occasion her love offered her, and she thought he gave her advice of what she
had to do; and Palamede was of this mind too, who never looked off Corinna,
whilst Melintus entertained the good man Curio, that began to have a very
great esteem of his guests. When it was bed time, Curio and Corinna brought
them to a chamber near unto those where they used to lie apart one from the
other, wherein there were two beds. Melintus and Palamede chose the biggest,
for they said, they would never be separated, and left the least for Eurylas.
Corinna was very glad for that resolution, and when she left them, gave the
good night to Eurylas, so as he well perceived the affection mingled withal.
Palamede considered all her actions, and having learned that she lay in one
chamber, and her husband in another, he thought, that if in the night he could
make her believe he was Eurylas, he might easily enjoy her: so as he was
resolved to rise from Melintus, and go secretly into Corinna's chamber,
imagining that without doubt the love she had for Eurylas, would hinder her
from sleeping, and he might easily be received of her. On the other side,
Corinna being retired with her husband, had the same design to rise out of her
bed, and come to lie with Eurylas, not believing him to be of a disposition to
refuse a fair Lady: And Curio willing they should shut up these strangers
close into their chambers for fear of some accident, she was not of that
opinion, for that were, said she, openly to mistrust them, that it sufficed to
shut the doors of the house sure, and they would not dare to attempt any
thing. That being appointed, Curio by misfortune would needs lie with his wife
that night, to whom this purpose was very unwelcome: Nevertheless when he was
asleep, she rose and pursued what she had to do. Corinna and Palamede at the
very same time went out of their chambers without any noyse-making, and meeting
one another in the dark at a passage, knocked their heads so rudely together,
that they were even falling backwards withal: and yet having each of them but
scandalous intentions, and not willing to be discovered, they kept themselves
from crying out, or expressing any pain for the blow: They would neither of
them enter into their own chambers for fear they should be known. Palamede
ignorant of what he was best to do, stood still in the same place, and leaned
himself against the wall; but Corinna better acquainted with the turnings,
slid her softly down the steps. Palamede taking heart, and thinking it was
some groom, gave not over going into Corinna's chamber; and she hearing no
more of him she had encountered, went up the stairs again and entered into the
chamber of Eurylas. She came near his bed, then sitting her down upon it
making no noise, she embraced Eurylas and kissed him, to make him awake gently.
Epicharis feeling as she began to wake, some body that pressed her on that
fashion, cried out, and would have got her self loose; but Corinna labored to
make her hold her peace, and told her she was Corinna, that moved with a love
to him, was come to give up her self to his bed, and offer him all the favors
he could desire of her. Melintus waked with that noise, and not feeling
Palamede near him, thought he was practicing upon Epicharis, and went toward
the bed to hinder him. Corinna hearing him come, escaped and ran into her own
chamber, where she stumbled upon two persons that lay upon the ground, and fell
with her head so cruelly against the bed, as she was not able to rise again.
She cried out and called for a light, and in the mean while heard a man that
said, why brother, are you mad? I am Palamede you torment thus. At last a light
was brought; Melintus and Eurylas came running also thither, and found three
down all along upon the place; Corinna hurt, and Curio with Palamede, that
held one another fast, and were wrestling together. But when Curio knew it was
Palamede, he was in a great wonder, and asked him, wherefore he was come to his
bed? Palamede for his part seemed as much amazed to see himself in that
chamber, and said to Curio he thought he had come to his own, and gone again
to bed to his brother; and how he had cause to think strange Melintus should
take such hold of him if he were not mad. Curio asked him pardon, and told him
he took him for some robber that would have killed him, feeling a man, as he
waked, that held his arms. Epicharis and Melintus had pain enough to keep
from laughing, seeing them in that disorder. Corinna putting her hand to her
broken face, and leaning it against her forehead, said, that having heard a
noise upon the stairs, she would know what the matter was, and at her return
found them in that posture to give her the fall. The suspicion Curio might have
of his wife, was changed into pity to see her in that case; and after they had
all of them got up, and some remedy was applied to two or three hurts she had
on her face, and to those of Curio and Palamede, for they had fallen from the
bed one upon another, Palamede desired their pardon, his error having caused
all that disaster, and every one retired to his chamber, where Melintus,
Palamede, and Epicharis shut themselves up for fear the noise of their
laughter should be heard, which they refraind as much as was possible. Palamede
knew then it was Corinna he had encountered in the passage, going to have
surprised Eurylas, and how she was forced to get her gone at Melintus coming.
He confessed to them also, that willing to go find Corinna, and put himself
upon her bed, he had in stead of her embraced that man that had awaked, and
seized upon his body at the instant, that he was strangely amazed to feel a
beard, and a man that would not let him escape, did he what he could; that in
striving together they were fallen from the bed, and Curio undermost, whose
fall must needs have well dazzled him, for that he did not so much as dream of
calling for help: that in the end he thought he was to make as if he had been
mistaken, and to call him brother, to have him believe he took him for
Melintus, and was in a wonder he should be in so great a madness, as not to
let him go, what ever he did to get out of his hands. They never ceased
laughing the rest of the night at these rancounters. Nevertheless Melintus
reproached Palamede for having had a thought to such an enterprise. He excused
him by the example of Corinna, whose attempt was no less unchaste, and
entreated Epicharis to pardon him that crime, which she willingly did, not
being able, she said, to take offense at a thing that had made them so much
mirth.

About morning they fell asleep, and waked not till it was near noone: and
being up, it was told them Corinna kept her bed. They went to see her, and to
know how she did; and meeting with Curio in the chamber, expressed again to
him the displeasure they had for being cause of her sickness; then they came
toward the bed, where they found her with her forehead bound up, but yet very
curiously, and as if in that disorder of her face she had not been over
negligent in dressing her. Palamede made her a thousand excuses for his ill
fortune: and a little after going aside with Melintus to entertain Curio,
Corinna took Eurylas by the hand, saying to him, What will you do for one
that has been thus handled for love of you? Madam, says he, all that ever I
can do in the world I offer you, in assurance that I am too much engaged to
you, and dying for grief that I was not able to receive the favors you would
have permitted me. Palamede would favor the contentment and pleasing deceit of
Corinna; for he drew Curio on the other side of the bed, as he spoke to him:
and Corinna taking the occasion, said to Eurylas, I see very well you must
forsake me now, but promise me to return hither one day, and you shall see
what affection I have to you. As she spoke those words, she brought Eurylas
head close to hers, and kissed him with a great transportation: and besides, she
uncovered all her neck to him, that he might be the more in love with her.
Eurylas had trouble enough to refrain laughing, and to recompense her with the
like favors could well have shown her as much: but he was content to give her
kisses back, and promised her it should not be long ere he came to see her
again. They were at last to give over that delightful exercise, for fear of
being taken by the husband that came for Eurylas to lead him to dinner. The
sweetness of Melintus conversation had wholly gained that man: and at dinner
he told him, that some Jewels they had still hidden about them; but it would
be hard to change them for things that were more necessary, as horses and
other provisions. Curio promised to accommodate them: and presently they went
to his stable, where they made choice of three horses, for which Epicharis gave
him a Ring that was of a far greater value, because she would recompense him
for the good entertainment they received at his house. Curio gave them besides
to every one a sword, and something with them to eat the rest of the day: then
they went to take leave of Corinna, who wept to see Eurylas part; yet she
concealed her tears; and Curio having seen them a horseback, let them go
with a great deal of sorrow.

They were no sooner a good way off out of their sight, but having liberty to
laugh, they were disposed to mock at the abuse of Corinna, and her so
passionate farewell. The incounters of Palamede also served them for no small
pastime; and Epicharis flouting him, that his desires had been so rewarded: I
find, says he, there is nothing so delightful as that which falls out in
love: for if a man has that he desires, nothing is more happy; and the greatest
disgrace that may arrive, is but matter of laughter. I, says Epicharis but the
mischief is, you are laughed at to your cost: I find you only happy in this,
that you are of a humor that shrinks not for any accident befalls you. It is
true, said Melintus, for I believe never any man was so often deceived and
punished as he. At Athens he began his apprentiship, with a thousand tricks
were played upon him: at Rome he hardly escaped dying in the trade: and here,
see what an adventure 'twas to go cast himself into the arms of an husband,
and so to be quit for the hurt he received in his face. Besides all this,
replide Epicharis, his greatest unhappiness is, that experience cannot make
him wise. How well you are both agreed, said Palamede, to despise my humor!
but tell me, whose courage do you esteem the greater, of him that puts
himself into many hazards, comes well off with some, is hurt in others, but
never yields: or his, that never attempts any thing? Would you have one, after
he has been wounded in a combat, quit arms for ever and grow wise by
experience? You have reason, answered Melintus, to make a comparison with love
and valor: but as valor is a virtue, so you ought to compare with it a
virtuous love, that is not fastened but to a fair and perfect object, like as
valor that has nothing for its object but honor, no differing considerations
to move to the duties of it: so in love, he that shall have but one design,
and ever maintains that, is more courageous than he that will always be
changing the subject of it. Palamede replide, if you will needs compare Love to
Valor, in my conceit this is exercised upon differing subjects, and diverse
encounters; one while in the siege of a Town, another at a battle, another
again in a private combat. Yet ever it is but one valor, says Melintus,
cutting him short: Neither is it but one love, answered Palamede, that makes me
cherish every thing that is amiable. But this valor, said Melintus, has but
one object, which is honor. And this love, replide Palamede, has but one
object neither, which is pleasure. Pleasure, said Melintus, cannot be the
object of a virtuous love; and if you will hear me, I believe you will be of
my mind. Virtue never has any thing for object, but that which is perfect and
certain, and for this reason she her self is her own end and recompense,
there being nothing in the world perfect and certain but she. So has valor
no satisfaction but in it self, and this is that we call honor, which is
nothing else but the glory that is in us for not failing in what valor
requires at our hands, what disgrace soever may happen; because fortune has no
power over virtues: he that has this quality in perfection, is as valiant
being overcome, as when he is victorious, and is conscious to himself of the
same glory: Victory and honors cannot be the principal objects of it, because
these are not things we can be assured of. In like manner, the perfect love
cannot have pleasure for his principal end, because it is not certain, but
depends on the will of another: and for that cause his end cannot be to be
loved neither, these being things that are without us, and we cannot dispose
of: but his only certain object is this, to love perfectly: So the end of
this perfect love is in it self, and can never fail it. If it chances one be
loved, or receives some contentment, these are but fruits of love, and not the
end, even as victory and honors are to valor: otherwise it must be necessary,
that after the satisfactions love received, and the honors that valor
possessed, both this and that should cease, and have no more operation, as
being arrived at their end. You see that imperfect loves, that have no other
end but pleasure, dye as soon as ever they have attained that pleasure; and
this might serve for an infallible reason to make you believe there must be an
end far more noble, and more assured than pleasure, to crown a perfect and
never decaying love.

I believe, said Epicharis to Palamede, you would be much troubled to answer
these reasons. It Is very easy for him, says he, to vanquish an enemy that
feels his conscience wounded, being to maintain an evil cause: for all the
disasters I have met with, and reason with this very dispute learn me thus
much, that we are to love but one thing which is perfectly lovely, and for this
cause that it is you alone I am to love: I pray you, said Epicharis, make not
Melintus weapons serve your turn against me: and yet I shall not be
displeased that he instruct you; and when you have had time enough to be made
wise, I shall demand of him what I ought to think of you. Swear, said
Palamede, you will always report your self to him. That will I surely, said
she, so much confidence have I in him, that he shall herein be Judge with
Ariana. Melintus said, there was hope of amendment in Palamede, and that he
would promise, if Epicharis joined her help, to make of him a perfect lover
one day for her sake, having already a Master very affectionate, and a
Mistress very lovely. Assure your selves, replied Palamede, that I knew before
how to love very well, what ever I said, for I love none but the fair
Epicharis; it is she I love perfectly, and will love her so for ever. Do you
take these little searches I make to others for infidelities? What be they
else, says Melintus? I would feign know, went Palamede on, if to love so
perfectly as you pretend, you abstain from all sorts of pleasures, as hunting,
pastimes, exercises, and what ever else may content you? That were not
reasonable, answered Melintus. So then, said Palamede, these little favors are
of those pleasures we are not to avoid. The choice a man has made once in his
heart, continues still there; and by this means he attends with patience, till
the cruelties of her he seeks be over, and the time may bring some ease to his
desires. I find this, said Epicharis, an easy way of loving; and if all were
of your disposition, there would not be heard such complaints and desperations
of lovers, because they would so soon know wherewith to comfort them. It Is
not, replied Palamede, a particular humor in me, but reason that makes me
love after that fashion, and every one finds contentment by it; for having a
cruel Mistress, I seek for consolation to the usage she makes me, and in the
mean time leave her in repose. When all comes to all, replide Melintus, you
would persuade us, that you love extremely, but desire moderately; and if you
can make these two agree, you have reason for what you say. Although, says
Palamede, I follow not these desires so ardently, think you I desire the less
for that? Contrariwise, I more honor her I love, not to torment her, seeing
her resolved to grant me nothing; and appease where I may the violence of my
desires. But, replide Melintus, they are not the desires you have for her,
which you go to ease otherwhere; they be some other. Sometimes, answers
Palamede, I imagine I am easing those very desires, persuading my self I enjoy
her, and receive those favors at her hands. Ah ye gods! cried out Melintus,
what crimes are here together. And why, said Palamede, am I so criminal? First
of all, replide Melintus, in seeking these favors from others, you serve your
self of the same words, and the same oaths which you use to her you love: see
there profaned the fairest means you can have to make your self be loved,
employing them indifferently upon a thousand subjects unworthy of the virtuous
design you ought to have: What poorness it is to lie? and which of them all
can believe you, having but the same protestations to give in all places? after
all this, if you love but one person, can you still find another lovely, and
there stay your eyes? for, as for pastime which you allege, a man may seek
that, without injuring his love: but one beauty may stand in competition with
another, and if you can make much of any, with, or besides that you love, it is
infidelity. But what crime can be greater than that your imagination commits in
the favors of another? and will your fancy then needs have it her you are
courting, who receives your discourse with affectation, who either yields with
weakness, or prostitutes her self with shamelessness? and do you perfectly
love her you imagine to your self, with all those defects? You charge me very
criminally, said Palamede, but I protest to you I have not so vile an
intention. No, no, pursues Melintus, you must resolve with your self, either
to believe your affection is very imperfect, or else to purge it of all those
errors, if you desire to make it perfect. See there, said Epicharis, one good
lesson already; and if every day he took but such another, I think he might
be reduced into the right way. To hear you both speak, replied Palamede, it
seems I have been instructed in an ill Love-schoole, and must endeavor to
forget the false principles I there learned: but I do still find something in
me repugnant to the austerity of your precepts: Nevertheless I honor my
Master, and love my Mistress so well, that I shall receive their rules upon
their word, without examination; and submitting to your reasons, I will make
you have obligation to me too for the pains I free my self of, in the search
of contrary reasons. They were then come to a pass of a river something
difficult, which hindered Melintus and Eurylas reply to him, to mind where the
easiest place of going over might be. Palamede having first sounded the depth
of the water, and being on the other side, betook him to singing.

CUpid in his childish flitting,
Changes station day by day:
Above the heavens he makes his way,
Then upon earth he takes all homage fitting.
If my heart seeks thus to remove,
Am I not like the God of love?
The same diseases Love importune,
Varieties do more provoake
Him, that in using many a stroke,
Wounds now the fair one, now the brown by fortune.
If my addresses thus remove,
Am I not like the God of love?
Cupid besides has no delight,
But in preparing some new blow;
Then slily laughs under his bow,
At all the mischiefs come from his despite.
When I my pleasure would remove,
Am I not like the God of love?
It will be a very difficult matter for us, says Epicharis to Melintus, to
gain any thing upon him by instructions: for see if he be not already returned
to his first error. You give a wrong judgment, answers Palamede, of my
intentions; because I mean to make these false opinions come out at my mouth,
as it were some poison or ill nourishment I had taken, and I have no other
means to rid me of them. The same censure you are to give of all I shall
hereafter say contrary to fidelity, in answering your arguments: for I shall
receive yours in harkening to them, and let go my own, as I mention them to
you. Here Is a pretty device indeed, says Epicharis, to contradict us all his
life long, under the pretext of letting out his false reasons. I am afraid
truly, replide Melintus, ours get not out of his mind as easily. Give me
them, said Palamede, good ones and strong enough, to the end they may take so
sure root there, as nothing shall be able to shake them for going out. Take
beed, replied Melintus, the fault be not in the reasons, but in the place that
peradventure is so slippery, that nothing can remain firm in it. They
sweetened the tediousness of the way with these discourses that held them
until the evening; and chancing upon a place commodious enough to eat what
they brought with them, they stayed their journey, and let their horses feed
upon the grass; but after supper they resolved to go all night, for avancing
their voyage.

Being a horseback again, they entered into a Forest a little before Sunset,
and had not gone through the half of it when night began to approach. Palamede
and Epicharis were together, and went before: Melintus was about twenty paces
of them, and entertained his imaginations, when there appeared to him an
apparition upon a great black horse, his face of a fearful blackness, his
body all covered with long and bristly hair, and holding a club on his
shoulder.

A man less assured than Melintus, would have been terrified at so dreadful
a vision; but he in no amazement stood still, and asked him boldly if he had
any thing to say to him. Know, answers the spirit, that thy death approaches.
Thou tell me no news, replide Melintus, I know it approaches every day.
That monster without a return would have discharged upon his head a blow with
the mace; but he avoided it by bending his body, and presently took his sword
in his hand. Then he saw coming to him another monster a horseback, like to
the former; and without trouble to see himself amongst these Devils, he began
to charge him that had spoken to him, and at the same time thought how the
other might do him no wrong. Palamede and Epicharis that saw Melintus did not
follow them, returned back again, and wondered strangely to find him engaged
in a combat against such fearful spirits. Epicharis was seized with horror,
but Palamede that would not have feared to assail all the powers of hell to
succor his friend, took his sword in his hand, and set upon him that came
last. At that time Melintus had run his sword into the other he first took
him to, in many places, escaping with nimblenesse the blows of his club, and
in the end made him fall from his horse. Palamede delivered himself too in a
small time from him he had taken in hand; and these two friends were very glad
to see those spirits had a life to lose, since they poured out so much blood,
being fallen to the ground, and had no more motion left in them. They alighted
from their horses, and considering them, found they were two men that had
black'd over their faces and their hands, and dressed them in skins, it may be
to skare passengers, and kill them with the more ease.

Epicharis had gone afar off for fear, and they had much ado to re-assure
her, and make her come near to see those dead bodies. At last she came on, and
wondered extremely that Melintus was not terrified at the first appearing of
these phantasmes. The Moon gave them light enough for not wandering out of
their way, and to beware they were not again assaulted by the like monsters;
but yet they came out of the wood without danger when the night was even spent:
and at break of day they met with a man on foot, who seeing them coming,
demanded if they had not encountered the two spirits that had slain so many men
within seven or eight days. Yes, answered Melintus, but they did us no harm
at all. I wonder, replide that man, they should spare you. Indeed, said
Melintus, they somewhat affrighted us; but from whence come they, do men
think? They say, replies he, they are infernal gods, that were constrained to
quit the Temple of Proserpine at Rome when it was burned, and how they will
never give over killing, till they have built them another. For my part I am
not so desperate as you, for I am going round about the Forest to Rome, for
fear of falling into their hands. Friend, said Melintus to him smiling, those
gods were not immortal then: fear not passing by the Forest, you shall find
their bodies lying on the ground, which we have deprived of life, and assure
your self they were but thieves disguised into spirits, to kill and rob
passengers with more facility after they had affrighted them. This man would
not believe him for all that: they swore to him all three, it was true; and
that if he were weary of going a foot, he might chance to find one of those
wretches horses, and get up to ride: but he could not be persuaded what ever
assurances they gave him; and would not take the way of the Forest, so hard a
matter is it to cast out fear and the belief of fabulous stories out of
vulgar spirits.

They went on their way, and after they had sufficiently spoken of this
rancounter, they took up their last days discourse for to instruct Palamede
in the laws of fidelity. Epicharis asked him if he would have Melintus give
him another love-lesson. I had rather, says he, take it from you: for from
the very first I should prove a Master. There needs him no other instruction,
said Melintus, but to examine well his life past, and he will find that ill
desires have brought him naught but shame and misfortune, and that he never
tasted pleasure but in virtuous affections: for I will have him confess to me,
if the honest behavior of the wise Eriphile and her sweet entertainments in
the very refuse, were not more pleasing to him than the favors he thought he
had enjoyed of her in the deceit was put upon him. But, said Epicharis, may not
I know that story? I shall bless, replide Palamede, that deceit all my life,
for giving original to the friendship of Melintus and me. Now you give me,
said Epicharis, a greater desire to know it, for it is a thing I never yet heard
of; and if Melintus would take the pains to make this relation to me, I would
think the service I have done you well rewarded. Palamede, replide Melintus,
might better tell you all the particulars of it; but since I can acquit my
self so good cheap, for that I am indebted to you, I will not lose the
occasion. Epicharis told him, If that be too small a request, mingle with it
your own story besides, and tell me all that happened to you at Athens, and in
your voyage into Asia. It is but reason, said Melintus, you should know how the
lives have passed, which you have been the preserver of. This relation, added
Palamede, will be very delightful to you, if with it he reports all the glory
and the advantages he acquired: for I fear that for this cause he will
conceal from you the fairest adventures of all. You would willingly, said
Melintus, have me leave to you this occasion of discourse to satisfy
Epicharis, but you shall find other services to render her. I would be very
loath, replide Palamede, to hinder her from hearing you: but take it not ill, if
you forget any thing, that I remember you of it. Melintus was content, after
he had rejected the praises they gave him; and some time after he began thus:

History of Melintus, Eriphile, and Palamede.
THere are very fortunate passages to be met with in the life of men, which if
they would make right use of, they might easily addict themselves to virtue and
glory: and I find that fortune is of maine consequence to good designs,
providing the means both to undertake, and to execute enterprises. I tell you
this, not to have you think I had by this means acquired any quality: but to
confess unto you, that I am the less excusable, if I have not made use of
this good fortune and facility that have always accompanied me.

When I was sent by Telephus to Athens, he directed me to the house of one of
his friends called Ephialtes, whose wife Eriphile was very handsome, and one of
the wisest women I ever knew. And her husband had such trust in her virtue,
that he was not afraid to receive me into his house, although I were very
young, and handsome enough at that age; nay, he never had so much as a
jealousy for the cares she since took of me: for I confess she loved me as
her own son, although she was not above two or three years elder than I;
and seeing that I had conceived an affection to her great enough, she would
make use of this good will of mine to get a power over me, to have me learn
with passion all my Arts and exercises. In such sort, that finding me to be of
a very willing disposition, she sometimes commended me to encourage me,
sometimes she kissed me on the forehead for a recompense, but yet far from her
husbands eye; and I swear to you, that greatly served to advance my studies;
because I employed my time in them for love of her, quite after another fashion
than I had done for my own sake. Besides, knowing her virtue, I was in awe of
her, and durst not attempt any thing that I was not sure would be pleasing to
her. I gave her account of all I learned, which made me careful in spending my
time well; and presently she became as learned as my self: On the other side
she taught me honest manners, and the good fashion of living those of our
condition are to follow; so as one taught the other what he knew, and learned
of the other what he was ignorant of; and thus was it a very delightful
school. After imparting my studies to her, I let her see the improvement I
made at our exercises. I did my arms in her presence, I wrastled, I lanc'd the
Javelin; and Ephialtes, that was one of the prime men of the City, having
always fair horses besides those were mine, I exercised them before her; and
when she approved my riding, I thought my pains well rewarded. At the
beginning I loved her as she had been my mother, but coming to more age and
understanding, which gave me the more credit with her, and dispensed so great
submissions to me, I loved her as my sister: so as entering into her confidence,
she had now no secret to hide from me. Palamede was then at Athens too, and
spending more time at his exercises than at his studies, he came off with much
dexterity and grace in them. We did every thing in emulation one of another,
without any other acquaintance, but that we were both of the same City.
Palamede shall confess with me that one of us suffered with some displeasure
the commendations were given to the other, and this spur served also to make
us more diligent in well-doing, so as there was not any there besides that
might exceed us.

But leave we this discourse of our exercises, to speak of his amorous humor.
After having loved some Ladies of Athens, where there is no want of those that
are flexible enough, and being weary of favors so easily obtained, as those he
had enjoyed to his cost; one day he saw Eriphile, and fell in love with her;
without delay he gave testimonies of his affection to her, by the care he had
to see her in all places where she was to come: but he well knew he should have
trouble to obtain what he desired of her; for her modesty was very great, and
by her speeches she never gave him any hold, whereby he might take the
boldness to propound any thing that might offend her honor. Nevertheless
having learned that she frequented sometimes at a woman's of mean condition,
who was called Harpalice, married to a freed man of Ephialtes, and that this
woman was very crafty and covetous, he hoped to gain her by her covetousness,
and that she might gain Eriphile by her craftiness. He made his address
therefore to her, and this woman received him, and assured him there was none
but she that had power over Eriphile, or was capable to serve him. She
entertained him a while only with hope; then one day she told him that Eriphile
having lost a very rich chain of gold, and fearing her husband should know it,
he had a fair occasion offered him to get her good graces, by presenting her
with such another. Palamede instantly promised it, and Harpalice having
described to him the fashion of that chain, he bespake it at a Goldsmiths. But
when he had it, he feared Harpalice might not give it to Eriphile: so as he
entreated her that he might be the bearer of it himself, to the end this might
give him occasion to see her in private, and that she would find some means
for this meeting. Harpalice was a little surpised, yet she told him she would
know that of her, and two days after assured him, how Eriphile had promised to
come to her house; that she would feign to make an assembly of Ladies, whereat
some men might be present too, then she would put them into a chamber apart,
where he might give the present into her own hand, and that there he might
endeavor to vanquish her by entreaties. Palamede waited for that day with a
great deal of joy, and Harpalice was not wanting to make her assembly: but
before the company was come, she carried Palamede into a chamber next to that
where the meeting was to be. Thither came I also waiting upon Eriphile, and
Harpalice going into the chamber where Palamede was, set him to observe through
the crannies those that were in the other chamber, and amongst others, Eriphile
and me. Do you not see, said she, how Eriphile blushes, and is full of
thoughtfulness for the purpose she has to come to find you? Palamede imagined
with himself it was so; and when she left him, she said, You may see when I
take her by the hand to bring her to you, but she will have me take away the
light, for fear you be seen together in this chamber through the same
crannies. Palamede consented, seeing it must be so; and a little while after
she came to take Eriphile by the hand, because she said, she would carry her to
see what was in the other Chamber. She had brought her to set her foot into
the Chamber where Palamede was, but it was so dark, that Eriphile retiring her
said something loud, Whither do you lead me, Harpalice? This crafty woman came
back again presently after, bringing with her in the dark another woman well
instructed what she had to do, and said to Palamede in giving him her, I had
much ado to make her resolve, serve your self of the occasion; but I pray
speak low: for I should be dishonored if you chanced to be heard; then she
shut them up both together. Palamede can better tell you than I what
expressions of his contentment he made her, and how much beholding he thought
himself to her for being willing to grant him this favor; how in order he
pursued that business, and what victories he obtained; but this I can tell
you, that he found far less resistance than he expected, and for an
acknowledgement gave her the chain: then Harpalice returning to take her away
in the same darkness, they parted asunder with a thousand protestations, and
as many kisses after them. Palamede was not at liberty till the company were
gone away, and then Harpalice asked him if she knew not well how to oblige a
man: he gave her many thanks, and a present, and then went his way very well
satisfied. I know not, continues Melintus, addressing him to Epicharis, but
looking upon Palamede, if I may dare to tell you what fault he committed. I
pray you, said Palamede, forget nothing befell me, no nor our combat neither,
for if it were not for that, the story would be nothing worth, and should have
nothing to follow upon it, or else you shall oblige me to take up the discourse
where you left. I will tell you then, replied Melintus, that he was not able to
conceal this favor, but published it. Eriphile was advertised of that vanity
of his, and acquainting me with it, seemed to be very sensibly displeased
withal. I loved her with so honest an affection, that I was touched as much as
she, so as I was resolved to revenge her. The day after I met him in the Park
for exercises, and drawing him to a place where we could not be seen, I told
him he had spoken ill of a Lady, that he must unsay it now presently, and
publish the contrary, or else I should very soon make him repent it. And I
will make thee, said he, have but a short time to repent thee of those words.
Then we both took our swords in hand, and being but so lately learned in all
the slights of fencing, we were not to seek for any one either at striking or
defending. It seemed we were both well content this occasion was offered to put
our art into practice, so as if heretofore we had an emulation when we fought
but for exercise, we were at this time far otherwise provoked, when we
considered the prize and hazard to be as much as our honor and life. After
this combat had been a long time debated without any hurt on either party,
Palamede impatient that it held so long, gave me a blow with such fury, that
having avoided it, his foot failed him, and he came falling close to me. I
cast my self upon him, and seizing his sword, I would have forced him to unsay
that he had invented against Eriphile: but he told me with a courage undanted,
that he would never unsay a truth. I threatened to kill him if he continued
those words, whereupon he said to me, Melintus, I confess it was not well done
of me to speak of it, but if I let you see how she favors me, will you not
then avow that I have no reason to unsay it? If you can, said I to him,
justify it, I will confess my self vanquished by you: but if this be not so,
I will oblige you to give me satisfaction before her, and to publish the
contrary. I agree, said he, to these conditions, with an oath to content you
within these three days: then I let him rise, and we went thus happily away,
without having any blood one of another.

One day after he entreated Harpalice to let him have once again the same
commodity of seeing Eriphile: She that aspired to nothing but his presents,
promised him; and the next day she bade him come at night. Instantly he comes
to me and tells me, I have found out the means to be as good as my word; this
evening if you come with the company to Harpalice's house, mark into what
Chamber Eriphile enters without a light; afterward you may see me come out
from thence, if you stay the last in the house. I was a little amazed, and
could not tell if I were to suspect Eriphile or no: Nevertheless I promised
him to be there, and without speaking a word to Eriphile, I accompanied her
thither at night. Harpalice failed not to bring him the same woman, that was as
courteous to him, as before: For my part that never left Eriphile in the
company, I mocked at Palamede within my self, and went home with her, never
staying for him. The day after, he came to me in the morning, and asked me,
why I stayed not for him the last night, to see him come out. Because, said I
to him, I was all the while with Eriphile, and could well answer for her. He
began to laugh, but seeing me mock him also, he began to mistrust Harpalice:
then he told me, one of us must needs be finely coozened. My eyes, said I, are
very certain. Truly, replies he, mine could stand me in no stead in the place
where I was, for it was too obscure: but yet I will have all cleared before I
have done, and without saying any thing else to me went out, and goes to
Harpalice's, and bound her by the same charms of reward, to let him have the
same favor once again. She told him it was impossible to have her company so
often: nevertheless she would make her come, provided he kept the agreement
that there might be no light in the Chamber, for Eriphile was afraid so much
as to be seen of those of her own house: that made him mistrust her more than
before, yet he was content; and when it was night, he repaired to the same
Chamber, where this woman being entered, in the midst of their kindnesses one
to other, he cut off some of her hair; and for all she felt him, and would
have hindered him from keeping it, yet he carried it away by force. As soon as
he was at his lodging, and could get a light, he went to see in trembling what
he held, and found it was black hair, quite differing from Eriphile's. Then
acknowledging how he had been coozened, and thinking how to be revenged upon
Harpalice, he passed away the rest of the night in great vexation. In the
morning he came to see me, and said, Melintus, I am ready to give you
satisfaction, and to recant what I have published against Eriphile's honor:
but this must needs be done in her presence. I sent to know if she were pleased
to receive this satisfaction, which she seemed very willing to, upon condition
I were at it. Palamede entering, went and cast himself down at her feet, and
said to her, Madam, I am come to demand your pardon for the fault I have
committed against you, and vengeance for a villainy that gave occasion to my
offense. Eriphile prayed him to rise, that he might with more ease relate to
her what he had to say. She made us sit down, and then Palamede showing what
he had cut off, said to her; Madam, these black hairs shall let you see the
blackest villainy that was e're invented against two persons; and thereupon he
repeated to us all the crafty devices of Harpalice, which Eriphile and I were
in great admiration at. In the end he craved so many pardons, and added so many
protestations of honoring her, and publishing in all places Harpalice's
cunning deceits, with an excess of submissions and respects, that we were
more content at his satisfactions, than we thought our selves wronged by his
offense. Eriphile gave him a full pardon, and when she knew of our combat for
her sake, she would make us friends, and have us continue so, since we were of
the same City, of the same age, and equally given to the same honest exercises.
I endured no great entreaty, for I had an high esteem of all Palamedes
qualities. And he expressed to us, how happy he accounted himself, for drawing
this advantage, as he called it, from his own folly. We embraced one another,
and swear before her a perpetual friendship: she afterward made Harpalice be
brought into the hands of Justice, and the wretch was condemned to be tied to
an Ass, her head turned to the tail, which she was to hold for a bridle, and
so to be walked through all Athens, the Hangman whipping her, and children
following her throwing of stones. Since that time Palamede rendered so many
honest offices to Eriphile, that she much esteemed him: she dispensed her
favors equally to us, never ceasing to make us confirm our friendship. And
upon that occasion Palamede made Verses, which I believe I can call to mind: I
think they were these:

I Love, but with the purest passion,
The perfectest that is here below.
The god that wounded me has no compassion
To heal so sweet a sore, nor would I have it so.
She loves me, and I dare not attend her
But for one favor to be blessed;
Letting her self be loved, she knows how to defend her
By that same virtue only makes me love her best.
One rival there alike is placed,
Which makes me no way jealous-hearted;
Nor am I grieved that he, as well as I, is graced
To see so little good between us both imparted.
To me alone I would not win her;
Nor do I cruelty pretend:
And yet it is not for want either of beauties in her,
Or passion in my heart, that equally contend.
I perceive, said Epicharis to Melintus, that you were both a modest servant,
and an honest friend, thus to make part in the friendship of this fair
Eriphile. You see, answered Melintus, how we have always parted between us,
as well our good, as evil fortune: But I must tell you how we divided to our
selves also almost all the honor of the Olympicke games: Then he goes on: The
time of them being at hand, there came to Pisa from all parts, some to appear
in the exercises, and dispute prizes; others to be spectators only. I would
aspire to a very high honor: for seeing that the greatest Cities of Greece,
and some Kings likewise had sent excellent horses with light Chariots to carry
away the prize of the race, I had a mind also to come upon the lists for
Syracuse: and having a long time before prepared Ephialtes horses and my own
for this occasion, and made a gilt Chariot, glittering all over, and
representing that of the Sun, I made six fair Coursers I had be painted, in
a fashion that had never been seen before: then dressed like Apollo, and
crowned with rays, I appeared in the lists with others that wanted neither
glistering shows, nor magnificence: Palamede was contented to pretend to the
prize of the Harp.

Eriphile, to encourage us both to well-doing, had given each of us a favor,
to Palamede a Harp, whereon he was to play; and to me a Quiver, with the
Scarf of her own working. Every one of those that were to run, drove his
Chariot round about the place where the games were had, and saluted the Ladies
in passing by, of whom they received favors too, and good wishes; then went to
range himself in the place that had been ordained him. I had learned my
horses this before, to start at the third time the Trumpets sounded, without
needing to hearten them either with the whip, or with the voice, reserving
these spurs till the middle of the Course. They failed not to start in time,
and orderly ruling them at first, I drove slily between two that violently
went away at the beginning, and were before me, and having this advantage, I
contented my self to keep close to them, until about the end of the race,
seeing them strive to overtake me, I spared my horses no more, but giving them
the reins, and leaving the rest behind me, I swiftly finished my course,
gaining a victory that could not be controverted. Then the Trumpets from all
parts began to sound, and next followed the cries and applauses of the people,
and afterward I was proclaimed Victor. Having received the prize, I repassed
again into the midst of the place as it were in triumph, and seeing they
went about to begin other games, I guided my Chariot near to the Theater,
where the verses were to be disputed; from thence I leaped up, where they gave
me the first rank, because of the victory I came from winning. I recited an
Ode that would be but tedious to repeat now to you, for it was very long. In
the end I carried away the prize there too, and having heard a little after
Palamede to be proclaimed Victor for the Harp, I assure you I had more joy at
it, than for my own victories.

Presently after, those of Syracuse having understood the honor we had
acquired, sent us Letters of acknowledgement, and thanks, and invited us to
return to them, to receive the honors they desired to give us. We could not
refuse so just entreaties, and so advantageous for our selves, and so took
resolution to depart, with a great deal of sorrow to leave Eriphile. I will
not tell you of the trouble she was in to hear this purpose of ours: but she
expressed more displeasure to me, than the wisdom of her mind could suffer:
and I confess to you also, that to be separated from her, I was to have a
great power over my self: for I had lived with her in so great a sweetness of
conversation, and such a confidence, that now I went to deprive my self of
many pleasures and consolations: Her virtue and her good qualities had always
furnished me with so profitable and delightful entertainments, that I made a
doubt, if ever I should chance to be so happy again, or meet with any thing
that came near that state I was to lose by quitting her: Nevertheless I must
have consented to this depart; and Palamede, that apprehends, as you know, his
comforts and divertments so easily, had some regret for it in the beginning,
but soon gave it over. But in stead of returning to our Country, the heat of
the war carried us away. Corbulo, that sage and victorious Roman Captain
came to land upon the Coasts of Greece, with the forces he lead, to pass from
thence into Asia, and make war with the Parthians. We took this occasion to
show our valor, and went to find him: then we followed him in all the
Conquests he made, where we gained some renown; and when the peace was
concluded, we separated our selves from the Army. And do you speak so
slightly, said Epicharis interrupting him, of a valor admired of all the
Empire, and so dreadful to the Barbarians? I will have you rela^e to me what
exploits you both achieved, for 'twill be the greatest pleasure I can possibly
receive. Give me leave, answered Melintus, not to go on with that story of
battles and sieges, that cannot but be irksome to you, considering the very
terms of expressing them are unknown to you. Content you only with this,
that we had the victory in many encounters, were hurt in others, ran many
hazards our selves, and made others run as many, and in the end the Romans
remained victorious. I see well, said Epicharis, I shall for the present gather
no advantage from your modesty, but some day or other I will put you in mind,
that you are not released of this relation: Go on now only with what happened
to you at your return.

Having left the Army, replied Melintus, we embarked us, and came to pass
near unto Greece, I would have turned out of the way to go to Athens, and see
Eriphile once again; Palamede that had now quite forgot her, would by no
means endure that, and thought of nothing but the reception was to be made us
at Syracuse for our Olympicke victories, which was more honorable for us, than
we could have imagined. I have heard, said Epicharis, of that reception, from
her mouth that gave you the presents; but though it were magnificent, I may
tell you it surpassed not the merit of the persons were received. And this is
that, continued Melintus, you desired to know of me, which is but a very poor
satisfaction for all those obligations I have to you: but it suffices me that
you are content what payment soever I give you. You are too good a play master,
said Epicharis, and I am to be very well satisfied; since in waiting on you I
have already so much pleasure, and besides you have given me for my service so
pleasing a recompense: for I never heard any thing with so much joy, as that of
your excellent and happy instruction, the wisdom of Eriphile, the coozening of
Palamede, and the birth of your friendships, together with all your honors,
and your glories; and if I often spent such hours, I should account my life
most happy.

They were a long time entertaining them with all those adventures, and went on
discoursing thus until the Sun was very high: then they retired into a
private place that was our of the way. Palamede went all alone to the next
Village for some provision, and left Melintus and Epicharis that were
discoursing a while concerning the gentile qualities of Palamede, in whom they
acknowledged many things that proceeded from a lovely wit, and a great
nobleness of heart: as for his humor that was merry, and something addicted
to pleasures; they confessed that would soon be ripe in him, and given over, and
esteemed him never a whit the less for it: then Melintus counseled Epicharis
to repose her a while, that they might travel after, not thinking it dangerous
any more to go by day. As Palamede arrived, Melintus made him a sign not to
wake her, but to sleep too, that they might merrily after go away together.

ARIANA. The seventh Book.
AS soon as sleep had forsaken Melintus, Palamede, and Epicharis, they made a
short dinner, and went forward on their way, till about evening they arrived at
Cumae, where they were of opinion not to enter, because they avoided the Towns
as much as might be. They sought therabouts some place to retire to, and at
last hid themselves with their horses in the den of the Cumaean Sibyll.
Epicharis was something fearful to go into it, having heard tell of many
strange things that happened in that place, and how the Sibyll had from thence
led Aeneas into Hell: Nevertheless, after Melintus had assured her that those
were but fabulous stories, she was the boldest of the company, and put her
self the forwardest: but she repented of that courage; for going onwards in
the depth of this den, and being a good way off from Melintus and Palamede, she
heard some complaints coming out as it were from the most hollow secret places
of the Cave: She started back for fear, and ran toward Melintus, whom she
took by the arm, and thought her self then well fortified: she told him the
cause of her being frighted; they came near to hear what it might be, and
perceived avoyce that spoke, which made them judge they were, it may be,
thieves that were retired thither: but lending their ear more attentively,
they heard these words; Ah Fortune, how treacherous art thou! and how more
advantageous is it to be miserable at first, than happy, since thou art so
changeable. How cruel were the favors thou gave me, since they served for
nothing but to bring upon me the more sorrow; and how malicious were thou to
place me in a condition worthy of envy, for to reduce me afterward so miserably
to provoke pity. But what pity? of whom can I expect it? Of men? they have
abandoned me: Of the heavens? they have none to give: Of the earth? she scarce
affords me this retreat: And of the Sea? she refused me the succors I hoped
from her, when I sought my death in her bosom. Alas, Love, what would thou
have me do? do thou let me live to have a perpetual remembrance of the
good I possessed, and of that misery which followed it, both of them alike
troublesome to my memory?

I believe, said Epicharis to Melintus, this man is mad, thus to speak to
himself. You know not, answered he, to what a desperation may bring one; and
if you knew that which belonged to a Lover, you would soon excuse these
extravagances. Then they heard how he went on; But seeing I must suffer,
Courage, let us again put the iron into our wounds. Cruel remembrances, I
provoke you, to the end you might again hurt me with your most sensible
prickings. Sweet entertainment, dear confidence agreeable pleasures,
heretofore the joys, now the executioners of my soul; and you Oaths of love
that ought to be inviolable, come to me traitors; and if there remains any
place in me to murder, spare not your rudest blows there: tear me with rage,
despite, and shame, and make my sufferance as eternal, as the love that causes
it.

Epicharis admired the transport of this wretched man, and the violence of his
evil that forced him to despair thus: and a while after he continued still:
It seems I hope to ease my griefs by these unusefull words: but how
unpowerfull are they for such an excess of evils; and to what purpose serve
these plaints, when all things are deaf to me? and though they were willing to
give me some remedy, yet it is now impossible. Ah ye gods! What make you in
heaven? and how do you cast off men to so many miseries? to what end are our
incense and our sacrifices, seeing the most innocent are the most miserable?
for I will no longer believe you take care of us: What visible assistance
receive we of you? What is become of the help of your Oracles for the
distressed? Are we more wicked than our fathers, to whom you gave sometimes by
your advice, either a remedy, or at least a comfort? And thou, holy Sibyl,
whose dwelling I take possession of, if it be true that thou art no more but a
voice, why do thou not make it speak in my favor? And why will thou not
favor me with some one of thy prophecies, to teach me what consolation, or
what end I ought to hope for?

Epicharis told Melintus, she had pity upon that poor Lover, and that she
was resolved to counterfeit the Sibyl's voice, to make him have a purpose to
go to his kindred again, amongst whom he might more easily recover his wits.
Melintus approved her invention; but she told him she must speak in verse, and
that she could not make any. Melintus answered, make haste, and pronounce aloud
the verses I shall tell you in your ear, and say every one after me, which she
did thus with a very shrill voice:

Lover of Constancy undaunted,
Thou shall perceive thy griefs decay,
If thou return'st without delay
Where thy birth to thee was granted.
The poor man having heard this voice, and making no doubt but it was the
Sibyl's, fell down upon his knees, and cried out; Sacred Sibyl, I give thee
thanks for the pity thou have had of my miseries: I shall follow thy advice,
for thy holy voice has been ever true, and if by thy help my life shall
prove more fortunate, thou from that time shall be the only Divinity I will
adore. Only suffer me but this night to abide within thy grotte. I would be
glad to find a little sleep here, which I have always denied my self, and to
morrow will I begin my course to go seek out the effect of thy Oracle.

Melintus and Epicharis were pleased to see their device succeed so well: but
Palamede told them; If you desire he should perfectly believe this Oracle, he
must not hear us speak, nor find us in this place tomorrow. Epicharis said,
she was of opinion they were best go out, being not well resolved neither to
sleep in that den, and that she desired rather to pass away the night in the
shadow of some trees, where she should be less afraid. They took that
resolution, and when they were got out, sat them down under poplers, where
they tied their horses too. The next day Palamede went to the Port of Cajetta,
to see if some vessel were not to set sail, that might take them in for
Sicily: Melintus and Eurylas saw passing by them a very pale man, with a
wandering look; but yet that seemed of a good mine, and to have some
satisfaction in his mind; although the estate wherein he was did not promise
any great reason for it. He came toward them from the ^^otward, and they took
him to be the very same they had heard there, to whom Epicharis had given the
Oracle, that might be the occasion of his contentment. Eurylas had a good
mind, he would have stayed by them to have known his fortune: but he went
off, far away, when he perceived them, to avoid the encountering of mankind:
and though Eurylas called to speak with him, yet he still continued his way in
a very feeble pace. What would you learn, said Melintus to her, the world is
full of these Love-traverses; he is so eager to depart because of your Oracle,
that there is no likelihood he would stay his journey for us: and if he be
soundly in love, he will never tell you his fortune; for I judge of him by my
self, that in the like occasion would not publish my affairs to all I met.

Epicharis looking on Melintus, asked him, If you were in love, would you not
have a friend to be confident in? I never knew any yet, said Melintus, I durst
be assured of in so important a secret. And do you not think, answered she,
Palamede loves you enough, not to deceive you? I should do an injury, said he,
to doubt of it; but he might be deceived himself, and not thinking any thing,
discover that which I should have much ado to keep secret my self. And what
would you think of me, replies Epicharis, that I might be brought to reveal
any thing, if you had trusted me with a secret that was to be kept with
discretion? I confess to you, answered Melintus, that you are the only person
I dare be confident of, for a thing that were so dear to me. Let it not grieve
you then, said she, taking hold of his hand, that I am acquainted with the
whole secret of your life; but live most assured for all that, that I would
rather suffer death, than one word to be drawn from me of that you desire
should be concealed. And because thereupon he stood still in a great amazement,
she added; Melintus, I had not so freely spoken to you, but that I am resolved
to employ my life at your service: and I desire you to believe there is not a
man I honor so much as I do you, and that my mind shall never be contented,
unless yours be so too, since your interests so nearly concern those of my
Mistress. Melintus seeing how she knew so much as she did, said to her; Is it
possible, Epicharis, she should tell you any thing of this? for I believe you
have perceived nothing by me, not so much as from my eyes. Do not seek to
inform your self, said she, how I come to know it, let it suffice I am not
ignorant either what you are, or how virtuously you love her; and I have no
greater joy than when I hope my services may be of some use to you. Then is my
soul, answered Melintus, and my life in your hands: but I am not sorry for it,
assuring you that next unto her there is not a person I esteem as I do you,
nor of whom I desire more to be esteemed. Melintus, replide she, believe this,
the affections I have to you are not of the common sort; and if I do you no
extraordinary great services, the fault shall not be for want of employing all
the powers are in me. I well know, said he, what you are capable of, and I
shall think my self happy in this only, that your will is good. Palamedes
return brake off that discourse, who came to tell them there was never a Ship
in the harbor, and that there was none expected there; notwithstanding they
determined to continue in that desert place until there might some arrive.
About Noone Epicharis walking about, met with a little house that leaned
against the back of the mountain, whereinto entering, she found an old man
and his wife of the same years, that got their living by making certain
household commodities of wood, which they carried to sell at Cumae. After she
had inquired of their manner of life, she perceived they had two or three beds,
and asked them if they had any children. Presently the tears came into the
eyes of these good people, and Epicharis desirous to know the cause of their
displeasure; they told her they had lately but one daughter remaining alive,
whose husband dying a year ago, left her two children, and about a month
since having them in the wood with her, a shee-wolfe carried them away to be
devoured, after she had strangled the mother. Epicharis lamented with them
that accident, and to stay their weeping, gave them some money: then she asked
them if they would lend her the beds they had to spare for two or three days.
They offered her all their house, and Epicharis well content that she had
found out a lodging whilst they could depart, went to advertise Melintus and
Palamede of her adventure, and brought them to this poor house where they
accommodated themselves as well as they might. They lived on that they brought
day by day from Cumae; and one while Melintus, another while Palamede went a
horseback to the Port to see if there were any vessel come. They passed thus
eight or ten days with much incommodity and weariness: for this stay was very
grievous, and deferred great joys as well from them, as from those they
desired to deliver out of pain in Sicily.

One day as Palamede was at the Port of Cajette, he perceived a man a
horseback that looked upon him all astonished: he knew him to be Arcas, and
brought his horse close to his, to embrace him. The poor Arcas was so
confounded, that he durst not yet be sure it was Palamede; and said to him;
Alas! and is it you I am seeking for dead, and do I find you living? It Is not
a shadow, answered Palamede, thou see, but the good friend of thy Masters.
And what is become of him, replies Arcas? He is not very far from hence,
answers Palamede, and I long very much till he see thee. Arcas not able to
recollect himself out of his amazedness, Palamede prayed him to come away to
go to Melintus. The gods, saves Arcas, favor all your designs for the good
news you tell me: alas! does my Master then live still, and have the gods had
care of your innocence? I think the time long ere I see him and embrace his
knees, after so many fears and griefs that tormented me when I thought him
dead. They went on then in their way to go to Melintus; and in the mean time
Palamede knew that his father and his sister were happily arrived at Syracuse,
and had nothing else to trouble them, but the extreme displeasure for leaving
him in so great danger. But Arcas reserved the report of the voyage he had made
since their landing at Syracuse, where he had presently left them to return to
help his Master, if he might be so happy as to come to him in time. They went
in such haste, that they were soon come to the little house where Melintus and
Eurylas being at the door, and seeing a man coming with Palamede afar off,
knew not what to think: but when they saw 'twas Arcas, they went for joy to
meet him. He cast him down at his Masters feet, and embraced his legs,
without being able to take himself off. Alas! said he, my dear Master, do I
see you once again? Melintus stooped down also for to embrace him, and with
excess of contentment held his head with both his hands: at last he asked him
how they did at Syracuse. Very well, answered Arcas, and when they shall see
you again alive, they will do better yet: But, went he on with a great sigh,
how is it possible you escaped out of the Tower? By the assistance of this young
man, says Palamede, showing him Eurylas, to whom we are beholding for our
lives. Oh! said he regarding him, how he has gained him the gods and men for
his friends, by so happy an action. Eurylas laughed that Arcas should not yet
know him. Melintus and Palamede too admired his abuse; in the end Melintus
asked if he had never seen any thing that resembled Eurylas: No, says he, if
it were not Epicharis, and at the same time knew her, and went to salute her:
Then were they impatient to know what his fortune had been. As soon, says
he, as I arrived in the haven of Syracuse, I saw a ship that was departing for
Italy: and I entreated Aristides and Ariana to give leave that I might return
to succor you; which they were very willing to, and the same hour I
re-imbark'd, and in three days space with no good fortune landed at the Port
of Ostia: from thence finding this horse, I went till I came at Rome, following
the river; and at my first entrance saw much people running to see some strange
thing. I was then curious of news, and sought to learn what was become of
you; and hoping that some one amongst that confusion might tell me something
of you, I followed those that went in this haste: but I heard of them news
more unfortunate than I would have desired to know: for being upon the bank of
the Tyber, with the rest that ran thither, they told me that two Sicilians that
should have been condemned that very day by the Senate, had cast themselves
down into the river from the top of the Tower where they were kept prisoners.
Judge you what could become of me then; but when I was told your names, and
knew my misery to be certain, I cannot relate to you neither my complaints nor
my despaires: in the end I resolved with my self to give my assistance to some
that might search for the bodies in the bottom of the water, to give you
burial at the least: but all our labor being proved in vain, and thinking
that the stream had carried you away, I took in hand to follow the course of
the river, along which I wandered some days, to see if the water had not cast
you upon some shore.

I went then again to Ostia without hearing any news of that I desired, so as
despairing to find your bodies at all, I determined to return into Sicily,
always coasting along the Seashore, to see if peradventure you had not been
cast upon some bank. Pursuing this sad design, I arrived at Cajette, where I
found Palamede, whose happy encounter changed my woefulness into an excess of
contentment: But, continued he, may I not know how this handsome youth was so
happy as to save you? Then Palamede related to him all her pretty inventions to
get into the prison, and the strange fortunes of their coming out, which Arcas
listened to with much admiration. At last it was concluded they should stay no
longer in that place, but gain (along the Seaside) the Port of Reggium, where
they would not fail to find shipping; and when they had taken leave of their
hosts, and well rewarded them, they got up a horseback, and feared no more to
lodge in any houses, since Arcas had assured them there was no more search made
for them, but that they were thought to be dead.

The places they passed through were very troublesome; for coasting the Sea
they met with many mountains and valleys, and the greatest part of the ways
were of a tedious circuit. That was the cause they advanced so little,
considering the great desire they had to get out of Italy, especially Melintus,
who impatient of seeing Ariana again, cursed incessantly this length of a
voyage; and one day entertaining his thoughtfulness, upon that subject he made
these Verses:

Ways that have such fearful spaces,
Infinite Country, that surpasses
The tediousness of Lybique sand,
Too cruel Seas that compass me so sore,
Perplexed turnings; shall I find no end,
Going to see what I adore.
Mounts that present me with your heights,
Valleys that open to me your depths,
To make me in these Deserts dwell;
I would not, with desire that had no use,
Mount up to heaven, nor yet descend to hell,
But I would go to Syracuse.
Cupid upon thy wings me bear,
And so the truest Lover cheer
That e're thy pleasing fires did try.
I am not heavy now, being all but flame;
But ah! I fear he knows no more to fly,
Ere sinceinte my heart he came.
Thoughts that to her your course address,
Where is my spring of happiness,
And instantly return again;
Make at one blow to end my punishment,
And with like motion carry me amain,
To my sweet harbor of content.
But these ungrateful, that in absence
Know so well to prize their puissance,
Had rather here I should reside;
Being well avis'd that in that other place
My eyes will ever make them stand aside,
Of seeing her to have the grace.
Phoebus, whose fortune is extreme,
Now to behold what I esteem,
Cause me by thy power divine,
That I may see, by rare effect of Art,
This beauty in thee, as in a mirror shine,
Inspight of all things that us part.
But every thing is deaf to hear
My prayer; then on with our carriere,
The course to follow of our travels:
O gods! O heaven I alas, is it possible
That ye should make me sensible of evils,
And the world to mine insensible?
The continual entertainments of this troop were so delightful, that they
were sufficiently diverted; and had it not been for the extreme passion of
Melintus, that permitted him no contentment being absent from Ariana, the
gentle humor of Palamede and Eurylas had bin able to have dispelled his
sadness: and although he covered it, what he possibly could, yet he gave not
over pleasing himself with often retiring into his thoughts, and by the way of
purpose separated him from the company, now going before them, another while
leaving them some space before him; having nothing more dear than the
remembrance of Ariana's favors which he had received of her by sending him
Epicharis; and he took it for a good Augury that his Mistress had acquainted
her with his passion, and what he was, there being appearance that this
discourse was not made to his disadvantage. He accounted himself more happy
yet by much, for having this Wench so affectionate to serve him, since she was
so necessary to him, and promised himself at his return a great alteration in
his fortune, seeing so many things contribute to his contentment. If this
voyage had been yet far longer, such sweet entertainments as these would
pleasingly enough have busied him, finding so many causes to hope well; and
when he saw his mind in so happy a state, he thought well to leave it so, and
came with a cheerely look to join himself to the discourses of the rest,
which he ever gave rule to as he pleased, by virtue of the reasons his wit
furnished him withal. At last they arrived at Reggium, where they were not
long without finding a vessel, and going aboard it, in less than an hour
they lost sight of that land, where they had run so many fortunes, making a
thousand imprecations against it, and all of them taking an oath never to see
it more.

Being arrived at Messina, they kissed their native soil, and prayed it to be
more favorable to them: the next day they went away betimes, and in three
days journey came something near to Syracuse, but the night overtooke them:
and the day after passing by the house Dicearchus had in the Country, Palamede
demanded if they would rest them there, that he might again see the place
where he had spent so sweet hours with Epicharis. Melintus liked not that
motion, and said they were not to lose any time to go to Syracuse. They
continued their way, and came to a hill that was of a good height, with a wood
by it; and from thence they might begin to discover a plain they were to
descend to, and the City of Syracuse it self.

Melintus, who went some thirty paces before, perceived three men afoot, armed,
and masked, that made go along with much rudeness an old man with his eyes
muffled, and forced him to enter into that wood. He spurred his horse to see
what they would do with that man, and came near to them just as they were
going to kill him: suddenly he took his sword in his hand, and striking from
his horse him that went to give the blow, he overthrew him to the ground: the
two others set on him behind, but turning about toward them, with a reverse
blow he cleft the head of one of them, and laid him dead in the place. The
other came to him with a great deal of courage: but Melintus made no great
account of it, having but him to combat with, and gave him four or five sound
blows with his sword: in the mean time he that was overthrown had got up,
and had shrewdly troubled Melintus, but for Palamede, who having seen his
friend go galloping away, doubted some encounter, and had followed him. He
came in just as this last man was coming to Melintus, and made no great matter
to defeat him; for having brought him to the ground the second time, he trod
on him with his horse feet, and ran him in three or four places with his
sword, at the same time that his friend had made an end of killing the other.
Melintus presently alighted from his horse, and took off their vizors to see
if he might know them: and he was strangely astonished when he saw they were
Garamant and Toxaris their ancient enemies, whose treasons they had now
punished without thinking of them: then he went toward the old man that had a
venerable appearance, but was so out of all heart, expecting nothing but death,
that he thought not of unbinding his own eyes, though he were left alone to
himself. Melintus and Palamede undid the napkin that covered his face, and
were in a great amaze to see that it was Dicearchus, who dazeled with the light
he so suddenly beheld, and having still the image of death before his eyes,
said to them; Alas! will you have me see my self dye too? Nevertheless his
sight restoring him, he knew Melintus and Palamede, whom he thought dead;
which made him still more possessed with trouble: not well knowing whether he
himself had not been already killed, and were now with them in the Elizian
fields; or whether their souls were not come to succor him. And that which
caused in him those doubts, was, that they on their part were amazed too, and
spoke nothing: but at length Palamede said to him; Ah gods, my uncle, into what
hands were you fallen? Tell me rather, answers he, in what hands I am for the
present in: for I know not if I be among the dead or the living. We are not
dead, says Melintus, the gods have preserved our lives to save yours this day;
and I admire my good fortune for coming so timely in, when they were going to
strike a dagger into your bosom. Was it you then, replied Dicearchus, that
hindered that misfortune? May the gods render you this benefit: but I know not,
but you may also succor my niece Ariana, who is within this valley in the
hands of above twenty soldiers, with Ericine your sister. Let us go, cried
out Melintus, and keep them from having any violence offered them, and he
would have parted that instant, but that Dicearchus said to him, Stay a while
that we may advise what is to be done: I am certain they will do them no
harm, because they stay for the return of these you have slain; and then I
shall have leisure to tell you the occasion of what is happened, to the end we
may take counsel together: then they were silent, and he goes on: You must
know that this man, showing Garamant, seeing how Ariana my niece had a great
estate, forbeing left sole inheritrix of Aristides and me, by the death of
Palamede which was thought most certain, was so insolent as to make her be
demanded in marriage by this other called Toxaris, and who at the same time
made himself in love with Ericine your sister, said he to Melintus. I excused
me the fairest way I could: but they attributing this refuse to contempt, made
me at length be threatened, that they would be revenged for this; and they had
such despite at it, that this day, to cut you short, having known how I was
to go to my Country house with my niece, and Ericine that accompanied her,
they waylaid us at this vale, where having stayed the Charet we were in, they
made me come down with a great deal of insolence, and were resolved to come
to cut my throat in this wood; because, said they, I did always seek to
revenge me of them, and that if they would live at their case, I was to be
taken out of the world. In this design they gave charge to the other soldiers
of their company to attend them, and keep Ariana and Ericine well, till they
should be come back from hence; let us therefore see for the present what we
have to do: for albeit your valor be great, 'twill be a difficult matter to
go set upon so many men. It is no matter, says Palamede, I hope we shall
amaze them, considering they have no more Commanders. I am thinking, replies
Melintus, on some other thing that will not be much amiss: Let us put on the
coats of Arms of these dead men, and take their vizors, and their false hair,
and then go to find them out, they being never able to doubt we be other than
Toxaris and Garamant whom they stay for, and so mingling our selves among them,
we shall have killed a number of them, before ever they be perceived what we
are.

Palamede found this invention to be very good, Dicearchus approved it too, and
Arcas being then arrived, Melintus bade him put upon him one of those Coats of
Arms, as well as Palamede and he would do, to go execute that they had
resolved on, whilst Dicearchus and Eurylas in the mean time looked to their
horses.

Thus they dressed them all three in haste, and took the Masks and Perruques,
and forgot not so much as the buskins: then Dicearchus wishing them good
fortune, let them depart, and went with Eurylas to put himself into a place
whence they might perceive all that happened, and never be seen. Melintus being
in the midway of the descent to the vale, made a stand, and said to Palamede,
I would never have thought of seeking any other means but force against those
we are going to, if that in abandoning our own, we endangered not also the
lives of our sisters, and their honor beside, which is more dear to them. I
am of opinion therefore, that in consideration of them we let our valor
altogether alone, and save them by a way more gentle, and infallible. They we
go to seek will never imagine we be other than their Captains, and so we
may command them what we please; and I would advise, that coming near the
Chariot we have our naked swords in our hand, bloody as they be, as if we came
from killing of Dicearchus; and then putting them up into the scabberd, we may
make sign to the soldiers to attend us again there; then we will take, you,
said he to Palamede, Erycine, because you are in the habit of Toxaris that
would have taken her away; and I Ariana, because I am dressed like Garamant. We
will make as if we would carry them away into this same wood, not to defer
our contentment any longer, leaving the soldiers in the same place still, and
then come with them to find out Dicearchus and Eurylas; we shall have means
good enough to save our selves by riding upon our horses to Dicearchus house,
before ever they suspect any plot. This crafty device is very fine, says
Palamede, and if my sister and Erycine make any resistance, we need but tell
them in their ear who we are. Nay contrary, said Melintus, we are to let them
torment us, to make the feigning seem the better. That being approved, they
came down the hill, and approached with assurance to these soldiers, who at
their arrive separated, and made them way to pass to the Chariot. Melintus
seized upon Ariana, and Palamede upon Erycine, and they spoke aloud in a
counterfeit voice like that comes out of a vizard: We will no longer defer
satisfying us, since the means is now in our own hands; this next wood is
very commodious for such an occasion. Ariana fell to crying out and shriekings,
but Melintus took her by force, after he had made a sign to the soldiers to
wait for them at the same place: but she in striving did what she could to
tear his very face, and outraged him as much as her forces would give her
leave: then seeing that he held her hands in such sort, as she could neither
defend her self any more, nor offend him: Ah cruel wretch, said she, art thou
not content to have killed my uncle, but thou must desire to take from me also
that by force, which I cannot lose without my life? kill me, barbarous man, so
shall not I much outlive my honor, nor thou long time enjoy the fruits of thy
insolence. Erycine on the other side was carried away by Palamede: but her soft
nature permitted her nothing but weeping and crying; and Arcas followed helping
them, and forbidding the Soldiers, that would have done that office, to stir
from thence. When they were half way up the hill, Melintus stayed him to take
breath, and Ariana recollected new forces for to vex him, and hinder his
getting up to the top: but Melintus rendering all her striving useless, she
could not contain her self from crying out; Ah poor Melintus, where art thou
now? If thou were alive, thou would not have failed to be here at my rescue,
or else not much survived my disaster; but it shall not be long ere I come to
thee, if not with a pure body, at least with a soul unspotted; and thou,
infamous goat, assure thy self that the gods will revenge me, and not suffer
thy fury to go unpunished. How sweet were all these speeches to Melintus?
Never were injuries nor outrages so well received. By this time he had got to
the height of the mountain, where Dicearchus came running; and Melintus having
set her upon her feet, took off his masque, and let her see him.

Arian's astonishment were hard to be described, one while looking upon
Dicearchus, another while on Melintus, two persons she thought to have bin
dead, and not well knowing whether she might think her self in safety, or
else in the hands of some spirits that had taken those shapes to abuse her, she
waver'd betwixt joy and fear. Dicearchus said to her, Make no doubt, niece, of
what you see: here are Melintus and Palamede whom you thought dead, that have
this day preserved my life and your honor. Ariana at that news was taken with
such an excess of joy and amazement, that she lost that little strength was
left her, after all her strivings: she let her self go into Melintus arms,
and fell lightly upon the grass: then with a soft voice she said to him; Ha
Melintus, is it you indeed I see, or your demon that takes care of me even
after your death? Madam, answered Melintus, assure your self that I am yet
alive to serve you; but we are not to make any longer stay here, if you desire
to secure you from the hands of these villains. Ariana seeing Palamede that
held Erycine, called him, and said, My dear brother, if you desire I should
not doubt of the good fortune they would persuade me into, do but so much as
come hither that I may embrace you. Then Palamede came to her; and Dicearchus
seeing their kindnesses last too long, put Melintus in mind of getting a
horseback, and that he would take Erycine with him. As for him he mounted
upon Arcas his horse, Palamede made Ariana resolve to be gone from that place,
and to be set upon the same horse with him, and Arcas got up behind Eurylas.

They determined to pace away, without any great precipitation, but in case
they were pursued, and get to Dicearchus house, the nearest place they could be
safe in. Palamede asked his sister if she knew that handsome youth with Arcas.
I know very well, says she, that it is my dear Epicharis: but I dare not
before my uncle express to her the joy I have to see her: I doubt not but she
has assisted you very carefully. Alas sister, answered Palamede, but for her
we had been now dead men, and that by a shameful death too. How so, replied
she? you may tell me by the way as we go in what manner you were preserved:
for every one believes here, you cast your selves down the Tower. They believe
this too at Rome, says he to her, and I shall make you a relation of our
happy, or rather miraculous getting out: but first tell me why you are thus all
in mourning clothes? Alas brother, answered she, the tears coming into her
eyes, must I needs, for the succors I have received of you to day, give you so
sad news? Sister, replide he, how I am in fear for my father, upon the report
of my death. Your fears, said she to him, are to be turned into assurances:
for he was not able to resist the displeasures he felt for the news of your
misfortune, being chiefly perplexed with the sorrow for having left you, and
calling himself author of your death, since he had abandoned you. Then was
some time spent in tears, after which they told by course all that had
befallen them, while they had been absent from one another. Melintus
entertaind Erycine too that was rapt for joy to see this brother she honored
so much; and he learned of her what had passed at Syracuse, after he had let
her know in a few words how he had been saved. And Arcas gave Dicearchus a
part of their adventures, as he went by his side, and thus they arrived at his
house, where seeing themselves safe, their spirits were entirely sensible of
joy, being no longer distressed with any fears. Melintus advised that the
Ladies should rest them whilst they in the mean time took order to go
charge those Soldiers that remained, to get the baggage out of their hands.
Dicearchus would by no means they should put themselves into that danger: for
that the men were not worth their pains, the Chiefes being slain, and the
booty they had, was but a small matter. Notwithstanding Melintus changed not
his resolution, and hiding his purpose from Dicearchus, assembled, together
with Palamede, some Boores of the Country whom he made take Arms; and taking
on him to be their Captain, led them on to go find those Soldiers, where of
some of them, being impatient for that their men stayed so long in the wood,
had gone to see what they did there, and having found them dead, they came
back again to advertise their companions of it, just when they were assaulted
by Melintus and Palamede: some of them were slain, and they carried away five
or six prisoners in the very Chariot, and returned to Dicearchus, who received
them as coming in triumph, with their captives drawn in their train. Ariana
and Erycine rose from their bed to see what it was entered; and seeing out at
the windows Melintus and Palamede in the head of that Equipage, they admired
their courage for not enduring that any thing of theirs should remain in the
hands of those soldiers: and the prisoners were surely guarded, to be carried
to Syracuse as soon as they returned thither.

Dicearchus acknowledging the obligation he had to Melintus, took him aside,
and demanded of him if he could desire nothing of him in recompense of the life
he was indebted to him for. I have done nothing, answered Melintus, but what I
was obliged to: but yet I will not dis-esteeme what it pleases you to make me
offer of; and I ask you no other favor, but that you will never wish me any
ill, whatever heart-burning you have had against my father. I confess to you,
answered Dicearchus, somewhat ashamed, that we have heretofore had some
difference, Telephus and I, by reason we were both of a contrary faction: but
for the present, things are well changed; and I am so far from having a
desire to wish you any ill, as I promise to employ that you have preserved to
me in your service, to the uttermost of my power. I beseech you, replide
Melintus, to take an oath of this in the hands of Palamede. That will I surely,
answers Dicearchus; and having called him, Melintus says to him; Dicearchus
will do me the grace to promise me, that he shall never bear any ill will to
me, whatever he has had to my father. I wonder, replies Dicearchus, you will
make any doubt of this, after the extreme obligation I have to you: but since
you are so desirous, I take an oath hereof between my Nephew's hands, and pray
the gods to punish me, if I ever fail of that I swear to. Palamede added,
Melintus may be well assured of that you promise him; for it is impossible you
should ever wish me any good without loving him too, seeing I will never have
any good without him; and he has too much merit to be refused good will. After
these common assurances of friendship, Dicearchus led them into his Neeces
chamber; where entering in first upon the sudden, he was strangely affected to
find a young man upon her bed that embraced her, and seeing him, presently came
down off her bed, and go his way toward the bed Erycine was in. Dicearchus
said to Ariana; Ha! what is this, my niece, is it possible this that I have
seen? Ariana smiled, but yet ashamed, as this young youth was also. Dicearchus
wondering why they should laugh so, replide, What Is the matter, Niece? Where is
become of this honor, and this virtue? What, uncle, said she to take away his
error, you know not Epicharis then; (for it was she still disguised that
embraced her dear Mistress, who could not be satisfied with the kindnesses
she expressed to her, for the agreeable services she had done her;) And now
Dicearchus regarding her, was himself ashamed that he had accused them, and
said that another would have been deceived as well as he. After rejoicing to
see her again, and learning some of their fortunes, he inquired of Ariana how
she did with her weariness, and after the fright she had been in; she
assured him that her brothers return had cured all her distempers. Well, says
he, I will leave you with this good brother of yours, and Melintus with Erycine
(that was in a bed on the other side) for it is no small matter you have to tell
one another, and the same time went his way out. Palamede told his sister, We
have had leisure enough of discoursing together by the way as we came, and for
my part I find these entertainments of sisters but cold ceremonies: It were
better we separated, and so went away from her to cast himself upon Erycine's
bed, leaving Melintus with his sister. Ariana to be even with him, said,
Brother, I admire your humor to be so soon comforted for what you have heard:
that remembrance all on the sudden abated his courage, and stayed the liberties
he began to take with Erycine and Epicharis, who had much ado to defend
themselves from him. Melintus taking that occasion, said to Ariana; Madam, I
understood this loss with a great deal of sorrow, you being so sensible of it
your self. I ought not, says she, to have bin exempt from miseries, while you
and my brother were so cruelly persecuted by fortune: but I swear to you, I
was sufficiently tormented with the fears I had for you two, though this
accident had not befallen me. I do not think my eyes were ever dry since I
left you; you see a face that sufficiently shows the part it has taken in the
vexations of my soul: and do but consider a little to what I was reduced,
when by your hands I was delivered, and what thoughts I could have being in the
hands of those robbers. After losing of a brother as I believed, whose death
was followed with my fathers, I saw they were gone to cut my uncle's throat,
the only support I had left me, and my self forsaken of all, and condemned to
suffer the rage of those hangmen, without your rescue, whom I am beholding to
for, what I have most dear in the world. Madam, answered Melintus, we were
first indebted to you for our life and honor, and you secured both to us by
means of Epicharis whom you sent us; if since we have assisted you, you are
wholly to thank your self for your deliverance: but I know not how you should
ever pardon me for the fears I put you in, going to force you away from among
those Soldiers. But rather, replide she, how will you pardon me the blows I
gave you, for so I paid you for all the pains you had taken to save me. Ah,
Madam, answered he, how pleasing were those blows to me, but may I dare to
remember you of one you called upon to help you? Ariana blushed, and told him
a little after, I remember it well enough, and give you leave to take those
words I spoke, as much for your advantage as you please. Melintus taking her
hand in excess of joy, pursues: Upon this assurance, Madam, may I from
henceforth without offense tell you my thoughts? He spoke these words in a
voice so trembling, and with a face so pale, that Ariana well perceived the
extreme respect he bare her, and the fear he had to tell her of any thing
might displease her: but to encourage him, she answered; Melintus, I have
sufficiently made trial of your friendship by your discretion; I will not have
you spend so much as one word to assure me any more of it. He was so ravished,
that bowing him, and putting his mouth to the fair hand he held, he was some
time in this posture, without any speaking, so transported was he with
contentment. Ariana was very glad to see him so seized: but at last he lift up
himself, and said to her; What will you think of me, Madam, to see me silent
after such a favor? and indeed so great it is, that there are not words to
express to you, neither the excess of my joy, nor how much I am to rest your
servant. Ariana answers him, If we measure the obligations, without doubt those
I have to you are far the greater: but you are to be satisfied with me,
seeing that to acquit myself I give you my soul, which is all I am. Your
soul, Madam, replies Melintus, may I be so bold to believe these advantageous
words? but why should I not believe them, since they come from your mouth that
cannot be but true? Will this fair soul then give it self to me, for to
animate a body so unworthy of it? and will you indeed receive mine in place of
it? Melintus, said Ariana, I do not mean so, this exchange would be too
prejudicious for you: but at the least I give you a part of my soul, which is
my will, and I must have you dispose of it from henceforth, in exchange of
yours, which I am sure is in my possession.

Melintus was so rapt for these dear engagements, that the commotions of his
heart disturbed his mind, and stopped the freedom of his thoughts; and the
knowledge of that disorder gave Ariana a greater assurance of his joy and
passion, than a thousand words could have done. In the end he replies, It is
impossible, Madam, I should express to you how dear these favors are to my
soul: for the more I resent them, the less am I able to tell you: but it
suffices you to know the greatness of my affection, by being assured how they
replenish me with joy, and you shall see with what submission I receive them,
by the inviolable respect that shall always accompany me in your presence; and
when I have declared what I am, I will incessantly call to my remembrance the
estate wherein I was when you were so favorable to me. Melintus, says Ariana
interrupting him, this declaration is the business you are to think upon at
this time: and I would advise you to make your self known to my brother: you
are not to defer it any longer, if you think it fit to be done: and then we
may consult together concerning the ways we are to take, for since the death
of my father, there is come from Corinth, Pisistratus, son of Calistenes, who
was uncle to Acidalia, by whose only means my uncle married her, after a suit
of many years lasting. This Pisistratus drawn hither rather by the reputation
of some estate, than of any beauty he says is in me, has brought letters from
his father to Dicearchus, wherein he desires him to do the like in his sons
behalf with me, that he had heretofore done for him with his Niece Acidalia.

Pisistratus relying upon that favor, thinks not he has made an unprofitable
voyage; but that with the duties he renders my uncle, and the affection he
expresses to me, he shall presently marry me, and carry me away to Corinth in
the same ship that brought him hither, which still attends him for this
purpose. On the other side, Diocles seeks my uncle more than ever, and he
entertaines them both with hope, not knowing what to resolve on: for although
he has great obligations to Calisthenes, he is not willing for all that to
have me so far from him, by giving me to Pisistratus: and again, seeing him
to have such fair possessions, and coming of a far more illustrious house
than Amyntas, he cannot find in his heart to refuse him. Upon these
uncertainties, it were good you first declared your birth, and after that, your
suit. Madam, replied Melintus, you do me a very great favor to instruct me of
all these things; and I am very glad your counsel is correspondent to the
design I had; but yet I would have wished that it had not prevented the
permission I had desired of you to make this declaration. I hope, it will be
well received; for the Syracusians have cause to love me, and Dicearchus is
obliged to me by oath never to wish me ill for my fathers sake. The life, says
Ariana, you saved him, ought much more to oblige him to that, and I have reason
to take this ill, because all that we shall resolve on from henceforth to your
benefit, will rather be thought duty and acknowledgement, than affection. I
shall ever take it for pure grace, replies Melintus; for scarcely could all my
services together pretend to hope for so much as one of those words you favor
me with.

This agreeable conversation ended at the arrive of Dicearchus, that came to
take Melintus, and to show him, with his Nephew, the beauties of his house,
before the night obscured them: and it was rare indeed for the wonders of it;
but yet more recommendable for the antiquity: for they took it to be the very
same house that the Syracusians made present of to Timoleon, to stay him
amongst them with his wife and children, which he had brought from Corinth; and
which he received at their hands for to enjoy, himself, the rest of his days
the peace and liberty that he had purchased to all Sicily: and for marks of
this antiquity had Dicearchus left in a place out of the way, some ruins which
he brought Melintus to see, where there were besides entire columns of that
same fair Corynthian work: but some years ago he had himself made that
house the fairest that was in all Sicily: for beside the richesse of the
buildings, the beautifulness of the gardens and walks was so delightful, for
the quantity of fountains and channels, that Melintus never left admiring that
delicate place, and failed not to observe whatever was most esteemeable to
please Dicearchus: yet he could not but admire above all things the rarities of
a great Park, where, reserving only that the allies were made by Art, nature
appeared in her pure richesse. The fountains that sprang out in many places,
the little rivolets that came of them, and the fair meadows they watered,
flattered Melintus's humor in such sort, that Dicearchus perceived well
enough, how in that place he had given over compleasance, to make a true
estimate of what he liked best. Palamede having advertised him to leave
Melintus there, for that he loved nothing so much, as to lose himself in so
delightful solitudes, by little and little they went away from him, as if they
had had something to say together; and Melintus making as though he favored
their entertainment, out of discretion, withdrew himself from them with much
joy, for to converse with his thoughts in that happy condition he was in.

As soon as he had lost sight of them, he chose a fit place to repose in, and
laid him down upon the grass near a Fountain that pleased him, and there
his mind represented his fortune to him in the highest and sweetest point a
Lover could possibly have desired it. His heart wanted place to contain all
the joys that assembled there. Ariana's gracious words too, came to strike his
ears with so melodious a sweetness, that there is no harmony able to cause so
much ravishment. This charm reduced his passion to that contentment, brought
his hopes to that height, and placed his soul in a heaven of such divine
pleasures, that he was even ready to expire in this pleasing ecstasy. In the
end, retiring him out of this abyss of joys, to consider his good fortunes
particularly, he forgot not one of them, that he might be the more sensible how
many sorts of happiness accompanied him; and after he had a long time
entertained so dear imaginations, he employed the time that remained in making
these verses:

YOu dear delights unto my heart,
Hopes only friends of my desire,
That flatter with so sweet a quire
The ardour of my happy smart;
You agreeable forerunners
Of that good, which made my horrors
Be accused of perseverance;
Refuse me not your blandishment,
Or be changed to assurance,
If you will suddenly be spent.
Alas! I scarce have faith to spare
For my felicity of Fate:
O heaven! what pleasures me translate?
What fortune may with this compare?
Her eyes that pity would not move,
Now change into regards of love
Their severer influences,
And henceforth freely them disarme
Of their sharper inclemences,
To wound me gently without harm.
That front whose sacred Majesty
Such terror struck into my face,
Becomes more mild, and there does place
In stead of fear, security.
Her soul, that better to admire
It self, had seemed to retire
In a rampart inaccessible,
To render her will now dispense,
In those forts no more invincible
To my respectfull violence.
The sweet and perfect harmony
That our wills now equalizeth,
Both of time and chance despises
The proud-disdainfull tyranny.
Her heart for chaste love excelling
In me chooses out her dwelling,
My wishes more to favourize;
And renders mine too-well apayd,
If heaven be pleased to authorize
The present which to me she made.
Ye verdant meadows and clear springs,
Ye sweet-murmuring rivolets,
How may a Lover when he sets
By you, enjoy his wanderings:
But fare-ye-well, I must away,
To follow the declining day.
Hours, that endure as long as days,
Daughters of aged Time, make haste,
And days that have whole years delays,
Bring me my happiness to taste.
Melintus having finished those verses, quitted the place he was in, to
return to them he had left, whom he found in a great plain Court, waiting to
carry him to supper. Ariana and Erycine rose to keep them company, being but
simply dressed, and yet this negligence of their dressing was to their advantage.
The more cause Melintus had to approach to Ariana, to enjoy the perfect union
they had made, the less dared he; scarce giving his eyes leave to look often
upon her: nevertheless he knew well enough how to govern his discretion, not
to make his constraint appear, nor too much affect dissimulation. The whole
course of their adventures furnished them with entertainment enough during
supper-time, and after they were rose from Table; Dicearchus who began to
admire the wit of Melintus, and could never hear him speak enough, took him
from the company to entertain him; and willing to know if he were as well
capable to manage public affairs, as to treat of any other discourse he
appeared so able in, he turned warily all he had to say upon that subject: but
Melintus seemed to be practiced all his life long in no other thing, and not
only satisfied Dicearchus in what he demanded of him, but upon every
proposition too, added so rare considerations as he had never heard the like,
that he was forced to avow, that so able a Genius deserved more than a public
government, and seemed to be borne to sustain a Crown and Scepter. In the end
they all parted to go to bed; and the Ladies being retired, Melintus was
brought to a Chamber richly furnished. He asked Dicearchus if it were that
Palamede ordinarily lay in, because they had sworn never to lie from one
another, when they should be in the same place. After some Civilities,
Dicearchus left them to their liberty: then being together, and in bed; when
they were alone, Melintus continued a while without speaking any thing, and a
little after came to embrace Palamede, and told him: It is time, dear friend,
you should know the secret of my life, which you have hitherto been ignorant
of. Is It possible, says Palamede, that you have concealed any thing from me?
You will confess, replide Melintus, that I was bound to conceal it from you,
and will not be offended thereat, when you shall know that the excess of the
affection you bear me, obliged me to it. My dear Melintus, answers Palamede,
haste you then to tell it me, and assure your self, that when I shall be able
to do you service, I will not think upon reproaching you. Then Melintus
declared to him all the manner of his birth; to which Palamede harkened with so
much contentment, that he would not so well have resented the like good
fortune, had it happened to himself. He ceased not admiring at a fortune so
unordinary, and doubted not, but that Diocles would be convinced by those
means they were prepared of: that if there were, at last, need of violence, he
was not a man to make resistance against them. This is it, replide Melintus,
that kept me from discovering me until now to you, for the friendship you have
to me would have prevailed with you to make this appearance, before, it may be,
there were cause for it; and now is the fittest time by far, you will
confess. Melintus went through with all that discourse assuredly enough: but
when he was purposed to discover to him the affection he had for his sister, he
scarce dared to pronounce the fair name of Ariana. Palamede, after some words,
knowing from whence that difficulty of speech proceeded, would encourage him,
and said; My dear Melintus, it is not necessary you tell me that I know as
well as you; and you have heard from my self, how greatly I desire that
happiness, as well for my own contentment, as yours: if I could bind me to
you by an alliance yet more straight, I would seek it, so fearful am I that
we are not yet sufficiently united: give leave therefore that from this very
hour the name of brother be common to us: we are already brothers in wills, and
I hope we shall be so in effect very shortly. I make no doubt but my sister
acknowledges your deservings, and acknowledging them, loves you, besides the
obligations she has to you; and for my uncle, he but now made me a discourse,
when we left you there in the Park, that showed plainly how his design might
easily correspond with ours. Oblige me, said Melintus, and tell me what he
thinks of me: You would not believe, replies Palamede, how much the assistance
he received of you this day has wrought upon him, and he desires nothing more,
than to render you one day, if it be possible, as great a pleasure. The
occasion, says Melintus, interrupting him, offers it self: for he may in like
manner oblige me for my life. He is not far off this, answered Palamede,
because having no greater intention than this, which is to maintain the
authority he has in Syracuse, he told me, that although Telephus had not been
his friend, he saw none so fit as you, whereupon to stay the credit and esteem
we might keep there: for the peoples love was already set upon you, and that we
had a fair means to bind us for ever to you, by a person whom it seems you
have fairly won, going to take her out of those Soldiers hands; and that he
believed too she would not make resistance to this, because certain words
escaped her, when she knew you, that gave him cause to think she hated you
not, and that you were also in love with her. That he was very glad he was no
further engaged with Diocles, nor with Pisistratus of Corinth, who is come
hither drawn by my sisters reputation; and for that he found himself still at
liberty to deliberate upon our good fortune and yours, which he would seek as
much as in him lay, in satisfaction of what he owes you.

There wanted but little to have this discourse as pleasing to Melintus, as the
entertainment he had with Ariana her self: in the end he knew, how there
remained no other doubt in Dicearchus mind, but the difficulty of his estate,
which was not so great as Ariana's: but Palamede added, that the news he was
to bring him, would soon clear every thing that might hinder their common
contentment. Melintus esteemed himself very happy in the opinion Dicearchus
had conceived of him; and after they had passed a great part of the night in so
dear discoursing as this, they fell both asleep, and waked not until it was
something at the latest.

But whereas they spent the beginning of the night in their entertainment,
Ariana, and Erycine that lay together, gave the end of it to theirs: they began
to speak as soon as they waked, which was before day; and when that appeared,
Erycine perceived Ariana had put the sheet from off her because of the heat,
and saw hereby so many wonders, that she could not contain her self from
saying; Who shall that happy man be, that shall one day enjoy all those
beauties? Ariana smiling, answered her, It may be a person you have some
interest in. Erycine blushed, thinking she meant it by Amyntas, whom she was in
love with, and who loved her too; and because she would seem crafty, told her;
I have no interest in those that have none in me. Ariana knowing her mistake,
replied; And of whom, think you, do I mean to speak? Of Amyntas, replied
she, because you have heard say that he loved me. Assure thy self, dear
Erycine, says Ariana, that I am very far from thinking of him: he is a man I
never spoke to, and whom I will not know whilst I live. And yet, answered
Erycine, but a while since, 'twas thought your marriage was resolved on. Never,
replide Ariana, came it to that point yet; for I take not my resolutions on
that fashion, and though I should have consented to it, the return of my
brother and yours gives me other thoughts for the present. But, went she on,
how could Amyntas endure the search of me, after he had loved you? Whence came
that coldness? Was it on your part, or on his? On neither, answered Erycine,
and if you will assure me never to marry Amyntas, I shall not fail to tell
you all that passed between us. I may well swear that to you, replide Ariana,
and if you have any design one to the other, be certain that I will not be
the cause of our being all three unfortunate: but you shall do me a great
pleasure, to learn me something of your life; and I pray therein spend the
time that is left us, before we are to rise. This assurance, said Erycine, and
your friendship, obliges me to conceal nothing from you: then she began her
story thus.

History of Amyntas and Erycine.
THe affections that are bred with us, and which we have as it were sucked in
with our milk, are turned into so powerful habits, and take so deep rooting,
that they are not to be plucked up but with violences that are as so many
deadly blows; and I rather believe the impossibility of ridding ones self of
them; because the passion that finds it self grown before the birth of
reason, knows its own strength, when reason begins but to appear, and so
always masters it not only as the first borne, but as superior. I confess
to you this is the reason why I have suffered so many troubles with a
pertinacious constancy, in spite of the crosses which Amyntas and my affection
have met with, and to tell you their beginning, I must of necessity tell you
the beginning of my life too.

Since the birth of my brother Melintus, Hyperia my mother had been many times
great with child, but she could never be delivered of any alive; until at
last having made some vows to Lucina, she was brought to bed of me. This was
a very great joy to the house; and Diocles, the chief friend my father
Telephus had, came to congratulate with him, and brought his son Amyntas too,
that was then but five or six years old: they told him jestingly, I should be
his Mistress, whereto he agreed, and asked to kiss me. I believe that he
could then make me no very eloquent offer of service; neither did I give him
any great cause to love me, being but a disagreeable Mistress, and very
troublesome, that had nothing but cries to entertain him. His father
instructed him in the duties he was to render me, and sometimes laughed with
Telephus at the fashion he took them in hand; every morning he sent first to
hear from me, and after came himself to seem, and kissed my hand: one while he
brought me a posie, another time a colored feather, that they pinned on my
head, in hope that one day I would give him some of my favors to wear in that
fashion. When I began to speak, he expressed much contentment, having no more a
mute to entertain; and seeing how that which he loved began to be informed
with a soul, he seemed to augment his affection at it: In like manner finding
him compleasant in every thing I desired, I had a friendship to him; for
children are pleased with those that contradict them not. We had a thousand
sorts of plays, where I was the Mistress, and he the servant: I commanded him
with gentleness, he obeyed me with joy, and so the tenderest of our years
passed away in many innocent recreations. I cannot repeat to you all our
childish discourses; but when he came to be seventeene or eighteen year old,
that age, that is accustomed to change all things, had not this power over him:
for in stead of diminishing by degrees this affection that had taken no
foundation, use served him for matter of love, and made him pursue his design
of loving me. For my part, coming to a little more understanding, I perceived
how these little liberties were not very honest, and would retire me from him.
He was not overmuch troubled at this, for he is of an humor, not to afflict
himself; and to be moved at nothing, as you shall see by that which follows,
and only said one day to me; It seems, my fair Mistress, you love your
servant no more. I had at that time judgment enough to answer him: I pray you
leave these names that are no more fit for me, than for you. He, without
accusing me of change, or going to complaints, told me; It Is now impossible we
should lose these qualities, since I have neither will nor power to do it. If
it be not possible to you, said I to him, it is very possible to me; and from
this time I will quit the name of your Mistress. That, answered he, depends
not on you. On whom then, replide I? On me, pursued he; for I remaining always
your servant, you must of necessity continue my Mistress. What, though I
forbid you, replied I. You pretend then, answered he, some power over me, and
in that respect your self agrees to be my Mistress. You may interpret, said
I, my words as you please; but I will not have you use me any more in this
fashion. Since you permit me, answered he, to give what sense I would to your
words: I will have them signify that you love me, but that you are not
desirous at all to make it appear. Look you, replide I, I loved you, being a
child; but things are changed. I do not complain at this change, answered
he, for in that first age you said before all the world that you loved me, and
it was nothing so; and now you will love me indeed, and say nothing. Flatter
your self as much as you please, said I, but for me I know well what I am
resolved on: so I left him, and went to join me with the other Maids, to avoid
his returns, for my young age furnished me not with reasons strong enough to
vanquish him; and my weakness emboldned him the more.

Some time after Diocles, who had by little and little enriched himself
without noise, was declared possessor of the great estate he had acquired; and
Amyntas thinking nothing could be refused him with the advantages he had,
seemed more than ever, assured of my affection. I believed, my honor obliged
me to express more coldness to him still, for fear it might be thought that
I made much of him for his riches; in such a fashion, that I altogether
withdrew me from him, and would not suffer him to speak to me in particular. I
think he perceived my cunning well enough, for without being amazed at my
resolution, he would needs write to me. One day he came to see me, when I was
in company, I know not what shift he made to put a Letter into my pocket, and
when he was gone his way. I put my hand by chance into it, and was strangely
taken, finding this writing that was not to have been there. Nevertheless I
dissembled what had befallen me, and having impatience till I were alone to see
what it was, went out, and finding a letter I opened it, and saw that it was
thus:

Amyntas to Erycine.
IF I found my self faulty, I should not be so bold to demand of you a reason
for your severities; but having always served you with fidelity, I dare be
bold to say that it is impossible you should wish me ill, whatever disguise you
put on. It may be you would make trial of me: but if you have a design to
receive my service after a great deal of time and pains, I pray you do it
for the present, and deliver us both of the cares and vexations you are
preparing us. I aspire not to that sad glory of knowing how to suffer well; and
when I shall have endured your cruellest torments, you would in the end be
obliged to relent. Do that now for affection, which you would then do for
justice, and making me so happy, you shall force me to serve you also for
justice, which I did not before, but for affection.


I blamed him a little to my self, for taking the boldness to write to me,
and for the liberties he used in his letter: but yet this humor of turning
thus all things to his advantage, was not disagreeable to me: sometimes I
accused my own facility that was the cause he could not think me so ill, as I
seemed: on the other side I was very glad that he gave not back for those
feined rigours, because I did but what I ought to do, and that made him never
the farther from loving me. At that time I gained also the affection of
Misander, if I may so call the desire he expressed to see and speak with me: fot
doubtless you will laugh at the humor of that man. I have heard say,
interrupted Ariana, that he is of Reggium, and comes often to Syracuse, but
that he is very melancholicke. It is impossible, replide Erycine, you should
imagine to what degree he is so. He came one day to see me in the company of
Amyntas that was his friend, at that time Hyperia my mother was very sick, and
in danger to dye: my affliction which he found to have some sympathy with his
sad humor, caused, as I believe, the good will he had to me. His discourses
were to make me see, that I had cause rather to be afflicted than comforted,
his wit affording him no reasons for to vanquish my griefs: and after he had
employed some words to express the part he took in my sorrow, he thought he
had sufficiently declared his affection to me; since it may be I was the first
he had obliged by that compleasance. Thinking therefore he had got familiarity
enough with me by this first encounter, he came to revisit me, when my mother
was in better health, and I rejoiced at her recovery: my jollity truly made not
his affection dye, which my sadness had produced; but standing mute to all the
discourses wherein I expressed a satisfaction in him, he would peradventure
have had me believed that his silence proceeded from love; and some days
after, seeing me to receive him with a great deal of kindness, as I am
accustomed to use all that come to see me, he took the liberty to complain of
me, and would have me think that I dealt unjustly with him not to acknowledge
the affection he bare me, although he had made none at all appear to me,
whether by discourse, or any other way. For my part having no cause to satisfy
him, it was no difficult matter to me to keep him in that plaintive humor;
and every time he saw me, he seemed to have obtained what he desired; for when
I used him with harshnesse, or contempt, he set himself to discourse, that he
was the most miserable of men; that those women that had a sweetness for all
other, had nothing for him but disdaines; that his encountering was so
unfortunate, that at the same instant he appeared, he inspired refuses, and
rude usage, into them he desired most to be esteemed of; that in his very
presence they affected a favoring of others, to give him the greater
displeasure: To end, upon the subject of the misery of his life, there came a
torrent of words from him which was impossible to be stopped. I laughed within
my self, that he was satisfied after that fashion, in making all those
complaints and reproaches to me; his soul loving to feed on nothing but such
ill nourishment as this. You describe a man to me, interrupted Ariana, of a
very strange nature, and yet pleasant enough withal. I cannot, replide
Erycine, sufficiently represent this miserable humor: for I have observed,
that it is impossible to please him, giving a sense to all things that confirms
his opinion of being miserable. If I used him with any sort of kindness, he
took it for feining; if I treated him with coldness, it was a certain
contempt: If I spoke to him, it was, said he, in a certain fashion whereby he
perceived well enough the small account I made of him; if I held my peace, it
was to let him see that he was troublesome, and to give him leave to be gone.
In the end I found very true what I had heard my brother say of him, that of
all the passions, he thought, he had none but the displeasant and unfortunate
ones, as sadness, fear, jealousy, despair, distrust, and the rest: And upon
this subject he made an observation which I have found a very pretty one, and
am like to retain it in my memory; that the most things have two faces, which
diversely regarded, make effects as diverse: As in a combat, a man of courage
considers nothing but the glory of vanquishing, and makes sure of it; a poltron
regards nothing but death, which brings horror and trouble upon him. Even so
Misander, being within corrupted with this same black humor, regarded but the
ill sense of all things, and interpreted all my actions to his disadvantage. I
had two servants then, very differing; one that complained incessantly without
having cause, the other that always satisfied himself whatever rigor he
received. I confess to you, Amyntas displeased me not, for the other you may
judge if he were love-able: yet although he were a man I had reason to banish
my company, the softness of my nature suffered me not to anger him enough to
drive him away. Amyntas knowing by the entreaty I made Misander, that himself
was not ungracious with me, ceased not seeing me, and had not failed of
greater attempts, but that I made him know his duty; and my modesty altogether
stayed him. Misander had so contagious a melancholy, that he was a vexation to
all he came near. Amyntas brought me his acquaintance, but he repented him
sufficiently of it for my sake, and more yet for his own; because Misander
never left me, and he could not entertain me as he desired. It Is true that if
I had an enemy, I should wish him to endure the love of a man of this humor:
for I believe there is nothing in the world more insupportable. If you stay at
home, they will besiege you cruelly, without speaking sometimes a word in a
day, and will weary out the most resolute that might think to attend their
depart, to speak with more freedom: if you have business abroad, they will
still accompany you, and not give you so much as one hour of respite: and in
the mean time, they will have their sighs be taken for the sweetest
entertainments of love, their silence for an admirable discretion, and their
importunity for services that cannot be sufficiently rewarded.

I remember one day Amyntas came to our house, feining to save himself from
the rain he was taken in; as he had ever some pleasant excuse to come often
thither, and finding Misander there, whose presence importuned him
sufficiently, without adding to his trouble any thing by this sorry humor, he
was not able to endure that constraint, and went out to be delivered of it, in
spite of the rain that still continued: but when he was abroad, the storm
so increased, as he was forced to come back again to us, where we passed away
a day as black as can be imagined, as well because of the weather, as for the
humor of Misander. On the subject of that rain, Amyntas the day after gave me
these verses:

Last day, fair Erycina, with a storm assailed,
At your house I believed I should have shipwreck failed,
As at some happy Port by heaven granted me:
Soon by their radiant beams your eyes me dried,
But when so near my heart their flames I spied,
Must I be burned, said I, for fear I drowned should be.
Long time I did endure, because I loved them,
But in the end surmounted by their heat extreme,
I took my leave of you to 'scape a fire so sore;
To the water I returned to seek a remedy:
Although I had despite to crave so suddenly
An aid from that, which would have drowned me before.
Then from a hundred clouds the heaven upon me powers
Whatever it contained of tempests, or of showers,
To ravish from your eyes the honor of my dying.
So came I back to you, fair Star of my desire,
For in your sight I chose, and in that flame to expire,
Then perish in the waters never you espying.
In the end Amyntas desirous to be free of the importunities of Misander, and
knowing his humor, advised of a trick as fantastical, as he knew his wit
was for the kind: and we had discoursed of him sometimes, Amyntas and I, and
were both persuaded, that he would be engaged by contempts, and put off by
favors: he chanced to tell me once, that he could not think well of the least
liberty a Maid took to express an affection to a man: judge you, if he
persuaded me to make any appear to him.

So Amyntas writ a letter in my name, and having superscrib'd the direction of
it to Misander, he made me believe being with us, that he had received it from
Reggium with some others, and prayed a wench I had to carry it him (for he
lodged very near us) without telling where she had it. I knew since that it
was thus.

Erycine to Misander.
Your respect has vanquished my coldness, and your modesty has acquired you
all the esteem you could have hoped for of me: but because the restraint you
use, permits you not liberty enough, I was willing to prevent you with this,
and to assure you, I shall take it very well, that you let me know by yours the
quality of your affection.


Amyntas after he knew of his receiving it, would see how his plot took; he
went to him, and entering into discourse with a friendlike familiarity, told him
he came from quitting me, and that he believed I would make him dye for
love, and he should never be able to move me by his affection, or by any
other duty. Misander answered him, You that are of so jolly dispositions, you
know not how to serve Ladies: Do you think that all your freedoms are so
acceptable to them? There must be discretion, and that no common one neither,
but of the perfect stamp, such as that I serve her with. What, said Amyntas
laughing, do you believe that your sadness, and your silence pleases her?
that were to love the most troublesome thing in the world. He would oblige him
by this means to let him know his good fortune; and Misander failed not
therein; for with a smile that seemed to mock at the other, he answered him;
Nevertheless, this sadness and this silence gain me the favors which your
jollities ought not to pretend to. Amyntas to engage him further, pursues, And
what persuasion have you ever had that Erycine approves your humor? He
answered him walking up and down, and going with a stately pace, By the
certain demonstrations I have received of it. Yoa, replide Amyntas; you must
have dreamed it then this last night, for I have heard her speak of you in a
fashion that was not very advantageous for you. He returned, She conceales by
that the good she wishes me: but read this, says he, in presenting him the
Letter, and you shall know the truth of the matter, if you know what belongs to
writing. Then Amyntas took the Table-booke, and after he had read it, he
feined to enter into a rage to see him favored to his prejudice: he blotted
out what was written, and then cast the Table-booke into the fire, that I might
not receive harm by it, if he should have shown it to some body else, and in
the end said a thousand things to him against me, as transported with love and
fury. Misander would have been angry for that he had so used his Letter.
What? said Amyntas, can you put an estimation upon the favors of that woman
that first writes to you, and takes a liberty that is unpardonable for a Maid?
for my part, take her to you, in this humor she is of, she must needs have a
great longing to have her letters seen, since she cannot stay till she
receives any, and is not content to write to one alone. I would but put a
trick upon you, thinking my self had been the only man she obliged by such
a favor as this. See, continued he, taking out of his pocket a letter of the
same writing, if I had not cause to be confident in her good graces? but I
scorn a thing she makes so common, and swear never to see her while I live,
then he threw the Letter in the fire, as he had done the other, and before he
went away so wrought upon Misander to bring him to what he desired, that they
protested one to the other never to see me more. I find, Ariana interrupted,
that he something endangered your reputation, only to get himself the
liberty of seeing you more at his ease. It Is true, replied Erycine, and when he
made me the relation of this, I was angry with him, but he told me that if
Misander should chance to boast of that I had written to him, as little as I
were known, or he either, never could it be believed.

So lost I this lovely Misander: but Amyntas did not long time enjoy his
artifice, and had no great trouble to hide himself from him for coming to our
house, because he was forced to keep away by a misfortune that arrived.
Diocles and my father had some contestation, in pursuit whereof it was
forbidden Amyntas to come at us, and me to receive him. A little after I heard
of the suit Diocles made to have you for him; and one day when he came to me
in the Temple, and would express to me the regret he had for that misfortune
of being hindered seeing me; I told him, These are not the speeches you are to
study for the fair Ariana; you must rather make you provision for some first
offers of service. He answered me, I know very well that Ariana is the desire
of all Syracuse, and that you have cause to think I esteem her, knowing that
she is one of the most perfect we can see: but assure your self I will never
turn my eyes toward her merit, for to fail in the fidelity I have sworn to
you. I said to him, How dare you speak thus to me, since I know the suit you
are making to her? Say rather, if it please you, replied he, that my father
makes to her: but albeit he believes, I would not oppose my self to his
intention, yet I hope many things will fall out, before he obtaines that he
desires. Dicearchus loves him not, and will never give his consent. Ariana has
too great a spirit, and will never make esteem of me, especially not seeking
to her by any duties; and though all things were resolved on, be assured that I
would get me far enough away for their ever seeing me, until the fair
Ariana were married: She deserves at the least an entire heart, and mine can
never be but Erycina's. I make an oath here before these gods we adore, and
desire them to punish me as perjurious, if I ever quit an affection which I
have maintained from my birth, and will take a course to preserve it to my
grave.

He spoke this to me with so much assurance, that I had an opinion he did not
deceive me; and I answered him, that nothing but time could make me judge if he
were true or no. Ever since he has continued the same protestations to me, and
whatever bruit ran of your marriage, I never found his passion at all abated.
Think, fair Ariana, went Erycina on, if I had not cause to esteem my self
much indebted to him: for at that time he saw himself so rich, the change of
his fortune changed not his affection: but since, what fidelity would not have
given way to the hopes of possessing this divine Ariana? That word made her
blush, and obliged her to desire she would use her with less flattery. Permit
me, replide Erycira, to speak thus of you; for there is no doubt but that this
change had been too advantageous for him: Notwithstanding I was assured he
abused me not, because I knew that he came not at you: and you cannot imagine
what torments I endured in these traverses: for the occasions of loving him
still continued, and I saw less appearance than ever that our marriage could
be. Consider for the present what contentment I receive, by the assurance you
give me, that you are yet farther off from thinking any such matter, than he
is; and by seeing you now in a power to be no more constrained against your
mind, since you have no more father to rule you.

There is no doubt, answered Ariana, but you are obliged to love Amyntas, for I
can assure you, he has never sought to give me the least testimony of
affection; and in stead of thinking amiss of him for making so small account
of the search of me, I extremely commend him, for not failing of his faith to
you. In the fashion you have described him to me, he must needs have his heart
in a good place; and I hope your affections shall attain their desired end: so
far am I from hindering it, that I could wish I were happy enough to serve
you therein, and satisfy the obligation I have to you, for not concealing from
me your secrets. But, replide Erycine, who can then be that person I have
interest in, that may one day enjoy you? Dear Erycine, said Ariana, I give you
leave to guess, but you shall never know it from my mouth. Truly, answered
she, you pay me well for the freedom wherewith I have told you the dearest
thoughts of my soul. Then she goes on, My Brother, shall he be so happy? That
may be, replide Ariana, and yet never shall my husband be your brother. I
comprehend not your meaning, said Erycine. There are many other secrets also,
replied Ariana, that concern you and Amyntas too, as much as my self: but
upon this subject words are forbidden me, and within a few days nothing
shallbe hid from you: only content your self that I hope to find the means
to make us both happy.

As they ended that discourse, Epicharis that was up, came to them, and Ariana
reaching out her arms to her, made her come nearer, to embrace her again, and
said to her; My dear Wench, is it possible I should see thee again? and that
with thy self thou should bring me so many contentments? Can I ever love
thee sufficiently for so many services thou have rendered me? Madam, answered
Epicharis, the satisfaction I have for having done any thing to please you, has
place of a great recompense with me: yet I refuse not the honor of your love,
without which I confess I could not live. Erycine said also that she was much
beholding to her, for her brothers safety: And because it was now late, they
were surpised in this entertainment by Palamede, who came into the Chamber,
bringing Melintus with him, and opening the Curtains, called them sluggards
for being still in bed: Melintus, who was more retentive, said they had endured
pain enough the day before, for to rest yet the whole day. It Is not reason,
said the fair Ariana, that you should be walking up and down alone by your
selves to day; and although my uncle has shown Melintus all he thought worthy
to be seen in his house, I am sure I shall let him see beauties which he
cannot see unless I be there. Without all doubt, replied Melintus, where you
are not, many beauties are wanting. That Is not my meaning, said Ariana: but
there are certain places in the house, whose beauty is unknown but to my
self; and I will carry you thither to see if you will be of my opinion. If
they please you, replide Melintus, I make no question but they will be pleasing
to me, and they will be so the more, when you are there. Let us then dress us,
said Erycine, and go you down to stay for us in the garden, where we will
presently come to you. They could not deny them this leisure, and so the two
friends went out of that place sorrily, where so many beauties were not so
carefully hid, but that some one would still discover it self, that seemed
never to have seen day before, so white, and delicate it appeared. They had
word brought them, that certain men inquired to speak with them in the Court
of the Castle, and impatient to see who it was, they went to them, whilst
these fair Ladies dressed them with all the curiosity they could devise.

ARIANA. The eighth Book.
THe accident that had happened to Dicearchus the day before, was known that
very night in Syracuse; and every one rejoiced that they had all of them
escaped the danger; but when they learned how this was done by the succors of
Melintus and Palamede that were living, there was a public joy so great, that
never did any people express the like. Telephus and Hyperia could hardly
believe so happy a news, after they had mourned for Melintus as dead, and
resented his loss with as many griefs as his desert, and their good nature
could produce in them. Telephus had not failed to have come to him, if he had
been in a friends house: but he was content to send him word to come away
suddenly to see them, and that he would no longer deny them this contentment.
Dicearchus chiefest friends came from Syracuse to congratulate his good
fortune: and the friends of Melintus and Palamede came in great haste to see
and embrace them. Diocles was not wanting to send to hear from Dicearchus and
his Niece: but Pisistratus came thither himself, being in pain for Ariana he
was so extremely in love with; and it was he, with some others, that having
seen Dicearchus, demanded to salute Palamede and Melintus. After the
embracements of the dearest friends, and the ordinary civilities of the rest,
Melintus knew that the very Deputies of the City were coming to see him. He
went as far as out of the house to meet them, and they perceiving him,
alighted from their horses, and saluted him severally. Then one of the number
said to him, that the great affection he had expressed to his Country, could not
be acknowledged, but by the like care for every thing that might concern him,
and in particular for the conservation of his life, which they were now come to
congratulate for: that death had deprived him of a reasonable fair recompense
he was to receive, as to see himself blessed, the remainder of his days, by all
the people: how that heretofore in Pisa he had acquired a victory glorious for
him, and for Syracuse: but that the other he obtained at Rome, surpassed that
by far; as being both honorable to himself, and profitable to his Country;
that it seemed he was not borne but to vanquish, and to be the safety of all,
being no sooner entered into Sicily, but that he found new occasions of gaining
honor to his own person, and preserving both the honor and lives of others.
He prayed him, in conclusion, to make haste to receive the praises and good
wishes of so many as were made happy by his means, and assured him that if the
gods granted but the least part of the vows were every day made for him, he
should be without doubt the most contented man in the world. Melintus answered,
that he received too much honor for so little merit; that the services men
do to their Country, are simply duties; that there was not one amongst them,
that would not have sought the same benefit for Syracuse; and that he was only
the happiest of them, for having met with the occasion; that if the Syracusians
desired to put a greater obligation still upon him, he demanded, not out of
acknowledgement, but grace, that he might be heard in public concerning a
cause that was of consequence to him, and that he should have wherewithal to
make trial of the peoples love, in a matter of justice he was to require at
their hands. Not the ears alone, said they, but the mouths too, and hearts of
the Syracusians are made your own; and if they find the occasion of rendering
you the good-turne they have had from you, they will reckon that day in the
number of the most fortunate of their life. He desired them to be mindful of
that; and from thence carried them to Dicearchus, who honorably entertained
them, and was well pleased that they had given Melintus that honor, making it
his design then to give him Ariana.

In the mean time that Dicearchus was busy with them, and Palamede with
Pisistratus and the rest, Melintus got him from them all to go find Ariana,
and not to lose the time he might pass in her company. He saw Erycine and
Epicharis that had but now made an end of dressing her with so many advantages,
as he stood in a maze, and spoke nothing. She feined a necessity of those
ornaments, being to receive so many persons of quality as were arrived: but the
principal cause was, to give, if it were possible, more love to Melintus: and
indeed he was so ravished with seeing her, that he almost forgot to make the
relation of the Deputies he came from entertaining. He told her at last, they
should be all obliged to return that very day, because the people would needs
see them; that he could no longer also defer the contentment of Telephus and
Hyperia, and besides that Dicearchus would wait on the Deputies into the City.
Ariana seeing they had so little time to be together, took Melintus and
Erycine by the hand; and giving Epicharis charge to follow, went with them
down a little winding stairs that led into the Park without passing by the
Gardens, and told them, they were to take that time to walk in at liberty,
while they might be thought to be still a dressing. When they were come to the
great Allies, Epicharis willing to favor these lovers, made as if she would
show Erycine the places that best pleased her, and went from them. Hardly can
Melintus his contentment be represented, at what time he saw himself alone
near to his fair Mistress: after the measure of losing sight of them, he
felt himself advanced to so high degrees of joy, that he could not express
them with his own eloquence. Ariana knowing his silence proceeded from excess
of pleasure, was willing to ease him, and spoke first to him: I promised to
show you places here you had not seen before, and to my liking, the fairest
that belong to the house: I will carry you to a place here hard by, that I have
often visited since the woeful news of yours, and my brothers death: you will
find, that nature seems to have made it of purpose, to entertain any
thoughts one has a mind to: but as heretofore it has been a witness of my
sorrows, so will I have it now be of my contentments. Madam, answered
Melintus, if your satisfaction be as perfect as mine, I esteem you the
happiest of the world; but I doubt whether it may be equal to it, being
impossible you should have those fair causes of raptures that are presented to
my soul. Melintus, replide Ariana, it becomes me not to express to you the
excess of my joy, and yet shame must needs give place to truth, and I must
confess, that yours cannot easily surpass mine: at the least, you are
deprived of this pleasure, which is extreme in me, to see you alive, after I
had mourned your loss: for you cannot be sensible of that contentment, not
having been tormented with the like grief for me. And I had less cause,
answered Melintus, to hope for the honor of your affection, than you to see me
living; and this happiness ought to be much more sensible to me; for my life
cannot be so greatly beneficial to you, as the expressions of your affection
are to me. Ending this discourse, he came to the place whither Ariana conducted
him. It was four delicate springs of water that issued forth with noise, and
spread themselves severally there about those Country places: in the midst of
them was a tuft of trees bent together, that made a most delightful shade;
underneath those trees slept a Diana of white Marble, that in her return from
hunting seemed to have chose the fraisheur of this place to repose in. Melintus
vowed he had never seen any thing so delicious; and being entered under those
leavy Arbors, Ariana sat her down at the feet of the Diana, and Melintus laid
him upon the grass at Ariana's feet, not letting go her hand. A little after
she said to him, Will you confess that I have brought you into a very pleasant
place? It Is far more agreeable to me, answered Melintus, than you can
imagine; and I am certain it was never so much till now. But Madam, goes he
on, kissing her hand, can I sufficiently prize the happiness I possess? and
may it possibly be one day so well confirmed, as to warrant me from all
apprehensions that afflict me? Melintus, replide she, diminish your fears, and
receive as powerful assurances of my friendship as my honor will permit:
after so long a trial of your affection in so many occasions, and being so
obliged to you as I am, to use dissimulation and coldness, would no longer be
modesty, but ingratitude. Ah Madam, says he, if I may believe this I hear,
make, I beseech you, my happiness entire: use the means that nothing may
separate us. I conjure you to this by my affection that never had equal, by
your beauty for which I have so many holy desires, and by this fair hand I
hold, and conjure too by these ardent kisses, never to touch other than mine to
give faith to. Ariana answered, I promise that I will never be but Melintus
his: to this am I obliged by his merit, more yet by his affection; and being
redeuable to him both for my honor and life, I remit both of them into his
hands, as things he has acquired, and whereof he can better dispose of than
my self. I speak thus for the present now I have no more father, whose
absolute power might contrary my desires. I dare very well then make choice of
you, and having made it, assure your self I shall as well know how to
maintain it. Madam, replide Melintus all confounded, stop I pray you the
course of these obligeant words: my soul is not capable to support their
sweetness; and the pleasures that enter in troops at my ears, are ready to
stifle it, if my other senses receive not a part of them. Ariana seeing that he
grew pale in scarcely pronouncing those words, bowed her self down thinking
he was going to sown; and Melintus lifting up his amorous arms to her, she
let him lay his head close to hers. It was then he made proof, that the
dearest pleasures of love are not those that are best resented: for he entered
into a fainting that stupefied all his senses; and when he came out of that
trance, love and respect had a long combat within him, to make him deliberate
whether he should attempt any farther, or be content with those favors. Ariana
knowing the doubt he was in, animated her face with a redness, and that
color made her yet more Majesticall: in such sort that Melintus being up, and
having one knee upon the ground, durst not conceive a dishonest desire, seeing
her so full of brightness: nevertheless, after he had many times kissed her
hand, he would bring his mouth even to her bosom, but she putting him softly
by with her other hand, Content your self, said she, with these hands that
shall ever be favorable to you, while you address your self to them only.
This Diana sleeps not so fast but she may be a witness of your actions: and
yet I do not believe you have so much as one thought contrary to my desire,
for fear I should be obliged to diminish the affection I bear you. Madam,
answered he, the living Divinity I behold, gives me a sufficient restraint, and
I here make an oath to this fair hand to seek no other favors but from it;
since it is from it I expect all my good fortune: but I hope to give it so many
kisses, as in the end it will be weary of them, and would gladly be eased of
those troublesome kindnesses, and permit me to give a part of them to the rest.
Ariana taking his head gently with her hands, kissed him on the forehead, and
said, you shall sooner receive favors thus, when you seek them not: then she
rose up, and said it was time to go find out Erycine and Epicharis that would
be in pain for them. Melintus answered her, If they have had as little thought
for us, as I have had for them, I do not believe they are in any great care
for what is become of us. If I were not assured, replied Ariana, that they know
us well, I had not suffered them to have left me so: but let me go now
together with them into my Chamber, and give the rest of the day to Ceremonies,
after having spent the morning in the liberty of our thoughts. Melintus with
grief quitting this pleasant resting place, where he had passed so agreeable
moments, told her, that his life would be too happy, if he might often meet
with so sweet hours. In such discourses as these they took the way of the
great walk, where they found the two Maids, whose discretion was such, as they
never inquired where they had stayed so long; and they all thinking it fit to
return, the Ladies went to get to the same stairs, by which they came into
the Chamber: and Melintus took another way, to take away the opinion of their
being together.

Palamede was walking in the great Court that was opposite to the front of the
house, with Pisistratus, who had a great desire to get the good graces of the
brother, so to attain to those of the sister: and seeing Melintus come from
the Park-ward, he went to meet him, and told him, he was very glad he had found
out places fair enough in that house, to invite him more than once to visit
them, and quit the company of men for their sakes. It Is true, answers Melintus,
that I would many times leave men, for a conversation I now come from. That of
your thoughts, says Pisistratus, must needs be very agreeable to you. I should
wrong my self, replies Melintus, to abandon men for the entertainment of my
thoughts: but one may justly quit them for goddesses; and I confess to you
that if I durst have prolonged my contentment, I should still have been
besides a Diana that is in this wood. The place, says Palamede, is reasonable
pleasant, and the figure is one of the fairest in all Sicily. I vow to you,
continued Melintus, that my eyes were charmed near her, and I do not yet well
know how I was able to retire me from her. The more skill one has in delicate
works, says Pisistratus, the more one admires them. I deny not, answered
Melintus, that my admiration proceeds from some knowledge: but I am sure never
any man went from her more satisfied than I. I am sorry, replide Palamede, we
are so soon to go for Syracuse, since you are so well pleased here: but I
hope we shall return hither often. While they were speaking thus together,
Dicearchus came from meeting with his Niece at the foot of the great stayres,
by which she was descended with Erycine and Epicharis; and leading her into the
garden, she appeared so handsome, with a redness that mixed it self with the
shining of her whiteness, for seeing Melintus she but now came from, that she
thereby much augmented the passion of Pisistratus, and extremely satisfied that
of Melintus, who was in hope to see himself very shortly possessor of so many
beauties. Pisistratus saluted her, and Melintus that had far more commodious
hours to himself, left him the freedom to enquire of her health, and the
fears she was in the day before. He expressed to her his grief for having
been so unfortunate as not to have come to her succors, that yielding to none
either in affection or courage, it vexed him to yield to them in so good
fortune. Ariana received all those civilities, and assurances of affection,
with a coldness pleasing enough: being not willing to cause to be produced in
him, either an hope, or the resentments of contempt; and presently she was
delivered of this entertainment, for they were called to dinner.

Dicearchus made his ambition and sumptuosity appear to the height in gold,
whereof the great dining chamber was full; and the magnificence of the feast
discovered the pride of his nature, which he veiled under an affected
courtesy. After that dinner was ended, they were to think upon returning to
Syracuse, and to make this entry the more agreeable to the people, it was
ordered that the prisoners should be carried in the front, bound in a Chariot;
the Ladies should follow after in a Coach, and the rest of the company go in
the rear a horseback. It was in this equipage they parted from that house,
which Melintus left with regret, because of the contentment he had there
received. After he had put Ariana into the Coach with his sister, Epicharis,
and some other Maids, he mounted a horseback, and joined himself to
Dicearchus, the Deputies, and the rest whom he labored to entertain by the
way; and sometimes he went to the Coach with Pisistratus, and Palamede; showing
himself as acceptable among Ladies, as he was serious and able with the most
ancient of the company that followed him.

Telephus that had been advertised by Melintus since the morning, came out of
the City to meet him; and both alighting from their horses, they could not quit
the embracements they each gave and received, being overcome with the pleasure
of seeing one another again: yet it became them to follow the troop; and
because Telephus had imparted his contentment to all his friends in the Town,
the people was prepared to receive him, and filled the streets where he was to
pass: so as at their entrance they were astonished at the world they saw. The
Deputies had placed Melintus in the midst of them; Dicearchus went near to
him with Telephus, Palamede, Pisistratus, and the other of their friends; and
he marched as it were in triumph, and with pleasure heard the cries of joys,
and the wishes the Syracusians made him, calling him father of his Country,
and giving him a thousand praises. Ariana believed that she participated of
this honor, and felt a thousand delights in her mind, to see him so much
beloved, whom she loved so much her self.

In the end this troop separated at Dicearchus house, where Ariana was left
with him, and Palamede. Telephus carried Melintus home with him, and his
daughter Erycine; and the Deputies, with Pisistratus and the rest, took their
leaves to retire every man to his own house. Some Officers of justice seized
on the prisoners, whose condemnation and death followed some days after.

When Hyperia had used Melintus with all the kindnesses that a true mother
might give her own son, she had thought dead, Telephus took him apart, and
made him a present of two writings; whereof one was an attestation signed by
Hermocrates, wherein he acknowledged, that he had committed into the hands of
Telephus, a son of his borne at Lylibeum, named Melintus, who in the place of
his heart was marked with another heart, for to be of some use to him, if
peradventure he might one day stand in need thereof. The other was a letter of
Diocles written to Telephus, while he was still at Lylibeum, wherein he
rejoiced for the birth of this son of Hermocrates, and said, that this heart
which he was marked with, signified that he should love his Country, and gain
the heart of all he desired to have for his friends. Telephus added, how he
had happily found these writings, whereof he was not willing to speak to him
before, thinking they had been lost; but that now with these assurances, he
made no doubt but Diocles would be convinced. Melintus rejoiced to have found
out these means at his arrive, and declared to him his resolution to accuse
Diocles in public: and that for this cause he had demanded an audience of the
people from the Deputies that had been sent to him.

They celebrated yearly at Syracuse a very ancient feast, to thank the gods
for the ruin of Tyrants, and there was always a man of the race of Timoleon,
that was President of the games were made, and a Maid of the same family, to
present the sacrifices, and give the prizes of the plays. This feast
approached, and the Syracusians knowing that Melintus desired something of
them, would have him make his demand that very day, and said, that being
delivered not only from the ancient Tyranny, but also again by his means from
all Subsidies, they could not receive a more welcome pleasure the day of this
feast, than to recompense Melintus in some sort for the benefit he had obtained
them. He communicated the matter with Ariana and Palamede, and told them he
feared that having to make an accusation, and not a request, lest Diocles might
not have cause to pretend, that holidays were no days for judgments. He
propounded to them whether it might not be more fit, first of all to speak
with Diocles; that peradventure they might obtain all of him by fair means,
in showing the infallible testimonies they were provided of. Against these
considerations it was alleag'd that they were to make use of the good will of
the Syracusians, and that they in the humor they were in, would for love of
him pass over ordinary formalities: how it was dangerous to speak to Diocles,
because there was no appearance he would be disseized of his goods any other
way than by force; and that he would rather go about seeking inventions
against the means were left them; that if he were surpised, the trouble of
this novelty, and that of his conscience, taking from him the way of replying,
would make him be condemned in the field: and that they were not to entreat
gently a man that had used malice and treason: but Ariana's reason was best
approved, that it concerned Melintus (if he would be known to be the son of
Hermocrates, and of the blood of Pyrrhus and Achilles) that this truth should
be declared in public, and that it was not sufficient one particular man
avowed it. Melintus well perceived, that interessing her self in the honor of
his house, she would have her choice approved of all the world; and confessed
that in that advice she had expressed a great deal of understanding and spirit.
Palamede added, that since it was so resolved, he would entreat his uncle to
suffer him to be President of the games; to this end, that being for that day
the Chief of all the youth of Syracuse, he might have the power in his own
hands, to make Diocles appear, and to arrest him, if he would avoid the
judgment. All being thus concluded on, they expected that day impatiently.

In the mean time Melintus saw Ariana often, and received of her as many
sweetnesses as he could be sensible of, being assured of her affection. Never
did two persons make so great an esteem one of another, and never did two
souls meet with so much sympathy. They had both of them a greatness of spirit
so perfect, a wit so discreet, a quickness in conversation so sparkling, and a
modesty so majestuous, besides the beauties wherewith nature had so liberally
endowed them, that never couple encountered together with so much perfection and
equality: and so admiring one another fair qualities, they framed within
themselves so relevated an affection, that every other thing had been to them
but a subject of contempt, had they not yet more despised to be presumptuous.
Pisistratus too saw Ariana often, and his love increasing every day, he ceased
not to give her new testimonies of it: but she received them so discreetly,
that he had no cause either to boast himself, or complain; and Pisistratus
believing that her virtue and modesty enjoined her to use him after that
fashion, could not esteem himself so far off, as he was of his hopes. At
length the day arrived, and Palamede having obtained of his uncle that he might
preside, made himself Head of all those that would present them at the Plays.
Melintus put himself under his Conduct, so did Pisistratus, who that day had a
design to show that he was worthy of Ariana: Amyntas that was one of the most
accomplished of Syracuse joined him to them, with some others; and Misander
himself, that had a mind to mingle his melancholious humor to the public
rejoicing.

Ariana was led to the Temple in the morning by her brother, and the Maids of
her train by Melintus, Pisistratus, and the others. She was dressed in a white
robe, the bodies whereof were close fitted to her waste, and made her good
shape appear: and in the skirts it was enlarged with a thousand folds, and
training upon the ground made her look very majesticall. She was crowned with
a hat of flowers, and her delicate hair in tresses falling upon a neck of
snow, did so well set forth the beauties of this divine face, with the
whiteness of her neck, whose splendor dazzled men's eyes so, that there was
not any one that could support unhurt the sight of so many wonders. She
presented the sacrifices upon the altar of Liberty, and made the ordinary
Vows: but her fair eyes mocked at the words her mouth pronounced, and sought
with their divine beams to ravish from all that beheld her, that very liberty
which by her vows she wished perpetual to them. Melintus was so rapt with
seeing her, and thinking that this ceremony should presently be followed with
another, that would place him in the very height of felicities, that these
dear imaginations served him for a pleasing entertainment. Pisistratus
regarded her too full of admiration, and desires accompanied with hopes, and
the others conceived wishes which they themselves confessed unprofitable, and
that were as soon smothered by the little hope they had reason for.

After the Sacrifices were ended, and the solemnities that followed them, she
was led up to a Scaffold that was erected in a great meadow out of the Town,
and all the Ladies came about her, after the same manner they had done at the
Temple. The ordinary Judges of Syracuse, that were also to judge the prizes,
were placed lower; among whom was Diocles, that never expected to be judged
himself that day.

Melintus was dressed in the same scarf, and mounted on the same horse Ariana
had heretofore presented to him: but besides all this, that very day she had
given him a Bracelet of her fair hair, and tied it to his arm.

Palamede had desired a favor of the gentile Epicharis, that from day to day
made him more enamored of her, and she not willing to refuse him that
contentment in such an occasion, had taken the pains to braid all his hair
for him, with ribbands of silk of her colors, for they were all to go
bareheaded: The rest were accommodated as much to their advantage, as it was
possible for them. The first exercise was horse-races, where the greatest part
presented themselves; and after they had made the Tower of the place with many
a passade, they ranged them at the entry of the barriers. At the same time the
Trumpets sounded, it happened that a Lark pursued by a Hobby, came to save her
self in Ariana's hands: thereupon there rose a cry of all the people, and
Melintus turning his head, and considering with pleasure Ariana's actions,
delayed the time to start with the rest: but perceiving his fault, and spurring
up his horse with fury, he soon passed the last; and seeing Misander that was
well mounted, and in hope to get first the end of the course, he came justling
against his side, and overthrew him and his horse to the ground. Pisistratus
that followed him, could not keep his horse from falling neither, when he
encountered Misanders: that disorder stayed the course of the rest that came
after, the most of them falling also, and not able to keep themselves up in
the heat they were in; and this number of men and horses laid along together,
made a spectacle ridiculous enough. In the mean time Melintus that saw none
but Palamede now as forward as himself, slackned the speed of his horse, being
willing to yield this victory to his friend: but fortune would needs
acknowledge this generousnesse of his; for one of Palamedes ribbands of his
head untying, flew away, and came to encircle Melintus his that ran behind him
in a little gallop, and girt him after the fashion of a Diadem: as if Palamede
seeing how Melintus yielded him the crown of the victory, had desired in
recompense to crown his friendship: some others interpreted this action to
portend a great Sovereignty that Melintus should one day attain to Instantly
there followed great applauses when this action was known; and Ariana her
self in her mind admired at Melintus his gentile courage. Palamede having had
the first honor, and Melintus the second; the rest to put off the shame they
were in, thought of appearing again in sundry other games, wherein part of them
in one kind, and the rest in others, acquired some glory. Melintus had the
prize for having best thrown the Javelin, Amyntas that of the bow, and
Pisistratus that of the foot-race, since the horse-race had been so
unfortunate to him.

The fair Ariana gave all the prizes that were ordained, and Melintus being
the last that ascended the scaffold to receive his of her hand, the whole field
resounded with the noise of the people that had an incomparable affection
toward him. Ariana as she presented the prize, said to him in a very low
voice; Courage, Melintus, it is time the world know what you are. That intention
was accompanied with the peoples at the same time: for that Melintus turning
his head, while he was still upon the scaffold, the most ancient of the Judges
said to him; Brave Melintus, you promised the Syracusians to make this day the
demand of that you desire of them: they entreat you no longer to defer this
contentment of theirs; that these pastimes might end with a thing that were
just, and very agreeable, as some recompense to your virtue would be.

Palamede was remounted a horseback, with those of his troop, and barricadoed
up the Judges with the rest of the people, in such sort that it was impossible
for Diocles to get out. Then Melintus being by Ariana's side, made a sign that
he concurred with the desire of all, and every one giving him silence, he began
thus:

SYracusians, if I were not pressed by your desires, I should but trouble my
self in hindering your recreations, having not a demand to make, but an
accusation: Nevertheless, as I am forced by your selves, and by my own just
resentment; I declare that it is Diocles I accuse, and who ought to depart from
among the Judges to be condemned by them, after he has been convict of the
crimes which he can never clear himself of.

Then there was heard a great noise, every one looking upon Diocles, and he
himself was in great trouble, never expecting this business might concern
him: afterward recollecting his spirits, he made an apology, that it was to
surprise him, and that this was no day for the accusation of Citizens; yet for
all this the people willing that Melintus should continue his appeal, Diocles
was constrained to retire from the rest of the Judges, and to go apart,
waiting Melintus his discourse, whereupon he might frame his defense: these
contestations being appeased with the noise, Melintus went on thus:

THe gods are my witnesses, if I love not my Country to that height, as to
have been in pain to resolve of displeasing one of our Citizens, by
redemanding of him the estate that he detaines from me; and I believe that if
my honor had not bin mingled with my interest, I had forsaken my pretentions,
and contented me with the fortune I am already in. But these very gods would
judge me unworthy of the favors they have given me, if I should let them be
lost; and my silence would rather be thought cowardlinesse than patience.

There is none of you but wondered whence Diocles riches came; not being a man
that has store of ships for traffic, or one that has taken in farm any
thing of the Public, which are the ordinary ways from a mean estate to
attain to great faculties; fortune recompencing sometimes those that are wholly
addicted to her. The goods of the earth fall not from heaven in a moment, not
being perceived; their original is not of that nature; but being things that
belong to the possession of men, they arrive to no man without the order of
succession, or acquisition. I cannot tell by what succession the goods of
Hermocrates should fall to Diocles share; and for his acquiring them, that can
he not justify by any title. But since it is necessary for knowing the secret
of his affairs, that I declare that of my life, I will conceal nothing from
those that express so much affection to me, not doubting but when ye shall
have understood the truth, you will render justice to whom it is due.

Syracusians, the greater part of you may remember Hermocrates, who by a
misfortune was banished this City; he thought Diocles so much his friend, as
he feared not to commit to his trust whatever he possessed within Syracuse,
and the rest of Sicily, to have the government thereof until his return: But
Hermocrates having been lost by an adventure that came not yet to light,
Diocles that heard no more news of him, was resolved with himself in the end
to call his own all that was Hermocrates his. This usurpation had for ever
been hid, but that another deposition was made to a friend more affectionate,
and more faithful than he. Diocles accompanied Hermocrates one days journey
only out of the City, at what time he went away: but Telephus followed him as
far as the Port of Lylibeum, where he was to embarque to pass unto Carthage;
and Euphrosyne that departed from Syracuse very big, being at that place
surprised with the pains of childbirth, was brought to bed of a son, whom
Hermocrates desired Telephus to carry to Syracuse, and nourish as his own
until he should return, being not willing to expose him to the Sea. Diocles
was not ignorant of this truth: for Hermocrates sent him the news of it, and
so did Telephus, and to both of them he gave answer of Congratulation with him:
I will not be afraid, Syracusians, to tell you that I am that son of
Hermocrates, whom you have hitherto thought the son of Telephus.

(All the people clapped their hands for excess of joy, understanding this
strange news; and Melintus continued on.)

Hermocrates had always loved you, and you have favored the memory of him,
and I know that his very banishment was a testimony of your affection toward
him. Therefore I make no doubt at all but you receive these news joyfully;
since you have both loved him, and are inclined to love me also. There remains
nothing for me to do, but to give you the proofs of what I say, which
proofs will appear so clear, that you shall neither make any doubt of my
birth, or Diocles's infidelity: for besides that I could produce many
witnesses; Hermocrates as he spoke to Telephus, gave him a writing signed with
his own hand, by which he acknowledged to have put into his hands a son of
his that in the place of his heart was marked with another heart.

(Telephus who was present gave that writing to the Judges, and Melintus
pursues.)

Diocles himself making answer to Telephus, wrote to him to Lylibeum, that be
rejoiced for the birth of this son of Hermocrates, and that the heart he was
marked with, signified that he should gain the heart of every one, and be a
lover of his Country.

(Telephus put that letter too into the Judges hands, which being read aloud,
Melintus unbutton'd his doublet, and discovering his stomach he raised his
voice, and said:)

Now Diocles, look upon this heart, that accuses thine of the basest
perfidiousnesse that ever was. It Is this heart that reproaches thee for having
failed of faith to thy friend; besides, I do dot know whether to this crime
thou have not added yet a greater treachery than that; by taking out of the
world Hermocrates, to be more secure of his estate. Nevertheless, I will not
believe thee so wicked: But what reasons can thou allege to color the
usurpation of what was his? For if thou had no meaning to keep it, why did
thou mock at Telephus, when he advertised thee not to aspire to the daughter
of Aristides by the support of those riches, because Hermocrates son was
living? and if thou would not believe that, why did thou not restore those
goods to them of the race of Hermocrates, since they belonged not to thee? See
there then the treasures thou have acquired, without running Fortune, either by
sea or land: see there the excessive gain thou have made return of, giving
nothing in exchange for so many possessions, but thy faith and thy conscience
which thou have forsaken. This Traffic was made within thy self, and thou
had nothing to do but to deliberate whether to get that estate thou were not
to betray thy soul. Thy avarice disputed against thy fidelity, and the decree
thy judgment gave in behalf of it, is the sole title of these new
acquisitions. But it is but to abuse the cares of the Judge, and of the people,
to seek for other proofs after a case so clear: it stands thee then upon to
disavow the writing of Hermocrates, and thy own too; and after that to report
the titles of all thou art possessed of; and all this being impossible, I
demand of the Syracusians, that they condemn thee to restore the goods thou
injustly detain'st from me, whereby I might from henceforth sustain the
quality of my birth, and that they ordain for thy infidelity that punishment
it has deserved.

When Melintus had made an end of his speech, all the people began to clap
their hands, and to cry out, Condemn Diocles: but the Judges having made the
noise cease, commanded him to speak. Then he required time, for to consider
upon his justification, and said that he could not answer in the field to all
Melintus his impostures: that he well knew how to defend himself from them;
but that he must have some leisure to make the falsnesse of what he had said
appear. They gave him the writings that Telephus brought in, and demanded of
him if he knew them. He could not disavow his own handwriting, nor that of
Hermocrates, but he said all this made not against him, but that he might have
gotten the goods before his depart. The Judges inquired of him, if he had the
Contracts of the sale that passed between them. He answered, that they were at
his house, and that he only desired time to produce them. They ordered that
he should send his son Amyntas who was present, to go bring them: but then
he said they were not in place where he could find them, and that he himself
had need of term for to put them in order. All these answers being but shifts,
and the people never ceasing to cry out against him, the Judges assembled
together to deliberate, and after a long time speaking what they had to say,
some excusing Diocles, that had to that time been ignorant who Melintus was:
others showing more severity, and saying that how-ever the case stood he was
willing to retain what appertained not to him. In the end the Magistrate
pronounced this judgment; That Diocles was condemned, not only to restore
into the hands of Melintus all those goods he held of Hermocrates; but besides,
to pay him the revenue for the time he had possessed them; and that for the
infidelity he had committed, he was banished for three years.

The people by their applauses seemed to be well satisfied for this sentence,
and Melintus making a sign with his hand that he would again speak, all was
silent, and he said; I have hitherto only demanded justice of you, and now I
demand a grace at your hands, which is, to revoke the banishment of Diocles in
my favor, and for the revenue of my estate for the time that is past, I give
it to Amyntas, whose good qualities I esteem, and will be a friend to him.

Every one having admired the generousnesse of Melintus toward the father, and
his liberality toward the son, he obtained all that he desired, and this
last action brake off the assembly. Melintus took Ariana's hand, who was full
of satisfaction for the happy success of their desires, and brought her back
to her house with Palamede, and their friends. Diocles full of sadness and
shame, retired him to his own house; not knowing whether he were to complain
of Melintus, or commend him, from whom in so small a time he had received so
many displeasures, and so many graces.

Dicearchus who had not assisted at the plays, because of his place which he
quitted to his Nephew, learned this news of a friend of his that presently
went his way to advertise him of it, for to advise together how they were to
live with Melintus, since he was known for the son of Hermocrates. When
they were upon that doubt, Melintus comes in bringing Ariana; Palamede made the
recite to Dicearchus of all had passed, and so to Melintus his advantage, that
he was obliged to confess to him, that he rejoiced for that good fortune: But
after all was retired, when Palamede said to his uncle, that they were to
esteem themselves very happy in this, that nothing hereafter could be found
wanting in Melintus for giving his sister to him, since his birth and estate
were as great as he could desire them to be; Dicearchus answered, how that
deserved well to be thought of at leisure, and for that time could get nothing
else from him. This acknowledging of Melintus for son of Hermocrates, was
cause of the death of two persons; Diocles, whether it were that he was seized
with grief for seeing himself fallen from so great a fortune, or whether he
repented for having committed so great an infidelity, was found dead the day
after in his bed; and Hyperia, who till then believed she possessed an
inestimable good, having a son so accomplished as Melintus, received a far
greater affliction when she knew she was not his mother, than she had done when
the news was brought her of his death, and not able to resist this dolor,
lost her life some days after.

Melintus having much resented the loss of a person that held the place of a
very affectionate mother to him, could not for all that keep any long time
this displeasure in his mind, being too much diverted by his hopes; and seeing
himself restored to the possession of all that could appertain to him, he
thought nothing could now retard his contentments, being assured of the
affections of Ariana, of Dicearchus, and of Palamede. He came every day to
visit them, and had conceived too high an estimation of his felicity, receiving
every moment new testimonies of Ariana's love, had it not been for some
coldness that Dicearchus made apparent to him, though he endevour'd to hide it
with a feined courtesy. Pisistratus too rendered many duties to Ariana, and
Melintus seeing that Dicearchus made more esteem of him than his custom was,
believed it was but to make him a more honorable refuse: yet for all that they
were exceedingly amazed, when Palamede having prayed his uncle to resolve on
the marriage of Melintus, he gave him this answer, that it was necessary he
went first to Corinth with him and his sister, to see their kindred, and advise
with them about it: that for this purpose they would go in Pisistratus's ship
that was to return, and that they should both prepare them for this depart.
Palamede would oppose some reasons to this resolution, but all was in vain;
and when he brought this news to Melintus, and his sister, he filled them both
with confusion: Melintus made Dicearchus be entreated by Palamede, that he
might accompany them in this voyage, to make himself known to their friends
at Corinth: but he said, that was not fitting, and it would seem he went to
speak of a thing resolved, if he were with them. That answer troubled Melintus
still more, not knowing for what design he intended that voyage, and made
those difficulties: For he thought he had sufficiently obliged him by saving
of his life, and more again by his oath, to make him forget those ancient
enmities.

Nevertheless all prepare to depart, and Melintus one day finding Ariana
amazed for this necessity of parting, full of sadness said to her, Madam, what
signifies this woeful voyage? I know not what end it may have, but the
beginning is too sad, to promise me any good. When I thought my self the
happiest of men, I find that good fortune absents her the more from me, and
forbids me so much as following her. Melintus, answered Ariana, I know not what
my uncles designs are: but mine shall ever be like yours, and finding that I
am seconded by my brother, there is no force can possibly overrule me. Live I
pray you in repose as much as you may during this absence; and if my being away
causes sorrow in you, let the assurance of my affection diminish it. Madam,
returned Melintus, how happy do these expressions make me in so unfortunate an
occasion: but may I be assured that no constraint shall ever change your mind?
You ought not only to believe this, said she, but you do me wrong besides to
make any doubt of it: for it seems you judge me capable of lightness and
ingratitude. Pardon, Madam, said he, never thought I these defaults could have
place in your heart; but losing so many blessings by your absence, me thinks
nothing can ever restore them again to me. What may I hope for more, after the
loss of those deceitful assurances that have these late days flattered me?
Will you have this misfortune of seeing you no more promise me any good, when
my very greatest contentments have brought me nothing but so cruel a disaster?
Melintus, says she, all contentments are followed with displeasures, and all
sadness with joy: things that are contrary succeed one another: we shall have
a little to suffer being separate so long: but after a while enduring, the
return will be more glorious, and more agreeable to us: afflict me not I pray
you with your sorrows, my own are sufficient for me; and after I shall know
that you support with constancy this separation, I shall have courage enough to
imitate you. I am of the opinion, replied he, that to have so much courage, is
to have but small love: for what strength can be able to resist the
displeasures of my soul, being deprived of the happiness of seeing you?
Resolution can do nothing to ease an evil, which judgment finds more hard to
master, the more it seeks wherewithal to give it consolation: to give over
sorrow, I must of necessity give over remembering you, and that can I not but
with my life. Melintus, says Ariana, I know this very well that our misfortune
is great: but do you complain of it to me, to this end that by my reasons I
might endeavor to comfort you? or else that I by knowing it, might be sure to
suffer as much as you? For the first you confess your self that reason can
do nothing, and for the other you would be cruel to desire an augmentation of
what I endure. Let us rather comfort us on both sides, and as I betray my
grief to express a constancy to you, so do you seem to have one too, that
being content with our miseries, we may at least be delivered from those we
seek to bring one upon another. These words that came from the excess of a
rare friendship, brought the tears into Melintus eyes; and it was a pain to
him, (so seized was he) to frame this answer: Madam, that I had a meaning to
increase your grief, were impossible, having so much love for you: but I am
brought to that pass, as not to know how to speak to you; for if I express
my sufferings, you complain of me; and if I express them not at all to you,
what will you think of my affection? Ariana perceiving his difficulty of
speech, to give him comfort interrupted him, and said; I will have no more
expressions of this affection: for if I still had need of them, you should not
already have received so much of mine. No, my dear Melintus, I am more assured
of you than of my self; but these mutual assurances serve for nothing but to
make us be more sensible of this accident: if we loved one another less, we
should be less touched for this separation: let us then esteem our grief
glorious, since it has so fair a cause; and not complain any more, since we
would not have less affection, to suffer the less pain. Melintus full of
seizure, and touched besides at these dear speeches, could not pronounce a
word himself, but only kissed Ariana's hands that were all wet with the great
tears that fell from him. He was a good while in that posture, and Ariana
giving way to an object so sensible, let fall too some tears from her fair
eyes, which she dried, willing to hide her affliction from Melintus, who at
last addressing him to that he held, never lifting himself up, said; Fair
hands, must I forsake you, and abandon the sweet pleasures you favor me with?
promise me at least never to receive others in the place of mine. Swear it to
me, fair hands, by your sweet restraints, I will believe you will never be
unfaithful to me: for you are too delicate to enterprise my death, and too
white not to be innocent. Ariana answered, I promise you for them all you
desire, and will have you (said she in presenting them to him) kiss them
again, for pledge of their fidelity: then she rose up to divert her from her
sorrow, and that she might not be taken in this trouble by any one that came
in. For Palamede chanced to arrive a while after, with whom they discoursed
upon the occasion of this voyage, whose true causes they could not understand.
He promised Melintus to advertise him by his letters of all that passed, and to
come back himself to Syracuse if need were. For to make any resistance to
their uncle, into whose hands Aristides at his death had committed Ariana, they
could not think it fitting.

From that day till the depart, Melintus could never entertain Ariana in
private; only he let her see these verses which he gave a borrowed name to,
that they might be read before all.

WHat fortune envious at my love,
Or what command imperious,
Absenting Cloris far from us,
Does my souls better half remove?
And shall I for my punishment
See her depart, and give consent
To this absence, to my misery?
Destinies jealous, heavens inhumane;
Let me part and her accompany,
Or in her hands my life retain.
Will any this injustice offer?
And must I now till her return,
The more for love of her I burn,
The more condemned be to suffer?
Already fear and discontent,
And cares that never durst attempt
To seize me in her heavenly presence,
At her depart their powers will try
On me, and threaten my innocence
With their insulting tyranny.
Cloris can you be so resolute,
The god of our hearts to despise,
And yield to the severities
Of a sorry force less absolute?
I cannot make you pity me,
Nor by my loves extremity,
Nor by the fountain of my tears,
Come forth my weepings; I will have
My eyes cast out these arms of theirs
That were too weak her stay to save.
And can this so constant humor
In all duties laws so tried,
Never to see me be denied,
And pretend the name of Lover?
Cloris your love is not like mine;
My heart with jealousy must pine
At such a cold tranquillity:
For but that in your eyes I vent
My passions livelier ardency,
I should be smothered where I went.
Are you so cruel then to leave me?
Can nothing hinder this remove?
No sense of pity can her move
That has no pity to releeve me.
Adieu then severest beauty,
Adieu heart full of durity:
No vainer hope can joy recall;
Hereafter let us naught pretend.
I lose my life, my speech and all,
And I am ruined without end.
The griefs Melintus felt at this depart can hardly be described; those of
Ariana were no less; but she so well concealed them, that Dicearchus never
knew the unwillingnesse she had to be gone. They were accompanied by their
friends to Pisistratus his ship, and Melintus could not bid farewell but with
his eyes, to the fair Ariana: but this adieu was so sensible to them, that she
betook her self with Epicharis into one of the Cabins of the ship, to lie
down upon a bed, where she was drowned in tears; and Melintus after having
taken his leave of Dicearchus, and quitted the dear embracings of Palamede,
seeing her no more, and the ship sailing away, let himself be so carried away
with grief, that he fell down between the hands of Arcas, and was a long
time ere he returned out of his fainting.

His suit and his love were now divulged in Syracuse, and the more he was
loved, the more pity did his sorrow move: in the end, full of discontent and
weakness, he was reconducted to his own home, for he lodged no more now with
Telephus, since he had been restored to his estate; and his friends labored
to divert him from his grief, which none but himself could have experience of
the greatness of.

Pisistratus thinking to have the wind of love as favorable, as that that
filled his sails, went his way to Corinth, proud with the spoils he imagined
to carry away, and the conquest he promised to himself. Dicearchus gave him
great assurances, Ariana's discretion forbade him not to hope, and Palamedes
courtesy made him believe he would not be displeased with his alliance.

He nothing wondered for that Ariana shunned his entertainment, judging that in
these occasions of being sought to, maids will appear modest. Dicearchus who
received him with more freedom, was his ordinary company; and Ariana had no
other consolation, but in speaking of Melintus with her brother, and her dear
Epicharis. Palamede that became more and more in love with the beauties of this
Maid, never ceased rendering her honest testimonies of his passion: but every
hour hearing the reproaches of so many lightnesses, he resolved hereafter to
make himself be known for a faithful man, and submitted to all the proofs
she could desire. Having passed the Isle of Cephalenia, they entered into the
gulf of Corinth, to which they had but lately given the name of Lepanto. At
last they arrived at Corinth, where Sebastus, a Cousin of Dicearchus, came to
receive them, and bring them to his house, and there they were entertained,
according as the quality of Dicearchus, and the magnificence of Sebastus
required. This old man was renowned for his authority in the City, and more yet
for being one of the wisest of all Greece: he brought to salute Palamede and
Ariana, a young daughter of his called Cassiope, whom they found very modest,
and handsome: but when Ariana heard tell of the mavelous qualities of another
sister she had, named Cyllenia, who was among the Maids that served at Juno's
Temple, she had a great desire to know her. Her beauty had given her the prize
above all those of Corinth, but her wit had made her still more recommendable;
and the extreme love which the virtuous Lepantus had to her, lessened not that
reputation. Ariana was impatient till the next day came, to go see her; and
Cyllenia that heard speak of this divine Ariana, had no less desire to judge
of so many perfections.

Pisistratus being come in the morning to see them, conducted Ariana and
Palamede to the Temple; and when the sacrifices were made, these two fair
Ladies encountered with so much rapture on either part, that there was never
satisfaction equal to that. Their sight was so busy in judging of their
beauties, that they never thought of speaking one to another. Ariana had a
brightness that far surpassed that of Cyllenia, but sweetness and modesty
were very equal in them: the admirations they had then one of another, were
since followed with mutual protestations of friendship; and in stead of having
jealousy for the advantages that each saw in her companion, the knowledge of
those merits bred more esteem, and affection in them. Presently faint
civilities were banished, from them, to make place for a freedom that permitted
them to conceal nothing from one another. The resemblance of their beauties,
and of their wits, joined their souls together, and by and by after, that of
their fortunes made this friendship perfect.

Dicearchus that would put into practice the promise he had made Pisistratus,
declared at last to Palamede, that he had not brought them to Corinth, but to
make up the marriage between him and Ariana: that he would never while he
lived consent to marry her to Melintus the son of his greatest enemy; and
that this was the resolution they were to take Palamede astonished at this
discourse, labored to divert him from his design; represented to him the
obligations he had to Melintus, the love of his friend to his sister, and after
all the oaths by which he had promised never to wish him ill for his fathers
sake; and that if he failed there, the gods would not pardon him. Dicearchus
answered him, that his intention thought but upon Telephus, not on Hermocrates,
when he made that oath; and though he were obliged to perform it, yet he was
not for that engaged to give him his Niece. Palamede employed all the eloquence
he was capable of, to bring him to reason; reproaching the life Melintus had
conserved him, and what injury he did himself in expressing so much
ingratitude: but nothing could bend this opiniated and vindicative spirit, that
would besides have Palamede advertise his sister of it, for to take her
resolutions accordingly.

This cruel news in such wise surpised her, that she lost speech at it; but
Palamede seeing this fair sister to be transported with grief, and out of all
heart, encouraged his own, for to assure her that he would not suffer this
tyranny: that their uncle ought to have over them a mild authority, but not an
unjust Empire; that he knew well how to defend himself, and her too from this
oppression; and that though he were not at all so engaged to Melintus, the
fashion Dicearchus used, sufficiently obliged him not to give way to him.
Ariana somewhat restored by this resolution, prayed her brother to try first if
he could gain her uncles spirit by sweetness: but she was much amazed when
Dicearchus himself signified to her, that nothing should ever divert him from
that design; and not knowing how to be free of her uncles cruelties, and
Pisistratus importunities, she advised to shut up her self with Cyllenia in
the Temple of Juno, where she should only have Epicharis with her, while
Palamede returned to Syracuse to advertise Melintus of what passed, and to
resolve together how she should behave her self. The next day she prayed her
uncle to give her leave to be some days with Cyllenia, who thinking he could
better be assured of her in that Temple, consented; and Palamede feining that
he went to see his friends at Athens, departed, and embarked him secretly, to
take the way of Syracuse.

As soon as Ariana was alone with Cyllenia, she made her part of her grief,
and after she had concealed nothing from her concerning Melintus and her self,
asked counsel of her what she had to do. You have reason, said Cyllenia, to
make your address to me in this occasion; it is impossible for you to find a
person more knowing than I am upon this subject, to tell you what is necessary
for the ordering your affairs, and avoiding what is to be feared; and since
experience has so well taught me, I will tell the greatest part of my life,
which will be the best instruction you can receive. Ariana having desired her
to make her so profitable and delightful a discourse, Cyllenia began to speak
thus:

History of Lepantus and Cyllenia.
Fair Ariana, you have conceived so good an opinion of me, that it grieves me
to diminish it by the recite I am going to make you: for you shall hear such
sad accidents that happened to me by my own fault only, that you will hardly
believe I was ever able to fall into a blindness of that nature: yet in
respect of the care I have of your good fortune, I had rather prefer your
safety to my reputation with you: that by my example you might receive counsels
that may be of use to you. I shall not fear to re-uncover my wounds for your
sake, and to strike terror into you, to the end you may escape the same
precipices whereinto I am fallen. Some comfort shall I have too in my miseries,
if they may but serve to hinder you from being miserable.

Know that Lepantus whom you have heard tell of, was of Naupactum, a Town not
far from hence, situate at the mouth of the Gulf of Corinth, who having lost
his father and mother, was not content with the cares they had taken to have
him instructed in all necessary studies and exercises; but after he had married
a sister he had to one of the chief of Athens, he came to this City, drawn
hither by the reputation of the great Philosopher Artemidorus, who was a
particular friend of Sebastus my father, for to learn of him the most hidden,
and sublimest Sciences. Though those studies were very serious, and that
required an entire wit, yet he was not so taken up with them, but that he
diverted some times to all other sorts of arts and gentilesses, where he
prosper'd with so much glory, as if his birth furnished him with a good
success for all he took in hand. Artemidorus admired this excellent genius,
and sometimes entertained my father with wonder at it: He came very often to
our house, where they conferred together concerning their studies; and being
very courteous, he many times escaped from them to come to speak to me, as if
he were tired with the high discourses they treated of; and he passed away the
time in my company with so pleasing discourses, that I should have thought his
only advantage had been to entertain Ladies, but that I knew how much he was
esteemed for things of more weight: so I made a far greater account of him
for that, and honored him as a person distant from the ordinary sort of men:
He expressed too, that he took great pleasure in my company, for that I loved
to quit the common discourse of Maids, and sought to make my spirit capable of
things our custom is to be ignorant of: so as accommodating him to the
sufficiency of my judgment, he learned me fair considerations by means that
were very intelligible: and when he advanced a little, and saw that I attained
him, he strengthened me in that estate with thoughts of a higher nature, and
bred in me a disdain of our ordinary conceits, with a desire to polish my
soul, and make it more perfect. It seemed he had framed himself what he
attempted to love: and on my part being much indebted to him for that pains, I
studied to please him, and so to use the means as to be thought worthy of his
esteem. Some jealousy I had, when I understood that every body favored him,
or that he pleased himself in any company, having a fear lest the kindnesses
of some Ladies might not take him from me, or that he encountered not some one
whose wit he might find more equal to his own. It seemed there was a design
in it, that those that came to see me, ever spoke of Lepantus, and thought me
happy for seeing him sometimes, as if all things conspired to make me love
him; and if he came to our house at the same time they gave him these praises,
I well saw they were not affected, because every one offered them him with so
much honor, and approved what he said with so great pleasure, that I could not
be wanting after so many persons, to give censures of him to his advantage. I
would have w^^hed he had seen me oftener, and since that seeing there passed
few days. that he came not to us, and finding him in a sadness that was not
ordina^^ with him, I imagined that he loved some Lady that used him ill, or
that ^e could not easily see; and came to divert his griefs with me. One ^^ile
I wished ill to that fair Lady, for the sorrow he suffered for her: anoth^r
while I was not angry for the small satisfaction he received, for the inter^^t
I had in him; and whatever were the cause of it, I was very glad to see ^im
oftener. He had the reputation to be loved of some Ladies; but they we^e such as
never troubled my mind; for he told me all the defects he foun^ in them, some
were too facile, others had no other pride but to get quantity of Lovers, and
to keep them all by different means, and because I knew that vanities and
affectations were insupportable to him, I was sure he would never have a
passion for those subjects. I inquired after the places he most hunted: but I
found none that deserved his stay, and in my soul I doubte^ not but that he
approved me as much as he did any else. At length one day when we were alone, I
showed him some verses were given me, and in re^ompence he let me see others he
had made himself; and they were these:

SHall I then suffer an eternal silence
Of my sad griefs to hide the violence,
Extinguishing my days most happy season?
And can this beauty that my thoughts adore,
The use of voice deprive me evermore,
After she had deprived me that of reason?
And shall the ardor of my secret fires
Still kindle in my soul so vain desires,
And no excess of rigor mollify:
Still shall her eye upon me fulminate,
And pitiless my hopes to dust translate,
As into ashes my heart multiply?
Where art thou Courage? have I lost that strife
That carries all to their own good and life?
My just resentments where have you remained?
What magic poison, what deceit might keep
Your power in most necessity asleep,
When I these unknown traitors entertained?
Ah! Whither will my senseless fury take me?
The discreet bridle of cold fear will make me
Soon disavow these transports of my tongue:
The torments of my rained soul I nourish,
The enemy that kills me I must cherish,
If I no reason have, my plaints are wrong.
They Are wrong, it is true; my fetters are too fair:
Causeless complaints my want of worth ^clare:
To free me of them it is not my design:
The honor of her sight is recompense,
And I too happy am without offense,
Always so near my heart to bear her shri^
Said I her shrine? ah, it is her self, it is she,
I feel her there within too cruelly
Kindling the coal that nourishes my torment:
It Is she, her power makes her well appear,
Who in that heat is pleased, she caused there,
And lives in fire as in her element.
Thou that liv'st in me, beauty inhumane,
What need I speak, thou well behold'st my pain;
Will thou establish peace within thy dwelling?
What! my ills horror makes thee insensible?
But if thou art but ice, alas! is it possible
Thou should not quench the ardor of my loving?
Is It possible, said I, giving him the verses again, Lepantus should stand
mute before her he loves? Not only mute, answered he, but so full of respect
and fear, that not so much as a look has ever given her an expression of my
love. You must needs, said I to him, fear her extremely, for I know but very
few that would not gladly receive the offer of your service. I wonder, replies
he, you should think that so strange, when you are one of those that cannot
endure to be loved. Speak not of me, returned I to him, for I have reason not
to believe that any can love me: but she you are in love with, being without
question very lovely, may well believe what you might tell her concerning your
affection. Contrariwise, goes he on, I love her not but because she resembles
you, and this is that makes me fear, that I be not sensible of the same
severity in her, which many others have made trial of in you. I answered him;
but it was not Lepantus that made me those offers; and being unsatisfied with
my own beauty, I could not believe any great effects could proceed from so
mean a cause: besides, I must tell you, that though I be not worth the pain
to be loved, I have not hitherto found a man worthy of my spirit; and though
some one might present himself, I should use him as if I thought him the least
of men, and my self one of the perfectest women. This answer surpised him,
and for a time he stood as if he had been without all sense; then recovering
speech, he said to me; I have then some cause to fear, that this beauty
resembling you, banish me not her sight, if I prefum'd to declare my love to
her, or at least that she thought not her self offended at me, and her
provoked eyes were not to be endured. All, said I to him, are not so
ill-natured, and I would willingly know her, to persuade her to think well of
you. May it please the gods, said he, you had as much will to help me, as you
have knowledge of her. I swear to him I would employ my self heartily therein,
if he would let me know her. That would be, answered he, to speak of love to
you, which you will never endure. That concerns me not, said I, will never
offend me. If she resembles you, replide he, both in beauty and humor, she
must have a like thought to yours, and to make trial by your self of the
usage I should have of her, I will tell you, Cyllenia, I love you: What would
you answer? But, said I, that is not so, and therefore I cannot make you the
answer I would. There is nothing more certain, continues he, and all the
discourse I made you, was but to make way for this declaration. I blushed, and
ashamed that I had thus forced him to discover himself, told him; Lepantus, if
the freedom I use with you cause this boldness, you shall not long time abuse
it: for you must either lose this liberty, or my sight. He, nothing amazed,
answered me; You will confess then I had cause to conceal my affection from
her that resembles you: for I apprehend as cruel an answer from her, as that I
have drawn from your mouth. I was now more ashamed than before, for having
been so deceived; and but for the coming in of some company, I had gone to
complain of him for thus playing with me: yet for all that I flattered my
self with a belief that his discourse might well be true; and all night long
I did nothing but fortify me in that opinion, that he would but sound me on
all sides; and that if my answer had been more gentle, he would have left off
feinings, to speak more open and plainly to me. It was a strange resolution of
mine: I wished he would love me, and thought I loved without being loved; but
when I saw him submit to me without knowing my design, I took upon me so
absolute an authority over him, that I would make him suffer as rigorous a
government, as if I had hated him, and would put him to the cruellest trials of
it.

Since that time he lived with me as before, thinking I had received his
excuse; nevertheless I would not stay there; and my desire was admirable. I
had a mind that he declared himself to me, and was for all that resolved to
take away all hope from him. So I sought the occasion as well as he did: and
one day as I spoke to him of a dream I had had, he told me he had put one of
his into verse, which he showed me that very time: they were these:

FOnd man, what have I done? ah wretched bold device!
Have I then dared to break theice
Of a respect so long preserved?
And has my fury then at last usurped this license,
Me speak of love she heard,
And for this I am banished evermore her presence?
Those fair eyes without mercy, more to justice bent,
Have added for my punishment,
Fierce anger unto Majesty.
I feel their venging fire: she flies away unkind
To a woods privacy;
And I in following her lose both force and wind.
Stay cruel one, to satisfy you I entend;
For if my mouth could you offend,
My hands to right you shall not spare,
But all is dark as night, and reaching but my arm,
I take but a light air:
Gods! I Am in bed, and but a dream is all my harm.
O fortunate awake that favors innocence!
What? her anger, and my offense,
Are they into air vanished?
My respect triumphantly laughs at these Chymears,
And my senses ioyed
Are safe from such fantastic miseries or fears.
Go, dream, the terror of souls amorous,
Bearer of visions hideous,
Brother of shady ghosts and spirits,
Cruel impostor, go, and plunge thee in the deep
Of hell devoyd of lights,
Where naught but crimes and monsters sadly keep.
Are you still then, said I to him, upon this restraint, not to dare declare
your self? Ah Madam, answered he, you have given me a lesson not to put me to
that hazard. All women, said I, are not made of this mould. I told you before,
replide he, that she, without giving you offense, is made just as you are. I
pray you, do not desire me to run that fortune; lest aspiring to blessings I
dare not hope for, I deprive not my self by imprudency of those I now enjoy. I
see her, I speak to her, and content my self with the esteem she makes of
me, since I cannot pretend to be loved of her. But, replide I, what can you
hope will become of your affection, if she have no knowledge of it? He answered
me; Since she will not hear speak of it, before she knows it, she must know
it, before she hear speak of it. What know you, said I to him, but that she
knows of it already, and that there remains not something more to be done
besides assuring one another? Promise me, said he, that she shall not be angry,
and I will take that liberty. I promise it you, said I, for the power I have
over her. He answered me, you have all the power over your self: and for this
cause I presume once again to tell you, that it is you I love; and that you are
to be fully persuaded of it, since you know well there is not a person in the
world besides you that I can love. You imagine, said I coldly to him, to make
me answer again in the name of her you love, and to try me the second time.
No, returned he, there is no feining at all in this I tell you now, and what
ever severity I may prove, I am forced to say it by the excess of my
affection, and by the assurance you have given me not to be offended. I will
not be angry with you, said I, since I have been so obliged in the business:
but I forbid you ever speaking of this affection: if you love me, you will
fear to disobey me; and if you love me not, I will never hear your
dissimulations. Then growing pale as if he had received an arrest of death,
he durst no longer endure my sight; and casting down his eyes, he said to me;
Madam, at this time I am not faulty but for having obeyed you; and since to
obey your commands, is to fail; my disobedience to that you ordain me, shall
not be any more a crime. You are for all that, answered I him, to resolve you
on this, or never to see me. This last blow confounded him altogether, and
took his speech away: some that came in upon us found us in a great silence,
which he never brake, but in his going out when he said to me, I had rather be
deprived of speaking to you, than of seeing you: and since you are so cruel, I
promise I will obey you all my life. Nevertheless he could not refrain from
taking up this discourse again another time, whereupon I alleag'd the promise
he had made me, and would hear him no more. The day after he let me see
these Verses:

YEs, I have promised, and will keep my word;
Hard-hearted woman, whose record
Holds only what exasperates my pain;
To suffer always, and to hold my peace:
Inhumane, inhumaine,
Keep then as I do, all your promises.
Those eyes, that hid a soul without all pity
Under a veil of amity,
Assured me to your grace to dare pretend;
But now they are my cruell'st enemies,
Where me they should defend;
Why do not they observe their promises?
When I resolved to send unto your prison
My heart together with my reason,
Your beauty promised them so sweet a bondage:
Upon those hopes to irons they were led;
But to endure your outrage:
Is this to keep what you have promised?
I grant, a spirit without love as you,
May live as well and never be true:
But I alone will make my promise certain:
And heaven, that laughs at lovers perjuries,
Shall never be in pain,
To mock, or pardon my disloyalties.
Again, I vow to hold my peace for ever:
And if I chance to fail hereafter,
I will endure the worst of your disdaines.
All things will speak for me; my pain will speak
That on my face remains,
And tell the griefs I suffer for your sake.
My silence more disert than my discourse,
Will be ready at my succors,
To let you know the evils that compass me:
And this amaze which your perfections
In your presence give me,
Will tell you the excess of my affections.
When you consult your glass early, or late,
The two bright Planets of my fate,
So worthy to be loved, my love will tell,
And without crossing that you me enjoyne,
Your own fair mouth as well,
Shall tell it to you in default of mine.
I confess to you I had a great power with my self, to use him so cruelly:
for there was not any thing in the world I could esteem like him, nor that I
had a greater desire to please: yet knowing that he valued nothing so much as a
virtue separate from the common, and that he would love me the better for thus
resisting his first attempts, I thought I must live with him after that
fashion. But judging then that I had proved him enough, and full of joy to see
him so touched with love, it became me to yield a little; and changing my
countenance, I said to him with a smile, Lepantus, I will have you obey me all
your life time, by never speaking of your affection: for I will be altogether
assured of it, thinking you too virtuous to be a deceiver. He was so surpised
at this discourse, never dreaming on so happy a fortune, that taking me by the
hand he could not tell what to answer. At last he said to me, It suffices that
you have knowledge enough of your self, and me to be instructed what you are
to believe of either: And you have reason not to desire any words for your
assurance; since all the actions of my life shall declare nothing else to you.
Lepantus, replied I, you have sufficiently known how much I esteem you: If I
must love something, it cannot be but you: I permit you to believe this, and
prescribe you no law for your manner of living with me hereafter, being
certain that all your desires are regulated by virtue. Madam, said he to me,
kissing my hand, my passion has for its object a thing too perfect, for to
permit me a thought that may be unworthy of the cause of it, and I receive no
small joy for the assurance you are pleased to have of it, whith makes me
believe that you judge it as great as it is indeed, though that be very hard to
do. Let us leave, said I to him, these common protestations, and live without
doubting one of another: It Is not your words, that have taught me what to
think of you, and one word only from me ought to assure you of my friendship,
since I durst say it. There is no more to be done then, replide he, but that
you order, how it shall please you to have me live: whether you desire I should
declare my self, or else keep still my affection hidden. It were better, said
I to him, not to discover us so soon (because at that time Callias sought me)
you know, added I, what my father desires, and I must break that blow, before
it be known that I have another desire: in the mean time live so discreetly,
that none may perceive your design. I receive, answered he, this ordinance for
an extreme favor, and you shall see in what sort I shall observe it. From that
time we lived together in a most perfect confidence, which we concealed with a
mavelous discretion; and there were very few that could suspect us of
intelligence: which made us both severally be thought insensible of what
belonged to love, as finding nothing worthy of us. I advertised him of
whatsoever passed, whereupon he gave me counsel, and received it of me also in
that which concerned him: I told him good tales of those that attempted to
love-me, how they behaved them in it, and in what fashion they were received;
he pitied some, and laughed at others. If there happened any thing to me, I
longed to see him, to make my report to: so did he also make me so exact an
account of his life, and satisfied all I desired of him, with so much care and
respect, that I became too much assured of the power I had in him. But I swear
to you, nothing was so agreeable to me, as his discretion: nothing seemed so
far from any design of loving me, as he: He never dissembled in presence of
all, and of my father too, to speak what he had to say to me, or knew of me,
under terms so pleasant, and with so much dexterity, whether in making any
relation, or to the purpose of what was spoken in the company, that without
being understood of any body, we did understand one another as well as if we
had spoke openly.

For the space of a year we lived after this manner, but in the end having
broke the marriage of Callias with much ado, and seeing how difficult it would
be for me, often to make the like resistance to the duty I owed my father,
since he expressed, that he had no other desire than to see me very soon
married to one of the chief of Corinth, I counseled Lepantus to lose no more
time, but to discover himself, though I foresaw many difficulties: for
notwithstanding that my father esteemed him as much as was possible, and saw
his condition as considerable as his own, yet was he far from having a
thought of him, being unwilling to make an alliance out of Corinth. We
therefore consulted together of the ways we were to take; and although
Lepantus received with much joy the permission of demanding me, yet he never
left fearing for all that; for he saw that if fortune were contrary to him, he
should not only lose the benefit of having me, but besides the commodities he
enjoyed before, as to see, and entertain me with so much facility. Well for all
this we were to resolve, and I promised him to express in his favor
whatsoever my honor might permit: nay, I gave him all the assurances of my
affection he could desire; and upon the sadness I saw him in, I told him;
Lepantus, are you not content with the words I give you? tell me what you
would have them, and you shall see, if I have not a purpose to do all I can
for you. Madam, answered he, the honor you do me is so great that my silence
in part is for not knowing how to give you thanks. I have nothing to desire of
you, but what it shall please you to command me: I had rather from henceforth
be obliged to your good will, for the favors I shall receive of you, than to
the promise I have drawn from you: but give me leave a little to apprehend the
hazardous fortune I am running: there is no midway for me; I must either be
the happiest of the world, or dye: for be you assured, that if I see my self
deprived of living with you, the readiest death I can find shall be my
deliverer. Lepantus, said I to him, fortune, it may be, will not be so cruel
to us, and before you lose all hope, I must first lose all sorts of means,
whereby you might have satisfaction. The power, answered he, you have herein,
is so great, that if you employ it, I make no doubt of my happiness: you have
a father that loves you, and that has no cause to hate me: I dare say our
conditions are equal: but a light difficulty many times overthrowes important
considerations. It Is not here, as with ordinary marriages, where after the
proposition is once refused, the small engagement of the parties leaves every
thing in the same state it was in: but as soon as overture shall be made on my
part, I must spend all the powers I have, and my very life in the acquiring of
a good fortune, without which I can no longer live in the world. I replide to
him, Do but on your part what depends on you, and for me, doubt not but I will
yet do more than you dare hope: I will believe, the gods will take care of us,
and not suffer that we be long-time divided. He took my hand, and kissed it a
good while full of transportation, and joy; and to retire him from that
trouble, I told him, we were to think upon the means we should use. We
advised that though he had kindred at Corinth, yet it were better the
proposition should be made to my father by Artemidorus, being a fit man to open
the purpose of it as a common friend, and capable afterward to persuade by the
strength of his reasons; and that if need were, others might join in it: all
the difficulty was, to have news one of another, in case the business went
hard, for to give advice of all should pass, and remedy the disorders might
supervene. I could not resolve of trusting any body, and that was a good turn
for me, for without doubt I had been betrayed. At last I told him, I had a
closet that was over a street where few ever passed, and that at night I would
let slip a cord to which he might tie the letters he sent me; and the day
after he should have my answer. And so that was resolved on, and he parted
from me with much sorrow, fearing he should not see me again of a long time:
yet I saw him once more, but it was in company of some others, and he had only
leisure to tell me how Artemidore would be for him with an extreme affection,
and was to propose the business the next day.

I waited for that day with a great deal of unquietness, and in the morning I
prepared my self to look well, when Artemidore should come to our house: but
I was prevented, for my father, returning home to dinner, I saw him look but
with a sour face, and walking fast up and down as if he had some thought to
vex him. I knew that he came from Artemidore, and made no more doubt of that
made him so thoughtfull. We dined without a word speaking, and after dinner
he went into the Closet where his books were, and sent for me to come to him.
I came trembling as if they had led me to execution, but yet as I entered I
recollected my spirits, and as his custom was to speak to me as soon as ever
any occasion was presented, he said, Daughter, I heard this morning, that you
are sought of one whose deserts are well known to you, and to me too: there
are difficulties that would divert me from thinking of him, and there are some
reasons also to make me have liking to him: but before hearing of any
proposal, I was willing to know if you could resolve with your self to
receive him. I desired to seem crafty, and preventing him, said; Father, I
beseech you name no man to me, but believe that whatever he be, I shall
receive him, so he be a fit man in your opinion. He had spoken thus mildly to
me of purpose, well doubting that I was advertised of all, and by and by he
perceived my cunning: Then he goes on; No, no, daughter, it belongs to you to
make choice of him you are to live with, and I shall see afterward if your
choice be reasonable, because in this judgment you are to refer your self
to me; and I will tell you truly that it is Lepantus is your suter. I could not
abstain from blushing, yet thinking how all depended of the declaration I
should make in his favor, I answered, Sir, Lepantus has too many good
qualities, and I have too often heard you valuing him, to find any thing to be
disesteem'd in him: if he be agreeable to you, I shall soon let you see that I
have no other design but to obey you. This answer, though it seemed very
fair, made my satisfaction too manifestly appear to him: he thought the
demand was not made, but that I desired it, besides the mistrust he had
heretofore of our intelligence together, and there was nothing could more have
hurt us, than the knowledge of this confidence that was betwixt us without his
leave; and though he had had no other cause to complain of Lepantus, that
provoked him enough to tell me with an angry countenance, I see well he does
not displease you, but I fear lest that which most pleases you in him, be not
that that most offends me: go, I will think of it; and in the mean I forbid
you seeing him. Those words strangely amazed me, and I went out as full of
confusion, as I had been before of hope.

At night I knew by Lepantus letters, that Artemidore had proposed our marriage
to my father, and remonstrated all the considerations that might move him to
it, which he something coldly hearkened to, and promised to think upon it. I
counseled him to employ all the friends he could make to persuade my father,
before he gave any answer to his disadvantage; because I came to know that he
was greatly offended at our affection; in such sort that there passed no day
that those that had a power over him did not speak of this business to him,
whereupon he would give no resolution.

Lepantus was very well beloved at Corinth, and as soon as his aim was
known, there was none but desired he might succeed in it: Every one made
wishes for him, and saw with sorrow the torment he endured, because of my
fathers aversion: And for that I was in some estimation there too, they thought
nothing could better be fitted together than we two; and I believe this, that
never were humors so equal, he not only loved all that was perfect, but had
rendered himself so accomplished withal, that whatever fair qualities men
have pain to acquire, seemed to have been bred with him; for me I will not
say, I was of that perfection, but yet I could not approve but that that was
so. We did ordinarily give the like judgment of all things; our courage was
elevated to the same degree; and we affected the same kind of life both. Do
but see what happiness I had possessed if we could have come to have lived
together. My father was blamed of all for opposing himself to our desires,
there being none but would have judged this affection to have been nourished
of a long time between us, and that he would have attempted nothing but by my
permission.

I protest, it despighted me that the world believed I loved him, and I was
sorry that his merit was so known to all, as it was impossible but it should
be known to me too. I would have wished him less accomplished, that it might
have been doubtful whether I esteemed him or not; and not knowing how to be
revenged of this common opinion, sometimes I was resolved to abandon him, and I
consented to make my self miserable, and him too, for to ruin this belief at
our own cost, it is true he has paid very dear for that glorious and haughty
virtue he taught me; and that I well served my self against him, of this
greatness of spirit to which he had advanced me, that persuaded me, it were
better to lose all the contentments of my life, than it should be said, I were
in love. In the mean time I considered not how there is nothing more lawful,
than to choose by honest means him one thinks she shall be happy to live
with, and when that happiness is arrived, one cannot but be thought wise.
That error made me commit faults I shall deplore all my life time.

Though my father had let Artemidore see, that Lepantus was not to think of
me, yet he refrained not sometimes to put him upon that discourse, and
represented to him what fault it was, to refuse this good fortune for his
family: that he despised in Lepantus the qualities that other fathers would
desire to meet with for their daughters; that if he loved me with so much
passion, it was rather a happiness, than a thing to make him culpable, that
the whole City would have an obligation to him, for the stay of a person of
that merit with them; for the greatest part of his estate being about Corinth,
he offered to settle himself there, and never forsake my father; but all this
prevailed nothing upon him. That which rendered Lepantus recommendable, was that
which did him the most harm; my father having this woeful opinion, that he was
rather to choose a son in law less able than he, and that would be more
careful of his affairs. But yet I believe the strongest reason was, that my
father (although a knowing man) retaining the nature of old men, that will have
all their opinions pass with authority, was envious of Lepantus's knowledge,
and desired not to have ordinarily at his house a person that could contradict
him: though Lepantus well knew how to give way to all he said with much
discretion. My father had not so much reason to refuse him, as I had to love
him, and he could not but perceive the desire I had, because I was not able to
suffer any body that spoke to me to the disadvantage of Lepantus, and far
rejected the parties that presented themselves. I know very well that if I had
declared to my father that I could not consent to any other search, he would at
last have been flexible to the tenderness he had over me, and the merit of
Lepantus: but fearing lest so absolute a resolution came to be known in
Corinth, I never had that assurance.

In the mean time I was tormented with Lepantus vexations, and with my own
too. I saw him at the Temple, but rarely; and with a face so changed, that
Death has not a more forlorn one. His letters were not filled now but with
the misery of his life, and modestly he remembered me of my promises. I
acknowledged he had reason, and that his good fortune was in my hands, but I
could not resolve me: and this severity that made me insensible to his griefs,
and prayers, in the end wrought in me also an insensiblenesse to his affection.

All that came near me, were instructed to speak in contempt of Lepantus,
and because I knew him too well to believe them, if they told me any thing
that were contrary to the truth; they did only disguise his virtues, and made
them pass for so many vices. Thus the charms he had to make him be loved of
the ablest, and respected of the meanest, were but an imperiousness, and a
tyrannicke authority which he usurped upon all that haunted him: his discretion
was dissimulation, and his courtesy artifice: all his good qualities in their
judgment were so many defaults. I confess to you, I began by little and
little to give place to their reasons. Lepantus absence effaced every day out
of my memory some one of his perfections. I said that peradventure my affection
blinded me, and made me imagine merits that were not in him: that those that
were without passion judged of him otherwise: at last believing I was far
more quick-sighted, and more perfectly judicious, I perceived not that I became
blind, and without all judgment. Nevertheless there still remained in me a
certain respect for Lepantus, that I durst not offend him by expressing my
coldness. I was ashamed to give him that displeasure, that never yet had the
fortune to displease me. His letters were still full of love and sorrow for
seeing me no more; and because he knew that the gentilesses, and points of wit
he wrote, were very agreeable to me, he ever mingled some of them, maugre the
cruelty of his fortune, and the torments he endured; and many times he so
forced himself, that laying aside his griefs, they were throughout filled
with sweetnesses and elegancies, and to any but my self would have seemed to
come from a man very well satisfied.

For me, I knew well his constraint, and lamented it: but then when my
affection diminished, I changed my opinion, and judged that if he had been
much in love, he would not amuse himself with those finenesses: if his passion
carried him away to express some despair to me, I said it proceeded from the
respect he ought me: if he gave me any advice, I took it not well he
should trouble himself to counsel me, or that he mistrusted my own
direction: if I met him, and he appeared to me with a very altered face,
finding no more in him that which heretofore was so acceptable to me, I thought
I had reason to withdraw my affection: and if some hope made him recover his
ordinary complexion, I said he was not much troubled with love. In the humor
I was in, it had been hard for him, so to have composed his face, and his
actions, as I should not have found something to distaste in them. He judged
well that the cause must needs be very ill, that produced so great a change:
for that heretofore he did nothing which I would not have approved: yet his
discretion always so perfectly maintained it self, that he never complained
of me, what cause soever he might have: He never made known any of the
assurances he had received, to express what wrong I did him. So he dissembled
his grief, not daring to accuse me, and hoping I would use his affection
better: but that good will I had had for him, began to be quite extinguished.

At the beginning I made answer to his letters, and gave him new assurances,
with some instructions for his conduct: since I took upon me to represent to
him the difficulties: a little after I received his letters without answering
him; and at last I sent one of his back again without seeing it, and closed
as I had received it. The same night that I did his affection that outrage, and
that he received that usage so unworthy of him, I understood how he hardly
escaped dying: his affliction assailed him in such sort, that they thought he
would have been strangled, but for the remedies were brought to ease him. I
thought I could no more receive his letters, since I suffered the suit that
Callias renewed. I let my self go with the common opinions, that all the
women that live in the world have not husbands so perfect, and yet are no less
contented with those they have; that it were better to obey ones father, than
satisfy the desires of a person that was before unknown; and if there
remained in me any consideration for Lepantus, I said that he having a
strong, and a constant spirit, would learn resolution by the loss of me, and
with this vile reason I defended that cruelty that sent him death into his
bosom.

I often considered upon the excess of his respect and love, that never
suffered him to make so much as one complaint of me; and the resolutions he
took afterward, made me plainly see that this silence proceeded of no little
resentment he was affected with. In the end I consent to the marriage of
Callias, and he is received at our house: Every one wonders at my resolution,
and how Lepantus had so dis-ingaged me from loving him. Callias was not very
vicious, and had no remarkable imperfection in him: but he was of the number
of these middle and indifferent sort, for whom those that have wit and courage,
have so much contempt. At first I compared him to the most part of them I knew
married, and I found that he might equal them. But all on the sudden, see my
traitorous memory, that had sometime concealed Lepantus from me, how it came
to represent him with all his perfections; and making comparison with Callias
to him, I found so great a difference, that I was ashamed of the fault I went
about to make. In stead of a right shape, and majestuous countenance, I saw a
heavy body, and graceless; in stead of that exalted spirit that handled rare
subjects with so much facility, and so pleasingly diverted me, I found a
languishing entertainment, and that was capable of nothing but the meanest
things: in stead of that so native courtesy, and gentile carriage, I saw a man
that observed no civilities but those he took from the imitation of others. I
begin to regard him with coldness, afterward with disgust, and in the end
with a contempt that was more cruel to me than to him: nevertheless I had let
all things be resolved on, and could no more go back.

The day that Lepantus knew the agreements were to be signed, when I went to
the Temple, he came near me unseene, and said to me, Never will I be brought
to make any reproach to you while I live; but the death I am going to seek
will never leave you in repose. At the same time he withdrew himself from
me; I had not known what to have answered him, so much did his sight and
words trouble me; and seeing him no more, an horror seized me, and so great a
shaking withal, that I could hardly stand upright. Yet recalling all the
resolution was left me, I thought it had been the last agony of our dying
friendship.

I estranged therefore, as much as I could, Lepantus from my imagination, and
rejected the exact consideration of what I was going to do; but when all was
settled, and by my hand too, and that I had shut my eyes to take this poison,
coming to open them again, I perceived that all those that loved Lepantus,
could no more endure the sight of me: the pity of the sickness he could have
no cure for, made them have me in detestation, and they esteemed me unworthy
to have been so well loved of him: in stead of a common rejoicing there was a
general silence, and there was none but the most contemptible persons that
expressed any joy. All this amazed me, one while Lepantus presented him to my
imagination, reproaching me with my infidelity: all his fair qualities came
to assault me one after the other, and seeing Callias in the place he was wont
to hold, I turned away my eyes, and could not endure him. Every one
acknowledged my phrensies; but they imputed them to my humor, which they took
to be something proud, and singular. At last the day arrived that I was led to
the Temple betimes in the morning; and having known that Lepantus was gone out
of the City, for not being a witness of an action so shameful for me, and so
unfortunate for himself, I never had so great desire to hear news of him as
then, to learn what would become of him. After I had been married, I
perceived at the door of the Temple a man that was not known, but I knew he
belonged to Lepantus; and ghessing he was not there but to bring this news to
him, I said to him passing by, Go tell thy Master what thou have seen, and at
what hour soever it be, come again to tell me what he has done after thy
relation. Judge, fair Ariana, what care I could have of him, after the action
I came from. The rest of the day I was so full of trouble, that to see my face
they thought I had been sick. It seemed the cruellest of thoughts attempted
to assault me all at once, for to put me into the greater disorder; and
sometimes they provoked me with such fury, that but for the restraint our sex
is obliged to, I believe I had given up my self to desperation. My soul was
already filled with these confusions, when about evening I knew that one asked
to speak with me. I presently imagined it was news from Lepantus, and went
in great haste, but trembling withal, to know what the matter was. I saw it
was the very same man, that having taken me apart, told me, with the tears
in his eyes, that having passed in a Squiffe as far as Naupactum, he found
Lepantus that attended him upon the bank of the Sea, to whom he told what he
had seen, with that he heard me say; and how ^^pantus had answered him. Stay
not a moment to go tell her again, what thou art about to learn; and
suddenly he had got up to the promontory that avances into the Sea, and from
thence precipitated himself into the Gulf, he being unable to have come near
to hinder him. Hearing this woeful news, I cried out, Oh gods! I have made him
dye; and staying no longer by the man, I bade him withdraw himself, and I went
again into the great Chamber all in trouble, and with wandering eyes. They
enquired what I ailed, but presently I fell into a weakness. My father,
Callias, and the rest astonished for this accident, labored to bring me
again, and by force of remedies I opened my eyes: then I was carried to my
bed, where I was taken with so violent a fever, that it troubled my judgment,
and made me furious. I lost all respect and knowledge, and when Callias came
near me, I cried out, Take away that Monster, that would devour me; ha the
villain beast! I am undone, see his venom that he casts upon me; and I
retired me as much as was possible. If my father came to restore me to my
wits with gentleness, I said to him, Ha! hangman of thy own blood, go cruel
man, think not to put me into the claws of this Dragon: I will kill my self
rather. No, no, thou shall never carry me thither; see Lepantus there coming
to my succors: then turning me again, I said, Generous Lepantus, how do you
come to my defense, since I was cause of your death? What, have you pity
enough of me, to go set upon him? Well, on then, go kill this Monster, and
take heed he does not enwrap you with his tail: Courage, my dear Lepantus,
see already one paw struck off; Courage, his blood is lost; Lepantus, one blow
more; look, look, he is dead: then I rejoiced, and thought to embrace
Lepantus as victorious, and demanded his pardon for making him dye, with a
thousand prayers, that were followed with a torrent of tears. I cannot relate
to you all my frantic humors, knowing nothing of them but what they told me
afterward: but my transport ceased not, but when Callias and my father betook
them out of my presence. Then returning to my ordinary sense, I could not
believe what they told me of my madness, although I felt great vexation of
mind for the loss of Lepantus, and the displeasure of my errors: And I
considered into what misery I had enengaged my self, when I preferred to be
miserable, before any should know that I loved, since I was then both
miserable, and known to be in love. But again my fever and fury took me,
as soon as ever they returned to see me; as three or four days after, seeing
how my life was endangered, and no appearance this marriage could be
consummate, for what I had expressed for Lepantus, and against Callias, they were
resolved at last to assure me, that he should not be my husband: then my fever
much abated; and when all the agreements were quite broke, because of my
aversion, by little and little I recovered my health; but I had still left so
great a grief for Lepantus death, that never since could I find any
contentment. At all instants his fair qualities, and the obligations I had to
him came into my mind: the fault for having brought him to dye, is to me so
cruel a remembrance, that it gives me no repose; and I have found too true
that he foretold me. In the end I was resolved to put my self into this
Temple, for to spend my days in the service of the gods; since I so ill knew
how to use the good fortune they had offered me amongst men. And this is that,
my dear Ariana, I have to tell you of my life, that it may serve you for
example, and hinder your falling into the same faults, that have been cause of
so much affliction to me, for I see that your affairs take the very same way
that mine did, and if you be no wiser than I, you will make your self as
miserable.

Ariana who had given great attention to this discourse, then brake her
silence, and said; I have had much contentment to hear the particular of your
life, but as much displeasure withal to know the misfortune of it. I find
that in some things you are blameable, and in others excusable; because you
were injurious to forget the merit of Lepantus, and to be changing in effect:
but on the other side, the authority of a father is very great, and I do not
know how I my self should have resisted it. Heretofore, answered Cyllenia, I
thought this authority was not given to fathers, but to this end, that we
might not doubt to render the respect we ought to the wisdom of their
counsels: but since, examining all things, I have found that there is nothing
so tyrannical; and that they only hide their own phancies under this cloak
of goodness, and love toward us. Ariana, assure your self, our parents have
their designs quite differing from ours; after we have well considered of
choosing a person, virtuous, accomplished, and conformable to our humor, to
pass our life with in honor and repose, they come to regard him with other
eyes; they will be only satisfied, and suffer no inconvenience: our happiness
is the least thing they consider; if they have some little cause of hatred
against that we desire, or some interest that obliges them to desire what we
avoid; to conceal the true cause of their own passions, they will blame ours;
they will represent us the obedience we owe them, and what shame it is to make
our selves be spoken of, serving them of our very virtues for to make us
miserable: then they employ their power against our weakness; for there is no
doubt (and you will confess that in this subject I have made my self very
learned to my cost) that if our understanding be not well fortified by reason,
it will many times waver in the execution of an enterprise, and be driven out
of the considerations upon which it was founded, by other very light ones for
the most part. We ought to do nothing we have not well thought of, and
approved; that nothing afterward may be capable of making us repent, for the
lightness of our judgments; for repentance makes the thing ill, which of it
self was good; and the election that is founded upon a certain science, and
firm discourse of reason, ought never to be changed. Thus when we have known
a person to be of a happy birth, endowed with all honest qualities, and for
these just respects have found him worthy of our friendship, and have been
willing to express this esteem of him, that we have received his assurances,
and returned him ours; there is no more consideration that should dis-ingage
us; our soul is given to him, when we have entertained his: heaven has
allied us, our virtue can no more consent to undo what we have done, and the
thoughts that move us to dream upon other subjects, are all of them criminal,
and against the honor of our sex, that cannot endure there should exist a man
to whom in effect we have given our heart, while another shall enjoy our
bodies: this meditation alone is a perpetual executioner to us, whatever face
we put on, and what pretense soever we take for the excuse of our Fightnesse.

I perceive, interrupted Ariana, that you have well studied these
considerations, and shall have cause to mistrust my own courage, since yours
being grounded on so good sense, was able to give way to difficulties. Truly,
replied Cyllenia, peradventure you need not fear falling into the like errors,
that I have done; because the authority of an Uncle is not so powerful, as
that of a father, and besides you have more strength of wit than I: but above
all, never persuade your self that the affection you have for Melintus can be
annihilated, whether by resolution, or by time; for fear you abandon not upon
that hope all the prosperity of your life. See then, Ariana, when by a mature
knowledge of virtues and deserts, two wills are encountered equal, it is now no
more a passion, but it is reason that loves. We cannot hope that ever such
affections should be separate from our souls; there arrive many times
accidents that may trouble us, and make us receive false opinions; but when
those fancies are dissipated, the first impressions that cannot be dissolved,
appear as ingraved as ever before, and are felt in their whole strength; and
judge you in what estate one is, if during the trouble of judgment, one has
committed so great a fault as cannot afterward be repaired. We must confess,
answered Ariana, that men have much more force in resolutions, than we: for
when they have once conceived a design that is of importance to the good of
their whole life, they maintain it to the very last breath, and do all things
possible to put it to effect: Contrariwise, our spirit slackens to the least
obstacle; we know not what will become of us; and our feebleness hinders us
from clearing the meanest passage, for the attaining of supreme felicities.
It Is true, pursues Cyllenia, but why should not one woman be found amongst us,
to express a resolution, and to relieve the honor of our sex? Fair Ariana,
if I have thus failed for want of courage, do not you the like; acquire to
your self with much glory, much contentment. Nature has given us secret
desires, not only to conserve our lives, but also to make them happy: for the
first she has given us the love of our selves; and for the second she will have
us love some other thing: but because the love of our selves is first, the more
the thing we love resembles us, the more happy are we when we can possess it.
So when two souls meet, alike in goodness, sweetness, and virtue, it is a
treasure cannot be esteemed; and such a rancounter is made but once in an age:
and these are to despise all the hindrances they find of uniting themselves
together, to the end they may enjoy the perfect contentments of so fair a
friendship; for after they be once known and loved one of another, if it
chances they be divided, it cannot be without an insupportable violence, and
without suffering afterward as cruel punishments as they had promised to
themselves pleasures of eternal conversation together. We must needs think,
replied Ariana, that these felicities are exceeding great, since the only hope
I have to live one day with Melintus, ravishes me: for to tell you the secret
of my thoughts, I do not believe that any thing but the death of one of us,
can ever be able to keep me from them; I think the time long till he be here
arrived with my brother, that you may judge whether I have reason to love him;
and that we may all together take counsel how we are to divert my uncle's
designs, for the favoring of our own. I shall be very glad, answered
Cyllenia, to give my advice in those conferences, and assure your self my
resolutions shall not be less generous.

These fair Maids entertained one another often thus, during the absence of
Palamede, and attending with impatiency his return, and Melintus his;
sometimes the gentile Epicharis interposed her counsels, being loved of them
both, as much as her wit and discretion deserved.

Dicearchus many times came to see them, and pursued his Niece to consent to
his design, whereupon she referred her resolution to the return of her
brother. Neither did Pisistratus fail of his respects to her, hoping to gain
by the expressions of his affection, what Melintus had already acquired by so
great a number of merits and services, that Ariana's, dis-acknowledgement had
far surpassed that of her uncle, if she should have so much as made a doubt
of satisfying the promises she had so solemnly sworn to him.

The end of the first Part.
ARIANA. The Second Part.
The first Book.
SInce the cruel depart of Ariana, Melintus had banished from his soul all
kinds of joy, and seemed to have lost by absenting her from his sight, so many
fair qualities that made him admirable. This spirit so generous, so sage and
courteous, now languish'd overwhelmed with grief, without any appearance of
virtue, receiving his friends respects without expressing a resentment to them,
and altogether careless of returning any. He hated as much as his disease, the
divertments that might ease him, and cherished nothing but that profound
sadness that consumed him. He had no contentment but when he redemanded of his
memory the dear pledge it had in keeping the divine Idea of his fair Ariana,
which never presented her to his imagination but with a pomp worthy of her,
accompanied with lights that rendered her all bright, full of charms and
graces, and who seemed to send him amorous regards for to comfort him in this
absence, and assure him of her fidelity. But still this pleasure was troubled
with many vexations; presently was bred a wish to see those beauties otherwise
than by Idea, then followed an impatient desire, if not to possess them, at
least to enjoy the favors that were heretofore permitted him: but this
unfortunate desire being acknowledged impotent and destitute of all succors,
replunged him into the excess of his afflictions.

They are but senseless people that can be happy by fantasy; because their
judgment nothing operative, and unable to discern the false from the true,
they receive and resent their imaginary good things as true ones. Melintus on
the contrary was not miserable but for having too much sense: the solidity of
his judgment repelled, in despite of himself, these vain illusions; and
brought him to see and feel the truth of his disgrace, with all the miseries
that accompanied it. If he sometimes labored to releeve himself by
meditations of virtue, which teaches to contemn humane accidents, as things
that are without us, and whereof we have not the jurisdiction; and if his
courage made a hard strife to find comfort in this separation, considering it
was to end, and that evils that have a term prefixed, receive consolation from
hope; suddenly a thousand cruel suspicions overthrew his resolutions. He found
that the hasty voyage of Dicearchus had no apparent thing in it, that could be
to his advantage; he considered the prosperity of Pisistratus, who seemed to
triumph over him, having had the power to carry away in his ship, and to hold
in his own disposition his dear Ariana, with those that disposed of her: the
advantage of this rival to be in his own country, assisted by his friends,
favored with a thousand means, having Dicearchus present, Ariana and her
brother, whom he would endeavor to overcome by all the ways he could invent;
whilst himself in the mean time was far away, uncertain of all things, in
vain provided of friends, in vain cherished and honored of a whole Nation,
and in vain restored to his illustrious and rich inheritance, since all this
power was of no use to him. These murderous thoughts, sustained by many
importunate reasons, whereof his wit was but too fertile, pursued cruelly his
hopes, and deprived him of the only remedy that was capable to sweeten his
troubles. His body participating of the griefs of his soul, had without doubt
fainted under the burden of so adverse a fortune, but for the last
preservative was left in him, the assurance of Ariana's affection, and of
Palamedes friendship, which he could not doubt of. Palamede was a friend proved
by too many rancounters, to have the least suspicion of; and to distrust
Ariana, were to add a crime to his misfortune, which the faithful love of
that fair Lady could never pardon, nor all the Ocean wash away.

How many times for all that, said he, overpressed with his fears, and
wavering betwixt assurance and doubt; Fair Ariana, whose resolution good or
ill, shall give me either life or death, pardon a little apprehension in him
that lives in ignorance of all that happens to you. If I fear, it is that I
doubt of my self, and not of you: when I imagine to my self the force of your
divine spirit, I feel a power coming into my soul, that drives out all
defiances; but to believe that I should be the subject of an invincible
constancy, were a presumption that would make me unworthy of you. It may be the
knowledge of many merits in another, shakes your resolution at this present,
and makes you avow that they have more equality with the greatness of your
virtue: it may be also you are at this hour generously resisting the attempts
of a violent pursuit: Me thinks I hear of one side the humble supplications
and advantageous promises; and of the other the counsel full of feined
affection borne out by a tyrannicke authority, by choler, and threatenings: if
this last be true, ha! how I envy you so glorious a trial of love; and how I
would cherish the happiness to be exposed to violences yet more cruel, to let
my passion appear victorious over heaven and earth. How am I happy, if in
these occasions you have me for your sole object, and how happy do I esteem
you too for the joy you receive in triumphing over their attempts and
practices. Thus was it, that Melintus flattered his passion, and strengthened
his dearest hopes; and if sometimes a little doubting mingled it self with his
pensiveness, it was so modestly, and casting always upon himself the fault
that might cause his misfortune, that even Ariana could not have taken offense
at him. But the blessing he expected still floating in a Sea so full of storms
and shelves; and his present evils giving him a sense of all their force, he
relapsed continually into his first trouble. His friends were often constrained
to take him away by force out of his solitude, and bring him to the public
recreations, and sometimes to hunting, where he ever stole away from the
company, and had no contentment, but when he was in place where he might freely
think that he had none indeed.

If honors had been capable to have satisfied him, the Syracusians had cured
his melancholy, establishing him chief of their Counsel, and erecting for him
a statue of brass in the public place, with this honorable Inscription, To
the generous Melintus, that loved his Country better than himself. But all
those favors were but a weak remedy for his evil: his face well showed the
displeasures of his mind, so strangely was he altered, and his body could not
long resist any more, being deprived of nourishment and rest. His days were
nights, because he no more enjoyed the light, having his sight so overcome and
weakened by watchings; and his nights were long and tedious days, since he
never tasted the sweetness of sleep.

About the end of one night which he had passed away in this manner without
sleeping, after having rolled in his mind a thousand different imaginations
upon the subject of his cares, he spent the rest of the time he had to lie
abed, in making these verses under the name of Cloris, which he ordinarily
supposed.

YE sad and miserable nights,
That waken all my un-delights,
While sweet repose you give to all things else beside,
Shall I thus complain for ever?
I have suspir'd enough, let me in rest abide,
And tell me not, that Cloris is not here, how-ever.
The Moon already waxing pale,
Does to the Sun's arising vale,
And yet unquiet slumber still my eyelids close:
To me alone under the heaven,
Day passes without light, and night without repose,
When e're of Cloris sight I feel my sight bereaven.
Messenger of approaching day,
Goddess, whose beauty, I dare say,
Borrowes a thousand graces of her I adore,
Come thou of her return to tell me?
Thou runn'st in vain^ for me, return, O fair Aurore,
If thy coming be the news of day light only.
Wherefore, Postilion of the day,
Powr'st thou down tears which look so gay?
Cry'st thou for pity to behold what I endure?
What may thy laughing then portend?
Is It not for this, to comfort me by an augure,
That I shall quickly see the beauties I attend?
Alas! how sweet is this conceit?
The heaven too-jealous will defeat
This blessed hope, I fear, of my felicity.
But thou that bring'st the day again,
And rendrest to our eyes the fairest things that be,
Why may thou not return the object of my pain?
Melintus thus passed a miserable life, having his soul perplexed with
griefs, impatiencies, suspicions and fears; full of uncertainties and doubts,
which is the wofullest estate a Lover can possibly be acquainted with. It Is
ordinarily between two extremities that virtue, happiness, and tranquillity
consists: but there is nothing so cruel in love, as the mean between hope
and fear; it is a space filled with confusion, despite, and rage. The mind
will always be acting, hearing and judging; if the senses make no report
concerning that it loves, it knows not wherein to be employed, it is troubled
and lost, and turns it is forces against it self to be tormented and destroyed.

At length the arrive of Palamede who came from Corinth retired him out of all
those doubts; but it was by the assurance he gave him of the misfortune he so
feared. He learned the tyrannous resolution of Dicearchus, the violent pursuit
of Pisistratus, and the cruel persecutions Ariana suffered, for not failing of
her fidelity to him. And yet he was more content to be assured of a mischief
that was without remedy, than to live incessantly in uncertainty and fear. His
courage permitted him not to despair, and the faithful assistance of Ariana
and Palamede was too powerful a stay to his resolutions. But the Letter he
received from Ariana, made him entirely confident, and obliged him no longer to
defer his depart for Corinth; the letter was thus:

Ariana to Melintus.
AT length we have known the cause of our voyage; they will have me marry
Pisistratus: but to consent to that, I must first lose the remembrance of you.
But yet I know not what will become of me, if you assist me not with counsel
and succors: having nothing for my defense but the friendship I bear you,
which is an invincible reason, though not fit now to be alleged. Came away
therefore as soon as you can possibly; and to the end you may not doubt any
thing of me, know that I permit you all the enterprise you have a mind to.


There needed Melintus but few such words, to make him go to the very
extremities of the earth; and instantly he resolved with Palamede to furnish a
vessel with all things necessary to serve them at all occasions; and because
they were in doubt whether force was not to be employed, they provided them of
the fairest and best arms they could make choice of. But although the love of
Melintus wholly possessed him, yet he omitted not to consider of things that
were more remote; and knowing well that sooner or later Nero would come to
understand that they were living, he was resolved to send Arcas to Rome, to
learn if there were no speech of them, and he gave him charge to make his
address to Maximus, to whom he sent rich presents, in recompense of the losses
he had suffered for their sakes. Having given order on that side, he entreated
Telephus to take the care of all the goods he left in Sicily; and when he was
ready to depart with Palamede, Amyntas came to offer himself to him with so
good a grace, to accompany and serve him in that voyage, that he could not
refuse him. Erycina her self too that always loved Melintus as her brother,
prayed him to receive him; being desirous that Amyntas, who continued
passionately to love her, should render her this testimony of his affection, to
go serve him in his enterprise, that was not altogether unknown to her.
Melintus, Palamede, and Amyntas, accompanied with the most courageous youth
they could be assured of, departed, and took the way of Corinth. The wind was
favorable to them at the beginning: but presently there arose a South Wind,
that forced them to go far away to land in Italy, whatever Art the Pilot
could employ. This going out of the way, and reculing of a voyage were very
cruel to Melintus, that every instant thought it the fatal hour, when they
would constrain Ariana to marry Pisistratus: Nevertheless a month and more
was he thus to pass, before the wind changed: but as soon as ever it was good
for them, they put to Sea again. The second day after they were gone, they saw
coming toward them a light Vessel, that seemed to have a purpose to set upon
them. Melintus because he would not be surprised, put a Casque on his head,
took a sword and a Target, and advertised Palamede, Amyntas, and the rest to
do the like, and make them ready to fight. They knew instantly that it was a
Brigantine of Pirates, that was very soon with them, for they were too
courageous to fly; and when they were hooked to them, Melintus first leaped
into the Pirates ship, and was presently followed by Palamede and Amyntas, which
strangely amazed the robbers, because they had never been accustomed to be
prevented, nor to fight only for their own defense. This astonishment they
were put to was attended with a thousand blows, that Melintus and his valiant
friends gave them in a moment. Melintus had already struck down at his feet
five or six soldiers, and all flew before him; but he was stayed by the
valor of a young Pyrat extremely handsome, who wore a gilt Helmet, covered
with plumes that over-shadowed his face, and gave him at the same time both
fierceness and grace; and therewithal he made appear so much force and
address, that Melintus judged him an enemy worthy of himself; so he instantly
assailed him, but he wondered to see that in what place soever he addressed his
blows, he still found there either his Buckler, or his Sword. In the mean
time it behooved him also to think of warding the strokes of so valiant and
skillful an enemy, that gave him no rest, and for well defending of himself,
left not well offending of his enemy. Yet Melintus had the better of him,
because by little and little he made him give ground, and at last avoiding a
blow he slipped besides his weapons, and passing up to him, ran him into the
left arm. They came then to closes; Melintus after much wrestling threw him to
the ground, and having drawn his sword out again, was going to kill him, but
that one stayed his arm: He looked upon him that held him, and saw a man of a
good mine, that had no arms at all, and that conjured him to give life to so
gentile, and so valorous a Captain. Melintus was contented to take his sword
from him, and advertised to have his blood stanched: at the same time he
regarded what Palamede, Amyntas, and the rest did, and he saw that they had
slain the greater part of the Pirates, and that the others demanded their
lives, seeing their valiant Captain vanquished. This young Sea-robber having
some-while held down his sight to the ground, because he was ashamed of his
defeat, lift it up at last to regard Melintus, and said to him, I had never
been so cowardly as to have given you my sword, and be beholding to you for my
life, but that I have a design to employ them both at your service: for you
must needs be the most valiant of all men, for having brought me to this
estate, when I never yet could find any that resisted me. I pray you
therefore, receive me for a soldier that shall well know how to obey you,
since I knew not how to overcome you. Melintus touched at these words, that
parted from a heart very generous, and feeling in himself some motion that
invited him to love him, whether for the grace that accompanied his countenance
and speech, or else for a secret affection that all valiant men have one to
another, reached him out his hand, and having embraced him, assured him of his
friendship; he only signified to him that he wondered, how being so honest and
so valiant, he addicted himself to a Pyraticke life. Eurymedon told him (for
so was he called) that as soon as the trouble should be appeased in the ship,
he hoped not to be condemned by him for any of his actions.

Melintus answered him, that he would be very glad to learn his fortune, and
because that Vessel was full of dead men, he repassed into his own with his
friends, and made the fair Eurymedon enter too, and him that had kept him from
being killed, whom he told that he would not willingly arrive at Corinth but in
the night. Eurymedon, who had often run over all those Seas, and saw already
appear a far off the promontory of Naupactum, and the Gulf which but very
lately had the name of Lepanto given it, since that unfortunate Lover had
precipitated himself into it, told him they were very near it, and they were
then to cast anchor to stay in that place. His advice was followed, and the two
ships separated, for not falling foul one of another. Eurymedon having seen
that his hurt was not very great, applied to it a drogue, which he was sure
would close up the wound by the next day. Then Melintus prayed him to make
known his fortune to them, being impossible they should better employ the time
that remained until night; and when they were all retired into a Chamber, he
began the history of his life thus.

History of Eurymedon and of Pasithea.
I Believe there is not a person in the world that can better testify than my
self, how much important to the life of men is the encounter one meets with to
be bred and brought up; for if I have done good actions hitherto, I am
altogether indebted to this nurture for them; and if ill, I hope to be
excusable by the same. You will confess this truth, when I shall have told you
wherein I employed my time, since I came to have any understanding; for of that
which happened to me before, I could never be able to learn any thing.

Within the Ionian Sea there is an Island called Corcyra, upon one of whose
sides looking toward Epire, is a retreat of Pirates, where it is impossible to
assault them. I was brought up amongst them in that place, without ever having
knowledge of what parents I was borne; only they made me still believe, that I
was of an illustrious blood. I know not whether they stole me from some King
being but a little child, or if it were only to put more courage into me: but
I have always observed that they bare a great respect to me, and that from my
very infancy they ordained some of their number to serve me; and since that as
soon as ever I was able to bear arms, they voluntarily submitted them to my
obedience; and thought their conquests most assured, when they could have me
for their Chief I cannot tell from whence the opinion came they had conceived
of me, or whether some divining Astrologer had not promised them some great
fortune, if I commanded them. At last I found them ever ready to obey me,
excepting only in that which most concerned me, to know in what part they had
found me. Nevertheless I thought them to be excused for refusing me that
contentment, when I confider'd they were in fear to lose me, and that as soon
as I were restored to my Country, I should seek their ruin in stead of
serving their fortune. I believe that which made them hope for something out of
my courage, was an action I did, being not fully yet nine years of age. Some
of the Pirates had made a prize, and coming to part it before me, two of them
took a quarrel against one; and to make him quit what he had, held their
swords in their hand against him. I could not suffer that unequal combat,
seeing him that was alone ready to be killed, though he employed all his
industry and courage to defend himself; and without dreaming of my age, or the
danger, I took into my hand a little sword I had, and went to set upon one of
the two. I know not whether he feared to offend me, or whether by despising me
he gave me the more facility to strike him, but I took him a blow into the
belly that made him dye in the very instant. Presently those that were present
came to embrace me, and gave me a thousand praises, for not having endured the
cowardlinesse of those two that had assaulted one alone. As soon as I came to
be twelve years old, they began to carry me to Sea, and whatever care they
took to hinder my getting out of the ship, when they were going to fight with
another, they ever found me in the midst of the Combat, my sword in my hand,
and having some enemy under my feet. At length when I came to have about
fifteen years, it happened that he that commanded all the Pirates dyed: they
chose me for their Captain; rejoicing, as they said, for that they should from
henceforth obey a Prince: the ceremonies that are usual to them in such
elections were observed, and they made me an oath of an inviolable obedience,
provided, I should maintain their privileges. A little while after, to show my
self worthy of that charge, I went to Sea with two ships only, and sailed to
the Coasts of Egypt: I was so fortunate as to take five great Vessels laden
with Merchandise, and with them I returned to Corcyra, where I made part of my
booty to all my companions, who ceased not commending me, and calling me their
good and their valiant Prince. In two years I made them richer than their last
Captain had done all his life time: yet I will not repeat to you all the
prizes I took, nor all the hazards I ran, to come to that which has been the
most sensible thing to me in all my life. I attained with age more
understanding; and having always lived among them in this error, that the
greater the massacre and booty were, the greater also was the glory; by little
and little I began to be of another opinion: for it seemed more glorious to me
to pardon the vanquished, than cruelly to kill them; and I took a far
greater pleasure in giving away what I had gotten, than in making treasures of
it. That made me consider that the life of these Pirates was miserable, and that
their actions were repugnant to those that generous courages ought to put in
practice. That which finished to bring them into detestation with me, was that
for my good fortune, being gone very far in course within the Helespont, we
were surprised with the winter at our return, and constrained to stay in port
a of Greece until the Spring. While those that were with me counterfetted
Merchants to be safe in that place, and sold what they had taken; I lost not my
time, but went through all the fairest Cities of Greece, resting some time in
every one, where I learned lightly the exercises that are proper to them that
follow arms, and the civilities I saw observed by the most Noble. In these
Schools I well knew that that where I had been bred, was founded upon wicked
Maxims, and that which our men call valor, and glory, was properly assassinate
and robbery. Notwithstanding after having stayed more than six months to
instruct my self thus, I failed not to put again to Sea with my companions to
return to Corcyra.

The second day after our parting, we perceived a great ship that came from the
coasts of Asia, and seemed to take the same course we did: presently we
resolved to set upon her, and having a while coasted her, at length we invested
her, and entered in. The sight was well enough maintained by those that were
within, among whom was the Captain that defended himself a long time against
me: nevertheless I made him in the end desire his life, and I pardoned all the
rest in favor of him. I had hurt him in many places, and was careful to make
his wounds be dressed; then I carried him with his ship and men to Corcyra. My
return was extremely acceptable to the Pirates, as well because it was along
time ere they had seen me, as for the greatriches I brought, with this
Prisoner that was an Armenian Prince, who went from thence Ambassador to Rome
from Vologeses, King of the Parthians, and from Tyridates King of Armenia. The
knowledge I had that he was a Prince, made me have a particular care of him; I
visited him very often, staying till his ransom might arrive, but I found him
in so deep a melancholy, that nothing was able to comfort him. In the end
having urged him many times to tell me the cause of his sadness; this Prince
that called himself Araxes, finding in me some civility, and a great deal of
freedom, resolved with himself to let me know what his grief was, and spoke
thus to me; If I had no other displeasure but this to be wanting to my King,
whose affairs suffer a great prejudice by the stay I make here, you will
confess that I have reason enough to be afflicted: but though the trouble I am
in for this be extreme, it is far surpassed by another torment I endure. I will
not, continued he, conceal from you that which causes me so much pain; and
for all you are the sole cause of the imprisonment I am in, I receive so many
courtesies from you in my misery, that I will willingly make you part of my
fortune, as the best friend I have in the world. Know, pursues he, that
Tyridates my Master is the legitimate successor of the kingdom of Armenia, by
the partage that was made between him and his brothers, Vologeses and Pacorus;
of whom the first that was the elder, reserved to himself the kingdom of the
Parthians, and gave to Pacorus and Tyridates, the kingdoms of Media, and of
Armenia. But the Romans under the Conduct of Corbule, having made themselves
the stronger party in Armenia, expelled thence Tyridates, and made come from
Rome Tygranes a stranger Prince, grandchild to the ancient Archelaus, King of
Cappadocia, and Nephew to Archelaus the King of Troas, who had always lived in
ostage with the Emperors; and established him King of Armenia. This change was
very sad to the greater part of the Armenians, who regretted their natural
King of the race of the great Arsaces: On the other side many loved Tygranes
better, hoping that the Romans, from whose hand they received him, would better
know how to maintain them in peace, than Tyridates who could not resettle or
preserve himself, but in continual fighting against them. Nevertheless
Vologeses having assembled all his forces to restore his brother into his
kingdom; after there had been advantage and loss on either side, we ordered
the matter so, that Corbulo was agreed, that Tygranes should abandon his
pretention to Armenia, and that Tyridates should remain peaceable possessor of
it, upon condition he went to Rome to receive the Diadem from the hand of Nero.
While they were in preparation of this voyage, I was sent in the mean time to
the Emperor, for to assure him of my Masters fidelity, for gage whereof he
has left his daughter in the hands of Corbulo; but I had Commission to pass
by Treas to see King Archelaus, upon certain conditions that concerned him
because of his Nephew Tygranes; and in that place I encountered all the good or
bad fortune I am to hope or fear while I live. This King has no sons, but
the disgrace is well recompensed by the fortune he has to have a daughter
named Pasithea* that is without doubt the fairest and most lovely Princess of
the world. After I had spoken to the King, I was brought before her to salute
her; and as soon as ever I saw her, a trembling surprised me, that presaged,
as I believe, the miseries that were to come upon me for having seen her. I
left not for all that reassuring my self; but after some discourse I had with
her, I felt that I was so taken with her love, that with astonishment my voice
failed me at every word. I could not finish that enterview, for the contentment
my new growing passion received in regarding her: On the other side, I was
ashamed to be with her, and unable to entertain her. Yet at last I left her
for fear of being troublesome; and retiring me to the lodging was provided me,
I began profoundly to meditate upon that which had happened to me. I considered
the beauty, and all the graces of the Princess that forced me to love her, and
whereof I found nothing capable to dis-ingage me: on the other part I had
regard to the small hope I had to be ever happy with her, because she was
destined to Tygranes her Cousin, who would ever be more considerable than I to
Archelaus (though I were of the race of the Arsacides) for being the only
remainder of his blood. Those cruel thoughts were indeed strong enough for to
ruin my hopes, but not to choke my affection; and the violence of it every
moment increasing, I had no way to ease my ardor but in seeking to see her: and
so far was this sight from bringing me any remedy, that I felt a thousand
desires entering into my soul by troops when I saw her, that never meant to
leave me, but render me the most miserable of men. I knew well that the more I
saw her, the more I resented my evil, and yet nothing was so cruel to me as
to be obliged to leave her for the performance of my voyage. All I could do,
was, that being with her when I took my leave; Madam, said I, I am going to
Rome, whence I would be glad to return as happy as Tygranes, though I would
not willingly bring away with me the qualities he acquired there. She asked me
what I meant to say? It Is this, answered I, that he is come back from Rome
with the hope of possessing you, but has brought away with him abase and
servile spirit, that makes him unworthy of so high a fortune. I had not taken
the boldness to despise her Cousin in this manner, if it were not a thing
known, that his spirit was abjected and grown degenerate, having been so
long time retained in hostage at Rome. She blushed to hear me speak so, and
without anger, said to me; If this hope be so high as you say, it may give
courage to those that want it; and take it away from those that have too much
of it. I had only leisure to return; It Is not to lose courage when it is not
lost but with ones life; and this is the resolution I take in the search I will
make for the honor of your good graces. She could not answer me, because some
company came near us; and I was reasonably well pleased for having expressed
my affection to her, and the poor esteem was made of Tygranes, before I was
separate from her. I parted from Archelaus Court with a purpose to go to Rome,
and to return as speedily as I could into Armenia, to acquit me of my charge;
where when I had stayed as little as I possibly might, I was resolved to go
re-visit Pasithea, the privation of whom was so cruel to me, that all the
moments I passed without seeing her, were so many years to me of insupportable
punishments. Judge, Eurymedon, continued he, what misfortune 'twas to me to be
taken by you, at that time my very voyage it self was tedious enough to me;
and what kind of life I must lead in this place, where peradventure I lose the
fortune of my Master, and the dearest of my own hopes? Then tears abundantly
flowed from his eyes, whereat I was touched, but yet more to know that I was
the cause of so great a trouble in the affairs of Tyridates, and the loves of
that Prince, all which obliged me to say to him; I believe your greatest grief
comes from not daring to hope for any courtesy at our hands; but I will let
you see that my soul holds nothing of the cruelty of Pirates. I think the gods
have sent you hither for my safety, and it may be too they have made me be
borne to serve you. From this present I give you liberty, without expecting
your ransom any longer, and render you all those that remain of your men,
with the riches you have, which are still entire: but it is upon condition you
grant the request I will make you. I have had a long desire, continued I, to
quit the life of these Pirates, amongst whom I have been educated against my
will; and thereupon I related to him all you have heard touching the
incertainty of my birth, and the manner of my living until then. Now, added I,
you may make your voyage to Rome, and depart when you please: I only desire
this of you, that we may live eternally friends, and that you tell me where I
shall find you at your return, whether in Armenia, or Troas; for after having
abandoned this Isle for ever, I will return to you in equipage worthy of a
Prince, that we may no more be separated.

Araxes at the beginning of this discourse, knew not if he should believe what
I said* but seeing at last that I spoke seriously, he cast himself upon his
knees before me, and said, That he made no doubt but my birth was of the most
illustrious, since I did actions that appertained not but to the gods, and the
greatest Princes of the world: that if he received of me so great a grace, he
had an obligation to me which all his services could never acquit him of, and
that if he were so happy as to see me one day in Armenia, I should acknowledge
what resentment he had of so singular a favor. In the end he made me a
thousand oaths, to assure me that never man was so redeuable to another, as he
should be to me, after having received an office so important to his life. I
lift him up again, and having embraced him to swear yet to him an eternal
friendship, we consulted together, and found that he required at least two
months for his voyage: he demanded of me that term, within which time he
would without fail render himself in Troas with the Princess Pasithea, if
there arrived to him no second misfortune; that yet he ought not so to call the
encounter he had made of me, since he had gained more in this mis-adventure,
than he could ever have acquired in the most happy accidents of his life. I
furnished his vessel the best I could, wherein I made to be re-imbarqued all
his men, with what he had lost; besides I added to that some presents of my
own, to the end he might remember me, whilst I should dispose of my affairs,
to forsake secretly those that had bred me, without their doubting of my
design. My companions had sorrow enough to see so much riches carried away
from them; but they respected me with so much honor, that they never durst
express any thing of it to me. At last I let Araxes depart from our I Will, after
many embracements, accompanied with protestations of friendship. Afterward I
was some time amongst the Pirates, living more than ever after their mode, and
approving all their actions, to the end they might have no mistrust of me. But
when I saw the time approaching that Araxes had given me, I began to choose
out those that were the most affectionate to me, to follow me in my enterprise.
One day having assembled them, I represented what our course of life was,
incessantly to purchase wealth without knowing whereupon to employ it. For,
said I to them, in the ordinary life of men, I find excusable those that
labor to accumulate goods, for the sustentation of their families, or for
satisfying their ambition, which cannot be done without their succors. But we
have no children, for whom we might have cause to travel; and for the degrees
of honor, we defer them not to the most rich, but to the most valiant. What
fury then possesses us to thrust our selves incessantly into peril, and to
trouble the repose and commerce of all other men? This same valor wherein we
surmount others, may make us gloriously acquire in the wars, that which now we
infamously gain by rapine. If all the world fear us, we fear all the world
also; and measuring our number with that of the rest of men, we have far the
greater part our enemies. Others again have this advantage above us, that
being in our power, either they go out by ransom, or else receive their death
with innocence; and we are certain being taken, to dye by the most shameful
punishment can be inflicted upon villains. Besides all this, I do not believe
the Romans will let us any longer live in repose: there is no doubt but in the
return from the Parthian war, Corbulo will scowre the Seas of Pirates as
easily as Pompey heretofore did. The more valiant we have been of late, the
more complaints have we provoked against us; and the more we have made our
selves redoubtable, with the more puissance and resolution will they come to
assail us. Why shall we continue living after this fashion, when we may be
seen among other men with more honor and safety, and with as much advantage?
I believe I will not give place in valor to any Captain in the world, and I
am assured there are no Soldiers in Corbulo's Army more courageous than you:
in the mean time we let them bear away the spoils of all the earth, and the
applauses of all men; while we amuse our selves unworthily in running over the
Sea, to wait for the passage of a Merchant. Let us go, my companions, in place
where we may purchase wealth accompanied with glory: Let us be friends to the
Romans, or enemies; either take part in their victories, or else join us to
those they assault, and hinder their Conquests. There is it we shall prove our
selves invincible, when all our actions will be authorized with the right of
war. If I be a Prince, as they would make me believe, I will atchieve actions
worthy of my birth; and if you retain still in you that great courage I have
had experience of in so many encounters, you will not doubt to follow me in the
design I have to render our good fortune perfect, and our glory immortal.

When I had finished speaking, they all cried out to me that they were resolved
to live and dye with me, into what part soever I would lead them. I took of
them an oath differing from that they had heretofore made me, and prayed them
to keep our enterprise secret; while they put apart what they had most
precious, and made them ready to follow me, when I should feine to make choice
of them to go out a coursing. I was afraid to arrive at Troas sooner than
Araxes; so as I let a month still pass, after which I took leave of the rest
of the Pirates, with a purpose never to see them again. I confess to you my
joy was extreme, when I saw my self escaped out of their hands; and I thought
upon nothing but the new fashion of life I went to lead, in which I promised me
all sort of contentment and honor. But it is very difficult for those that are
accustomed to vice, entirely to quit it, and not again to relapse into their
first manner of living, when the occasion freely offers it self. Two days
after we were parted, when we had gone round about the Peloponesus, and were
passed the Cyclades, as we entered the Egean Sea, there comes a ship to us, that
was found so fair a prize, as it was impossible for me to hinder those that
were with me from going to board her. I said enough to them, is this that same
generous resolution we have made? is this the oath that ought to be inviolable?
They prayed me to give them this last satisfaction, and that it was only to
take leave of their trade. In the mean time they carried me away, did I what I
could, toward that Vessel, what ever remonstrance or command I laid upon
them; and being joined to it, they entered pesle-mesle in: as for me I stayed
in the brigantine with my arms acrosse, unwilling to have any part in that
action, which I was to suffer in despite of my self; only I desired them to
kill no man. Some while after I saw them return charged with quantity of fair
Stuffes, which were going to Rome, and came from the Levant: they made pass
into our ship young children very fair, rare horses, and store of precious
Merchandises that had been destined for to serve the strange luxury that then
reigned within the chief City of the world: they took nothing but what was
rich, and left the rest with their lives, to those that were in that ship which
they let depart. The greater part of my men fell down on their knees before
me, to entreat me to pardon this disobedience, and promised that hereafter they
would inviolably observe all I should command them. I was constrained to do
what they had a mind to, then we pursued our course.

We had purposed to go land at Troas, and had already discovered the Island of
Lesbos, when there appeared to us another Vessel that came from the Islewards:
My companions assured me that I should find in that occasion whether they
would not from thenceforth observe what they had promised me, and were
resolved to let her pass: but when she was near us, I heard the voice of a
Maid crying out, Save the Princess, friends, save the Princess. I said to
those of my ship, that there was an occasion worthy of our courage, and that
we were to assail those ravishers. Presently we went to board them: it was a
ship of robbery like unto ours; whereinto I leaped with my companions: I found
there small resistance, though those of the Vessel were well armed, and we put
all to the sword; then I entered into one of the Cabins, where I found an
ill-favored counterfeit man, assisted with four or five soldiers, that held
a young Princess, the fairest it is possible to see. I gave three or four good
blows with my sword to those wretches, and suddenly this villain cast
himself upon his knees before the Princess, and said to her; That if she
prevailed to make me save his life, he would learn her something that was of
great importance to her. She hearkened to what he would say, and after she had
a while spoken to him in private, she addressed her self to me, and prayed me
to prepare to fight with another ship that was presently to assail her; then
she said to me; Know, brave Warrier, that the man of the world I most hate, had
a design to carry me away far off from my Country, and with a very
pleasant artifice: for so to work his purpose as I should have an obligation
to him, he made two Vessels be in a readiness; the first was this, which he
had kept hid behind a Rock along the Seacoast, where I was to walk with my
Maids, and in it were those that took me away, whom you have defeated: the
second is still in the Port, and he is to go aboard it, feining to come to my
rescue; to the end that after he had attached this, I should believe he had
saved me from the hands of this man, whom he chose the most ugly he could
find, to make me have the more horror at him, and believe that I was
extremely obliged to him for such a deliverance: then he was to conjure me by
his affection to receive him for my husband, in recompense of so notorious
service; if not, he was resolved to carry me away by force into his own
Country. Now, pursued she, if you desire to perfect my obligation, I beseech
you not to spare him when he shall aboard us, as he is purposed to do
presently; that he may receive at your hands the reward his treason has
merited. She spoke with so much grace, that I ceased not admiring the
sweetness of her discourse; and I answered her; Madam, if the duty that
commands us to serve all Ladies, did not ordain me this obedience, your birth,
and so many fair qualities I see in you, oblige me too much to give you this
contentment you desire; and I think the time long till this Traitor appear,
for to punish him before your eyes for so great a villainy: but to the end he
may not fail to join us, I am of opinion that we pass into my Brigantine,
that is very like this, and better provided of all necessaries: then after
having set up the same colors, we will sink this, with what remains of
these miserable men; and he will not fail to take us for the same Vessel that
brought you away. This proposition was found very good by the Princess, who
smiled hearing the invention of it, and at the same time struck a thousand
wounds into my heart. I took her by the hand, and made her pass into my
Brigantine: and instantly I caused diverse holes to be made in that we came out
of, whereby it took water on all sides, and a little after appeared nothing of
it above the Sea. I had impatiency till this other Vessel arrived, so desirous
was I to please this fair Princess, whose sweet Majesty already bound my
heart with a thousand chains: At last I see it appear, and withal gave order
to make them feine a slow flight, and that when they should aboard us, they
would let a part of them enter: I took only a helm, and put down the
visiere for fear they should be shye of entering, seeing unknown faces. The
Captain of the other ship was armed just so when he leaped into ours, and he
said as he entered, Ha traitors! I shall reward you well for carrying away such
a Princess; but he found what he never expected, for I received him with so
great blows, that he perceived with astonishment that they spared him not. I
swear to you I was ashamed for so facile a victory: yet having promised the
Princess to punish him before her eyes, I struck him down at my feet, and
willing to cut off his head, I made her be called, that he might dye in her
presence: but when I snatched off the helmet from this wretch that lay at my
feet, I stood immovable to see it was Araxes. Then my spirit was troubled with
a thousand confusions, to have thus treated him I went to seek in Troas; and
on the other side I had promised the Princess not to spare him: whereat she
wondering, I very sadly regarded her, and casting me down at her feet, said,
Ha! Madam, how miserable am I, I must either disobey you, or kill my friend.
She embraced me to lift me up, and said to me; How is it possible you should be
friend to so wicked a man, being so generous as you are? Nevertheless I will
be satisfied for your sake, with the punition he has received, and will have
you give him his life. I thanked her for this grace she gave us both, and went
to make Araxes blood be stopped, which he lost on all sides. He was so ashamed
and confounded for what he saw, being yet scarce disabused, that he durst
neither lift up his eyes to me, nor to the Princess that was the fair
Pasithea his Mistress: yet he let his hurts be accommodated, and in the mean
time I went to demand of the Princess, if she desired not I should wait on her
back to Lesbos. This is that, said she, I beseech you to do. Presently I made
Araxes be returned into his own ship, and recommended him to his people,
commanding them to follow mine. Having given order for every thing, I had now
no more care but to entertain this fair Princess; and although the
friendship I had promised Araxes, strove to impeach the birth of my love, yet
it kept not so good guard, but that there entered by little and little much
passion into my soul: and I did my self turn away my thought from that
friendship, to favor the surprise, and betrayed it of purpose to let my self
be taken. This Princess made me so great thanks, that I knew not what to
answer to her obligeant words; and the more she expressed her self redeuable
to me for the succors I had so timely brought her, the more she reduced me to
have need of hers. After having assured her of my service, and that she might
dispose of my life, I entreated that she would not declare Araxes for author
ofher carrying away, which she promised me.

At length we arrived in the Port of Mitylene, where there was already come
running together much people, with the King Archelaus her father, who was then
in that I Will, and much troubled to set out Vessels for to follow after those
that carried away his only daughter. We descended, and the King coming to
embrace his dear daughter, demanded her how she had been saved. See there,
said she to him showing me, the man to whom I owe my honor and life, which his
valor has conserved me. The King came to embrace me, and assured me that I
might dispose of all his estates, in exchange of so dear an assistance. He
asked who those might be that would have stolen her away; and I well knew she
would oblige me, at what time she answered; I believe they were some of these
Sea-coursers, of whom there was not left a man, for that their vessel was
sunk to the bottom. Araxes, replied the King, has not he met with you? No,
answered she, and it may be he has taken some other course.

But, continued Eurymedon, I cannot but recount to you the peoples rejoycings
for Pasithea's safety: there were nothing but exclamations of joy round about
us, and so great a throng, that we were in danger of stifling. I knew very well
that she was infinitely beloved, but the cause of that love I shall tell you
some other time. I commanded those of my ship to return to Sea along the
coast, to go meet with Araxes his, who yet appeared not, and to advertise him
not to fail to return to the Court to have himself cured; and that the King
had no suspicion of him: I retained by me two or three of mine only, and with
them accompanied the King and Princess to the Palace, where they would have me
be lodged as long as I desired to remain in that Country. Archelaus demanded
me if there were no means to know whom they had so great an obligation to. I
told him, they called me Eurymedon: as for my birth, that I knew it not my
self; and how they that bred me would persuade me that I was of a royal
blood. They were satisfied with that for the time, then conducted me into a
chamber, where they prayed me to repose: but I told them my travel had not
been so great, as to oblige me to take rest before night. I reconducted them
into their retiring chambers; and by the way admired the number of Lords that
came to kiss the Robe of Pasithea, and express their extreme joy to see her
again. And indeed the qualities of this Princess were admirable, as I came
afterward to know. Besides her mavelous beauty, she had so many charms in
all her actions, whether in the sweetness of her looks, or in the obliging
familiarity she used to all that approacht her, that she acquired not the
benevolence only, but the passionate love of all those that could see, or
speak to her. All the strange Princes that came to her fathers Court, could no
more part from her: those of the Country that had been acquainted with her of
a longer time, kept in their hearts her old-inflicted wounds, and the Gentlemen
that were ordained to serve her, were all pale and languishing, to feel
themselves consumed by an hopeless love. As soon as ever she desired any
thing, all the company round about her ran to have the happiness to render her
service: if any indisposition happened to her, it was a general affliction; and
if the gods had desired humane victimes for the restitution of her health,
there was not a man in the Isle, nor yet in all Troas, that would not have
sacrificed himself for her. It is not for any affectation in her to make her
self be loved; nor that she employed any kind of artifice thus to acquire all
hearts: but it was so natural to her to please every one, that not thinking
thereupon she produced always these effects, and sometimes she was angry at
her self for so rare a gift of nature that contrary to her desire gave hurts
to those very persons she had a will to oblige. It was then no great marvel,
if being so universally beloved, she was so of me too: but yet herein was it
very strange for me, to obtain without pain the honor of her esteem, which
so many Princes of a long time had sought with a thousand duties; and by such
an hazard as scarcely can at any time be encountered. Araxes being departed from
our Island by the favor I showed him, was gone in all diligence to Rome, then
he returned again into Armenia; and presently he had rendered himself in
Troas, having employed no more than two months in all those voyages, so pressed
was he with the desire of seeing Pasithea; and the King Archelaus desirous to
pass away a part of the Summer in the Isle of Lesbos that appertained to him,
he had followed them because he would not forsake the Princess, whose good
graces he labored to gain by all sorts of artifices. In the end not able to
obtain of her any favor that might encourage him to attain them, he was
resolved to carry her away, when she were walking upon the coast in company of
her Maids only: for that she had set hours to be free in without any man to be
present. But consider what misery was that of Araxes; and what fortune I had;
he would have the Princess obliged to him for his artificial deliverance; and
my good fortune would have me give her a real succors, which entirely
procured me her affection. I acknowledged her good will to me by this, that
being in her chamber, after the King was retired, she said, she would walk in
the Gardens before supper, and gave me her hand to express that she would be
waited on by me. I was so taken with this honor, as I am not able to repeat to
you the transport I was in. I confess, I had not yet loved any thing, and was
but new to begin in the entertainment of Ladies: I was young and without
experience of the civilities are to be observed; having bin always upon the
Sea, and among Pirates: only I called to my remembrance what I had seen in
Greece during the stay I there made. Much company passed before us, and others
followed us with the Maids as far as to the Gardens, where the Princess
separating from the rest, that went off out of respect, brought me to a walk,
and we were left alone together: then desiring to make her some entertainment,
as she seemed to invite me to do, I said to her; Madam, what greater fortune
could arrive to me, having a purpose to see this Court, than to have had
entrance by so favorable a means? She answered me, This encounter is happy
only for me, because without your finding me at Sea, you would ever have been
a welcome man here, but if I had not met with you, I should at this present
have been the most miserable of the earth. Madam, replied I, there is no Judge
but will avow that your encounter being infinitely more agreeable than mine, I
must be the most happy in this occasion; if it be not for this, that so rare a
sight bring me not more misery than I can yet foresee. I can very well, said
she to me, take from you that fear, and assure you that if my sight be not
happy to you, at least it shall never be unhappy, as long as your good fortune
may depend upon my will. The greatest glory I have in the world, is, not to be
hated of any; and I must be so in a great degree of you, if after so many
satisfactions you have given me, you should receive little from me. I was
strangely ravished at those obliging words, and me thought they gave me
occasion to press her further, that I might receive greater testimonies of her
favor: but contenting her self with that she had said to me, she brake that
discourse to demand of me, whence came the acquaintance I had with Araxes,
Madam, said I to her, I can tell you nothing of this subject, unless I recount
to you my whole life, and because I will not conceal any thing of it from you,
give me leave to remit that entertainment of you, until you shall be more at
leisure: I beseech you only to believe, that I have too little known him for
having ever participated of his maliciousness. Remember you then, said she, of
this promise: for I hope to receive a great pleasure by understanding your
fortune; it can be no ordinary one, and I expect to hear of you actions very
contrary to those of Araxes. You must know, continued she, that the first time
he saw me, was, when being sent to Rome by Tyridates, he passed by Troas to see
the King my father. I know not what design he had for me; but after he was
willing to express an affection to me by some sighs, he was so insolent in
taking his leave, as to speak contemptuously before me of Tygranes my Cousin;
thinking much to avance his own affairs, by reculing those of Tygranes, whom
the speech went I was to be married to. I had temper enough not to give him
offense then, by returning to this indiscretion, what would seem but
reasonable. But believing I should never see him again, I would let him depart
without coffeehouse. About two months after, I saw him returned to Trous,
having power again to make some other treaty with the King my father, while
Tyridates was gone to Rome for to receive the Crown of Armenia from the hands
of the Emperor. I cannot relate you the tricks and villainies he used to gain
some advantage upon my will. The mildness I express to all I see, made him so
insolent, that he feined not to attempt all he could upon my wit, which it may
be he esteemed but weak, and susceptible of many impressions. For to abuse
me, he consulted with Priests and Soothsayers, who would have made me
believe, that by their science, and by their immolated sacrifices, they knew my
good fortune could come from no other part but Armenia; that a Prince of the
most illustrious blood of those provinces, ought to possess me; above all that
I well guarded me from what came from the Romans, and from that they had
nourished; because from that side there could arrive nothing but misery to me.
Beside all this he gained by presents a woman that lay in my chamber, who was
so wicked as to terrify me by night, and make me hear voices with pitiful
accents, as if it had been the Queen my mother, that was dead a little
before, who advertised me to fly Tygranes, and to choose Araxes for my husband.
Nay, he was so cowardly and treacherous, as he dressed ambuscadoes for to
assassinate his rival, from which his good fortune only preserved him. All
these practices were discovered to me, but one day before he made me be taken
away; and he knows not yet that I have had any knowledge of them. I remember
that some days before he took the boldness to tell Tygranes in my presence,
that he was a King without a Crown, and that he should be shortly a servant
without a Mistress: I could not then conceive what his meaning was; but since
I have known that he then meditated my carrying away, whereupon he was
resolved, seeing that he gained nothing by his wicked practices. His
unfortunate design was reasonably well ordered; and I had been twice stolen
away, but that I was delivered by you only from both those miseries. See for
the present if there were ever a man more villainous than this same, and whether
I have not cause to detest him above all things. Pasithea left speaking,
continues Eurymedon, and I was so astonished to hear of so many malicious
devices, that I stood immovable, and looking upon her, at last I spoke to her;
Madam, I knew not this Prince to be so traitorous a man, having never seen him
but a few days in a place where he was retained prisoner, whence after he had
been delivered by my means, he promised me his friendship for ever: I assured
him also of mine, and I never saw him since. I esteem him very wicked by this
you have learned me, but I find him nothing crafty withal, or else
unfortunate, for that endeavoring to get your affection, he acquired nothing
but your hate, wherewith he may well think himself hated of all the world.
For me I abandon him, as well for your sake, as for my own: confessing that
there is nothing so dangerous as the friendship of a traitor. We encountered
then at the turning of an alley, where we found much company: she had only
time to tell me, If you lose on one side, you may gain much more on another;
there being here none that will not be pleased to have you for a friend. I
could not return, because we were to join with the company; and the rest of
the day passed away in civilities and ceremonies.

When I was retired* I was in great perplexity how I should treat with Araxes:
but he delivered me himself out of this unquietness, for my men returning to
find me, after they had been long at Sea told me how they had seen nothing
appear, what ever care they had taken, and that without doubt Araxes had
withdrawn himself to some other place. I had no other thought therefore, than
well to govern the fortune of my affections, since they had so prosperous a
beginning. The next day I went to wait on the Kings rising, who still gave me
all sorts of kindnesses; then he led me into the Princess Chamber, whom we
surpised as she was new coming out of her bed, but this surprise was most
advantageous for her, and very agreeable to me, because she had all her neck
bare, that was of an extreme whiteness. All she could do, was to put before
it her fair hands, which though they were jealous of the marvel of this
bosom, and seemed to dispute beauty with it, yet for all that let escape the
victory by the overture of the fingers that could not wholly hide it. My
contentment ended by means of a linen cloth they brought that entirely
covered her, and stole away all those treasures from my sight. The King left me
with her, ordaining her to entertain me; he could not have done me a greater
grace, and desiring to prevail of it, I said to the Princess, Madam, pardon
that I cannot wish ill to the greatest enemy you have, since he is the sole
cause of my good fortune of seeing you. This good fortune, answered she, is not
of consequence enough to be much beholding to him for it. Thereupon she
demanded me where he was. I told her, that having sent out my people to search
him at sea, they had heard no news of him. O! That the gods, replied she,
would never return him again to us, for my repose and yours! But, continued
she, may I not know how he had obliged you to come hither? This is that, said
I, I cannot altogether clear, if I have not the leisure to learn you with all
my whole life. I will at this very instant, said she, give you the commodity;
because I think the time too long ere I know your news: and calling for a
Persian simarre, or mantle, to be brought her, she sat down again upon her
bed, and having made me come near her alone, commanded me to sit down, and
acquit me of the promise I had made her the evening before. Then I recited to
her all I have learned you of my fortune, thinking it had been disloyalty to
reserve any thing to tell, from her I had given my heart to. She heard me with
much astonishment and joy; it seemed too she did already take part in the
accidents of my life. There rested only to relate to her what I had done since
my depart from Corcyra, for to come into Troas, when they came to advertise
her, that Tygranes who was arrived from the confines of Armenia, came to see
her. She blushed, and put her self out of the bed; at the same time I fetched
a deep sigh, and that suspiration more inflamed the fire of Pasithea's cheeks,
who to cover the occasion of her redness, said aloud; I am truly very much
ashamed that Tygranes will find me in this disorder. And then he entered to
salute her, and made certain compliments: afterward he addressed to me, and
told me, that he came from knowing of the King the obligation all his Realm
had to me, wherein he took more part than any body else, having a great
interest in the Princess safety. I answered him, that none was redeuable to me
for a thing which my duty alone had ordained me to do: nevertheless that I
esteemed my self very happy for being so fitly encountered at sea for her
succors, and for being cause of their contentment. I observed by his port and
discourse, that he was such a man as Araxes had described to me, that appeared
rather borne for to serve, than to command, showing no greatness of courage at
all, and affecting nothing but a few civilities, that are practiced among
honest Citizens of a Town. A while after a great number of Princes and Lords
arrived, and there was nothing spoken of but sacrifices and rejoycings for the
safety of Pasithea.

The next day was chosen by the King for certain exercises these Princes
renewed often in the public place, for to dispute prizes in emulation of one
another; their design being no other in those Countries but to please the
Princess, and enter into her good graces. I waited on Pasithea to the Temple,
where the sacrifices were made with much ceremony and joy: as for me, I lost my
self in the prease, having made sign to my men to follow me, and being
returned to my vessel I went away into the plain Sea. The Princess wondered
to see me no more, and thought I was gone to find Araxes. The King commanded
they should seek me out, and could not know wherefore I had quitted them
without any leave-taking. In the mean time they gave not over the resolution
they had taken to rejoice, and all things were prepared for the plays against
next day. I came to know since, that Tygranes led the Princess into the
public place, and having left her with the King upon a Scaffold, he mounted a
horseback and went to join him to his troop among the Princes, who would that
day show their address in favor of Pasithea. After disputing of some prizes,
they planted in the midst of the place a pillar of wood, to which they
fastened arms in fashion of a trophey, that represented a man armed. The
Princes came on horseback running about it, and he did best, that struck the
fairest blow into those arms. When they had all given different strokes, there
was heard twenty trumpets at the end of the lists, that made all turn sight to
that side, and the barrier being opened, the Trumpets entered, and placed
themselves about the field. Presently after fifty men appeared on foot richly
clothed, each their spear in hand, and buckler on the left arm, and in the
middle of them was a young warrier, armed lightly, upon a fair Arabian horse,
who after that his companions had all of them lanc'd their Javelins upon the
trophey, came on in a gallop, and fastened his into the visiere of the helmet.
Every one clapped his hands in expression that that was the fairest blow was
given: but that noise ceased, because of the same Trumpets that sounded again;
and those warriers having ranged them round about the field, the barrier was
opened, and there was seen to avance by degrees, a great pavilion, of a stuff
very fine, and extreme light, the base whereof was carried round on all sides
by four and twenty young children very handsome, clothed in Cassaques of
Carnation silk embroidered with silver, with little head-peeces of the same
livery, from whence hung down plumes of carnation and white. When this engine
was brought into the midst of the place, two of those children that bare up
the borders before, opened the pavilion; and at the same time was seen to come
out of it a great Eagle that flew with the pavilion up into the clouds, and
made sight of it be lost. I appeared then upon a fair white horse, marked with
red natural spots. I had my head covered with plumes of diverse colors, I was
dressed in a proud Cassaque of embroydery of gold and silver, and managed my
horse, that was in very good equipage. The children went to dispose themselves
about the Princess Scaffold, and in the mean time after I had given some
passada's with my horse, I made him take course toward the trophee, and I
struck my Javelin into the Casque with so stark a violence, that it not only
stayed fastened in it, but the pillar also that peradventure had been shaken
before, was therewith overthrown to the ground with the arms. My strength was
admired of all the people, and the Princes themselves, but much more when I
descended from my horse, and going toward the Arms, I took them with the
pillar and all upon my shoulder, and carried them to the Kings Scaffold. I
presented them to the Princess, and having laid them at her feer, I received
of her a bracelet of great pearls that was the prize, which I kissed, and then
passed upon my arm. She was filled with a great satisfaction to see me again,
and for the honor I had acquired in presence of her father, who gave me a
thousand praises, and invited me to appear again at the pastimes remained.

Give me leave, said Palamede then, to interrupt you; and let us know, if it
please you, how you were able to find where withal to make so mavelous an
entry. I am very glad, answered Eurymedon, that you have remembered me of it:
for it may be I should have forgot this. I had by good fortune, replied he,
found all these things in the first ship my soldiers took; the pavilion, the
children so adorned, that great Eagle, the horse on which I rode, and the other
of my Lieutenant who was a young soldier very valiant and expert; he it was
that appeared in the midst of those fifty that first entered, who were the
very choice of my companions. For me having found this Eagle very big, I tied
a cord to her foot, the other end whereof was fastened to the top of the
pavilion, that was sustained within by the point of a great spear I held in my
hand: and I bare it thus my self on horseback in marching with the children,
that lift it up by the borders. I held the Eagle all that while, and when the
Pavilion was opened, I let her go, and she carried away with her that pavilion
that was but of a light stuff. This invention was much approved of Melintus,
Palamede, and the rest, then Eurymedon went on; The last pastime was, that all
they that had appeared in the other exercises, should join them together, and
strike at one another with Javelins whose point was rebated, only to show
dexterity and grace, which was rather a kind of dance, than a combat. They
gave me one of those Javelins, and remounting upon my horse, I went to mingle
my self with that company; but the play was such as greatly troubled the joy
of that days work. Two Armenians had put themselves into the party, with
darts that were very sharp, and one of them struck Tygranes, and wounded him to
death; the other addressed him to me, whose blow I happily avoided, rather
because it is natural to turn away the body from a dart one sees coming to
him, than for any fear I had cause to have of being hurt therewith: but yet I
could not hinder the blow from piercing me into the arm. Presently Tygranes
cried out that he was hurt; he that gave the stroke would have run away with
his companion; and their flight only accused them, for it would have been
doubted whence the blow should come, if they had stayed amongst us; all was in
alarm at the instant, and in disorder. Archelaus came running with some of
his officers that assisted him, and as soon as he was arrived, Tygranes
expired, which put the King into a great sorrow. But that which astonished all
the world, was, that an old man of the chief about Archelous, cast himself
upon the dead body of Tygranes, and embracing him, melted into tears, and
filled all with his complaints. The King demanded of him what cause he had so
particularly to be tormented for that accident. Ha! Sir, said he, let the cause
of my extreme grief serve for diminution unto yours. I will tell you then that
this same was my son, whom I carried with the little Tygranes your nephew,
when you sent him by me in hostage to Rome. Your nephew dyed at Sea, and seeing
that it was altogether important for the good of your affairs this child
should go to Rome, because there remained not any of your blood to be given in
ostage; I supposed my son in his place, who was received for him, and ever
since he has been bred as if he had been the true Tygranes. I believe I am
not blameable for making this supposition, having then had no other design but
the establishing of your estates; and if since I have left every one in this
error, it was for fear the Romans might think you had been author of the
deceit; but since I durst not render him any duty of a father during his life,
suffer me at least to give him this last testimony of my affection; and
thereupon he betook himself to embrace him, and to mourn as before. Every one
was immovable for astonishment; but the King more than all, who left not for
all that to take care of Tygranes body, and to comfort this good man whom he
had always proved most faithful. In the mean time they had arrested the two
Armentans, who after some torments, confessed that they had been sent by
Araxes, for the dispatching of Tygranes and me; and how they were not able to
devise a better means to compass it. I had Araxes then in horror for that he
would have caused my assassinate, after so many good offices he had received at
my hands; and I thanked the gods for preserving me from that danger. The King
and the Princess had now no other care but of me; they constrained me to keep
my bed because of my wound, though it were a small one: and I was not angry for
it for being visited by the Princess, who said to me the first time she was
alone with me; Ah, Eurymedon, these are the presents of your good friend. I
answered her, Madam, a though his intention were most villainous, I know not how
to complain of him; for thinking to take me out the world, he has taken him
away too that would soon have filled me with miseries, and rendered you
unfortunate besides, for being unworthy of you. But since he is no more, give
me leave, Madam; my voice failed me then, whereat she smiled; and having a
while regarded me, said to me, You may go on: I took up my speech, but in
trembling, and said, Give me leave, Madam, to hope. My tongue was tied the
second time; and she smiling again, said to me, I will not have you make an
end: for I permit you to hope all things. Ha! Madam, said I how happy do you
make me! but when you shall consider that I am a stranger, and unknown, I may
well fear my happiness change not. Your actions, answered she, make you to be
known too well what you are; and as Tygranes actions could not be but base;
being no Prince; so is it impossible but you must be a Prince, considering you
do all the actions of one. I replied; My ambition never made me affect that
title, although I were brought up in the opinion of possessing it: but yet I
will retain it for this, since it is that alone that may encourage me to
pretend any thing near you; though my extreme passion will take a great part
in the enterprise of acquiring the honor of your good graces. She said to me,
I will believe concerning your passion all you please to have me: but I command
you to take upon you from henceforth the quality of a Prince, staying till you
may verify your birth, for to strengthen in the mean time, and bring to a
good end the choice I will one day make of you. I took then one of her fair
hands, which she let me kiss a long time; and I could not let it go, not
knowing in what other sort to express my joy to her. But we were to separate
now, and she went her way, after having ordained me so to order my affairs
as I might know what I was. I promised her to employ all my care in that
re-search, since from thence depended all the good fortune of my life. The day
after when I arose, I went to see her, to give her thanks for the cares she had
taken of me. At my first coming she came to meet me, and told me she had
strange news for me: heaven at length has delivered us from Araxes. A man of
his came to let me know that he is dead of his wounds: but before he died, see
what impression he was willing to leave with me of you. Then she presented me a
letter she had received from him, where in I read these words:

Araxes to the Princess Pasithea.
Fair Princess, I am going to dye for you; and having always had this
design* I should not regret the quitting of my life, if I lost it not by the
hand of a traitor. The care I have had to serve you, continues even after my
death; and I advertise you that he you favor, and who calls himself Prince,
is the most famous and infamous Pyrat that ever cours'd the Seas. The hurts I
have received of him, have been my recompense for having given him the
happiness to see you, and you are not to expect but the like treason at his
hands. If you do him justice, you will rather let him feel the hand of a
hangman, than ever give him hope of the honor of touching yours.


Ha! the wicked rogue, cried I out after I had read it, see what rage he is in?
The Princess said to me, If you had not acquainted me with your life, and I
had not been witness in what sort you are cause of his death, he might
peradventure make me believe something against the truth; and besides I must
not have known him for a villain and an artificial companion. But as his
other malices have turned to your advantage, so shall this more augment the
favor I will have to you. The rest of our discourse passed in admiration of
the strange fury of that Armenian, and in common assurances of our affection.

Since that she could not so well hide the love she bare me, but that the
King perceived it: he expressed to her that it was not agreeable to him; and in
the end he entered into an extreme choler against her; so far as he made me
covertly understand, he would be glad I retired from thence: but I was deaf to
the propositions they made me, being too dearly engaged in that Country. I
well saw that the King received me with more coldness than he was wont, and at
last showed me a countenance that witnessed a great aversion to me: but that
which lost us, was, that one day he surpised me alone with her in her Closet,
as I was kissing her hand. Then he entered into such a fury, as he drew his
sword, and had killed me, but that I made my escape. I went out of the Closet,
and a little after out of the Palace, being stayed by no man, because I was
reasonably well beloved: nevertheless seeing there was no safe abiding for me
in Mitylene, I went aboard my ship, with all my soldiers, who were soon come
about me; and I was sometime in full Sea about the Isle, being not able to go
far away: but in the end impatient to know what was arrived to the Princess,
I landed one of my men, for to go learn news of her: he made report to me
that she was kept prisoner, but in a very strange fashion. The King after he
had expressed all the anger an offended father might make show of, deliberated
to hold her in sure guard: yet for the execution of that purpose, he was much
troubled, because she was so generally beloved, as he knew not of whom to be
confident. But when he had along time considered in his mind, he advised to
put her into a Castle with a guard of many women that would be incapable of
resenting her charms, who were shut up with her, having provision of victuals
for more than six years: then he sent for out of the farthest parts of
Paphlagonia, six thousand Barbarians, that were disposed round about the
Castle, which was environed with high walls, in such sort as they could not see
her. This order having been given, the Princes that were in love with her,
being resolved to serve her, and judging it impossible to deliver her, if they
were not puissantly assisted, departed for to go each into his own country,
and bring forces from thence that might give them the honor of her
deliverance, and gain her affection to them: as they believed I had justly
possessed it before, for having saved her out of the hands of Araxes. The man I
had sent brought me all this news: presently I consult with my self what I
was able to do, not enduring that any but my self should deliver the
Princess, who was prisoner for my occasion. I call to counsel my companions,
and tell them, I was resolved to return to the Pirates, for to bring with me
all the forces they had in the Island, and with them to deliver Pasithea: that
we ought to feine we had been long retained in some place; and for our better
reception we were to make some more prize. They accorded to what I desired, and
then we traversed the Egean Sea; and we had coasted all the Peloponesus finding
nothing, until here hard by we met a Vessel of Merchants, amongst whom was
this brave Greek (said Eurymedon, showing him that had kept Melintus from
killing him) to whom, pursues he, I can render no other recompense, for being
cause you took not away my life, said he to Melintus, than by telling you,
that he has seemed to me the most virtuous man I ever knew, as well for the
contempt he made of death, when my companions assailed him, as for the wise
discourse he has since given us: so as in admiring him, I embraced him, and
prayed him that he would continue my friend: I have counted to him a part of my
adventure, for to take his counsel; and when we were entertaining one another
with much affection, your ship appeared, which we set upon to our loss. I vow
to you, that nothing ever so amazed me, as to see you leap into my Brigantine,
having never yet been assaulted in my life; and I have for the present no
greater desire than to know who you are, for to devote my self to you in
quality of a soldier, or slave, which you please.

Eurymedon thus ended his story, and the generous Melintus having admired his
grace, and the natural liveliness of his discourse, and nothing doubting of
his valor or nobleness, promised him not his friendship alone, and that of
his company, but their assistance besides for the enterprise of Pasithea. We
are, continues he, Sicilians, and are going to Corinth for such a design as
yours is: for I have there a fair Mistress, sister to Palamede you see here
(showing him) who is injuriously retained from me. We are now so near our
journeyes end, that if you will aid me for the getting of her, we shall
afterward join us to you to go along to the Isle of Lesbos. Eurymedon
thought himself very happy for finding so soon an occasion to serve him; and
when they had all embraced to be friends one to another, Eurymedon commanded
his men to follow him in their Brigantine. They continued on their way, in
consulting what they had to do, and arrived by night at Corinth.

ARIANA. The second Book.
THe night seemed to open all her eyes, to behold the actions of a troop so
generous; and lent as much light as was necessary to make them know one
another, and not be known. Forthwith Melintus came out of the ship with
Palamede, after having committed the government of what they had resolved on,
to that wise Greek, whom they already made great esteem of because of the
prudent advice he had given them in the counsel they held together; and when
they had entreated Eurymedon and Amyntas to be in a readiness with the
soldiers, if they had need of their aid, they entered into Corinth, and went
toward the Temple of Juno. Palamede having conducted Melintus thither, made
him retire seven or eight paces, while he had spoken with the guard of the
Temple, and after they had opened, he demanded them, if he might not speak a
word to Epicharis from Sebastus and Dicearchus. These people that had seen him
before with his uncle, failed not to go call Epicharis, who coming forth to
see who inquired after her, was greatly amazed to find Palamede there:
presently he brought her where Melintus was, and she was overcome with joy for
seeing them again. Melintus asked her how Ariana did: Very well, answered she,
if she may but see you; and assure your self you never came so seasonable, for
we are reduced to a great extremity. Ariana has always deferred her
resolution to the return of her brother, and Dicearchus not enduring so long
delays, has given her three days only of respite, which expire to morrow;
and do not hope, said she to Palamede, to be able to bend him by any reason:
for he is so settled in mind to give her Pisistratus, that all the powers of
heaven and earth could not make him alter this resolution. Melintus stood mute
to understand so cruel opiniativenesse, but Palamede and Epicharis told him,
there was no other remedy but to carry away Ariana to a place where Dicearchus
had no power, and where she might dispose of her self. This very night,
continued Epicharis, you are to depart, for to avoid the violences of to
morrow. Can Ariana, says Melintus, resolve her self upon this flight? You are
too respectuous, answered Epicharis, and she too virtuous: you must for a time
dispense with this severity of wisdom, and let love and courage work. Never
hope your virtue should subdue Dicearchus fury: you must oppose your passion to
his, and yours being the more noble, it will without doubt master the other.
Remember you only that this nights hours are very precious, and if you lose
them, peradventure you may never recover them again. Melintus demanded
counsel of them, what he had to do: and it was a strange thing, to see a
person so stored with wisdom and valor, reduced in this occasion to implore
the counsel and assistance of a wench, and of Palamede too that so many times
had needed his prudence, for the redress of his youthful errors. But yet
Melintus now mistrusted his own virtue that slackned, and was giving way to
his passion, for to let that have the ordering of this enterprise which seemed
something violent to him; and he asked counsel of others, thinking he was
incapable in that estate to counsel himself. Epicharis told him she would
go first to advertise Ariana and Cyllenia of their arrive: and when she had
taken advice of them she would return, and that then they might resolve of all
things. So she left them, and being entered in again went to bring Ariana and
Cyllenia this news, who attended with much apprehension to know what
Dicearchus had to say to Epicharis: but their passions were well changed at the
return of this wench, when they understood how Melintus was so near them. It
moved Ariana extremely, that felt all at a time, joy, fear, and hope.
Epicharis and Cyllenia confirmed her, and after many reasons alleged on either
side, made her resolve to go her way with Melintus. That which most encouraged
her in this project, was the determination Cyllenia took to go with her;
having had, she said, no prosperity since the death of Lepantus, besides that
of her friendship, which she would enjoy all her life time, and for this cause
she would follow her fortune. Ariana could scarce believe what she said: but
she assured her, it was her resolution. They sent away Epicharis again to
bring Melintus to the place they were in, and thought good to have
scaling-ladders procured, whereby they might save themselves; because it was
impossible to have them all go out by the gate by reason of the guards of the
Temple, whom they would not have killed though that had been easy enough.

Melintus, when he knew the resolution of Ariana and Cyllenia, entreated
Palamede to go back to the ship, to fetch from thence a ladder of cords; and
to bring along with him the sage Greek; that Eurymedon and Amyntas came armed
also, with five or six soldiers in favor of their retreat; and that all
should be conducted to a place of the wall Epicharis showed them. Palamede
promised not to fail in that order, then went his way. Melintus let himself
be led all-trembling by Epicharis, for to go see his dear Ariana, whose
absence had been so cruel to him. The gates were shut up as soon as they
were entered, and Melintus was brought to a Chamber, where Ariana going out to
meet him, could not refrain from opening her arms to receive her dear
Melintus, and suddenly being ashamed for doing that action before Cyllenia, she
left him without speaking, to give him leave to salute that dear friend of
hers. Cyllenia admiring the majestuous fashion of Melintus, though he were
much out of countenance, assured him that he was welcome. He answered her, that
to have been received only into that Chamber, was a favor too sensible to
him for being able to express the true apprehension of it. Presently she made
him sit down by his fair Ariana, which was to good purpose for him that could
no longer have sustained himself in that sudden taking he was in. They felt
themselves both so moved, that being one before the other, and holding hands
together, they could neither of them speak. Melintus to ease his heart which
he felt oppressed, fetched a great sigh, which Ariana received as she breathed
at the same time, and then by suspiring she sent it back again to Melintus;
and it seemed that their souls did thus visit one another, or rather that they
made use but of one soul for the animation of their bodies. In the end
Cyllenia that nothing wondered at this silence for being so well acquainted what
love was, would comfort them, and said, that sighs would not serve the turn
to save them, and that time must not be lost. Then Melintus began to speak,
and addressing him to Ariana, said to her; But, Madam, can I believe you will
follow me? She answered; Melintus, I am yours, and without you I cannot live:
In what part of the world it shall please you to retire me, I shall account my
self happy there to dye with you. See there Cyllenia, continued she, who will
accompany me; and I am persuaded not to miscarry, since she will take part in
the action. Cyllenia told them, now the resolution is taken, let us consider of
choosing out the most necessary of our furniture, and be gone. Epicharis, that
already thought of getting them together, said they should soon be ready. Then
Cyllenia having taken a little Cabinet, wherein was what she had most precious,
put it amongst the things Epicharis wrapped up together; and every thing being
in a readiness, they went out of the Chamber without noyse-making, and took
them to the foot of the wall, where they stayed not long, til they saw falling
at their feet a ladder of cords. Melintus first ascended, and took Ariana hy
the hand to hold her up in coming after him, and having drawn her to the top,
he gave her to Palamede who helped her down, and Melintus went for the two
that remained, one after the other. Cyllenia would have Epicharis go away
first, it being more dangerous she should stay behind than her self, but yet
in the end they were all three saved. Presently Melintus took Ariana in his
arms, and carried her away as fast as he could: Palamede seized on his dear
Epicharis, and the Greek took Cyllenia. Eurymedon and Amyntas, with some
soldiers, favored their slight, but they were amazed when they heard a great
noise in the City, and many people coming toward them. The egresse out of the
house could not be so secret, but that the servants soon perceived it, and had
advertised the guards of the Temple that came running after the ravishers, and
some of them went to Dicearchus and Pisistratus, to give them advice of this
escape. Eurymedon and Amyntas were constrained to stay those that followed
them, by shutting up the pass of a street, while the Ladies might have time to
be transported into the ship: they would have been contented to sustain them;
then to make their retreat, but that they saw the number increased, so as they
resolved to kill some of them, to strike fear into the rest. Instantly they
struck down dead five or six upon the place, and that cooled the courage of
those that followed, so as it was easy for them to make their retreat without
danger. They entered into a Skiffe that waited to carry them to the vessel, and
arrived at the same time the Ladies were brought by Melintus and the two other
into the Cabins for to repose them: but at their entrance they saw a strange
spectacle. There were Torches in the ship, by means whereof Cyllenia seeing
him that carried her, made a great cry, and violently striving, got out of his
arms: then all affrighted as she was, she ran away toward Ariana, looking
behind her in trembling if he followed her not. On the other side the Greek
that held her, having seen her, fell down the whole length of him, and gave
no more sign of life at all. Ariana demanded of Cyllenia the cause of that
great fear, and she said to her, Dear Ariana, know that I was carried away by
the soul of Lepantus, which had re-assum'd his body, for to render me this
office, and having put me into the ship, it left the same body that is fallen
down dead again. Presently they went toward that Corpse. Melintus and
Eurymedon said it was a Greek they had brought with them, and that well
deserved they should take care of him. Then by virtue of remedies they brought
his pulse into him again, then his sight, and a little after his speech. Ha
gods! said he, what have I seen? Eurymedon took care of him, and Melintus
returned to Cyllenia who was all-affrighted, to tell her that it was not a dead
Corpse, but a living man. No, no, answered she, it was the soul of Lepantus.
Melintus could not imagine what she meant; but Ariana that knew her life, said
to her, And may it not be Lepantus himself, who it may be is not dead? On the
other side, the Greek says to Eurymedon, Ha! I have seen Cyllenia. He
answered him, What do you so hate Cyllenia, that you cannot see her without so
much horror and amazement? Alas! it is contrary, replied he, I cannot see her,
because I have too much loved her. What is it then? reparted Eurymedon, do you
fly that you love? In the estate she is in, answered he, I cannot see her but
dye. On the other side Ariana says to Cyllenia, let us go see if it be
Lepantus. I will not go thither, answered she, for he is dead. But
peradventure, replied Ariana, he is living. Dead or alive, said she, I cannot
endure sight of him. Thus they would neither of them see one another: Lepantus
because he thought her married, and Cyllenia because she thought him dead, and
though he had been alive, because she had been so unfaithful to him. At last
Ariana went to see Lepantus, and assured him that Cyllenia was not married;
which he would not believe; then she returned to Cyllenia to tell her that
Lepantus was not dead. Thus were many voyages to be made, first to one, and
then another, before they were able to certify them; and Ariana was
constrained to tell Lepantus in what sort the marriage of Cyllenia with Callias
had been broke, and how the displeasures she had since received were
punishment enough to her for her disloyalty. She went again to tell Cyllenia
that Lepantus had been preserved from death, and had always kept his
affection as perfect as if she had never failed in her constancy to him, and
she prayed her to resolve to see him. Lepantus and Cyllenia were at the last
brought one before the other; Cyllenia conducted by Ariana and Epicharis; and
Lepantus by Melintus and Eurymedon. Cyllenia cast her self at his feet, and in
weeping asked him pardon for her fault. Lepantus put one knee to the ground to
be as low as she, and in lifting her up again, said to her, that he saw for
the present how the gods had been nolyars to him, and that in saving of his
life, they were desirous to conserve to her the faithfullest servant she could
have in the world. After that these two lovers had many times embraced one
another, full of astonishment and joy, they retired them all into the Chambers;
and because it was not sure for them to stay so near the port, the two vessels
parted, and put into the full Sea. They consulted to what place they ought to
retire to, not willing to go to Syracuse, whither without fail they should be
followed; and because Melintus had promised to assist Eurymedon for the
enterprise of Pasithea, they resolved to go descend to a Port of Epirus, where
they might attend him while he went to Corcyra to get his forces together, and
that in the mean time Melintus should marry Ariana, and Lepantus Cyllenia.
Taking this course they saw pass by a vessel well armed that went to Corinth:
but considering of nothing but their joys, they prayed the winds to be
favorable to them, and went with full Sails. The weather was very fair, and
Melintus taking Ariana by the hand, led her out to go walk upon the hatches,
where having a good while entertained her, (and Palamede coming on the sudden
that had something to say to his sister,) he set himself in the mean time to
thinking, without ever quitting her hand, and in a short time made these Verses:

YE happy waves that bear the beauty I adore,
Which made the earth to feel her Empire rigorous;
Respect you her rule too, and be commanded over,
This vessel gently court with kisses amorous:
Unfaithful Element, know that at least it is she
Thou ow'st thy loyalty.
What! do you murmr waves? and foame your selves to rage,
To feel you are o're-rul'd by so triumphant power?
Rebels be quiet, and your storms see you assuage:
If you had eyes to see, you would not be so sour;
For soon of her regards the lovely violence
Would still your insolence.
But you are yet more fierce, and beyond custom wroth,
Pressing too near to look on this Divinity.
No Venus you have here, no daughter of your froth,
She you are bold to see has far more majesty;
And that pure shamefastness that shines upon her face,
Shows that she has more grace.
Yet unto us incline you to be favorable,
Vast Seas, and safely guide this Vessel to the Port:
But if we be pursued, then open as you are able,
For them your deepest gulphs that unto death resort.
To your waters I commit this stolen jewel,
To lose it be not cruel.
Lepantus that was come upon the hatches too with Cyllenia, and the rest, heard
Melintus repeat those verses he had newly made. And at the same time he
composed some in emulation, and made an air of them: then having found a Harp,
he accorded his voice to it, and sung these Verses:

Soul, be no more to torments so subjected:
Heart quit vexation, and to joys aspire:
I see my fortune passes my desire.
Where I sought death, I find my life protected.
In place where deadly envy I suspected,
And happy Spouse's arms her to combine,
Without all thought I took her into mine;
Where I sought death, I find my life protected.
When my sad griefs by fury were directed,
I sought to dye, but Seas could not me drowned:
Where I never sought, my fortune there I found:
Where I sought death, I find my life protected.
After that Lepantus had made an end of singing, and they had much commended
his voice, and the grace he had in touching the Lute; they prayed him to tell
how he had been saved from the Sea, and what his life had been since; for
Ariana had already related part of that which happened to him before. He was very
willing to give them this contentment, and seeing every one set and prepared to
listen, he quitted the Lute to put himself in the midst of them, and began
thus:

Continuation of Lepantus History.
TO avoid the reproaches I might seem to put upon Cyllenia, I will make no
repetition of the resentments I had, to see that I was by little and little
abandoned of her: yet I shall only let you know how I flattered my self with
a belief, that she would prove to what extremity of grief my fidelity might
resist. For I could not imagine that her spirit that seemed to me so raised
above the ordinary of women, and had honored me with so perfect a confidence,
could forget that estate we were in together, and draw a veil before what had
passed between us, to lose the remembrance of it for ever: but in the end I
learned, how to make Callias happy, she had signed the arrest of my death.
Until then I thought all her coldnesses to me were but feinings; and even
when I understood my misery, I could scarce believe it, my mind being unable
to be so soon dis-abused: it may be too I did believe it, seeing no cause at
all of doubting, but that my soul astonished at so unfortunate a blow, was
then in a dizzinesse that hindered so soon an apprehension of its misery. I was
at last forced to confess so visible a truth, and to be sensible of those
stings of sorrow that accompanied so cruel an accident. Not knowing what to
do with my self, I went into a Boat, and fled away to Naupactum, believing to
ease my misery by avoiding the dwelling with those that were cause of it: but I
was to have the power to escape from my self too, that was then my cruellest
enemy; my mind producing continually furious imaginations for to tear it
self in pieces. I was not content to see my self in so miserable estate, but
still to augment my fury and despair, I sent back one of my servants to
Corinth in the same Squiffe, for to go to the Temple where Cyllenia was to be
married, and bring me news after what sort she would govern her self in that
action. I expected that news with as much unquietness, as if I had hoped for
the greatest pleasure of my life by it: but when he was returned, and I knew
that after she had given me my death, she added blows that seemed to come
from an extreme inhumanity, as to desire to know what I had done, after hearing
she was married; my soul could not endure this anguish, it chased away my
reason, and received in place of it, desperation; which getting the mastery,
ordained me to say to the man that spoke to me; Go, and fail not to tell her
what thou art about to know: and suddenly I gained the height of a great rock,
that avances into the Sea, and cast my self down in his presence.

But who can doubt (after what I shall tell you) of the continual care the
gods have over us? for it is impossible to attribute to fortune, that is
blind, and imprudent, many assistances we receive in the greatest hazards of
our life, which cannot be given but from a better, and a more advised hand. In
stead of losing my self, I fell, as I may now say, happily, into a great
Fishers net, who were with their Boats under that same rock. My fall was so
sudden before the eyes of these men, that I was at the bottom of the water
before they could judge what it was; and they thinking it was some monstrous
fish that had thus leaped out of the water and then fallen in again, drew up
their net with great expectation and hope. When I came to appear, they could
not yet know what it was, because I was entangled with the net, and store of
weeds that involved me: but at last when they had dis-intricated all with much
carfulness, they found to their great grief that it was a man. Nevertheless
their hope was turned into pity, and after they had made me void the water I
had drunk, they spread me upon their cloaks, and labored very carefully by
all ways to make me come again. I opened at length my eyes, and when I knew
the place I was in, I was much amazed, yet after I had learned in what manner I
was preserved from death, and a long time studied upon so strange an accident,
I knew that the gods were not willing I should dye. That consideration affected
me with piety and fear all at once, and brought me to understand what fault I
had committed against them, when I followed the blind transports of my
despair. This gave me the resolution to live, but not to comfort me; and I
entreated these people to carry me in their Boats to some remote place, where I
would reward them for their pains. They set up then a little sail, and
because the wind was good to go to Cyrrha, which is a Town of Phocide
something near that place, we arrived there presently. I found that they had
taken away nothing that was about me, so I had enough to content them with. I
had besides remaining some Diamonds, which now were happily at hand, wherewith
I believed I might make a voyage: in such sort as I took upon me to go on,
not yet knowing in what part I should choose my abiding, and having no other
purpose than to fly the circuits of Corynth. But yet I could find no corner
of the earth where to live without sorrow, and I had bin very happy if in any
place I could have lost my love and my remembrance. My fidelity had too
profound a rooting to be shaken, and inconstancy was not acceptable to me, but
in the continual change of places, that gave some diversion to my unhappy
constancy. I wandered thus over all Greece, avoiding those places I had any
acquaintance in; and for that reason I would not see Athens, which is a Town
that might have much diverted my grief, because of Eriphile my dear sister,
who is married to one of the best men of this great City. What, interrupted
Melintus, are you brother to the virtuous Eriphile, wife of Ephialtes? Yes,
replied Lepantus. Give me leave, continued Melintus, to embrace you then, since
you are brother to one of the wisest women I ever knew, at whose house I was a
long time brought up, and to whom I have a thousand sensible obligations. Then
they expressed a great deal of kindness one to another, and Palamede that had
shared in the friendship of the sage Eriphile, would also mingle himself with
their embracements. Afterward Melintus referring to some other time to tell
him all the causes he had to love and serve him for his sisters sake, prayed
him to continue his story. Lepantus went on: In the end I resolved with my
self to depart from Greece, and to pass into Asia. I arrived in Eolida, from
thence I went into Lydia and Phrygia, but there befell me no remarkable thing
but in Galatia, where I ran a great hazard of perishing by an infamous death.

As I was coming near to arrive at the principal City, I passed by a wood
where some murder had been committed. I saw my self encompassed with a
number of horsemen, who took me for one of the murderers, and carried me away
to the City, what innocence soever I was able to allege. They that did the
murder were presently after apprehended and put in prison with me, and when
they knew that I was accused of their crime, they mocked at me among
themselves, and swore they would not discharge me though they knew me not, that
I might die with them for company. I was much perplexed having no means to
justify me but by them, and in great displeasure that I was to dye so
shamefully, as a way-robber and a murderer. One day when I thought they came
for us to be led to punishment, I saw coming in an Officer of Justice, who
having assembled all the Criminals, declared to them that each was to choose
his advocate, for to plead his cause before the King; to the end that the most
eloquent of all should bear away for his Client the grace that was yearly
accorded. I inquired what that grace was, and learned that in Julius Caesar's
time, Dejotarus was King of Galatia, who after he had followed the party of
Pompeius, and been received into favor by Caesar, was accused for having
dressed Ambuscado's for him, when he was at his house in Galatia. For that
cause he was cited to Rome, where making his appearance, he was ready to be
condemned to dye by Caesar and the Senate, but for the succors of Cicero's
mavelous eloquence, which had so much force as to make Caesar change his
determination, and pardon Dejotarus. The King being returned to Galatia, that
he might remember this benefit received by eloquence, ordained that every year
on a certain day, the Criminal persons should make choice of Advocates,
amongst whom he that should be judged the most eloquent should carry away for
his Client the grace of his life, besides the advocates prize, to whom was
given a Crown of great value. After I had learned this, I knew that the most
famous advocates were retained of a long time by great sums of money, and I
saw it would be very difficult for me to hope for that grace, having no means,
nor any acquaintance in the Country. Nevertheless I took heart, and said all
aloud to this Officer, that I demanded leave to defend my self. Every one
took him to laughter to hear my proposition, for they saw me in an estate too
miserable, to believe I could have any science: but for all that I gave in my
name, to the end I might be heard before the King as well as the rest. In eight
days space that were given to prepare the Orations that should be made, I had
leisure enough to think of mine: and when the time was come, they brought us
all to the Palace. We were put into a great Hall round about certain bars,
that hindered any approaching to the King, who was within upon a seat raised
with four or five steps, and had on each side of him his chief Officers that
were the Judges. When they would begin to hear the pleadings, the bars were
opened to let in the first Advocate that was to speak, who standing before the
King, began a very studied speech, wherein he labored to defend a criminal
that was present with us. When he had ended, there rose a little noise of the
different judgments were made of him: then they opened to another, who
discoursed with a great deal of vehemence; and so many were heard one after
another. I was in a wonder to see so many Advocates, but they told me there
were come of them from all parts of Asia, and out of Greece too, some sought to
by the Criminals, and others invited by the ambition of making their knowledge
appear, and carrying the prize. This number troubled me much, yet order was
taken that the speeches should be short, for else one day had not been
sufficient to hear all that presented themselves. At last, they said there
were no more Advocates to plead. The King was now demanding the Judges advice,
and I thought to have stepped forward, to entreat audience, but an Herald
prevented me, that told the King there remained no more but a poor Criminal
called Lepantus, who desired to defend himself. Well then, answered the King,
we will not deny him that justice. Then I entered within the bar, and being
before the King, I said in a few words what I had premeditated, with all the
assurance and modesty I could. Brave Lepantus, interrupted Melintus, do not
deprive us I pray you the repetition of that Oration; we have time enough to
hear it, and since it is but short, it cannot be grievous to you. Grant this
at least to the desire of Cyllenia, who so attentively hearkens to the
accidents of your life during her own vexations. It Is to command me, answered
Lepantus, so to entreat, and since you will have it so, I will recite what I
spoke then; I began thus:

GReat King, and you equitable Judges, I cannot complain of fortune, for the
strange accident I am fallen into, since she gives me the happiness to be
heard of you: And wherefore should I be aggrieved at her? since both before and
after my calamity, she provided me means to releeve my self? As soon as I
entered this Country, she has rendered me criminal before I was culpable; but
at such a time when a grace is offered which she puts me in hope to obtain,
having made me to be instructed from my infancy in all sorts of Sciences and
Arts, foreseeing the need I should have of their assistance. The gods beside
had been unjust and cruel to permit the adventure is arri'vd to me, if they
had not known in what sort I could secure my self. Accuse me not of
presumption for being assured to carry away this day the prize is given to the
most eloquent: it is impossible you should refuse me it, seeing there is nothing
can better persuade than innocence.

All that the Art of Eloquence can do for to palliate a crime, is to breed a
doubt to take away the knowledge of the accusation, whether it be true or
false; then it labors to move compassion in the Judges, to make them incline
toward the better part: but truth has no need of artifice or disguisement;
she discovers her all naked, and then produces out of her self an infinity of
powerful and invincible proofs. This is that truth that comes to my defense,
and goes so pure out of my mouth, as you shall have no trouble to acknowledge
it.

No crime it was, most just King, that made me depart my own Country: neither
by any crime have I entered into this. One misfortune drove me from the land of
my birth, and another have I met with, in your kingdom. The first lost me the
dearest of my hopes, and the other will violently take from me the only things
are left me, which are honor and life. As for my life, I would abandon it
willingly as the most unfortunate of the world; it is not the fear of losing it
that makes me speak before you. I endeavored to forsake that when it seemed
honorable for me to dye: but since the crime they accuse me of is shameful,
and the punishment that threatens it; this occasion has fast bound my life
unto my honor, and I am obliged to defend the one, for to preserve the other.

Since I left Greece, I wandered from province to province to give ease to an
anguish that afflicts me, and passing by a wood to arrive at this City, I
perceived that I was environed with persons that took hold of me, without
telling me for what cause: afterward I knew there had been a man slain in
that same place, and how the murderers were brought to the same prison with
me, who knowing that I was accused of their crime, mocked at me when they saw
me, and swear they would not declare me innocent.

But it is easy to verify whether I be guilty or no. Let them be interrogated
apart in what sort they know me, and it will appear that I never saw them
before. It is but a month since I passed into Asia, and in that time I
traversed Eolida, Lydia, and Troas: I was but two days within Galatia, and the
day I was taken, I had come from a place so remote from hence, that it was
impossible for me to have any acquaintance with them. All this may be known of
those whom I lodged with in my voyages, who will not deny to witness to that I
say.

See there, great King, and you the Judges, all the eloquence I will serve my
self of: The truth it is that speaks out of my mouth: She will have you give
her the victory of this days work, it is she pretends the prize, and not I:
she shows her self to you all naked, for to show you, that the others
eloquence, in comparison of her, is but an adulterate beauty. Justice, that is
seated by your sides, holds out her arms to her, and from under her head-band
fails not to know her perfectly. This severe goddess is without doubt for the
present well satisfied, that the gods have put amongst the accused an innocent,
for fear she should this day have been constrained to let go an offender.
Great King, take pity of a stranger, that has no support with you besides this
justice: but this stay is very powerful, sine it is that alone that can
maintain kingdoms. I fear not death, but infamy. If I cannot deserve the
prize of eloquence from so many rare wits, ordain me at least from this
present to go employ my life in the defense of your frontiers against the
Barbarians: I shall esteem my self happy to dye like a man of courage. If I
cannot avoid death, at leastwise let me avoid shame: or if you will make this
day famous, by the most memorable judgment that ever was, let none of us all
bear away the victory; but give in my favor the prize of eloquence to truth,
and life to innocence.

I made an end thus with some kind of hope, because I was heard with much
attention. Presently the King rose up, and after taking the opinions of all the
Judges, he sat him down in his seat again; then he pronounced; The Greek
Lepantus is declared by our judgment innocent and victorious. By and by they
came for me from among the criminals with whom I had placed me again; and
making me approach to the Throne where the King was, I put one knee upon one of
the steps, and received from his hand the crown ordained for the victor. The
King was not contented with this grace, which he had given to my innocence
rather than my eloquence; but lifting up himself he took me by the arm, and
commanded me to accompany him, because he would know what I was. He did me the
favor to lean on me till we came to his chamber, where having inquired of me
all he had a mind to, I satisfied him with the most respect I could; then he
offered me one of the chief places of his judicature, if I would stay with
him. I answered him, that being redeuable to him for so many graces, he might
dispose of the life he had given me: but that finding me incapable to govern
my self, it would be impossible for me to govern his people that were under
his authority. That if he would add an extreme favor to so many others, I
besought him would give me leave to return into my own Country. He labored
to retain me still by some reasons, but seeing that if I would have yielded to
him, it was for not daring to contradict him; and that my desire was altogether
bent to depart his Realm, he made me some presents, and let me go. I put my
self into some equipage for my return, and providing me of men and horses for
not running any more such shameful fortune, I re-passed by the same ways I
came; then I crossed the Egean Sea, and descended into Macedonia, where having
stayed some time, I went into Epire, whither we are now going. But because
vexations were my most agreeable company, I began to be weary of my men, and
resolved to go live in some solitude. According to this project I left them in
Epire, with charge to attend me there, until I had made a voyage into Italy.
I passed the Sea without any of my people, and arrived at Brundusium: I
traversed Apulia, never meeting with any place I could delight in; from thence
I came to Cumae, where having found a corner to be alone in as much as I would,
I took some small provision to eat, which I carried in with me; and there I
accused the gods as much as I pleased: I tormented my self according to my
humor with cruel remembrances: and the more pain I inflicted on my self,
the more satisfaction I imagined to receive. That place was the den of the
Cumean Sybil, and one night when I had made a thousand complaints, I bethought
my self to implore the succors of her voice, which as they said was still
remaining in the world, for to favor me with an Oracle. This sacred Sybil at
last had pity of my evils, and I heard the divine voice speak to me in these
verses:

Lover of Constancy undaunted,
Thou shall perceive thy griefs decay,
If thou return'st without delay
Where to thee thy birth was granted.
Epicharis, Melintus and Palamede interrupted this discourse, by taking them to
laugh, and said all at once, Was it you then, Lepantus, we gave that same
Oracle to? Look you, continued Melintus in showing Epicharis, there is your
Sybil that pronounced the verses, and I it was that made them on the place.
Lepantus was so amazed that he knew not what to say, having believed until
then that he had been divinely assisted; whereupon being all confounded,
Cyllenia, Eurymedon, and the rest that knew nothing of that encounter, prayed
Epicharis to tell them what it was. She recounted to them, how being escaped
they three out of the prisons of Rome, and flying that City, they hid them one
night within this den, where hearing a man that complained to himself, and
implored the aid of the Sybils voice, she resolved to counterfeit that voice,
and to send back this woeful man to his own kindred. Lepantus returning out
of his astonishment, said to her; Fair Epicharis, is it possible, this you
say? It Is even so, answered she, and beside I call you well to my remembrance,
because now I know 'twas you that passed by us the next day morning. It Is true,
said Lepantus, that I saw some body that would have stayed me; but I was so
satisfied with my Oracle, and the gods assistance, that nothing was capable of
holding me. In the mean time, said Epicharis, see how beyond all thought I
have proved true: for you have found here by my means, your fortune entirely
changed; and to me you are beholding for all your prosperity. It Is true,
replied Lepantus, that you are my Sybil, and the sole goddess I am bound to
adore; since of you alone I hold all the contentments of my life; and had it
not been for you, I should still be within that grot. Everyone admired this
rencounter, and how casually they had repaired to that same place, and been
inspired to render him the Oracle that was the truest, and the most wholesome
the gods themselves had been able to have given him. Lepantus gave many thanks
to Epicharis, and to the gods which had spoken to him by her mouth. The he went
on:

Although I believed the gods took care of me, and would deliver me out of
that miserable life I was in, yet I could not imagine for all that they were
able to heal me otherwise than by the forgetting of my love: in such sort that
albeit I followed the command of that Oracle, it was without all hope of good
fortune, because I would not be cured on that fashion. I took the way of my
Country with languish and disdain enough, finding my self forced to go
thither by a power that seemed fearful to me, and yet abhorring the very
places I sought. That caused me to make no very great haste for avancing my
way, and being arrived at Rheggium after many days, I was well content to find
no shipping there to go to Corinth, because the more I drew near it, the more
fear had I to arrive. At Rheggium I had an host, a very ancient friend of my
deceased father, whom I resolved to go see, never thinking he could have any
knowledge of my miseries; to the end I might so journe some time in that place.
This good man that was called Menander, having known of me who I was, made as
much of me as was possible; and knowing that I stayed at Rheggium but whilst
some vessel parted for Corinth, he prayed me to dwell with him as long time as
I pleased, and expressed to me, that he could not receive a greater
contentment, than to see the son of his good friend. I was in this house a
long time, because they were not weary of me, and I thought not of going away,
not yet being able to resolve of any thing.

Menander knew very well my mind was troubled, and having many times labored
to know the cause of it, he could never learn any thing, whereupon not willing
to press me any further, he only tried to divert me. He had a daughter was
married at his house, named Melicerta, that was a very pleasing woman, and of a
most gentile wit, he commanded her not to leave me without entertainment, and
she performed the charge with a great care, and more grace withal. Every day I
knew the City news, which she was well informed of; and when the time
furnished none of it self, she related to me things that had passed before,
and so agreeably made her recites, that she rendered my mind attentive to her
discourse, and gave it no time to consider of its melancholy. But since we have
leisure enough, I must needs impart a story of hers to you, that so possessed
me when I heard it from her, and in such sort diverted me for seeming to
concern my affairs, that I believe I shall bring some pleasure to you too by
the repetition of it.

One day I saw come to her house a Lady called Ardania, to visit her; and by
the kind entertainments they gave one another, I knew that they were entire
friends. This Lady had much sparkling: but her beauty seemed to have encountered
some great sickness, because her complexion, though very delicate, was pale
and decayed, and her eyes that were very full, and of an agreeable bigness,
had no quickness in them; and were so languishing, that they seemed to regret
the loss of their luster and charming vivacity. I perceived how my presence
made their discourses indifferent, and hindered them from speaking freely
together; so as I took Chares apart (that was Melicerta's husband) and
entertained him, for to give them all the liberty I could. I saw well I had
done them a pleasure, for they were more than an hour in secret together; and
at length Ardania resolved to be gone. Chares would wait on her home, because
it was at the latest, and left me alone with Melicerta, that said to me a
little after; Here was a Lady that has been a great deal handsomer than she
now appears for: but her griefs have caused that change. I attributed, said I
to her, that palenesse to some sickness; for there is no doubt but she still
retains the marks of an extraordinary beauty. I will not conceal from you,
continues Melicerta, that for an inconstant woman she is as well punished as
could have been desired; and when I consider the accidents that happened to
three or four of my acquaintance, I find that love is very just: when he
pretends to be revenged, he advises sometimes to punish infidelities after a
pleasant manner; and though Ardania be my dearest friend, I have so much
confidence in your discretion, as not to fear relating to you the whole story.

Three or four years ago, went she on, amongst the most accomplished of of
this City, there was one called Polydamas, who besides many other excellent
qualities, had so great a discretion, that it made him be loved of all the
world. He was of kin to Ardania, and that consideration made them see one
another often; they had each a very great esteem of other: and their affinity
giving them still cause to love, they were indeared with much affection, and
did communicate together with a great confidence. I was at that time one that
knew all Ardania's secrets, and I perceived that nothing pleased her like unto
Polydamas, for she ever made me relations to his advantage, and if he then made
her not in love with him, at the least he made her have contempt for all other
men. He was engaged above two years before, in the search of a Maid named
Elusina, who loved him with so much constancy, that she suffered for his sake
all the cruelties a furious father can inflict, when he sees his daughters
passion contrary to his designs. Ardania knew of Polydamas all that passed in
that affection: but because he was more loved, than he loved himself, he
pursued that enterprise with coldness enough, and seconded not the endeavors
Elusina made to attain to what they desired: only he contented himself to
render her such duties, as he could not deny her without expression of much
forgetfulness and contempt. Ardania sometimes reproached him before me for the
small care he had of Elusina; and he confessed to her self that she was cause
that he could never have a love to any to be in love with. In the end the
constancy of Elusina gave way to the violencies of her father; she resolved
with her self to obey him, and for this demanded leave of Polydamas, that she
might be delivered from the vexations she was made to endure. He did at that
time an action that might seem to proceed from a good sincere affection; but
that was indeed a testimony of his coldness. He wrote to her, that not able to
see her eternally endure, he had resolved to entreat her the same thing for
which she had desired leave of him: that losing all hope, she ought to give
satisfaction to her friends, to preserve her self from misery; that he prayed
her to forget him, if it were possible, for not being all her life miserable;
that for this purpose he returned her all the pledges he had of her friendship,
and remitted her all the oaths she had made him; to the end that engagement
hindered not her repose. Hereupon she married, and left Polydamas at liberty,
who but poorly resented this misfortune. Ardania, continued Melicerta, has a
brother called Misander, who, with other base qualities, is possessed of so
heavy a melancholy, as he is distasteful to all company. Lepantus was there
interrupted by Amyntas, who told him, I have sufficiently known Misander to my
cost. Ariana added, it may be it is the same Misander Erycine spoke of to me.
The very same, replied Amyntas, whose humor made us suffer a long time both of
us. I perceive then, went on Lepantus, you know him better than I do by sight;
but yet peradventure I know more than you the effects of that sad humor that
vexes himself, and has given so much trouble to others. Polydamas, continued
Melicerta, though he despised Misanders humor, yet he gave not over making
shows of kindness to him that he might be often with Ardania, whose company
he was very well pleased with. One day Misander heard how they spoke of
marrying Polydamas; and when they were all three together, he told this news
to his sister, as if it had been very agreeable to them; whereupon Ardania
blushed. Polydamas observed this action; for there is nothing so soon
perceived, as that which makes for our advantage, and he judged that she was
interessed much in him. That made him think of a thing he was not yet well
advised in, which was to seek her affection, having but till then desired her
friendship. Ardania was far more handsome than Elusina, and it was very easy
to kindle a fire, after the beginning of heat that was between them. There had
been nothing but the consideration of their kindred that hindered Polydamas
from casting his eyes upon her for to marry her; but then he knew, that since
she made no difficulty of it, he ought not to be more scrupulous than she. See
him then resolved to testify much passion to her; and without seeming to have
apperceiv'd her inclination, that she might not be ashamed for having prevented
him, he judged that he was to feine to have loved her of a long time with a
concealed affection. Upon that occasion he made many verses, whereby he said
it was at least permitted him to put in writing what he suffered without
telling the subject of it, and to comfort his mind in this sort, for so many
cruel thoughts that tormented it, and would break out. At the same time he
was more careful than ordinarily in his respects to Ardania, and expressed to
her by his sighs, and some interrupted words, that he dyed for love of her. At
the first testimony she had of it, she learned me the news that Polydamas
loved her, as a thing extremely desired of her, and that possessed her with
joy; I was then at her house, when he showed her those verses, and she was
very glad to have him read them before me, to the end I might know how much
passion he had. He imputed all his coldnesses for Elusina, to this secret love
he had for another a long time since, and feined to have done many things out
of necessity, which were not done then without design. We asked him many
questions upon this secret love he yet declared not, to all which he very well
satisfied; and Ardania took great pleasure therein. He knew very well we
understood all he would say; and from that time we took a custom of speaking
together without declaring of any thing openly; and yet we failed not to tell
all things as intelligibly, as if he had told the name of her he loved. I found
him very happy for treating on this fashion, because that under the coverture
of the kindred, he took such liberties as would not have been permitted him,
if he had been declared for a lover: as to bring near often his mouth to
hers, and to hold and kiss her hand incessantly. Thus was it that he gave
birth to the most violent passion that ever was, because this fair Cousin
refusing him not those caresses, and obliging him with a straight confidence,
he felt himself so redeuable toward her, and at the same time so touched at
her beauty, that he kindled a fire not of a long time to be quenched. Misander
saw not very willingly this great intelligence; yet he could not judge then
that it were other than a simple friendship. Polydamas seeing that he had need
of this melancholicke man, gave him in the mean time all sorts of duties; for
Ardania had but a mother who was very old; and all the power of the house was
in the hands of this Misander, who though of a weak and heavy spirit, had yet
the authority because of the harshnesse of his disposition which they were
afraid to displease. Ardania and Polydamas persuaded him for the most to what
they had a mind to by gentleness of spirit: but they feared him, when he
should have come to know of their love; for he had other projects for his
sister. One day Misander, whether out of simplicity, or of purpose, entreated
Polydamas to persuade Ardania to a marriage she resisted. Polydamas found
himself obliged to speak of it to her, and it chanced to fall out in my
presence. He represented to her all the considerations that ought to move her
for the choice of that husband, whereto at the beginning she replied with
laughter, as if she thought he did but mock her; but he urged her so, in
speaking seriously concerning this affair, in plot, as I believe, to prove
her, that at last she was angry, and said to him, that she took this ill at
his hands, more than at any other. She discovered her self thus, and it was
the first word had escaped her, whereby she showed that she approved his
affection. Then he appeased her, and would make her believe he had so spoken to
know her thoughts; and to tell them to her brother. She feined not to tell
Polydamas often, that she should be the most miserable woman of the world, if
the resolution she had prosper'd not: but although he knew that he was well
loved of her, yet he knew it not then so well as I did, to whom Ardania told a
thousand things touching his affection, that made me see, never woman was more
in love.

Afterward there was presented a party to her, which gave them many fears and
troubles. The business had been debated amongst the kindred before
communicating it with Ardania, because they would not so much as doubt of her
will, in such sort as all was in a good forwardness, when she learned the
news of it. Consider her then full of apprehensions, and all she could do,
was to represent some difficulties. She acquainted Polydamas with it, who knew
not what remedy to invent; and their affection not daring yet to break forth,
they were both of them in great pain. One day he came in to Ardania's, when
the friends of either party were assembled, to remove some difficulties
concerning that marriage. Misander came out to meet him, and Polydamas
signified to him that he would be gone, since they were busy. No, no, said
Misander, you shall stay if you please, because you have as much interest in
this affair, as any one that is here. As little, said Polydamas to himself,
then suffered to be led to the place where they were that debated the
differences. Ardania was present, as pale as if she had been ready to be
condemned to death: but when she saw Polydamas enter, she conceived some
hope, and took a little courage. He was in the esteem of so great virtue, and
so good a judgment, that presently they proposed the difficulties to him for
to consider and judge of them himself. At first he pretended that he would
accord all things; having for all that no other design than to break this
assembly; and said that they were to yield on either side, and that small
respects ought not to hinder an affair of great importance. He insinuated
himself by this means into the credence of both parties; but when they would
precipitate the marriage, he said, that was not reasonable, and that that which
regarded the whole life deserved to be thought of at more leisure. In the end
he was so skillful in managing their wits, that he brake this assembly, and
made the resolution be deferred to the next day. Ardania at the beginning knew
not what to think of Polydamas, hearing him speak: but seeing he had so well
brought about his design, she was very well satisfied. Then being alone with
Misander and his mother, he declared how they were to distrust those that would
dazzle their eyes by so sudden a resolution as they obliged them to take; that
there was some great defect concealed under it, and time were necessary to
find it out. After he had put these suspicions into them, they made so many
adjournments, as they gave despite to the others; and at last all was broken
off, to the great contentment of Ardania and Polydamas, who were of opinion
that they could not always so turn off the storms that should be presented,
and that it was time for them to declare. The succors Polydamas had given
Ardania in this last occasion, had so obliged her, that she was entirely bound
to him, and gave him all the honest assurances Love is able to accord. They
consulted of the means they were to use, and provided them of persons that
might make her mother consent. There was but this troublesome Misander, who was
too wild a beast to be easily governed; so as there were but few to be found
that could persuade him. Polydamas that had an empire upon his mind, had been
the only man sufficient to bring him to any thing he was willing to have him,
if he had been to speak to him for another, but for to serve himself of him,
he remained without force. Upon these attempts the mother sickens, and dies.
Ardania after having rendered her the last duties, received no consolation but
from the faithful company of her dear Polydamas, who believed not that any
thing was able to hinder their good fortune, since she was left Mistress of
her self. There was made between them a renewing of assurances; they lived in
so strict an union, and had as particular cares for one another, as if they had
been already married together. Then were presented more parties for her, so as
they resolved to conclude their affairs, and to make the proposition of them
to Misander, to whom she had purposed to declare her absolute will, and to pray
him to consent thereto, if not to pass forward. Polydamas made choice of one
of his friends to speak to Misander; and he acquitted himself so well,
showing him a thousand respects that ought to oblige him to desire that
marriage, that if he had been of any judgment, he could not have refused to
consent to a thing so desired of all. He received this overture with a great
deal of sadness; nevertheless he promised to speak of it to his sister; but
within his mind he conceived a furious hatred against Polydamas, in stead of
the near friendship was betwixt them; and he believed, as there was much
appearance for it, that Polydamas had not expressed affection to him but for
this design. So, unworthy souls fail not to acknowledge their own defaults,
and the merit of others, through the darkness that encompasses them; and in
stead of cherishing the virtue of those that excel them, they hate and shun
them for fear of being overruled. Misander being returned to his house, makes
himself sick, and refuses to eat: they ask him what his grief is, he is
angry, and spightfull, he knows not to whom to take him for to wreake his
choler on; and his whole project is but to counterfeit the mad man and enraged,
in testimony of his aversion to his sisters design. Ardania doubted that all
his transports came from the declaration had been made him, whereof she was
well advertised; and knew not how to speak to him in this unquiet humor. At
last he took him to his bed, and then sent for his sister to come to him, and
when they were alone, he said to her; Well, sister, I knew at last the cause of
your coldnesses, and of all the refuses you made of the parties were offered
you; I perceived my suspicions were well grounded, when I could not approve
such secrecy with Polydamas. I know well it is from your advice that he makes
you be demanded in marriage: See if it be a thing you have resolved on: I can
no longer hinder your purposes, and will sign you what consent you will have
me: but assure your self, that I will not live two days after. Yes, I will
dye, and make him dye too, for having mocked me all his life, and abused my
freedom for to deceive me and you also. There fell in continuation a torrent
of enraged words against Polydamas and Ardania, and after that his fury had
taken some respite, she told him, that she knew not why he should be so
transported; that she was ignorant of Polydamas design, but that if he had an
affection to her, he honored her by it; that she would tell him truly, that
if he consented to it, he should do her a great pleasure, for she could never
be happy but with him. I would rather, said he to her, throw my self down
headlong, and strike a poynard into your bosom. No, no, I shall hinder the
effect of your fancies well enough, or else blood shall be seen spilt. Ardania
perceiving that his transport made him speak strange follies, left him,
without expression of any great care she took at his words, and they both
passed away a night that gave them but little repose. I had been chosen,
continued Melicerta, by these two lovers, to be their confident during the
traverses which they had foreseen, and it was impossible for them to see one
another after that declaration, Misander having shut up all the avenues: so as
Polydamas the next day came to see me, to know what had passed. I told him that
affairs were much embroyled, and that there was a rumor in the house, that
Misander was mad, and Ardania resisted his rage the best she could.

But it was a strange thing, to see the small force of Ardania: she could not
endure her brothers choler, and seeing that he would not eat, she went to
beseech him not to be angry, and she would do nothing contrary to his will. I
durst not tell Polydamas of this weakness, seeing to what point of sadness he
was brought, because Ardania had not spoken with so great a resolution as he
expected. She on the other side seeing her brother pacified, recovered her
forces, and expressed affection to Polydamas: Misander then made the madman as
before, and constrained his sister to give way to him. That combat between
Ardania's love and Misanders rage endured a long time, and when this was
cooled, the other had the advantage. In the mean time Polydamas seeing no more
Ardania, that put not in effect what she had promised him, was tormented with
many cares and unquietnesses; and the more facility he saw of executing their
designs, the more grief he had to see that she could not resolve to despise
her brother. But to come to the infidelities I told you of, said Melicerta,
which were punished one by another, I will let pass all the strifes Ardania
made; then the weaknesses which made her release, with all the complaints and
reproaches Polydamas used to her, who yet was so discreet, as he never
complained of her but to her self and to me. He had been false to Elusina
without her knowing of it, and she too had been unfaithful to him, in
abandoning him to deliver her self from misery, although she believed that he
still loved her. Love, to revenge Polydamas on Elusina, made her being married
have her husband in such a contempt, that she feined not to seek to Polydamas
again who despised her. Again, to revenge Elusina on Polydamas, he caused
Ardania to forget the greatest affection that ever was; and I believe that
which made her unfaithful, was the fidelity of her glass, which representing
her complexion to her effaced with cares, What now? said she, shall I lose my
beauty that procured me so many vows and commendations, to maintain my love
that brings upon me so many mischiefs? No, no, let us quit this love, the
trouble of my soul, and the ruin of my dearest treasures; and forgetting it
for ever, let that beauty return, which for one lost lover shall gain me
above a thousand. See her then deliberating to become handsome again, and for
the recovery of her good looks, quite unwilling to hear speak of Polydamas
any more. I wondered with my self at so strange a change; and when I reproached
her for her lightness, she had the boldness to deny to me all she had told me
when she loved Polydamas, even thus far, as she would have made me believe,
that she never had any affection at all to him. At that time a young man
called Cyllarus sought her; he had loved Danaide, a woman he had been
beholding to for all the civility he knew with Ladies, for she had taken the
pains to instruct his youth; whereupon Cyllarus being ingrate, renounced her
friendship, and pursued the affection of Ardania. Love that had already taken
vengeance of Elusina and Polydamos, was revenged at one blow of two unfaithful
persons; joining in marriage Cyllarus with Ardania to punish them one by the
other. This delicate woman that thought her charms so puissant, could not stay
that wanderer; who was no sooner married, but that he returned to Danaide, and
without considering of the displeasures he gave his new wife, sought by all the
ways he could to re-enter into her good graces. Danaide in revenge of her
self, mocked him a long time, whereat he received so many sorrows, as he
could not hide them before Ardania. She on the other side seeing her self
despised, began to regret her faithful Polydamas, she had forsaken; so as
being both of them in bed, they lay off from one another as far as they
could, and suspired each of them apart, one for Danaide, the other for
Polydamas. But a while since, Cyllarus has found the means to re-joyne with
Danaide, and this is that Ardania but now told me, said Melicerta, at least she
has this opinion, whether it be so indeed, or that her jealousy makes her
believe it. Do but see, Lepantus, said she to me, what repose Ardania can
expect for the present: for whether her husband finds himself in grace, or in
disgrace with Danaide, she receives by it the same affliction: she despaires to
see him sigh for her; on the other side she dies, when Danaide makes him happy,
and in this I account her most miserable indeed, that the more she is
afflicted, the more she brings her self into estate never to regaine the
affection of Cyllarus. At length all those displeasures have caused the loss
of that beauty she had so much cherished, and for which she had forsaken him
that had so much affection for her. Polydamas meeting her by chance very
lately, and seeing that fair face so altered as it was, made verses under
another name, which he sent to me; and I assure my self, Lepantus, added
Melicerta, you will find them very witty. She took them out of her pocket,
and showed me them; I took a copy of them, which I have now about me. Lepantus
let Melintus see it, and the company, and it was thus:

PHillis, alas how you are changed:
Where are the baits you had so rare?
Ha! now my love is well revenged:
My eyes are wondering who you are:
And is your beauty thus to change inclined,
In imitation of your mind?
Poor Phillis! you have no more charms
To make another amorous:
Your eyes deprived of their arms,
Are now no more so dangerous:
Their beams so lively, now have lost the art
Of penetrating to the heart.
For when you banished that flame
Which in your spirit had such power,
Not without fury forth it came,
Your complexion to devour.
That teint though lovely had not force enough
For to resist so keen a blow.
Your beauty proved faithful yet,
When your heart wanted loyalty,
For seeing me to dye for it,
It rather chose to dye for me.
Her fairest flower passing so soon away,
Was constant in her changing day.
Alas! said the soul so grieved,
Beauty will you forsake us quite?
To this lover I Am obliged,
Answered she in great despite;
If you resolve to change, and make him dye,
My change must give him remedy.
Lepantus folding up the verses went on. Melicerta thus ended her story, which
I listened very attentively to, continually thinking upon Cyllenia; whom for all
that I could not wish to be punished in like sort; having always kept for her
so dear a remembrance, that very often when my memory presented her to my
imagination, and let me see her as unfaithful, it seemed that I turned away my
sight, but I had sorrow to be willing at the same time, and unwilling to think
of her. And thus lived I during my griefs, which Melicerta only was able to
comfort by her delightful recites. But at length I considered how I too long
time neglected the good fortune the gods had promised me; so I thought of
departing; and having found the commodity of a vessel, I took leave of
Menander, Chares, and Melicerta; and being at Sea, we were encountered by
Eurymedon. His companions having killed some of those were with us, I attended
to receive my death at their hands, and I believed that that was the
alleviation of my miseries the gods had promised me, not able to imagine any
other. And for this cause I presented my self without arms with much
assurance before their swords. They were amazed to see me so resolute to dye;
and Eurymedon who saw me in this action, thought it was out of greatness of
courage; so as he saved me, and embracing me expressed that he would have me be
his friend. Afterward I was present when the Pirates went to assail the brave
Melintus; and I was so happy as to render Eurymedon what he had lent me, by
obtaining of Melintus that he would not kill him. In the end following so
courageous a troop, I found in my arms my dear Cyllenia, as pure, as fair,
and with as much affection for me as ever, and all this by the strangest hazard
fortune is able to produce. It Is for this I shall esteem my self all my life
time redeuable to the fair Epicharis, whom I shall hereafter call my Sybilla;
and though this encounter may be ascribed to fortune, I believe rather that the
gods are extremely her friends; who would make me happy by her enterprise.
Lepantus ended thus, and every one admiring those incounters; Melintus prayed
him that they might swear together an eternal friendship, as well because of
his virtue, as for that he was brother to the sage Eriphile. They related then
to one another all their lives; and the adventures all of the company had met
with, furnished them with entertainment enough in their voyage until they came
into Epire, where they landed. Eurymedon took his leave of Melintus and the
company with many embraces, to go find out his Pirates; and he assured them he
would pass by the same place again, and see them before he went to the Isle
of Lesbos with his forces; and that if he found them not there, and they needed
his service, they should hear news of him in the Isle, which was the place of
his dearest desires. He entered into his own ship with those companions of his
that remained; and Melintus, Ariana, and all their friends, went unto
Nicopolis, the chief City of Epire, in hope to stay there without fear of
their enemies, and enjoy all the contentments they could promise themselves.

ARIANA. The third Book.
FOrtune that had given these lovers so many traverses, now seemed weary of
persecuting them; and they were resolved to give end to their own pains.
Melintus was the next day to marry Ariana, and Lepantus Cyllenia. Palamede
offered himself to return to Corinth to his uncle, feining to come back from
his Athenian voyage; and by making as though he were ignorant of all that had
happened, endeavor to appease him, and likewise Sebastus for Cyllenia, and so to
mediate their peace and return. Lepantus had found out his men in this City,
who attended for him in the same place where he had left them, when he parted
from Epire to pass into Italy. They were lodged very commodiously: so as all
of them made choice of that house, for to be the happy place where so many
fair and violent desires should receive an entire satisfaction. Melintus was
so ravished to see himself in the Evening of tasting so many delights, that he
himself could not measure the greatness of his own joy: but the more Ariana
approached the height of her desires, the more did her modesty strive to
repress the testimonies of her contentment. Lepantus and Cyllenia in their
souls felt no less pleasure. Amyntas promised himself that his good fortune
would follow that of Melintus, from whom he expected much succors with
Telephus: and Erycine ought to be satisfied with him, for having so well obeyed
her when she commanded him to serve Melintus. There was but Palamede, to whom
the love of Epicharis gave desire and impatiency enough: but the discretion of
that wench moderated him, who knowing that he should commit a great fault to
marry her being aslave, had forbidden him the hope of it, as long as she
continued in that condition. Palamede notwithstanding in this occasion not
enduring to see so many persons made happy, and himself so far off enjoying
the same pleasures, said to her, Fair Epicharis, how long do you mean to
defer satisfying the passion I have for you? desire you I should attend an
infinite time, and in the mean space live with you the most unfortunate of
men? fear not to have me do any thing unworthy of me by marrying of you; your
merit abundantly recompenses the default of your liberty; and my uncle cannot
refuse to give it you, when you shall be my wife. What occasion more favorable
may we hope for? Now all things are here in disorder, if we commit a fault, it
will easily be considerable. Can you fail by imitating the actions of Ariana
and Cyllenia? and must my condition, which you judge more exalted than yours,
be the sole cause of making me unhappy? Palamede, answered Epicharis, if you
could judge how much I esteem my self obliged to you for your affection, I
think you so reasonable, as you would have cause to be satisfied with me: but
you shall pardon me if I cannot consent to what you desire. I know well the
difference of our affections. It Is a passion something blindish that makes you
love me, but it is reason only that causes me to honor you. You consider not
well what I am, when you express so much love to me; and without doubt turn
away your thought from a defect that accompanies me, while you esteem me
worthy of you: Contrariwise the more I open my eyes to see what your worth is,
the more cause I find to love you, and think my self indebted to you. But
loving you with reason, I love your honor as much as I do your person; and it
would show I had out small care of that, if I should make my self happy to the
prejudice of it. That which is fit for the fair Ariana and Melintus to do, is
not so for us; and the same reason that permits them to marry against the
desire of Dicearchus, is that which ordaines me to continue still a Maid
against yours. Palamede, I beseech you to temper your desires; and assure your
self that if the gods are pleased with our affections, they will so bring
affairs to pass, that honor and fitness shall not be separate from our
contentments. Thus did this wench, full of wisdom and courage, stay the
transports of Palamedes affection, who the farther off he found himself from
contenting his desires, the more he admired the virtue and generosity of
Epicharis, and increased his passion by them. Melintus sent to have brought out
of his ship much riches whereof he was provided, for to make that day as famous
and magnifique as he was able, in a place so distant from their acquaintance.
He made to be taken out thence many sumptuous movables, vessel of gold and
silver, and what ever he thought necessary to make himself seem worthy of
Ariana, if Dicearchus received him into grace at Corinth. Ariana and Cyllenia
that ought to have bin the fairest ornament of that happy day, failed not to
prepare against the morning all that might make their beauty appear more
resplendent: but nothing could render their charms more pleasing, than the
excess of their contentments, which not able to be contained any longer in
their hearts, were now discovering themselves upon their faces. Every one used
the greatest care he could, not to be without pomp and grace; and at last that
morning arrives so much desired of all.

When all things were ready, and they putting themselves in the way to go to
the Temple; they heard Trumpets sounding in the City. Ariana thought Melintus
had sent for them from his ship to lead her to the Temple with more solemnity:
but he stood in amaze at it, and having sent to know what it meant, they
brought him word, that a public cry was made, by which was commanded to all
those that were subjects of the Empire, to seize upon Melintus and Palamede,
Sicilians, wherever they were found, and to send their heads to Rome; because
they were the enemies of Caesar and the people of Rome: and for the better
knowledge of them, they gave all their marks.

This cruel news troubled all their joys, and filled their souls with
astonishment and sadness. They durst not now go abroad for fear of being
known; and they could not tell what counsel to take in such an excess of
misery. When they fled from Dicearchus fury, see them fallen into a far
greater misery, having the Romans for enemies, whose Empire being of so large
an extent, they could not hope to get out of it without being discovered upon
the ways. They shut up their house as carefully as they could, staying till
they might think upon some remedy, though they had but small hope to find any.
Ariana fell a crying, to see a persecution so cruel against her dear Melintus
and her brother, Cyllenia accompanied her tears out of compassion, the others
sought to encourage the resolution of these fair Ladies against this
unhappiness: but they that took upon them to comfort others, were no less
afflicted themselves. Lepantus and Amyntas offered to go learn what they said
about the Town: but because they were strangers in that place, they feared
lest they might give some suspicion of those that dwelt in the same house. All
that day passed with much sadness and fear, and the next day also, without
inventing of any expedient.

Epicharis whose wit was full of a thousand inventions, told them, she saw well
that it appertained to none but her to save their lives, as she had once
already done at Rome: that she would go about the Town to see what passed,
and for this cause she was to be disguised in a man, that habit being fatal
for their safety. Nevertheless that they should not be so secure in her
devices, but they might try to find out other means besides. Melintus said,
he could find no better, than to send away some to Corcyra, to advertise
Eurymedon of the danger they were running; that he coming by with his forces
might deliver them. Amyntas would go thither to do them this service, and
because he would not take their ship, for fear they might have need of it
themselves, he went away in a Skiffe toward Corcyra. Epicharis on the other
side made no matter of cutting her hair once again; and being accommodated
with a man's clothes, and a sword by her side, she went out of the house one
morning, with a design to go gain the Porter of the City, to let them out by
night. She had mistrusted the conduct of another in this occasion: fearing he
might cause a suspicion, and being apprehended discover them: but she was
assured of the dexterity of her wit, and made no doubt of her courage in case
she were taken, never to tell where they were. Her project happily succeeded;
for after having sounded this Porter every way, she found him to be a man that
for a little money would let the very enemy enter into the Town. She put some
pieces of gold into his hand, and prayed him to attend them about midnight:
from thence she went to their vessel, for to give order that all might be in a
readiness at the same hour, to the end they failed not of departing away. But
when she was at the Port, there was a young man that cried out as he saw her;
See there my fugitive slave, friends, lend me your help to arrest him.
Instantly he would have laid hold on her, but Epicharis stepping apace
backward, took her sword in her hand and struck him a blow with it upon the
arm. Yet she presently was arrested, and brought before the Romans that were
newly arrived. That young man having his arm all bloody, failed not to come to
the same place, and entreated the Romans they would not let go his slave that
was called Eurylas, but that he might be restored to him again. Then Epicharis
knew it was the Goalers son of Rome, to whom she had sold her self
heretofore: but without any amazement, she addressed her to the man that seemed
to have the most authority, and said to him; I make you Judge of the difference
that may be betwixt this man and me; and I am assured he will condemn
himself; then she turned her toward him, and said, I confess I sold my self
to you; but was it not upon condition that I might be redeemed at the same
price? It Is true, answers he: she goes on; When you would have given me the
money we were agreed for, did I not leave it with you to keep for me? It Is
true, said he again. Then I might, continues she, lawfully go away from you
when I thought good, since you have the same price in your hands, I can redeem
my self with. The young man stood without any answer; and he before whom this
cause was pleaded, said that Eurylas had reason, and might go at liberty.
Epicharis made a leg, and took her leave of them: but this young man coming
out of his amazement, cried out; Let him not go, for it was he that helped out
of our prisons Melintus and Palamede. So they seized the second time upon the
poor Epicharis that was going her way; and she was brought back again before
him that had judged her, who was called Trebatius. There was with him a young
Roman, whose face appeared very delicate, that said, Without doubt he will
learn us news of those we seek for: let us go into the Town, and
encompasse all with soldiers, lest any thing escape. Epicharis was overcome
with grief, when she saw this resolution, and accused her extreme misery for
the regret she had for having so well hitherto carried her plot, and the fear
that she might be a cause of the death of Melintus and Palamede. Yet she
dissembled as much as she could the trouble she was in, for not giving any
suspicion by her astonishment; and considering how they knew assuredly at Rome,
that Melintus and Palamede were living, as well because of the cry was made, as
to see the Goalers son that spoke as he did, and the rest that made search
for them, she told them; I am alone in this Country without any acquaintance,
and know no news of Melintus or Palamede, with whom this Jailer had shut me up
in a Chamber of the prison. I confess to you truly, that when they saved
themselves by the chimney, and from thence by the top of the Tower, I was
asleep, and I think verily they had stupefied me some way or other: but at
length being awake, and not finding them, because they had left lights in the
Chamber, I was strangely perplexed, and I knew not but that I was to go give
notice that they had made their escape: in the end fearing to be accused of
their flight, for not having had care enough of them, I resolved to save my
self by the same means they had done. But being descended by the rope, a
pinnacle of the Tower fell down that was like to have overwhelmed me: when I
got free of those ruins, I went away as fast as I could, and never since heard
I any news of them. She entertained with these reasons Trebatius, and those
that accompanied him, as they entered into the City: but although they had some
appearance of truth in them, they were not for all that yet satisfied.
Trebatius sent to those that were in another ship, for to advertise them to
come on shore; and how they were in hope to have news there of those they
sought. In the mean time they went to repose them in the most apparent house
that was in all the City, as belonging to the Emperor. Epicharis at the same
time was sounded on all sides, and she satisfied the best she could possibly
all the demands were made her: but at last they of the second ship arrived,
among whom she was very much astonished to know Dicearchus and Pisistratus;
then she judged her self lost. Dicearchus coming near her, said in looking
firmly on her; If I be not deceived this is Epicharis disguised, and this is
not the first time she has taken this habit: she had the confidence to enter
thus into the prison, and to save those you are seeking; and this Jailer had
reason to know her. Every one stood in a maze at the resolution, and the wit of
this young Maid. But, continues he in directing his speech to her, if you be
not the slave of this man, at least, minion, you cannot deny but you are mine.
Your slave, answered she reculing a step, and regarding him contemptuously, I
am none of yours, but Ariana's your Niece, to whom you gave me. No, no, replied
he, you are my slave, and by the right I have over you of life and death, I
command you to tell me where are Melintus and Palamede whom the Emperor makes
search for. Go, answered she, hangman of thy blood, that fear not to
sacrifice thy Nephew for satisfaction of thy vengeance against Melintus: go
furious mad man, that wilt destroy the only hope of thy house, to please thy
brutish passion: assure thy self the gods will punish thee. Yes, I confess to
thee I know what Country they are in for the present, but be certain that I
will never tell it, nor yet for what purpose they sent me by Sea into Epire:
and I shall make it appear to the cruellest executioners, that I have still
more constancy than thou have rage. Dicearchus blushed hearing those sensible
reproaches, and could not answer her: but Trebatius for all that left not
commanding they should put her into irons, until she had declared what she
knew. Epicharis answered him as she went out from his presence, that he then
expected to stay a long time in that place, or else to put her suddenly to
death. She was thus brought into an obscure place, and as she went she saw one
of those that led her away, which made himself known to her. It was Arcas the
faithful freedman of Melintus, who told her in her ear, Let me know where
they are that are sought, that I may advise them to save themselves if it be
possible. She named him the place so handsomely, that none perceived this
secrecy, because they no whit mistrusted Arcas; who as soon as ever Epicharis
was shut up, escaped from among those of that troop, and went to find Melintus
and those of his company, that knew nothing of all had passed. Melintus was
well pleased to see again his dear Arcas, and from him expected much succors
in the necessity they were in. But he was in a great amazement, when he heard
that Epicharis was taken, and had been known by Dicearchus and Pisistratus,
who were arrived at this City, with some Romans that on the Emperor's part
sought to put them to death. Arcas told them how Epicharis expressed resolution
enough never to tell the place they were in; that she would make them believe
very finely, that they were in a very far Country, and had sent her hither
by Sea upon some defignes: but that he saw little hope of escaping, because the
City was every where environed with soldiers. All these cruel news dismayed
their spirits for grief, that were already well forward in fears. Alas, said
the fair Ariana, it seems the fury of our misfortune assembles forces from
all sides of the earth, for to take from us all hope of safety. What crime,
good gods, have we committed, that you should suffer men to persecute us with
such rage? and from whom can we e^pect help, since he that served in stead of
a father to us, is the most animated to destroy us? Alas how miserable am I to
live! Without me, Melintus should not have been here, nor my brother at this
present; and but for me, my uncle had not thus pursued their life. Just gods!
if I be cause of their misfortune, let me be punished only: give an end to my
life which is to them so fatal, and by my blood appease your anger. But what?
my blood is too poor a thing to extinguish so much choler: you will not have
so much as one of us escape. Well then, ye gods! delay not the time to make us
perish. Are we so puissant and so redoubtable, that so much people must be
brought against so few persons? Gather here together all the forces of the
Empire: join our very friends to our enemies; provoke besides against us all
the rest of the earth, with heaven and hell. The valor of Melintus and my
brother is then very formidable, since it makes it self be feared even of you;
that you should need the assembly of so many powers for to vanquish them.
Ariana in her grief, cast against heaven all those complaints, and if she had
believed any thing to be more revered yet than the gods, which might have power
of governing the resorts of fortune; in that transport she was in, she would
not have feared to assault it. Melintus comforted her the best he could
possibly, and told her they were yet all estate, either to save themselves by
artifice; or defend them by valor. At the worst, that death was not a thing so
miserable; and that there were in life many things more to be dreaded: above
all he entreated her not to accuse the gods for their calamity. We must take
heed, said he, of offending those, from whom succors may be expected. They
have drawn us out of greater perils; and if they permit for the present that
we be reduced to such an extremity as this, it may be it is to the end we should
acknowledge that we hold not our safety but of them. Melintus thus labored to
appease the griefs of his dear Ariana, whose sorrow was more insupportable to
him than his own misfortune. Lepantus also employed all the Art of his
eloquence, and all the force of his virtue, to find out a remedy, or at least
a consolation for the danger they were in. There was none but Palamede
transported with fury, who knowing in what sort Epicharis was handled, and that
she was in danger of her life, would have parted that very hour to find out
means for her delivery. What, said he, shall I let her dye that she might make
me live and be so unworthy as to secure my own life by the loss of hers? I
will rather kill all those that keep her, and my uncle himself. Nothing is
capable of resisting my love and courage in such an enterprise as this. Thus
made he many threatenings in his fury, and nothing seemed impossible to him: but
he was kept back by the rest, that represented to him how by going forth he
exposed them to danger; that they were to consult a while what was to be done;
and that if force were to be used, he would much better bring to pass his
design, when he should be assisted with all their troop. These considerations
something appeased the agitation of his spirit; and the care they had over him,
put him out of hope of escaping their hands. In the mean time Melintus and
Lepantus inquired of Arcas who they were that had questioned Epicharis, and
were landed at the Port before Dicearchus; for it was necessary to know all,
and how he had encountered them, to the end thereupon they might see what
enemies they were to guard themselves from, and what remedies they might invent
in the miseries that menaced them. Arcas told them that the relation he had to
make them upon this subject was something long: that he was first to return to
those he had come with, that they entered not into suspicion of him if they saw
him not; but that he would presently return, and pass away the night with
them: especially he would learn the resolution had been taken since he left
Epicharis. They let him go, and having attended him with much impatiency, he
came back about evening; and after they had eaten a little, he assembled them
all in a place, where setting himself in the midst of them, he began thus
what he had to tell them:

History of Arcas, Trebatius, and Emilia.
IT must be confessed that a benefit is never lost, and that by knowing how to
acknowledge an obligation received, one ordinarily draws on a second: for had
it not been for the care Melintus my Master took to send me to Rome with
presents for Maximus to recompense him for the losses he had suffered for our
occasion, I should not now be here to advertise you of what is prepared against
you, and give you assistance according as I shall be able.

When I was come to Rome, I inquired where Maximus dwelt, because his house
that was consumed by the fire had not yet been repaired. At last I found him
out, and having been received by him more courteously than I hoped for at my
first coming, he was much rejoiced to hear news of you; for he believed
until then that you were dead; and accepted with a great deal of difficulty
the presents I brought, esteeming them, as he said, too rich for the small
service he had rendered you. I demanded of him if there was nothing spoken of
you: he told me he had heard nothing at all concerning you: but two days after
word was brought us, that there was a public cry made, whereby it was ordained
that Melintus and Palamede, who had escaped the prisons of Rome, should be
killed in what place soever they were found, for that they were enemies to
Caesar and the people of Rome. This news struck a terror into me; and
instantly I prayed Maximus to go to the Palace of Nero, for to know in what
manner the speech went of them. He reported how he had understood, that
Trebatius, Tribune of the Emperor's guards, had a command to go with three
companies of soldiers in search of Melintus and Palamede to Syracuse, or any
other place where they thought to find them, and that he furnished a ship for
this purpose.

Although I had much trouble in my mind, I left not thinking what I was able to
do to serve you: I resolved with my self to make me a soldier of Nero's
guards, and enter into the companies that were to follow Trebatius. Maximus
brought me acquainted with a Centurion, whom I gave an honest present to,
presently he received me, and made show of much affection to me. I did my
reverence to Trebatius, who finding me ready to serve, regarded me favorably
enough, and began to have a confidence in me; he many times after that put
commands upon me, and at last gave me the charge of Marshall of the lodgings to
my company.

When we embarked us I observed near him a young Roman very handsome, whom he
had a great respect to, and much care over: he wore a helmet on his head that
gave him much grace, and I saw that all his actions were accompanied with much
delicateness. I imagined that I had seen his face heretofore; but I could not
tell who he should be. Trebatius had given me charge to take care of some
stuffes, and I was laid down amongst them to keep them more sure. This young
Roman came to sit down by me, never seeing me, because I was laid. Trebatius
who lost not sight of him, came presently near to him; and never thinking
there had been any body that saw them, or could listen to them, he put one
knee to the ground before him, and taking his hand, said to him; It seems you
fly from me, and what care soever I take to do you service, I observe nothing
in you but coldness to me, not to say contempt. Trebatius, answered he him,
excuse the violence of the thoughts I am possessed with: I forget not the due
acknowledgement of the pains you take to satisfy me; and I shall one day know
how to express the obligation I have to you. Ha! Madam, said he. I was
strangely amazed, pursued Arcas, to hear that word, never having thought it
had bin a woman. That made me give ear more attentively. Ha! Madam, I say,
continued he, what have you then ordained concerning me? and if it happened that
I could never find what you are seeking, should I always be miserable?
Trebatius, answered she, use herein the greatest care you can: for be assured
that I shall never make you contented, till I be revenged. Ha! said he, how
cruel you are to me. What would you have, Trebatius, replied she? one passion
hinders the other: as long as I shall have vengeance in my heart, I can never
have love there. But replied he again, may I not know what cause you have of
so great a hate against Melintus? Oblige me by telling me it to take part in
your passion, that I may afterward oblige you to take part in mine. Tell me,
faite Emilia, what Melintus has done to you. What! was it Emilia? interrupted
Melintus; ah! is not she dead? That name, went Arcas on, surprised me as much
as it does you, and presently I called to memory that it was she her self
disguised in a man's habit. That made me apprehend being known by her;
nevertheless being not fallen yet into that accident, I was resolved to avoid
her presence as much as I could: then I trusted in the change that was made of
me; for she had not known me but a slave and shorn, and ever since you gave
me my liberty, I let my hair grow that quite altered me. Is it very true then,
replied Melintus all astonished, that she is living? Give me leave, answered
Arcas, to pursue the rest, and you shall know if it be she or no. Ha gods! said
Melintus again, there remained nothing but to make the dead rise again
against us; and I think there is not a thing now in the world that has not
conspired our ruin. Arcas went forward thus. Emilia answered Trebatius; Since
you desire to know the cause I have to hate Melintus, I will not deny you this
satisfaction; if you can receive any at all, by learning how much love I have
had to him: for I must confess to you, that he is the only man that has had
the power to produce this passion in me. But he has made me pay well with usury
for the time I deferred to receive it into my heart, and has revenged to the
full upon me the contempts I had until then of you, and some others. Know,
continued she, that this traitor insinuated him into my heart by a very great
appearance of virtue and merits; observing a dissembling modesty, that knows
as often how to conceal vice as virtue. I deny not but he has qualities that
render him admirable; but he must of necessity have a presumption in him, that
persuades him there is nothing in the world worthy of him: On the other side,
he affects so great a contempt of glory and praise, that one could hardly
believe he has any vanity. I swear to you that since I have cause to be his
enemy; considering of all his qualities, I know not what I ought to think of
him; for if he were virtuous, why did he express a love to me without having
any? and if he were not so, why did he refuse the offers of my good will? Well,
he made love to me, and I loved him. Afterward having been hurt before my
lodging, and left for dead, I made him be carried home to my house; where I
assisted him with more passion than a mother could have done the dearest of her
sons. This insensible man began to receive my endeavors and my assistances
with coldness and disdain; and I perceived that my presence was always
troublesome to him. At first I believed that the pain of his wounds caused his
ill humor, or that it was grief for a long sickness: but since, a certain
Ariana, sister of Palamede, came from Sicily, what sickness soever was upon
him, he spoke no more but of retiring from me to go to her. I knew then he had
never loved me, and was tormented with a cruel jealousy that gave me no
repose. I saw well that I had no cause to retain him, since he loved me not;
and yet I could not endure he should forsake me. Never had I experience of so
many troublesome passions as then distracted me; but I confess there cannot be
imagined a more cruel torment. Love, hatred, the resentments of contempt and
jealousy, put me into such a disorder, that my mind was in (...) perpetual
fury. There rested for all that in me I know not what hope, that believing him
to be of a great spirit, he could not but esteem himself much obliged to me,
for so many duties I had rendered hi(...) nevertheless this ingrate, this
perfidious man prayed me at last to give him leave to retire. I expected that
blow with a great deal of fear, and receiving it I forced my self some time
to persuade him to stay still with me: but seeing him resolved to be gone, I
perceived there is nothing so sensible as the contempt and the ingratitude of
that one loves. I could no longer contain my self, but gave him all the
reproaches an outraged lover could make, in calling him traitor, villain,
ungrateful, and all that may be said in a furious anger. This artificial man
having given free liberty to my rage, to make it lose its force, began to
pacify me by little and little, by the most flattering words deceit it self
could have invented. He persuaded me to what he would, being so weakened by the
agitations of my soul, that in that estate it was easy for him to vanquish
me. Then he labored to make me believe things that were so pleasing to my
desires, and that in such sort flattered my hopes, that I conspired also with
him for to abuse my self. Never had he expressed so much passion to me, as he
did at that time: he spared, neither protestations, nor oaths, for to assure me
of his love and his fidelity; and feining some days that he could not be far
from my presence, he obtained insensibly leave to be gone, in making me hope
that he would return to me every hour. Being thus escaped out of my hands, he
counterfetted himself sick, that he might not be obliged to see me again,
until he returned into Sicily. I sent often to hear of him, and was
advertised of all that passed at their house, by the means of a young boy
called Damis, slave of Maximus, who reported to me that nothing was so
agreeable to Melintus, as the dear assistance of this fair Ariana. It
consumed my heart with jealousy and despite, that he had thus deceived me to
get away. I attended still a good while; and the more time passed away, the
more he made me lose hope of seeing him ever again. This outrage seized me in
such wise as I became sick, and willing to prove to what degree his
ingratitude would proceed, or whether pity might not do that which love could
not obtain, I gave out every where that I was at the extremity, to try if he
would not render me at least some office in the very last moments of my life.
But this cruel man, this Barbarian, was never touched for any accident that
could arrive to me; and had less care of me, than if he had never known me.
Not content yet with that trial, I made it be reported that I was dead, to see
if he would not come to visit Camilla, and to hear being closely hid, what he
would say to her upon the regret of my death; and I will tell you truly what my
fury was then; I was resolved if he came, to come forth of my ambuscado after I
had heard him a while; and to tear him in pieces with my teeth and with my
nails: but all that moved him no more, than if he had had no soul; and I knew
beside that he had hindered Palamede from coming to see my sister, upon the
accident was thought to have befallen me. I knew not now in the extreme dolor
I was in, what artifice to use, nor what resolution to take, when the passion
of others was near to have succored mine, and supplied the defect of my
inventions. Marcelin, as I knew of Damis, to be revenged of these Sicilians to
whom he was enemy, attempted to burn them all one night in their house, or if
they got out, to kill Melintus and Palamede, and to carry away Ariana in that
disorder, for to give her to the Emperor. This enterprise, as I came to know
since, succeeded not well for Marcelin, who was slain without the City by
Melintus, and Ariana saved her self by I know (...) what means: but the day
after, Palamede and Melintus were taken and brought prisoners to Rome. Never,
pursued Emilia, had I so much joy as to learn that they were destined to
death, being accused for having set fire on the City; and when I was advertised
that they were to be brought before the Senate to have judgment, I disguised
me in the same estate as I am now for the present in, to see what countenance
they had, and to what punishment they should be condemned; and slipping into
the Senate House among the crowd, I so wrought that I got a place, whence I
could see them at my ease. I saw this traitor present himself without any
amazement, and in seeing him, I became pale, and a shaking horror surpised me
that took from me all strength. The trembling that had seized me, quitted me
not as long as I beheld him: but when he began to speak, I felt my self even
gone, so was I taken with the different passions that perplexed me. In the end
I recollected a little force and courage; and seeing in what sort he defended
himself; Ha! said I to my self, see how this deceiver spoke to me, when he
would abuse me. How well he knows to disguise the causes of their misery, and
his love for Ariana. He dares not pronounce that name for fear of being
troubled. And yet I confess to you that I felt my self affected with the
things he said; and my hatred was not powerful enough to resist the force of
his discourse. I would have had them adjudged him to death, and yet I well saw
that it was impossible to condemn him. I attended his judgment with as much
trouble as if it had been my own; and for all I desired he should dye, I
surprised my self sometimes in the estate of having a fear for his life. But
yet for all that I saw they were about to absolve him, and I was angry and
content at the same time: but when they came from Nero to command the judgment
to be surceased, for that he would declare his will upon the matter, I cannot
express in what state I was in. I well perceived how the Emperor feared lest
they should have been dismissed and quitted, and that this signified an
inevitable death: but I could not rejoice at the assurance of their misfortune.
Nevertheless when Melintus was sent back again to prison, and I saw him no
more, I re-entred into fury against him. I accused my self that I had not
provoked the Judges to punish them, that I had not invented some crime to have
made them be condemned at the instant: I represented to my self all the
contempts and all the indignities he had offered me, and was impatient till
Nero sent to murder them in the prison. All day long I did noting but torment
my self upon this occasion; and at night I could not sleep. I conceited in my
mind that I saw Nero's soldiers enter the prison, and massacre with a thousand
blows that perfidious man. I imagined that I arrived there at the same time,
and rejoiced to see him in the expectation of death, and then to wash my hands
in his blood. After I had passed away the night in these ravings, I sent to
know at the prison, if they were not yet dead: but they brought me word that
all was in great tumult there, and how they believed they had precipitated them
from the top of the Tower into the Tiber, having found means to get out by the
chimney of the Chamber where they lay: that a great multitude of people was
about the river, and many men in Boats to search for the dead bodies which were
thought either drowned, or brained, because a pinnacle of the Tower was fallen
down with them. My fury persuaded me to a strange curiosity: I would needs go
to the very place where they searched for the bodies, for to satiate my sight
with that spectacle; and I believe that if Melintus his had been found, I
should have died for joy to see it. But all the care so many persons took, and
I my self that gave money to have the water searched, proved unprofitable: the
night came on, and I was constrained to give over this search, with all the
rest of them that had labored in vain. I wanted not satisfaction, though it
were not entire, believing them to be dead, and that the stream had carried
them away. Some days after when I would go upon the water, I made them
conduct me far out of the City, to see if peradventure these bodies were not
cast by the stream upon some bank. A young youth that guided us, seeing an
empty Boat at the banks-side, told us without thinking any thing; See there a
Boat without a Master. I asked him what he meant: he answered me; A young man
bought it, but I believe it was not to make himself a Water-man; and gave it
me to keep that night the prisoners saved themselves. Then he added a little
after; They thought good to search in the water the other day I believe they
are far enough off by this. I fretted, pursued Emilia, to hear him speak
thus; and I urged him to tell me what he knew of the business. I will tell
you, says he, upon condition you will not discover me; which having promised
him, he continues, that he had seen the prisoners save themselves in that
Boat, after they had been a long time descending from the Tower by a rope, and
how he saw them pass by, because that night he watched upon the river. I made
as if I rejoiced, added Emilia, that they were safe; but in my soul I resolved
not to let them escape so unpunished; and he that had well regarded me would
have seen that I could not choose but have my face all of a fire for excess
of choler. What, said I to my self, shall this Barbarian be presently in
Sicily beside his fair Ariana? and have no dearer entertainments with her than
to relate what contempts he made of my affection? and shall he boast himself
all his life time for having securely triumphed over all my passions? No, I
will not dye so, without a revenge: he is not so safe as he thinks himself to
be. I will pursue him into what part of the earth soever he retires; and if I
be not powerful enough my self, I will provoke the fury of all the world
against him, to hinder his escaping out of my hands. I returned into the City,
musing of a thousand ways to his destruction: but to be more assured that he
were living, I resolved to send one of my men expressly to Syracuse, that might
enquire, if Melintus were arrived there. This man reported to me all the
rejoycings were made at their return; the sacrifices and the plays, with the
glory of Melintus and Ariana, whom they believed to see very shortly married
together. All these things so animated me with jealousy, shame, and despite,
that I purposed to prevent their happiness by the death of that villain. I
advised to make use of the Emperors power, that I might not fail of my
enterprise. I saw you then, more than of custom, says she to Trebatius,
because I began to acknowledge that you had always loved me with a true
affection, and that had resisted all my contempts; and I was sorry for having
made choice of this traitor and this perjurious man, in stead of you that were
never wanting to me: I resolved to be no more ingrate toward you, but to
content your just desires; upon condition you should first see me revenged upon
Melintus. You promised me to satisfy my passion, before you would press me to
content yours. It was then, continued Emilia, that I gave you advice to go and
declare to Nero, that Melintus and Palamede, his enemies, were living; and to
demand a Commission from him to go put them to death. I desired besides to
have it published throughout Rome, and all the Cities of the Empire, that they
should be killed in what place soever they were found; and I was willing my
self to assist you in this Commission by disguising me thus, that if it were
possible, I might kill that perfidious wretch with my own hand: for I confess
to you it is the greatest pleasure I can ever hope for in all my life. Emilia
ended thus, pursues Arcas, and Trebatius answered her: Well then, Madam, I see
that he must dye, or I shall never have any contentment from you: Now I know
how much cause you have to seek his death, I will join the desire of
revenging your injuries, to that desire I had before only to obey you. They
had other discourses afterward together, says Arcas, besides these. O gods!
interrupted Melintus, must this woman live still for my torment? See what rage
she is possessed of. Arcas prayed him to let him go on, and he replied: I was
in a strange wonder to have heard all Emilia's fury; yet I had an opinion that
the gods had suffered me to be advertised of all these things, to give me the
means of doing you service. I had no other care, than to keep my self from
being known to Emilia; and so we arrived at Syracuse. I knew very well you
were not there, so as in that place I was in no fear for you. About the
evening we landed, and were lodged in the City. Presently I went to see
Telephus, and told him of the search was making after you, which troubled him
exceedingly. We advised, that we were that very night to send tickets all about
the Town, for to entreat those of Syracuse, if they loved Melintus, to take
heed of telling the Romans whither he was gone, because they sought to put him
to death. We brought this to pass, and the peoples love was so great toward
you, says he to Melintus, that Trebatius and Emilia were more than eight days
enquiring after you in all places, without being able to learn any news at
all. As for me, I had resolved to go to Sea in the mean time, and find you
out at Corinth, to advertise you to save your self; but they had stayed all
the shipping at the Port; so as this was impossible for me to do. At last, I
cannot tell by what means, but they came to know whither you were gone:
presently they made us go on shipboard again, and I departed with them,
after I had taken my leave of Telephus, Hyperia, and Erycine, whom I left all
in tears: I cursed the winds for being so favorable to us; for we arrived at
Corinth in less time than could be hoped; and at the Port found all in great
trouble. Trebatius demanded what the matter was; and they told him they had
carried away certain Maids in ships that set sail not above an hour before.
We went on shore, and I was greatly amazed to meet Dicearchus and Pisistratus,
who were busy in preparing a Vessel to go out after the ravishers. Trebatius
asked him what his trouble was. Roman Lord, said he, I had a Niece, the
government of whom was committed to me by my brother when he lay a dying. I had
promised her to Pisistratus, you see there, says he in showing him; and a
traitor called Melintus is come from Syracuse, and has taken her away from me.
Ha! the villain, cried out Emilia, it is the same man we are seeking for the
Emperor, to have him dye. Comfort your self good man, continued she, we shall
revenge you well enough. I believe, replied Trebatius, they are in one of the
two ships we encountered sailing toward the coasts of Greece; we are to lose no
more time, to depart and follow them: if your Vessel be ready, said he to
Dicearchus and Pisistratus, accompany us, and we will join our quarrels
together. Never saw I any thing so encouraged as Dicearchus, who hastened his
imbarquement with Pisistratus as fast as he could; and when Trebatius and
Emilia set sail, he followed them.

After having passed the promontory of Naupactum, we took the right hand
along the Grecian Coasts, and came into all the ports one after the other,
where we did but enquire if two Vessels had not arrived very lately: Thus went
we into diverse places never hearing any news of you. At last we arrived here;
where being descended, Epicharis that was at the Port disguised in a man, was
so unhappy, as to be known by the Goalers son, that kept you prisoners at
Rome. He had accompanied us having known the design of Trebatius; for his
father being kept in irons, because he had been too negligent over you, he
was in hope to deliver him, by lending his help to make you be put to death,
and for this reason he embarked with us. You may see by this how many persons
have encountered together for to work your ruin, and this is that we are for
the present to endeavor to defend you from. But even now when I left you, I
learned that they had set straight guard at all the ports, and along the walls
of the Town: from thence I went to mark out the lodgings for those of my
company: and I have kept for my self a very commodious one, that it may serve
you, if you should have occasion to use it; then I came to find you again, and
we must for the present advise how we ought to order our selves, and in what
sort I may succor you. Arcas ended thus, and he was heard of all with much
astonishment and fear, learning by his discourse so many occurrences that were
prepared to make their deaths inevitable.

Melintus brake off his silence then and said, Well then I see it is but my life
they require; they seek neither Palamede, nor any one of you: by my dying I
will make them all satisfied, and deliver all of you from the danger wherein
you are for me alone. Yes, I will go and present my self before them; I will
open my bosom with a poniard in their presence, for to content with one blow
the vengeance of the Emperor, of Emilia, and of Dicearchus. Were it not far
better to let it appear, that none was able to make me dye but my self,
rather than fall unworthily into their hands, and receive a shameful death? It
is no fury this, that transports me. If I saw any appearance to secure my self
and you too, by valor, or by any other means, I should be much troubled to
desire to lose my life before I lost all hope: but seeing us environed with men
of war on all sides, 'twere better I dyed alone courageously, than to attempt
means that could never succeed, but bury you all under my ruin. The sage
Lepantus stopped this discourse of Melintus, in putting his hand upon his arm,
and said to him; Pardon me, if I esteem you not exempt from transport, in the
resolution you take. Those that have a great courage as you have, when they
offer themselves to dye, are carried many times away to this desire, rather out
of a pleasure they find in despising death, than for any necessity that
obliges them to desire it. But we are never excusable for having prevented our
destiny, as long as wit or force are yet capable of surmounting the rigor of
fortune. We are to make a trial of all things before that extremity, and not
to neglect the meanest hope that may be left us. One moment of time may change
the state of the whole world; and this same fortune that assembles so many
enemies to destroy you, can with a reverse bring themselves to ruin, and
overthrow so many accidents by one alone. They know not yet where we are; Arcas
is in good estate to give us advice every hour; and if you must dye, stay at
least till you can no longer live. For my part, I am of opinion that we change
our lodging, and go presently into that that Arcas has taken for himself in
the Town, as if we were Romans too; because that lodging being marked for
them, they will never come to seek us out there. Then must Arcas go and
advertise those of our ship, that they retire to a bay I saw hard by, for fear
they should discover us, if they inquired of them: we will find out afterward
some means to deliver Epicharis. Those reasons, and that counsel appeased
Melintus, and gave a little consolation to all the company: presently they
resolved to follow the propositions of Lepantus, and to depart that house to
go into that Arcas had reserved for himself. It was done that very night, and
what ever they had more precious than other, was transported into that lodging,
which was commodious enough; the house they were in was left to those it
belonged to, whom they took leave of, feining to go and embarque themselves:
they left them reasonably well rewarded, and obliged them by their presents not
to tell that any of them had stayed in that place. Arcas went toward the ship,
which he sent away to that same Bay, with a charge that if they were found,
they should not tell whose men they were, but to feine any thing rather.

ARIANA. The fourth Book.
THe next day after that cruel one, wherein so many miseries happened, in stead
of so many expected joys, Trebatius and Emilia made an exact search throughout
all the City, except the houses where the Roman soldiers were, who had all of
them given their faiths that no Citizen was lodged with them. Arcas made
himself the busiest man of all, in ferretting all the corners of houses, being
certain that they would never go into his. About evening he failed not to
appear there, and assure his good Master and all the company, that he hoped to
keep them from being discovered; and that Epicharis was to be admired at for
her resolution, not to disconceale them; especially that she had removed the
opinion of their being in that Country at all: she feared only lest they
might not expose her to some punishment. That word so transported Palamede, as
he resolved either to dye, or save her. He inquired of Arcas in what part of
Trebatius house she was shut up, and how many persons were appointed for her
guard; and when he had learned all the particulars he desired to know, he
feined no more thinking of her, and went to bed. But when he thought every body
asleep, he descended down the window by his sheets into the street, having no
other arms but his sword. He went to Trebatius lodging, at the gate whereof
was a Corpse de guard, where being entered without any trouble, because they
took him for one of the soldiers, he went on toward the descent of the
obscure place where Epicharis was enclosed; and finding a soldier that kept
the entry, he threw his cloak about his head for fear he should cry out, and
at the same time stabbed him twice or thrice into the body; and went not from
thence till the soldier had expired. He went down afterward without fear
into that obscurity; and was come even to the door of the dungeon, where was
another soldier with the keys, and a little light about him. This soldier
surpised, asked him who he was; but Palamede not willing to give him the
leisure of knowing him, assailed him with good blows of his sword, and
presently laid him dead at his feet. Then he took the keys, and with the
help of the little light he had, opened the dungeon door. Epicharis believed
that they came for her, to propound more questions, or else to make her
confess something by torment: but when she felt her self embraced by
Palamede, she took him for some indiscreet soldier, and repulsed him rudely.
But for all that Palamede making him known to her, and expressing a thousand
joys for seeing her again, she was exceedingly amazed, and asked him how he
was able to come thither. He related to her all he had done: then he said how
they were to lose no time, and prayed her to make haste to go out with him. I
am fast, says she, by the feet; and I am much afraid that all your pains have
proved unusefull, and that you be not here in great danger for having slain my
guards. Nevertheless searching among the keys, they were so fortunate as to
find those of her irons. Palamede opened the lock, and full of rapture for
delivering his Mistress, kissed her fair feet, and cursed a thousand times
those that had made so delicate a person endure such misery. At last Epicharis
after having tried a while if she could go well, resolved to be gone. Palamede
was of opinion she should go out alone, as he had entered alone; and that he
would follow her presently after: and, for fear she should be known, he made
her take the Coat Armor, and the Casque of one of the two soldiers he had
killed, to the end they might let her pass without difficulty. She would have
had him go first alone; but it became her to give way to the love of Palamede.
She passed therefore without fear so disguised, through the Corpse de guard,
and being escaped she stayed some time in a place for to go along with
Palamede, whose fortune had been very different from hers: for having delayed
the time a while, he was going out also, after he had taken the Casque and
Coat Armor of the other dead soldier: but when he was very near out, a
soldier stayed him by the arm, and asked him whither he went? He answered him
in the Roman language, that he was going out by the command of Trebatius: but
when he was demanded the word, he could not tell it; and though he took his
sword in hand to escape by valor, yet they failed not to encompasse, and seize
upon him. By and by after the dead soldiers were found, and they knew that
Epicharis was escaped. Palamede was kept till the next day, attending the
waking of Trebatius; and betimes in the morning he was brought before him: but
when Dicearchus was sent for to know him, there cannot be described an
astonishment like to that of this old man, who prosecuted the death of
Melintus, never thinking his Nephew had been with him, but that he was still
at Athens, whither he thought he had gone. In the end being come to himself
again, he entreated Trebatius to save his Nephew's life, who was in no sort
guilty of what Melintus had done: but Trebatius willing to satisfy the command
he had received of the Emperor, and revenge the death of his soldiers, by
punishing the hardy enterprise of Palamede, commanded him to be set in the
place of Epicharis, and if he would not tell where Melintus was, that within
two days they should put him to death. Palamede said, it was a long time ago
ere he had seen Melintus, and that his uncle could witness for him, with whom
he parted from Syracuse to go to Corinth, and after that had taken leave of
him to go to Athens: that he had a desire to see in order, all the Cities of
Greece and Epire; and being arrived at this, he had learned that Epicharis was
retained prisoner, whom he loved sufficiently for to undertake her deliverance:
that since he had been so happy as to effect it, he took no more care for any
thing could happen to himself. Trebatius said, how this encounter of him and
Epicharis, made him believe, it was not true he told; and that they might very
well have news of the other person they sought, since already they had one of
them in their power. Assure your self, pursues he, that if you declare not to
me where Melintus is, torments shall make you confess it. There is no torment,
answers he, capable to make me say that I know not. I am ignorant where he is,
and for what cause you make search for him: you ought not to delay the time of
putting me to death, for having slain your soldiers, if you prolong my life
only in hope to learn news of Melintus, of whom I can tell you nothing, but
that I left him at Syracuse. Arcas was present, who was come in haste to
Trebatius his, very early; because Palamede had not been found in his bed, and
they all imagined that he had done some strange enterprise for Epicharis, the
unfortunate event whereof he considered, full of sadness and despair.
Palamede was led to the prison whence he had drawn Epicharis, what entreaty
soever Dicearchus could make to save him; and Arcas went to report these woeful
news to Melintus and Ariana, and he told them that they knew not what was
become of Epicharis.

This affliction renewed the weepings of Ariana, and put Melintus out of all
patience, who having followed until then the wise counsels of Lepantus, could
not endure to see the grief of Ariana for her brother, and the danger his
friend was in. He took Arcas aside, and made him swear that he would
inviolably obey his commands: then he told him, that he was resolved to deliver
Palamede; but what misadventure soever chanced him in that enterprise, he
charged him, not to declare himself to be any of his; to the end he might
preserve Ariana with their friends, and that they never came into the power of
Trebatius and Emilia. This faithful servant labored to make him change this
deadly resolution: but Melintus astonished him, by swearing, that if he opposed
his design any longer, or advertised Ariana of it, he would strike himself
with his sword into the body. He recommended to him above all the care he was
to have all his life long over Ariana, whose safety he committed to his charge.
Arcas knew not what to say, seeing the desperateness of his Master, who
commanded him besides to go presently out of the house, and attend him at
Trebatius his, where he should be a witness of what he meant to do. And thus
was it that Melintus hindered Arcas from declaring his design: instantly he
chose out eight young soldiers that had followed him from Syracuse, whom he
had proved to be full of great courage, and who admiring his virtue, expressed
a passionate affection to him. He acquainted them with his purpose, and
perceiving how they entertained with joy this occasion of dying at his service,
he made them arm them under their Cassaques, and without speaking to his dear
Ariana, or to Lepantus, went out armed as they were. He would serve himself of
nothing but his valor in that enterprise, without employing any other
artifice. As soon as he was come before Trebatius gate, he cast himself
bravely into the Corpse de guard with his companions, and after having killed
above six soldiers, before the others were avis'd of them, he shut the door
upon him, for fear there might not come succors to Trebatius. The Alarm was
presently all over the house, and more than thirty persons were assembled
together, for to sustain them: they gave not over their pursuit of cutting in
pieces whatsoever presented it self before them; and never gave Melintus so
many proofs of his valor, as having to defeat the most warlike amongst the
Roman soldiers. His companions that labored to imitate him, seemed to acquire
new forces by seeing the great blows he gave, and believed that nothing could
vanquish them in the company of so valorous a man. Already above twenty Romans
had been slain, when Trebatius, himself came running thither, with Emilia,
Dicearchus, and Pisistratus; and seeing this slaughter of his men, and so
valiant enemies that pursued them, he could not imagine what they were, nor how
they should conceive so furious a design: nevertheless seeing that it became
him to join himself to the number, he prayed Emilia to retire, and go see
their combat out at a window. It was she that knew Melintus first of all, and
showed him to Trebatius: Dicearchus remarked him too, and being retired with
Emilia into one of the Chambers, they saw that Trebatius had put on arms, and
was engaged in the fight with the rest. Arcas that he might not be obliged to
strike his Master, or his companions, had broken his sword, and mingling with
Trebatius soldiers, seemed to be one of the first in fighting against them,
for to hinder by this means the most daring of their party from approaching
them. Melintus perceiving Trebatius whom he knew, thought of nothing but
assaulting him, hoping that if he were once defeat of him, the rest would soon
be disheartened, and easily dispatched. On the other side Trebatius refused not
the combat, being in despair to see so great a number of his men upon the
place, and Melintus began to have a good hope of his attempt, seeing so many
dead about him, and that he was still assisted with six of his company against
a few that remained. But by misfortune a Roman was advised to go fetch by a
back way, those that guarded the gates of the City, who came running
instantly; so as Melintus was environed on all sides. The six that remained
with him were presently put to the sword, and Emilia seeing him alone, cried
from aloft to Trebatius, that they should not take away his life. Melintus was
even ready to be trodden down with the crowd of those that set upon him, but
yet he still left not strowing the place with dead bodies, in the fury he was
in; and they were afraid to come near him by reason of the great blows he
gave on all sides of him: but at last he was taken by means of a Roman
soldier, who in dying, for rage took hold of his legs, and made him fall.
Thus was this prodigious valor constrained to yield to so cruel a fortune,
and presently he was carried into a dungeon apart, and laden with irons by
order from Emilia.

During this tumult, Dicearchus minding the safety of Palamede, was gone
toward the place where he was, and having given money to a soldier that was
left alone to guard the entrance, because the rest were run away to the defense
of Trebatius, he persuaded him to let him go, being able to excuse himself
upon the disorder that had happened. This man having been thus gained,
Dicearchus conducted his Nephew by a back door, never telling him the
occasion of the rumor he heard (for without doubt he would have succored
Melintus,) and having given him advice to save himself, he returned to
Trebatius, who was then thinking of carrying away the bodies of so many dead
men as were in the Court of his house, and could not sufficiently wonder at the
great courage of Melintus, and his resolution for the safety of Palamede.
Emilia was well pleased to have Melintus in her power, and was casting in her
mind what kind of death she should give him, being resolved to kill him with
her own hand. Then word was brought them how Palamede had been saved, and
there was a soldier that accused Dicearchus for having been toward the
prison: thereupon those that guarded him being not to be found, they
conjectured that Dicearchus had gained them, whereat Trebatius being offended,
made him be put into the same dungeon, where his Nephew had been before, near
unto that wherein Melintus was, and was resolved to put him to death, for
having dared to corrupt his men, and save the enemies of Caesar, and at the
same time he made Pisistratus be banished from his presence.

On the other side Palamede being got out, knew not what to think to see all
the City in a rumor: and yet considering of nothing at that time but his own
safety, he regained the lodging of Arcas; never enquiring what the matter was.
But he was greatly amazed when he understood that Melintus was gone out with
eight soldiers, and he could not imagine for what design he had stolen away
from his troop in that equipage. Instantly he would depart, for to go seek
and succor him, but he was hindered by the arrive of Arcas, who learned them
all that had passed. The fair Ariana who began to dry her tears for her
brothers return, felt then a new affliction that opened afresh the source of
them. Every one was in such a despair at this calamity, for the affection they
bare Melintus, that in stead of comforting her, they expressed by their extreme
grief what cause she had to afflict her self. Palamede seeing in what sort he
was obliged to Melintus, for having conceived so generous an enterprise for his
safety, was fully resolved to render him the like: but he could not yet invent
the means to effect it; and he only mingled his despite with the extreme
displeasures of his sister, Lepantus, and Cyllenia.

In the mean time Emilia that meditated of nothing but the means of entirely
satisfying her vengeance, having in her hands the subject of all her furious
passions, considered that if she could get Ariana into her power, she might
have wherewith to punish her, for being cause of her torments, and an occasion
besides to aggravate the punishments of Melintus, by the resentments he should
have at that she would make Ariana suffer, before she put him to death; and
doubting that she might be in the same place, since Melintus was met there,
with Palamede and Epicharis, she made a further search in all parts to have her
in her hands. But Arcas knew so well to divert the scrutiny that might be made
in his house, that she could never learn any news of her. Many days were
thus consumed in this search about the City, and some places adjoining: in the
end not able any longer to defer her revenge, and Trebatius urging her to put
an end to the life of Melintus, for to give a beginning to his happiness; she
resolved one morning to go her self and kill him with her own hand. She
took a poniard, and Guides to conduct her to the dungeon; then being sure that
Melintus could not defend himself from her, because he had his hands tied
behind him, and irons at his feet, she sent away those that were with her, to
enter alone into that obscurity with a torch in her hand; having yet some shame
left, to commit that action in the presence of another. What? said she to her
self in entering, it seems I tremble, and that my body fears to execute what
my mind has so resolutely undertaken! Can I yet doubt whether I be to revenge
my self, having run over so many Seas to find the occasion? No, no, let this
cruel man feel the fury of a woman justly provoked, and repay all the
torments he has made me endure. She encouraged thus her self, for to fortify
her heart that seemed not over much assured, and went her way toward Melintus,
conducted by the torches light, in design to make him have a sense of the
death she would give him.

Melintus knew her presently, and seeing that she sought him among the
shadows, he would prevent her, and said; Come, Emilia, that you bring me is
very agreeable to me. Those words troubled her, because this voice heretofore
so loved, surpised her; and she thought not that Melintus could know her,
believing her dead, and seeing her in the habit she was in. Ha! traitorous
Sorcerer, said she at length, what spirit has learned thee that I am Emilia?
Yes, I am that Emilia, the object of thy contempts and thy ingratitudes, that
am come from hell to ravish from thee thy perfidious soul, and abandon it to
the furies. Well then, replied he gently, dispatch, Emilia; do that you have
enterpriz'd: behold my breast uncovered, strike the poniard in, and assure your
self that the death you are going to give me, I shall receive it, not as a
punition for having offended you, but as a recompense for the good service I
have done you. Done me good service! replied she instantly. Ha! Villain,
call'st thou that good service, to have mocked at my love, and to have rewarded
my cares with disdain and ingratitude? call'st thou that good service, cruel
man, when after thou had escaped from me by subtilty; thou would no more
think there remained an Emilia in the world, to whom thou wast so much
obliged? call'st thou that good service, thou ungrateful wretch; when neither
the sickness that happened to me for the regret of seeing thee no more, nor my
death so near, nor my very death it self could oblige thee to give one visit
to our house? Emilia, replied Melintus, to what purpose serve these reproaches,
since you are resolved to make me dye? Dispatch, Emilia, see my breast ready for
you, give the blow, and believe that you never yet obliged me so much; as you
shall do at this hour by taking away my life. No, answered she, I will know
first, wherein, traitor, thou have served me. Ha! Emilia, said Melintus, will
you have me to your shame present before your eyes so trouble some
remembrances? Did I not serve you well, when seeing that this same Emilia,
whose wit and virtue I had before admired, let her self loose to desires that
were not very honest, I endeavored to assuage that heat by my coldnesses, for
fear she should bewail all her life time, the fault of a few days? Did I not
serve you well, when deploring with my self the wandering of your soul, and
comparing your abasement with the honor of your preceding life, I was not
willing to take advantage at your blindness, but maintained you, pure at least
from ill effects, since I could not hinder the impurity of your desires and
thoughts? And did I not well serve you, when seeing that my presence rather
kindled your passion, than my reasons had power to extinguish it, I took a
resolution by subtlety to go from you, hoping that by taking away the object
that carried you to impudicity, by little and little reason would be restored
to you, and make you know into what misery you were ready to have fallen?
Emilia, Emilia, I had been such an one, as you would then have wished me, what
should you be at this hour? What repenting for having committed so shameful a
fault? what remorse would seize you at this present, for having lost that
honor that heretofore became your front with so much assurance? and to see
your self constrained to hang down your eyes, as accomplices of your shame, and
of your misery? What have I done to you then, Emilia, to pursue me thus so
furiously? You will make me dye, for being cause that you may yet boast of your
being honest; that you fear not the reproaches, either of men, or of your own
conscience, and that you find persons yet that will enterprise all things for
your sake. See, Emilia, whether I have done you good service or no; and judge
for the present, if I should have more obliged you by satsfying your desire at
that time, than by not doing it at all.

Emilia, in whom there still remained seeds of virtue and a good courage, was
so touched at these true and sensible reproaches, and stood so full of shame,
as her furious and irregular passion, not able to sustain the force of so
great a virtue, forsook her, and she was constrained insensibly to let fall
the poniard she held. She continued silent a long time, not knowing what to
answer him: at last she sat down by his side, and said to him, Melintus the
wisest of all men, thou have twice vanquished me: the first time thou gainedst
but my heart and my affection; but now thou surmountest my soul, and my very
reason, that confesses there is no virtue in the world comparable to thine. I
submit to all the pains thou will ordain me, for the torments I have made
thee suffer; and I will confess every where, that I am redeuable to thee for
the resolution I take, to follow all my life time the advice of thy mavelous
wisdom.

Emilia thus rendered due homage to the virtue of Melintus, when Trebatius who
had care of her, and feared that Melintus all fettered as he was, might find
means to defend himself from her, because she stayed long, came all alone to
find her, and was in a great wonder to see her by Melintus, rather in estate
of a suppliant, than a person that sought revenge. What Is this? said he to
Emilia, What do I see? Trebatius, says she to him, you have reason indeed to
wonder: but if you had heard the sage discourses of Melintus, you would be
overcome as well as I am. See the most virtuous man of the world, to whom I am
beholding for the purity I have hitherto preserved, and for the virtue I shall
follow all my life hereafter: I require you would save his life for my sake, or
else put me to death in his stead. Madam, replied Trebatius, you know I have
not enterpris'd the ruin of Melintus, but to satisfy you, having no cause at
all to hate him. If you have admired his wisdom for the present, I have lately
admired the greatness of his courage and strength; and it was with much regret
that I permitted you the destruction of so valiant a man. Melintus brake off
this discourse, to tell them that he had neither so much virtue, nor so much
courage; that what he had done against the Roman soldiers, was rather an
effect of despair than valor, for having understood that his friend was in
danger of his life; and that Emilia called wisdom in him, the knowledge he had
given her of the transport of her fury, which made her do things mis-becomming
her sex: that since they had a command from the Emperor to put him to death,
they should not for this refuse to do it, for fear they themselves suffered
not for it. No, no, said Emilia, I will dye, before any such thing happen to
you from Trebatius; and I know that he is not here, but to obey me. Trebatius
confirmed what she had said, and then Melintus replied; Since you are willing,
I have an obligation to you for my life, I will acquit my self in some sort
toward you; counselling you, said he addressing him to Emilia, to consider for
the present the merits of Trebatius, his faithful affection, and so many
services he has done you, which altogether oblige you to receive him for your
husband. And you, said he turning him toward Trebatius, receive from my hand
Emilia, whose fair qualities you are not ignorant of, and who having let her
self be surpised with the passion of revenge, shall from henceforth prove the
vertuousest woman of the world, since she has known how to overcome it. Emilia
gave her hand to Trebatius for Melintus sake, and having permitted him to kiss
it for a pledge that she received him as her husband, made him all-transported
with joy. Trebatius finding himself so redeuable to Melintus, asked him, if he
desired any other thing of him beside. That you would deliver, answered he,
Palamede. He is no more in our power, said Trebatius; and thereupon he told him
how Dicearchus had saved him, but that he had caused the old man to be put in
his place in a dungeon near to that they were in, and that he was resolved to
have him dye for having dared to conceive such an enterprise, and that now he
was the more persuaded to it, because he was Melintus enemy. Ha! Trebatius,
said Melintus, I demand of you then the life of Dicearchus, in stead of
Palamedes. Too-generous Melintus, replied Trebatius, if you knew in what sort
he is incensed against you, you would never desire he should live any longer.
It Is no matter, said Melintus, he is uncle to Ariana and Palamede; and though
he be very cruel to me, I will never endure to have him dye. I give you his
life then, and will have him hold it of none but you. Melintus thanked him for
this favor; and then Emilia asked how he was able to save himself in the
City, while she made the search for him. He answered her, that it was by the
means of Arcas his freeman, who had put himself into their company being at
Rome, and told her all he had done since to succor Palamede and him being in
Nicopolis: that they had ever bin with Ariana and the rest of their troop in
the lodging he had made to be marked out for him; and thither without question
was Palamede retired. Trebatius and Emilia highly commended the fidelity, and
resolution of this freed-man, and Emilia that remembered what he had done
heretofore at Rome with Nisus, being a slave, when he attempted to dye for his
Master; added, that this was not the first time he had shown a great courage,
and extreme affection for him. Melintus interrupted this discourse, to tell
them, that seeing his own safety assured, and that of Dicearchus too, there
remained no more but to think upon Trebatius his; and this was it they were
well to provide for: for if the Emperor knew that he had let him escape, he
would never pardon him. They considered some time thereupon, then Melintus
replied; I am of opinion that to take away from those are with you the
knowledge of the favor you have done me, you were best to go both of you out
from hence, as if you came from killing of me, and Dicearchus too, since he is
in a dungeon here hard by; and that you command all your soldiers, and all
that serve you, to go seek Palamede in all the shipping at the Port, that so
I may escape when all shall be gone out, and there be not any left that may be
a witness of your letting me go. You may tell them how Dicearchus hoping to
save his own life by discovering his Nephew, declared to you before he died,
that he had hid himself in some ship or other. You may keep still by you
Arcas only, for to serve you, and help my escape. Trebatius approved of this
advice, and resolved to follow it: he went with Emilia out of the dungeon
whither they had descended, being followed by none, and as soon as they were
above and among the soldiers, Trebatius made as if he were in a great heat,
and said that he came from killing Melintus and Dicearchus; but that he must
have Palamede too, who was hidden at the port in some of the Vessels, and that
Dicearchus had confessed it before his death. Instantly he commanded all his
soulders to go seek him there, and forbad them returning, till they had found
him out. He met none in all the house that he sent not thither, feining to do
it out of a great passion to have Palamede under his hands. He kept only about
him Arcas, who melted into tears believing his Master was dead. But when they
were alone, Trebatius commanded him to shut the doors, and bade him be
comforted, for his Master was still living. Arcas was in a strange amaze, that
Trebatius knew Melintus was his Master; and continued in a suspense, not
knowing if he were to believe that he was alive, and not able to imagine in
what sort Trebatius had understood any thing concerning him by Melintus: but
Emilia assured him by telling him how she knew him, and how Melintus and they
were become friends. Arcas cast himself at their feet for excess of joy to
give them thanks, and presently they went away together to the dungeon to have
Melintus out. This poor freeman seeing by the Torch-light that Emilia had
left his Master, who reached out his arms to him, thought to have dyed for joy
to see him yet living; and in testimony of his extreme satisfaction, undid the
irons off his feet: at the same time Trebatius and Emilia took him on both
sides for to lift him up, and because his feet were stiff and benumbed, they
would needs sustain him, until he came into the Court of the house, and could
go alone; and they led him thus, as it were triumphing over the rage they had
before conceived against him. When he saw himself in case to go freely, he
would take his leave of them, and prayed them, that they would send away
Dicearchus after him: but Emilia desired to accompany him with Trebatius to his
lodging, because she was desirous to see Ariana, and entreat her pardon for the
troubles she had made her suffer, in pursuing the death of him she loved.
Melintus prayed them not to take this trouble upon themselves, for fear some
body might see them together in the City, and this occasion make Trebatius be
accused. She answered that they were but to put every one a casque upon their
head, with the vizard down, and so they would not be discovered: that Arcas
should go in the mean time to fetch Dicearchus out of the dungeon, and bring
him away with his chains and all to their lodging; that he might receive the
grace of his life of none but Melintus. This contentment must be given to the
desire Emilia had to see Ariana again, and make a friendship with her. They
put each of them a casque upon their heads, and went out, after they had given
charge to Arcas to go deliver Dicearchus, and bring him bound as he was to the
lodging they were going to.

They found the streets empty of people, for the greatest part had followed the
soldiers to the Port out of curiosity, to see what they went to do there: so
as they were seen but of a few, till they came to the house they went to.
Ariana and Cyllenia were in a great fright, when they knew that three armed men
demanded entrance. Palamede who was already in desperation for not knowing what
was become of his friend, was resolved to ease his resentments by revenging
himself on these three men whom he judged to be Roman soldiers; and after he
had armed him with Lepantus, he commanded they should open and let them enter.
Melintus went first, and was amazed to see himself in an instant assailed by
Palamede: he perceived the error of his friend, yet he was constrained to take
his sword in hand, for to ward the blows he gave him; at last taking his time
he lift up his vizor, and in speaking made himself known to him. Palamede
presently threw away his sword, and cast himself at his feet to demand pardon
of him. Melintus embraced him, and lifting him up, said that he would yet more
wonder, when he knew who they were that accompanied him. Trebatius and Emilia
advanced then the visiere of their Casques; whereat Palamede had a like
astonishment, as if he had seen enchantments. Lepantus that knew them not,
rejoiced only to see Melintus alive, and ran instantly to advertise Ariana and
Cyllenia of this good news. At the same time Melintus entered into the Chamber,
and Ariana came to receive him with open arms, and could not speak a good
while, so transported was she with joy. Trebatius and Emilia saluted her after
that, and she was so confounded for what she saw, and heard them speak, that
they were to give her some time for to be assured that it was no dream. Tears
of joy flowed every where abundantly to see so fortunate a change. Trebatius
and Emilia made them many excuses, and endeavored to have them forget their
miseries by the continual kindnesses they showed them. At length Melintus
said, that nothing now remained, but to have Dicearchus. Presently after he
entered all laden with fetters, Arcas holding him behind; and being brought
before them, he was in a great wonder, when he lift up his eyes and saw
Melintus, Ariana, and Palamede besides Trebatius, with well-pleased
countenances. He could not imagine what such a change as that meant: but he
was much more confounded when Trebatius said to him; Old man, you had deserved
death rather than any of these persons here, for having corrupted my men in my
own house, and I had ordained you to punishment; but I was constrained to give
your life to the entreaty of Melintus the most virtuous of men; and from
henceforth you hold it of none but him. Dicearchus was allasham'd, once again
to have an obligation for his life to a person whose death he prosecuted: but
Melintus knowing his disorder, would comfort him, and went to embrace him; then
putting one knee to the ground, he began to undo his irons, and asked him
pardon for having given him much displeasure in that he was forced by his love
to carry away his Niece. Ariana at the same time was upon her knees before her
uncle, and desired his favor for the fault she had made in going away from
Corinth; and it was an action that drew tears from the assistants, to see a
captive at the same time suppliant, and sought to, and that the same persons
demanded grace, and gave it. Dicearchus weeping also, could not tell what to
say to them; only he embraced one while Melintus, another while Ariana. At last
Trebatius said to him, that he should receive Melintus for the husband of
Ariana, and for the most apparent happiness that could arrive to his family:
that he himself acknowledged him to be the most valiant and most virtuous man
of the earth; and that he wondered how he could possibly have such animosity
until then, against a person of so admirable qualities. Live, says he, from
henceforth, happy together, being obliged to one another by many important
services; and make much of the repose that fortune sends you. The embraces then
redoubled, in testimony that they confirmed the advice of Trebatius; and a
little after they consulted what they had to do. Trebatius said he would go
to find his soldiers that were still searching Palamede in the Vessels, to
whom he resolved to say that Palamede had been found in the City, and put to
death: that at the very hour he would embarke them, and return to Rome with
Emilia, in whose company he hoped to pass away his days happily. As for them,
he counseled them, as well for their own safety as his, to change their
names, and retire to some part of Asia, where the Emperor should never hear
more of them: besides, they ought not to retire them to places commanded by the
Roman Governors, but into some Kings dominions, either of Troas, or C^mm^gena.
These advices having been approved, they took leave one of another with a
thousand embracings, and as many wishes that they might live all of them in
prosperity and repose the rest of their days.

Nothing now remained but to find out Epicharis, and they judged that she had
returned to the first lodging they were in; because she knew not they had
changed it; but there she was not to be found: nevertheless the day after
having known that Trebatius was departed with all his troop, they would remove
again into that lodging, which was very great, staying until they might hear
news of her, and sent the faithful Arcas who remained amongst them, to have
brought thither what they had transported into the other house; to the end they
might in that place celebrate the marriage of Melintus with Ariana, and
Lepantus with Cyllenia, which had so cruelly been deferred; but now was
resolved on by the very consent of Dicearchus, who was so ashamed for being so
many times redeuable to Melintus, that he could hardly lift up his eyes before
him. Palamede in the mean time went to the bay where the vessel was hid, for
to have it return, and to see if Epicharis were not along the Seacoast
somewhere: but all his care proved unprofitable. That very day they took out
of the ship all they thought necessary for them, to go away by land as far
as the Hellespont, and from thence to pass into Asia; because the way was much
shorter, and withal they were in hope to find Epicharis. Afterward they sent
away the Vessel to Syracuse, with charge to go secretly advertise at the
houses of Dicearchus, of Melintus and Telephus, what fortune they had met with;
and to bring them all the commodities they could get together out of their
estates, to the end they might be able to live in Troas, where they would
settle; and that those were sent to them should come the same way they went,
not to fail of encountering them: they gave marks also whereby they should be
found, and instructions concerning all they had to do.

About evening, when every one re-began the preparations for the next day, they
were told, there had been in that house some days a sick woman that was
landed at that place, and appeared very venerable. They had the curiosity to
go see her and offer her what assistance they were able; but when they were
entered into the Chamber, and came near her bed, she cried out having perceived
Dicearchus; Ha ye gods! Who presents this hangman to me, this traitor? and
continued a thousand outrageous speeches against him, in such sort as they
thought her sickness was some burning fever; and having recommended her to
those that waited on her, they left her. A little while after, Dicearchus by
chance repassed by this woman's Chamber, who beginning afresh her injuries and
maledictions, made her self at last known to him, to be the sage Euphrosyne,
wife of Hermocrates, and mother of Melintus. Dicearchus then full of confusion
to find himself guilty of all the miseries that had happened to Hermocrates and
her, knew not what to do with himself, whether he regarded her, or returned
toward Melintus, whose sight he could not endure, for having so much offended
him, and for being so obliged to him. At last he resolved to go nearer, and he
said to her, that in satisfaction of so many miseries and displeasures he had
brought upon her, he thought himself happy for having a means to give her as
much contentment now presently, as before he had given her troubles and
griefs. Euphrosyne not able to judge what he meant to say, asked him, if he
would not still continue his deceits and treasons, and assured him, that the
gods would one day revenge her for all his villainies. Dicearchus failed not to
go out, and finding Melintus he said to him with a heart touched by
repentance, that he esteemed himself at last very happy for having found out
in his misfortune, wherewith to pay him in part for so many obligations he had
to him; not only in granting him Ariana for his wife, but also in making him
an inestimable present, for which without doubt he would be extremely joyful.
Melintus having given him thanks, and not able to imagine what he could give
him, let himself be conducted by him into the Chamber where Euphrosyne was, to
whom he presented Melintus for her son, and said to Melintus, that he gave
him Euphrosyne for his mother, and that he rejoiced for that the gods had
offered him this means to give them satisfaction. Euphrosyne and Melintus knew
not yet if they should believe it or no, and continued silent and astonished.
No, no, replied Dicearchus, never doubt of what I tell you. Euphrosyne knows
who she is, and for you, says he to Melintus, open your breast to her, that
she may see the mark of the heart, which will assure her that you are her
son. Melintus showed her that mark, and then Euphrosyne said, opening her
arms; Ha my son, is it you indeed, whose sight I have so longed after? and
whom I could never hear any news of? Ha Dicearchus, how from my heart I
pardon you all the torments you have made me suffer, and if Hermocrates were
with us, how happy should I esteem my self for the present. At the same time
a stream of tears bedewed her face all over. Melintus had his heart so
pressed, to feel himself embraced by this virtuous mother, whose loss he had
so often lamented, that he could not be at ease but in letting fall also many
tears. This object so tender, and so pitiful, mixed with regrets and
satisfactions, with sorrow and joy, could not be seen but with weeping, which
served for two uses, being capable to represent both the resentments of grief,
and the excesses of contentment. Melintus presented afterward Ariana to his
mother; and having told her a part of her virtues, and of their adventures, let
her know that she was destined to be his wife, if she were pleased withal.
Then they embraced one another with much transportation; and Euphrosyne said,
that after so much happiness, she had nothing to be sorry for but the loss of
Hermocrates. Melintus expressed to her that his greatest desire was to know
what their fortune had been since their exile from Syracuse, and in what sort
she had encountered in that place. She let them know that she was very willing
to give them this contentment, believing now she had strengh enough to perform
it; but Dicearchus foreseeing how that discourse could not be made, but that he
must receive the stings of many a reproach, withdrew himself with Palamede,
leaving Melintus, Ariana, Lepantus, and Cyllenia, in preparation to hearken to
Euphrosyne, who began thus her discourse, holding Melintus by the hand.

History of Hermocrates and Euphrosyne.
MY dear son, if you desire to know the original of our misfortunes, and
what the great Hermocrates your father has been, I must of necessity take up
my discourse something from afar off, for to let you see that at what time I
married him, fortune never brought together any couple that had cause to expect
more happiness, and yet proved so unfortunate as we. Under the reign of the
Emperor Tiberius, Hermocrates (of whose illustrious birth I will make no
relation to you, because I believe you are not ignorant of it) would go to
Rome being very young. His father and mother having no other child but him,
were in trouble to have him so far removed out of their sight: but in the end
he obtained leave. As soon as he was at Rome, he stayed not long to put
himself into the acquaintance of the great Prince Germanicus, who then was the
refuge of what ever there was virtuous upon earth. Hermocrates that was perfect
in all kinds of excellent qualities, and among others had a wisdom and a
valor to be admired, was presently loved of him; and a while after the
occasion of the German wars was presented, wherein he followed that Prince,
and made so many proofs of his valiance, and prudent government, that he gave
him great commands in the Army, and honored him diverse times with many
crowns, and advantageous praises. After these wars were finished, he
returned to Rome with Germanicus, and admiring the virtue of this great Prince,
he could not forsake him: Germanicus on the other side, loving Hermocrates
dearly, gave him cause enough not to abandon him; and knowing his nobleness,
and his virtues, believed that he alone was worthy of his friendship. They were
a long time in this sort inseparable; and if the gods willing to punish the
earth by the cruel Emperors they gave since, had not so soon taken out of
the world this lovely Prince, whom by a just title they called the delights of
humane kind, I believe I should never have known Hermocrates, nor been to
him the cause of all his miseries. But Germanicus having been poisoned by Piso
and Plancinus in Syria, Hermocrates could not endure to see Rome any more,
where there was an Emperor so execrable, who envying the virtue of his Nephew,
and the love that all the world had to him, had cruelly deprived him of his
life; so as he returned to Syracuse, but with such a regret for the death of
Germanicus, that his sadness appeared visibly upon his face, and made him be
affected the more by others to see him faithful to a Prince so lamented of the
world. At that time was I one of the most considerable of Syracuse, although I
were not originary of that Country: but the Nobility of my birth was well
enough known; for that my grandfathers that went out of Carthage when it was
destroyed by the Romans, were of the race of the Princes Hamilcar and Hannibal;
and therewithal I had an estate, if I may say it, equal to my Nobility, and
my mother only was left me of my kindred, all whose cares tended to the choice
of some party that might be for my advantage.

Dicearchus (many ages since descended of Timoleon, and having a sufficient
estate to sustain the rank that his birth gave him,) was one of the chief
that presented themselves. He was wanting in no care or practice, for to order
his affairs so as he might marry me, and labored by a thousand ways to give
my mother great impressions of his honesty, for he knew her to be of so great a
virtue, that he well saw she would be impregnable any other way but this. But
Hermocrates arriving at Syracuse, obtained without thinking what the other
tried to gain by a thousand subtilties: for every one being already prevented
with his great reputation, it was acknowledged not to be without cause, that
renown had so high advanced him, because his Nobility was accompanied with so
many virtues, and he added to his other good qualities so honest a modesty,
with a sadness that was still more graceful in him, that there was not a
person but bare a love and respect toward him.

At the same time having been bred under the government of the wisest mother
in the world, I made my self also sufficiently esteemed by a great restraint I
observed, endeavoring to imitate her virtue, and give her all the contentments
she could expect from a daughter. I know not what it was Hermocrates saw in me
that pleased him, whether appearance of virtue, or some other thing, but he
expressed with a great grace and respect the design he had to serve me. As for
me, who had no desire to make a choice, but would leave my self to my mothers
judgment, I always feined not to understand what he would say to me: but for
all that I was not sorry when he came near me, and I took the pains to
entertain him with the best discourse I was able. Dicearchus was not in that
esteem with me; because I knew him to be a violent and an artificial man, and
I judged that his humor would never agree well with mine. My mother soon
perceived the purpose of Hermocrates, and was well content therewithal; so as
she was never displeased that he should speak to me, and the first time he
found the occasion to come to our house, she assured him that the entrance to
it should ever be open for him. He received this permission with a great deal
of respect, and made very discreet use thereof: but Dicearchus could not suffer
to see a rival so well entreated, and to find himself so distant from our
good graces; believing that he was not so removed but by the advancement of
Hermocrates. He had recourse to a thousand devices, and at last counterfetted a
letter, which he sent to my mother, as if Eryx (who was Hermocrates father) had
written it to her; wherein he advertised her not to receive any more his son
at her house, and that he had other designs for him; that if she of her own
accord hindered not those frequent visits of Hermocrates, he should himself be
forced to do it by a means that would be heard with no very agreeable noise
to her. See what a crafty plot here was: see my mother then in a great wonder,
and more offended withal. As soon as Hermocrates came to see her, she prayed
him to come no more at her house: nevertheless with so much temper, as she
expressed no coffeehouse at all to him, believing that he had no part in
what his father had written to her. Hermocrates, although my mother used him
with no discourtesie, was yet in a great surprise, and besought her an hundred
times to tell him what fault he could commit against the respect he ought us.
She would reveal nothing of the matter to him; but in the end she told him
that Eryx was not well pleased with their friendship. He confessed that his
father indeed had proposed a marriage for him, but that it was a thing so
unlikely, that he believed verily he thought no more of it. No, no,
Hermocrates, replied she, he has forbidden me by writing to receive you here
any more: but I think he might have expressed his aversion to us by something
a civiller way. Ha, Madam, says he, is it possible, this you tell me? It Is so
true, answered she, that without opposing his desire, or my own honor, I can
no longer suffer you in this house. Then he went his way, overcome with
displeasure, and not knowing how he should make shift to live any more;
because that as he had a great respect and love toward his father, so he had
also as great a resentment of the injury he thought he had received from him,
in such sort that piety and choler began a combat in his soul which gave him
no repose at all. When he was at home, he durst not lift up his eyes upon Eryx,
for fear of offending him with an ill look; for it had been impossible for
him to see him without pain. He would not wish his father any evil, and yet
he could not desire any good to him: so as having lived some time in this
trouble of spirit he could not rid himself of, at last he fell sick, and the
more care Eryx expressed to have of him, the more did his sickness increase.
This good father full of grief to see in that danger his son whom he had
reason to cherish, as well for the loveliness of his person, as because he was
the only one he bad, who for all this gave no comfort to his sorrow, not
enduring the sight of him, and refusing from his hand the remedies he offered
him, knew not whence this aversion should proceed of his son toward him, and
shed tears abundantly. Hermocrates on the other side seeing his father in that
perplexity, accused himself for an ungracious son so to torment his own
father; and could not tell whether he should wish himself dead or alive, well
knowing that if he dyed, he should but heap sorrows and anguishes upon the
old age of those that brought him into the world, and by living he could expect
no contentment from them, nor give them any. But at length Eryx prayed his wife
to ask him what cause he had not to love him, and if ever he had given him any
occasion to be displeased with him; that having received of the gods a son so
virtuous and obedient, he should think himself very ingrate toward them,
and himself too, if ever it should happen that he gave him any displeasure.
His mother labored to get this secret out of him, but he could never be
persuaded to accuse his father; and he was resolved rather to dye, than a word
should escape him that showed any want of respect. She forced her self many
times to make him declare his grief, which she doubted he concealed, though
she knew no cause he had for it; but it was impossible to draw any thing from
him. In the end this good father outraged with affliction, could no longer
contain himself; but approaching his sons bed, he put himself on his knees
before him, and full of tears prayed him to tell him if ever he had displeased
him in any thing. Hermocrates ashamed at this submission, and believing he
received an injury rather than an honor by it, kneeled him down upon his bed,
and bowing toward his father, desired him as he embraced him, to rise up, and
not make his pity guilty of shame, by an abasement unworthy of him. No, says
Eryx to him, I will never rise, until you have told me wherein I have given
you displeasure. Ha my father, says he, must I have been so unfortunate, as
not to have inviolably followed all your desires? and that my affections should
be repugnant unto yours? What would you say, replied Eryx, speak more
clearly, my son; for I do not think you have ever opposed the thing I
desi'rd of you, and besides I promise you never to be contrary to any thing you
shall desire of me. No, no, father, answered Hermocrates, be well assured, I
will never be disobedient to you, and I shall take order with my self for your
sake, for ever thinking upon Euphrosyne, but. Then he made a stop, and his
father said to him; Go on, son, and fear not to tell me what you desire:
you shall learn me what I know not yet, and peradventure what I shall as much
desire as your self. Ha! father, says Hermocrates, if it be lawful for me
to put a reproach upon you, your letter made no such expression that you would
desire it. What letter? answered he. But not to seem troublesome to you,
continued Euphrosyne, the good father knew at last, there had been sent to my
mother as from him, a supposititious letter; and without any more delay he
comes to our house, and entreated my mother to show it him, and told her it
must have been sent by some spirit that was very near to have ruined his
sons life. When he had seen it, he expressed in such sort that he was
innocent of this letter, and made her so many satisfactions, that she could
have no suspicion at all of him, and made it appear that she had much sorrow
for Hermocrates sickness, whom she greatly esteemed her self. And for this
cause they concluded together our marriage before they parted; and imagining
from whence this letter should come, they conceived it must be from Dicearchus,
who since that time had expressed a greater passion to me than ever before. See
then how Dicearchus willing to hinder our marriage, advanced it: assembling
together by his own invention, those that otherwise would have had much ado
to have effected it. As soon as Hermocrates learned this good news, it seemed
they had restored him his life, and we went often to visit him until he was
perfectly recovered. Then were we married together with a thousand rejoycings,
and passed away three or four years with all the contentments can be
imagined, without having yet any children. In the mean time Dicearchus not
able to endure that our marriage should be made while he were at Syracuse, was
gone to Corinth, where he stayed about two years, at the end whereof he
returned into Sicily with Acidalia whom he had married. Presently after he
declared himself enemy to Hermocrates, who having then lost his father, seemed
to hold the first place in the City; he practiced the factious men on all
sides, to make a league against him, and seemed to have no other end in all his
actions than to displease and ruin him, if it were possible. At last he
sought out so many means to attain his design, that there was one that
succeeded to his wish. You know, it may be, pursues Euphrosyne, how he made
arms be carried by night over the walls of our house, and ranged them as in a
readiness for an occasion: at the same time he went to advertise the chief of
the City that Hermocrates projected to make himself a Tyrant, and that it
would appear at his house. They came to our house that very night, and
ravished from my arms my dear Hermocrates, for to carry him away prisoner.
You may judge what trouble I was then surpised in: nevertheless in this
calamity I received some consolation for the innocence of my husband; and when
Dicearchus friends solicited on that side to have him condemned to dye, I did
all I could to make the villainy of that artifice appear, and what appearance
there could be, that a private man would make himself Tyrant over a City that
was of the Roman Empire. But all I could obtain, was to moderate the
condemnation to a banishment for five years, and to have fifteen days given
us to order our affairs in. Nevertheless that time served but to increase our
misery: for Dicearchus having known that we were to retire to Carthage, the
place of my original, and not content with our banishment, had leisure to
practice certain Pirates, who covenanted with him for a great sum of money
that they would surprise us in our passage from Lylibeum to Carthage; and after
that they would go and sell us apart to some Barbarians, for fear we should
ever see one another again, or return into our Country; and because I was
very big with child at the same time, he made them promise him to put to
death whatever should be borne of me, until we came to be sold. After we
had committed the managing of our estate to Diocles our friend for to
administer it during the five years banishment, we departed accompanied with
Telephus, not knowing the miseries Dicearchus had prepared for us: but I was so
happy as to be brought to bed of you at Lylibeum, said Euphrosyne to Melintus,
where I stayed more than fifteen days till I could endure the Sea; and it
seemed you were willing to be borne at that time, to retard as much as you
could possibly, the miseries that were to happen to your parents. We happily
advised to leave you secretly in Sicily, and give you to Telephus; for if we
had carried you away with us, you had not been alive at this hour: then took
we leave of our Country all in tears, and went to go aboard the Vessel: But
there befell me a mischance that was an augury that this voyage should prove
very deadly to us: for thinking to enter into the ship, my foot slipped, and I
fell into the Sea: the affection of Hermocrates was such, as he threw himself
presently after me, ind by swimming saved me, and brought me aboard again.
After we had dried us a while, we stayed not our departing, and because the
passage is but short, we soon perceived a light vessel that had parted from
the coasts, which in a small time set upon us. Hermocrates judged them to be
Sea-coursers, and entreated those that were with him, to take arms and defend
themselves as well as they might. But their number was but small, and besides
they were not in state to fight, never expecting they should have been fought
with in the small way they had to pass. Yet for all that they were not wanting
to defend themselves courageously, and Hermocrates was not taken until he had
laid six of them at his feet. His valor was esteemed of the Pirates, who in
consideration of him pardoned those that were with us, and taking what they
found best out of our ship, made us enter into theirs. After they had passed us
a good way on the Sea, they brought us to a place of their own retreat; and it
was strange to see what fidelity these Pirates kept with Dicearchus in that they
had promised him; because they might have expected a greater ransom from us,
than that they had received of him, and yet in the mean time they failed not
in what they had sworn to him. Nevertheless they showed us some favor, for
we lived in honor among them, and accommodated with all things necessary. They
delayed three whole years to sell us, during which I was brought to bed of two
children whom they put to death as they had resolved; afterward they went to
sell my husband into a Country very far removed. As for me they were minded
to keep me still by them, what request soever I made not to be separate from
Hermocrates, because they had brought me a Kings son very young to breed up,
whom they had taken in some place or other; and on whom all my affection was
placed, being comforted by the nurture was committed to me for our cruel
captivity and dead children, attending the change of fortune. These cruel
people were never touched, neither with the supplications and advantageous
promises of Hermocrates, nor yet with my tears, but in spite of me they
carried him away to a place where now I believe he has ended his days. All my
entertainment and consolation in the cruel vexations I endured, was in the
nurcing I had of the little Prince which was called Eurymedon, who also bare me
a great affection, and as he grew gave testimonies not only of the greatness
of his extraction, but of a mind very generous also. When he saw me afflicted,
he labored to appease me, and comforted me by the hope he gave, that as soon
as he had any power, he would restore my liberty, and endeavor to discover
where Hermocrates was, that he might be mine again. Nevertheless when he had
the command over all the Pirates, he could not so soon effect what he had
promised me, being retained from doing it, for not offending their laws. About
a year since, desirous to go to Sea, he promised me that I should go with
him: but I fell so sick that it was impossible for me. Some days since he
returned for to assemble all the Pyraticke forces with a design to go upon
some great enterprise, whence fearing never to return, and willing to deliver
me, the Pirates never knowing of it, he entreated one called Amyntas that was
come to find him in a Squiffe from some of his friends, to save me secretly
with himself when he returned hither to find out those persons he sought
for. This Amyntas had a care of me as if I had been his mother, and brought
me into this City, where not encountering those he thought to have found, he
left me with the people you see, for to serve and accompany me unto Syracuse:
Amyntas knowing that Eurymedon was here hard by for to assist those he was in
pain for, is gone to find him, and I believe they are gone away together,
having heard no news at all of them. As for me attending the recovery of the
sickness is fallen upon me, and the labor I endured in my flight, I made a
stay in this lodging, where I was in a great wonder to see this same
Dicearchus, the author of all our displeasures, all whose wicked practices I
learned of Eurymedon, and to whom for all this I cannot wish ill, since he has
restored me my dear Melintus, and makes me conceive some hope, being become
our friend, that he will help us to find Hermocrates your father.

Euphrosyne thus ended, and Melintus told her how they knew who Eurymedon and
Amyntas were, and that he hoped very soon by means of Eurymedon to learn
what was become of his father; wherein he would employ all the diligence he
could possibly use. He entreated afterward this virtuous mother of his, to
pardon Dicearchus for his dear Ariana's sake, which she promised him, and they
embraced one another with much affection. He told her then the greatest part of
what had happened to them, and among other things the faithful friendship of
Telephus, and the infidelity of Diocles, and how he had been known for the
son of Hermocrates. Then these discourses being ended, every one retired to
go to bed, and to attend with repose the ceremonies and joys of the next day.

ARIANA. The fifth Book.
WHile the sage Euphrosyne thus entertained Melintus, Palamede, whom Epicharis
loss gave no repose to, would not lose the time he might employ in search of
her: he took a horse and rode out of Nicopolis, and went into all places
thereabouts to see if she might not be retired somewhere out of the Town. In
vain he spent all the evening in this search, and a great part of the night
that was very dark, and as he returned toward the City, he heard two men on
horsbacke coming to him, who spoke of Melintus and Ariana, expressing a great
deal of angry malice against them. He could not know who they were, because
the obscurity was so great as he did not so much as see them. But when they
were past, he had a mind to know more of their secrets; and after he had tied
his horse to a tree, he overtooke them on foot as speedily as might be: then
going a light pace by them without making himself be heard, he listened their
discourse some while, not able yet to understand any thing: but in the end one
of the two replied thus: What? have I brought from Syracuse with such respect
and care, this traitorous and perjurious old man? have I so long courted him at
Corinth? and since followed him through all the ports of Greece for to revenge
his injuries? and now he is satisfied himself, shall he take no care whether I
be so too or no? Palamede knew then by this discourse, and by the voice, that
it was Pisistratus, who went on: And shall I suffer Melintus to marry her that
is promised me, whose love brings so many desires and unquietnesses upon me?
Shall they go away together contented, and leave me here full of despite, of
shame, of rage? In the mean time must I appear without heart, and not make
them feel what a man of my condition is able to do, betrayed on this fashion,
and wanting no resentment? No, no, though they have escaped the hands of
Trebatius, they are not yet safe from mine; and if they stay here but one day
more for to marry together, I am certain to make a funerall-wedding of it.
But, answered the other that accompanied him, are you very sure they are still
living? I saw this evening, replied Pisistratus, Arcas the freeman of Melintus
leading Dicearchus bound, and bringing him into a house. I sent one of my
servants to follow them, and commanded him to enquire what they did in that
lodging, making as if he had some business there. He brought me word, that he
saw Trebatius, Melintus, Palamede, Ariana and Dicearchus at good accord
together, and that there was nothing but rejoicing amongst them, and I make no
doubt of what he told me, because he knows them all as well as I do. But,
returned he whom he spoke to, when you have spoken to the Governor of Epire,
to put to death Melintus and Palamede, because they are the Emperors enemies,
and told him how Trebatius had been sent from Nero for the same purpose, do
you think he will believe you? Pisistratus answered, you do not know then,
how they have been proclaimed throughout all the Provinces, enemies of Caesar,
and of the decree that is gone out to kill them in what place soever they be
found. No, no, Maxentius cannot defer their putting to death, because he is
advertised of the Imperial order, and if he makes any difficulty of doing it,
I will threaten to accuse him too before Nero. Palamede knowing in what sort
Pisistratus would be revenged, resolved to prevent him by killing him first:
presently he drew his sword, and staying him by the reins of his horse, for
fear he should escape, struck him a great blow into the body; Pisistratus
cried out that they murdered him; he that was with him took his flight, and
Pisistratus had never escaped that danger, had it not been for a mischance
that befell Palamede; for his foot slipped when he was going to redouble his
blow, and he was constrained to quit the bridle of the horse, which carried
away his Master so far that he could never overtake him. Palamede was forced
to return the way he came, and having found his own horse again, he rode
back into the City, when the daylight began to appear. Being come to his
lodging, he told his adventure to Melintus and the rest, and counseled them
that without troubling themselves more about their wedding, they should depart
as suddenly as they could: because Pisistratus having escaped out of his hands
would not fail to go to Maxentius, if his wounds hindered him not. This news
brought no small trouble again to the contentments they expected. Ariana then
besought Melintus, that he would no more desire to have their marriage
performed, till they were in a place full of repose and security; and said, he
should first of all think upon his own safety, and afterward she would
endeavor to make his life as happy to him, as she possibly could. Melintus was
constrained to obey her, and Euphrosyne approving the wisdom of Ariana, was of
her opinion. Instantly they all considered upon the retreat, and they repented
them for having sent away the vessel; because they would have saved themselves
more certainly by Sea, although the way were longer: nevertheless they were
resolved to go by land, and to put their baggage into Carts, and they were
persuaded, that there being above fifty of their troop counting the train they
had, nothing less than an Army would assault them. So they encouraged
themselves to depart, that they might get out of Epire before Maxentius the
Governor were advertised by Pisistratus, and having bought as many horses as
they needed, they put into the way, trusting in the gods and their own
courage. This troop so fair, and so persecuted of men, had the good fortune to
pass Epire in three or four days journeyes, and at last arrived in Thessaly
without any adventure. They wanted no diversions, or pleasures, having at least
with them what they made most of; for which they accounted themselves so happy,
as it seemed they desired nothing but the continuation of the same kind of
life. Yet Melintus gave not over his admiration, that misery should persecute
them with so much eagerness, and not permit them so much as one day of repose,
for to let them enjoy a blessing they desired, and which ever escaped them when
they thought to have attained it; and upon this thought one day he made these
verses:

FOrtune incessantly adverse,
Eternal source of miseries,
What mean thou by a new reverse
To hasten our calamities?
O gods! by what severe decree
Are you enraged so suddenly,
When we believed you were appeased?
For me, I can no more complain;
Think you to make me fear the pain
Of death which you have me refused?
It Is surely some immortal strife
Whereby the Stars are all conspiring
To vex the pleasures which my life
Has been too earnest in desiring.
These Stars in their malignant spite
Some storm or other still excite
Just as I think at Port to arrive.
Then forced by my innocence,
They mitigate their violence,
And dare not me of life deprive.
It Is true the blessing I desire
Transcends all mortal faculties;
And I prefer where I aspire
To that of having sacrifice.
Heaven be not jealous any more
If I see her and her adore,
For there my pleasures all abound;
Then temper thy excessive rage,
Since in this blessing I assuage
My other vast desires around.
Tedious griefs before her presence
Durst not make attempts upon me:
Fierce anger and impatience
Fly from me when her face I see;
And then despair as in disgrace
Forsakes me too, and gives place
To mirth; and sports of innocence:
Love quitting then his envious spights,
Offers me all the dear delights
Wherewith he ravishes our sense.
Alas! one fear does only hant me,
I speak too unadvisedly.
If heaven knows how thus I vant me,
I shall have some new misery.
Conceal, my soul, this joy of thine,
That jealous eyes it may decline,
If long thou will thy bliss enjoy,
Or soon this heaven inexorable,
To render thee more miserable,
May take thy happiness away.
Thus did Ariana's presence give a great ease to the love of Melintus: but in
all the troop there was not a more afflicted man than Palamede, who regretted
Epicharis, and met not a passenger that he demanded not news of her. Besides,
he was in a kind of constraint with Dicearchus, not daring before him to let
that affection appear, and so was deprived of this consolation at least, in
the power of free complaining. Euphrosyne had no greater pleasure than to make
Areas or some other relate the admirable life of her son, and with how many
mavelous qualities heaven had furnished him; whereat she ceased not to give
the gods thanks, and esteem her self very happy. She had already passionate
cares for the fair and virtuous Ariana, whose respectuous duties she received
with much contentment. Lepantus and Cyllenia were no small ornament to this
fair company, but recreated them with their sweet humor, and gentilenesse of
wit; and all of them together made up a troop of as pleasing travelers as
could be found in all the world again.

Already had they traversed all Thessaly, and were approaching to Larissa which
is near the Sea; when they entered a village where they saw all the inhabitants
in great trouble. They all ran up and down diverse ways, not able to find
security in their own houses, and not knowing to what part they should retire.
Melintus addressed him to some of these forlorn men, and asked the cause of
this affrighting and disorder. They told him how a fearful number of
Scythians, after having crossed Thracia, and passed the Egean Sea, was come to
land in Thessaly, and plonder'd all those coasts in drawing toward Larissa.
Melintus re-assur'd them the best he could, and was of opinion they should all
retire them into that Town as speedily as they could: that to be better
received, they were to carry with them the most of the Corn and other victuals
they had: he promised he would serve them for a leader, and prayed them to have
no fear. This resolution being taken among them, he rallied all those that
were scattered, and having made them load into Carts all the provisions they
had, he armed the strongest of them, who made three hundred men, besides those
were with him: then he appointed to set a good watch all the night, and the
next day in the morning he disposed the old people with the women and baggage
in the middle, and put those that might serve to fight, part of them in the
head, part on the flanks, and the rest in the rere. He gave the vantgard to be
led by Lepantus, the rere-ward to Palamede, and reserved to himself the
gross, for to have an eye over all. He would have given the command to
Dicearchus; but the old man finding himself then indisposed, because he felt a
thousand vexations, and as many sorrows within him, and not able to employ his
mind in giving orders, he entreated Melintus to take the charge upon him. In
the mean time Palamede and Lepantus had armed them with Melintus, in the
fairest arms they had amongst their baggage, and prepared themselves well to
defend the persons they led, against all powers that might assail them, and
they parted thus in good order, marching toward Larissa. They were no sooner
two miles from the village, but they perceived a body of Scythians of about two
thousand men coming toward them. Melintus encouraged his soldiers to fight
valiantly, and fearing the cowardice which is ordinary with peasants, enflamed
them by the consideration they had to defend not only their persons, but their
parents, their wives, their children and their goods: that if they ran away,
they abandoned them all to the mercy of the enemies; but if they showed
themselves to have heart, they would find nothing so cowardly as these
Barbarians, who know well to pursue cruelly those that fly them, but yet fail
not also to fly from those that dare attend them. After thus animating them,
he gave order to Lepantus to go charge the Scythians, who thinking they had
been a far greater number by reason of the baggage that took up much place,
defended themselves only as being to fight with an equal army of their
enemies: nevertheless they failed not, courageously to receive Lepantus, and
shot their arrows thick upon his troop. Melintus a while after advanced, and
his men seeing so hardy a Captain, were not wanting to follow him. He had
commanded his soldiers to join close to the enemies as soon as they could,
hoping that the Scythians having no more the space that is requisite for
shooting their arrows, would be forced to come to fight with the sword,
wherein they were no way expert. This subtilty succeeded to his wish: for the
Scythians being neare-hand charged by Melintus, and not able any longer to use
their bows, could not sustain the great sword-blowes he assailed them with:
wherever Melintus showed himself, the Barbarians vanished: and yet flying
none but him, they made some disorder in another part, and so held the victory
in suspense. But Palamede who perceived a side of their troop to suffer the
worst of it, went presently away, and so opportunely relieved them, that the
Scythians could resist no longer. Then they threw away their Arms, and took
flight on all parts. Lepantus on his side practiced all the valor and good
government could be shown; and Melintus apppear'd like lightning, to what
place soever he spurred his horse, being so provoked by the fair Ariana's
presence, as he cut off as many arms and heads as his sword could reach. In the
end after having left above twelve thousand men upon the place, they would not
pursue the rest, for fear of abandoning the dear treasures that were with
their baggage, but returning full of blood, of sweat and honorable dust, they
accompanied their troop which were in great fear for them during the fight,
and marched on by little and little to Larissa, where they were received with
much honor and joy.

The fray was great within the Town, for it was destitute of a chief that
understood the war: so as having learned the defeat of this number of
Scythians by the valor of Melintus, they all with one accord submitted
themselves to him, and prayed him not to forsake them in this danger, until
the Romans sent them a commander with succors. Melintus seeing himself forced
to remain there, was constrained to accept the charge, although he were in
fear to come to the knowledge of the Romans: nevertheless he hoped to make
himself necessary in this occasion, and that the war would change many
things, and to the end he might not so soon be discovered by the reputation he
acquired, he resolved to change his name with Palamede, following the advice
Trebatius had given them, and called himself Alcydamas, and Palamede,
Polydore. They were lodged in one of the fairest houses of the Town, where
Dicearchus presently betook him to his bed, feeling himself sick, and
scarcely able to endure daylight for the griefs that assailed him:
Euphrosyne, Ariana, and Cyllenia refreshed themselves after their travels; and
their fears were something appeased. The chief of the Town came to receive
order from Alcydamas, who having known that the inhabitants could make to the
number of five thousand men of war, believed he might with them very well
defend himself: then taking Lepantus and Polydore, he went with them and the
principal Townes-men to visit round about the City, and see in what manner it
was defensible with walls and ditches, and what places were weakest. After he
had been assured on all sides, he set men at the ports, and other places
which he judged important; and for the soldiers that were not of any guard,
he appointed them a continual exercise of arms, of purpose to make them
warriers, and that they might serve when he should have need of them; and at
the same time he dispatched one of his men to go find Eurymedon in the Isle
of Lesbos, and advertise him how they had need of his succors.

When eight days were spent, only in causing a sure guard to be made, and in
instructing his men, he thought it now timely to make a sally out: being
willing so much time should slip away without showing himself to the
Scythians, to make them slack of their first fury, and believe it was out of a
great fear they had of them, that they thus blocked up themselves. That made
them more negligent, and so spread them into diverse troops, for to go a
forraging about, staying until they resolved to give an assault. Alcydamas
took his time, and leaving Lepantus to command within the City, issued out
with Polydore in the head of fifteen hundred men, and went to charge the
Scythians that were divided and in disorder, whereof he left more than four
thousand on the place: then seeing a body of above ten thousand men coming to
charge them, he made his retreat, having lost not above thirty men in this
combat.

Alcydamas was received into the Town with cries of joy from all the people,
who looked upon him as their god protector: but nothing was so agreeable to him
as the caresses of his fair Ariana, who at the return of his sallies whence
he came often back with glory, received him victorious, and took the pains
to disarme him, finding her self in an excess of joy to see him again, and
be delivered from the fears she had, when he was gone abroad. Alcydamas was
then in an unparalleled rapture, though he were ashamed for the pain these
fair hands took, which were too delicate to handle iron: he kissed them ever
as she brought them either to undo his Corslet, or his Gantlets; and when he
was wholly disarmed, he fainted for pleasure in giving her more straight and
freer embracements. These kindnesses were shown in presence of the sage
Euphrosyne, who was transported her self with joy, considering the perfect
union of these excellent souls, to whom she wished a speedy repose in some
place of assurance. These were the contentments Alcydamas gave his friends by
his frequent victories, thus making the joy of seeing him Conqueror, often
succeed the fear they had to see him in danger. But at length he was to yield
up the authority he had in the City to one Arimin, who was sent by Flavian the
governor of Macedonia and Thessaly: Nevertheless Arimin having understood the
great exploits Alcydamas had done, entreated him to continue together with him
the cares he had taken over the Town, and still to employ his valor in the
defense of it. Alcydamas and Polydore made yet some more sallies, which brought
them into such esteem with Arimin, that nothing was done but by their advice.
They maintained themselves thus a long time, the Scythians never daring to
approach the walls for the scaling of a Town whence such valiant men issued.
But in the end their great number having affrighted all Thessaly and the
neighbor Provinces, Flavian and the Praetor that governed Epire, were obliged
to join together what troops they had to go fight with them. They had in all
ten thousand men, and Alcydamas and Polydore having received advice that they
would give the battle, demanded leave of Arimin to go thither, and went out
in the head of two thousand Gentlemen of Thessaly, and three thousand foot that
Arimin sent. Their arrival was extremely acceptable to Maxentius and Flavian,
who seeing them of so good a mine, and having been advertised of their
valorous actions, received them into the counsel of war, wherein was
propounded, in what place they were to fight with the enemy. They were all
agreed that because of the inequality of the number, it behooved them to seek
out some advantageous place, which made Maxentius and Flavian of the opinion
that they should labor to draw them into the covert places of Thessaly, between
the mount Olympus and the river Peneus, to the end they might not extend their
troops in so straight a place, nor they themselves be encompassed by them. This
counsel was ready to be followed: but Alcydamas said, they were to take great
heed of drawing the Barbarians into the midst of their Country; because
there being no retreats there, they would without doubt obstinately intend the
victory, and the greater number might thus carry it away from the lesser. That
his advice was, they should go and fight with them as near their shipping as
they could, that amongst the rocks the same advantages of straight places were
to be found; and that the Barbarians having their retreats so near, would not
fail to go seek them in the least fray they had: that since they had no
other design but to chase them away, they were to facilitate their flight, and
not to reduce them to a place where they should be obliged to kill to the very
last man for to vanquish them. For his part he thought it more fitting to go
fight with them in the very place where they had seated their Camp, which was
between the City of Larissa and the Sea coast; for in case the Romans had not
the better, they should have the Town for retreat, and this place was
straightened by reason of the rocks, and as commodious as they could desire it.
These considerations were found most prudent, and every one having followed
this advice, they resolved to fight with them the next day, and to go lodge
about the Town for to be near against the morning. In the mean time they
ordained their battle thus: It was decreed that the Romans should in the point
be commanded by Maxentius, the Macedonians should march on the right side with
Flavian in one battalion, and that the Epirotes and Thessalians should be on
the left side led by a Knight of Rome called Milo: the Cavallery of the
Thessalians was ordered to be upon the two wings, whereof there should be a
thousand men on the right wing commanded by Alcydamas, and as many on the left,
having Polydore for chief. All things having been disposed in this order, and
every one encouraged to do well, they retired them to the places about
Larissa: but the Cavallery was lodged in the Town with a command that at the
point of day they should join with the body of the Army. Alcydamas and
Polydore brought back their troops thither, the first of them retired to his
lodging, and the other having had charge to guard the ports on the Scythians
side, went to repose himself in the Corpse de guard.

Alcydamas at this return found Dicearchus very sick, who knowing he was
arrived, sent to entreat him to come to him; he told him that he rejoiced to
see him before his death, and having made Euphrosyne and Ariana be sent for
too, he prayed them willingly to hearken to him, and spoke thus:

History of Dicearchus and Acidalia.
SInce my sickness reduces me to extremity, I will not depart the world with
the reputation of a man so wicked and cruel as you have reason to esteem me;
and to keep my memory from being so odious with you, I am constrained to
recite my whole life to you, (which I may call a continual disaster,) without
concealing any thing, either of those shameful accidents that happened to me,
or the violent and furious resolutions which the cruelty of my fortune forced
me to take.

I confess, ambition has been the outrageous passion that always distempered
me, to which that other of love mixing it self too, these two furies together
have so cruelly tormented me, that I have not been Master of my own actions,
but let my self be governed by them without ever calling reason to my aid.
Euphrosyne knows in what sort my youth has passed: for I doubt not but she
knows how from my younger age it was impossible for me to endure an equal in
Syracuse, believing that my Nobility and courage gave me advantages, which none
besides my self could pretend to Living thus, I had many quarrels to redress
with the chief of the young men of the City, over whom I was ever to have the
better, or else I had no rest. When I was about the age of twenty years,
seeing Euphrosyne to be the best of those that were in consideration at
Syracuse, I conceived that there ought to be fixed the end of my desires. At
the beginning I was not drawn to the search of her, but through the fear I
had that if another came to possess her, it would be a testimony that he were
more esteemed than I: but afterward finding in her excellent qualities, I
joined in such sort love to my ambition, that there was not a mean I would not
then have enterprised to attain to her good graces. She knows the services I
endevour'd to render her, and how many artifices I made use of for advancing my
design: one while employing magnificence, to show the grandeur of my estate
and birth, another while using an extreme modesty for to gain her mothers
heart, who approved not superfluous expenses: In the end I turned me a thousand
ways to vanquish her, finding that I was engaged both by honor and love to
carry her from all the rest: nevertheless I acquired nothing upon the spirit
of Euphrosyne, or her mother. But when Hermocrates was returned from his
voyages wherein he had followed Germanicus, I found my self more reculed yet
by far from what I pretended: because Hermocrates having prevented the
Syracusians by a great reputation they had of him, even before he was returned,
every one fixed his eyes upon him as soon as ever he appeared; and it seemed
they would not so much as take the pains to regard me. That contempt so
animated my jealous ambition, that I feared not to declare my self his enemy;
having as then no other cause of hating him but that he was more honored than
my self; and the more lovely he rendered him to all men, the more did I see him
with displeasure. But when he attempted to love Euphrosyne, my jealousy went
upon a visible foundation, and I practiced what I was able both openly and
secretly, for to destroy the opinion was had of him. Yet for all this obtaining
nothing that way, and perceiving how by my expulsion he was received at
Euphrosyne's, I cannot express to you what rage I felt within my heart; at
last I found the invention to drive him from that house, by means of a letter
counterfetted from Eryx, father of Hermocrates, to the mother of Euphrosyne,
wherein he entreated her not to suffer his son at her house, because he had
destined him some where else. This crafty device succeeded for a time, every
one being ready to resent that which touches upon their honor, and you know
that an offense of this kind so surprises, that its impossible one should then
think of doubting whether the thing be true or false. Euphrosyne's mother
presently banished Hermocrates her house, without hearing any defense he could
make. And for me, knowing what had happened to him, I enforced my self to the
uttermost of my power for to gain Euphrosyne in that resentment of injury,
hoping that to work Eryx despite, they would turn their eyes upon me. But
Eryx and Hermocrates having made all clear together, my plot wrought its
effect against my self, and in a small time the marriage of Hermocrates and
Euphrosyne was agreed on, and soon after accomplished. I conceived such a
despite at the contempt they made of me, and at the good fortune of
Hermocrates, that a hundred times I resolved to have him dye: but seeing there
was no remedy to undo what was already done, I could no longer endure to live
at Syracuse, where I should be constrained to see perpetually an object that
was so troublesome to my sight, but went my way for a long time to Corinth.

When I was there arrived, all my acquaintance labored to divert me, and I
sought nothing else my self, but to expel the grief that tormented me: I
went often into companies, and at last willing to chase away the passions I
traveled with, by one that might be more happy for me, I had a design to make
another love, and casting my eyes upon Acidalia that was the fairest of all
Corinth, I enterpriz'd to love her. I was willing at my first coming to dazzle
the eyes of those of Corinth, by aproud bravery of clothes and train, which
made me be honored throughout all companies. All the Maids that love these
external ornaments, regarded me with a desire, and attended with much
unquietness the choice I would make of some one of them: so as when I made my
addresses to Acidalia, she received me with a great deal of contentment, and I
perceived as soon the plots of some other women, that labored to put me off
from this affection, by a thousand malicious inventions against Acidalia: but
those attempts wrought no effect upon me: contraiwise, the intelligence I had
of their purpose, caused me to be farther engaged with her; and because she was
very handsome, by little and little I was taken with a very violent passion.
She used much coldness at the beginning, to assure her self the more of me,
and confessed not that she would love me but after a long time: But when she
saw me entirely submitted, she took a kind of Empire over me; notwithstanding
she obliged me with a great confidence, and so mingling her favors to some
affected rigours, she made me so in love, as I could not live any where but
besides her. At that time a young man called Attalus frequented with us, who
was well enough borne, but that made himself so acceptable by many pleasant
actions, and jesting humors, that they thought there could be no good mirth if
he were not in the company. It Is true, he was of so merry a disposition, and so
borne to buffonnery, as the features of his face, his arms, his legs, and all
the rest of his body were not deficient in executing what everslights his wit
ordained them. There was not a ridiculous person that he imitated not, no
subtilty he was ignorant of: but he had so studied to counterfeit the discourse
of impertinent and stupid people, as it would have been a difficult matter for
him to speak seriously. I perceived that Acidalia took a little more pleasure
than was fitting in whatsoever Attalus did. As soon as ever he spoke, she
admired the quickness of his wit: if he turned but a foot or a hand, she made
an observation of the gentilenesse of his postures, and always gave advice to
the very first of his motions, for fear he might lose the praise of any one
action. I was angry for that she was something overmuch carried away in the
estimation of him, judging it proceeded from a weak spirit, to think that
highly commendable, which was simply ridiculous. I endeavored to make her lose
by little and little this good opinion she had of Attalus, giving her to
understand that he had reason thus to counterfeit sots and fools, because he
could never make a discourse himself that expressed an ability to any thing:
that such wits as these were not proper but for laughter, and that we were to
have a care of trusting them with a secret, or expecting any counsel from them
in a matter of importance: besides, we see ordinarily that women and maids love
these persons in public to make them laugh, but for thinking them worthy their
affection, they are well aware of; because this sort of men cannot have the
conditions that are necessary long time to entertain a friendship: for, said I
to her, respect, discretion, and fidelity, are qualities too serious for such
ready wits: they are so free and flitting, as they cannot endure a constraint;
and rather than lose a good word or a pleasant action, they will quit all
considerations of keeping an affection secret. Acidalia knew well I spoke as
one interessed, and that made her doubt the goodness of my reasons: and yet
she believed me for a while. But at last Attalus having perceived her
inclination, which she could nolonger conceal, began to be more sparing of his
buffonnery in all companies, and expressed to her that he made use of those
actions but only to please her. This obliged her entirely, and Attalus knowing
what progress he made in her good graces, set himself forward to take other
liberties of her without any great hazard: for if she would not suffer him, it
was excused by the free humor of Attalus; and if she would suffer him, he knew
well how to use the same favor often. All this I saw with a great deal of
despite, but could not remedy it, and still I loved her infinitely; and my
love increasing, augmented my rage, to see him receive favors I durst not
pretend to. Acidalia let her self be so transported with this foolish love of
Attalus, that she could now conceal it no longer: if he were in any place, she
must instantly leave what company soever to go to him; and she was so blinded
in admiring all he did, as she perceived not the visible appearance she made
to every one of her passion. I represented to her as discreetly as I could what
injury she did her self, and let her see that she ought to esteem of me
otherwise than o^ him: but she could not endure to hear me speak any more
after that fashion; and I perceived she began to shun me for fear I should
importune her with this discourse, and had no care now but for her Attalus.

I must needs relate to you in the end the cruellest of my griefs, and the
subject of all my shame. One day I went to her house something late in the
afternoon, and knowing she was gone out to walk, I resolved to attend her in
her chamber, and laid me down upon a bed, where insensibly I fell asleep. But
yet I awaked when she came in, and saw Attalus alone with her in the Chamber:
she knew not I was in the house; so as I removed as far as I could toward the
farther side of the bed into the dark, for fear of being perceived, but so as
I could see what they did. She took off the handkercher that covered her
neck, and presently Attalus set himself to kiss it freely enough, because
she took pleasure in those caresses, and in the conceited flatreries wherewith
he admired the beauty of that neck, and confessed himself beholding for the
liberty she gave him: then he added in mockery; But truly, Madam, you ought to
grant the like favors to Dicearchus that loves you so seriously; and she
answered him, If I should permit him the same, he would never take them with so
good a grace as you do. I was struck to the quick at those words, but yet I
endured far more sensible blows after. They sat them down upon seats that
were at the bed, feet, where indeed I could not see them, but I might easily
hear what they said. After some discourses expressing that she permitted him
great privacies, I heard her say, Ha gods! Attalus, let me alone; are you not
yet satisfied? and a while after she added: Well, are you now content? I
believe for the present that she only permitted him some liberties, which yet
are not to be suffered: but then my jealousy forced me to believe that those
words signified he had obtained the very last favors of her, and never casting
so much as a doubt of it, I entered into so great a fury, as I repented me a
hundred times that I had not a poniard about me for to kill them both: but
being unable to revenge my self at that time, my shame and my despite
constrained me to hold my peace, for fear they knew I had been a witness of
their kindnesses. They went away soon enough for being surpised, and for me,
having stayed some time full of confusion and rage, I retired me as secretly as
I could, with more fear of being discovered, than if I had done an action my
self that were very shameful.

When I was at home, I shut my self up alone, and there my love provoked by so
cruel an offense, abandoned me to fury and despair: I tore my hair, I
outrageously struck my self, and acted all that a violent rage forces one to
do. I saw well enough that I might despise this Acidalia, and leave her at
liberty with her Attalus: but I was so powerfully engaged to love her* as I
believed I had received as great an injury from her, as if already she had
been my wife. I considered her in her fault, and then despised her: but
presently I imagined her as handsome as might be, and then I could not so much
as endure the thought that another should possess her. But what? said I, shall
I love her still, and not rather have in disdain a person defiled? the shame
of her sex, and the relics of Attalus? Shall I still continue to desire what
I ought to have in horror, and esteem my self miserable for having been a
witness of that she endured, in stead of rejoicing for having known her
levity and weakness? No, no, let us be more wise, and expel out of our mind
this beauty that hides so many defects, and has not offended my love but in
destroying it self. I remained some time in this resolution; and a little
after this Acidalia returned into my mind with more charms than ever; and it
seemed my imagination was pleased in representing her to me, the more
gloriously to keep me from forgetting her, and embroyle me in a greater
trouble. Then I replied thus: What then, shall I leave her in the possession of
another, and while I am in pain to be delivered from so sweet and cruel a
remembrance, shall Attalus peaceably enjoy Acidalia, and taste as many
delights, as I torments? Whither shall I fly? Wretched man, shall I stay at
Corinth, to see continually my own misery, and be the more sensible of it? or
rather return to Syracuse, to see on the other side Hermocrates happy with
Euphrosyne, whose contentments will every hour renew in my memory those of
Attalus with Acidalia? Acidalia, thou cruel, ingrate, foolish, unchaste woman,
can I still love thee? But again, Acidalia, full of beauty, of graces, and of
charms, can I not love thee? Spirit unworthy to be loved of me: but beauty
worthy of all the vows of the earth. O despite, O love, what am I to do?
Shall I love her, or shall I not love her?

My soul was thus agitated with a thousand furious and extravagant thoughts,
and my rage so transported me, as I conceived a resolution whereat you will
bless your self, not finding the like to have been taken by any man in all
the ages of the world. No, said I, it is certain that I ought not to love her;
but contrariwise that I am to pursue with a mortal hate, her that has done me
so cruel an outrage: but I ought to provide too, that none else possess her.
I will marry her, to the end I may have the power to make her as miserable, as
she makes my life disastrous. I will never touch her my self, not enduring any
more to come near a person that is defiled: but I shall take order that none
else approach her neither, and by this means I shall have but the displeasures
for not enjoying her, which every way are unavoydable.

After having passed away the night in tormenting my mind with these furious
imaginations, I fortified me so well in this strange resolution, that the next
day morning I went to one of her uncles to entreat him to speak with her mother
concerning our marriage, knowing well they would receive me presently; and to
oblige him to dispatch this business, I made him a present of a Diamond of
great value. I had settled my face as well as I was able, to feine a great
affection: and some time after I had an answer as favorable as I desired.
Acidalia her self was not repugnant to her friends will, well knowing they
would never have consented that she married Attalus. She expressed a reception
of me with much contentment, for to abuse me; and I feined also to desire with
impatiency the day of our marriage, making appear all the joy I could;
although the more I saw her then, the more I resolved with my self to hate
her. Attalus was some days at her house about that time, and I well observed
the looks they sent one another, the one envying my happiness, and the other
making show that she received me against her will; and they knew not that I was
so well acquainted with their intelligence: but I had strange designs within
me.

In the end our marriage-day arrives, and all the ceremonies being performed,
at night they brought us to lie together; but that night was a strange one: for
as soon as we were left alone together, I said to her; Acidalia, think you I
am at this present the Dicearchus heretofore so amorous of your beauty, and so
ready to obey your commands? No, no, know that I am your cruellest enemy, and
have not married you but to make you the miserablest creature in the world. She
began to cry, and asked me why I spoke on that fashion to her. Go, said I,
filthy shameless woman, lament your fault only, and never hope to have me
moved. Remember your self what Attalus obtained of you, whereof I was
witness, and believe I have not married you to enjoy his leavings, but to
hinder his enjoying of you, and make you every day feel the punishment of the
injury you have offered me. She denied a long time that she had ever permitted
Attalus any thing: but at last seeing how I knew too much of that they had said
one to another, she was brought to confess to me that she had only granted
him some few liberties, for which she demanded pardon of me with a torrent of
tears: nevertheless I would not believe her, and she could never make me
relent; so as all the night passed in reproaches, in despaires, in sighings and
in tears. The next day those that came to visit us, were in a great wonder to
see her in the estate of one in desperation, and they knew not what to think
of it. I saw well she had a desire to seek to her mother for refuge, and by
making her complaints to her, to obtain that I might not carry her away to
Syracuse, and that she would take her home to her house; but I prevented that,
for the very same day I had made a Vessel be prepared with all my furniture,
and having taken leave of my friends in Corinth, I constrained her to depart
with me.

Judge a little what hope I could have of ever enjoying any contentment: I
took for my ordinary companion a person that was the plague of my life, and to
whom I was resolved to be a perpetual scourge, having attempted never to let
her enjoy any repose, since she rendered me the most miserable of men. But when
we were come to Syracuse, I was much troubled, finding my self obliged to
watch continually over her I could not regard but with sorrow, and whom I
feared also to provoke overmvch, for fear she might not be moved once again
to take my honor from me, and it may be my life. Yet she neither was of a
violent nature, nor able to conceive a daring resolution: only when I was
alone, she came sometimes to me, and casting her self at my feet, she implored
my pity, and desired pardon of me in shedding abundance of tears, embracing
my knees, and making a thousand submissions. Her weeping, and her beauty did a
little shake me; but presently I turned away my sight, and full of cruel
resolution, said to her; Madam, if you could recover the purity you have lost,
you might have cause to expect my friendship; but since that is impossible,
believe I have always your fault present to my remembrance, which forbids you
to hope for any pardon at my hands. She made me then a thousand oaths, that the
fault she had committed was not such as I believed it; but the gods themselves
had not been able to have made me lose that opinion. Ha, said she then, since
you will believe it, take me out of the world; let me dye by your hand, and
finish so cruel a misery. I must of necessity then, answered I, kill my self
at the same time, for I am assured never to be cured of the resentment of your
offense but by death, and I cannot comfort my self but by the revenge I am to
take of you. Then she took her self to injurious speeches against me, calling
me cruel Barbarian, Tiger, with a thousand reproaches which her grief forced
her to make me. But, neither her submissions, nor her tears, nor her rage,
could ever bend me. All the relaxation I gave her, was when I let her some time
live apart without seeing her; being assured of her continency, because out of
displeasure she had banished her self from all kind of companies.
Nevertheless thus giving torment to another, I was not exempt from it my
self, and I believe I had my mind at leastwise as much troubled as she, being
constrained to lock up my griefs within my soul for fear of expressing them
to others, when she gave ease to hers by the tears she feared not to shed.

When I saw that I was reduced to so miserable a life by my own procurement,
and not encountering in my house other than pitiful and funest objects, I
resolved with my self for easing of my mind a little by businesses abroad, to
employ me in the public affairs; and feeling my self consumed with
vexations, I took an hatred against all the world, and wished to have seen
all men as miserable as I. Hermocrates was the first object of my fury: the
ancient enmity I had conceived against him, caused me to be altogether disposed
to wish his destruction, hoping that if I satisfied my passion thus to revenge
me on all sides, I should not at least be deprived of all pleasure. I practiced
all sorts of means to ruin him, and having made a league against him, I
possessed my mind with all the designs I could think of upon this subject,
to the end it might be entirely busied with those considerations, and I the
less thoughtfull of my domesticke miseries. This league made me powerful, and
I found my self in estate to resist whatsoever he proposed in the public
assemblies, and to overthrow all his designs: but finding again that he
sometimes overruled it by the authority he had acquired, and the love was
shown him, I let my self be carried away more than ever with a desire to
ruin him entirely. To this purpose I made use of craft to make the Syracusians
believe he affected tyranny: and by the Arms I made be found at his house,
gave a color to my accusation, which notwithstanding had easily been
discovered false, but for the artifices I employed to make the Roman Praetor
judge of this cause; but the Syracusians that loved him prevented me, and yet
not daring to absolve him altogether, they banished him only for five years
according to their ancient law.

I was not content with this judgment, but contrariwise I esteemed it
advantageous for Hermocrates, whom the Syracusians had expressed so much
affection to, I feared lest they recalled him not very soon from his exile, to
place him in greater authority than ever. By fortune, a little before, certain
Pirates had been taken upon the coasts, and Hermocrates pursuing their
punishment, I attemted to save them, only in contradiction to him. I was
visited secretly by some Sea courses of their company, that labored to corrupt
the Judges; and who having had intelligence of the design I had to oblige
them, offered me all I could desire of them for the safety of those were taken*
I refused all their presents; but at the same time Hermocrates being condemned
to banishment, and knowing how he was resolved to go to Carthage, I sent for
them, and bound them by oath faithfully to execute what I desired of them, and
I would return into their hands their companions. They promised to serve me
against all the world, and presently I made be delivered by my sole authority
those that had been taken, because I governed all at that time; and having
them all at my house together, I entreated them to join their quarrels to
mine, and so to order the matter as they might take Hermocrates their enemy and
mine, as he went to Carthage, and carry him away with his wife so far off,
that no more should be heard of him within Sicily; that for this cause they
were to sell them to some Barbarians, and I desired too of them it might be
done separately, to the end I might thus dis-unite those whose union had given
me so much jealousy and torment.

They all received this entreaty with much joy, as well for having occasion to
express in what sort they desired to serve me, as to be revenged upon
Hermocrates for having prosecuted their death, and all of them swear to me
they would inviolably execute my desire. I prayed them beside, that if
Euphrosyne who was very big, should be brought to bed in the time she were with
them, they would throw into the Sea what should be borne of her, to extinguish
for ever this race. After they had promised to perform exactly all I
recommended to them, I made them yet some presents; I received also some of
them, for not showing a contempt of them, and after many mutual protestations,
they went their way to attend Hermocrates in the passage near the Port of
Lylibeum. They failed not to accomplish faithfully what they had promised me:
for they took away Hermocrates and Euphrosyne, but they were wanting only in
this, that they sold not Hermocrates so soon as they had assured me, but kept
him some time with his wife amongst them.

I had no news what they were all become of, but about four years after,
during which time being rid of Hermocrates, that before wholly possesed my
spirit, I relapsed into the lively resentment of the evils of my house, and to
ease them in some sort, I enterpris'd to build a stately house in the Country;
and at the same time made a Tower be erected, with an intention there to
enclose Acidalia the remainder of her days. But at the end of those four
years, I heard that certain men demanded to speak with me. I sent for them,
and knew them to be the very same Pirates, that came to give me an account of
what they had done. They told me they had taken Hermocrates and Euphrosyne,
whom they had not yet been able to sell in place whence they might not return
again: that when they had Euphrosyne, she was already delivered of the child
she had been big with; but that since being with them, she was brought to bed
of a daughter, that seemed so fair to them, as they could not resolve to put
it to death: nevertheless, for not failing in that they promised me, they had
brought it me to dispose of as I should think good. Then they presented me
this young girl of about two years of age, whose beauty surpised me: but
when she opened her little arms to embrace me in saluting, I was touched with
love and pity for her sake, and resolved with my self rather to nourish it,
than be so cruel as I had resolved. I am very sorry, pursued Dicearchus,
addressing him to Euphrosyne and Melintus, that I cannot at this time present
you with this nurse child of my bringing up; it is the gentile and courageous
Epicharis, who is the daughter of Euphrosyne, and your sister, said he to
Melintus. Euphrosyne knew not who this Epicharis was; yet she rejoiced that her
child had been preserved: but Melintus and Ariana cried out at the same time:
Melintus said, What, is Epicharis my sister? And Ariana, Alas Melintus, my
dear Epicharis, is she then your sister? Ah! what joy will this news bring my
brother that loves her so passionately; and what grief too will he receive by
it for not knowing where she is? Dicearchus caused a little ceasing to all
these admirations and joys, in continuing thus: It Is true this young child
made her self always so agreeable, as I was constrained to love her maugre
the hatred I had against those that brought her into the world. She had a wit
so gentile and quick, that she forced me many times to laugh, when I had but
small cause in Acidalla's presence; and when she was more advanced in age, I
was pressed by some of my friends to marry her, thinking she had bin a slave,
to one called Asylas a servant borne in my house: but I had in horror that
proposition; comparing the nobleness of her blood, with the baseness of
Asylas; and could not hinder my self from saying, how the gods would never
pardon me for mingling her illustrious blood with another so unworthy of her.
This speech was well remarked, and often times after I was pressed by many, and
by Palamede especially, to tell them of what parents she was borne. Never would
I tell them any thing, being willing to reserve to my self always the
disposition of her fortune, to render her such as I pleased. In that time
Acidalia died, whether she had given her self death by poison, or it had
seized on her through displeasure, being unable any longer to support her
misery, and chiefly seeing that Tower was prepared for her: but before she
died, she made me so many oaths, that she had not committed the fault I had
imagined, as I think now the belief I had of it was only founded upon my
jealousy. She vowed her self to the furies to be eternally tormented in hell,
if it were true; and desired of me no other satisfaction at her death, but
this, that I would lose that opinion. I was willing to let her soul depart
with this contentment, and I have had as much regret since for having cruelly
used her, as heretofore I was pleased with it; and I was tormented with a new
kind of punishment, for before I was vexed with the sense of the injury I
thought I had received of her; but since her death I have bin persecuted with
the sorrow for those injuries I made her suffer.

I had always kept Epicharis with her, but at her death I gave her to my Niece
Ariana, because she loved her: Afterward having known that Melintus had been
acknowledged the son of Hermocrates, there was a renewing of my fury against
this blood I so hated: I had resolved a little before to give him my Niece in
marriage, thinking he had bin son of Telephus, and seeing the great affection
the Syracusians bare him: but when I knew the truth of his extraction, the
consideration of his condition so highly advanced, in stead of serving his
desire, made me not only lose the affection I began to have toward him, but
also to swear his ruin; and seeing how it behoved me first to be assured of
Ariana who loved him, I carried her away to Corinth, hoping after I had married
her to Pisistratus, to return to Syracuse and destroy Melintus. He prevented
me by the resolution he took to carry away my Niece; and as I was incensed
with this affront that made my hatred irreconcilable, I found my self
assisted by Trebatius to pursue him, and I refused not his help, though he
sought to put my Nephew to death as well as him. Indeed I believed then he had
been at Athens, and could not imagine he could be with Melintus; but when I
knew that they were together, I would not have doubted in the state I was in,
to sacrifice Palamede and Ariana too, provided I might have revenge. I followed
Trebatius for this purpose, and animated him as much as was possible for me, to
the end Melintus might not escape us: but the gods have rendered all the
enforcements of my rage unprofitable, and the graces I have so many times
received from him, have forced me to confess, not only that he was beloved of
them and in their protection, but besides that, in spite of my hate, my fury,
and all my resentments, I was to have an obligation to him for my life, and to
love him too.

It seemed that having driven out of my soul the passions that tormented it,
by the reverence I began to bear to the secret decrees of the gods, I might
live from henceforth in some repose; but feeling continual seizures of
repentings that assail and kill me, I perceive well how the gods have ordained
me a life entirely tragical, and will not have me survive my miseries. They
are determined for the present, that I dye; but since death ought to be the end
of my calamity, I pray you let it be also the end of the hate you have cause to
bear me. You, sage Euphrosyne, and you generous Melintus, I conjure you by
whatever remains dear to you in the world, to pardon me for all the evils I
have made you suffer: lament rather the perpetual furies of my miserable life,
than accuse my actions, or keep a remembrance of them to have me in
detestation. You, my dear Niece, that have sometimes felt the effects of my
miseries, pardon me also, and obtain of Melintus and Euphrosyne that they
would pardon me. Let me carry at least this consolation down below, that
though I lived enemy of all the world, yet I died at leastwise in the favor of
those I most afflicted.

Dicearchus ended thus in tears, and often interrupting his words with sighs
that proceeded from his repentance. Euphrosyne and Ariana could not refrain
weeping: but Melintus that had an heart more constant, spoke to him on this
manner: My father, for I will so call you, since you serve for a father to my
dear Ariana, cease, I pray you, to afflict your self and us too, by your
tears and regrets, that give us a sufficient testimony that you have a good
nature, but that the only misfortune of your life has forced you to hate us,
and our misfortune alone has rendered us the objects of your hatred. Dicearchus,
we see every day the force of the Destinies, that overruled and constrain us
to do many times actions our natures are repugnant to. But since the same
Destinies permit you for the present to acknowledge your self, and leave you
at your own liberty; you must now act of your own accord with courage, for to
expel the train of these first furious passions, as shame, sorrow, and
repentance? It Is the only evil you are for the present sensible of, and which
if you let it take force, will without doubt be your death. Dicearchus, show in
this occasion what blood you are come of: appease courageously these little
seizures, and enjoy from henceforth with us the repose that fortune prepares
us. That same great courage which your cruel fortune constrained to serve your
furies, would have been employed in nobler actions, if your life had been
more happy. Hitherto you have not used it but against your self, now make it
serve your own turn. Lose you the regret of what is past, since we are
willing to lose the memory of it. Euphrosyne commands you this, Ariana entreats
you, and I conjure you. Then they confirmed what Melintus said, in embracing,
and praying him to take heart: But Dicearchus feeling his evil grown to such
a point as he could not now vanquish it, assured them that they were not to
hope he could live any longer; yet that he died with much comfort, since with
so good a heart they pardoned him.

After some other discourse, they resolved to leave him to his rest, and every
one retired to go to bed; Melintus having judged that he was to have a little
sleep, to do his duty the better in the battle that was to be given the day
after. Dicearchus died three or four hours after: Melintus, when he knew of
this accident, arose to go comfort Ariana, and after having spent some time in
that duty, he recommended it to the sage Lepantus, with the guard of what they
had both most dear in the City, while he himself thought of nothing but
fighting. He parted before day to go find Palamede, whom at the same time he
told very sad news, learning him the death of Dicearchus; and other as
agreeable, relating how Epicharis was his sister. This intelligence made him
lose the grief for his uncles death; and he was so ravished with knowing this
good fortune for his dear Epicharis, wherein he had a great participation,
that he embraced Melintus a thousand times, and prayed him to promise him she
might be his wife. Melintus esteemed himself very happy for having wherewith
to acquit himself toward him, for the assistance he had given him besides
Ariana; and after some other discourse upon this rejoicing, and some regrets
for Epicharis loss, they gave over that entertainment to think of araying
their troops in good order, and preparing themselves that day to atchieve
actions worthy the great reputation they had acquired.

ARIANA. The sixth Book.
ALready had the Scouts been sent from all parts, to know what countenance the
enemy held, and they reported how the Scythians looked as if they expected the
combat, for not daring to scatter any more into several troops to go a
foraging, because the Romans were now a body of an army, they had gathered all
their forces together, which appeared to be of about forty thousand foot,
without any horse at all.

The Town of Larissa is situate between two hills, the valley whereof
enlarging it self by degrees toward the Sea, ends at last in a spacious
campagnia. This situation afforded the commodity of choosing the just extent
that was necessary to contain the front of an Army, and for this cause after
they had taken up that space, they were resolved to go assail their enemies
by some skirmishes of horse, to draw them thi^her in feining a flight, to the
end they might afterward have such advantage of place to fight in, as they
desired. Alcydamas and Polydore were that day armed with the rich Arms those
of Larissa had presented them with, and had not forgot to dress them in rich
skarfes, and to be covered with plumes, that they might be the more remarkable
to those they commanded, and in an estate worthy of the brave actions they
desired to perform.

The Army presently took up the place that was destined for the fight, and the
troops being embattell'd, the Chiefs began to walk about the ranks to
encourage their soldiers. The valiant Alcydamas seemed that day higher than
usually, and had a certain sparkling in his eyes, and splendor upon his face,
that made him appear like unto some god descended from heaven for the succors
of Greece, and the Roman Empire. They saw waving his white and carnation plumes
over the ranks he exceeded by the head, and his mine alone seemed to inspire a
part of his great courage into those that were ready to fight under his
command. At length, willing to speak to his men, before sending out a party to
the skirmish, he commanded silence, and with an agreeable and assured voice
spoke thus to them:

FEllow Soldiers, if I speak to you, it is not that I doubt of your courage,
nor that I desire to provoke it more, but rather to express to you the
contentment I receive in seeing my self assisted with so generous troops. I
hope this day to make the Romans confess, what their good fortune is to have
the Thessalians for guards to the limits of their Empire: for I am assured,
seeing the ardour of fighting which appears on your faces, they will be
beholding to us for this days victory. Remember you, that we are in that
Thessaly, which has always been fatal for great exploits of war, which
has seen heretofore decided the quarrel for the Empire of the Universe,
between two of the greatest Captains of the world. Let us show as much valor
this day, as those famous warriers did, in fighting for causes far more just
than theirs: They ruined the world to remain Masters of it, but your fight is
to preserve your Country from the fury of Barbarians. They were not moved but
by a violent ambition; but you are animated with a generous piety, desirous to
conserve your Altars, your parents, and your dearest Country. Let us go then,
fellows in Arms, let us on to go swim in the rivers of blood we shall make
these brutish Nations shed, whose number will but serve to augment our
trophies and our glory. Let us make them feel with our swords, a regret for
having dared to assault so warlike a province. Follow me, companions. But what
is this? You will be gone already: I will follow you then, and labor by
imitating you to serve the valiant Thessalians in the acquisition of an
immortal glory.

When Alcydamas had thus spoken, all his company lift up their swords on high,
to express to him the desire they had he should lead them on to the combat:
presently he commanded some of his troops to go charge the Scythians, and
feine by little and little to fly, that they might draw them to the place
where they were. The Barbarians received them with great cries, and seeing they
were so few a number, pursued them by shot of arrows with all the body of
their Army, that approached the Romans within shot. Then Maxentius sent to
command Alcydamas and Polydore to go charge them, to the end the Barbarians
should not have the honor of the first chocque. They both parted in the head
of their troops, and with such fury rushed upon the Scythians, that they brake
through the two wings of their Battalion which they had formed in the figure of
a Crescent* Alcydamas having foreseen that it was necessary for him to make a
great slaughter, had provided a broad sword of fine metal, that no kind of
Arms was able to resist: so as being managed by a strong and able arm, it cut
off all it reached, and the field was spread all over with heads, arms, legs,
and trunked bodies. Polydore also on his side gave no little proofs of his
valor, and the Thessalians courageously followed so valiant Leaders, and cut
in pieces whatsoever presented it self before them. The Romans seeing so happy
a beginning, avanc'd their point, and went to set upon that part of the
Scythians Army that was opposite to them, for to second the happy success of
the horse. Alcydamas in the mean time continued his great blows, and put all
the encountered either to the edge of the sword, or into disorder: in the end
with the assistance of his companions, he was come to the midst of the
enemies left wing, from whence he began to perceive somewhat a far off a
troop of Scythians that stood close round about one that surpassed them by the
head, and had all the marks of being their King. There it was he set up his
rest for his designs, and because his horse began to fail being all over
pierced with arrows, he mounted upon one of those were held ready for him, and
having emboldned his company to follow him, he thrust toward that body which
he soon opened by force of blows, and pierced with two or three of his
companions only to the very place where the King was, accompanied with the
strength of his Army. Then his sword did exploits to be admired, for these
great bodies opposed themselves before their King, and he was to kill many of
them before he could come near him. But at last he struck down so many at
his feet, as he came to encounter with the King, who refused not the Combat: he
a long time defended himself with a great deal of courage, and gave Alcydamas
many a blow to make him feel the weight of his arm: nevertheless the valiant
Alcydamas after he had weakened him by diverse wounds, struck so many blows
upon his casque, as it fell in pieces; then he divided in two the head of this
barbarous Prince, that fell down at his feet. The rest of Alcydamas company
came up at the same time, and admired the great slaughter he had made: Then the
Barbarians could no longer sustain them, and took their flight. Alcydamas
pursued them, incessantly killing those he could overtake. He chased them as
far as to the Sea, where a party of the Scythians saved themselves in their
shipping, and this element was the sole bound of his victory.

The fortune of Polydore had bin very near equal to this, for having also
brake through those of the point that was opposite to him, he had made a
strange carnage of them, and still pursued the remainder that ran away toward
the Sea, where they were received by Alcydamas and cut in pieces. These two
friends thus encountering, bound themselves together with their victorious
arms, and held a long time one another embraced, rejoicing that they met
again, and thanking the gods for so great a victory. Polydore only had a
wound of an arrow that struck him into the thigh; they stayed the blood of it,
and presently after they rallied all that had followed them, and found how they
had not lost so many as fifty men of the horse they led: but they saw
themselves accompanied but with about three thousand of the foot that had
followed them; and wondered to see none of the Romans among them. They resolved
to return into the field of the battle, where they found indeed a great
number of Scythians slain, but again the greater part of the Romans killed,
whose fortune had bin very differing from theirs: for they learned of some
soldiers that were left for dead, that when they vanquished on their sides,
the Scythians battalion that was in the midst, had broken through the battle
of the Romans, and after having slain the greatest part of it, pursued the
rest into the Town. Then Alcydamas complained at his misfortune, that his heat
should so carry him away with the desire of killing with his own hand the King
of the Scythians; for had it not been for this encounter, he would never have
quitted his care for the gross of the Army, and had not failed to have
succored the Romans, having always before taken heed to what passed.
Instantly be entreated them that remained to follow him, and in a short time he
came with his little troop into the City, where the Barbarians were pesle-mesle
entered in with the flyers, and began to pillage on all sides, after having
slain all that had resisted their fury. There was but the Castle that held out
still, whereinto Arimin had shut himself. Alcydamas began to put to the sword
all the Scythians he encountered, and made a fearful butchery of them, because
they dreamed of naught but pillaging. He bestrewed the streets with bodies of
these Barbarians, who feeling an enemy so little expected, betook them to
their heels every where. And those very men that kept Arimin besieged, thought
them to be gods descended from heaven to the Romans aid, not able to judge from
whence these enemies should come upon them, and ran away also. The night
approaching favored the Scythians retreat, and hindered Alcydamas from carrying
away with Polydore the honor of two great victories in one day, and of
entirely defeating the great number of the Barbarians. They were not willing to
pursue them out of the Town, for fear of forsaking it; but taking care for
the preservation of what remained, they made the gates be shut up, then they
set guards every where, thinking only to defend themselves, and all the
Scythians that were then found within the City were taken prisoners. Alcydamas
having given order on all sides, went with Polydore to the Castle to find the
Commanders, and advise of what was to be done. There he learned how Maxentius,
Flavian, and Milo had been slain in the fight; and Arimin told him that he
had received certain Romans into the Castle, with whom he had a long time
defended himself. That Governor obliged to Alcydamas for his own safety, and
the preservation of the Town, received with a thousand embraces this glorious
Conqueror, and gave him as many commendations for having done so great
exploits: after their kindnesses were ended, they assembled in counsel to
deliberate of what they had to do, after so great a defeat on either party.
Every one concurred in opinion with the sage Alcydamas, who considering that
there remained no more of them but about five thousand men, and that they had
not slain above the half part of their enemies, said they were by all means
to avoid fighting, for fear of hazarding the entire loss of the Town, but
that it was necessary to attend the troops that were coming to them out of
Achaia, wherewith they might chase away what remained of these barbarous
people. When they were upon this resolution, there was brought them a Greek
that had bin taken amongst the Scythians, who said he had something of
importance to communicate with those that commanded the Town. This man being
before Arimin, seemed to be an old man of a good aspect, that had saved
himself from the Scythians to be delivered out of their hands, and having
known that there were so few men left in Larissa, was come to advertise Arimin
to keep his men from going out of the City to fight: because there was nothing
so dangerous as these Barbarians in desperation, and he was certain that they
would depart after so great an overthrow, being not able to vanquish all the
forces of Greece. This good old man seemed to have a great care over the Romans
and Greeks, and prayed them with earnest affection, that none would endanger
themselves, whether out of an hope of defeating the remainder of the
Barbarians, or out of vainglory to show their courage in attempting some
hardy action, to get themselves a name before their enemies retreat. But he had
no trouble to persuade those that were already resolved not to fight, for
putting any thing to the hazard. Then they discoursed of some young men's
actions, who to acquire honor had oftentimes endangered their whole party.
Thereupon they alleag'd the laws of the Romans that had provided a punishment
for such faults, ordaining death to those that should fight against their
Generall's command, although they returned victorious; and some examples hereof
were produced. The old man that had a long time lived amongst the Scythians,
who had obliged him to serve for a sacrificer to their gods, said that these
Barbarians, although they were unfurnished with learning, were not wanting to
establish laws, which, for all they savored a little of Barbarism, were
nevertheless founded upon a great deal of reason; as it might be seen by
that they had made against private Captains, who without order should fight
with the enemy: for they punished with death their disobedience, although they
had bin happy in success, and this kind of punishment was very strange and
remarkable; for they led this miserable Conqueror in a Chariot through all the
City as it were in triumph: The soldiers that had served him in the action
went before, and carried the spoils they had gained; after this Chariot
followed the Priest with those that were destined for the sacrifice; and a
little after the hangman with an hatchet: in the midst of the City was a
Scaffold, whereupon stood a little Altar where they laid him that had offended
upon his back, and the Priest opened his stomach, and took out his heart to
be honorably burned in a fire that was kindled of the enemies arrows;
afterward his head was cut off by the hangman, to show that the heart which
was the seat of courage, ought to be honored for having done a brave action,
but that the head where government consists, was to be punished for having
failed to obey the commandment. This law was found to be very fantastical,
and yet they said it had in it something very reasonable: whereupon many having
made other discourses, Arimin to express he would have a great care of the
lives of those Chiefs that remained, swore he would make that Scythian law be
observed, if any one should be so desperate as to fight against the prohibition
he had given to the contrary. All the Captains to show that they would
inviolably obey what he commanded, swore they would not fight but by his order,
upon pain of incurring the rigor of that very law. Arimin told them after,
that if the Scythians went not so soon away, and he found a fit occasion to
make a sally, he would not refuse to give them means to make their valors
appear: but that they should not expect any such permission until four days
were expired. After this discourse they made the old man be carefully looked
to, for fear he proved a liar in the assurance he gave, that the Scythians
would be gone before two days: then every man retired to his own home, to
repose him after so many travels endured in this great day of battle.

When Alcydamas and Polydore were come into their lodging, Euphrosyne came to
meet her son, to embrace him, and express the joy she had to see him
returned from so great dangers. He would have gone into Ariana's chamber, but
Euphrosyne told him that she and Cyllenia were asleep together, and prayed him
to let them rest after so many pains and fears they had suffered; how the
Scythians had assaulted this house before they two returned into the Town, and
that Lepantus after he had valiantly defended it, was left hurt of many wounds,
which nevertheless were not very dangerous. They would have gone to see
Lepantus, but Euphrosyne conjured them to go to their rest, and remit all
visits and entertainments till the next day. She obliged them thus to go to
bed: for never had they so much need of sleeping as then, and they gave it not
over until the day was already well forward the next morning.

This repose was very necessary for Alcydamas, as well to refresh him after his
travels, as to resist the troubles and griefs he was to receive at his
awaking. Euphrosyne was then constrained to tell him that Ariana had bin
carried away by the Scythians, but that she was not willing he should know this
news the night before, to give him at least some time to repose in. That after
that Lepantus had defended them with a great deal of valor, he had bin left
for dead, and but for the succors he and Polydore brought into the Town, they
had all bin taken prisoners: but the Barbarians finding themselves pressed,
took away Ariana only. This cruel news seized him with such a grief, as he
remained in bed without either voice or color, and was a good while
immovable; but returning out of the astonishment which so unfortunate a blow
had given him; Ah fortune, said he, how cruel art thou to me? And have I
killed so many of the Barbarians, have I gained two famous victories in one
day, and could not keep my self from losing the dearest treasure of my life?
Have I preserved a whole Country, and peradventure all the Roman Empire from
the fury of the Scythians, and was not able to conserve what was most precious
to me upon earth? Ah! Euphrosyne, ah! my friends, why did you not advertise me
yesterday of this accident that I might have followed the Barbarians at the
same time; and since I knew how to save this City out of their hands, I could
as well have delivered Ariana from them. Ariana, my dear Ariana* where are
you? What will you now say of me, for being so unworthy as not to have come to
your aid? Must a Scythian dare to have touched with his profane hands so fair
a person? and some execrable Barbarian make her it may be at this present feel
the effects of his brutishness? O cruel thought, O grief, O rage! But no,
without doubt she is dead by this time: that generous soul would either have
prevented so sensible an outrage by death, or else not have survived her
honor. Fair Ariana, if it be true that thou art no more upon earth, but
either be now some new constellation, or received into the company of
goddesses, pardon me the cowardlinesse for not succouring thee, pardon me,
dear Ariana. But how can thou ever excuse this crime that makes me unworthy
of the very remembrance to have loved thee? No, it is certain, that for the
present thou regardest me with contempt: thou see how little I deserved the
honor of thy friendship, and how the heaven alone was worthy of thee. Thou
have reason for this, divine Ariana, and I think my self no more worthy to
look up to heaven that possesses thee. I will dye, to take from the world a man
so unworthy to live: but first I will avenge thy death upon this beastly
Nation. I will erect Tombs and Pyramids for thee with the slaughtered bodies
of these Barbarians, and make them wash away their impiety in rivers of their
own blood. Great goddess, I will have all places of the earth where I shall
encounter them become thy Altars, whereupon I will offer up to thee bloody
sacrifices; and after having sacrificed my self too for a final oblation, I
will go down below, to mourn eternally for the crime I have committed in
abandoning thee. Alcydamas, after having vented in his grief and rage many
such like discourses, leaped at once out of his bed, not knowing what
resolution he should take upon so cruel an accident. He called for his
clothes, and by and by his Arms, continually changing his determination, and
appearing as one without all sense. Euphrosyne endevour'd to restore his wits
by comforting him, and would have bin glad the sage Lepantus had bin in state
to have moved him to take some constant resolution. She told him that he ought
not yet to despair of any thing, and that peradventure Ariana had bin left in
some other part of the Town; that they were to search in all places, before
they lamented this misfortune as certain. So was there a search made with
great care; but all that diligence proved in vain. Polydore offered himself
to go secretly by night with Arcas into the Scythians Camp, and to look about
on all sides, if they might not find her some where among them: Alcydamas
himself had some desire to go thither, and try this means; but every one
considering how they exposed themselves to manifest danger without any great
appearance of finding her, they were desired to stay a while until fortune
presented some other occasion, and by hope to moderate the cares and sorrows
for so grievous a loss.

Alcydamas went up to the walls of the Town, that he might discover what the
enemies were doing, and he saw how after they were returned into their Camp,
they began to remove thence all they had to carry it into their vessels, and
looked like people that were disposed to depart the day after. This sight
struck a thousand griefs into him: for he imagined they would never suffer
him to go out and fight with them, since they made show of going away; and
that if Ariana were once carried into Scythia, he should never more hear of
her. Then he revolved within his mind a thousand differing thoughts, and cast
a thousand designs that were found at last to have no sure foundation at all.
In these perplexed studies was he, when one of those that commanded the guard
over the ports, brought him a man that desired to speak with him. Alcydamas
knowing it was Amyntas, ran to embrace him, sighing. And Amyntas told him in
private, that within two days Eurymedon would be with him and three thousand
men of war. Alas! said Alcydamas, Eurymedon comes too late for me. Know,
dear Amyntas, that the Scythians are gone to morrow, or the day after at the
furthest, and carry away Ariana with them. Ariana? replied Amyntas all-amaz'd:
ah gods! what misfortune is this! Alcydamas could not refrain weeping, and
conducted him home to his house, making his complaints and regrets to him by
the way: nevertheless he entreated him to let no body know for what occasion
he was come, because he might some way or other make use of his arrival.
Amyntas promised to keep it secret, and told him how Thessaly alone had not
bin assaulted by these Barbarians, but the Island also whence he came, but that
they were happily beaten out of it. They were come into the house, where
Amyntas after he had saluted Euphrosyne, rejoiced much to see her again, but
more yet to understand that she was mother to Alcydamas, and he esteemed
himself very happy for having rendered him this service in her deliverance: but
seeing Alcydamas to stand in need of divertments, he resolved to relate what
adventures had be fallen him since he left them in Epire. Being set down
therefore besides him, Euphrosyne, and Polydore, he spoke thus:

Continuation of the History of Eurymedon and Pasithea.
WHen you shall understand what prosperity has accompanied us in our voyages,
I doubt not but you will have cause enough to envy us, and complain against
fortune that has so cruelly persecuted you, at the same time she entreated us
so favorably.

At my arrive in Corcyra, I found a great preparation of war was making in
favor of Eurymedon, for whose return all the Pirates had bin so joyful, as it
was no difficult matter for him to have obtained whatever he could desire at
their hands. Some were busied in furnishing of ships, others in providing good
Arms, and all of them expressed as much joy to go serve their Prince, as if
they had been assured of the Conquest of all Asia. I found Eurymedon in the
Isle, ranking his men into battle, for to learn them to fight as well by land
as they did by Sea. As soon as he perceived me, he came to meet me, and after
embracing asked me news of you. I told him in what estate you were, and the
need you had of his succors: and for this cause he advertised his men that
they were to depart the next day, and told me I might return, and assure you
that the day after he would come with his forces to Nicopolis, whence he made
no doubt but he should deliver you, and that from thence you might together
take the way of Lesbos: nevertheless he would keep me the rest of the day, to
the end I might depart by night, and do him a pleasure in my return. I
expressed to him how glad I should be to have an occasion of serving him: and
about evening he gave me Euphrosyne, and desired me to carry her secretly into
my Skiffe, to save her from the Pirates, recommending her to me with as much
affection as if she had bin his mother. I took my leave of him, and came to
Nicopolis, where I found you not in the lodging I left you in, and what care
soever I took, I could never know what was become of you. I left Euphrosyne in
the house, and the next day I went to the Port, where I saw a ship arriving,
wherein was Eurymedon, who came to know what was necessary to be done, before
he made the rest of his little Army appear. I told him I could not find you
in the City, but that I knew Trebatius was yet there, who had heard no news of
you, and that without all doubt you had found some other means of saving your
selves. We thought it in vain to stay there any longer. Eurymedon asked me if
Euphresyne were in a sure place. I told him I had left her at the same lodging
where we had dwelt together. He gave me some commodities he had sent for out of
his vessel, to carry her: then he inquired of me what I meant to do. I
signified to him that my friends being departed thence, I had no more business
there; and how I should be very glad to wait on him to Lesbos. He was very well
content I would serve him in that occasion, and after I had bin to see
Euphrosyne, and carry her all things she might have need of, I returned to
find him, and we parted from the haven together; then having met with his
other shipping that attended him, we began to set sail. The wind was so
favorable, that in a few days we passed round about the Peloponese, and
having passed the Egean Sea, arrived happily in the Island, where Eurymedon
advised to land upon the coasts, and not at the haven.

The shore was so desert, as we had much ado to find a man there that could
tell us in what estate the affairs of the Country were: nevertheless in the
end we encountered certain persons that sought for a retreat in those
inhabitable places, who told us how a great number of Scythians were come to
land in the Isle to pillage it, and that the King Archelaus was resolved to
give them battle, having many stranger Princes with him that came to the
deliverance of the Princess Pasithea, and were opportunely met with for the
safety of the Island, and expulsion of the Barbarians.

Eurymedon learning this news could not tell what to resolve on; he had a
great desire to go and present himself to the King, to serve him in the day
of battle; but he feared his indignation. Besides, he knew not how to appear
at the combat, without being known: On the other side it was impossible for
him to stay in the Country and not be met with, either by the Scythians, or
Archelaus; and we had in all but four thousand men, with which we could not
resist a great Army; at last he bethought himself of this subtilty: You know
he is very young, and extremely handsome, he resolved to disguise himself into
a Maid, so to go find the King before he could know him, and to tell
Archelaus that he was daughter to the King of Thrace, whom the Scythians had
massacred, after they had pillaged his kingdom, and how she had found means
to save her self out of their fury, with a few soldiers she brought with her;
that seeking for refuge at his Court, she was glad to find occasion at her
arrive to succor him, and be revenged upon this cruel people for her fathers
death. His plot being thus laid, he chose out the youngest of his soldiers to
be disguised also, and represent the Maids of her train; and because I have
yet no hair on my face, he prayed me to be one of that number. By good fortune
he had made some provision of women's clothes that were very fine, having a
design to carry away Pasithea, fearing she might need them, going so
unprovided away with him; and this happened very luckily for him and us too. I
swear to you, when he had taken a juppe, and dressed up his hair which he wore
very long in tresses, I was deceived in him my self; and I know few women that
would have exceeded him in beauty. He armed himself only with a corslet and a
caske, having his sword by his side, and a javelin in his hand. He commanded
all those that were disguised with him, to put themselves in the same equipage;
so we landed some horses out of the ships, whereupon being mounted we went in
good order in the head of our troops toward Mitylene.

We had scarce gone half the way, when we perceived armed horsemen that ran
scattered about as if they were sufficiently out of heart; we stayed some of
them, that told us how the Armies of Archelaus and the Scythians were joined,
and that the King was very near to be defeated. Eurymedon made the place be
shown him where the battle was given, and presently he commanded us to
advance and aid that Prince. We arrived instantly at a hill from whence we
viewed the combat, and having known the Kings troops that were in great
disorder, we ran to aid them, which we did so opportunely as the vanquished
began to take heart again.

Eurymedon in a moment opened the Squadrons of the Scythians, and his woman's
habit made his blows appear more mavelous: I followed him close,
endeavoring to imitate his valor, and at last we came to the very strength of
the battle, where the King was fallen from his horse, and defended only with
two or three soldiers, that with much ado sustained a great number of
Scythians. Eurymedon killed four or five Barbarians that seemed to be the most
obstinate, and, while I undertook the rest, alighted from his horse, and
addressing himself to the King, said to him; Courage, Archelaus, assure thy
self thou shall this day be victor. At the same time he helped him up his
horse again, and remounting upon his own, they went together to charge the
Barbarians that began to tremble.

The King had always his eyes fixed upon this unknown warriouresse, and knew
not from whence this succors came. He admired the blows were given by the
arm of this generous Maid, and could not believe but that it was Pallas her
self who was come to his defense. I will not relate to you all the particular
encounters of this battle: in the end we remained vanquishers; and after we
were returned from chasing the flying enemies, the King received Eurymedon with
as much respect as if he had bin a goddess indeed: but he not willing to keep
him in that error, told him, he was the daughter of the King of Thrace, with
all he had premeditated, adding that he never received so much joy, as in
punishing these Barbarians for the death of his father.

Archelaus took the boldness then to embrace him in quality of a Princess,
and told him that since he had drawn so great an advantage from her fathers
calamity, and her own, he entreated her in like manner to dispose of all she
had conserved to him. Great King, said this disguised Princess, I demand
nothing of you but a retreat within your territories, and that I may live with
you in a rank worthy of my birth. The Prince that already felt himself
touched with love, says to her, that it was in her own power to hold the
highest degree in his kingdom her sex was capable of, and that he would make
her Mistress of his estates, and of his person too, if it pleased her.
Eurymedon would not lose this occasion, and said to him; The fortune I am in
forbids me to hope for such an honor: nevertheless since that you are in
permits you all things, I accept the offer you make me, and I entreat you well
to remember your self of it, when I shall challenge you of your promise. He
swear to her he would never fail her, and that it would be no difficult matter
for him to effect what he desired himself with so much passion. Many Princes
arrived at the same time, and seemed to desire something of the King, who
seeing their impatiency, told Eurymedon (that had named himself Hermione,) how
these Princes expected his judgment; because he had promised them, that he
that showed the most valor that day, should have in marriage the Princess
Pasithea his daughter. Eurymedon blushed at that discourse, being angry he had
not appeared at the battle in the habit of a man, because none could more
lawfully have pretended this honor, than himself. The King perceived his
redness, and asked him the cause of it. I will tell it you another time,
answered Hermione: but let us see whom you will give the Princess to. If you
were a man, said Archelaus, without doubt she had bin won by you, for you are
the person that has shown the most valor; but being it is not so, I will not
fail for all that to give you the honor of this victory. Then he made sign
to the Princes that he would speak to them, and he pronounced these words:
Since we are all redeuable to the only courage of the valiant Hermione for the
Scythians defeat, there is none but she that ought to pretend any honor; and
since in the person of my daughter the kingdom of Troas and of this Isle, was
destined to him that should have carried away the prize, I am obliged by my
oath to make Hermione Queen of my estates, if I were not obliged at all to it
by my affection.

The Princes were greatly amazed; and though Hermione appeared with many
beauties and graces, yet they could not be satisfied with her. The King took
her then by the hand, and made her be placed with him in a Chariot that
attended him for his return to Mitylene, with the victorious troops that
accompanied him. The people that was advertised how the King desired to many
this Princess, already called her their Queen; whereat Eurymedon smiled
within himself. Archelaus having her beside him, would know what reason she
had to blush when she heard speak of his daughter Pasithea. Because, answered
she, I believed you had had no children, and that word surpised me. I have,
says he, but this daughter, though it would be better for me I had her not,
for the displeasure I have received by her: then he fetched a deep sigh.
Hermione demanded what cause she had given him to complain of her. A while
since, answers Archelaus, a young stranger came to land in this Isle, and after
I had received him with much honor, he knew so well how to gain her, as he
made her in love with him. This villain avoided my anger by flying away, and I
was constrained to shut up my daughter for ever in a place where she can never
hear more news of him. I pity you indeed, says Hermione, if she were so
unfortunate as to have offended her honor. I do not think, replies the King,
she has so far forgot her self: but I surpised her one day as this young
man, that called himself Eurymedon, was kissing her hand. Ah! great King,
returned Hermione, this alone deserves not so cruel a punishment. But,
continues she, what was this Eurymedon? was he a Prince, or else a person
unworthy of the Princess good graces? He called himself Prince truly, answers
the King, and had many excellent qualities; nay, we had some obligation to him,
my daughter and I: but very hardly could I have been assured if he were of
Royal blood, since he knew it not himself; and it was too much boldness for
him to enterprise the search of my daughter without my consent, seeing fortune
had given him nothing whereupon he might ground that hope. Love, says Hermione
to him, has not all those considerations, and the faults he is subject to, are
rather excusable errors than crimes: and if this Eurymedon had some good
qualities, I do not find that the Princess has committed so great a fault;
and entreat you by the affection you express to me, not to be so cruel to
your own blood, but to set her at liberty in my favor. Archelaus was willing
to oblige Hermione, and promised to deliver her before eight days, because she
desired it.

He led her into the Palace, where she was lodged as if already she had been
the Queen, and all the Princesses, and the Ladies came to do their reverence
to her. Hermione very well acquitted her self of all those ceremonies, and
seemed to have been bred in them all her life; but the time seemed tedious to
her until she saw Pasithea. Nevertheless she was afraid to be discovered if
she spoke of her too often to the King. He on the other side had no other wish
than to be married to Hermione; but there was no appearance of making that
marriage, until first he had well provided for the safety of his kingdom on
all sides, after the defeat of the Scythians. Yet he gave not over expressing
to her his impatience, and Eurymedon called the gods to witness, and prayed
him to believe, that he desired the honor of his alliance as much, or more
than he himself. Whereupon the King gave him thanks, never understanding the
sense of Eurymedons words, who meant the alliance he desired to make with him
by marrying his daughter.

At length two days after Hermione entered into discourse concerning Pasithea,
and expressing a great desire to see her, obtained leave of the King to go
visit her in the Castle where she was kept, upon condition she were not
accompanied but with her Maids. I was one of that number, continued Amyntas, so
as I went with Hermione into that Castle, which within was guarded only with
women. They all of them showed a great deal of honor to Hermione, knowing she
was destined to be their Queen, and we were conducted to the place where the
fair Pasithea was, who came out to meet us, and having heard speak of
Hermione, and of all that was said concerning her, she received her with a very
great respect, as the person she believed she should one day wholly depend on.
Hermione embraced her, and kissed her a long time; then having taken her aside,
asked her if she remembered not one she had seen very like her. Pasithea
blushed, and durst not tell her she resembled Eurymedon very much, because she
feared to produce that name before her that very shortly was to be her Queen.
Eurymedon knew the fear she was in, and for her re-assurance said to her;
Fair Princess, fear not to discover your secret to me; I am sister of the
Prince Eurymedon, that am come into this Isle for no other end but to serve you
and my dear brother that dies for your love. I have bin so happy as to succor
the King your father in the battle, and give him passion enough to make him
desire to marry me. But I will never while I live accord to what he desires,
until you be first married with Eurymedon. Madam, answered Pasithea something
confounded, I should think you meant but to surprise me by these words, if I
remarked not in you all the features of Eurymedons face; and seeing you have
been willing to express so perfect a friendship toward him, I will also avow
to you the extreme love I bear him, which makes me esteem my captivity very
pleasant. Hermione kissed her to show how agreeably she took those words, and
prayed her to swear Eurymedon should be her husband. I do swear it, says
she, between your hands, and I promise you to give myself to him, as soon as
ever the King shall have given his consent.

Then they gave one another their hand, and kissed a long time: afterward that
discourse being ended, Pasithea spoke of the griefs she had received in this
prison, whence Hermione promised she should very speedily be delivered, if the
King kept his word with her. Eurymedon was so rapt with seeing his dear
Mistress, and for the error he kept her in, that he never ceased expressing a
great contentment to her, and failed not to take as many kisses, as by time she
gave him occasion. But he would proceed farther yet, and having signified to
Pasithea how willing he would be to be delivered of her fathers entertainments
for a day or two, he so wrought with her, as the Princess thought good he
should send to the King to ask leave of him that she might lie that night with
his daughter the Princess, because she could not see her sufficiently to her
desire. I was, went Amyntas on, the chief Maid of Hermione's train, and was
chosen to go to King Archelaus, who willingly agreed to what Hermione desired,
upon condition she returned the day after. I brought them this news, that was
received with a great deal of joy of them both, but of Eurymedon most, who
under this disguise hoped to receive the dearest favors of his fair
Mistress. All the evening they ceased not entertaining one another with much
satisfaction, and night being come we undressed them. Pasithea's Maids had no
sooner taken off what covered her neck, but Hermione brought her mouth
thither, and told her that her brother had reason to be so passionately in love
with her, and she would never repent her self for having attempted to serve
him for so fair a subject. Pasithea received those kindnesses and speeches
with a great respect, and at last we put them into the bed together. It had
been easy for me to have lien also with one of the Princess Maids: but
though my will had been good, I could not have had the leisure: for presently
we heard Pasithea cry out. I went with her Maids to see what had happened to
her, and when we were about her, I found her in great trouble to know what she
should complain of: for Eurymedon having told her what he was, and pressed her
extremely to grant what he desired, she thought but to have rid her self out
of his hands; yet she would not accuse him before the Maids, for fear the
King knew what trick was played upon him. At last she resolved to feine that
she was taken with violent pains that made her cry out on that fashion, and
she said, that for fear of troubling Hermione, she went to retire into her
Maids Chamber. Eurymedon seeing her resolution, durst not keep her by him, and
she getting out of the bed, went and locked her self up in a Chamber, where
we could not see her until the next day.

He imparted to me all his secrets, and told me that very night that having
declared himself to the Princess, she was extremely offended with his
boldness; and though he labored to vanquish her, by representing how she had
given him her faith, and the King had given them leave to lie together, yet she
would never hear him. In the end that having enterpriz'd to employ some
enforcements, for not losing so fair an occasion, she cried out to have some
body deliver her out of his hands. He was afraid she had been very angry with
him: but I assured him he needed not fear it, and that since she had the
temper not to accuse him before her Maids, it was a sign she had still a
great affection to him. The next day he found to be true what I told him, for
feining to go see how she did, she let her self a long time be entertained by
him, and received all his excuses, then resolved to be carried away into what
part of the world he would bring her, upon charge that he attempted nothing
until they were married together by her fathers consent.

Eurymedon was at last constrained to leave her to go to the King again: we
parted from the Castle and went to the Palace of Archelaus, who testifying much
joy to see Hermione, asked her if his daughter had entertained her as she
deserved. You have, answered she, the loveliest daughter in the world, and you
may judge if I were not satisfied with her, when yesterday was not sufficient
for me to enjoy her company, but I must have the night added to it. The King
replied, Has she not made you many complaints of me? Contrariwise, returned
Hermione, we ceased not commending you for the permission you gave us, for
never had two persons so much inclination to love one another. I rejoice
exceedingly, said Archelaus, to have any thing proceed from me, that is
agreeable to you, and shall be very well pleased she may keep you company, and
serve you all her life time. They had besides some other such like
entertainments, after which Eurymedon sent me to his troops, to advertise them
to make ready to depart, and that in the mean time they should have a great
care not to discover him. I met in the streets with him you had sent us, said
Amyntas to Melintus, who had never known me in the habit I was in; but I was
very glad to find him, because enquiring after Eurymedon, he might
peradventure have given some suspicion. I made my self known to him, and he
told me the place where you were, and for what cause you sent him: I promised
him to speak of it to Eurymedon, and to dispose him to bring you his forces
when we had taken away the Princess, and having conducted him to our shipping,
I gave him charge to attend me there.

When I was returned to Eurymedon, he received much joy to know in what place
you were, and to have the means to aid you; for having the Princess away with
him, he might commodiously enough go land in Thessaly: nevertheless we
referred the deliberation of all things till we saw Pasithea.

The next day he returned to see her, and after a thousand expressions of
kindness, he imparted to her the news he had received from his dearest
friends who stood in need of his succors, and told her, that if she pleased,
they would go away together into Thessaly, which was a very fit place for
their retreat. She consented to all he had a mind to; and because she was
the day after to be set at liberty, they advised to send me to you before, to
tell you that within two days after they hoped to arrive here, for being both
of them at liberty, they might feine to go a walking together out of the
Town, and so go aboard the Ships that were kept ready for their depart.

I was impatient until I saw you, to bring this news to you, in such sort as
I took my leave of them instantly, and came to embarque me with him you had
sent, who made me an account of all that happened to you, since I left you, and
how for fear of being discovered, you made your self be called Alcydamas, and
Palamede, Polydore: he showed me a place where we might land in the Country
without being seen of the Scythians; and you see I am here arrived without
danger. I sent him back in the same Vessel, to the end he might direct
Eurymedon that way, when he came. I make no doubt but they will very soon be
here, because there is no mistrust at all of the disguised Hermione; and
Archelaus is so blinded with her love, as he permits her whatsoever she
desires, so as it will be very easy for them to make their escape, and I hope
when they are once arrived with their forces, we shall have means to hinder
the Scythians from carrying away Ariana, if they stay but here so long, and
find some occasion or other to take her out of their hands either by subtilty
or open force.

Amyntas thus ended his discourse, which would have been regarded with a great
deal of more pleasure in another season; nevertheless it gave some remission
to the pains they endured for the loss of Ariana. But when he had ended, they
could scarce declare their opinion upon what they had heard, so afflicted were
they; and every one returned to his complaints as before.

ARIANA. The seventh Book.
WHile Amyntas recited the adventures of the generous Eurymedon and the fair
Pasithea, Alcydamas was in great pain to give him attention, being so cruelly
diverted with his misfortune which entirely possessed his mind, that he diverse
times made him begin his narration again, to the end he might be perfectly
informed of the issue, because his thoughts were still wandering after Ariana.
But when he had made an end, he drew him aside, and desired him to go with him
to the Castle to speak with Arimine. Polydore was advised to keep his bed by
reason of his wounds, so that it was easy for Alcydamas to conceal his
purposes from him in the present business: and having acquainted Amyntas with
his design, he carried him to Arimin, whom he informed that he was a friend of
his addressed to him in private from Eurymedon, (of whom he had told him at the
beginning of the siege) to let him know that he had sent him by sea three
thousand men, who were at Anchor in a road somewhat removed from that where the
Scythians Fleet rode, and which should that night come into the Town by
several ports, to the end their marching in one body might not cause them to
be discovered by the Barbarians. Arimin was well pleased to hear of this
supply, and Alcydamas entreated him to give order to all the Commanders and
guards at the Ports to do what he should require of them. Presently Arimin
sent directions all about, that for that night they should obey all the
commands of Alcydamas; and within a while Alcydamas left him to go and put in
frame that which he intended. Only Amyntas and Arcas were of his privy
counsel, with whom when night was come on, he went and drew fifty horse out of
every troop of the Thessalians, which none of the Captains refused to give way
to, persuading themselves that he had order for it. In this sort he made up a
squadron of about five hundred men: then he took thirty Trumpets; and having
drawn them all out of the Town without any noise, he told his company he had
promised Arimin to give a defeat to the whole Scythian Camp that night, and
could not endure to see them depart, carrying away so many persons as they had
taken in Larissa, without endeavoring to recover them out of their hands
again: that he had chosen out all of them, being persuaded they had courage
enough to go charge the Barbarians in their very Camp, when they should be
oppressed with wine and sleep; and that a few men falling upon them on the
sudden, would do more good, than if there were a multitude of the plot; that
they would therefore express their willingness to him, if they had a desire
to follow him, and gain as great honor as men of war were able to attain.
These Gentlemen of Thessaly so loved the valiant Alcydamas, and were so
confident in his direction, that they all cried out to him, to lead them on.
Then he signified to them, how this enterprise had been conceived by him in
particular, to save certain Ladies that were taken prisoners by the Scythians,
so as entering their tents they were to spare this sex, and to take them out of
their hands only; and because the chiefest of them was called Ariana, he gave
them this cry to terrify the Barbarians at their first assailing them all at
once, and prayed them to cry without ceasing, Ariana, Ariana, where are you,
when they should once be mingled in the fight with them. It being thus ordered,
he went himself, and placed twenty of his Trumpets two by two round about the
Scythians Camp, with command to sound when he began the charge on his side. He
reserved the other ten to go in the head of his five hundred men, when he
should enter with them into the Camp. After he had well encouraged them once
again, he made but one whole troop of them, marching very close together; and
at the entry of the Camp, he bade his Trumpets sound; the others answered at
the instant from all sides, giving a fearful alarm, and suddenly he began
to enter the tents every where, and to make a strange butchery of the
affrighted Scythians, who thought all the Devils of hell were met together to
their confusion. Melintus and his companions had no other trouble but to kill
every where as they went, crying out incessantly, Ariana, Ariana, and all
places ecchoed with that fair name. Melintus searching in the very secrettest
corners of all, cried still, Ariana, my dear Ariana where are you? Ariana,
it is Alcydamas that seeks you: fair Ariana, where are you? In the mean time
he slew as many Scythians as appeared before him; and he engaged himself so
far in this search, that he encountered a body of Scythians that were gathered
together, having then none but Amyntas and Arcas on each side of him. His
courage suffered him not to retire; but contrariwise he spurred his horse into
the very midst of them, and scattered them in an instant. His valor the more
provoked by his love, made him give blows that were prodigious, imagining to
himself, that every Scythian he struck, was he that had stolen away Ariana.
Presently he slew or put to flight this number that had rallied together, and
afterward there was not a man that made any more resistance. He clave heads,
he struck off shoulders, and his enemies cried out, that it was Mars himself
that came to destroy them. Amyntas and Arcas killed in like manner as many as
they found, and the rest of the Thessalians admiring the dreadful fray of
these Barbarians, ceased not to put them to the edge of the sword; in such sort
as all the Camp over the dead bodies were heaped one upon another; and in the
mean time none of them left off crying, Ariana, Ariana.

When Alcydamas had visited all the tents, the day now beginning to break, he
came at last out of the Camp, seeing no more enemy appear, and himself not
able to find what he sought for. He left his men to pursue what remained of
the Scythians, who gained their shipping as well as they could; and weary with
killing, searching, and crying out, finding himself out of breath too, and all
in a sweat, he was constrained to alight from his horse, and laid him down at
the foot of a tree. And is this the fruit, says he then to himself, I must
reap of all my travels? There remains not a man in Thessaly of so many
Barbarians which invaded it. Have I exterminated them all, and yet have not
Ariana? Ah unprofitable valor! that suffer'st this barbarous people to triumph
over me in their very defeat; that were not able by the death of so many men
to redeem the life of Ariana alone. Miserable love, what shall I do? Shall I
unworthily survive my disaster; or can there be any hope left me by some means
yet untried? Unjust gods, why do ye not render me her? Have not ye your selves
ravished her from me? A god could assume no other shape but a Scythians, for so
barbarous an action. Alas, if a god now possesses her, what rage of jealousy;
but if a Scythian has stolen her, what horror of shame and infamy must I
endure?

When the miserable Alcydamas was employed in these woeful complaints, he saw
passing before him a Scythian that fled, and a maid running after and pursuing
him with bow and arrows. Alcydamas was afraid the Scythian might not turn
back and do her some displeasure; so as he arose up, and following after her,
cried out; Stay fair Maid, you are too valorous: do you not fear the
Barbarian? This Maid heard a voice speaking to her, and returning back again,
let Alcydamas come near her, whom she presently knew, and said to him: Ha! my
dear Alcydamas, is it you indeed? Alcydamas as soon knew the voice and face
of Ariana, and opening his arms for excess of joy, held her a long time
embraced. They continued thus some while without motion, and unable to speak;
at last quitting embracements to look upon one another, and admire their good
fortune for being so happily met; Alas! said Alcydamas, is it indeed you I
could never find when I sought you in all places, but now do I find you when
I sought you not? They were both of them so weakened with travel, and seizure
of joy, as they were forced to lie down upon the grass near an hedge, and by
and by Arcas (who was wandered from his Master) arrived the same place, and a
little after Amyntas, who rejoiced with Ariana for the happiness of seeing her
again. As soon as she could speak at liberty, Alcydamas expressed the
impatiency he had to understand what her fortune had bin, and how it came to
pass she heard them not when they called her from all parts.

To let you know, answered she, in what fort it happened, I must tell you the
accidents befell me since I was taken at Larissa. A Scythian that stole me
having found an horse in the Town, set me up and rode away with me; when he
was out of the ports, his purpose was to get to a wood, to be the more removed
from encountering his companions. Judge you in what affright I was, and how many
shrieks and plaints I uttered all in vain; but when he stayed to alight off a
horseback with me, he felt himself struck with an arrow. Presently he turned
him, and saw another Scythian that had followed him on foot, whose design
being to have me; because he could not so soon overtake him, he thought to
have stayed him by this blow shot from a far off. The first that had bin
struck drawing a shaft out of his quiver put it hastily to his bow, and with
it wounded the other also that was coming to him. Then they both threw away
their bows and arrows, and took their swords in hand to fight it out, and
see whose of the two I should remine. I was so forlorn that I knew not what
resolution to take, seeing what accident soever happened I was to remain with
one of them. I labored to get upon the horse that stood near me, to fly away
while they fought; but I was never able to compass it; so I was forced to
attend the success of this duel. They gave one another furious blows, being
both animated with the desire of having me: but the first of them being
inflamed besides with anger, and a longing to revenge himself upon the other,
seemed to me the most valiant: so he struck down at his feet him that had
assaulted him, and lying upon him did his best to take away his life, the other
being unable to defend himself but by struggling. Already had the first man
struck him twice with his sword into the throat, and I saw that he had even now
won me, when a Serpent gliding forth of a bush there hard by, came and bit the
leg of him that was uppermost, then went and put her self into the bush
again. I thought it presently an advice sent me from the gods, that if I could
defeat him that remained, I might save my self. I took courage then, and
believing I was assisted by some divine inspiration, took up one of their
bows, and putting an arrow upon it, came near them, and bending the bow with
all the force I had, I let fly the arrow, and pierced the body of him that had
gotten the victory, as the other Scythian, in dying, held him still embraced. I
was not content with this, but seeing he could not yet get loose of him he
killed, I redoubled my blow so happily with another arrow, that I pierced him
to the very heart, and at the same time they both of them expired. I was well
pleased to see my self thus delivered: but when I thought to depart, looking
up I saw four or five other Scythians approaching to me. These had bin
witnesses of my action, and (peradventure my face after so much motion having
some extraordinary color,) believed there was something divine in me, for
having killed, as they thought, two men at one blow. So they had a respect to
me, thinking I was some goddess tutelary of Greece, that took vengeance of
them for the spoil they had made in Thessaly. But yet one of them bolder than
the rest, came near, and would have touched me, I withdrew me instantly
behind the bush where I had seen the Serpent retire, and putting an arrow to
my bow, shot it into the bush to make the Serpent come forth, which presently
glided out upon them. Then they made no doubt at all but I was a goddess,
thinking the arrow I had shot had bin changed into a Serpent to devour them.
They cast themselves at my feet to adore me, and expressed to me in their
language, which I understood not, how they desired I should pardon them, and
keep the Serpent from hurting them. It happened by chance that the Serpent
went away from them at the same time, to hide her self in the hedges: they
signified by their actions, how much beholding to me they were: But when I
would make use of this opinion I had produced in them of my being a goddess,
to get away from them I found it no easy business; for they came round about
me upon their knees, and prayed me not to forsake them. On the other side, I
was rather willing to stay with them that were possessed with this error, than
fall into the hands of some others, who might not be so mistaken as they were.
So I was resolved, because I could do no other, to go along with them, and
serve my self of their company for my defense against others. I went in a
stately pace, and one while I threatened them with my bow, another while I
looked with a more pleasing face upon them, to give them hope of my assistance.
At last they brought me into a tent, and presently made it be noysed among the
Scythians, that they had found the goddess tutelary of Greece: because I saw
many of them come and open the tent borders, and to look upon me in great
admiration. I was much troubled how to demean my self, that they might not be
disabused; and fearing that having known me for one that had abused them, they
would make me suffer many indignities, I resolved with my self, since I could
not escape from them, to dye by hunger; and this resolution served to confirm
their opinion the more; for still refusing them when they offered me any thing
to eat, they believed I had no need of the ordinary sustenance of man's life,
and I was in hope to dye in this fashion, when they never perceived any thing.
So I passed away the night, and yesterday too, without taking any nourishment:
but in the evening seeing how they drank more than ordinary, I had some hope to
save my self. I provoked them my self to drink and be merry; and in the end
they were so drunk, that of seven or eight that were in the tent, there were
but two of them yet awake, though their eyes showed they would soon be laid
upon the ground with their fellows. Then I still offered them wine, which they
received with respect, being very proud, I believe, to have a goddess their
Cup Bearer; and a while after they fell backward as well as the rest. So was I
left alone in that tent with open eyes, and I resolved to save my self: but
being as much pressed with hunger, as desire to be gone, I confess I took
some pieces of bread and meat before I went out, and as I made my escape, I
could not refrain from putting to my mouth instantly what provision I had. But
I was no sooner twenty paces out of the Camp, but I heard Trumpets sounding on
all sides. I was affrighted at them, and knew not if I should go forward, or
else return into the Camp: but choosing all sorts of ill adventures, rather
than to come among the Barbarians again, I went onward, and found a cave
whereinto I had the assurance to enter, having the bow in my hand, and the
quiver on my shoulders, with an arrow in readiness to defend me, either
against men or beasts. I kept close a while within this place; but hearing so
much noise, I was curious to see what the matter was, and went up to the top of
the cave, from whence I perceived all the Scythians running away, and so
terrible a fray amongst them, as they thought themselves pursued by those very
men that fled. I rejoiced at their defeat, with a conceit I had that Alcydamas
was chief in so bold an enterprise. I spent above three hours in considering
that sight which was not unpleasing to me, and I began to wonder that all the
field over there appeared not a Scythian any more, for now the day began to
break. I was lifting up my hands to heaven for so great a victory acquired by
the Greeks, when I heard a noise, and perceived two Barbarians that sought
where to save themselves. I was afraid they would have seen me and done me
some mischief, so as I entered the cave again, and a little while after
perceived them coming into the same place with an intention to hide themselves
there. Then being unable to avoid their finding me, if they came any further, I
resolved, because I saw them, and they were not aware of me, to shoot my
arrows, and drive them away by striking a terror into them. The first struck
one of them into the throat, and laid him dead upon the earth: the other
Scythian hearing it whizze, and believing some enemies were hidden there
within, began to fly. His cowardice made me courageous, and I felt my self
carried away with a certain ardour of glory, to have the honor of killing the
last Scythian. So I set my self to pursue him with shot of arrows, and in the
chase I was so happy as to encounter you. And this, my dear Alcydamas,
continued Ariana, has been my fortune since I lost you, whereby you could
neither find me, nor I hear you when you called me in the Camp, and I doubt
not but you have had fear enough for my sake, and that your enterprise was
attempted only for my deliverance. Then they embraced again; and Amyntas
related to the fair Ariana what he had heard of the two victories of Alcydamas
in the day of the battle; the death of the King of the Scythians by his hand,
his regrets afterward for having lost her, and the strange resolution he took
with five hundred men to fight with the rest of the Barbarians Army, that he
might deliver her before they departed. When they recited their adventures
together, the Thessalians that were scattered on all sides, rallied in that
place, when they knew their Captain to be there, and they told him there was
not a Scythian left alive in all the coast, and that the few that remained had
fled, and gained the plain Sea in their shipping. These Gentlemen were so well
pleased at this glorious victory, that they could not contain their joy, for
never did so few men defeat so great a number; and Alcydamas having seen some
of them too busy in pillaging, prayed them to leave the booty, because they
were rich enough in honor: but to make it appear at their return into the
Town, how great a defeat was given, and how many men they alone had slain,
that they would load themselves with as many bows as each of them could bear,
to astonish Arimin and the people with these very spoils in their entry. Every
one agreed to his desire, and Ariana being set upon Arcas horse, who went by
her side, Alcydamas gave order they should all march three by three, bearing
the bundles of bows upon their shoulders, and he put himself into a rank in
the midst, and went beside the fair Ariana, who triumphed also over the
Scythians, with bow in her hand, and quiver in a skarfe. Alcydamas was ravished
for having found her, and to see her now in this habit of a soldier, which
added a majestuous fierceness to so many graces she had before, and augmented
the affection of Alcydamas; his valor even falling in love with Ariana's; and
in this equipage they marched all toward the Town.

In the mean time they were in a great fight within Larissa; for Arimin having
sent to know about midnight if the supply were entered; word was brought him,
that not a man appeared; but contrarily that Alcydamas was gone out with
certain troops he had drawn out of all the companies. This amazed him, not
being able to imagine what Alcydamas project was, and having let some hours
more pass without receiving any message from Alcydamas; they informed him at
length, that without doubt he was gone to save a Maid he loved, whom the
Scythians stole away when they were in the Town; because he had done nothing
all day but mourn for her, after having searched all places. Arimin could not
then persuade himself, that Alcydamas with so few men hoped to make his party
good against all the Scythians: but he believed that to redeem his Mistress
he would deliver to the Barbarians the best of his men he brought them for that
purpose, wherewith the Town being weakened, he might easily also bring the
Scythian in, to oblige them still more to render him that Maid. He sent in all
haste for Polydore who was in bed; but when he was up and gone to him, Arimin
told him that Alcydamas was a traitor and a villain, and that he should answer
for him. Polydore, after he was made acquainted with what had happened, assured
Arimin that Alcydamas was no traitor; that peradventure he might have attempted
something out of despair, because the Scythians carried away Ariana: but he
was very certain he would not lose those he took with him, much less sell
them: whereof he gave him his own life for caution. Arimin caused Polydore to
be surely guarded, and not fully satisfied for what he had told him, went to
visit all the Towne-guards; and the people were left in great fear, not having
above three or four thousand men remaining to make resistance against so many
enemies.

The Ports were therefore guarded with extraordinary care, when Alcydamas with
his troop demanded entrance. They went to advertise Arimin that he was at the
gates with those that went out with him, and required to be let in. This news
restored the spirits of Arimin, who for all that fearing a surprise, commanded
they should not suffer them to enter but one after another. And this order
served to make more glory and praise be given Alcydamas; for his soldiers
entering thus separately charged with bows, the people gave acclamations to
each of them as he came in; and when they were all within the Town, they put
themselves into the same order they marched in before, and went to the Temple
to thank the gods for so renowned a victory. All the inhabitants for joy lift
up their hands to heaven, to see so many spoils, and so few persons to bear
them away; and they were in a wonder to behold by Alcydamas side that young
Warrioresse, who seemed to have a great share in this victory, and to attract
the eyes and vows of all the world.

After Alcydamas had thanked the gods for the safety of Ariana, and the victory
they had given him, he prayed Amyntas to conduct Ariana to their lodging, and
gave Arcas charge to accompany them; but he with the rest of his troop went to
find Arimin. He besought him to excuse the transport of his affection which
had obliged him to abuse him, and go forth without his leave to deliver Ariana
out of the Scythians hands; and told him how the victory he had gained was so
great, that when he knew the truth of it, he hoped he would easily forget a
fault that had been followed by so happy a success, and freed all Greece of
so many enemies. Arimin in admiration of so wonderful an effect, though it had
cost him many a fear, was constrained to honor Alcydamas, and smother all
resentment he might have at his disobedience: and when they had a long time
discoursed after what manner the combat passed, he suffered him to retire to
his rest, and gave Polydore his enlargement.

When they were come to their lodging, Alcydamas was constrained to betake him
to his bed, and repose himself after so many combats, cares and watchings;
Ariana on the other side was received with a thousand joys by Euphrosyne and
her dear Cyllenia, who had taken no rest since her carrying away, as well for
the regret of her loss, as the danger her beloved Lepantus was in, because of
his wounds, which now began to be in better estate. Euphrosyne full of
contentment to see them again, ceased not to take care one while of her son,
another while of Ariana, and visiting them severally at their Chambers, she
obliged them to sleep, though it were then but midday.

A little while after Polydore and Amyntas hearing a rumor in the street,
looked out at the window, and spied a distressed Maid that certain soldiers
would have taken, against whom an old man and a youth defended themselves with
more courage than force. They presently went down to hinder that un worthy
violence, and labored by words to make those soldiers retire; then seeing
they would do nothing by entreaty, but continued to press the old man and the
youth, they were forced to take their parts, and defend them: two other
soldiers seeing this supply, joined them to the first: but in a short time
Polydore and Amyntas killed three of them, and the rest took their heels.
Then they desired to see safely bestowed those that had thus been pursued, and
going toward the young man, that so courageously had defended himself,
Polydore was advised that it was his dear Epicharis. He embraced her in his
arms, full of joy to see her again, and for having secured her from that
danger. Amyntas had as much cause to rejoice also, seeing she that Epicharis
defended was the fair Erycina his Mistress; and the old man was Telephus
Erycina's father. Embracements followed their admiration for so happily
encountering one another, some to be defended, others to have succored them;
and all of them having great impatiency to know how they were met together,
entered into the house, where Polydore receiving her he had so much regretted:
Fair and valiant Epicharis, says he to her, for the happiness you give me
in seeing you again, I will give you news that will be very welcome to you:
but promise me before hand that it shall be happy for me too. Epicharis said to
him; You know I am so many ways obliged to you, that you ought to be assured
of your being happy, when your happiness shall depend of none but me. I know,
replies he, of what parents you are borne. Ah Palamede, says she full of joy,
is it possible? of whom might you learn this? I know it, replies he, and
demand of you what man of the world you had rather have for your brother. I
would have, answers she without much study, such an one as Melintus, whom I
have always loved after that sort, although I could never hope for so great an
honor. Ah! worthy sister of such a brother, answered Palamede, Remember,
Epicharis, that this day I give him you for your brother; and since you could
not expect a greater happiness, grant me also the greatest I am able to hope
for, which is the honor of possessing you. Palamede, says Epicharis, mock me
not, though I have a great courage in me, I have not yet so much ambition. No,
pursues he, assure your self I speak truth, and that you are Melintus sister,
and daughter to the sage Euphrosyne, whom we have found in your absence, and
she is now here with us.

Epicharis stood silent, and durst neither contradict Palamede at that time,
nor yet believe him: but he seeing how she could not be assured at his words,
brought her where Euphrosyne was, to whom he said, he presented her Epicharis,
that daughter of hers she had heard such wonders of. Euphrosyne seeing her to
be dressed in a boy; What, says she, is this young man my daughter? Yes,
answered he, see the generous Epicharis, who under this habit has done braver
actions than the valiantest man alive could have done; and whom the gods
without doubt had made of my sex, but that they had a design to make me happy.
Euphrosyne was thus obliged to believe him, and opened her arms to receive
her. Epicharis, although full of joy, was amazed for all that, not able yet to
be confident of that good fortune, and ashamed to see her self in this estate,
before a mother that had so grave a fashion. Alcydamas and Ariana awaked at the
noise of so many gratulations, and being advertised that Epicharis was found,
they came running half dressed as they were to see her, so great desire had they
to give her the first embrace of brother and sister. They found her in
Euphrosynes arms, and then they oppressed her with so many caresses that she
was even confounded withal. On the other side Telephus embraced now Melintus,
now Euphrosyne. Erycine likewise required her turn to embrace Ariana, and
could not give Amyntas the time he desired for her entertainment: nevertheless
she acknowledged the great obligation she had to him for her deliverance. They
had at one time so many persons to make much of, and so many joys to resent,
as they knew not either how to speak to those they desired to see, or how to
quit those they had addressed to, that they might see the others. They spent
above two hours in dispatching all those acknowledgements; and at last every
one having moderated his admiration and joys, they were desirous to know by
what means they had encountered in that place. But because at the same time
different questions were propounded to all of them concerning their adventures,
it was thought fittest to know their several fortunes, that one should speak
only; and Epicharis being chosen to relate what she had done, since she lost
her self at Nicopolis, she demanded silence, and when every one was set, began
to speak in this manner:

History of Epicharis.
WHen I shall have acquainted you with all the fortunes I have run my self
since I was separate from you, and with all those too I have caused that estate
run which upon earth is confessed highest and the most redoubted, you will admire
certainly, that a Maid in so short a space could be capable to remove so
puissant obstacles, and enterprise to revenge the world of the tyrant that
oppresses it, by giving another head to the Empire: but certain it is that
there is no power safe, if there be found a person that will abandon his own
life.

After I had escaped Trebatius prisons, by the hardy enterprise of Palamede, I
attended him some while at the place we agreed to meet in: but seeing that he
came not, I believed he had lost his way by reason of the darkness, and after
having thrown away the casque and coat armor of the dead soldiers I had
taken to go out in, and which I wore in pain for the weight of them, I went
straight to the lodging where we lay together, but there I found you not, nor
could hear any news of you. From thence I went to the haven not knowing what
should become of me, and believing you had saved your selves by some means or
other, I resolved also to return no more to the City, for fear of falling
again into the hands of Trebatius and Dicearchus. By good fortune I found a
little Vessel that was ready to set sail, whereinto I went aboard, never
enquiring for what place it was bound, for I thought of nothing then but flying
from our enemies. I cannot tell you for what occasion this ship came into
Epire, because I had very little conversation with those that were in her, for
not discovering my self: but they were going to join with the Fleet of the
Emperors Galleys which ordinarily rides by the promontory of Misena in Italy.
It was near upon two days that I had not slept, so as when we were arrived, I
was constrained to stay in the ship still, for sleep assailed me with too much
violence to be resisted, and I laid me down in a place out of the way.

I had not quitted my habit of a man since I was taken, and some indiscreet
fellow finding me, as I was fast asleep, was very earnest in considering me,
and seeing a swelling in my clothes about the bosom, uncovered my neck when I
never felt him. After he knew what I was, he went to advertise his companions,
who showed themselves as insolent as he, and presently they waked me without
any respect, to carry me to him that commanded them. I was in a great wonder at
my awaking to see my self in these men's hands, with my bosom open; I demanded
of them what they would do with me, and they said, they would know for what
design I so disguised my self. So I came before their Captain, whose name
was Proculus, and I was more angry at their insolent uncovering of my bosom to
let him see what I was, than afraid of being punished. I was so fortunate that
Proculus was moved with compassion, and forbade those men to wrong me: then
making as if he would examine me apart, he commanded them to be gone. When they
were out of his gally, he led me into a Chamber, and asked me for what cause I
went in that habit.

I do not know what it was that pleased him in me, but he showed a liking to
me that was too suddenly bred to be founded upon any good design: therefore to
take from him the hope he seemed to conceive, of obtaining something of me
against my honor, I resolved to express a great courage, and I spoke thus to
him: I well know, this disguisement is held a crime, because there have been
of my sex that under this habit have concealed their infamy, and made use
thereof, to continue with more liberty the actions that were unworthy of them:
but it ought to be esteemed commendable when one serves her self of it for an
effect quite contrary, as I that have been constrained to take it for the
conservation of my honor, and escaping the hands of those that would have
spoiled me of it; and if this mean had failed me, I was resolved to lose my
life rather. This discourse hindered him from making appear to me then any
unlawful desire, and he only entreated me to tell him who they were that
would have offered me displeasure. I could not in a moment invent a
continuation of falsities, with many names and circumstances, so as having
nothing more present in my mind than Trebatius, and the resentment of the
injuries I had received, I told him, how being at Nicopolis, I fell by
misfortune into the hands of Trebatius, Tribune of the Emperors guards, who
from Nero sought to put to death certain persons with whom I was: that
Trebatius after he had a long time kept me in irons, had threatened me with
death, if I declared not to him where they were he sought; but in the end
seeing so great resolution in me, he had converted his rage into a dishonest
affection, which I now feared more than the purpose he had before to have me
dye; and having found means to escape his hands by this disguise, I had been
in no place since where I could accommodate my self with other clothes.
Proculus willing to oblige me, and being himself not satisfied with Nero,
says to me; O gods! how long will this Tyrant find executioners for all his
massacres? See how he is forced to serve himself of wicked men to exterminate
all the world. Offices are now the reward of crimes, and none is advanced to
honor, but according to the greatness of the villainies he has committed, or
of those he is capable to commit. A few days since we had for General of
these Galleys one Anicetus, who never had come to this charge, but for killing
the mother of Nero. This infamous Emperor willing afterward to rid himself
of his wife Octavia that was of the Caesar's race, to marry Sabina, drew that
murderer from hence, for to go before the Senate, and name himself falsely
the adulterer of the chaste Princess. And during the reign of so abominable a
monster, can it be hoped that virtuous men should attain any honor? I have a
long time served in the charge I have here over some vessels, and was never yet
able to obtain any favor for my services, but that they still suffer me to
serve. Comfort your self, fair Maid, goes he on, you resent not alone the
cruelties of this tyranny; and be assured that if you have suffered some
torment, there be an infinite number of persons that groan, and expect but a
man that has the courage to take upon him to be their Chief, and deliver the
world of so many miseries.

I was very well pleased, proceeds Epicharis, to hear him speak after that
fashion: for I had no less resentment than he against Nero, for the rage he
expressed against Melintus and Palamede; and considering with my self how they
would never be in safety as long as so wicked an Emperor lived; I would
encourage him further, to cause him to attempt something, and deliver us of so
puissant an enemy. I told him, that if there wanted but a person to awaken the
rest, I offered my self to go into Rome, and make a powerful conspiracy
against Nero, and that I would willingly sacrifice my own life for the safety
of all the world. Courage, said he to me, generous Maid, begin but so fair a
design, and be assured I shall second you well enough. If the Emperor comes
hither shortly, as he oftentimes takes his pleasure upon the Sea, I will employ
no other man but my self, for the worlds deliverance: If you will go to Rome,
endeavor to draw him hither by the means of some you may practice for the
purpose, and then you shall see, that I can execute what I have attempted. We
had besides some other such like discourse together, whereby we emboldned one
another in the enterprise. I took a resolution to be gone the very next day to
Rome, that I might draw into our conjuration the men that were of most power
there; not doubting but there were many of them full of courage, who desired
nothing so much as Nero's death, but durst not trust another with so hardy a
design, and who would not fail to join their forces together, if they might
but communicate their grievances.

Proculus, who at the beginning had not dared to signify the lewd desire he
had to me, because I had spoken with such a boldness to him, thought then,
that binding my self to him by this confidence in a secret of that importance,
he might have some greater familiarity with me, and said to me; Fair Maid,
those that desire to run a hazard together, have ordinarily a friendship one to
another, whether there be in them a sympathy that carries them to like
designs, or by reason of the mutual assistance they are to give each other,
to make an enterprise successful. I pray you, let us join in affection, to
the end that if our project happily takes effect, we may enjoy together the
repose we shall obtain for all the world. I answered him, that I refused not
to bind my self to him in a friendship that were necessary for those that had
the same design; and that I promised him all kinds of fidelity and succors.
Add hereunto, said he, that after we shall have executed our desire, you will
promise to live with me, and we shall never be separate. I returned, that I
could not as yet determine of what I was to do, after delivering the world of
that tyrant, and entreated him to leave me at my liberty until that time. Then
he expressed much passion, and urged me with many words to show a little more
affection toward him than so; but I would give him no other assurance: yet I
spoke to him in a fashion that deprived him not of all hope, for fear of
angring him, or making him alter his resolution.

The next day I dressed me in woman's clothes, not willing to go to Rome
otherwise, for fear of being known in a man's habit by those I had deceived in
the prison, and to avoid a second apprehension. Proculus would have given me
money, but because I had still about me that I took to gain the Porter of
Nicopolis, I thanked him, and taking my leave, put my self in the company of
some that were going to Rome. We arrived there in a small time, and I went to
lodge at Maximus his, who received me with many testimonies of affection, and
told me he had great obligations to Melintus for the remembrance he kept of
him; and about evening he showed me the rich presents he had sent him, which he
said he received only to keep them as dear pledges of his friendship. I
believed that he being loved of the powerfullest of Rome, I might by his means
enter into their acquaintance; and when we were alone, I began to tell him how
many ways Nero had persecuted us. At first he only pitied our case,
afterward by little and little I so wrought with him, that he discovered
himself, and confessed to me, the world would be much at ease to be delivered
of so cruel a Prince. Then I feined not to tell him my design, and that I
should want no courage for an enterprise so profitable to all the earth. He
fortified me as well as he could in that resolution, and told me he would give
me access to persons, by whose intermission he believed my desire might
succeed: and because at the same time it was considerable to know who should be
successor to the Empire, he said he knew none more fit for it than Piso, both
for Nobility and all other qualities requisite, and how that choice would be
approved of the Senate, of the people, and of the legions. I told him all the
discourse I had with Proculus, and that it should not be laid to his charge,
that Nero received not punishment due to his crimes, if he might be drawn
toward Misena. Maximus told me, that indeed Nero went often toward Baiae and
Puteoli, which were in those quarters, to delight himself upon the Sea, and
many times to Piso's house at Baiae, and much opportunity might there be found
to kill him: but that he knew Proeulus, and that he was not a man to be
trusted, for being both a great talker, and of a turbulent and volaticke spirit.

The day after he brought me to the speech of two or three Senators, and of
some Roman Knights, who received me as if I had been sent from heaven, to
assemble what remained of virtuous and courageous men, and by a generous
violence to free the world of tyranny. I was well pleased to see so happy a
beginning: but I encountered Proculus in the City, who had followed me, and
sought me all about, being no longer able to live without me, as he said. After
having expressed much joy to see me, he asked me if I had done any thing in
the affair we were plotting together: I was very much troubled how I should
carry my self to this man, that I might neither discontent him, nor yet give
him part in my secret for following the advice of Maximus. I resolved in the
end to tell him I had quitted the design we had taken together, and that the
difficulties had deterred me. He would have re-assur'd me to the pursuit of
the enterprise; but I told him I would think no more of it. After some other
discourse, he obliged me to tell him where I lodged; and afterward he came
very often to visit me at Maximus his: but I ever made him be answered that I
was not there, to avoid any further engaging my self with him.

In the mean time, within three or four days I had drawn to my party more
than twenty persons of authority: and at last they brought me to Piso, who
after many kindnesses, prayed me to have a good courage, and promised me great
rewards when he came to the Empire.

Piso was a friend to Seneca and Lucan: for Seneca he durst not speak of this
conspiracy to him, redoubting his too severe wisdom: but having gained Lucan,
Seneca's Nephew, he prayed him to mention it to his uncle for to sound him;
that if he disapproved the design, he might at least be retained from
revealing it by the consideration of his Nephew.

I met by chance at Lucan's, when Seneca came to see him: for I went ordinarily
to his house, because Attila his mother was of the conjuration, and for the
honor of my sex I was well content to be often with her, that I might not seem
a sole practitioner of men. Lucan being desirous I should make report unto Piso
in what manner he had spoken to Seneca, shut me up in a Cabinet where I could
hear what they said; and I was so extremely delighted at this encounter, for
having an occasion to hear the discourse of that great Philosopher, whose
virtue and learning were of so high a reputation. When they were alone in the
Chamber, they spoke at first of diverse indifferent things; and Lucan at length
putting him upon the discourse of affairs, and of the life of Nero; Nephew,
said he, I can inform you of nothing. Since the Emperor, as you know, would
not suffer me to retire into the Country, I have found means to enjoy
solitude even in Rome it self, and not daring to remove my self from
affairs, I have removed them from me, not suffering them to approach me any
more.

Lucan answered him, Take heed Nero imagines not a disliking you have to his
actions, in that you avoid to be a witness of them; and if he takes this
opinion once, he that feared not to put his mother, his brother, and his wife
to death, will never be afraid to have his Preceptor dye. Ah! my nephew,
replied Seneca, do you believe I can be troubled with this fear? to what end
served my continual study of Philosophy, if it learned me not to dye? I give
not up my self to wisdom for acquiring repose, but I seek repose, to acquire
wisdom. I had much rather he should make me dye, than oblige me to participate
his crimes. If he takes me out of the world, I shall receive death as a
benefit, in stead of the retreat I desired; and he shall give me, without
thinking, the same thing he refused me. These be speeches, returned Lucan,
worthy of your self: but should you not express more virtue yet to succor
the dying Commonwealth, than not to fear dying your self? If she reaches out
her arms to be sustained by you, when she is ready to fall, will you refuse to
lend her your hand? and shall your Philosophy warrant you from the reproaches
of having abandoned her? If this succors, replied Seneca, might be given
without the death of him I have brought up, and who holds the place of a son
with me, I call the gods to witness, I would willingly employ this despicable
life of mine, for the universal safety: but what virtue is there so severe, to
oblige me to kill my Nurse-childe and benefactor? and what wisdom teaches
ingratitude and parricide? Truly I excuse in you this affection for the
Re-publike. I protest if I were not Seneca I should be the first man to give
Nero his death. So many crimes, and so much bloodshed have effaced that sacred
Majesty which the gods imprint upon the front of Princes; and this abominable
man affecting the titles of Player and Harper, has of himself abandoned those
other of Emperor, and Master of the Universe. I believe there will never be
another Prince in the world besides this, for whom it may be lawful to break
the oath of Allegiance: We ought to reverence those we obey, because we are to
believe they are given us from heaven: But that Prince certainly is not given
of the gods, who delights himself in the filthiness of the most horrid crimes.

Lucan having let Seneca speak some time, was very glad that he approved the
riddance of a Tyrant; and feined no longer to discover to him the conspiracy:
nevertheless he found it not strange that he refused to lend his hand to the
plot. Seneca wondered much to learn that so many persons had been practiced in
so short a space, and highly commended the enterprise. He advertised his Nephew
that they were to make all the haste they could, for fear so many persons
participating of the secret, there were not some one amongst them, whose
courage might slacken. When Lucan had named him the greater part of the
conspirators, he found that they had happily addressed themselves to all those
that were capable of keeping a secret, and wanted no courage for the
performance of it: yet he judged of the Senator Scevinus what happened
afterward, for he said, he was a man that had spirit enough, but that a small
occasion would trouble him; and that having so important a design in his head,
he feared lest he might discover by his actions, what his tongue would keep
close enough. In the end Seneca going his way, advised his Nephew to go find
out Fenius Rufus, one of the Captains of the Emperors guards, and that he
without doubt would join in the combination, because of the jealousy he had
against Tigellinus his companion, who had all the credit about Nero; that he it
was that had the best means to execute what they desired, and would not fail
to have at his disposition the Tribunes of the guards, that sought nothing so
much as change.

When Seneca was retired, I came out of the Closet where I was; and Lucan gave
me charge to go tell Piso what I had heard, and he told me he was going to see
Rufus, whom he found disposed just as Seneca had described him. When the
conspirators knew that one of the Captains of the guards was of the party,
they were much the more encouraged by it, especially when he came amongst them;
and now they made no more doubt of perfecting the enterprise. All the question
was to know in what place Nero might be set upon. One day being at Lucan's, I
had a long conference with Rufus, wherein he declared more willingness than I
desired: and the second time he saw me there, he drew me from besides Attila,
whom I was speaking to; and having taken me apart as if he would discourse upon
the subject of our plot, he says to me; I cannot but wonder, gentile
Epicharis, that with so much youth and beauty, you can have so grear a courage;
and when I look upon you, me thinks I see the goddess that takes protection
of Rome, and by her presence encourages us to defeat the Tyrant. I answered
him, there was no beauty in me, and less Divinity, but that a little courage I
had, and took great pleasure to lend my resentments and indevours to a benefit
so necessary for the world. Fair Epicharis, replies he, you oblige the whole
earth by this design, but I will take part in the obligation above all others,
if you please to add to that general affection you have for all the world, a
particular friendship for me. I returned thus; That I was not ignorant in what
degree I ought to honor him, and how much every one was beholding to him for
being willing to further us with his assistance; that in this respect I should
think my self happy to do him service. Leave, says he, these words of
honor, respect, and duty, and let us treat, I pray you, with more familiarity:
I confess to you that your grace charms me, and that your actions ravish
me; and I believe this affection you are breeding, will bring me trouble
enough, if you help me not. If you have the pity to consider of easing the
whole world, refuse not me alone a comfort, since you may with far less
danger effect it. Rufus, said I to him, I understand not what you mean by
affection, pain, and comfort: they are words I am not accustomed to, and I
verily think it a crime to hearken to them. Let us not, I pray you, make our
selves unworthy of the favor is presented us by the gods, or think they will
be served of vicious persons in so glorious a work as the safety of all men.
What authority could we pretend to take away disorder if there were
irregularity in our selves? and what grace should we have in going about to
punish the crimes of others, if we rendered our selves in like manner criminal?
By this discourse I somewhat moderated his desires; yet he never left
importuning me still; and afterward he often sent to entreat me to come to his
house, but I would never go, knowing he had a design to speak of something
else to me, beside the conspiracy against Nero, and to tell you the truth, I
believe he had conspired against my self.

All things were then prepared, and it was resolved that one of the
Conspirators should cast himself at Nero's feet as it were to ask some favor
of him, and then embracing his knees, should give him a fall; and at the same
time Rufus with some Tribunes and Centurions of the guard, and the rest of the
Conspiracy should fall upon him; Scevinus offered to give the first blow, and
to this purpose he wore a poniard which he had taken out of a Temple. I
ordinarily retired my self at Maximus his; and one evening I was in a great
amaze to see many soldiers enter the house, and lay hold of me to be carried
before Nero. I believed then the conspiracy was all discovered, and resolved to
dye: but when I was brought thither, I found it was nothing but this, that
Proculus having a despite that I would see him no more, had changed his
affection into hatred, and declared to the Emperor, how I had told him that
there was a powerful conspiracy against his life. They presented me to him,
and when I had heard what he denounced, I denied that I ever communicated any
conjuration to him; not willing so much as to tell him that he had first
spoken of it to me, for fear it should have been demanded why I had not given
advice of it sooner, and it might be suspected that I had since had
intelligence with some others. Rufus was present by Nero's side, and was in
fear both for himself and me, thinking out of weakness I would have
discovered the secret: but I asked Proculus whereupon he imagined I had
mentioned any conspiracy to him, and bade him name me but a man that were privy
to the design, out of my pretended relation. He was not able then to name any
body, and they began to mock him that he grounded his accusation no better.
Rufus was well satisfied at my constancy; and it increased the affection he had
to me: but although I had not been convinced, they were of opinion to retain
me prisoner; for they considered that a thing not well averred might not be
altogether false for all that.

Not long after came to pass what Seneca had foretold; for this Scevinus
having his mind possessed with the design of Nero's death, troubled himself
with the foresight of all he had to do before dying, in case the conspiracy
were detected. So impertinent was he as to make feasts for his friends a^ if he
were to take leave of them; to make his will, to distribute his goods to his
servants; to prepare binding clothes for his wounds, and remedies to stay the
blood, to serve him, if he should chance to be hurt in the execution: besides,
he wore this poniard he took out of a Temple, and could not refrain giving
out, that it was for some great design: but the thing that ruined us was, that
this ill advised man gave that same poynard to one of his freed men called
Milichus, to sharpen the point of it and make it very keen.

Milichus having considered all his Masters actions of late, conceived he had
some plot against the life of the Prince, and expecting great recompenses, went
to advertise Nero of it. Scevinus was presently taken, who denied what his
freed man had said, and reasonably well satisfied all they demanded of him
touching those preparatives: but when Milichus said, how Scevinus the day
before had been long in conference with Natalis the intimate friend of Piso's,
and one of the conspirators, Natalis was apprehended, and they were examined
apart upon the discourse they had together in that conference. Their answers
were different; and then they would have had them to the torture: but they
could not so much as endure the sight of it, and confessed all they knew of the
conjuration, and named the greater part of the accomplices. Lucan was taken
instantly, and this man that made a show of so much constancy, was so
treacherous, and so unworthy, as he accused his own mother. Piso and the other
having bin arrested, detected their trustiest friends; and about that time they
remembered I was in prison for the same suspicion, and they were in hope that
having a delicate body, I would never be able to suffer torments, but discover
still many others.

I was brought before Nero, and commanded to name the rest of the conspiracy
to him. I would still deny that I had any acquaintance with it; but at last
when I perceived the secret was discovered, and Nero himself having inquired
of me, what it was that moved me to attempt the taking away his life. Because,
said I to him with a confident look and voice, thou art a parricide,
incestuous, and an infamous Stage Player; because thou will exterminate virtue
from the earth: and the world can never be too soon delivered of thy execrable
cruelties. He blushed to hear me speak on that fashion; peradventure because
he had never heard so free a language before: being indeed accustomed to commit
crimes, but not to be reproach't for them. He commanded they should make me
suffer all sorts of punishment, to get the truth out of my mouth; but as I went
out of his presence I bade him be assured that my tongue should express as
much courage in saying nothing, as my arm had shown in striking him.

It chanced that Rufus was not detected by any of those that were taken; and to
testify that he was none of the accomplices, he interposed himself strongly in
the Emperors service to search and examine the conspirators, and prevent the
peril of his life. When he saw I was destined to torments, he took upon him
the charge of fetching the truth out of me, himself, and commanded his
Soldiers to carry me into a private place, where he presently made ready the
torture; and some parts of my body were uncovered. Rufus had there only those
he commanded, and the greater part of them were of our conspiracy:
nevertheless seeing himself reduced, either to put me cruelly to death, or
else to run a danger of his own life by endeavoring to save me, he knew not
what to resolve on. He betook himself to a corner of the prison, where
turning his face from me, and leaning his forehead against the wall, he wept,
he tore his hair, and rent his clothes. In the mean while his Soldiers
attended his commands to torment me; till at length a Tribune bolder than the
rest, that began to have pity of me, went to ask him if he desired I should
be saved; and that there was not a man of them who desired it not as well as
himself. But, answered Rufus, we are undone if the Emperor knows it. Be
confident in us, replied the Tribune: we are to make the world believe she died
in the torments, as it was very likely she had resolved to do; and then we
will bring her to your house, where you may dispose of her as you please. Rufus
let himself be persuaded, and the Soldiers expressing much joy, helped me on
with my clothes again, and about evening led me away secietly to Rufus
lodging.

From that time I fell from one misery into another; for Rufus having me in his
hands, renewed his evil desires, in the very midst of the unquietness he
might have for fear of being accused by the conspirators; and after he had
labored in vain to vanquish me by sweetness, he began to reproach me with
the life he had conserved, and to threaten that he would return me to the
torture he had delivered me from. I let him see that I was as well invincible
to menaces, as to gentler words, yet I believe he would have proceeded unto
violence, but for the succors heaven sent me.

Rufus was ordinarily never from the Emperor, and abusing the good fortune
that they had not accused him, showed himself the more cruellin tormenting the
conspirators, to the end he might not at all be suspected. In the end those he
ordained punishments to, being no longer able to endure that one of the
accomplices should be the cruellest Inquisitor, resolved to accuse him. Scevinus
being examined by him in presence of the Emperor, and threatened with greater
torments if he declared not the truth, said to him: There is not a man knows
more of it than thy self. Rufus stood confounded, and knew not if he should
answer, or hold his peace; his fear soon discovered him, and at the same time
the others that were interrogated with Scevinus convinced him: the Emperor
commanded he should be bound, and a while after put him to death. As for me, I
found means to escape out of his house, whilst his wife, his children, and
his servants were all in desolation and disorder. I went to Maximus his, who by
good fortune had not bin accused by any of the conspiracy, and he was very
joyful to see me, for it was noysed, and certainly believed in the City that I
was dead, after having testified an admirable constancy in suffering the rack
two days together, without declaring any thing, and that I had strangled my
self. But not willing to stay at Rome any longer, my honor having run so many
fortunes, since I had bin known for a Maid, I re-assum'd the habit of a man to
save myself in. I took leave of Maximus who gave me a little money, and an
horse, to go and embarque me in some Port or other, and return into Sicily,
where I hoped to hear news of Ariana. I made a fortunate voyage, and arriving
at Syracuse, I found no body at Dicearchus house that could tell me any news
of you: but going to Telephus his, he was much astonished, with Erycine, to see
me in that estate; and I learned of Telephus that the ship that carried us into
Epire was newly arrived, and how you had sent it back again, being desirous
to go by land as far as the Egean Sea, and from thence to pass into Asia:
and withal to advertise Telephus, and those that had charge of the affairs of
Dicearchus, Palamede, and Ariana, to send you what money they were able, for
the need you had of it, being purposed to remain in Asia. Telephus told me he
went to gather together what he was able to bring you as well out of Melintus
his, as his own estate, and that he was resolved to go find you out himself
with Erycine, who would not abandon him. Very glad was I at so fit an
encounter, to come away to you, and two days after we departed with some of
Dicearchus servants, that brought him many commodities.

The wind was so favorable that we soon arrived in Epire, and having landed
all our goods, we hired a wagon whereinto we loaded them, and went our selves
on horseback, with a purpose to go the same way you had taken, according to
the advice you gave us. We were resolved not to forsake the wagon, for the
riches it was charged with, so as we thus passed through the Epire, the mount
Pindus, and all Thessaly, going still about it, with Telephus and Dicearchus
men, without ever making an ill encounter, but only this day, when we met with
certain insolent soldiers who were pleased at Erycina's beauty, and followed
us into this City, never ceasing to come about her, to touch her, and affront
us with many injurious speeches. We had much ado Telephus and I to make
opposition to them, yet we did it with gentleness, for fear their impudence
should have proceeded further; and thus we came into the City where our wagon
having bin stayed at the gate to be visited, by reason of the common practice
during the wars, as I believe; we were constrained to leave our men to guard it,
and come our selves away to put Erycine in safety. Those soldiers seeing we
were now but three, followed us still, and here hard by seeing themselves
before their lodgings, and backed with the presence of their companions, they
would have forced Erycine to go in with them, and shamelesly made her come
down off her horse. Instantly we allighted, Telephus and I, to hinder this
violence, and had our swords in our hands: but to abridge the recite of what
you know as well as we, Palamede and Amyntas gave us a timely assistance,
without whom we could not have long time resisted. And now you have all that
happened to me since I was separate from you: for the present, it will not be
amiss to send some body to have in our men and baggage; and afterward we will
advise together in what place the gods will afford us a retreat after so many
strange fortunes: for there is no doubt, but as long as Nero lives we are to
have a care that the names of Melintus, Palamede, and Epicharis come no more to
his ears.

Epicharis ended thus, and they all wondered at her, that she should conceive so
hardy an enterprise, only for the safety of Melintus and Palamede; and that in
so short a time she had so greatly endangered the most redoubtable power upon
earth. They sent Arcas who was very well known of those that guarded the
Ports, to make Telephus people enter, with those of Dicearchus, that knew
nothing yet of the death of their Master. After they were come, and all of them
provided of goods and servants, advertisement being given to those that were
newly arrived of Melintus his taking on him the name of Alcydamas, and
Palamedes that other of Polydore; they resolved to depart all together out of
Thessaly, and to go live in some place within Asia, so to order themselves
that no more news should be heard of them at Rome.

ARIANA. The eighth Book.
BUt Pisistratus who had been hindered from going to Maxentius, by reason of a
great wound received of Palamede one night, as soon as he was cured,
understood that this Praetor was gone with all the men of war he had toward
Larissa. He enquired afterward at the house where Melintus and Ariana had
lodged in Nicopolis, what was become of them, and knew they had taken the way
of Thessaly. He resolved with himself to follow them, and go give advice to
Maxentius in Larissa, that search might be made after Melintus and Palamede, to
put them to death. He arrived there just at the time that Melintus, who called
himself Alcydamas, returned laden with so many spoils, and brought back
Ariana. As he stayed a while to have that little triumph pass, he soon knew
Melintus, and Ariana, who went besides him. He heard all was said of them, and
learned that Melintus under the name of Alcydamas, had done great exploits the
day of the battle, and afterward utterly defeated the Scythians Camp with
five hundred men only. The testimonies of the peoples joy for his return
augmented the envy and rage of Pisistratus, who having inquired particularly in
what sort all had passed, came to know that this Alcydamas without any
consideration of the oath was taken by the Captains, not to fight; or regard
to the punishment was to follow the contempt of his General, had gone out by
night to assault the enemies that carried away Ariana, and had been so valiant
and happy as to defeat all that remained of the Scythians within Thessaly.
Pisisratus, in stead of admiring the fair effect of so brave a courage,
resolved in his mind to make that valor ruinous to him that possessed it: and
when evening came, he went to Arimin, and represented to him what fault he
committed, to let the crime of this Alcydamas go unpunished; of what
consequence it was to suffer the laws of the Roman Discipline to be violated,
which until then was not maintained but by severity: that he would remember
also, how he made himself forsworn, never thinking to have a law of the
Scythians observed, whereto he had bound himself by oath. But that above all
these things he declared to him, how he that called himself Alcydamas, was
that Melintus destined to death by the Emperor, that had been proclaimed every
where enemy to Caesar and the people of Rome; that he would make Nero become
such an enemy to him, as would never pardon him, when he knew that Melintus had
been in his power, and not put to death; and that he drew upon himself the
same punishment he saved Melintus from: as for him, that he was resolved to
advertise the Prince of it, in satisfaction of the allegiance he ought him; and
that Arimin should not think it strange if he gave advice of Melintus his
being in his hands, who to the crime of high treason had added that other of
violating the laws of War. Arimin troubled at these words, and entering into
the due apprehensions of the fortune he ran, not being able to think his own
life safe, as long as Melintus lived, gave over all considerations of the
friendship he bare him; and (albeit with regret to see himself forced to
destroy such a virtue,) resolved to put him to death: but because he was so
valiant, and so beloved in Larissa, he judged that he was to proceed in the
design with a great prudence and deliberation. He sent for all the Captains,
of whom again he took the oath of fidelity, and advertised them that
Alcydamas was that Melintus, enemy of Nero and the people of Rome; that if they
let him escape, their own death would be inevitable. After having thus
persuaded them, and they had promised to prefer the fidelity they ought to
Nero, to the conservation of Melintus, he sent troops that very morning to
seize upon his lodging; one of the Captains entered in with his soldiers, and
finding him in bed, commanded him from Arimin to dress himself and follow
him. That command surpised him, not knowing what change had happened since the
day before, and having put on his clothes, without any amazement he demanded
whither he was to go. This Captain executed the command much against his
will, for the esteem he had of his great courage, and was ashamed thus to
surprise without Arms, him that in the wars would not alone have feared the
encounter of a thousand enemies; so as by the way as he led him to the place
appointed for his prison, he told him, that one Pisistratus was come to
declare to Arimin, that his name was Melintus, and that he was the Emperor's
enemy, and condemned to dye; that he had withal threatened him, to give Nero
advice of his disobedience if he let him escape. Melintus advertised from
whence his misery came upon him, was resolved for death, seeing it was now
unavoydable; and he was carefully shut up, for fear some violence might be
offered on their part that were affectionate to him. In the mean time was a
guard also set to keep within their house Palamede, Amyntas, Lepantus, and all
those that were able to make any attempt for his deliverance, who knew not how
this great alteration should come to pass, and there was nothing but
astonishment and crying in that house. The fair Ariana, Euphrosyne, Cyllenia,
and Epicharis mingled their tears together, and the less they knew whence
their grief proceeded, the more did they resent it. The Gentlemen of Thessaly
that loved Melintus dearly, were not wanting to him in this occasion, but
deputed some to go and obtain his safety of Arimin. Those of Larissa too
finding themselves redeuable to him for all they had in the world, went and
threw them down upon their knees before the Governor to demand his grace for
him, but nothing was capable to make him relent, so fearful was he of Nero;
and that if he pardoned, they would never pardon him. The people desired but to
resist this injustice, yet they were retained by the soldiers they saw in
Arms on all sides, and at last the life of Melintus was brought to that pass,
that there was no deliberation now but what kind of punishment he should
suffer.

Arimin to make it appear he was no violater of oaths, would needs have that
law of the Scythians executed, which he had sworn to observe, if any offense
were committed against the prohibition made concerning fighting; although it
seemed very inhumane to him, that a living man's heart should be torn out of
his bowels, to have his head cut off afterward. Nevertheless he would at once
both satisfy his own oath and Nero's desire, knowing how great a pleasure he
should do him, to bring him news that his enemy had been punished after so
strange a manner, for the love he had to new inventions of cruelty.

He sent in all haste for the Priest of Larissa who served at the goddess
Thetis Temple, telling him how by oath he was engaged to see executed a law of
the Scythians, that ordained for the punishment of every man that fought
against order given to the contrary, although he had returned with victory,
that the criminal having been carried in triumph through the City, should be
brought upon a scaffold, where the Priest was to open his stomach, and take
out the heart to be burnt with honor, but his head was to be cut off by the
hangman. The Priest asked him what reason there was for that barbarous law; he
answered him, that the Scythians conceived, how the heart that was the seat of
courage ought to be honored, and the head that had failed in government and
obedience to be punished. This Priest of Thetis refused the execution, and said
he should think himself polluted by shedding of humane blood, and incapable
of ever sacrificing to the gods again, who loved not the murder of men, but
were content with the ordinary sacrifices of beasts: especially that effusion
of humane blood was forbidden them by a particular Oracle of Thetis, which he
could by no means disobey. Arimin when he could not dispose him to serve that
execution, sent him away, and called for the old sacrificer of the Scythians
who had taught the Law; when he was brought before him, he commanded him to
perform the service, since he better knew in what fashion it was to be
observed. This good man would have excused himself, and said he knew not the
law but by recite, had never seen it practiced, and should think himself
very unfortunate to lend his hands to so cruel a punishment: but Arimin
threatened him with death if he contradicted him any longer. So this old man was
constrained to put on his habits of high Priest, and prepare himself for that
miserable ceremony. He taught with much regret what was to be done, and
presently they sent to gather together all the arrows they could get of the
Scythians last defeat; then they ordained they should be distributed to all the
Thessalians that had assisted Melintus, every man to carry his load of them at
the triumph, and afterward to put them on a heap, wherein the victorious
heart was to be burned.

Melintus who was advertised of all that passed by him that had him in keeping,
seeing that he was to dye, and knowing that Pisistratus alone was cause of his
death merely out of malice, sent word to Arimin that he desired but two
favors at his hands: the first, that he might fight with Pisistratus before he
dyed, and punish him for his wickedness; and the second, that Ariana might
accompany him in the Chariot going in triumph, and that he might have the
consolation to hold her by the hand during the punishment, for to dye between
her arms. Arimin who was not cruel, nor hated Melintus, granted him these two
requests, provided that Pisistratus consented to the first; and he believed
Melintus had found out this invention to let himself be killed in the combat
rather than endure the shame and cruelty of the punishment; and because
Pisistratus might be in fear of Melintus, as a man whose valor was of that
esteem, he sent for him, and told him, that Melintus his design was to dye,
his arms in his hand, rather than by punishment: that for this occasion he had
said, that Pisistratus was a traitor and a base fellow, of purpose to provoke
him to fight with him: that he might therefore acquire much honor with little
danger, by taking away the life of so valiant a man, that had no other design
but to lose it. Pisistratus, who wanted no courage, was easily persuaded by
Arimin, finding himself flattered also with the hope of putting his enemy to
death by his own hand, and answered him, that he accepted the Combat to make
it appear he was neither traitor nor base fellow; the only grief he felt in
this case, was to fight with a man condemned.

All that day passed on in these contestations, and in preparations for the
cruel ceremony. Palamede was distracted with fury to be shut up, and not able
to know what they did with his friend. All was full of sorrow in that house,
and Ariana never ceased pouring forth tears for the fear she had of what
might befall her dear Melintus. But the day after when they came for her to
go to him, and she knew what passed, though they indevour'd to put a
resolution into her, and persuaded her to a constant support of that
misfortune, she swooned at the very first hearing of so horrible a punishment.
Nevertheless after she was a little come to her self again, they carried her
into the prison, and set her beside Melintus, who astonished all the world by
his admirable constancy, and seeing her without color and voice, and so
transported with grief, addressed his speech to her thus:

Fair and dear Ariana, you that have taken part in all the accidents of my
life, refuse me not at this last the assistance I desire of you. Since I have
bin so fortunate as to deliver you from the Barbarians, and return you safe,
suffer me some time to enjoy the happiness of seeing you, and assist me also,
now death is going to deliver me from the Barbarians, that have ordained it
me. Courage, Ariana, let the world see, there never was so perfect a
friendship as ours: and that it has been as constant in well suffering, as in
well loving. Ariana, have a care you deface not by these tears the glory of
your excellent courage. Shall not she that has vanquished the Scythians,
overcome sorrow, which is not made strong in us but by our weakness? Dear
Ariana, if we have followed all our life the laws of wisdom, let us enforce
our virtue in this last action; and in stead of giving pity, give admiration
to the whole world. Shake not, I pray you, the force of my resolution by the
assaults of your grief; and since the greatness of your merits has advanced
my courage, ruin not you your own work, but find in your self the same
virtue which you have produced in me. Let us go, my dear Ariana, I demand no
other favor of you till my death, but that I may hold this fair hand you have
given me, and after my soul is departed this body, that you would express
love enough to be able to survive me.

Never had Melintus Eloquence an effect so contrary to his desire, for the more
reasons he alleged to persuade her unto Constancy, the more grief had Ariana
to see so great a virtue so cruelly outraged. She could make him no other
return but deep sighs and tears, being impossible for her to have better
answered that she could not be comforted, than by letting it appear that she
could not answer.

When Melintus knew that all things were prepared, he called for his fair
Arms that had served him the day of the battle; they were brought him
straight, and after he had entirely armed himself, except his head, he
entreated Ariana again to resolve to accompany and assist him to the very last
breath, since this favor was accorded him by Arimin. She let her self be led
away not able to stay her tears, and dying a thousand times for sorrow to see
her dear Melintus destined to a death so barbarous, and she alone the cause
of it.

The streets, and the public place were bordered with Arimin's soldiers, to
hinder disorders and commotions. The Thessalians who had followed Melintus in
that glorious defeat, his only crime, were commanded to go before disarmed,
and bearing their bundles of arrows. When all were passed in their order, they
set up Melintus in a golden Chariot, armed as he was, having his head only
uncovered, and his casque at his feet. The desolate Ariana was set by him, whom
he held by the hand. The Priest went afterward on horseback, and about him,
those that were necessary for the sacrifice: the hangman followed on foot,
carrying a hatchet, and after him some other officers. So began to march this
funeral triumph, that drew tears from all the company; every one considering
the glorious cause Melintus was to suffer in. His face so clear, and his
countenance so assured near so cruel a death, affected the hardest courages
that were present; but the softer natures, as the greater part of the people by
their complaints and cries testified how sensibly they were touched with
compassion. On the other side, the continued tears and heavy fighings of
Ariana broke all hearts with pity, in such sort as the constancy of the one,
and the weakness of the other wrought an equal displeasure in all. But the
sage discourses of the virtuous Melintus, whereby he endeavored to resolve her,
being heard, added great astonishment to the common grief; and in the end when
they had thus passed the streets, and gone round about the place, the Chariot
was driven to the foot of the scaffold that had been erected, in the midst
of which was an Altar where the sacred knives lay. By and by arrived at the
place from another side Arimin, bringing with him Pisistratus all armed on
horseback, and sent another horse to Melintus. The Priest and Ariana ascended
the scaffold, and sat them down upon two seats that were on each side of the
Altar, and Melintus after he had promised Ariana to return presently to her,
took his leave of her; and when he had put on his head-peece mounted on
horseback.

Arimin caused the soldiers that were at the ports, and in the streets to come
thither and reinforce the guards of the place for fear of an insurrection,
seeing the wills of the people hotly inclined toward Melintus, who was placed
at one of the ends of the Camp, and Pisistratus at the other, having each of
them but one great Javelin in their hand, and their swords by their side.
Ariana unseene had seized one of the knives that were upon the Altar, for to
kill her self with it if Melintus dyed in the combat, and full of fear and
horror regarded what the issue would be. The trumpets sounded, and instantly
Melintus and Pisistratus rode one against the other; as they approached, they
darted their javelins; that of Pisistratus lightly struck against Melintus
Arms, but Melintus his parting from a more dextrous and puissant arm, pierced
through his Armor, and fastened it self very deep into his left shoulder.
Presently they took their swords in hand, Pisistratus enflamed with fury
against Melintus, and with despite that he spared him not, and Melintus moved
with his own great courage, and a desire to punish the villainy of Pisistratus.
Melintus in a moment showered his blows as thick as hail upon the Arms of
Pisistratus, without scarcely giving him leisure to lift an arm up, and after
he had made fly about the place the pieces of his armor and casque, in the
end opened his stomach with a large wound: then seeing he was going to fall,
he cut off his head at one blow, and so punished him with the same death he had
prepared for him.

This combat ended, the people began to clap their hands, and cry out, Save the
brave Melintus; but he never staying for these acclamations, and hoping for no
grace, returned of himself toward the scaffold, whereupon he mounted, and
bade they should disarme him to finish what was ordained for him: only he
entreated that he might not be bound. In the mean time he comforted Ariana,
and prayed her not to envy him by her tears so glorious a death: that nothing
but her grief lessened the contentment he went to dye in, after having saved
her out of the hands of the Barbarians, after having acquired so many
victories, and punished his principal enemy. Well, Ariana, said he, what could
we more have desired of the gods, but to let us enjoy our affection with
repose? If they refuse me an idle life, and ordain me to dye now there
remains no more honor for me to acquire, ought I to complain of them for
retiring me in the most illustrious period of my life? No, Ariana, I well see
you do not complain for me; contrarily you envy my death: but yet
peradventure you mourn for this, to be abandoned by me. Ah! my dear Ariana,
comfort your self, and live without that fear. I will be the happy Genius that
shall assist you incessantly until the gods have disposed of you: I will
remove all misfortunes from you, I will conduct your ways and your actions,
that you may encounter nothing but happiness; and you ought to be assured to
have me always at your side; by day I will invisibly assist you, and by night
communicate with you in pleasing dreams. Prevent not, my dear Ariana, the
Destinies that are ordained you: you are to show as much constancy for life, as
I ought to have for death. Adieu, my dear Ariana, be comforted, and live for
my sake, as from my heart I am going to dye for yours. Then he came nearer her
to give his last kiss: but she not able to endure that cruel farewell, in the
midst of her sighings at last let escape these words: O gods! O heaven! ah
Melintus, I dye; and fell down thus in a swoone upon the scaffold.
Nevertheless they brought her again with water they threw upon her face, and
opening her eyes she knew what fault she made to let Melintus dye on that
fashion without assisting him: then taking courage, she looked whether she had
still the knife about her which she had hidden, and when she found it she made
a show of resolution. At that time Melintus being undrest to the girdle, and
seeing the honorable pile they had prepared of the enemies arrows for to burn
his heart in, he turned him toward Ariana, and said to her: Dear Ariana, I
demand yet one grace of you after my death; it is that this heart which has
loved you so well, when it shall be taken out of my breast, may be received into
your fair hands, and carried by you to be burned upon this pile. Permit not,
fair Ariana, that this heart, that feels it self so noble for loving you, be
touched by other hands than yours, and see that having never burnt but for you,
it be not also burnt but by you. What joy think you will it receive, when after
having adored you so much without knowing you but by desire, it shall feel it
self carried by these hands so fair, and so beloved? Ariana, promise me this
favor: have no horror to touch a thing that has adored you, and despise not
after my death this part of my self, which in its little space contained so
much love and affection to you. I give it you, to be sacrificed by you to your
self; and be assured, there never was an offering purer, or presented with
more ardour.

Ariana having other resolutions in her mind, promised the constant Melintus
that she would obey all his desires; and after they had a long time embraced
one another to give their last adieu, the old Priest with tears in his eyes
bade Melintus overthrow himself upon the Altar, that he might open his breast.
And then this brave and generous courage quitting at last his dear Ariana,
though never letting go her hand, laid himself down backwards upon the
Altar, having his stomach all naked, and bade the Priest dispatch. When Ariana
saw he had taken the sacred knife, and bent himself down upon Melintus, she
could not support the cruelty of that sight, but turning her head, took out
the knife she had hid, then she stretched out her hand as far as she was able
to strike it with more force into her bosom.

But the cry which at that time the Priest gave, troubled her, and made her
turn her head to see what had befallen him. The good old man that very
unwillingly lent his hand to so cruel an office, coming nearer with his eyes
to Melintus breast, and seeing the mark of the heart which he had from his
birth, fell a crying out, Ah my son, ah Melintus, the true blood of Pyrrhus
and Achilles, never will I be your executioner. Then having let fall the knife,
he fell down himself too with astonishment and weakness. All the assistants
desired to know what it was. Arimin himself came near with his soldiers and
officers, thinking this old man out of pity refused to execute what he had
promised, and asked him why he dispatched not. The good man not able to speak
but with pain, says to him, It Is my son, it is the divine race of Achilles.

Presently they heard a man cry out in the prease to have place made him, and
to stay the execution. This man was known to be Thetis Priest in Larissa; and
Arimin believing, that after he had better considered it, he would not suffer
any other but himself to perform the office of High Priest at so solemn an
occasion within the City, made him come forward, and ascend the scaffold. But
as soon as he was there, he commanded silence, and addressing his speech to
the Governor, said to him; Arimin, beware of putting to death this man, for he
is of the blood of the gods: then showing an old book he brought with him, he
proceeded, that being desirous to review the ancient Oracle wherein was
forbidden them to sacrifice men, he had read these verses, which he pronounced:

LEt all my Sacrificers dread
The blood of humane kind to shed,
If from my ancient progeny
You desire a King to have:
When so easily you may save
His heart from Scythian cruelty.
Then he made Arimin read this Oracle out of the old book, where it was
recited how the Kings that were of the race of Achilles, having failed in
Thessaly and Epire, the Thessalians had consulted the goddess Thetis, to know
whom they should choose for their Commander; whereupon they had this answer,
and never a King since. The Priest added, that it was very clear Melintus was
meant by the Oracle; and that his heart ought to be preserved from the cruelty
of this Scythian law: it remained only to be confirmed how he came of the
blood of Achilles: for his part he thought that his valiant actions had already
given powerful testimonies thereof. The other Priest who by that time had made
himself known to Melintus for his father Hermocrates, that was sold to the
Scythians by the Pirates, assured Arimin and the High Priest of Larissa, that
Melintus was of the true race of Pyrrhus and Achilles, and that proof of it
was easy to be made at Syracuse. Arimin answered them, that admit it were so,
yet the Emperor would never suffer the Thessalians to withdraw themselves out
of his government. The Priest of Thetis replied, that Melintus might well hold
the kingdom upon the same conditions which other Kings did that relieved of
the Empire. But Arimin rejecting a thing so far from his intention, and which
he believed expressly invented to save Melintus, was resolved to proceed on, and
commanded his soldiers to mount the scaffold, and go kill Melintus, who at
the same time was left without all motion for astonishment, with Ariana by him,
to see so many novelties.

But a new rumor that was spread about the place hindered the soldiers from
obeying Arimin: It was Eurymedon with three thousand men, that had entered the
City, having found the Ports without guard, and understanding what danger
Melintus was in, marched on toward the place. He began instantly with a cry
from all sides made by his men, Save Melintus, or ye dye all. Arimin being
ignorant what it might be, called all his soldiers, and ranged them about him:
then he sent to know who these new arrived were. In the mean time many
Thessalians had already mounted the scaffold, and saluted Melintus, in kissing
his hands, and calling him their King promised by the Oracles; and told him
that as he was heir of the beauty and valor of Achilles, he must be also the
legitimate successor of his kingdom. Melintus rejected these submissions and
names, and thought of nothing but embracing and honoring his father. Ariana
also rendered him her dutiful respects, and they considered all three together
the strange event of things, that gave them some hope amidst a great deal of
fear. Arimin at that time was much troubled, seeing himself environed with so
many people, whose number he thought yet greater: but Melintus, having known
of Eurymedon's coming, prayed Arimin to come near him, and says to him, I
perceive well many things concur to save me, but I know as well, that if the
Emperor desires my death, there is nothing can preserve me. I flatter not my
self with the hope of the kingdom of Thessaly; it is a thing far from my
desires, though it be true that I am of the blood of Achilles: but, Arimin, for
the present I counsel you to defer my putting to death, until you hear
further of the Emperors pleasure: not that this delay can promise me any
safety, but because you cannot otherwise be assured of your own.

Arimin agreed to what he said, bearing no ill will to Melintus, and finding
himself troubled at all these encounters: then he prayed him to go move those
men of war, that they might treat as friends. Melintus went toward them on
horseback; and when Eurymedon perceived him, he ran to embrace him, and
consented to what ever he desired at his hands: but he would never suffer him
to return any more to Arimin. The people joined themselves presently to their
party, and they all called Melintus their King and their Protector, and cried
aloud, they would protect him well enough, since he had so well protected
them. Melintus refused all those honors, and sent to assure Arimin, that he
consented not to them, and would never attempt any thing against the authority
of the Roman Empire; only he besought him that he would assist him
favorably with Nero, to appease his anger. Arimin restored by this assurance,
and who desired but peace, promised he would serve him with all affection
near the Emperor, and then retired himself into the Castle. Melintus and
Eurymedon went away toward the scaffold to take with them Hermocrates and
Ariana, who were confounded for joy to see themselves delivered out of so great
perils. Eurymedon having saluted the fair Ariana, told her, he had brought a
Princess to be her companion: they were then impatient to see the fair
Pasithea whom Eurymedon had left behind, when he advanced toward the place
to save Melintus. Ariana at that time was set on horseback, and Pasithea in
the same equipage coming to encounter her in a guard of soldiers, they would
both of them alight for their better receiving of themselves, having heard very
advantageously one of another. After the salutations and complements, every one
began to judge of these different beauties, that were both of them mavelous:
nevertheless that of Ariana surpassed the other by far, and those that knew
the strange effects of Pasithea's, were in a wonder that Ariana being the
fairest, was not so generally beloved: but the ablest judgments comparing the
majestuous grace of Ariana, with the familiar sweetness of Pasithea, were
agreed that the last kindled all desires in an instant, producing hope by this
general compleasance: but that Ariana by her beauty indeed stirred up an
admiration, but by her gravity accompanied with modesty, struck hope dead,
which is the only nourisher of love: in such sort as she could not be loved
but by men of great courage that feared not the difficulties, whereas Pasithea
facilitated her self the birth of love by her natural sweetness, that gave
access to all, and yet with no other design, than nobly to favor those that
approached her.

They all retired to the lodging that was given them at first, which was the
most remarkable house in the Town, whence were coming forth the soldiers
that guarded Palamede, Euphrosyne, and the rest, for Arimin had sent them a
countermand that they should return to wait upon him. There were given in that
place embracings without number, for if some of them had run great hazards, the
others had been in great fears for them. Euphrosyne was near dying for joy
to see Hermocrates, he was a long time also without being able to quit her,
after so tedious and cruel a separation from her: afterward he embraced one
while Telephus his faithful friend, another while Epicharis his daughter; and
told them how he had been sold to the Scythians, from whom he never could have
hoped to be delivered, but for the resolution was taken by a great number of
them, to go seek out other Countries, and they had brought him along with
them, and constrained him to be their Sacrificer, because they had observed him
to have some knowledge in natural things. The others related also to one
another their diverse fortunes, and above all Palamede expressed the
displeasures he had received with Amyntas, for being kept enclosed during the
extreme danger Melintus was in, for which was left them no other consolation
than their dear Mistresses Epicharis and Erycine, who nevertheless had no
less grief than they, whereof the one was then sister to Melintus, the other
had been so heretofore. When Eurymedon knew that his friend Lepantus kept his
bed for the wounds he received in defending the Ladies, he went to him into his
Chamber, where he found Cyllenia alone with him, assisting him with much
affection: but seeing that his wounds would not be cured a long time by
ordinary remedies, he caused an excellent drogue to be brought him which he
was accustomed to use himself, and two days after his wounds were closed. In
the mean while the faithful Arcas kissed his dear Masters hands, being
ravished to see him yet living, after so perilous a fortune: There was a
general rejoicing in that house, and abroad too, because of the Thessalians
that shouted a thousand times for joy to have found a King so wise, so valiant,
and so accomplished as Melintus was. They had assembled together, to make a
guard about his house, and were resolved to dye all, rather than suffer he
should have any displeasure offered him.

All the fear Melintus had was on Nero's side, whose choler he judged would
increase, when he came to know that he pretended to the kingdom of Thessaly.
But Arimin the day after sent him word of the happy news were but then brought
him, that Nero was dead; and that his memory was cursed all the world over, as
of an execrable monster; how Galba had been declared Emperor, and was upon
the point to pass out of Spain into Italy. Then their contentments were
perfected. All the people ran presently to the Temples, to give the gods thanks
for having taken out of the world the Tyrant; and the noblest of the
Thessalians entreated Arimin that they might go to Rome and demand of Galba
Melintus for their King* Arimin willing to serve Melintus in that occasion,
that he might give him cause to forget the injuries he had done him, not only
granted what they desired of him, but would also accompany them himself to
make relation to the new Emperor of Melintus his extreme valor, by whose
only means, the Scythians had been profligated, before ever any news came
to Rome of their descent. After having visited Melintus, and taken leave of
him, he left a Lieutenant in his place, and would be gone: Palamede who had
learned that Otho returned with Galba, and at that time had all the power with
him, obtained of Melintus and Epicharis that he might also make that voyage, to
the end Otho being obliged by their ancient friendship, might favor Melintus
with the Emperor, and so they departed all together.

In the mean time they prepared at Larissa with all magnificence the feasts
for the wedding of Melintus, whom already they called their King, and Ariana
whom they named the Goddess of the Scythians. An old Pyrat that ordinarily
accompanied Eurymedon, seeing Hermocrates and Euphrosyne whom he remembered to
have been amongst them, and having understood all that had happened to them,
and how they were the parents of the brave and noble Melintus the dear friend,
and heretofore conqueror of his Master, would give a new supply to their joys
by discovering himself to them. He desired their pardon first of all, for
having made them endure so many miseries, for which, says he, I can never
acquit my self toward you, but in making you a present of incomparable value.
I give you, proceeds he, Eurymedon my Master for your son. Every one stood in
a great amazement, and Eurymedon too, whom he addressed himself to and said,
Eurymedon, that I say is true, and I believe you are not sorry (having always
been kept in the opinion of being a Prince) to find your self now descended
of Pyrrhus and Achilles.

They could not yet comprehend how it might be; but this Pyrat continued: I
came to know, said he to Euphrosyne, that you understood how Dicearchus had
obliged us to put to death what should be borne of you, till the time you were
sold. The first child you brought into the world while you were with us, was
this Eurymedon, whom we presently took and carried in a little mantle toward
the Sea, for to have cast him in. But as we were in the way, there comes an
Eagle and takes him out of our hands, when we thought of nothing but carrying
him away, and throwing up her self into the air, flew at length stooping
down toward a place we marked. We ran instantly thither out of curiosity,
and after we had a long time searched, we found the Babe at last, which the
Eagle had hid under a laurel. We conjectured from thence that he would one
day prove illustrious, since the King of Birds was willing to save him, and had
given him for sanctuary the tree ordained to crown the victorious: so we
resolved to bring him up, and that he should serve us for our Conquests: but
not willing Euphrosyne knew him to be hers, having a purpose to make himself
believe one day that he was of Royal blood to heighten his courage; we made
him be nursed some days by a woman, and after that we returned him to you,
said he to Euphrosyne, to have him better nourished, feining it was a Kings
child we had taken; and ever since he lived as you know. As they were upon
these rejoycings, and Pasithea in a rapture to know the illustrious and valiant
race of her dear Eurymedon, word was brought them that Archelaus had followed
them, and was very near entering into the City. Melintus would go forth to
meet him in equipage of a Prince, being accompanied with Eurymedon, Lepantus,
and Amyntas, to the end he might procure that his new acknowledged brother
were received into his favor. Archelaus at his arrival in the Port had
learned that Melintus was destined to be King of Thessaly, and that he was of
the blood of Achilles and Pyrrhus, so as when they incountred, they saluted as
Kings; and Melintus seeing much sadness in his face, said to him: Great
Prince, you must here quit all resentments of offense against those you pursue,
and keep the promise you have given. See there my brother, said he showing
Eurymedon, whom you have promised your alliance, and I pray you receive him
into your grace.

Archelaus knew not what Melintus meant to tell him, but he proceeded; Wonder
not if I say you promised my brother your alliance: This is that fair Hermione
that had the good fortune to succor you so timely at the day of battle, and
whose beauty was able to touch your heart with affection. His name is
Eurymedon, and it is he that after having saved the Princess your daughter
whom they would have stolen away, was so happy as to be loved of her. He was
constrained so to disguise himself, fearing your anger; ascribe to his passion
the enterprise he conceived to abuse you, and change I pray you the love you
had for Hermione, into a friendship for Eurymedon. Archelaus was so confounded
with that he heard, as he stood without all motion; and by this time the fair
Eurymedon threw himself down at his feet to desire pardon for the fault he
had made in carrying away his daughter. At last the King considering that if he
expressed more anger, it would but turn to his own confusion, was resolved to
embrace Eurymedon, knowing him of a birth that made him worthy of his daughter;
and when the peace was made between them, they brought him into the City,
where Pasithea came out to meet him, conducted by the fair Ariana. She cast
her self at his feet, and he pardoned her in lifting her up, and was willing
to stay in that place to assist at the ceremony of Melintus Coronation, and
celebrate the nuptials of his daughter, as well as those of Ariana.

During some days as they were thus rejoicing together for so many past
travels, and the hope of a fortune for Melintus becoming his Heroike virtue,
and admirable actions, those that were gone for Rome arrived happily there, and
in a small time made the singular services Melintus had done the Empire be in
such sort acknowledged, that they obtained what they desired with the
assistance of Otho, who showed himself passionate for his friend Melintus, and
for the fair Ariana whom he had so suddenly and ardently heretofore loved;
and Palamede was made Knight of Rome, and with that title created Governor of
Sicily. Arimin, Palamede, and the Thessalians returned in great haste, and
brought Melintus the Emperors letters, with the Decree of the Senate, whereby
the kingdom of Thessaly and of a part of Epire was given him, as being the
legitimate heir of Pyrrhus and Achilles, to whom they wished all prosperity
for the important services he had rendered to the Empire, whereof
notwithstanding he should releeve, exhorting him withal to continue the same
cares for conserving the Roman limits against the inundations of Barbarians.
Then Arimin presented two rich Crowns of gold sent from the Emperor, one to
the valiant Melintus, and the other to the fair and virtuous Ariana.

The Thessalians every where made fires of joy for so happy a news, and to the
end so many rejoycings were not made in confusion, but that each of them might
be resented in particular, the next day was destined for the Coronation and
marriage of Melintus and Ariana: The day after for the Nuptials of the Prince
Eurymedon with the Princess Pasithea; and the third day for the marriages of
Palamede with Epicharis, of Lepantus with Cyllenia, and of Amyntas with
Erycine. The Deputies of all the Cities of Thessaly, that attended at Larissa
the return of the Ambassadors, came to congratulate with their King given by
the gods and promised by their Oracles, and to take the oath of allegiance to
him; and the whole City was full of employment against the next days Ceremony.

The inhabitants of Larissa had strewed all the streets with flowers, and
crowned themselves with them, to make that the most celebrious and agreeable
day they could possibly. Betimes in the morning every man went to dispose
himself before Melintus gate; and they brought him to the Temple with Ariana
in this order. The soldiers as well of the City as those that Eurymedon and
King Archelaus had brought, were set in rows all along the streets whereby the
pomp was to pass to the Temple of Thetis. Many trumpets were in the head of
the companies of Thessalian Gentlemen, which Melintus had led the day of the
battle: then they caused to march store of Chariots laden with the spoils of
the Scythians. Afterward were carried in Trophey the arms of their King whom
Melintus had slain: then the Barbarian prisoners were led with their hands
bound behind them; after them followed on horseback two by two, the five
hundred brave Thessalians that had served Melintus in the valiant
night-enterprise, having their arms all silvered, and rich caparisons upon
their horses: the javelins they carried were inwreath'd with flowers, and their
heads crowned with laurel. In the midst of them was led in hand of both
sides Melintus his horse, that seemed to be grown prouder for the fortune of
his Master, so stately was his pace. Fifty white Bulls followed for the
sacrifice, having their horns and hooves gilded their heads adorned with
flowers, and covered all over with tapistry of silk trayning on the ground.
The Priests went after the offerings, and carried all things necessary for
sacrifice. A little after ten young gentlemen of Thessaly, clothed in white,
and crowned with flowers, bare upon their shoulders a kind of Chariot, in the
midst whereof was a Carpet of purple, with the fringes of gold training to
the ground, whereupon was laid the Crown of gold, and the Scepter for
Melintus: then followed ten of the fairest Maids of Thessaly, clothed also in
white* with their hair loose and crowned with flowers, that bare up another
Chariot beautified with purple, the fringe of gold, upon which was the other
Crown and Scepter for Ariana. Arimin the Emperors Ambassador, and King
Archelaus followed in order on horseback, one beside the other, environed with
their Officers. After them marched the triumphant Chariot of Melintus and
Ariana, all glittering with gold, and adorned with posies of flowers, drawn by
six white horses of Thessaly, that had their maines braided with incarnate
ribbands of silk mingled with gold and silver, whereon were mounted six young
children winged after the fashion of Cupids. The valiant Melintus then
attracted the eyes of all; he was crowned with laurel, and wore a cloak of
purple Royal laced with gold, holding the hand of the divine Ariana, that was
dressed like a Queen, and whose admirable beauty animated by the joy of so much
happiness and applause had a splendor, the beams whereof were yet
unsupportable for dazeling the beholders, and giving a delightful ravishment
to their eyes. The valorous Eurymedon followed on horseback, by the side of
the fair Pasithea, that was likewise mounted a horseback upon a foot-cloth of
embroydery of gold, being sustained on both sides by two Lesbian Gentlemen*
Palamede went in that fashion after and made himself admired of all, as well
for his pleasing mine, as the grace he had in managing his horse. The gentile
Epicharis went besides him after the same manner that Pasithea, having, I know
not what, more gravity in her countenance, since from a slave she became to be
a Princess. After them followed Lepantus with Cyllenia, mounted likewise, and
then Amyntas with Erycine. Telephus went alone on horseback, and was followed
with a Chariot wherein were Hermocrates and Euphrosyne that lift up their hands
without ceasing, and gave thanks to heaven for having put so happy an end to
their misfortunes. The Nobility of Thessaly marched after, and in their order
the Deputies of the Cities, afterward an infinite number of people.

Of the spoils there was only the arms of the Scythian King that entered into
the Temple, to be left there, and consecrated to the goddess Thetis, the rest
passed on. All the train entered, and after the sacrifices were made, Melintus
having his cloak Royal borne upon one side by Eurymedon, on the other by
Palamede, and Ariana having hers carried by the Princesses Pasithea and
Epicharis, they were set in a conspicuous place, where kneeling down upon
cushions, they were crowned by Arimin representing the Emperor, and by the King
Archelaus. Then the chief Priest married them, and instantly all the people
fell a showting, Long live the King Melintus, and the Queen Ariana: Let their
reign be happy to themselves and us. These ceremonies being finished, they
went out of the Temple, and there was nothing but the accident happened to
Hermocrates and Euphrosyne that a little tempered those contentments, for they
were found dead for joy at the foot of an Altar, and embraced one of another;
nevertheless being judged very happy, they thought it envious against their
repose, to have shed so much as a tear for them.

All the City ecchoed with songs of joy: the feasts that had bin prepared for
this Royal assembly, were accompanied with Music of all sorts of voices and
instruments. But nothing was more acceptable to these two noble lovers, than
the night, which gave an happy conclusion to so many joys. When their senses
were asleep with pleasure, their spirits at their turn tasted so many
delights, that this sweet transport had made them abandon their bodies, if
without them they could have bin able to conserve those divine raptures: but
for fear some disunion might happen, they held one another so straightly
embraced, that nothing but the next days Ceremony could have separate them.

It was Pasithea's and Eurymedons day, whose love felt no less impatiency, nor
was the accomplishment of their desires followed with meaner pleasures. The day
following, Palamede with Epicharis, Lepantus with Cyllenia, and Amyntas with
Erycine, having observed the same ceremonies, tasted equal contentments; and
after that Arimin, Archelaus, and some others that would retire were departed
with a thousand embraces, and many presents, Melintus began to give order for
the safety of his kingdom, by fortifying of his ports, and frontiers: and
having established his government with sweetness, he peaceably enjoyed the
rest of his days with his dear Ariana the delicious fields of Thessaly: as if
the gods had destined to the fairest and most virtuous persons of the world,
the most agreeable places of the earth.

FINIS.

