DIRECTIONS FOR MVSTERS

Wherein is Shown the order of Drilling for the Musket and Pike

Printed at Cambridge And are to be sold by Roger Daniel at the Angel in
Lumbard Street



DIRECTIONS FOR MUSTERS: Wherein is shevved the order of drilling for the
Musket and Pike.

Set forth in postures, with the words of command, and brief instructions for
the right use of the same.

Printed by Thomas Buck and Roger Daniel, printers to the Universitie of
Cambridge. 1638.

Directions for Musters.
THe Landforces of this kingdom are either Trained or Untrained. His
Majesty's letters, September 21. 1628.
In the Trained-bands, and in having them well 1 Chosen, well 2 Armed, and well
3 Disciplined, a most essential part of the strength and safety of the
kingdom consists.

Ibidem.
Touching the Choice of the persons of men to be enrolled in the Trained-lists;
They must be men sufficient, of able and active bodies; none of the meaner
sort, nor servants; but only such as be of the Gentry, Freeholders, and good
Farmers, or their sons, that are like to be resident. And this stands with
great reason: Q. Elisab. her letters, April 9. 1585.
these Bands being only to be employed as a Guard for the Prince his Person,
and the withstanding of a foreign enemy. LL. of the Counsels letters April 27.
1635.
And therefore it is also required that they be well affected in Religion, and
take the oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance. Q. Elisabeths Commission, March
14. 1573.
None were formerly to be excused from personal service, but Prelates, Lords
of the Parliament, and privy Counsel, Ecclesiastical persons, and Judges and
judicial Officers. And now LL. of the Counsels letters, May 31. 1631.
none are to be exempted but the Kings meniall servants, or such as have some
such place under the King as may lawfully excuse them. Also, His Majesty's
orders, 1626.
none to remove his dwelling out of the Town or Parish of his abode, without
license of a Deputie-lieutenant.

Arming; Every Captain is to His Majesty's letters, Sept. 21. 1628.
charge Arms in his respective hundred or precinct, equally and impartially,
according to the value of each man's lands or means, whether the owners be there
resident or not. Ibidem.
And no Arms are to be allowed of but complete ones, and of the best modern
fashion. Orders, 1626.
Every man must have the Horse or Arms he stands charged with, at all times
ready at an hours warning, of his own. LL. of the Counsels letters, Jan. 10.
1627.
And if any man shall appear at the Muster with a borrowed Horse or Arms, or
in any other unfitting manner, he shall be proceeded against as a high
contemner of the Kings royal command, and as one that betrayeth (as much as in
him lies) the honor of his Majesty, and the safety of his kingdoms.
Moreover, every man is required not only to appear at Musters in Stat. 4o. and
5o. Phil. and Mar. cap. 3.
his best Arms, but also in his best Array. Proclamation.
And for the preventing of the abuse of showing borrowed Arms, every Captain
is to stamp the Arms of his Company, thereby to be known and distinguished.

Now the Arms be either for Horse or Foot.

Military instructions for the Cavallerie, 1632. Part 1. chap. 23, 24.
Concerning the Horse; how the several kinds of them are to be armed, is showed
at large in a book of Cavallerie lately published.

The Foot are either Pikes or Musketeers.

Order advised on by the Counsel of war.
The Pikeman must be armed with a Pike seventeen foot long head and all; (the
diameter of the staff to be one inch. the head to be well steeled, 8 inches
long, broad, strong, and sword-pointed; the cheeks 2 foot long, well riveted;
the butt-end bound with a ring of iron) a Gorget, Back, Breast, Tassets and
Headpiece, a good Sword of 3 foot long, cutting and stiff-pointed, with Girdle
and Hangers.

The Musketier must be armed with a good Musket, (the Barrel of 4 foot long,
the Bore of 12 bullets in the pound rolling in) a Rest, Bandelier, Headpiece,
a good Sword, Girdle and Hangers.

Election and Arming avails little without Discipline; this being the soul
and principal part, must be seriously and frequently practiced: for the better
performance whereof Orders, 2626.
every Commander and Officer must enable himself to perform the duties of their
several places.

LL. of the Counsels Orders, 1623.
Every Captain must make choice of his certain and constant File-leaders, out of
his best men, which must exercise their respective files on holy days or other
convenient days; the Musketeers then using only a little powder for the pan.

He must appoint to every File-leader his certain file, of such as dwell
nearest to him, for the more ready calling of them together.

The Captain, Lieutenant, or Ensign is to exercise a Squadron, or the whole
Company once a month or 6 weeks on a holy day, as shall seem good to the
Deputie-lieutenant. For the better enabling the Musketeers for service, they
are sometimes to be exercised with bullets at marks.

Orders, 1626.
No Soldier must presume to depart from his Colors, until he be discharged by
his Captain.

Stat. 4o. and 5o. Phil. and Mar. cap. 3.
If any one absent himself from the Muster (general or special) he is to
suffer 10 days imprisonment without bail or mainprise, or else to pay 40
shillings.

Soldiers must be exercised, (first apart by themselves) in their Postures or
true use of their Arms; (then joined in a Body) in their Distances, Motions
and Skirmishes.

How the Horse are to be exercised, is showed in the said book of Cavallerie.

For the Foot, the usual Postures for the Pike are these; Handle your Pike.
Order your Pike. Advance your Pike. Order your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Port
your Pike. Charge your Pike. Advance your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Charge to
the Rere your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Order your Pike. Cheek your Pike. Trail
your Pike. Recover and charge your Pike. Order at close order your Pike. Charge
for horse your Pike. Recover your Pike.


The Postures for the Musket are these; Put on your Bandeliers. Take up your
Rest. Take up your Match. Handle your Musket. Order your Musket. Give your Rest
to your Musket. Open your Pan. Clear your Pan. Prime your Pan. Shut your Pan.
Cast off your loose Powder. Blow off your loose Powder. Cast about your Musket.
Trail your Rest. Open your Charge. Charge with Powder Charge with Bullet. Draw
forth your Skowring-stick. Shorten your Skowring-stick. Ram home. Withdraw
your Skowring-stick. Shorten your Skowring-stick. Return your Skowring-stick.
Recover your Musket. Poise your Musket and recover your Rest. Give your Rest to
your Musket. Draw forth your Match. Blow your Coal. Cock your Match. Try your
Match. Guard your Pan, and blow. Open your Pan. Present. Give fire. Dismount
your Musket. Vncock your Match. Return your Match. Shoulder your Musket. So
make ready as before. March with your Rest in your right hand. Carry your Rest
with your Musket. Vnshoulder your Musket. Poise your Musket. Rest your Musket.
Draw forth your Match. Blow your Match. Cock your Match. Try your Match. The
Sentinel posture.


The manner how to perform these postures, both of Pike and Musket, is fully
showed in the figures annexed.

These postures in service are reduced to these three more general words,
namely, Make ready, Present, and Give fire.

Having attained the use of their Arms, they must be taught their military
Motions. To do this, they must be ordered into a Body, composed of Files.

Aelian. cap. 5.
A File is a sequence of Men placed right after a Leader, every one according to
his worth; and consists (at the most) of ten men, which are thus
distinguished; Number of place. Number of dignity. 1 Leader. 1 2 5 3 9 4 8 5
Middle-man. 4 6 Middle-man. 3 7 7 8 10 9 6 10 Bringer-up. 2

A Rank is a row of Sidemen, standing one by another in a right line, shoulder
to shoulder; and are thus distinguished; Number of place. 10. 9. 8. 7. 6. 5. 4.
3. 2. 1. 2. 6. 10. 7. 3. 4. 8. 9. 5. 1. Number of dignity.

That which follows next is distance; whereof there be three kinds most usual:
Open order, which is 6 foot in Rank and File; Order, which is 3 foot in Rank
and File; and Close order, which is a foot and half between File and File.

Open order is used when a company is to be exercised: Order, when they come
to fight, or wheel: Close order in File, is only for the Pikes when they come
to charge the enemy, or to receive a charge.

In a long March, the Files are at Order, and the Ranks at Open order. The
usual way to measure these distances, is thus; Open order between File and
File is, when the Soldiers stretching out their arms, their hands touch each
other; and between the Ranks, when the butt-end of the shouldred Pikes almost
reach to their Leaders heels. And for Order between the Files, when the
Soldiers setting their arms a kembo, their elbows touch; and in Ranks, when
they come up to their Leaders swords point. Close order, is shoulder to
shoulder.

The Motions are of 4 kinds, namely, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, and
Wheelings.

Suppose a Company of 100 men ( Orders, 1623.
which is the number thought fittest) whereof 50 to be Muskets, and 50 Pikes:
being drawn up (by Files) into a Body, at their Open order, they stand thus,
Stand right in your Files. Make even your Ranks. Silence.


Front.

Right Flank.

Rere.

Left Flank.



To the right hand.


This motion is performed by turning (all at once) to the right hand, keeping
the left foot fixed. Thus, they are ready to receive a charge on the Flank. To
reduce them, you command, As you were.

To face them to the left, you command, To the left hand.

And reduce them as before.

To the right hand about.


To reduce them, you command, By the left hand as you were.

There be many other Facings, as, To the right and left (by Ranks) outward and
inward; By the Half-files; To the Angles; To the Center; and the like: which
are here omitted for brevitie sake.

Ranks to the right double.


The second Rank passes into the first, the fourth into the third, and so
successively, every man standing at his Leaders right hand.

Ranks as you were.

By the left hand they fall into their places.

Ranks to the left double.

Which is done as the former, only the hand is changed.

They are reduced as before; every man that doubled falls into his place by the
right hand.

Middle-men, to the right hand double the Front.


Middle-men, as you were.
Middle-men, to the left hand double the Front. Bringers-up to the right or
left
double the Front.
Which makes the Figure as the former, but that the last Rank begins the
motion, and stands within the first Rank.

Middle-men to the right or left
entire, or by division, double the Front.
Files to the right double.


The second File moves into the first, every man behind his Right-side-man;
the fourth into the third; and so successively.

Files as you were. Files to the left double.
Which is as the former, only the hand changed.

Files as you were.

Files to the right hand Countermarch.


Every File-leader advances with the right leg turning to the right hand
about, and marches until he come into the ground where the last Rank stood;
the other Ranks move up to the File-leaders ground, and there turn as the
first, successively.

Files to the left Countermarch.
Ranks to the right or left
Countermarch.
Files to the right, left, or middle
close to your order.

Ranks close forward to your order.

To the right hand wheel.



All the body wheels toward the right, upon the right hand File-leader, as the
Center.

To the left hand wheel.

To the right or left
about wheel.

There be diverse other Doublings, Countermarches, and Wheelings: but because
the Trained bands are not so capable of them, and there be many books published
on that subject, they are here (for brevitie) omitted.

Concerning Skirmish (for which they are now in fitting distance) there be
diverse and sundry Forms, both against Horse and Foot. Usually, the fight is
begun by drawing out some Files disbanded; or else by 2 Ranks advancing 10
paces before the body, which make ready together: a Sergeant (or some other
Officer) there stands, to whom these 2 first Ranks come up; then present, and
give fire, first the first Rank, then the second; so fall off into the Rere,
into their own Files. So soon as the two first Ranks advance forwards, the two
next Ranks must make ready, then advance forward 10 paces, and do as the former
two Ranks; so all successively. They may then fire even with the Front of
Pikes; then on the Half-files, or as they shall be commanded.

To fire to the Rere, the last Rank makes ready, keeping still with the body;
being ready, they present to the right about; then fire, and march a round
pace, and place themselves in Front in the same order as they were ranked: so
all the rest successively.

To fire by Flanks, the outermost File toward the enemy makes ready, marching
with the body; then faces and presents to the hand commanded, and fires: the
next File to that does the like; and being marched clear off that File, gives
fire: so all the rest. An Officer is to lead up the Files which have given
fire, either in the same order they stood in, or to conveigh them beyond the
left Files of Musketeers, or within the Pikes, or beyond the Pikes on the left
Flank, as shall be thought best.

The Musketeers must ever be careful (whether being shouldred or making ready)
to mount the muzzle of their Musket.

The Front Half-files of Pikes are only to charge their Pikes, the Rere
Half-files to port them in time of fight.

Touching the untrained forces; all able-bodied men untrained from 16 years to
60 must be enrolled. LL. of Counsels letters, April 27. 1635. and Orders, 1626.
And the abler sort of men are to be provided of Arms for their particular
uses. With these Arms, and the Arms of Recusants sequestered, such leavies as
shall be made upon any sudden occasion out of the untrained men, are to be
armed; and then exercised and ordered into Companies.

FINIS.
1 Put on yor. Bandeliers.


Take up the Bandeliers in the right hand, hold them in the hollow between the
thumb and forfinger, then clearing yor boxes from tangling with yor left hand*
put yor elbow through the handeleir and bring yor right hand over yor head,
taking your hat in the left hand leave the bandeleir on yor left sholder.

2 Take up your Rest


Take your Rest in the Right hand at the foot end then take it in the left
about the middle they with the right hand take it at the iron and put your left
hand through the string and hold the Rest with the left hand

3 Take up your Match.


Take up the Match at the middle with your, thumb and fore finger of the left
hand, then with your thumb and second finger of the Right hand peace one end of
the match between the great and Ring finger and the other end between the
Ring and little finger of the left hand and so let the middle hang down.

4 Handle your Musket


Standing at the But end of yor musket with yor right foot, the left somewhat
advanced and the knee bent) which is the general proper stand of a Musketier
give a large step with yor right leg, then stooping down yet bearing up yor
head, with yor right hand gripe the Musket, and so raising up yor body fall
back to ye first stand.

5 Order yor. Musket


Being come to your first stand hold yor Musket barrel in yor hand about the
height of your shoulder with the But end on the ground, Jn your left hand hold
the Rest a little below the forke, the Pike end on the ground

6 Give your Rest to your Musket


Sink down your right hand not bowing yor body, then gripe your musket and
lift it up the bring about the left hand with the rest and join it to your
musket on the out side, holding yor thumb hard against the forke of the Rest
and so carry both musket and Rest in the left hand only.

7 Open your Pann


Jn the joining of yor. musket and Rest together, fall back with your right leg
to your proper stand, then hold the thumb of the Right hand behind the
scutchian of the Pan, and with yor. two formerr fingers draw back ye cover of
ye Pan.

8 Clear yor. Pann


Bring up your musket with the left hand only, toward your mouth and blow
your Pan stiflie not slooping upon any terms, and in the mean time with yor.
right hand take your touch box as in the figure 8

9 Prime your Pan


Hold yor touch box between the thumb and fore finger of the right hand
only and so Prime as in the figure.

10 shut your Pan


Lay the right thumb over the barrel near the Pan, and with your two
foremost fingers shutt the Pan.

11 cast of yor: loose Powder


Hold yor. musket fast with the right hand at the breech, the left as before
turneing the Pan. downwards yt the loose powder may fall of.

12 Blow of yor. loose Powder.


Hold yor. musket in both hands as before, bear it up toward your mouth, not
stooping blow of the loose powder.

13 Cast about yor Musket


Hold yor musket in both hands as before bear it right up toward yor left
side and with all step forwards ye right leg then holding the musket only in the
right hand at the breech forsake the Rest

14 Trayse your Rest


Haueing forsaken yor rest take the Musket into the left hand about ye middle of
ye barrel so as ye butt end touch not ye ground trayling yor rest between yor
musket and yor body

15 Open your charge.


Take your charge in your right hand: with the thumb and forefinger thereof
thrust of the cover

16 Charge with Powder.


Put back your left hand with the musket as far as conveniently you can, and
with yor right hand turn ye powder into the muzell of the barrel holding ye
charge between yor thumb and forefinger only as in ye figure.

17 charge with Bullet


Take yor. Bullet forth of yor bag or out of yor mouth and put it into the
muzell of your musket.

18 Draw forth your scouring stick


With yor. right hand (ye palm turned from yor) draw forth yor scouring stick
beareing yor body and yor left hand with yor musket so far back as you cann.

19 Shorten your scouring stick


Having drawn forth yor scouring stick set the Rammer head against yor breast
and slip yor hand close to yor Rammer yt you may ye easier put it into ye
muzell.

20 Ram Home.


Put your scouring stick down into your musket and Ram home hard twice or
thrice.

21 withdraw your scouring stick


With your right hand turned draw your scouring stick out of yor musket as
before.

22 shorten yor scouring stick


Your scouring stick being drawn forth of ye barrel, turn it, and bring the
scouring stick end to yor breast and so slip yor hand wthin an hand full of the
end.

23 Return your scouring stick


Put the scouring stick to his place from whence you had it

24 Recover your Musket.


Bring forward yor musket with yor left hand and bear it right up Take it into
ye right hand at ye breech and so hold it in ye right hand only.

25 Poize your Musket and recover your Rest:


Fall back with yor right leg to your first stand hold yor musket in fright
hand at ye breech and recover your rest in yor left hand holding it just under
ye forke.

26 Give your Rest to your Musket.


Bring up yor left hand with ye rest toward yor right side near yor musket and
so sink yor musket and hold it with ye rest in ye left hand only, the rest
being one ye out side of ye musket.

27 Draw forth yor Match


Take yor match from between yor little finger with ye thumb and ye second
finger of yor right hand being turned with ye Palm from you.

28 Blow your Cole


Bring the right hand with ye match backward and your left hand with ye musket
and rest forward, turning your face some what backward blow yor match stiff

29 Cock your Match.


Holding your match between yor. thumb and second finger bring it to the cock,
and press it into the cock with the thumb

30 Try yor Match.


Your thumb and forefinger being upon the cock and the second and third finger
under the cock, pull the cock to the Pan and with the finger either raiseor
sinkethe match

31 Guard and blow.


lay the two forefingers of the right hand upon the pan, the thumb behind the
scutchion of the pan the easier to lift up the musket, and so raising up the
musket with both hands blow as before in the i2 posture

32 Open your Pan


with the two forefingers of the right hand open the Pan as in the 7 posture

33 Present.


Remove yor. right hand to the thumb hole yor second finger to ye tricker with
yor left hand fix the forke of ye Rest to yor musket and yor thumb against the
forke, and the pike end of the rest on the ground.

34 Give Fire


lift up yor right elbow and place the but end of yor musket within yor
shoulder nere your breast, the small end appearing a little above you shoulder
standing with ye left leg foremost and the knee bent and the right leg standing
stiff

35 Dismount yor Musket


Bring your musket and rest to your right side and carry both in the left hand
only

36 Vncocke your Match


Take the match from the cock with the thumb and second singer of yor right
hand holding the musket and rest in the left hand only.

37 Return your Match.


Put the match between the two lesser fingers of the left hand from whence you
had it.

Note from henc forward you may Prime and charge as before from ye 8 postur and
so forward as in ye 25 postur

38 Shoulder yor Musket.


Haueing yor. musket poized hold yor rest an handful under the forke, then
bring your musket before yor. body and yor rest crossouer it behind the thumb
hole, and so with both hands lay it gently on yor. shoulder haueing the rest
cross yor body and withal bring yor right leg up to yor left, then fall back
again with yor. right leg.

39 March with yor rest in yor right hand.


First take the match from the left hand between the fingers of the right
hand, then take the string of the Rest from the left arm, and return the
match between the fingers of the left hand and take ye rest in ye right hand.

40 March and with your Musket carry yor. rest.


First shift the match as in the former direction, then put the string of the
Rest over the left arm and the rest in the hand and so return the match and
carry yor rest as in the figure.

41 Vnsholder yor. Musket.


Bringing up yor right leg to your left sink your musket and carry it right up
and withal turn it, that the pike end of yor. Rest be toward yor left side
then take the Musket at the breech with yor right hand and slip down yor left
with ye rest

42 Poyze your Musket.


Hold the Musket right up in the right hand on yor right side raise yor left
hand to ye forke of yor rest, and set yor thumb against the forke as in the
figure.

43 Rest yor Musket.


Bring up yor left hand with the forke of the rest to the musket, and so let
Musket and rest sink down togather and fall back with yor right leg to
your proper stand*

44 Draw out yor. Match.


Take the match beetweene the thumb and the seacond finger of the right hand
as in the xxvii posture and with the thumb of your left hand hold the musket
fast on the rest.

45 Blow yor. Match.


Bear your Musket and rest forward with the left hand, and your match backward
in the right, and blow as in the 28 posture.

46 Cock yor Match.


Cock your macth as in the 29th posture

47 Try your Match.


Try your match as in the 30th posture.

48 The sentinel Posture.


Hold the two forefingers of ye right hand upon your pan, the thumb behind the
scutchian ready upon all occasions

1 Handle yor Pike.


Standing at the but end of yor Pike fall backward with yor left foot, and with
yor right hand turned, take your Pike at the But end and bring yor right hand
up to your hip.

2 Recover your Pike and Order.


Bring yor left foot before yor right, and with yor left hand take yor Pike
forwards bearing the butt end downward, and remove yor right hand above yor left

3 Order yor Pike.


Set the but end of yor Pike nere your right foot on the outside, holding it
right up in yor right hand, about the height of yor eye, and your arm a little
Bending, and yor right foot forward

4 Advance yor Pike in three motions.

The first Motion.



with the right hand alone bring yor Pike just before yor body, bearing it
directly right up, raising the but end from the ground, then take ye Pike with
yor left hand about ye height your girdle

5 the seacond Motion


Forsake the Pike with your right hand and with the left hand alone raise up
the Pike, that the But end be about the height of yor thigh, then take ye But
end in yor. right hand, without stooping to it

6 the third Motion being Advanced


Forsake the Pike with the left hand and with yor right hand alone carry the
Pike right up locking the Pike between yor shoulder and arm. yor right hand
holding the but end of the Pike about the height of yor hip.

7 Order yor Pike in three motions.

the first Motion.



Sink your right hand a little and with your left hand take the Pike as high
as well you can reach and bring ye Pike just before yor Body.

8 the 2d Motion


Forsake the Pike with yor right hand, and bring down the pike in your left
hand that the but end be nere unto the ground, then with yor right hand take ye
pike about the height of yor head.

9 The 3d motion being ordered


Forsak yr Pike with your left hand, and with the right hand only set the but
end on the ground, on the outside of yor right foot as in the third Posture.

10 Shoulder yor. Pike in 3 motions

The first Motion



Bring ye Pike just before yor body and raise the but end from ye ground
bearing it forward, then take it with yor left hand a little beneath yor right.

12 The seacond Motion.


Bring forward the Pike with yor left hand, and take it in your right, reaching
backward as far as well you may.

12 The 2d motion being Sholdred


Forsake yor Pike with yor left hand, and with the right only lay it upon yor
right shoulder, bearing the but end about a foot from the ground, holding yor
thumb under the Pike, the better to govern it, carrying the pike forward.

13 Port yor. Pike in 3 motions.

the first Motion.



Bear yor right hand with the pike backward as far as well you can, with yor.
left hand take ye pike forward, and with. the right hand bear ye pike upward.

14 The 2d Motion.


Forsaking ye Pike with the right hand cast ye point forward that ye But end may
conveniently be taken in ye right hand.

15 The 3d motion being Ported.


Take ye But end of ye Pike in yor right hand holding it about yor hip, and
raising the pike with yor left hand about ye hight of yo breast carry ye Pike
directly before you yor left foot forward.

16 Charge yor Pike


Raise ye right hand and strech it backward, yor left hand being at yor breast,
yor left elbow against yor hip

17 Advance yor. Pike.


Bear down the butt end of ye Pike with yor right hand and raise ye pike with
ye left, and so advance as in ye 6 figure.

18 Sholder yor. Pike in 3 Motions.

The first motion.



Sink yor right hand, and with yor left take ye pike as high as well you can
reach bringing the pike just before yor body

19 The 2d motion.


Forsake the butt end with yor right hand bring forward yor Pike in the left
hand, and take the pike backward in ye right hand as far as well you may reach.

20 The 3d motion being Sholdred


Forsake ye Pike with the left hand, and with the right only lay it upon your
shoulder etc: as in ye i2 figure.

21 Charge to ye Rear in 3 motions.

the first motion.



Bear the pike with yor. right hand backward, take it forward in yor left hand
as far as you may conveniently reach, bearing ye pike with yor right hand upward

22 The 3d motion.


Forsaking the Pike with yor right hand, bear it over yor head and at the same
instant turn yor body to ye left hand that you may conveniently take ye butt
end of ye Pike in yor right hand.

23 the 3d motion being Charged.


Having ye butt end of ye Pike in yor right hand stretch yor right arm
backward and set your left hand at yor breast etc as in ye i6 figur

24 Recover yor Pike and Sholder in 3 motions

The first motion.



Slip yor left hand forward as far as well you may and lift ye Pike upwards to
yor head and with the right hand bear ye But end somewhat downward.

25 The seacond motion.


Forsakeing the But end of the Pike with yor right hand, bear in the Pike over
your head with your. left hand only and that instant turn yor face to ye right
hand, and be ready with yor right hand to take ye Pike more Backward.

26 The 3d motion being Sholdred


Having the Pike in the right hand forsake it with your left and with the right
hand only, lay it on your sholder, as in the i2 and 20 figurs,

27 Order yor Pike


This is to be done in 3 motions as the contrary is shown in ye. 9. i0. ii.
figures Bear the Pike with the right hand backward, with yor left take it
forward, bearing the but end downward, then slip down your right hand a little
above yor left and set ye but end on ye ground, as in ye: 9 figur

28 Cheek yor Pike

the first motion



This is to be done by several palming postures, first with the right hand
bear the but end of the Pike backward, as far as you can and so Contie^w
palming till you come to the head of your Pike

29 The 2d motion being Cheeked


With yor left hand hold the Pike a little below the head, your right hand more
backward, as far as the cheeks or arming reach, set yor right hand upon yor
hip, yor elbow stretched forth and yor left hand more forward before yor breast.

30 Trayle yor Pike


Remove your Right hand to your left, and in your right hand only carry your
Pike, your hand Being upon your hip.

31 Recover yor Pike and Charge
The first Palmeing motion



This to be done by several Palming postures backward, Bring forward your
right hand as far as well you can, and with ye left hand gripe the pike
Backward as far as you can.

32 The 2d Palming motion


Forsake the Pike with yor: right hand, bring forward the Pike with ye left and
take it backward with the right, and so continue palming until you have the
But end of ye pike in your Right hand

33 Charge yor. Pike.


Strech yor. right arm backward with ye butt end of ye Pike in yor hand yor.
left hand at yor breast, and yor elbow upon yor hip and as in ye i6 figure

34 Order at close Order.


This is to be done in 3 motions first bearing the pike right up before ye body
and so forward as from ye Advance in ye 6. 7. and 8. figures, only you must
observe to set ye, butt end of ye Pike at the inside of ye right foot with is
yor closse order.

35 Charg for horse and draw yor sword


The Butt end of yor Pike resting against yor right foot take it in yor left
hand about, ye hight of yor girdle and step forward with yor left foot ye knee
bent lay yor left arm upon yor knee couching down low and draw yor sword over
yor left arm

36 Recover yor Pike and put up yor sword.


Raise yor body right up set yor Pike: against yor right sholder with the left
hand ye but end being still upon ye ground then put up yor sword:


