A QVARTRON OF REAsons, composed by Doctor HILL, vnquartered, and proved a
quartron of follies: by Francis Dillingham, Bachelour of Divinity.

August. in Senten. Inimici Ecclesiae si tantummodo adversantur male sentienda
exercent eius sapientiam.

The Churches enemies if they be only her adversaries by false opinions, do
exercise her wisdom.

HINC ^ LVCEM ^ ET ^ POCVLA ^ SACRA


Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1603.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and my very good Lord, OLIVER, Lord S. John, Baron of
Blettenshoe, Grace and peace.
THe pains of Papists (Right Honorable) in propagating the Romish religion,
should move sincere Protestants to be painful in defending the truth of the
eternal God, who in hi^ rich mercy amongst other innumerable benefits
bestowed upon this land, has given us the benefit of his holy word, not in a
strange tongue as it was in the days of Popery, but in our mother tongue,
that it may be a lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths. This light
the Papists have labored to extinguish by treasons, by writings, and all
means that they could use, but (blessed be God) frustra illis est, they are
deceived. Now least it should seem strange to any that heretics should be so
laborious in auouching heresy, may it please him to consider that Idolaters
have bin studious in maintaining their idolatry. Jeroboam made two calves, 1
King. 12.
the one of them he placed at Bethel, and so made it Bethauen, the other at
Dan, and so made it a den of Idolaters. The Israelites offered their children
to Moloc: behold the rage of idolatry! If men could be content that their
children should be sacrificed unto idols, shall we think it strange that some
should write books to subvert the truth of religion? Wherefore to leave this
point and to return to that which I said in the beginning, that the labors of
Papi^ts should be a spur to Protestants to defend the Gospel now publicly
authorized in England. Why should not we be as careful for Gods glory as they
are for the glory of their purple whore? But I fear some are like the beete,
which is good both in winter and summer: others have bought farms, or it may
be have married wives, that is, they are so addicted to the world, and to their
pleasures that they have no leisure to write: I would these men would consider
of Christ his commandment, Negotiamini donec venero, use traffic until I
come. But to leave these loyterers in the Lords vineyard upon the forenamed
consideration, I have endeavored my self to answer a book, called a Quartron
of Reasons for the Catholic religion: which book as I dedicate to your
Honor, so I humbly desire you to accept the same as a token of my dutiful
mind toward you. The author of this pestilent pamphlet commends the Romish
religion for peace, d^ privil. and (...).
yet Theodoricus de Niem says, that vnum patet, one thing is manifest, after
the suppression of the Imperial power nothing but factions did spring up in
the Catholic Church, especially in Italy. And as he is not ashamed to lie in
this point so does he also in saying that in England all were Papists, without
exception, from the first christening thereof until this age of king Henry
the eight: yet Ministers were married many hundred years in England, as M.
Camden shows in his Britannia in many places. In the 129. page of the third
edition he proves that ante annum 1102. sacerdotibus vxores in Anglia non
fuerunt interdictae, Ministers were not restrained from marriage before the
year of our Lord a 1102. And as Ministers were married, so Transubstantiation
was not acknowledged likewise a long time, as may be seen by Aelfricus his
epistle against the bodily presence. Moreover, the author as he labors to
disgrace all Protestants in general, so especially he inueyeth against Luther,
wherefore to stop the mouths of Papists, I will set down the testimony of
Langius a Papist concerning Luther. First he says, that he was vir venerandus
and profundissimus Theologus, a reverend man and most profound Divine.
Afterward he writes thus, Martinus ille theologorum nostrae tempestatis omnium
facile princeps doctrinam suam Evangelicis testimoniis and divi Apostoli Pauli
necnon priscorum orthodoxorum patrum originalibus dictis roborans and
comprobans perstitit invictus. The same Martin the most wise ringleader of the
divines of our age, confirming and strengthening his doctrine with testimonies,
out of the Gospel and out of S. Paul the Apostle, and also with the original
sayings of the ancient orthodoxall fathers, perfisted invincible. This
testimony may suffice to clear Luther from the frivolous quarrels that this
slanderer has written against him. Bellarmine makes the confession of the
adverse part to be a note of the Church. Hence then are we proved the Church
by this confession of Langius. The same author exceedingly commends Hierome
of Prage, saying that he was orator eloquentissimus atque acerrimus dialecticus
adeo quod nullus doctissimorum virorum in Concilio disputando eum superare
poterat. He was the most eloquent Orator, and fine Logician that the learnedest
man in the Council could not overcome him in disputation. Mutius his
testimony of the same man is worthy to be heard, Erat, says he, Hieronymus
vir eloquentissimus and insignis cum in omni philosophiae genere tum praecipue
in sacris literis. Hierome was a most eloquent and famous man in all
philosophy, but especially in the holy Scriptures. Now what cause this proud
Papist has to vaunt of their own learning, and to disgrace the Protestants,
let every man judge; seeing Protestants by the Papists own confession have
been such famous men. Lastly, not to be long, the author of this book
extolleth the holiness of their religion: touching which point let that
ancient writer Aronobius speak, who in his seventh book has this sentence,
Crescit multitudo peccantium cum redimendi peccati spes datur and facile itur
ad culpas vbi est vaenalis ignoscentium gratia. Sinners do much increase when
there is hope given to redeem their sins, and men easily commit faults where
pardons are sold. Then is the Romish religion dissolute which sells pardons.
Not to proceed any further, the Lord multiply his graces upon you and your
virtuous Lady, to your souls good and the benefit of his Church.

Your Honors ever to command, Francis Dillingham.

THE FIRST REASON: Of Prophesies.
IF M. Doctor had contended, pondere argumentorum, and not multitudine, with
sound arguments, and not with a multitude; he might happily have persuaded some
to his religion: whereas now by reason of the weakness of his reasons, he has
rather hindered many from the same, then moooued any unto it. That which is
commonly said of pictures, has a fit place in this work of doctor Hill,
Picturae eminus, non comminus videndae, pictures are fair a far off, but if
the eye draw near them, there is no show of them.

Before I come to the matter, I will examine the title of his book, in which
he has placed a piece of holy Scripture, taken out of S. Peter, 1. Pe^. 3.
who wills all men to be ready to give an answer of that hope which is in
them: what then is become of the vnfolden faith of Papists, who will have
simple men to answer, that they believe as the Church believes? S. Peter
speaks of the hope that is in them, not out of them, in themselves, not in
another. In a word, to say they believe as the Church believes, is an answer
fit for all heretics. Furthermore, out of this place of S. Peter, we gather
that Christian men have a hope in them, yet Pope John the 23. denied the
immortality of the soul. Bellarmine had rather discredit the Council of
Constance, in which this is reported, then confess an error. There is one
thing yet to be touched in his answer unto the coppie of a letter, in which he
protests his loyalty to our late gracious Queen Elizabeth. May we trust
him? If I should demand of him, whether he allows the Bull of Pius Quintus
or no, it may be I should pose him. The Papists teach that the Pope may depose
Princes, and yet they will be good subjects. If he answers that he is not a
Papist in this point: where is his Unity, of which he vaunteth in one of his
reasons? Parrie confessed that every word in Doctor Allens book was a warrant
to a prepared mind. Do^t. Bill. 704.
It taught that Kings may be excommunicated, deprived, and violently handled:
it proves that all war undertaken for Religion is honorable. Thus M.
Doctor you see we have cause to doubt of your loyalty, but I leave that to God
Almighty who searches the hearts of all men, and come to your Reasons.

In answering your arguments I purpose to draw them to syllogismes, your first
argument has in it this syllogism.

They which make the prophesies of Christ to be false, hold a false religion:
But the Protestants make the prophesies of Christ to be false: Ergo they hold a
false religion.
I deny the assumption, which you prove out of the 12. of John, where Christ
foretells that he will draw all men unto him; but by the Protestants doctrine
Christ has not done so. Ergo.

I deny the assumption again, for exposition of which place of holy writ, in
hunc locum.
I produce Augustine, who writes thus. Quae omnia? nisi ex quibus Ille
eijcitur for as. non autem dixit omnes, sed omnia, non enim omnium est sides.
What all but those out of which Satan is cast? he said not all men, but all
things, for all men have not faith. Again Augustine writes thus. Aut si
omnia, ipsi homines intelligendi sunt, omnia praedestinata ad salutem possumus
dicere. If by all things all men are meant, we may understand all the
predestinate unto salvation.

Your other Scriptures foretell the calling of the Gentiles, which we confess.
To proceed in this argument, was not Christ true in his promise, when as Act.
1.15. the Church was but about a hundred and twenty souls? here is no great
number, and yet this small number was in a chamber. In the 13. of the Revel. v.
3. the whole earth wondered at the beast, yet is Christ true in his promise. In
your Apology of English fugitives, thus you shall find it written. The whole
world did run from Christ after Julian to plain Paganism, after Valens to
Arrianisme. The Rhemists upon the second of the Thessalonians, acknowledge a
revolt from the Church. Nazianzen in his oration of Cyprian says, that
Cyprianus in temporibus Decij solus e Christianis est relictus. S. Cyprian in
Decius his time was the only Christian. Th^oph. lib. 1. cap. 16. Read Aug. in
128 psalm. and Te^tul e^hor. ad Ca^i and Paci^nus in part. ad po^ni.
The Arrian Emperor speaks thus unto Liberius, Quota pars tu es orbis
terrarum; qui solus facis cum homine scelerato, and orbis terrarum, and mundi
^otius pacem dissoluis? What part of the world art thou that only take part
with the wicked man, and dissoluest the peace of the whole earth? Liberius
answers, Non diminuitur solitudine mea verbum sidei, nam and olim tres soli
fuere qui edicto resisterent. In that I am left alone, the word of faith is not
diminished, for in times past, there were three only which resisted the kings
edict. Thus every man may see Christ true in his promise, though the church be
not always glorious in outward appearance. I will now retort the argument upon
the Papists themselves; They which hold that the faith of Christ may be wholly
extinguished, make the promises of Christ untrue: But the Papist holds that
the faith of Christ may be wholly extinguished. Ergo.
The assumption is avouched by Dominicus Asote, who says, Lib. 3. d^ Pap^.
cap. 17.
as testifies Bellarmine himself, that extinct a fide per discessionem ab
Apostolica sede, totus mundus vanus erit, the faith being extinguished by a
departure from the Apostolical See, the whole world shall be vain. I may
speak therefore of this Doctor, as Tullie does to one, Ea in alterum ne dicas,
quae cum tibi responsa sunt, erubescas: utter not these things against another,
which when they are answered, will make thee ashamed. Now I come to untruths
which are avouched in this chapter. First, he charge us that we affirm, that
almost all nations have been in Lucifer his thraldom until this our age in
which Luther came to expel Lucifer. Secondly he affirms that in our country
of England, it is most manifest, that all were Papists without exception, from
the first christening thereof until this age of king Henry the eight. M.
Doctor, have you lost your forehead? was John Wickliff a Papist? I persuade my
self you dare not affirm it. Again, this land received the faith in the
Apostles time, as witnesses Tertullian in his book against the Jews. But the
Apostles preached not Popery. Did the Apostles teach the half communion? who
but blind would affirm it? Again, in Pope Gregory's time, this land differed
in ceremonies, and in celebration of the Mass from Rome, as 2. 2. 93 quaest,
art. 1. arg. 3.
Aquinas teaches: who list to read more of this point, may be referred unto D.
Fulks overthrow of Stapletons fortress. Thus I have answered this first cavil
of the Doctor against our religion, for I pass by the title that he gives to
Lucifer calling him the master devil. The difference of devils I leave to
Papists to set forth, who are sometimes too familiar with them, Tasc. temp.
as Silvester, who was made Pope by the help of the devil.

Luther his speech concerning the restoring of the Gospel, must be understood
comparatively: the Gospel was before his time, but it was not, in tanta luce,
in such brightness, as it has been since, and I trust it shall more and more
increase ingratijs Papistarum, whether the Papists will or no. They may press
the truth, but they shall never oppress it: they may vaunt of verity, but
they must win the cause by force of arguments.

The second reason: the name of Catholics.
A man may marvel that any who would persuade to religion, should make so
simple an argument as this.

They which are called Catholics are the true Church: But the Papists are
called Catholics: Ergo they are the true Church.
The proposition is false. Salvianus in the beginning of his 4. book of
providence, speaks excellently of this point. Nomen sine officio nihil est.
nam sicut ait quidam in scriptis suis, quid est principatus, sine meritorum
sublimitate, nisi honoris titulus sine nomine. A name without the duty is
nothing, for as one faith in his writings, what is principality without
sublimitie of good works, but a bare title of honor. For the further handling
of this matter, we will consider what Catholic is. Vincentius Lyrinensis thus
describes this word Catholic. Quod ab omnibus creditum est, Catholicum est:
that which is believed of all men is Catholic. Is Popery then Catholic,
which is not believed of all men? I will name some opinions and prove them not
to be credited of all, and I will begin with the worshipping of Images, which
I will prove not to be Catholic. Minutius Foelix in his Octauius speaks
thus, Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus, we neither worship, nor wish for Crosses
Again in the same treatise, it is demanded of Christians, Cur nullas aras
habent, templa nulla, nulla nota simulachra? why they have no altars, no
temples, no images? The Council of Eliberis in Spain, have in plain words
banished them out of Churches. Placuit picturas in Ecclesiis esse non debere,
ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur. We have decreed that
pictures ought not to be in the Churches, least that which is worshipped or
adored, be painted on walls. Sigebert in the year of our Lord 755. writes,
that Constantinus Jmperator Constantinopoli synodum trecentorum triginta
Episcoporum congregat; in qua edicto promulgato, de Imaginibus Dei and
sanctorum eius deponendis, Ecclesiam Dei nimis scandalizat. Constantine the
Emperor gathered a Council at Constantinople of 330. Bishops in which,
publishing an edict against the Images of God and the Saints, he does too much
scandalize the Church. Thus it appears that worshipping of Images is not
Catholic.

Secondly the Papists teach, that the Church is built upon upon Peter's person.
Is this Catholic doctrine? Jonas in his second book of Images speaks thus
of this point, Multi and pene omnes, Petram, super quam aedificatur Ecclesia
fidem intelligunt beati Petri, quae communis est totius sanctae Ecclesiae,
videlicet eam quae paulo ante promissionem hanc praecesserat, id est, tu es
Christus filius Dei vivi. Many and almost all understand by the Rock, on which
the Church is built, the faith of blessed Peter, which is common to all the
holy Church, namely that which a little before was precedent to this promise,
that is to say, Thou art Christ the son of the living God.

Thirdly the Papists teach, that the virgin Marie was no sinner: is this
catholic doctrine? Read Aquinas in his third part, the 27. quaest. the 4. art.
and his answer to the third argument, where rejecting Chrysostomes authority,
he says, that excessit in illis verbis, his words are too broad, yet many
years after Chrysostom was this doctrine held. in 22. Math.
Theophilact writes that Marie was ambitiosula, tanto sibi filio subdito,
somewhat ambitious, having such a son under her.

Fourthly the Papists teach, that Ministers may not have wives: is this
catholic? many hundred years after Christ, Priests were married. In the year
of our Lord 1074. Hildebrand (as Lambertus Schafuaburgensis reports) decreed
that, Habentes aut dimittant, aut deponantur, they which had wives must either
dismiss them or be deposed: therefore, says the forenamed writer, Aduersus
hoc decretum infremunt tota factio Clericorum, the whole company of the
Clergy stormed against this decree. The same is also reported by Sigebert,
saying that Gregory vxorates Sacerdotes a divino officio removit novo exemplo,
removed from divine service the married Priests by a new example. What should
I speak of prayer in a strange tongue, of concealing the Scriptures from the
people, of summoning of Counsels by the Pope? These with many other opinions,
might I show to be against divinity taught in the ancient Church. Pacianus
thus describes Catholic, that it is Obedientia omnium mandatorum, scilicet
Dei: an obedience unto all Gods commandments. Now let us see whether you teach
obedience unto Gods commandments or no? to let pass Idolatry and other
sins, M. Perk. ex Molano. See more of this point in the Reason of doctrine.
I come to swearing. The Papists teach that they may swear that they have not
been at Mass, when they have been there. This is nothing but to profane an
oath as Aquinas testifies, in his 2. 2. 89. quaest. art. 7. and answer to the
4. argument, saying, Quacunque art verborum quis iuret, Deus tamen qui
conscientiae testis est, ita hoc accipit, sicut ille cui iuratur intelligit:
with what cunning soever a man does swear, God who is the witness of
conscience, does take it as he means, to who^ a man swears.

Let us now hear the reason why the name Catholic proves a Church; because
they that are so named, have on their side Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, and
Martyrs: (for of miracles we shall speak hereafter.) This proud brag I
utterly deny: and concerning Scriptures, I say with Salvianus in his 5. book
of providence, that Nos tantum Scripturas plenas habemus, qui eas vel in font
suo bibimus, vel certe de purissimo font haustas: we only have the Scriptures
fully perfect, which either drink them in their fountain, or translated out
of a most pure fountain. Touching Fathers, by that which has bin said before,
it appears that they are not all on their side. What should I speak of the
famous Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, which died in the religion now taught in
England? Thus therefore I return the argument:

They which are falsely called Catholics, are not the true church: But the
Papists are falsely called Catholics: Ergo they are not the true church.
Concerning the name of Protestants, we do not hold our selves content with
it, although it be not so bad as the name of Papists: and touching the names of
Calvinists, and Zwinglians, they are names invented, as Athanasians and
Omousians were, by the old heretics. But whereas he gives some allowance to
the name of Papists, it may not be tolerated, for why may they not as well be
called Petrians? and therefore I say with Nazianzen, (...), In dic. Christ's.
I will not be named of men, being borne of God: In Psalm. 44.
and with Augustine, Sumus Christiani, non Petriani, we are Christians, not
Petrians. I cannot let pass his ignorance in saying, that all heretics have
always taken their names of some one, who began that heresy. For (not to take
exception against his speech) by the first authors of heresy, as Nestorius,
Pelagius, every mean divine knows that many heretics have their names of
their heresy, not of their author, as Apostolici, Cathari, and others. If the
Lutherans have changed the word Catholic in the Creed, draw your pen
against them, and not against the church of England. But it is a perilous
matter for some of our translations to say, for an heretic, a man that is the
author of sects. His own men so translate the word heresy, Act. 24. chap. and
28. chap.
A great matter to english a greek word. Thanks be to God, that you have no
other cauills against our translations. I hope such pelting will drive men from
Popery. Your saying out of Hierome galleth your selves, and proves you to be
sectaries, as being named Dominicans, Franciscans, Jesuits, and with diverse
other names. Therefore please not your selves any longer with a bare name,
without the subject matter: for that is like a pearl in the snowt of a swine.

The 3. reason: unity and consent.
Having answered two of the Doctors reasons, I come to handle the third, in
which he vaunteth of unity after this manner. The Catholic religion has
variety of doctrine, with diversity of manners, yet ever kept unity in such
a peaceable manner, as never any disagreed in any point of doctrine.

Blush M. Doctor at this notorious untruth, I have in my disswasiue from
Popery gathered 20. contradictions betwixt Papists in matters of faith: and to
give you a taste of your unity, I will set down your harmony about
Antichrist. Some Papists hold Mahomet to be Antichrist, Bellarmine in his 3.
book de Romans Pont. cap. 3. This is denied by other, because, say they,
Antichrist shall be one singular man.

Secondly some Papists teach, that Antichrist shall arise of the tribe of Dan:
cap. 11.
yet Bellarmine confesses that this opinion is not certain, because no
scripture conuinceth it.

Thirdly the Papists teach, that Antichrist shall reign but three years and
an half, yet Hentenius confuteth this opinion.

Fourthly some Papists teach, that Antichrist shall utterly extinguish the
faith, as I proved before. Bellarmine denies this not without cause.

Fifthly the Rhemists say, that it may well be that Antichrist shall sit at
Rome. Bellarmine will have him to sit at Jerusalem. I will not follow any more
contradictions about this opinion, but come to their unity in Idolatry.

Catharine affirms the commandment which concerns Images to be temporal
and positive: is not this goodly divinity? others deny it. Caietan
confounds an Idol and an Image, Bellarmine cannot bear this doctrine.
Aquinas will have the cross of Christ to be worshipped with divine honor,
others renounce Aquinas in this point. Alphonsus de Castro counts Serenus and
Epiphanius enemies to Images, Bellarmine confuteth Alphonsus his opinion.
Abulensis and Peresius teach, that Images of God are not to be made: Bellarmine
like an Idolater allows Images of God himself. Augustine speaks plainly
against this devilish divinity. Nulla Imago Dei coli debet nisi illa quae hoc
est, quod ipse, nec ipsa pro illo, Epist. 1^9.
sed cum illo: No image of God must be worshipped, but that which is God, and
that not for God, but with God. By these contrarieties every man may see the
popish harmony. Now I reduce the Argument into a syllogism.

Where unity is, there is the Church: But the Papists have unity. Ergo.
The proposition and assumption are both false: and whereas he would prove the
proposition out of the 4. of the Acts, and 17. of S. John, we must know that an
unity in true doctrine is there commended, and prayed for. Si vultis, says
Augustine, vivere de spiritu sancto, c ^6. sermon. de temp.
tenete charitatem, amate veritatem, desiderate vnitatem, vt perveniatis ad
aeternitatem. If you will live according to the holy spirit, then embrace love,
make much of truth, and desire unity, that you may come to eternity. Unity
therefore in verity must bring us to eternity. But in sadness is there no
Church where there are dissentions? ^ book tripar. hist. 12. chap.
Themistius wrote to Valens that he should not be cruel to Christians for
difference in Ecclesiastical opinions, for amongst the Pagans there were more
then three hundred sects. Will you M. Doctor, cut off the Church of Corinth
from the body of the Church, because of dissentions? What shall become of Paul
and Barnabas, Cyprian and Cornelius, Epiphanius and Chrysostom, with diverse
others? And to stay thy mind, Christian Reader, touching this point of
dissentions, I desire thee first to consider, that all men have not the same
measure of the spirit, and therefore there must needs be contentions. God his
gifts are diverse, to one man he gives greater knowledge then to another:
therefore Paul says, when perfection of knowledge comes, there shall be an
unity in opinions, which is not to be looked for in this vale of misery.
Secondly, vainglory, the mother of mischievous contentions, is not wholly
driven out of men that live in the Church: I would to God it were, for then
many broils would have an end. Marvel not then, gentle Reader, though there
be variety of opinions. I might enlarge these reasons and annex more, but I
desire brevity. The Doctor here to amplify our divisions without all
conscience, charge us with the heresies of Anabaptists, Adamites,
Striblerians, and many other, which we condemn to the pit of hell. But for a
testimony of our unity let our heavenly harmony of Confessions be read, in
which a man may see our consent to be greater then the Papists would wish. The
scornful name of Parlimentarie religion, I leave to God to revenge: (if
Queen Marie might receive the Pope by Parliament, why might not Queen
Elizabeth do as much for Christ?)

And thus I retort the argument:

Where there are divisions, there is no Church: But amongst Papists are
divisions. Ergo.
In the end of this reason he concludes with a manifest untruth, saying, that
all decrees of lawful Counsels and of Popes do agree in points of doctrine
one with another. Good God! what dare not this man affirm? I pass by
Counsels, and come to Popes. Pope Nicholas avouches that Baptism may be
given and ministered only in the name of Christ: which is a false opinion, as
Bellarmine himself confesses. Pope Pelagius contrariwise decreed that it
ought to be ministered in the name of the blessed Trinity. Aquinas 3. par.
quaest. 66. art. 6. In epist. 1. ad Cor. cap. 7.
But let Erasmus speak concerning this matter: Qui sit, how comes it to
pass, says he, that the decrees of this Pope fight with the decrees of that
Pope. That I say nothing of Formosus, do not the decrees of John the 22. and
Nicholas fight one against another? what should I speak of Innocentius, and
Coelestinus, Pelagius, and Gregory's decrees, one contrary to another? By
these examples appears the Doctors vanity.

The fourth reason: conversion of countries.
In this fourth reason the framer of it according to his custom, begins
with an untruth, saying, that all countries which ever believed in Christ, were
first converted to his faith, by such as either were precisely sent, or at
least wise had their authority from the Pope. The Apostles which received
authority from Christ himself, not from Peter, converted many countries. That
the Apostles received authority from Christ himself, the scriptures are
plain: in the 20. of John our Savior says, As the father has sent me, so
send I you: what can be more plain? Paul says of himself, that he was an
Apostle neither of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ. How many countries did
Paul convert? Concerning this land I spoke something before. Read Theodoret his
4. book and 3. chap. where he reckneth England amongst the Christian lands.
Chrysostom as the same writer testifies, comparavit viros aemulatores
Apostolicorum laborum, eosque ad Scythias misit, provided men followers of the
Apostles labors, and sent them to the Scythians. The Indians were converted by
Frumentinus, whom Athanasius ordained Bishop, as the same author testifies in
his 1. book and 12. chap. The people of Iberia were converted per captivam
mulierem, by a woman that was a captive, Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 10. by all which
clear and pregnant proofs every man may see the boldness of the authors
assertion. But now I come to reduce his reason into a syllogism:

They which take pains in conversion of countries, hold the true religion: But
the Papists take pains in conversion of countries: ergo.
I deny the proposition, and say to the Papists, as our blessed Savior spoke
to the Pharisees: Math. 23.
woe be to you Papists, for ye compass sea and land to make one of your
profession, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell.
Heretics have labored to convert, or rather to pervert men. Paul in the 2.
Tim. 3.13. affirms, that evil men shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived. The Arrians perverted many kingdoms, Read Sigebert in his
chap. de regno Gothorum.
as witness Theodoret, and others writers. As touching the conversion of the
west Indians, if things be true that are reported; Sadeel. con. are. pos.
in novo illo orb amplius decies centena millia barbarorum aut fame aut gladio
perierunt: in the new found world above ten hundred thousand have perished
either by famine or by sword. If our Savior Christ had said, Go kill all
nations, when he said, Go teach all nations, he had fitted the Papists
humor. What Gregory spent in founding Seminaries to restore Catholic
religion, I know not, but this I am sure of, that Papists have taken pains in
contriuing of treasons here in England. But to return to the Indies: The
people there lived not only without all manner of knowledge of God, but also
wild and naked without any civil government: Iuel. 42. page
being in this miserable estate, some worshipped the sun, some familiar
devils: what marvel then if they were easily led into any religion,
especially carrying such a show of apparel and other ceremonies? But do not
the Protestants take pains in winning of souls unto God? Calvine, not to
speak of others, read almost two hundred lectures every year, and preached
above two hundred sermons. Who converted England, Scotland, Ireland, and other
countries from Antichrist to Christ, from the Mass to the Messiah, from Images
to the service of the living God? did not poor Luther, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, and other Protestants the ministers of England, labor in their
own charges preaching in season, and out of season? God is as well glorified
in the conversion of a soul here as in other countries. But do the Papists
now labor in converting of souls? in times past it was not so; hodie proh
dolor, says Aeneas Sylvius, Lib. 1. de ge^^. con. Basil.
now alas he is a rare Prelate which does not prefer temporal things before
spiritual things. Again, Nos ignavia nostra nimia vitae cupiditate,
Christianam religionem ex toto orb in angulum redegimus: we by our lasinesse
and great desire of life have drawn religion out of the world into a corner of
the same. Clemangis in his book which he wrote of the corrupt state of the
Church, speaks thus: Multo aequanimius ferunt december millium animarum
iacturam, quam december solidorum. Pontifices suas traditiones divinis long
mandatis anteponunt: they had rather loose ten thousand souls then ten
shillings: the Popes prefer their traditions far before Gods commandments.
Thus then I return the argument:

They which esteem money, more then the souls of men, are not the true
Church: But the Papists esteem money more then the souls of men. Ergo.
Whether M. Calvin sent ministers or no into new found lands I know not,
neither am I privy to the success they had. Ezekiel was sent to the Jews,
that they might know that there had been a Prophet amongst them; the fault is
not in the doctrine, but in the men who resist the same. I will not dispute
whether a wicked man may be a means to win souls, as a good master
bestows a good alms by the ministry of an evil servant: so also the
merciful Lord may call one to repentance, by the means of another, though he
be an unpenitent person. The Doctors railing upon Luther, Calvin, and Peter
Martyr, calling his wife fustilugges, fitteth the spirit of a Papist. If Peter
Martyrs lawful wife deserves the name of fustilugges, what name do the
popish priests concubines deserve? In that our Ministers travel not without
their wives, 1. Cor. ^.
I answer with Paul, Have we not power to lead about a sister a wife? Beza his
epistles and pistols are but words to fill up pages, and to wast paper. But
have not the Protestants for-gone any worldly wealth, to spread abroad
religion, why are they then exiles, and have witnessed their religion with
their blood. In a word, Popery gains more by wealth and arms, then by
conscience, and if it gains any soundly it is by some relics of truth which
remains with them.

The fifth reason: largenes of dominion through multitude of believers.
That the Church which the Messiah was to plant, must be dispersed throughout
all nations, and kingdoms, as the holy Prophets most plainly foreshewed, we
acknowledge: neither needed the Doctor to have produced so many testimonies. I
may well say of the Doctor, as did Aristippus of Dyonisius his liberality:
Tuto Dyonisius, inquit, liberalis est his enim qui multis indigent, pauca
mittit, Platoni vero qui nihil accipit, plurima. Dyonisius, says Aristippus,
maintains all his liberality well enough, for to the needy he sends few
things, but to Plato which lacks nothing, many gifts. Even so the Doctor in
needelesse matters heapeth up many testimonies: but in matters of question, he
has no proof, but bold assertions. If he had proved that these prophesies
are verified in no religion, but only in the religion, which now the Papists
hold, he had done well; but hic labor, hoc opus, this is such pains as would
make the Doctor sweat. As the Prophets foretold the largenes of Christ's
religion, 2. These. ^.
so Paul prophesied of an Apostasy from the same: as the Rhemists confess,
and as the same men write upon the 12. of the Rev. where S. John foresheweth
that the Church shall fly into the wilderness, that now in England, The Church
Catholic.
(because it has no public state or regiment, nor open free exercise of
functions) may be said to be fled into the desert. so say I of our Church in
the reign of Antichrist. And thus I conclude:

As the Papists Church is now in England, though not visible, so was the
Protestants in Antichrists reign: But the Papists Church is now in England.
Ergo.
The proposition is manifest by S. John, who foretells the flight of the
Church into the wilderness. Let Reinerus speak, Catal. test. ^ec.
who was a popish inquisitour, he says that the poor men of Lions were more
pernicious to the Romish Church, then all other sects, for three causes: first
because it has been of longer continuance: for some say that it has endured
since the time of Sylvester, others say it has endured since the Apostles
time. The second cause is, because it is more general: for there is almost no
land in which this sect does not creep. The third cause is, for that all other
sects do bring in an horror with their heinousnes of their blasphemies
against God. This sect of the Leonists has a great show of godliness, because
they live justly before men, and believe all things well concerning God, and
all the articles which are contained in the Creed, they blaspheme and hate
only the Church of Rome. This is the testimony of a cruel enemy and
persecutor of them: whereby every man may see the Church to have continued
maugre Antichrist. These men are known to have continued in Bohemia, Calabria,
Piemont, and other places. Their faith is printed in the book called
Fasciculus rerum expetendarum, where who lists may read the same. But now I
reduce his argument into a syllogism:

They which have the largest scope are the true Church: But the Papists have
the largest scope. Ergo.
The proposition beseems an Ethnicke better then a Christian: might not the
heathen have made the same against Christ? The Pharisees argue indeed after
the same manner, Ioh. 7. Does any of the Rulers believe in Christ? so the
Papists say, Do any Popes, Cardinals, embrace Luthers doctrine? In the 1.
King. 22. there are four hundred Prophets against Michaiah, yet Michaiah had
the truth. In the third of Daniel three only resisted the Kings edict. Esa.
1.9.
The Prophet Esai affirms, that except the Lord had reserved a remnant, they
had bin as Sodom and Gomorrah. Elias complains that he was left alone. In the
days of Achab, the altar of God was removed and an idolatrous altar by the
high Priests consent was set up. 1. king. 16. and chap. 17.19. it is said that
Judah did not keep the Lords commandments, but walked in the errors of
Israel. Likewise Manasses and Amon built an idolatrous altar, 2. king. 21.4, 5.
and 22. v. might not they have made the same argument? Lib. de bre. vitae.
Well says Seneca, Non tam been cum rebus humanis agitur, vt meliora pluribus
placeant, argumentum pessimi turba est: It is not so well with humane affairs,
that most men like the best things; the multitude is an argument of the worst.
Bellarmine has this ingenious confession, Si sola vna provincia retineret
veram fidem, adhuc vere and proprie, diceretur Ecclesia Catholica. If only one
Province should retain the faith, yet that Province should be the true Church.
Therefore largeness of dominion is not a note of the true Church. But it is
worthy to be noted, first that this Doctor reckneth the largeness of the
Roman religion but for a thousand years: for space then of six hundred
years our Church had large dominion: antiquity then is with us. Verily, if
our Church was ample for six hundred years, I make no doubt of our religion:
and indeed the largeness which the Prophets foretold was verified of the
Apostolical Church, and by consequent of ours. Let the Scriptures judge
whether we teach the same doctrnie, that the Apostles did or no. I would not
have the Doctor to think that for a thousand years we had no church: for
that we always had a Church, I proved before out of their own writers.
Images were rejected by many Bishops seven hundred years after Christ:
Ministers were likewise married, as I showed before, for a thousand years. And
not to name many other points of doctrine, Bellarmine proves the seven
Sacraments out of Peter Lombard: is not this goodly doctrine which can bring no
better authors for it then the master of sentences? Barnard denies merits,
Bellarmine answers that he did it of humility: at sancti, humiles esse
debent, non mendaces; Saints must be humble, not liars. In the year of our
Lord, one thousand, one hundred and seven, the poor men of Leodium proved
Pope Paschal to be Antichrist: In epist. ad Pas.
Hactenus interpretabar (say they) ideo veluisse Petrum per Babilonem,
significare Romam, quia tunc temporis Roma confusa erat Idololatria and omni
spurcitie, at nunc dolor meus interpretatur, quod Petrus prophetico spiritu
dicens, ecclesiam in Babilone collectam praedicit confusionem dissentionis, qua
hodie scinditur ecclesia. I was wont to interpret that Peter by Babylon, would
signify Rome, because Rome at that time was confused with idolatry and
filthiness, but now my sorrow does interpret unto me, that Peter calling the
Church gathered together in Babylon, foresaw by the spirit of prophecy the
confusion of dissension wherewith the Church at this day is rent in pieces. And
in the year of our Lord 1240. Cran^. lib. ^. Met. 18.
many preachers in high Germany did freely preach against the Pope. Crantzius
a man who greatly favored the Pope, says thus of them: Quidam pulsatis
campanis and conuocatis baronibus terrarum, certain ringing the bells and
calling the Barons of the countries, are affirmed to preach publicly, that the
Pope was an heretic, his Bishops and Prelates Symonists and heretics.
Bertrame eight hundred years after Christ was an enemy unto
Transubstantiation: but you have purged him to your perpetual shame, as
testifies your Index expurgatorius: the title is, vt liber Bertrami, how the
book of Bertrame being amended may be tolerated. But let it be granted that
the truth of doctrine was not public for many years, yet might there be a
Church. For at the coming of our Savior Christ the Pharisees had the
government and were blind guides, yet was there a Church, and a number of
chosen people, as Joseph, Marie, Simon, and Anna. In Elias time when religion
was corrupt, the Lord had thousands which never bowed their knees to Baal.

But I return the argument:

Largenes of dominion is a note of the Church: But for many hundred years
after Christ, our Church had largenes of dominion. Ergo.
Secondly the Doctor fearing least our Church should flourish and dilate it
self, affirms that the Church is now old, and to make her flourish in her
old age is to make her a monster. Verily we acknowledge that she flourished in
her young age, (if these titles of young and old may be attributed to her:) but
shall not the Church flourish in her old age, as you speak, M. Doctor? what
then is become of largenes of dominion? If largenes of dominion be a note of
the true Church, then it shall be always ample and large. Indeed thanks be
to God, our Church now is ample, as testify England, Scotland, Denmark,
Suetia, Saxony, Helvetia, and other countries, and therefore the Doctor
varieth in this point. But that Antichrist shall be revealed, and the Church
increase, it is plain out of the 2 Thessalonians. 2. where Paul prophesies, that the
Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth. This to be done we see it
daily with our eyes, for by the preaching of the Gospel Antichrist is
continually lessened. Moreover in this reason the Doctor affirms, that
persecution of any moment is not against Papists, but only in England. The
persecution of Papists in England is for treason, as their own writings
testify. The title of the book is this, Important considerations which ought
to move all true Catholics to acknowledge that the proceedings of her
Majesty since the beginning of her highness reign, have bin both mild and
merciful. The Rhemists are contrary to this Doctor, for they writing upon
the 20. of the Rev. affirm Catholics to be persecuted not only in England,
but also in Scotland, Flaunders, and other places: thus well heretics agree
amongst themselves. To be brief: the Papists are so persecuted, that they are
been habiti, well liking as all men know, and have affluentiam honorum, store
of goods. But the Doctor desires to be told whether against all learned
Physicians, and against all Lawyers, one or two of later years are to be
credited. I answer, if they have the truth on their sides, they are. Might not
Michaiah have been posed with this question, who was but one against four
hundred prophets? Did not Paphnutius stand up in the Council of Nice, and
teach that a heavy yoke should not be laid on those which were dedicated to
the ministry. Here was one against that famous Council. This question might
well have been demanded of Eugenius, who would not obey the Council of
Basil. 1^00. de gest. conc. Ba.
Aeneas Silvius writes thus, Neque in Concilio dignitas patrum, sed ratio
spectanda est, in a Council the dignity of men is not to be regarded, but
reasons. And again, Non ergo cuiusvis Episcopi mendacium quamvis ditissimi,
veritati praeponam pauperis praesbyteri. I will not prefer Bishops untruths,
before an Elders truth, though one be rich and the other very poor. What
should I speak of Athanasius condemned in the Council of Millan? Panormitane
is plain, Whi^ak. 34. p. cont. Dur.
Plus credendum est vel simplici Laico scripturam proferenti, quam toti simul
Concilio. A layman is more to be believed, alleging scripture, then a whole
Council. Hierome translated the scriptures according to the Hebrew, whereas
before the authority of the 70. Ann. 39^.
interpreters was current: yet says Sigebert, praevaluit authoritas Hebraica
veritatis: the authority of the Hebrew truth prevailed. Hieroms act was
against inveteratum vsum Ecclesiae, the ancient custom of the Church. Whereas
he calls Luther a loose Apostata, and M. Calvin a soar backed priest for
Sodomie, I doubt not, but that for such slanders of these men, good men shall
more and more abhor popery. And for thy satisfying, Christian Reader, I
desire thee to read that which Erasmus has written concerning Luther: and that
which is printed by Beza concerning Calvin's life. Sodomie is too common among
Papists, as witnesses Picus Mirandula in his oration to Leo the tenth, in
these words, Sacrae aedes ac templa lenonibus ac calamytis commissa: Churches
and temples are committed to bauds, and boys abused contrary to nature. With
Picus agrees Mantuan, Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara cynaedis.
seruit honorandae divum Ganymedibus aedes.
The Church lands are given to common lesters, the sacred altars allotted to
wantons, the temples of Saints to boys provided for filthy lusts. Lastly
whereas he faith, that if he should refuse the Catholic Roman religion, his
Ancetours would use such speeches as these; do thou condemn all our doings?
do thou send us all to hell? etc. I answer that God has not referred us
from his word to our fathers: Walk not in the precepts of your fathers, Ezekiel.
20.
neither observe their manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols, says
the Lord. We condemn not our fathers, except they condemned themselves. Dei
iudicia occulia, sed semper iusta, Gods judgments are secret, but always
just. If our fathers held the foundation, (as I hope many did) they might be
saved. Ignosci potest simpliciter erranti: he that erreth of ignorance, sins
less then he to whom knowledge is revealed. I conclude with Cyprian, Si solus
Christus audiendus, if only Christ must be heard, we must not regard what any
before us has thought meet, but what Christ himself has done: for a man
must not follow custom, but Gods truth. And with Prudentius, who answers
Symmachus his objection, Nobis sequendi sunt parents, we must follow our
fathers. frustra igitur solitis prava observatio inhaeres, in vain do thou
cleave to custom o wicked obedience.

The sixth reason: Miracles.
M. Doctor, Noli illud tam confidenter affirmare, quod socij tui falsum esse
docuerunt: avouch not that so boldly which your fellows have taught to be
false. True miracles say you, were never wrought but by them, which were of the
true religion: for that they are done only by the power of God. The Rhemists
upon the 9. of Mark are of another mind: for thus they write; Miracles are
wrought sometimes by the name of Jesus, whatsoever the man be, when it is for
the proof of truth, or for the glory of God: insomuch that Julian the
Apostata himself did drive away devils with the sign of the cross, as
Gregory Nazianzen writes, orat. in Julian. Theodo. lib. 3. cap. 3. hist. and
so heretics may do miracles among the heathen. If miracles may be done by
heretics, they are then not always done by those which are of the true
religion, except heretics be of the true religion. Thus your own men, M.
Doctor, drive you to the wall. Socrates in his 7. book and 17. chap.
reports a miracle done by Paulus a Novatian Bishop: Iudaeus quidam veteratus
Christianam fidem simulans, saepius baptizatus fuit, per quam fallaciam multas
pecunias corrasit: a certain Jew being an old deceiuer and counterfeiting
Christian religion, was diverse times baptized, by which deceit he gathered much
money: in the end when he should be baptized by Paulus, Vniuersa aqua divina
quadam virtute quae oculis cerni non poterat subito exhausta est. all the water
by Gods power which could not be seen, suddenly vanished away. Here you see a
Novatian bishop did a miracle. And so men if they should credit miracles
without true doctrine might be drawn to heresy. Thomas your Angelical
doctor in his first part and 114. quest. art. 4. teaches, that daemones
possunt vera miracula facere ad seducendum: the devils may do true miracles
to seduce: and he proves it out of Augustine, who writes that Magicis
artibus sunt plerunque miracula similia illis miraculis quae sunt per dei
servos: miracles are done by Magic, even such as Gods servants do. In the
same place he answers the vulgar argument which is this, then they are not
effectual to confirm faith. Read his answer your self M. Doctor, at your
own leisure. Where you say miracles are done only by the power of God: if you
speak exactly of miracles, I join with you: for as the same Aquinas teaches
in his 110. quest. that is properly a miracle which is done praetor ordinem
totius naturae creatae, above all power that is created. When God works such
miracles by false prophets and heretics, he does it to try men, as Moses
speaks in the 13. of Deuteronomy. If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer
of dreams, and give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign come to pass,
thou shall not hearken unto the words of the prophet: for the Lord your God
proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart or
no. Out of this place it is plain that God will try his servants, sometimes
by wonders, and therefore they are not always done to confirm true religion.
In the Questions that go under Iustins name, the author thus propounds the
question, (...), if heretics work wonders, as curing of diseases, casting out
of devils, how comes it to pass that they should not be confirmed in their
errors? he answers: as God causes the sun to shine upon the good and bad,
not to confirm them in their wickedness, but to make a way to his righteous
judgments: so he does in heretics that work wonders. Hence I gather that the
Lord does prepare a way for his will, when false prophets work any wonders.
But I reduce his reason into a syllogism:

That religion which has miracles is the true religion: But the Roman
religion has miracles: Ergo.
I deny the proposition, for I have proved it false by sundry testimonies. I
will now annexe Tertullian his speech, who writes thus; Adijcient praeterea
multa de authoritate cuiusque haeretici, illos maxim doctrinae suae fidem
confirmasse, mortuos suscitasse, De prae.
debiles reformasse, futura significasse, quasi nec hoc scriptum sit, venturos
multos qui virtutes maximas aederent, ad fallaciam muniendam corruptae
praedicationis. Furthermore they will allege for the authority of Heretics,
that they have especially confirmed their doctrine by raising of the dead, by
restoring the weak, by foretelling future things: as if it were not written
that many should come working wonders to confirm their corrupt preaching. In
Gratian I find this sentence, 2. part causa. 1.
Non melius debet credi propter miracula, nam communia sunt and bonis and
malis: men are not the better to be credited for miracles, because they are
common to good and bad: many of the ancient miracles we acknowledge. This
Doctor numbreth some in Tertullians time and in others: but let him show the
Roman faith to be wholly the same as then it was. Miracles might then be
needful to convert Pagans, and Jews, amongst whom Christians were
dispersed, but the popish miracles are fained things, Lib. 5.
as testifies Pabrugenius, Heu quas non nugas quae non miracula fingunt, vt
vulgus fallant optataque praemia carpant! what miracles do they not feign for
reward? Lyra writes thus upon the 14. of Dan. Aliquando fit in Ecclesia maxima
deceptio populi in miraculis fictis a sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus,
propter lucrum temporale, and talia sunt extirpanda a bonis praelatis, sicut
ista miracula extirpata sunt a Daniele. Sometime even in the Church the people
is shamefully deceived with fained miracles, wrought either by their priests,
or by their companions for lucres sake, and good Prelates are to abandon such
as Daniel did. These testimonies may suffice any man not being uttered by a
Calvinist, as they call them, but by some of their own coat. Iuel. ex Cop.
What should I speak of making barren weomen bear by holy water, and driving
mise out of the country by the same. Eras. pere ergo.
The milk of the Virgin Marie, and the blood of hearts are not yet forgotten:
the transportation of the virgin Mary's house, Gomarus 16 p.
is monstrous to remember. The author reports that venienti domicilio arbores
obvias velut venerabundas inclinasse: trees did meet it, and bowing down did
worship it. Gregorius Turonensis reports, Lib. 9. cap. 6.
that one in stead of Saints relics, had sacculum magnum plenum de radicibus
diuersarum herbarum, and dentes talpae, and ossa muruum, and vngues vrsinos: a
great sack full of roots, of diverse herbs, and there were also teeth of
moules, and the bones of mise and bears claws. But I take no pleasure in
heaping together this trash, and therefore I come to Augustines authorities
alleged by this Doctor. The first is not in the 17. cap. but in the 16. de
vtil. creden.
where he says, that miracula nos movent, miracles move us: but he speaks
of Christ miracles, as it is manifest toward the end of the chap. homines
illius temporis aquam in vinum conuersam viderunt, the men of these times did
see water turned into wine. In the second place he says, that ista vincula
recte hominem credentem tenent in ecclesia catholica, Con. epist. f^n, cap. 5.
these bands do by right hold a believer in the Church, speaking of miracles
and other things. I answer first that Augustine speaks of ancient miracles,
for he says, tenet me authoritas miraculis inchoata, authority begun by
miracles does hold me in. Secondly I answer, that Augustine does prefer truth
before miracles: in the same place he confesses that veritas est illis omnibus
praeponenda, truth is to be preferred before all those things. Now I return
the argument:

They which have true miracles, are the true Church: But the Protestants have
true miracles. Ergo.
For the proof of the assumption, we produce the Apostles miracles, by which
that doctrine which we maintain, was confirmed many hundred years ago. If
our doctrine be not contained in the scriptures, let it be disprooued by the
same. But because the Doctor says out of Augustine that he is bound in the
Church by the bond of miracles, I would it might please him a little to listen
unto S. Augustine writing thus; de Vni eccle. cap. 16.
Non dicat ideo verum esse quia illa and illa mirabilia fecit Donatus vel
Pontius, etc. Let no man say it is true because Donatus or Pontius has done
these or these miracles, or because men at the memory of the dead do pray and
are heard, or because these or these things do happen there: or because this
our brother or that our sister saw such a vision waking, or dreamed such or
such a vision sleeping. In in the same cap. Augustine speaks thus, quaecunque
talia, such things whatsoever are to be approved, because they are done in the
Catholic Church, yet it is not made known by them. Belsee his reports of
Luther and Calvin we reject: and touching our Gospel it is not altogether
without miracles in these days. your Idols are fallen. quisquis adhuc
prodigia, vt credat, inquirit, The world believing.
whosoever seeks for wonders, that he might believe, is himself a wonder.
Take heed therefore M. Doctor, least you make your self a miracle, that will
not believe without miracles.

The 7. reason, visions and the gift of prophecy.
Cytharaedus ridiculus chorda qui semper oberrat eadem. This Doctor harpeth
always upon one string: he is not contented with Miracles, but now he comes
to Visions, and confidently affirms that visions and the gift of prophecy
were never found to be but in the true Church: yet Aquinas in his 2. 2. 172.
quest. art 6. teaches, that prophetae daemonum aliquando verum praedicant, the
devils prophets sometimes foretell the truth: yea he avouches, that propheta
daemonum non semper loquuntur ex revelatione daemonum, sed interdum ex
inspiratione divina: that the devils prophets did not always speak by
revelation from the devil, but sometime by inspiration from God: and this he
proves by Balaam his example, unto whom the Lord spoke, as it is in the 22.
of Numb. The Sybilles as the Doctor himself confesses, prophesied for the
confirmation of right religion, yet were they Ethnicks, and lived amongst them.
Who dare say, that the Church were with the heathen, because of the Sybilles?
But I draw this argument into a syllogism:

They which have visions, and the gift of prophecy, are the Church: But the
Papists have visions and the gift of prophecy. Ergo.
Aquinas as you have heard, M. Doctor, denies your proposition, and whereas
you would prove the same, because S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. John stand upon
Revelations, behold now your double folly. First you thus conclude: the Church
had visions, therefore it only has visions: which is as good as if a man
should conclude; the Church teaches the Trinity, ergo no heretics teach the
same. Secondly the Church had visions, therefore it shall always have visions:
who will grant you this consequence? S. Augustine says, 3. book, de bap.
cap. 10.
that miracles were ad ecclesiae primordia dilatanda, to enlarge the beginnings
of the Church: so were visions to last for a time. I return the argument:

They which have visions, and the gift of prophecy, are the true Church: But
the Protestants have visions: Ergo they are the true Church.
The Assumption is proved by S. Paul's, Saint Peter's, and Saint John's visions:
our doctrine is the same with theirs. Saint John heard a voice from heaven,
saying, Blessed are the dead, for they rest from their labors: so say we,
therefore there is no purgatory pains for them after this life. The Scriptures
teach that the sufferings of Christ are a perfect and full satisfaction for our
sins: so say we, and therefore there remains not any part of Gods justice
to be satisfied by us. But let us see what visions the Papists have, and what a
dangerous thing it is to stand upon visions. Bellarmine in his 2. book of
purgatory and 7. chap. alleges a vision out of Beda, to prove besides
hell, purgatory, and heaven, a fourth place, namely, pratum florentissimum
dilucidissimum, as it were a most goodly meadow. And in the same book and 4.
chap. he shows that Dyonisius the Carthusian, and Michael Baius by visions
would prove, that the souls in purgatory were not certain of their salvation,
which opinion he confuteth. Thus you see out of your own writers what credit
is to be given to visions: by such counterfaiting means we may prove any
thing. I say therefore with Augustine, Removeantur ista vel figmenta, mendacium
hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituum: Away with these fained things of
lying men, or monsters of lying spirits. And now M. Doctor, to argue upon your
own graunts both of miracles and visions. You say, that the heathen had
prophesies to confirm right religion: grant you then that you have some few
which works both true miracles and see true visions, it is not to confirm your
erroneous doctrine, but to confirm that truth of doctrine which is held in
your Church: for all them you are a corrupt Church: yet there are some relics
of true doctrine remaining, and so by sequel of your own speech these things
may come to pass to confirm that true doctrine which is amongst you.
Heretics have held some true opinions that there heresies might be the better
bolstered out. You hold the Trinity, and some other points of religion: it may
be then that if there be any miracles or visions amongst you, it is to confirm
the relics of that truth which remains with you. Thus I have argued upon
your own words and grant. But for my part I hold with Chrysostom, 49. hom.
in op^. imper.
that nunc nulla probatio esse potest vorae ecclesiae, there can be now no
proof of the true Church but only by the Scriptures. He gives a reason of
his speech, quia, says he, qua propria sunt in veritate, ca hareses habent in
schismate, habent ecclesias, habent scripturas diuinas, habent Episcopos,
caeterosque ordines clericorum, habent baptismum, habent Eucharistiam,
caeteraque omnia: because those things which are peculiar to truth, heresies
have in their schism, they have Churches, they have Scriptures, they have
Bishops, and other clergy orders, they have baptism, the Eucharist, and
all other things. He proceeds affirming that the church was in times past
known by miracles, but now they are either ended or else in greater number with
false Christians, yea he auerreth that a man might know by the lives of men,
which was the true Church: but now Christians were worse then either heretics
or Ethnicks. If this work were written by an Arrian, as some say, yet there is
no cause to condemn this excellent sentence, proved by so weighty reasons.

The eight reason: Scriptures.
We have finished by Gods assistance seven Reasons, some of which as the
Doctor seems to grant are nothing worth without Scripture, and therefore he
says that they teach not any doctrine but such as is derived out of the holy
Bible. If you would abide by this confession, you would not hold so many
unwritten opinions as you do. For adoration of Images, for the half
communion, for the Popes not erring, for the lent fast, with other points of
Popery, what scripture is there? It is one of your principles, Cens. Colon.
that traditiones ecclesiae non scriptae credendae ac seruandae sunt, unwritten
traditions are to be believed and kept. Hence I conclude after this manner:

They which hold opinions by unwritten traditions, derive not all their
opinions out of the scriptures: But the Papists hold some opinions by unwritten
traditions. Ergo.
But good M. Doctor, are we driven to deny certain parts of Gods holy Bible,
for the maintaining of our opinions, and are the Manichees our predecessors?
take heed least by auouching untruths, you do vastare conscientiam, make
shipwreck of conscience. If Luther rejected the epist. of S. James, what is
that to us? Caietane will have it to be minoris authoritatis quam caeteras,
Bell. lib. 1. cap. 17. 2. book. 23.
of less authority then the other epistles. Eusebius says, sciendum est eam
esse adulterinam, we must know that it is a bastard epistle. Eusebius. 3.22. cap.
Now I reduce your argument into a syllogism:

They which refuse books of Scripture, frame that bible to their opinions: But
the Protestants refuse books of Scripture. Ergo.
I deny the assumption, which is set down without any proof: and for the
disproofe of the same, I will not content my self with a few fathers, but will
produce a cloud of witnesses, that the Papists may see their proud brag of
fathers. Origin at Eusebius speaks thus, Eusebius. hist. 6. book 24.
Hand ignorandum fieret esse veteris testamenti libros sicut Hebraei tradunt
viginti duos, qui etiam numerus apudeos est literarum. We must understand that
there are 22. books of the old Testament, as the Hebrews do teach, which
also is the number of letters. Hence I gather, that if the Canonical books
answer the hebrew letters, then there are but 22. otherwise there should be
more then the letters are. Melito numbreth the same books which we do,
excepting the book of Wisdom, as witnesses Eusebius. 4. book 25.
Cyril of Jerusalem in his 4. catechism exhorts the Catechumenes to read 22.
books, but that he reckneth Baruck with Jeremy he reckneth the same which we
do, and directly warns us vt cum Apocryphis nihil habeamus negotij, that we
have nothing to do with Apocryphal books, for says he, multo prudentiores
te; and religiosiores fuerint Apostoli, and primi Episcopi veritatis duces, qui
nobis eas tradiderunt: the Apostles and first Bishops were wiser and more
religious then thy self, they delivered these scriptures to us. Leontius in
his 2. action of sects, agrees with these authors saying, that veteris
scripturae libri sunt viginti duo, there are 22. books of the old testament.
Innilius rejects the Machabees from divine scripture, quoniam apud Hebraeos
super hac differentia recipiebantur libri Canonici, sicut Hieronymus alijque
testantur; because with the Jews the canonical books were received with this
difference, as Jerome and other writers witness. He rejects Job and some
other books which are Canonical by his own reason, namely because they were
of that authority with the Jews. Amphilochius differs not from the above
named writer, after that he has set down the same number which we do,
excepting the book of Wisdom, which yet it may be but put in for verse,
because he reckneth but three of Solomon; after I say he concludes thus, hic
verissimus divinitus datarum est scripturarum Canon, this is the most true
Canon of the divine scriptures. Ruffinus in his exposition upon the Creed,
says that he will describe the Canonical books of the old testament, which
he does after our order in England, and acknowledges that non Canonicos libros
legi voluerunt in ecclesiis, sed non proferri ad authoritatem ex his fidei
confirmanda^: they will have the books that are not Canonical to be read in
Churches, but not to be aleadged to confirm a matter of faith. I will not
produce the testimonies of Hierome, Epiphanius, Nazianzen, Athanasius, and
others, because they are obvious to every one: neither will I convince the
Doctor by his own writers, as Caietan, Hugo, and Arias Montanus. Josephus is
worthy to be heard, who plainly teaches, that duo solum and viginti libri
fide digni esse creduntur, Eusebius. 3. lib. hist. ^0.
only 22. books are to be credited. By this cloud of witnesses I hope,
Christian Reader, thou may see the vanity of Papists, who do nothing but
crepare patres, patres, cry the fathers they are on their side. I return the
Argument:

They which add books to divine scriptures, draw the holy Bible to their
fancies: But the Papists add whole books to divine scriptures: Ergo:
Where he says that the Catholics follow the bible, I will not stand upon
that famous corruption of the Hebrew psalter by an English Papist, to justify
their vulgar latin text, but come to one place out of which they would gather
purgatory. Where it is said, that a certain sin shall not be forgiven
neither in this world, Math. 11.
nor in the world to come: we expound it by Mark, who says it shall never be
forgiven: the Papist says, Matthew must not be expounded by Mark, because he
is shorter: but is he not plainer? How absurd is it to expound these words,
^ell. lib. 1. de into. cap. 4.
[he has never forgiuenes] to this sense? whereas to expound the words of
Matthew by Mark, has an excellent construction. Thus every man may see who
draw the scriptures to their fancies, whether Papists or Protestants.

The 9. reason: Counsels.
Whether the Church of God has ever bin accustomed when any heresy did spring
up therein to gather a Council of Bishops, Prelates, and other learned men, I
will not stand to dispute: If your meaning be, M. Doctor, that nothing is
heresy but that which is condemned by a Council, Lib. 4. cont. d^^s epist.
Pelag. in fine.
I utterly renounce your vain conceit. Let Augustine speak, Aut vero
congregatione synodi opus erat vt aperta pernicies damnaretur, quasi nulla
haeresis aliquando nisi Synodi congregatione damnata sit, cum potius rarissimae
inveniantur propter quas damnandas necessitas talis extiterit, multoque sint
atque incomparabiliter plures, quae vbi extiterunt illic improbari damnarique
meruerunt, atque inde per caeteras terras devitandae innotescere potuerunt. Was
it necessary a Council should be gathered to condemn open mischiefs, as if
no heresy had been condemned without a Council, whereas very few are found
for the condemning of which, there has bin such necessity, and there are
without comparison more which deserved to be condemned, where they did spring
up, that being so condemned they might be made known unto other countries. Out
of this testimony I gather these two things, first that it may be an heresy,
though not condemned by a Council: secondly I gather, that in Augustines time
there were few heresies for the condemning of which Counsels were gathered
together. To proceed. You say whosoever were condemned by Counsels confirmed
by the Sea Apostolical, were ever deemed and indeed were heretics. What say
you to Cyprian, De vnico lap. cap. 14.
whom as Augustine reports, Stephanus Bishop of Rome, censuit excommunicandum
esse, deemed to be excommunicated? 8. book. 4 chap. Bellar. lib. 2. de con.
cap. 5.
Eusebius says, that scripsit vniuersis conterminis gentibus, he wrote to all
countries that were near, that he would not communicate with them, because
they did rebaptize heretics. Was Cyprian either an heretic, or of that mind
that whatsoever the Pope did condemn, was heresy? why did he not then yield
to Stephanus who was Pope? For I think you mean by the Sea Apostolic, the
Pope; otherwise you condemn Eugenius, who said, as Aeneas Sylvius reports,
that tantum aebest vt generalibus Concilijs debeat obedire, vt se dicat tunc
maxim mereri cum concilij decreta contemnit; It is so far from him that he
should obey general Counsels, that he does then best deserve, when he does
contemn the decrees of the same. But I reduce your Argument into a syllogism:

They which are condemned by the Council of Trent are heretics: But the
Protestants are condemned by the Council of Trent: Ergo they are heretics.
I deny the proposition: for it is against all reason, that they which are
parties, that are partial, that are accused should be the only judges.
Augustine says, Solis Canonicis scriptis debeo sine vlla recusatione
consensum; I ought to consent only to the Canonical scriptures without any
refusal. De not. and great. ^.
Nicolaus de Clemangijs writes, that Ecclesia quandoque contraria determinat,
the Church does sometimes determine contraries. in Fas. v^ta ex.
Again, Trita regula est ecclesia militans and fallit and fallitur; it is an
old rule the Church militant does deceive and is deceived. Gregory his speech
who says, that he does reverence the four first Counsels as the four
Gospels, de alijs suspitionem in animis hominum relinquit, leaves a suspicion
in the minds of men of other Councels. Says the same man, the council of
Neocaesaria condemned second marriages: this is not confessed by Bellarmine in
his tractate of counsels, least he should grant that Counsels may err. But
in his first book of marriage and 17. chap. he writes, that Concilium tractat
de secundis nuptijs, qua contrabuntur mortua priore vxore: the Council does
entreat of second marriages, which are made the former wife being dead. Hence
I thus conclude: That Council which condemns second marriages, erreth: but
this Council condemns second marriages: ergo. And touching your Tridentine
conuenticle, why do not your men stand to the decrees of the same? Arias
Montanus rejects the books from the body of the holy bible, which we do.
Catharin teaches, that a man may be certain of grace: yet these opinions are
condemned in your chapter of Trent, if we believe Bellarmine. Again, if your
chapter of Trent teaches rightly of original sin, why does the same
Catharin teach, that it is nothing else but Adams actual transgression, and
disobedience. Noli esse tam iniustus: be not so unequal M. Doctor, to bind
us with your council of Trent, when your own men dissent from the same. Where
you say, that we shall utterly vanish away, because we have no head to gather a
general Council, I acknowledge you to be a false and no true prophet. We see
the fall of Babylon daily more and more, and the madness of them that seek to
uphold her daily more and more manifest. You say also that we receive fix
Counsels: them. Act. 15.
yet your fellows marvel that we attribute much to the four first and nothing
to the rest: it were good for you to agree amongst your selves before you
charge us with error. Lastly, the liberty of our Gospel is such as Gods word
does teach, 1^. epist.
ego, says Augustine, solis eis scripturarum libris; I have learned to give
this reverence and honor only to the canonical Scriptures, that no author of
them can err.

The 10. reason: Fathers.
The Doctor in the beginning of this chap. proijcit ampullos. casts out
lofty and arrogant words, after this manner. The Catholic Roman religion is
most plainly taught by all the ancient Fathers of the first, second, third,
fourth, fifth, and sixth hundred years, and has been ever without controversy
taught of the fathers of every age since until this day. This proud brag I
have disprooued before by many testimonies, and now by Gods help, I will make
it manifest to boys. Theophilus Alexandrinus is plain against traditions: in
his 2. paschal sermon he writes thus; Daemoniaci est spiritus instinctus
aeliquid extra scripturarum authoritatem putare divinum: it is the instinct of
a deuillish spirit to think any thing divine without authority of scriptures:
what spirits then have Papists but deuillish spirits, who fight for their trash
of traditions. Caesarius is as plain, for reading of the Scriptures in his 20.
homily he takes away the excuse commonly used for not reading the same. Nemo
dicat non mihi vacat legere; Let no man say I am not at leisure to read the
Scriptures. Inanis and invtilis est excusatio ista; this excuse is vain and
unprofitable. Mark the Eremite has written a book against those which think
to be justified by works: in which book this notable sentence is extant;
Regnum coeloru^ non est merces operu^ sed gratia domini fidelibus servis
praeparata; the kingdom of heaven is not the wages of works, but the grace of
God prepared for faithful servants. In his book de baptism, of baptism, he
teaches the same. Mandata ipsa non tellunt peccatum hoc enim per solam crucem
factum est, sed donata nobis libertatis limits custodiunt; The commandments
take not away finne, for that is done only by the cross, but they keep the
lists of the liberty that is given us. G^l. de (...) not in Christ. advers.
Eutych. and Nest. fol. 2^^
Gelasius is direct against Transubstantiation: Sacramenta quae suminus
corporis and sanguinis Christi divina res est, propter quod and per cadem
divinae efficimur consortes naturae, and tamen esse non definit substantia vel
panis vel vini. The sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of
Christ are a divine thing, therefore by them we are made partakers of the
divine nature, yet for all that cease not the substance of bread and wine to
be. Gelasius writes against Eutyches, who affirmed that Christ^ humane nature
was turned into his Godhead: this opinion is thus refuted. As the bread and
wine after consecration are changed into the body and blood of Christ, so is
his humane nature turned into his divine after ascension. But the bread and
wine are not changed in substance. Ergo. Thus by your doctrine of
Transubstantiation you make the ancient Churches argument worth nothing. I
will adioyne the testimony of Cyril of Jerusalem, because says Bellarmine
(testimonium huius vel solum sufficere debet) his testimony alone ought to
suffice. Mista in his 4. Catechism, thus he speaks; Ne ergo consideres panem
nudum, and vinum nudum; corpus enim est and sanguis Christi: consider not bare
bread and wine, for it is the body and blood of Christ. ergo it is still
bread, but not bare bread. Again in his 3. Catechism, he is as plain:
Quemadmodum panis Eucharistiae post Spiritus sancti invocationem non amplius
est communis panis, sed est corpus Christi: sic and sanctum hoc vnguentum, non
amplius est vnguentum nudum atque commune, postquam iam consecratum est, sed
est charisma Christi: As the bread of the Eucharist after the invocation of the
holy Ghost, is no more common bread, but it is the body of Christ, so is this
holy ointment no more bare ointment, nor common ointment after it is
consecrated, but it is the gracious gift of Christ. Here is no more
Transubstantiation in the one then in the other. Likewise in his first
Catechism, he writes after the same manner; Quemadmodum enim panis and vinum
eucharistia ante sacram inuocationem adorandae trinitatis, panis erat, and
vinum merum, sic and cibi ciusmodi pompae Sathanae suapte natura puri sunt sed
invocatione daemonum impuri efficiuntur: even as the bread and the wine of the
Eucharist before the invocation of the adored Trinity was bare bread and wine:
so such meats Satan's pomps were pure of their own nature, but by invocation
of the devils they are become impure. Lo what is become of your
Transubstantiation! Augustine condemns worshippers of pictures, Novi multos
esse sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores; I know, says he, there are many
that adore sepulchers and pictures. Bellarmine in his first answers to this
place, comes in with his fortasses, peradventure: in his last answer he
confesses that he wrote this book when he was first converted. Here then it
is manifest that Augustine condemns worshippers of pictures. Lactantius in
his 6. book, 3. chap. acknowledges but two ways, duae sunt viae, vna, quae
in coelem ferat, altera qua ad inferes deprimat; there are two ways, one which
goes to heaven, and the other which tends to hell. The testimony which
Bellarmine alleges out of him for purgatory, speaks of a fire to purge
the righteous after the last judgment, when Popish purgatory shall have an
end, as Bellarmine proves in his 2. book and 19. chap. Theophilact
condemns your half communion, saying, that tremendus hic calix cunctis pari
condition est traditus; this fearful cup is equally given to all. The
testimonies of fathers in this point are many and pregnant. Paschasius thus
expounds the words of Christ, bibite ex hoc omnes, id est tam ministri, quam
reliqui credentes, Drink ye all of this as well ministers as others.
Bellarmine confesses, Lib. 2. de miss. cap. 9.
that nusquam express legimus a veteribus oblatum sacrificium sine communione
alicuius, vel aliquorum, praeter ipsum, sacerdotem; we never read expressly,
that the sacrifice was offered of ancient men, without the communion of some
besides the priest. Lo what friends the fathers are to your private Mass! 28.
cap.
Walfridus Strabo writes thus; Fatendum est illam esse legitimam Missam cui
intersunt sacerdos, respondens, offerens atque communicans, sicut ipsa
conceptio precum euidenti ratione demonstrat; we must confess that to be a
lawful Mass at which the priest, the answerer, and the communicant are
present; even as the conceiving of prayers does prove by evident reason.
Therefore your private Mass is unlawful. Vealrichus Bishop of Augusta, anno
978.
wrote in the defense of the marriage of Ministers: Bellarmine proves this
epistle to be fained: be it so, yet did no Lutherane coin it. And whereas he
will have but one of this name, it is false. For Complicatio Chronologica
confesses there are two, and that anib^ were sancti, both were holy. I will
not contend about this matter, it sufficieth that some taught this doctrine.
But why do I labor to show that the fathers do not teach all points of
Popery? let their own Index expurgatorius speak, Quanquam librum istum vz.
Bertrami non magni aestimemus momenti, says the Papist.
itaque non magnopere laboraturi sumus si vel nusquam sit vel intercidat,
attamen cum in alijs ca^bolicis veteribus plurimos feramus errores, and
extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato commento persaepe negemus and commodamijs
sensum affingamus dum opponuntur in disputationibus and conflictionibus cum
adversarijs, non videmus cur non candem aequitatem and diligentem recognitionem
mereatur Bertr^^s: Although we make no great account of this book, namely
Bertrams, and therefore we would not greatly care if either it were extant or
utterly lost; and seeing that in other ancient Catholic writers we bear very
many errors, and extenuate them, excuse them, and very oftentimes by devising
some preuie shift we deny them and do feign some commodious sense unto them
when they are opposed against us in disputations or in conflicts with the
adversaries, we do not see why Bertrame does not deserve the same equity and
diligent recognition. This their own testimony may suffice to prove that the
fathers are not theirs, and that the Papists are void of all truth and
honesty. What Causaeus a French Protestant and Luther have written touching
Dyonisius, I know not, but this I am assured of that this Demus was not S.
Paul's scholar. Bellarmine in his 2. book de confess. cap. 7. writes to this
effect, that his book est dubious vel supposititius, is either doubtful or
fained. The same thing is not denied by the Catechism of Colon. page 119.
Gregorius and Dyonisius, says Picus Mirandula, discordant circa ordines
angelorum; Gregory and Dyonisius disagree about the order of angels. If
Gregory dissenteth from him, why may not Luther do so? Who so desires to
read more of this Dyonisius may be referred to Erasmus and Valla. That the
Protestants rail at the fathers it must be numbered amongst the Doctors
untruths: but by Protestants this man means the Puritans forsooth; although
this odious name of Puritanes agrees better to Papists, August. haeres. 38.
who do so stand upon their purity, because they can keep all Gods
commandments. Yet know not I any so called, that rail at all the fathers. But
here it is to be noted even by his own confession, that the Protestant defend
the fathers against the Puritanes: therefore they rail not at them. Thus M.
Doctor you hardly know what you write, you are so egerly carried against the
Protestants: somewhat ye would say, but yet know not well how to utter your
mind. We acknowledge the fathers to have had excellent wits, to have studied
and prayed continually; yet do we not deifie them, neither do we account
their writings canonical scripture, as Augustine speaks of Cyprian, lib. 2.
cont. Cres. cap. 32. Where you call the Protestants foolish, vnstudied,
unlearned, profane, and arrogant fellows, you bewray your vain spirit:
Vascula inania maxim tinniunt, the emptiest vessels make the greatest sound.
Of your learning we shall speak more hereafter; in the mean time I would have
you to know, that constat plures Papa^ adeo illiteratos fuisse, vt Grammaticam
penitus ignorarent; Alphon. l. 1. c. 4.
it is certainly known that sundry Popes have bin so unlearned, that they
never understood their Grammar. You say further that Protestants are given to
lust, ambition, gluttony, and covetousness. If for Protestants you had named
Papists it had bin a true saying. For as your own man Coster confesses,
Plarique Catholici feris ac bellumis moribus blasphemiae causam prabent
infidelibus; many Catholics or Papists being of savage and beastly manners
and behavior do cause Infidels to blaspheme. But more also of this in another
place. If the Centuriators and Calvine have noted some errors in some of the
fathers, it is no more then Papists have done. The Rhemists renounceth
Augustines exposition upon the 16. of Matthew. Bellarmine in his first book de
sancto beat. and 6. chap. says that Justinius, Epiphanius, Ireneus, and
Oecumenius, cannot be defended. Again Ambrose, Hilarie, and Nissen, are
rejected of him, cap. 4. lib. 2. de rel. To proceed, he holds that Adam was
not deceived, Lib. 3. de Amiss. great. cap. 7.
yet communis patrum sententia id videtur habere, vt Adam fuerit seductus; the
fathers common opinion seems to be that Adam was seduced. Hierome agrees not
with the fathers concerning the burial of Adam. Bell. lib. 3. de amiss. great.
cap. 12. Theodoret expounds some places of scripture as the Pelagians-doe.
Bellar. lib. 4. de amiss. great. cap. 9. The fathers before Pelaguis did not
accurately handle the doctrine of predestination. Bellar. lib. 2. de great. and
lib. arb. c. 11. Lastly, not to be too tedious, cap. 14. eiusdem lib. he says,
that patres cum ad populum verba facerent, ea dicebant quae vtiliora videbantur
ad excitandos homines ad bona opera. The fathers when they did speak to the
people uttered those things which were most profitable to stir up the people
to good works. For thy further satisfaction, Christian Reader, I desire thee
but to read Bellarmines exposition of the Lords prayer, and tell me how the
fathers do agree even in expounding that one prayer. Their diversity also in
expounding this article, He sits on the right hand of God, is worthy to be
considered. Bellar. lib. 3. de Incar. cap. 15. M. Doctor Humfrie his spech of
that famous and reverend Bishop Jewel being injurious to himself, is uttered
in respect of his great pains, and not to detract from the truth of his
challenge, if you can confute his book set upon it; if you cannot, never
hereafter brag of the fathers. For indeed it is no small means to confirm
the Protestants in their cause, that his books have not been answered in so
long a time: you cry the fathers, the fathers are on your sides, and yet have
not satisfied M. Jewel his challenge in many years. I reduce your argument
into a syllogism:

They which condemn the fathers of errors, hold a false religion: But the
Protestants condemn the fathers of errors. Ergo.
To this argument let Augustine answer; Si divinarum scripturarum, earum
scilicet quae in Ecclesiae canonicae nominantur perspicua aliquid firmatur
authoritate sine vlla dubitatione credendum est, ^pist. 112.
alijs vero testibus vel testimonijs quibus aliquid credendum esse suadetur,
tibi credere vel non credere liceat; if any thing be confirmed by evident
authority of those Scriptures which are called Canonical in the Church, we
must believe it without any doubting, but other witnesses or testimonies by
which some thing to be believed is persuaded, thou may believe or not
believe. I might abound with his testimonies, I will adioyne one other. Neque
quorumlibet disputationes quamvis catholicorum and laudatorum hominum velut
scripturas habere debemus, epist. 1^1.
vt nobis non liceat, salva honorificentia, quae illis debetur hominibus,
aliquid in little scriptis improbare aut respondere. We ought not to account any
men's disputations (although catholic and laudable men) as the scriptures, as
if it were not lawful for us the honor which is due unto them reserved, to
disalow and reject something in their writings. Picus Mirandula in his Apology
proves that, in dictis sanctorum extra canonem bibliae, non est infallibilis
veritas; in the sayings of Saints without the canon of the bible, there is not
infallible truth. The Papists themselves refuse the fathers. Pucichius says,
Mihi non placet Augustini ea de re definitio, I^^l. 548.
I like not S. Augustines determination of that point, namely original sin.
Epiphanius is rejected for breaking images by D. Harding. Cyprian is condemned
by Duraeus, because he teaches that only Christ is to be heard. But that we
may see all the fathers to be on your side, M. Doctor, produce I pray if you
can their testimonies, to prove that the Pope cannot err; that he may depose
Princes, that he must summon Counsels, and that he is above the same, or that
the virgin Marie was not conceived in original sin. I have desired to see
these points proved by all the fathers, if you can do it you shall do more
then your own men have done. By these new opinions we may gather, that Popery
did begin by degrees, and has increased to this height. These doctrines
although they concern the head of your church are so weakly proved by the
fathers, that a man would imagine you do not hold these things but in scoffing
manner: if you do seriously hold them, prove them seriously, and not with
ridiculous authorities.

The 11. reason: Trial of truth.
That it appertains to the Church to try and to discern Spirits, as also to
determine and to decide doubts, we confess, M. D. Try all things, says Paul:
1 Thessalonians 5. 1. Ioh. 4.
and S. John commands us to prove the Spirits. But the question is, whether
you are the Church or no? Quid ergo facturi sumus? what shall we do? I answer
with Augustine propounding this question, cap. 2. de vnitat.
that we must seek the Church of Christ in his word, qui veritas est, and
optime novit corpus suum, who is truth, and best knows his body. Where you
say that we cannot otherwise but receive the scriptures upon the catholic
Roman churches credit, and also three Creedes and some articles of belief, as
the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and the Son, and many terms, as
person, Trinity, consubstantiall, Sacraments; I will answer these points
severally. And first I desire to know what reason you have to make a particular
church, (as the Roman church) Catholic. The Roman church, if it were a true
church, is but a part of the catholic church. It is Catholic says Augustine,
because it is per totum, through the whole world. de unit. cap. 5.
Cyril in his 18. chap. among many reasons of the name, gives this, Quia per
vniversum sit orbem terrarum diffusa; because it is diffused thorough the whole
world. Is it all one to say, I believe the Catholic Church, and to say, I
believe the Roman church? To leave this matter, and to come to your speech,
that it is not possible to know the Bible which is used amongst Christians, to
be the true word of God indeed, but upon the Roman churches credit. First,
such idle questions the old heretics the Manichees demanded of S. Augustine,
to whom S. Augustine answered, Lib. 32. cap 21. cont. Faust. Man.
Si quaeratis a nobis vnde nos sciamus Apostolorum esse istas literas, breuiter
vobis respondemus, inde nos scire, vnde and vos scitis, illas literas esse
Manichaei: If you demand of us how we know that these be the Apostles writings,
we shape you this short answer; as you know that your writings are of the
heretic Manichee. Secondly, I would know how you can prove any church to be
the church but by the Scriptures; if you cannot prove the church but by the
Scriptures, then the Authority of the church depends upon them, and not e
contra. Thirdly, we receive not the Scriptures upon the Roman churches credit,
for then we should have received also the books which are Apocrypha, as well
as the true Canon of the bible: for the Roman church does receive them.
Fourthly, we receive the Scriptures from the Scriptures themselves. Many men by
the heavenly majesty of the Scriptures are moved to receive them before they
know which is the true church. Gonarus con. Cost. Justin Martyr says, that
Christ's words have in th^^ fear to persuade. in dialogo cum Try.
Mantuan de pat. l. 3. c. 2. says thus, Firmiter scripturas ideo credimus,
quod diuinam inspirationem intra accipimus; we steadfastly believe the
scriptures, because we have received an inward inspiration from God. He that
will despise the Scriptures, will despise the Church. He that will not believe
there is a God because the Scriptures teach it, will not believe it because the
Church teaches the same. The Scriptures were credited before the Roman church
was ens or in rerum natura. The Apostles believed the Gospel of our Savior
Christ, before he wrought any miracle, because it was testified by the
scriptures. Ioh. 1.46. Adam and others believed without the church. Our Savior
Christ preached, Repent and believe the Gospel, which some did without the
Church. Eusebius in his third book and 21. chap. writes that the Gospels of
Thomas and others were rejected, because that phraseos character a consuetudine
Apostolica variat, and ipsa sententia and propositum eorum, quae in illis
adferuntur, plurimum a veritate rectae doctrinae discrepant; the style does
vary from the Apostolical manner, and the matter and the intent of those
things which are alleged in them do much differ from the truth of right
doctrine. The consent of Scriptures, the miracles and prophesies, with many
other arguments, draw a man to credit the same; yea the deadly hatred which the
world bears unto them, persuades not a little. Sacris Scripturis (says
Bellarmine) nihil est notius, Lib. 1. cap. 2. de v^^. D^i.
nihil certius; there is nothing more known and certain then the Scriptures.
Read Bellarmine your self, M. Doctor, that he may satisfy you in this point.
But if we believe the Scriptures by the Church, does not the church teach us to
believe by the scriptures? how can the church rightly persuade us to believe,
but by preaching and producing of scriptures? Ergo the scriptures are of much
more force, then the bare name of a church. For propter quod vnumquodque tale
est illud magis tale; if the church induces us to believe, then the scriptures
do much more, because the church does it by the scriptures. The church is an
excellent means ordained of God to bring men to belief, neither do we
contemn the authority thereof. The Samaritans believed by the testimony of a
woman, Io^. 4.
but afterward they believed because of Christ himself: so the Church may
bring one to believe, but afterward to believe for the word it self. The
testimony of Augustine is fraudulently alleged by you: his word is
commoveret, for he says; As there were many things which held him in the
faith, so if he were an infidel, he would not believe the Gospel, unless the
authority of the church with other things did move him. ergo not only the
church: and he speaks, if he were an infidel, as the words going before do
plainly manifest; Si invenies aliquem, if thou should find any which yet
does not believe the Gospel: what would thou do, saying to thee I do not
believe? then immediately follows your sentence, I would not believe unless,
etc. Nicholaus Clenangis is worthy to be heard concerning this testimony of
Augustine, Disp. super G^^. con.
Mirum sane prima specie satis videtur, at the first fight it is marvel that
he should prefer the authority of the church, being a stranger in the earth,
before the authority of the Gospel, seeing the Church may be deceived in many
things, and the Gospel cannot. Afterward he gives the reason of Augustines
speech; because the Manichees did reject Scriptures at their pleasures. To
stand yet somewhat longer in this testimony: Con. lib. 5 c. 1^.
Augustine was moved to believe by Ambrose: is Ambrose his authority
therefore equal to the scriptures? God forbid: whosoever lists to read the
5. chap of the 6. book of his Confessions, shall find that he did believe the
Scriptures for themselves. In his 14. chap. of the book cited by the Doctor,
he writes thus; Quid putas faciendum, nisi vt eos relinquamus, qui nos
invitant certa cognoscere, and postea imperant vt incerta credamus, and eos
sequamur qui nos invitant prius credere, quod nondum valemus intueri, vt ipsa
side valentiore facti, quod credimus intelligere mereamur, non iam hominibus
sed ipso Deo intrinsecus mentem nostram firmante, atque illuminante? what have
we to do but to forsake them, that inuit us to know certain things, and
afterward command us to believe uncertain things, and to follow the^ which
inuit us, first to believe that which yet we are not able to behold, that
being made stronger through faith, we may attain to understand that we
believe now, not men, but God himself, confirming and lightning our mind
inwardly. The spirit of God therefore must cause us to believe, otherwise we
shall waver and stagger. To conclude this point, many borne in heresy and
schism have bin moved by heretics to believe the Scriptures, is heresy
therefore equal to the scriptures? nothing less. The three Creedes we receive,
because the doctrine is contained in the scriptures: but you do not receive
Athanasius his Creed, for he makes but two places, vitam aeternam, and ignem
aeternum. Omnes homines resurgent cum corporibus suis, and reddituri sunt de
factis preprijs rationem, and qui been egerunt ibunt in vitam aeternam, qui
vero male in ignem aeternum. All men shall rise with their own bodies, and
shall give an account of their deeds, and they which have done well, shall go
into life everlasting, and they which have done evil, into everlasting fire.
You teach that Infants unbaptized shall be in a brimme of hell, and not in the
fire of hell. Thus if you had bin wise, M. Doctor, you would have bin silent
concerning these Creeds. If I should show your contrarieties to the Apostles
creed, I should be ouerlong. That the holy Ghost does proceed from the Father
and the Son, Lib. 2. de Christ. cap. 22.
Bellarmine proves plentifully out of the Scriptures. What an ignorant Doctor
is this, that cannot see this mystery proved in holy Scripture? Touching the
terms, as person, Trinity, consubstantiall, Sacraments, what if they be not
in Scriptures? the heavenly doctrine signified by the words is contained in
scriptures. If these words were necessary to salvation, then men were damned
before they were invented, which I think the Doctor will not grant: for many
believed the things, although the names were not extant. Augustine calls the
books of Tobie, and other, Canonical, because they were read to edification:
for I hope you will not oppose his authority to so many Fathers, as I have
before produced. In the place by you cited; he will have those books which are
received of all Churches, preferred before those which some Churches receive
not: hence it is manifest, that he makes not all of equal authority. Lib. 2
con. gaud. cap. 23.
Elsewhere he will have the books of Machabees read, so it be non inutiliter
and sobrie, not unprofitably and soberly. Why does he give this caution to
these books, if they were of like authority? And in his book de praed.
Sanct. c. 14. he confesses when he did produce a testimony out of the book
of Wisdom, that the brethren did reject it, and there he contendeth not much
for it. If it had bin Canonical, he should not have so remissely pleaded for
it. Thus it appears why he calls these books canonical. Where you say that
no heretic can charge the Church with adding or diminishing one jot from the
Scriptures; we must admire Gods providence and his love toward his church: he
preserves the Scriptures though men would take the^ out of the world. But if
you mean that the church of Rome has not altered the holy Scriptures, you
must know that the Papists hold the Hebrew and the Greek text to be corrupt,
and have established a Latin translation, differing far from the Hebrew and
Greek: and is not this to alter the scriptures? If I should show the
corruptions of that translation, I should be very tedious. I will name one: in
the 1. of the Hebr. it is said, Christ has purged our sins by himself:
these words [by himselfe] are clean stricken out of their Rhemists
translation; what an intolerable corruption is this? But I will conclude the
matter in a syllogism:

They which establish a corrupt translation, alter the scriptures, or at least
a jot of the same: But the Papist establish a corrupt translation: Ergo.
And indeed I cannot sufficiently wonder at them who establish their Latin
translation eo nomine, because it is Hieroms, and yet will not allow, his
translations of the Psalms: what dealing with the Scriptures is this? he has
corrected that translation of the Psalms which they use, and yet they have
defied it. You further demand, why we should trust the Church of Rome rather in
this then in other things? I answer, first that (as I have proved) we trust
not the Church of Rome but the scriptures themselves: secondly it is a
ridiculous consequent, We believe the church of Rome in this point, ergo we
must do so in all other. To make your folly manifest unto you self, M. D.
you believe the church of England in some points, will you do so in all? I
would it were so. That we have had nothing to do with the Bible for a thousand
years, and that we have robbed the Church of many books, are detestable
untruths. But I pray you, Sir, were not the scriptures preserved in the Greek
church as well as in the Romish church? did not the Jews keep the scriptures?
and yet (to use your phrase) our Savior wrested the^ out of their hands, not
as just, but as unjust possessours of them. The Pharisees might have used the
same speech to our Savior Christ, that the Doctor does to us. He has three
other questions in this chapter. The first is, how we relying only upon
scripture can show certainly which books be scripture, and which not? This
question I have at large answered in this chapter, and therefore I will not
repeat my answer. Secondly he would know of the unlearned Protestant, how he
knows the translations to be true? I answer, that it is not necessary to
know every thing to be truly translated. The spirit of God speaking in the
scriptures, certifieth the conscience of the unlearned, that the scriptures in
the English tongue are the scriptures. The third question it, why we believe
our own judgments rather the Luthers or Calvin's? I answer, we believe their
judgments that bring best proofs out of Scriptures. But M. Doctor, because
you have posed us with so many questions, now I will pose you with one
likewise. Why do you receive your latin translation, rather upon this Popes
authority, then upon that Popes authority? Pope Sixtus says, ^ead M. James.
before the Vatican edition their vulgar latin translation was schismatis
occasio, the occasion of heresy. Now Pope Clements edition is approved, far
differing from Sixtus edition. What certainty then have Papists, who will take
the scriptures now upon this, now upon that Popes warrant? But I reduce your
argument into a syllogism:

They which have no certain trial of truth, are not the Church: But the
Protestants have no certain trial. Ergo.
I deny the assumption, for we have the scriptures which are the infallible
rule of truth. Our Savior Christ vanquished the devil by the scriptures. The
Bereans tried the Apostles doctrine by the scriptures: Lib. 2. denupt. cap. ^^.
and may not we so do? S. Augustine writes thus: Ista controuersia iudicem
riquirit, this controversy requires a judge: who shall be judge? he
answers, Christ; Iudicet Christus, let Christ be judge. He does name neither
Pope, nor Romish church. For, as he says in another place, Scriptura est
eminentissima authoritatis, (...) Civit. l. 11. c. 3.
the scriptures are of a most sovereign and peerless authority. Lib. 5.
Optatus disputing whether the baptized are to be rebaptized, is worthy to be
heard; Quarendi sunt (says he) aliqui huius controuersiae indices; si
Christiani de viraque part dari non possunt. quia stuaijs veritas impeditur,
de foris quarendus est index: si l'aga^^^, non potest nosse Christiana secreta,
si Iudans, inimiens est Christiani baptismatis, ergo in terris haec de re
nullum poterit reperiri iudicium, de coelo quaerendus, sed vt quid pu^samus ad
coelum cum habemus hic in Euangelio testamentum? inquam, quia hoc loco recte
possunt terrena coelestibus comparari. Some judges for this controversy are to
be fought for: if Christians, they cannot be had on both sides, because by
part-taking the truth is hindered: we must seek abroad for a judge; if he be a
Pagan, he knows not Christian secrets; if a Jew, he is an enemy to
Christian baptism: in earth there can be found no judgment: a judge from
heaven must be required. But why do we knock at heaven, when we have in the
Gospel a testament? because in this place, earthly things may be fitly compared
to heavenly things. I marvel, M. Doctor, that your vanting upon all the
Fathers, light not upon this Father, who is, as you call them, a plain
Calvinist. But I return your argument:

They which have no certain trial of the truth, are not the Church: But the
Papist have no certain trial of the truth. Ergo.
The assumption is manifest, because they rely upon Popes that may err.
Marellinus sacrificed to idols, Liberius was an Arrian. And more then this,
some Judas might creep into the office, as your Rhemists confess. Some Popes
they will not appeal to Counsels, as it it manifest by the Council of Basil.
And M. Doctor, in a word, what certainty have you, or can you have, if there
happen to be a schism amongst the Popes? The 22. schism continued 40. years,
as it is recorded in Fascic. Temp. and until Martin the 5. it was not manifest
who was Pope. You blaspheme the Scriptures; Turrian calls them a Delphian
sword made for want. The Censure of Colen says, that it is veluti nasus
caereus, a nose of wax. O Antichristian Prelates, the Lord rebuke you for
these your blasphemies against his holy Bible! What trial of truth you have, I
hope I have made plain to your own conscience, M. Doctor. In the end of this
chapter you call us boat-swanes, admitting no judge, and say we have no means
to rest until we end in Atheism. That this name of boat-swanes may return
upon your head, I pray you consider how M. Harding pleads for your Pope to be
head of the church, because the Prophet Hose prophesies that the children of
Israel and Judah shall have one head. Out upon you, Antichristian heretics,
that ever you should thus abuse the holy Bible touching Atheism, whence did
Machiauell spring? Caius constantly avouches Italy to be the very fountain
of Atheists. I conclude this reason with the saying of Picus Mirandula, Magna
profecto insania est Euangelio non credere, cuius veritatem sanguis martyrum
clamat, Apostolicae resonant voces, prodigia probant, ratio confirmat, mundus
testatur, eleme^ta loquu^tur, Daemones confitentur: sed long mayor insania, si
de Euangelij veritate non dubitas, viuere tamen, quasi de eius falsitate non
dubitares. It is exceeding madness not to credit the Gospel, the truth whereof
the blood of Martyrs does cry, the Apostolical words do sound, miracles do
prove, reason does confirm, the world does witness, the elements do utter,
the devils confess: but it is far greater folly if thou doubtest not of the
truth of the Gospel, so to live as if thou made no question but it were
false.

The twelfth reason: the use and custom of the Church.
De faece hauris, you draw of your dregs M. Doctor, when you will beat us
down with the bare club of custom. Custom in civil affairs may prevail
much, but in divinity it is not worth a rush, except it be joined with truth.
Prudentius answers Symmachus making this defense, Suus cuique mos, suus
cuique ritus est. Every one has his manner and rite.

Quid mihi tu ritus solitos, Roman senator,
obiectas? cum scita patrum, populique frequenter
in tabulis placiti sententia flexa nouarit:
Nunc etiam quoties solitis decedere prodest,
praeteritosque habitus cultu damnare recenti?
Why do thou object unto me Custom? when a diverse opinion has changed the
decrees of Father and people: now also how often does it avail to depart from
custom, and by a new manner to condemn the old habits? Morosa moris
retentio res est aeque turbulenta ac nouitas, A wayward retaining of a Custom,
is as turbulent a thing as novelty Balsamon upon Photius says that aequitate
exigente mutamus consuctudinem, Tom. 6.
when equity requires it, we change custom. And again, Vidi non scriptam
consuetudinem fuisse infirmatam, I have seen an unwritten custom to have
been infringed. But says the Doctor, the use and custom of the church has
been always an infallible rule to direct and order things by. First the
Doctor beggeth that which is a question, taking the Romish Church to be the
true Church. We deny it: prove it before you plead custom. Secondly the
Church in times past did give the Eucharist unto Infants; was this an
infallible rule, M. Doctor, to give the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ unto children? if you deny that the Church did so, you may be
confounded with infinite testimonies of authors. Augustine in his first book
de peccato mort. cap. 20. is plain, upon which place Erasmus has made this
marginall note, Lib. 1. cap. 2. cont. Julian.
Nunc parvulis non datur Eucharistia, now the Eucharist is not given to little
ones. Innocentius Pope of Rome, as the same father testifies, Definiuit
parvulos nisi manducaverint carnem filij hominis, vitam prorsus habere non
posse; that Infants cannot have eternal life except they eat the flesh of the
son of man. I could produce your own men, who acknowledge that the Church
did use to give the Sacrament to Infants. By which I conclude, that the Church
is not an infallible rule to direct unto truth. The Apostle Paul does not only
fight with custom, but uses many other arguments and that in indifferent
matters, as your Rhemists write, therefore you abuse the place to establish a
custom, to confirm matters of moment, when the Apostle entreats of
indifferency. Secondly I would you could truly say that you are the Church, as
Paul did: you are departed from the Apostolical Church. But hear what
Theophylact writes upon tnat place; Ad verecundiam Auditores haec dicta
compellunt, ne quid praeter Apostolorum consuetudinem factitent; these sayings
drive the auditors to shame, that they should not do any thing besides the
Apostles custom. Bring us therefore the Apostles practice, and you shall cause
us to yield to it. But that which he cannot obtain by Paul, he would prove by
Augustine, who avouches that it is strange madness to dispute of that which
the universal Church practices. Secondly he proves that Infants are borne
in sin, because the Church does baptize them. To the first testimony I
answer, that Aug. speaks of ceremonies, as whether a man must fast before the
communion or no: and such like. Secondly I answer, that Papists must prove
their ceremonies to be used of the whole Church, as also that they be the
Church. The original of their ceremony is set down in their writers, as in
Bucch. and others. To the second argument I answer that we have infallible
testimonies out of scripture to prove that infant are borne in sin, besides the
custom of the church which baptizeth them. And now because you have objected a
place out of the 5. part of the 18. Epistle, hear what he the same S.
Augustine writes in the first part. I would have you (says he) to know that
the Lord has made us subject to a light yoke, and that he has joined together
the society of the new people with Sacraments, in number the fewest, in
observation the easiest in signification most excellent, such as is Baptism
consecrated in the name of the trinity, and the Communication of his body and
blood, and if any other be contained in the Canonical Scriptures. If S.
Augustine had known your seven Sacraments, he would never have come in with
Si quid aliud, if any other. Immediately after he will have such ceremonies in
the Universal Church, as are instituted by the Apostles, or by general
Councels: are all yours such? The ceremonies of particular Churches are
variable, as Augustine himself confesses. In his hundredth and nineteenth
epistle and 19. part, he would have these particular burdens cut off,
complaining that the estate of the Jews is more tolerable, being subject to
ceremonies of God, then of Christians subject to humane praesumptions. If it
was thus in Augustines time, what is it now? To reduce your argument into a
syllogism, thus you dispute:

They which may plead Custom have the truth, But the Papists may plead
custom. Ergo: They have the truth.
I deny the proposition, and say with Hildebarte, that it is Pertinacia, ^.
Epist.
consuetudinem praeferre veritati, Obstinacy it is to prefer custom before
the truth. This he proves by many testimonies out of Augustine and Cyprian,
which for brevity I will omit. That we have taken away the sacrifice of the
Church it is senseless untruth, for that sacrifice which Gods word approoueth
we embrace from our hearts. But we are charged with great malepertnes for
altering the mass, placing in stead thereof chapters psalms ill translated,
and ballads called Geneua psalms, with railing sermons. If we had placed their
golden legende of lies, it may be we should have heard nothing, the Psalms are
David's psalms, and if there be any imperfections in our translations, there
are more in theirs, our sermons are not railing, except that be railing which
disgraceth error. Erasmus complains of Papists, that Quorumlibet somnia, imo
mulier cularum deliramenta leguntur inter diuinas Scripturas, Every fools
dreams, yea very mad women's doting fancies are read with holy Scriptures. Yet
we are malepert, because we read and sing David's Psalms. Their Popes may add
to the mass what they will, and we may not alter any thing without sausines.
Your mass has been by little and little increased, as Walfridus Strabo
evidently shows, and yet you boldly say it has continued through all
generations. The Apostles did consecrate only adjoining prayer to the same.
Bellar. lib. 4. cap. 13. de Eucharist. which he proves out of Gregory. But
in his second book de Missa and 19. Read Fulbertus of variety of orders, in
his epist. to. 3. lib.
chap. it is wonderful to see how he would elude this testimony, and says
plainly that some deny it, yet afterward he recalleth himself. It suffices
to have showed, that their service has not, as this Doctor dreameth,
continued through all generations. Can. 12.
In the Miletan Council there is a decree that no prayers be made in the
Church, but such as are approved in a Synod, Ne forte aliquid sid compositum
contra fidem, least there be any thing composed against the faith. Ergo, there
was not one uniform order in prayer, the diversity of Liturgies, as Basil,
Chrysostom, and others do show likewise, what variety has been in the
Church concerning the service thereof? Nay the very Church of Rome at this day
does not compel all to observe the Canon of the Roman mass as necessary,
as I can prove by their own writers. Micrologus says, cap. 12.
that one Scholasticus did compose the Canon of the mass, in his 13. chapter
he recites superfluities in the Canon thereof, and finds fault with the
mention of the birth of Christ in it, seeeing we should Anunciare illius
mortem, show his death. Now M. Doctor, go and accuse Micrologus of
malepertnes. To conclude this point of custom, what say you M. Doctor to the
feast of the conception of the virgin Marie which is celebrated in you^ Church,
as though she was not concerned in sin, is this infallibly to direct unto
truth? your own conscience tells you the contrary: how many testimonies
might I produce to prove her conception in sin? and yet a feast is kept to
the contrary.

The 13. reason: Doctrine.
The Doctor in this chapter gives the Papist no small blow, who teach that
the sincere preaching of the word of God is no note of the Church. Here he will
needs have that Church whose doctrine tends to mortification and holiness
of life to be the true Church, and contrariwise that congregation which
teaches the contrary to be a false Church. Hence I gather that true doctrine
is a note to discern the Church: for if that be the true Church which teaches
holy doctrine; then holy doctrine is only in the church, for if it be not
inseparable from the same it cannot mark and chalk the Church. Now by holy
doctrine, Christian reader, I mean not that which may have a show of holiness
in the opinion of men, but that which gods word allows. The Pharisie may fast
and make great show of piety. The Montanists had three lents in the year: the
false Apostles did teach doctrine which had a show of wisdom, Coloss. 2.15.
in voluntary worship and humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body: out
of which we gather that pretended piety and holiness must not be made a note to
discern a Church, but such holiness of doctrine as Gods word does allow, for
indeed that only is holy, and all other doctrine is profane, whatsoever show
it may have with men. The Doctor to prove his opinion says, that the church
is called holy, because it professes and teaches nothing but that which is
holy. Who would think that a Doctor could be ignorant in his creed? The church
is called holy because it is washed in the blood of Christ, and sanctified by
his spirit. The Apostle shows that the Church has no wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27.
which is as much as if he had called it holy. That this is so, it is plain,
because the triumpha^t church is holy, and yet teaches no doctrine: and this
triumphant church is understood in the creed as well as the militant; witness the
Papists themselves who teach also that it is called holy because it is
consecrate to God. But grant him that the Church is therefore called holy,
because it teaches holy doctrine; does the Church of Rome teach such
doctrine? let us see whether it be so or not: here he will not compare lives,
and yet he says that Catholics live like Saints. What Saints Catholics are I
have showed before; to omit this then, and to come to his grounds. He proves
their holiness of doctrine, because Priests may not marry. This is so far
from being holy doctrine, that it is deuillish doctrine, as I will make plain
to your conscience M. Doctor. The Apostles were married, Eusebius. l. 3. 27.
for Petrus and Philippus liheris procreandis operam dederunt: Peter and Philip
did beget children. Philemon, if we believe Bellarmine was a Bishop, and he had
his wife Apphia, as Chrysostom witnesses. The Council of Ancyra, Lib. 1. de.
Chr. c 27.
can. 10, decrees after this manner: Diaconi quicunque cum ordinantur, etc.
Deacons whatsoever they be, if in their ordinatio^ they protest that they
cannot contain, if they marry after, let the^ remain in the ministry: ergo
marriage is not a profaning of orders. If this Council will not suffice;
Irenaeus I hope will, who avouches that a Deacon had speciosam vxorem, a
beutifull wife. Lib. 1. cap. 9. Lib. 2. de gest. con. Basil.
Aeneas Syluius writes thus. Id quod de vxore dicitur nihil pendo, cum non
solum qui vxorem habuit, sed vxorem adhuc habens queat assumi. That which is
objected concerning a wife I regard not, seeing not only he which had, but
also he which has one may be Pope, I let pass the history of Paphnutius,
Tempore cap. 14. l. 6.
mentioned by Socrates and others.

Basilius was Ecclesiae Ancyranae Presbyter, and Eupsychius Cappadociae: Basil
was priest of Ancyra and Eupsychius of Cappadocia, they ended their lives in
Martyrdom, and yet Eupsychius had lately taken a wife, and was but even as a
Bridegroom, Chaeraemon a Bishop fled in persecution with his wife. Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 41. l. 5. 21.
Socrates writes that many bishops, Dum Episcopatum gerunt etiam liberos ex
vxore legitima procreant, whiles they are Bishops do beget children of their
lawful wives. Spiridion was a Bishop, and had a daughter Irene. But hear what
Bellarmine writes: he proves that single life is not annexed unto orders by
divine right, and therefore says that Si liceat Sacerdotibus iure diuino
habere vxores, quas ante ordinationem duxerant, cur quaeso etiam non licuisset,
Decaeli sacer,
etiam post ordinationem ducere. If Priests by Gods word might retain their
wives, which they had before ordination, why I pray you was it not lawefull to
marry after ordination also. Now I have proved that Priests did retain
their wives which they had before ordination: ergo.

But M. Doctor if it be so holy doctrine to deny Priests lawful marriage,
then what shall we say of Popes who give dispensation in this point? you know
what your men write, the Pope dispenses against the Apostle, is not this good
divinity, to teach that the Pope may dispense against holy doctrine? but you
like the Donatists, as it seems; hold that Quod volumus sanctum est, that
which we will is holy. Your Inkchorne terms in which you flourish after this
manner, that the Protestants wiuing and rewiuing, trick and trim up
themselves to please the eyes of their sweet hearts with their starched
ruffes, fine monsaches, trim tuscabonians, may be doubled upon your selves,
who use all these with many more vanities, as curling the hair, to please your
Concubines and harlots. Inde est (says Bernard) quem quotidie vides
meretricius nitor, Sermon. 33 in Cant.
histrionicus habitus, regius apparatus, inde aurum in franis, in sellis, in
calcaribus: Thence is it as thou may daily see, that they be trimmed like
whoores, attyred like plaiers, served like Princes: thence is it that they were
gold in their bridles, saddles, and spurs. This has no Lutheran uttered but
deuote Bernard himself concerning the Romish manners, and that you may know the
fruits of this your doctrine, hear what Aeneas Syluius says, in the place
before quoted, Plures saluarentur in sacerdotio coniugato, qui nunc in sterili
Presbiterio damnantur: Many might be saved in married Priesthood. which now are
condemned in barren Priesthood. Panormitan also says, that ex lege
continentiae, by the law of continency Priests are defiled with unlawful
copulation; but because I desire brevity, I refer you to Gildas, the title
of his book i^ Acris inuectio in Ecclesiasticum ordinem: a sharp inuectiue
against the Ecclesiastical order.

Thus M. Doctor, it had bin good for you to have concealed this profane
doctrine of your impure priesthood. You say further, that the Roman religion
teaches restitution of goods wrongfully gotten; so do we teach and say with
Augustine, Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum; the sin is not
forgiven without restitution: and therefore you slander us most detestably,
saying that we leave all at large to our followers. To proceed, the cathohke
Roman religion teaches observation of vows and promises; so do we, of
lawful vows and promises, but otherwise we say, in turpi voto muta decretum,
in malis promissis rescinde fidem, in a filthy vow change thy purpose, in
wicked promises disanull thy faith. So does Aquinas teach in his 2. 2. 88.
quest. art. 10. in these words: Potest contigere, It may happen, that a vow be
simply evil, or unprofitable, or a hindrance of a greater good, and then it
may be changed. But you like filthy heretics hold, that it is a greater evil
to marry after a vow, then to commit fornication. Bellar. lib. 2. de Mo. cap.
34. and your Rhemists hold that it is the worst fornication. 1. Cor. 7.
Turpis, says Hosuis, Philippo videtur hac oration, p^. 412.
Catholicis autem honestissima, these words unto Philip Melancthon seem
shameful, but unto the Catholics they seem most honest: what words will some
say? namely these, that it is better for vowed persons to commit fornication,
or to have a concubine, then to marry. For your credit sake hereafter M.
Doctor, never come in with your doctrine of vows: I hope men by considering it
will abhor Popery. But we are not yet come to an end of this their
doctrine. The catholic Roman religion teaches abstinence and fasting, which
mortifieth our bodies and enricheth our country: so do we, and do abstain
not only from flesh but from fish when we fast, and from wine with all other
delicates: and for the enriching of our country, there are laws made to
prohibit the eating of flesh on certain days and at certain times. But we
differ from the Papists in these points: first they teach, that religious
fasting consists in choice of meats, as abstinence from flesh, cheese,
eggs; but we teach, that it consists in abstinence from all kind of meats.
It is well known that Popish fasting is feasting, and many had rather be fed
with wine, and spices, and delicates, then with flesh. Secondly we teach, that
we must fast to humble our selves, to tame the flesh, and for other respects;
but they teach that they fast to merit and to deserve at Gods hands: now
Christian Reader judge which side holds most truly and soundly concerning
fasting. Some Papists write that we must abstain from flesh and eat fish,
because God cursed not the waters: is not this to make flesh an unclean thing?
and so by consequent they resemble the old heretics which condemned the
creatures as unclean. The ancient Christians when they fasted, had but one
meal a day, and that at night: our Papists have two, a dinner and a supper:
Bell. de I^iu.
but M. Doctor whether is this to fast or no? to gorge your selves with eating
fish and drinking wine in bowls. Wine inflameth concupiscence as well as
flesh. The ancient Church did not restrain fasting to certain meats, as you
may see in Tertullian his book, adversus Psychichos, Take heed, therefore
least you take part with Montanus in restraining to certain meats and times.
Spiridion did sell flesh in lent to be eaten, ^^cause to the clean all things
are clean. Out of this history mark these things. First, that to fast is
sine omni cibo permanere, to be without all meat. Secondly the guest did
refuse flesh because he was a Christian. Spiridion faith therefore he ought to
eat. What can be more direct against Popish fasting? The Papists say men are
no Christians if they eat flesh in lent: Spiridion says, because they are
Christians, therefore they ought to eat flesh. Alcibiades living sparingly was
admonished by God that he should use all creatures. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 3.
Possid. in vita August. cap. 22.
Augustine had always wine, because every creature is sanctified by the word
and prayer. By the same reason flesh is sanctified as well as wine. A Christian
may say with Augustine, Non ego immunditiam obsonij timeo, sed immunditiam
cupiditatis; I fear not the impuritie of the creature, but the impuritie of my
appetite. Take heed also least you take part with Eustathius in this point, as
you do in marriage. So lib. 2. cap. 31.
For he did eschew the company of a Priest that had a wife, and taught that
men must abstain from meats. I will not speak of your doctrine of meriting
by fasting, only this I say, that if Popish fasting be right fasting, many can
be content to enjoy no other feasting. To have most dainty cates, fish and
wine, pleases the mouths of many men as well as flesh, To leave this and to
come to other points. The Catholic Roman religion, Who raise rents in England
like unto Papists? yea it may be proved by examples that there be Rom^ne
Chatholikes as hard dealers as any other.
says the Doctor, forbids Landlords to raise their rents, except urgent
occasion drive them so to do. And we teach, that oppression is peccatum
clamans, non amans, a crying and not a loving sin: and therefore it is false
which you say, that we teach the Landlord to do what he list with his own:
the landlord must do as he would men should do unto him; he must deal with
his tennants as considering himself to be a tennant. The same Catholic Roman
religion teaches marriage to be indissoluble; so do we, excepting the case of
adultery: and your doctrine causes many to fall into that foul sin; for
the offending person knowing that the innocent person may not marry again,
cares not to commit that sin if liberty were granted the occasion is taken
away. Secondly, you make no difference betwixt the innocent person, and the
person offending; is not this good divinity? The Grecians also teach as we
teach in this point; so does Erasmus and your own men Caietane and Catherine.
Thus M. Doctor, you care not to accuse your own champions of profane
doctrine. I pass by other testimonies, because I will answer briefly. libr. de
Ma. c. 14.
Bellarmine writes thus; Sola fornicatio direct oppenitur fidei coniugali,
and sustantiae ipsius matrimonij: Only fornication is dire^^ly opposite to the
marriage covenant and to the substance of matrimony. Great reason then is
there surely that this sin should dissolve marriage. Does not that dissolve a
thing which overthrows the substance of it? And how they provided for the
innocent party, let his word judge, which punishes the adulterer with death:
if the adulterer ought to be so punished, there can be no question but marriage
may be dissolved.

Hitherto the Doctor has had but badde success for his holy doctrine, let us
see if his success be better hereafter. The Catholic Roman religion, says
he, teaches that all laws of magistrates which be not expressly against the
word of God, do bind the subjects in conscience: the greater therefore is
your sin, because you care not to murder Princes. But what if the Pope gives
a dispensation? then you may do what you list. O holy and heavenly doctrine.
Our doctrine concerning magistrates laws is this, that the authority in
general is to be regarded for conscience, because it is Gods ordinance. But
every law does not bind Conscience, but those which are divine, being
immutable. And this doctrine is taught by your man Gerson, as witnesses
Bellarmine. There are no men that have given greater obedience to magistrates,
then Protestants, as the world can testify. The Papists bring the Magistrates
into contempt. The Emperor must lead the Popes horse. Coster glories that
Pipin king of France, 43. p.
doing reverence to the Pope did lead the Popes horse: if Emperors must lead
the Popes horse and kiss his toe, who bring Magistrates to contempt, the Pope
or the protestants? Henry the fourth barefooted, fasting from morning to
night, waited for the Popes sentence three days. If this be not to contemn
Magistrates, I know not what is. In the book of ceremonies the Emperor is
appointed wonderful seruilitie but I leave this contempt of Magistrates and
come to venial sins, and concupiscence. A man may wonder that we should be
charged with unholy doctrine because we teach every sin to deserve damnation.
The greater the sin is, the more men should abstain from it: therefore on
the contrary, the lesser it is, the less regard is had of it. By our doctrine
then me^ regard sin more then by the Papists doctrine; because we teach no
sin to be small: judge therefore indifferent reader, which is most holy
doctrine. Hierom says, Nescio an leave aliquod peccatum. ad Co.
I know not whether we may term any sin small which is committed against
God or no. But the Papists care not to call sins venial and small, though
committed against an infinite God. To enlarge this doctrine a little, their own
men, namely Gerson, and the bishop of Rochester teach as we teach. Bellarmine
uses strong reasons against this wicked doctrine. Bellar. l. 1. de amist. gra.
c. 1.
No punishment is so evil as any sin can be. Ergo no sin is venial. A man
must rather be annihilated then he must commit any sin, how then can sin be
venial of it own nature. Thus your own school resolves against your
doctrine. The scripture is plain, Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things that are written in the book of the law to do them. 3. Gala.
If man be accursed for every sin, then every sin deserves death: but man
is accursed for every sin. Ergo, Augustine writes excellent well of this
point, Leuia multa faciunt vnum grave, Tract. 1. in epist. Ioh.
multae guttae implent flumen, multa grana faciunt massam: Many small sins
make one great, and many drops make a flood, many corns make a heap. Take
head therefore M. Doctor of your small sins, least admitting them, you have a
mass of corruption. Theodorus Abucara speaks as plainly as any Protestant,
In lib. Pa.
Peccati nullus expers est, nisi Christus Dominus. I am vero omne peccatum vel
tantillum mortem infert. No man excepting Christ our Lord is without sin:
Now the least sin deserves death. Touching concupiscence, we teach with the
Apostle that it is sin, and by this doctrine men must of necessity be moved
to strive more against it then if it were no sin. How say you M. Doctor, will
you not strive more against that thing which is sin, then against that which
is no sin? if you will not, the greater is your shame, and your conscience is
the more dissolute. Concerning the reward of good and bad life in the world to
come, we teach it with you, but yet we deny the merit of eternal life. Opera
sunt via regni non causa regnandi, says Bernard, Good works are the way to
the kingdom of heaven, de lib. arb.
they are not the cause of it. Tota spes mea, says Augustine, est in morte
Domini mei, mors eius meritum meum, in anual. 22.
refugium meum. My whole hope is only in the death of my Lord: his death is my
merit and refuge. And again, Meritum meum miseratio Domini, My desert is the
Lords mercy, Besides these authorities M. Doctor, if reasons will satisfy you
why we deny merits, take these.

Whosoever meriteth must perfectly fulfill the law: but no man in this life can
perfectly fulfill the law, ergo no man can merit. Secondly, where there is
merit, there is no mercy, for gratia non est vllo modo gratia, nisi sit omni
modo gratuita. Grace is not grace except it be every way free: but the reward
is of mercy. Ergo.

Thirdly, where there is merit there may be confidence in merits, but no man
must put his confidence but in God. Ergo. To this syllogism I will annexe
Augustines speech. Lib. de pec. mo^ 14 cap.
Quisquis ergo ausus fuerit dicere iustifico te, consequens est, vt dicat etiam
creed in me, quod nemo sanctorum recte dicere potest. Whosoever can say I
justify thee, may by consequent say believe in me, which none of the Saints
can rightly say. If then we justify our selves, we may believe in our selves,
which speech all Christians do abhor.

Fourthly, where there is merit, there the reward is due by justice to the
work, but by justice it is not due, save only in respect of Gods promise;
ergo, If you will see the assumption proved, read Aquinas, 1. 2. 114. quaest.
where he says, that Deus est debtor sibi non nobis. God is debtor to himself
and not to us. Read also Bernard de lib. arb. and hear Augustine writing thus,
Debtor factus est, he is made a debtor by promising. Now to produce your own
men, as Scotus and diverse others, I hold it needless, yet let the Catechism
of Colon speak. Quis tam stupidus est, etc. Who is so sottish as to think our
good works to be worthy of eternal life? Thus merits are rejected by reason
and by sundry authorities: therefore he slaundereth us in saying, that we give
the people occasion to be negligent in doing of good, and little or nothing
fearful to evil. Now we are come to auricular confession. The Catholic
Roman religion teaches confession to a priest, of all deadly sins which we
can remember, under pain of damnation, which restrains the people from
sin, and causes them particularly to be well instructed and counseled. But
the Protestant taking that away sets open a door to all wickedness and
loosenes of life, as also to ignorance. To answer this latter speech: first, no
man can be ignorant, that shuts not his eyes, how we condemn loosenes of
life, and how we cry for knowledge. We desire and beseech the people to read
the bible; we catechize and instruct them, we examine them also before the
communion, do we then open a door to ignorance? Some Papists have said that
ignorance is the mother of devotion, and I am sure that knowledge abounds now
more then ever it did in Popery. As for auricular confession, Iuel. 27. ait.
we say it is neither commanded by Christ, nor necessary to salvation. The
Papists to maintain their doctrine, make their priest is judges, and yet the
master of sentences witnesses, Lib. 4.
that omnes Sacerdotes non habent scientiam discernendi; all Priests have not
knowledge to discern. What wretched judges then are Popish priests which have
not knowledge? But suppose them to have knowledge, can they discern the heart?
Augustine demands, ^^n. 3.
vnde sciunt an verum dicam? how do they know whether I speak truth or no?
seeing no man knows what is in man, but the spirit of man. But if confession
be so necessary, why did Nectarius take away confession, and leave it to every
man's conscience, how he would come to the communion? A certain noble woman
confessed particularly her sins to the Priest, Socrat. l. 5. cap. 18.
and because a Deacon had slept with her this confession of sins was taken
away. Is confession of sins for this one fact was taken away, what just cause
was there to alter Popish auricular confession, let the world judge. Not to be
long in this point, set apart abuses in confession, and we do not deny it. If
any be troubled in his mind for his sins, let him seek a skillful
physician. Otherwise we say with Chrysostom, Homil. 31. ad Hebr.
Non dico tibi vt te prodas in publicu^, neque vt te accuses apud alios, sed
obedire te volo prophetae dice^ti, revela domino via^ tua^. I will not advise
thee to betray thy self openly, nor to accuse thy self before others, but I
counsel thee to obey the Prophet, saying, Open thy way unto the Lord. And
again, Si confu^deris dicere alicui quia peccasti dicito ea quotidie in anima;
if thou art ashamed to tell thy sins to any, speak the^ in thy soul.
Satisfaction depending upon confession, is in the next place to be handled. The
Catholic Roman religion, says the Doctor, teaches satisfaction to be done
either in this life or in Purgatory, and upon consideration of this they
builded so many goodly Churches, hospitals, etc. In few words the doctor has
condemed, all their glorious works, as being done for wrong ends. We
acknowledge the satisfaction of Christ to be our only satisfaction for sin:
and say with S. John, If any man sin, he has an Advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Maxius says, that
Christi passio nobis sufficit ad salutem, Sermon. 3.
Christ's passion is sufficient to salvation. And Bellarm. in his 2. book de
iustificat. and 5. chap. writes thus; Nihil frequentius omnis scriptura
testatur, quam Christi passionem and mortem, plenam atque perfectam
satisfactionem fuisse pro peccatis; The whole Scripture does witness nothing
more often then that the suffering and death of Christ are a full and perfect
satisfaction for our sins. If man might satisfy for sin, he might be
called a redeemer and a Savior, which is horrible to hear of. Neither does
this our doctrine rob the poor of their alms, children of their education,
and the sick of their relief, and makes men unwilling to do any good at
all. The Doctor except he be blind may see, that men build Colleges and
hospitalls, and relieve the poor, though they do it not to satisfy for their
sins: but his confession is to be accepted that faith, their building and
giving of alms is to satisfy: by which he disgraceth all their works. From
satisfaction he comes to freewill, saying, that their doctrine causes the
people to endeavor to do good, and flee from all evil, the Protestant taking
it away discourageth men utterly from doing good works: for who will go about
a thing which is not in his power? What could Pelagius have said more? M.
Doctor, is it in our power to do good unto salvation or no without grace?
answer directly. Our Savior Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing.
Augustine writes, lib. 1. Retract. c. 15.
that voluntas in tantum est libera, in quantum est liberata; our will is so
far free, as it is freed. To set down our doctrine briefly. We say with the
same father 3. Hyp. esse fatemur liberum arbitrium omnibus hominibus non per
quod sit idoneum, qua ad Deum pertinent sine Deo, aut inchoare aut certe
peragere: we confess that all men have freewill, not that it is able either to
begin or to perfect those things which belong unto God, without God, but
only in the works of this life whether they be good or evil. To shut up the
matter: does Cyprian withdraw men from doing good, when he says, Dei est omne
quod possumus, all is of God that we do? Now we must speak of the Mass: the
Catholic Roman religion teaches the holy Mass to be a sacrifice in which
the true body and blood of Christ is offered up, which makes the people so
devout and reverent. I answer, first what if the Priest have no intent to
consecrate, what then is become of your sacrifice? secondly we knowledge no
bodily sacrifice for sin, but only Christ on the cross. And that I make
plain by the Apostles reasons. Where there is no remission of sin, there is
no more offering for sin: Heb. 10.
but by Christ's passion there is perfect remission of sins: ergo. Again,
Christ died but once, ergo he offered himself but once. Ireneus writes thus;
Oportet not oblationem Deo facere, we must offer to God, Lib. 4. cap. 34.
and in all things yield thanks to the maker, with a pure mind, unfeigned
faith, steadfast hope, and fervent love, offering the first fruits of his
creatures. And this oblation the Church only sacrifices in purity, offering
to God of his creatures with thanksgiving. Where is your sacrifice of the very
body and blood of Christ, if the Church sacrificed only the sacrifice of
thanksgiving? Not to heap other testimonies, I pray you tell me, M. Doctor,
resolutely and with infallible arguments in which part of the Mass this
sacrifice consists? Bellarmine is his 1. book de Missa, and 27. chap. makes
many propositions, and faith; some think thus, and some thus: it were
therefore good for you to be certain your selves, before you obtrude this
sacrifice upon the people to stir them to devotion. Now let every man judge
of this your syllogism:

They which teach holy doctrine are the true Church: But the Papists teach holy
doctrine: ergo.
To make a brief of that which has been handled, he charge us with unholy
doctrine, because we approve ministers marriage; yet his own man Panormitan
does the same. Bell. lib. 1. de. cler. cap. 19.

Again, he charge us with unholy doctrine, because we allow marriage to the
innocent party after a just divorce: yet his own men teach at we teach.
Caietan and Catharin.

Thirdly, he charge us with the same crime, because we teach that all
magistrates laws bind not the conscience, yet his own fellow Gerson holds
as we hold.

Fourthly, he charge us with the same crime, because we teach every sin to
deserve eternal damnation, which doctrine his own men have taught as I have
proved. These doctrines might have served to have returned this untruth upon
his head, but let us further see into their doctrine.

It is not lawful for the faithful to marry with infidells, for Paul says,
1. Cor. 6.
be not yoked with infidells: yet the Pope may dispense in this point. Bellar.
lib. 1. de Mat. cap. 23. who gave the Pope leave thus to play with Gods word?

Secondly, God forbids diverse degrees of kindred, yet the Pope despenseth
with them, if Gods word be holy the Popes doctrine is profane and shows him
to be Antichrist sitting in the Temple as God.

Thirdly, subdeacons may not marry, yet the Pope dispensed with them Greg. lib.
1. Epist. Cap. 42.

Fourthly, God commands the children to honor Parents, but the papists teach
that they may enter into the state of Monks and Nuns without the parents
consent. Bellar. lib. 2. de. me. 36 cap.

Fifthly, the Pope should honor the magistrate as being his father, but the
Emperor kisseth is toe.

Sixthly, the Papists allow stews, and one calls them a nenessarie evil.
God says, Deuteronomy. 23.27. There shall be not whore of the daughters of Israel.

Seauenthly, the Papists teach, that the Seriptures are not to be read of all
men, a doctrine tending to ignorance and profane life.

Eighthly, the Papists say, that the passions of Saints are joined to Christ's
passion to make up the treasure of the Church: a most blasphemous doctrine
against Christ's sufferings which are of infinite valor. Bell. lib. de Indulg.

Ninthly, the Papists teach, that Saints may be called our redeemers after a
certain respect, though not simply. Bellarm. eodem lib. if there were nothing
but this one thing in Popery, a man should ever detest the same.

Tenthly, the Papists teach, that it is better to commit fornication then to
marry after a vow, as I proved, which is most filthy and odious doctrine.

11. The Papists teach, that in this life and after death the Pope may give
pardons: which is a most dissolute doctrine, as is the doctrine of purgatory.
Give good store of gold and silver, and thou shall have pardon: alas, what will
not a man give for the redemption of his soul?

12. The Papists teach, that some sins deserve not death of their own nature,
which makes men to commit these small sins, whereas the greatness of sin
terrifieth men from it. Thus M. Doctor, behold your holy doctrine: and now I
return your speech: if the Papists doctrine open the right way to heaven, then
is the way to heaven most pleasant and delightful to flesh and blood, and
consequently most easy to be walked.

The 14. reason: Negative Doctrine.
Although this reason, with the rest following, has no substance, but many
vain words, yet I will examine it with the others that follow. Pope Boniface
robbed the Church and ^^ed to Jerusalem Fas. Tmp. page 70. Albertus robbed the
Church by Papal authority. ^^n. 90^.
. Whether Tarltons father spoiled the Church, as the Doctor reports. I am
ignorant: but if you thus dispute M. Doctor, Tarletons father sold the lead
off the parish Church. Ergo the religion in England is a false religion.
Tarleton himself I am sure had more wit then you: you are beholding to his
father for this fact, for otherwise as it seems you had wanted matter to fill
up your chapter: as for the destroying of Abbeis, Monasteries, Nunries,
Chauntries, Altars, you might admire the just judgment of God upon such places,
which being abused to Idolatry, and to filthy lust, whordome, and Sodomie,
are changed to other uses: your own prelates also in king Henry his days,
committed Abbey lands to the Princes disposition. And if you think it carnal
liberty to possess any such Church goods, you may do well to persuade a
number of your favorites, to renounce the possession of their Abbey lands, and
to restore them to the Church. If you refuse so to do, (I will say no more,)
you are libertines your selves by your own verdict. Who first annexed
parsonages to abbeyes but Papists? and this thing has not a little maimed Gods
Church. Who first exacted first fruits but the covetous Pope? read M. Doctor
Fasciculum rerum expetendarum, what orations are there against them. If your
Abbeyes be spoiled blame your selves, for Julian the Cardinal writing to
Eugenius says, iusto Dei Iudicio fiet, quod quia nolumus dimittere Concilium
fieri, perdemus temporalitatem nostram, and vtinaus non corpora and animas. By
the just judgment of God it shall come to pass, because we will not suffer a
Council, that we shall leese our temporalities, and I would to god we might
not leese our bodies and souls. Touching first fruits says the Author of the
oration against them, that exorbitanter factum fuerat and contra ius and
iustitiam, in oppressionem praelaturarum, ecclesiarumque, manasteriorum, and
beneficiorum, and etiam personarum quibus contigerat. It was exorbitantly done
against right and equity, to the oppression of Praelacies, Churches,
Monasteries, Benefices, and also the persons to whom it happened. If some
Lutherane (as you call them) had thus written, you might have discredited it,
but now you have no cause so to do. No marvel then if others followed the
Popes example. If these testimonies will not suffice, call to mind the popes
confession, namely Adrians, that Omne malum a Curia Romana processit. All
wickedness proceeded from the Roman Court. Thus you have gained little by
this your preface to negative doctrine. I might answer this reason only with
the like, namely that the Papists stands upon mere negatiues, as these, I
deny Christ to be the only king, Priest, and Prophet of his Church; I deny
that only God is to be called upon; I deny the Scriptures to contain
sufficient doctrine unto salvation; I deny we are saved only by Christ: thus
I might proceed and show that your religion stands upon destructiues. But I
will give you arguments for the opinions which we hold. And to begin with
Baptism, with which you likewise begin: you hold it to be simply necessary
unto salvation, we deny it, affirming that Gods grace is not tied to the
Sacraments, but that he may dispense it as it pleases him. The thief upon the
cross was saved without baptism: ergo it is not simply necessary.
Valentinian died without baptism, as Ambrose reports, and yet he doubted not
of his salvation. And if it be necessary simply unto salvation, it is by this
place in the 3. of John, No man can enter into the kingdom of heaven, except
he be borne of water and of the spirit: but this place does not prove a simple
necessity, for Bellarmine teaches, that baptism was not necessary simply
before the passion of Christ: therefore this place proves it not. We say
therefore with Bernard, Non carere baptism, sea contemnere, capitale est,
epist. 77.
not the want, but the contempt of baptism is damnable. In the Church of
Thessalie, as Socrates writes, they did baptize only at Easter, ob quam
causam, says he, Lib. 5. cap 20.
omnes paucis admodum exceptis absque baptismate moriebantur: for which cause
all excepting a few died without baptism. Would the Church of Thessalie have
done thus, if it had thought baptism simply necessary unto salvation? If you
object Augustines authority, I answer first that he thought the Eucharist
necessary also, as I proved before: and if he erred in one, why might he not
err in the other? secondly the same man says, tunc invisibiliter impletur,
cum misteriu^ baptismi, Lib. 4. cap. 2^.
non contemptus religionis, sed articulus necessitatis excludit; then it is
inuisibly fulfilled, when the point of necessity does exclude baptism, and
not contempt of religion. S. Augustine therefore did urge baptism to be
necessary against the Pelagians, who thought it superfluous, and not against
those that were prevented with inevitable necessity. The contempt therefore is
damnable, and not the want of baptism. I might also oppose Vincentius
judgment to that of Augustine, if he be of another mind, but I let it alone.
Catharin the Papist assigns neither heaven nor hell to infants, but a third
place; and so shows himself a flat Pelagian, as I might show: but I refer
the reader to August. sermon. 14. de ver. Apost. lib. 1. de poena mor. cap. 28.
To be brief, it is admirable to consider the variety of popish opinions about
this point. Bellar. lib. 6. de amiss. great. cap. 1. Agree amongst your selves
you that teach so severally concerning Infants, before you come to charge the
Protestants doctrine with bare negatiues. Next to baptism, we must speak of
inherent Justice, which we do not deny to be in men: for this inherent
righteousness is sanctification: but we teach this inherent righteousness to be
imperfect, and cleave only to the righteousness of Christ: whose righteousness
is the very thing that causes a man to stand righteous before God, and to be
accepted to life everlasting. This doctrine I marvel you dare once bark
against, being so holy and so comfortable as it is. I will give you reasons of
it. In the 3. to the Romans we are said to be justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be
a reconciliation through faith in his blood. By grace here, Bellarmine will
have inherent grace understood, because the favor of God is sufficiently set
forth by the word freely, as though to fortify and amplify a matter one thing
may not be uttered in diverse words? which I might plentifully prove.
Secondly, says he, the word [by] cannot be applied to the favor of God, but
to the formal cause, or meritorious cause, or isntrumental cause: this is
likewise false as I might show by some examples: but let this be granted, that
by grace is not meant the favor of God in this place, Paul expounds
himself, saying, through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ. And to
retort Bellarmine his reason: if by the favor of God we must understand
inherent righteousness, then the Apostle needed not to have added, through
faith: because faith is a part of inherent righteousness. Hence I thus conclude:
if we are justified formally and meritoriously by the redemption which is in
Jesus Christ, then are we not justified by inherent justice: but we are
justified formally and meritoriously by the redemption that is in Christ: ergo.

In the same chapter we are said to be justified without works, some answer
works ceremonial are to be understood; this answer Bellarmine refuteth because
the Apostle speaks simply without the works of the law. What works does
Bellarmine understand? works that go before faith? But by his own reason we
must understand all works, for the Apostle speaks simply not restraining his
speech to Moses his law or to works going before faith. Again, such works
are excluded as we may boast in, but we may boast in the works which follow
faith especially, seeing they proceed partly of our selves, and not only of
grace, as the Papists teach. Augustine is worthy to be heard, speaking against
Pelagius, upon the like place of scripture; Non ait ex praeteritis operibus, De
praedest and gra. cap. 7.
sed cum generaliter dixerit non ex operibus, ibi and praeterita intelligi
voluit and futura; he says not of works which are past, but seeing he
speaks generally of works, he will have both works that are past and to come
understood. So say I to the Papist, the Apostle speaks generally, why
should thou then restrain his speech to works that are past? I let pass
the arguments taken out of the 4. chap. which are many, and come to the place
in the 2. of the Cor. the 5. chap. where Paul writes that Christ was made
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. As Christ
was made a sinner, so are we made righteous: but Christ was made a sinner by
imputation: ergo we are made righteous by imputation. To this text semblably
suteth Augustine. Ipse ergo peccatum, cap. 41.
vt nos iustitia, he was made sin, that we might be made justice: not our
justice but Gods justice, neither in us, but in him. Again, 3. tract. in Ioh.
omnes qui per Christum iustificati, iusti non in se sed in illo, all that are
instified in Christ, are righteous in him, not in themselves. Lastly for
brevity sake, I thus dispute. That righteousness which must answer Gods justice
must be pure and perfect: but ours is impure: ergo. Augustine says, 19 lib. de
civ. c. 17.
our righteousnesis such that it consists rather of remission of sins, then
of perfection of virtues: ergo it is not perfect. Optatus speaks thus, Only
Christ is perfect, lib. 2.
caeteri omnes semiperfecti sumus; all other of us are but half perfect. The
testimonies of Fathers are many in this case, I conclude with Bernard: 61 in
Cant.
The righteousness of Christ is not a short cloak which cannot cover two. Thus
I have given you a few reasons why we cleave only to the righteousness of our
blessed Savior Christ. I desire you, M. Doctor, as you love the salvation of
your soul, that you cleave only to it, and leave your stained righteousness:
for your conscience t^lleth you that your inherent righteousness is imperfect.
Quantaelibet fuisse virtutis antiquos praedices iustor, non eos salvos fecit
nisi fides mediatoris. What virtues soever you preach that the ancient just
men had, nothing saved them but faith in the Mediator, Lib. 1. cont. Pelag.
cap. 21.
says Augustine. Except therefore you be better then the righteous men,
Abraham, Noe, and others, only faith in Christ must bring you to salvation.
Concerning works of preparation, if by them you understand works by which God
brings us to repentance, as hearing Gods word, afflictions, with other
things, we do not deny them: but if you understand works, which deserve
favor of congruitie, we reject them, as some of your own men do give us
leave to do that which is done by your selves; and indeed who can think that
he to whom damnation is due should merit and deserve Gods grace? this is mad
divinity. Augustine says, ^^. Psalm.
Nihil boni fecisti and datur tibi remissio peccatorum, attenduntur opera tua,
and inueniuntur omnia mala. Thou have done no good and remission of sin is
given thee, thy works are considered, they are found all evil. To be short,
says the same father, Miseretur Deus. God of his great goodness has mercy,
and he bardeneth without any iniquity, (...)
that neither he which is delivered might boast of his own merits, neither he
which is condemned might complain but of his own deserts, for only grace
discerns those that are saved from those that are damned. Now M. Doctor
plead you merits and deserts, I for my part will cleave only to grace. From
works of preparation we are to descend to good works and free will, but of
these I have spoken before, and therefore I will not repeat the matters
handled, but come to the keeping of Gods commandments, which we deny can be
done in that perfection as the law requires, for there is no man that sins
not, and to say as the Papists say, is plain Pelagianisme, facilia dicis
(says Hierom) thou say Gods commandment are easy, Ad C^^.
and yet thou can allege none that has fulfilled them all. Augustines
testimonies are pregnant in this point, wherefore to leave it, as also humane
laws, and to speak of the seven Sacraments. The Papists make not only 7.
Sacraments, but many more. For as they make orders one of the seven, so do
they make diverse Sacraments in orders: as namely the order of Bishops one
sacrament, the order of Priesthood another, and the order of Deaconship
another, as Bellarmine shows. Hence it is plain that they make about seven
sacraments, yea they make inferior orders also a Sacrament, and so they have
exceedingly multiplied the number of sacraments: but we make but two, and this
number I proved before out of Augustine; besides the Sacraments did flow out
of Christ's side, but only blood and water did issue out of Christ's side, ergo,
there are but two. Water signifies Baptism, and blood the Eucharist: touching
the proof of this, that the sacraments did flow out of Christ's fide, read
Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Sacr. cap. 15. To proceed: August. in 8. tract. in Job.
in a Sacrament there must be a word of institution and an outward element:
Accedat verbum ad clementum and fiat Sacramentum, Let the word come to the
element and so it shall be a Sacrament. But only Baptism and the supper of
the Lord, has an outward element, and the word of institution: ergo. I will
not adioyne the testimonies of Fathers, neither show that Durand denies
matrimony to be a Sacrament after the Sacraments. The Doctor names Priesthood
of which I have spoken, as also of the single life of the Clergy. But
concerning Priesthood I would know whether his Priests are after Aarons order,
or after Melchizedechs. Aarons order is ceased, Melchizedechs order is peculiar
to Christ, what Priesthood then would you have M. Doctor? And whereas you say
that we deny penance, contritio^, and the perpetual virginity of the Virgin
Marie, with trimming up of Churches, ceremonies, and singing, it is false; for
we teach godly sorrow to be necessary unto salvation, and do not deny the
perpetual virginity of the virgin Marie, neither do we condemn moderate
trimming up of churches and ceremonies: as for satisfaction and the real
presence, I have handled them before: as also worshipping of Images, and the
visibilitie of the Church. I will speak of prayer unto Saints, which as yet I
have not spoken of. If we must pray unto Saints, we must believe in them, for
to whomsoever we pray we must believe in him; but we must not believe in
Saints: ergo. If you answer that we may believe in Saints, hear what the
Fathers write. Vemantius says, Vbi prepostio (In) ponitur, To. 2.
ibi diuinitas approbatur: Whersoeuer the preposition [in] is, there the
Divinity is approved. To Vemantius agrees Paschasius, T^. 9.
Credimus Ecclesiam quasi regenerationis matrem, non in Ecclesiam credimus,
quasi salutis vxorem. We believe the holy Church as the mother of regeneration,
but we believe not in the Church, as the author of salvation. Bellarm. proves
the Deity of Christ, because we must believe in him: to believe then in Saints
is to make them Gods. Nazianzene also proves the Deity of the holy Ghost,
because we believe in the holy Ghost. Furthermore to whomesoeuer we must pray,
we must call him Father, but we must not call any Saint Father: ergo. The
proposition is manifest out of the Lords prayer, which is a perfect pattern of
prayer: Ep. 121.
for as says Augustine, Qua^libet alia verba dicamus, nihil aliud dicimus quam
in ista oratione dominica positum est, si recte and congruentur oramus.
Although we utter other words, yet we say no other thing then is contained in
the Lords prayer: if we pray conveniently and aright. Thirdly, to whomsoever we
must pray, he must know the heart, but only God knows the heart, ergo.
Theophylact upon the 19. of Math. writes, that ex hoc quod cogitationes
resciuit, ostendit se Deum Christus, Christ by this thing did show himself
God, because he knew their thoughts. Now M. Doctor judge whether you have not
uttered a most wretched speech, that a horse if he could speak, might be as
good a Protestant as the best of them all. We come not in with bare negatiues,
but with sound arguments, which if you can answer, I reduce your argument into
a syllogism:

They which stand upon bare negatiues, are of a false religion: But the
Protestants stand upon bare negatiues. ergo.
The assumption as I have showed is utterly false. And M. Doctor I would know
whether you own men stand upon bare negatiues or no. We teach many points as I
have proved, which the Papists hold themselves: if we stand upon hare
destructiues; then do they also. Charge not us then M. Doctor with bare
negatiues, except you will disgrace your own men.

The 15. reason: Divinity.
Solomon gives counsel that an other should commend us not we our selves yet
this Doctor thirsts so after praise that he commends the papists for
learning, and condemns the protestants for Idiotes I do not willingly
diminish the papists learning virtus in host laudanda virtue is to be
commended in our enemies, yet now I am enforced to show the Papists ignorance,
and to defend the protestants knowledge; many Popes as I have proved have
been so ignorant that they did not know their grammar. Pope Benedictus, says
Waltheramus Symonaice Papatu Romano inuaso, cum esset rudit literarum, alterum
ad vices Ecclesiastici officij exequendas see^ Papam consecrari fecit. Bennet
getting the Popedom by symony, seeing he was unlearned, caused another Pope to
be consecrated with him to do ecclesiastical duties. If I should repeat Popes
arguments I might wast paper; touching monks, they were so unlearned, that it
was grown a proverb, monacho indoctior, more unlearned then a monk, Doctor
Fulke in Smith.
and of Bishops Erasmus said that only England had learned Bishops. Bellarmine
defends their latin translation, because in a council it may come to pass
that few understand Greek or Hebrew; thus ignorance must serve their turns
when it pleases them, the Papists plead for learning; and yet ignorance, must
be an argument to defend their translation of the bible. The Rhemists also
defend their unlearned papists, as it is to be seen in their annotation upon
the 1. Epist. of Tim. 5. v. Who would now think that these me^ should vaunte
of learning* the papists were so learned that they derive the word articles of
actans, many such strange notations might I show, Aquin. 2.2.
if I delighted in this trash Ludouicus Viues faith, that they which were of
the Dominican order, nec latin sciunt, neither know latin, Praefat in com. d^
Ciuit. dei.
neither have attained to any good author, being nourished and drowned up to
the ears in the sermons of Dormi secure, yea he says that saeculum iam est
literis excultissimum, now the world is exceeding learned, judge then what it
was heretofore, but that Christian reader, thou may see, that this doctor
eareth not how he extolleth the papists, and disgraceth the protestants, attend
unto his words. I pray you says he what a learned clergy was their in Queen
Mary's time, in respect of these poor creatures that occupy now their
prebends and sit in the sunneshine of their new pretended Gospel with their
wives and children round about them. Were not one Tonstal, one Watson, one
Christopherson for learning, one Fecknam, one Gardener, one White for wisdom
and learning together, able to set to school all your ruffled Clergy at this
day? I lived not in Queen Mary's time, to see the learned Clergy that then
was, neither will I detract any thing from the men here named, but this I say
that one Peter Martyr has abundantly answered Gardener: yea I dare say
reverend Iuell, Grindal, Pilkington, Whitgift, Hutton, Cooper, Pears, Matthew,
Bilson, M. Humfrey, M. Fulke, M. Whitakers, with diverse others, were able ora
Papistarum obthurare, to stop the Papists mouths. And concerning the
Clergy that now is, for learning, let those that were alive in Queen Mary's
time judge, thanks be to God it is known that knowledge abounds now far
more then ever it did in those times. The Priest in the days of popery is not
forgotten that read Rundit for respondit, and bunpzas for baptizas. Concerning
our pelting objections taken out of Calvin and Beza, I say that if we should
dispute so peltingly as the papists, we were worthy to be hissed at. I will set
down some popish arguments. There are seven deadly sins: Bellar. lib. 2. de
Lap. cap. 26.
ergo, says the papist, there are seven Sacraments. Again the number of
seven is mystical: ergo there are seven Sacraments I will not say what
learned men ever broached such conclusions: but I come to other arguments, the
wise men came to adore Christ, ergo we may adore holy persons, places and
things; such shameless collections are fit for Papists, Dureus proves that the
Jews did invoke Saints, because they thought that our Savior Christ called
upon Elias when he cried Heli, Heli; what admirable learned men are the
Papists? I might fill many sheets with such popish arguments, but I leave them
and come to school divinity, the Catholic divines says the Doctor teach in
their schools more exactly all things which a man may know in this life, of
God almighty, of his perfection, goodness, Infinity. etc. which the
protestants never beat their branes about, being so much occupied about
woeing, wenching, and wiuing, taking upon them to be Doctors of divinity and
husbands also. The marriage of ministers troubles the Doctor very much, for he
harpeth ever upon this string; but he cannot disgrace married me^, except he
does disgrace the Apostles, who as I proved were married. And if the Doctor
had read that same famous learned protestant Zanchy, he would never have
written as he has, for Zanchie has written of Gods attributes, of the
Trinity, and of the Creation, so as I fear few papists can do the like. But
as for the schoolmen, they have defiled Divinity with idle questions. Erasmus
has set down many of them: as whether God can prohibit every good thing;
whether he can make the world better the^ he did, whether he can make of a
harlotte a virging: whether the Ideas of all things are in Gods mind or not:
whether the Pope may abrogate the Apostles decrees: whether he can establish
any thing that fights with the Gospel: whether he can command Angels, or
take away purgatory. These questions with many more has Erasmus witnessed to
be disputed amongst papists, where you say, M. Doctor, that if any Protestant
should appear in Catholic schools, he durst not once open his mouth in
matters of learning: you still continue your railing spirit, and, as I hope,
disgrace your self, more then you are able to do the Protestants learning. I
will name you some that durst show their faces in any popish school, both for
knowledge in tongues, and arts. Iunius and Tremellius for learning in divinity
may be matched with any Papist: and for arts, what say you, M. Doctor, to
Ramus? whose learning the world can witness. But, say you, this gross ignorance
of these new Gospellers is the cause that people do remain utterly void of
the knowledge of mysteries, which they are bound to believe upon pain of
damnation. If you mean popish mysteries, I answer, the people are not bound to
know them. And what ignorance you keep the people in, your practice shows:
who take from them the Scriptures, which are the key of knowledge. They must
not read the Scriptures, because holy things must not be given to dogs, they
must have their service in latin, and be taught by Images which you call Lay
men's books. Yea your doctrine of vnfolden faith, that a simple man must believe
as the Church believes, may testify what knowledge the Papists require in the
people. I will not speak of your dumme ministers which cannot bark: it is
well known that your priests have bin idols, and therefore the people in
popery could be little better. And indeed to me it is no small confirmation
of the truth, that the Protestants require such knowledge in the people,
whereas Papists rather hold them in ignorance. Not to be tedious, Hierom of
Prage his learning is commended by Papists themselves, and school divinity is
condemned by Langius a Papist. The Doctor further to amplify our vnlearnednes
speaks thus: Take the most learned Doctor of them all, and set him to reason
with an heathen or with an Atheist, and you shall see what goodly arguments he
will make. Are you not once abashed thus to proceed in untruths? Philip Morney
lord of Plessis has written so learnedly against Atheists, that I think few
Papists can do the like. Yet I would not have you to think that it is
necessary to prove the faith of the blessed Trinity, and other points of
divinity with natural reasons. Read Aquinas in his first part and 32. quest.
where you shall find that, Sufficit defendere non esse impossible quod
praedicat fides; it suffices to defend that that is not impossible which faith
teaches. I admire with you the providence and goodness of God toward his
Church, in furnishing it with all kinds of learning and sciences, whereby it
may maintain it self against all sorts of enemies, be they Jews, Turks, or
heretics whatsoever: and I also do not deny your disputations and
resolutions of cases of conscience; but I deny that the Protestant does not
meddle with these things, but fraughteth his ship only with faith, and never
beats his brain about sins. These odious untruths the world can control:
and for your school divinity, might not the heathen Philosophers have made
the same argument against Christ's Apostles, they might have cried, lo a few
rude ignorant men deceive the world? so the Papists not unlike the heathen,
cry a few ignorant Lutherans seduce the people. The Apostles wanted your
school terms, M. Doctor, yet it was the truth which they taught. But now I
draw your reason into a syllogism:

Where there is greatest learning, there is truth: But with the Papists, not
with the Protestants, there is greatest learning: Ergo.
I answer, both propositions are false. Heretics may be well learned, Erasm.
and yet the truth rests not in their breasts. Valentius was vir pollens
doctrina, i^xta and eloquentia; Valentius was both excellently learned, and
wonderful eloquent. Laicus simplex, a simple layman overcame a Logician, and
an unlearned man opens Christian religion unto a Philosopher, Lib. 2. hist.
says the Tripartite history. But that you may see, M. Doctor, how in this
objection you resemble the old heretics, hear Ireneus: Qui relinquunt
praeconium Ecclesiae, Lib. 5.
(says he) imperitiam sanctorum praesbyterorum arguunt, non contemplantes,
quanti pluris sit idiota religiosus, a blasphemo and impudenti Sophista: Such
as forsake the preaching of the Church, argue the unskillfulness of holy Elders,
not considering how far more worth a religious idiot is, then a blasphemous
and impudent sophister. Thus, Christian Reader, I have made comparison of
learning being thereunto forced. De lau. sui ipsius.
The heathen man Plutarch allows this: for, says, he laudare seipsum potest
criminis depellendi causa, a man may praise himself to drive away crimes. Paul
maintained his dignity against false Apostles, so I have maintained the
Protestants learning against this slanderous and venomous mouthed Doctor. My
purpose is not to disgrace the learned Papists, I know some of them to be
skillful men in tongues and arts, and I fear many are so learned that they
offend against their consciences. Howsoever it be, let the Protestants be
counted ignorant, and the Papists learned, the Protestants mauger the Pope
himself will by Gods assistance maintain their cause. And seeing M. Doctor
you are so learned, I pray you answer M. Doctor Whitakers, and other men's
works, which have been written against popery. Never brag of learning
until our men's works against your religion be answered. And if you do this,
yet I would wish you to mark Augustines speech; Melior est in malis factis
humilis confessio, quam in bonis superba gloriatio, better is an humble
confession in doing evil, then a proud vaunt in doing well: and take heed
least as Seneca speaks, you teach men disputare non vivere, to dispute and
not to live. Learning and religion meet not always in one subject, they lodge
not always in one breast. To end this point: a man may be learned and yet an
heretic.

The 16. reason: Holiness of life.
As in the former reason I have been compelled to make comparison of learning,
so here I am enforced to confer lives. Although I would not have religion
measured by the life of any, yet to answer this man's vanity, least he should
be too proud of popish holiness, I will out of good records set down the
lives of Papists. Before I do this Christian reader, I must give thee to
understand, that thou may not measure religion by external holiness, as
the Doctor himself confesses; and therefore in the beginning of the chapter,
he overthrows the residue of the same, for to grant him his external
holiness which he says to be in the Catholics, and not to deny their
fastings and their prayers: all these things may be in hypocrites, as it is
plain Math. 6. The Pharisees fasted and prayed, and did other works, yet was
their doctrine erroneous, and so is the Papists. The Doctor confessed before
that they did undertake fasting to satisfy, which overthrows the fasting:
for Christ has perfectly answered Gods justice for us. Tertullian writes
excellently to this purpose. De pr^.
Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? do we prove the faith by
men, or men by the faith? The Rhemists upon the 7. of Math confess that there
may be extraordinary zeal and holiness in some heretics, which saying is
sufficient to overthrow this whole chapter of the Doctor. By these proofs it
is manifest that we must not measure true religion by external holiness: and
not to stay any longer in this point; Judas betrayed our Savior Christ, yet he
was a Preacher of the Gospel. But that the Papists may see their holiness I
will begin with their Popes, Fasciculus temporum says of eight Popes together,
Non nisi scandolosa de his repperi. I find nothing but scandalous matter of
them. Stephanus the 6. cut off two of Formosus his fingers, and cast his hands
into Tiberis. Boniface the 8. entered into the Popedom as a Fox, reigned like
a lion, and died like a dog. Of Boniface the 9. his time says Largius,
Italia^ totam, maxim autem Romam, vitiorum vorago, etc. A gulf of sin had
almost swallowed up all Italy, especially Rome. Now M. Doctor you have an
universality of your holiness, all Italy, and specially Rome drowned in sin.
And because you speak of Simonie: Simonaica pestis, lethaliter omnia
insererat, Simonie had inserted all things most deadly, says the same Langius.
Your Cardinals were so proud that Caelestine the 5. decreed, Quod nec Papa,
nec Cardinales cum tanta pompa equis vterentur, sed asinis veherentur ta^tum.
That neither the Pope nor Cardinals should use horse with such a pomp, but
they should be carried upon asses. I doubt not but his law is now overthrown.
Palingenius describes at large the notorious corruption of the Roman
Clergy. Sed tua precipue non intrent limina quisquam, Frater vel Monachus vel
quauis leg^ sacerdos.

Hos fuge, pestis enim nulla hac immanior, hi sunt
Fax hemiuum, fons stultitiae, sentina malorum,
Agnorum sub pelle lupi, mercede colentes,
Non pietate Deum, falsa sub imagine recti
Decipiunt stolidos, ac relligionis in vmbra,
Mill actus vetitos, ac mill piacula condunt,
Raptores, maechi, puerorum corruptores, luxuriae atque gulae famuli, caelestia
vendunt.
Hos impostores igitur vulpesque dolosas,
Pelle procul.
Let no Friar, Monk, or Priest come within thy doors, take heed of them, no
greater mischeife can be, these are the dregs of men, the fountains of
folly, the sinckes of sin, wolves under lamb skins, serving god for reward
not for devotion, deceiving the simple with a false show of honesty, and
under the shaddowe of religion hiding a thousand unlawful acts, a thousand
heinous offenses, committers of rapes, fornicators, abusers of boys, slaves of
gluttony and luxury, they sell heavenly things: these impostors and crafty
foxes, chase far from thee. It grieueth me to rake the dunghill of these
loathsome Papists lives, yet if these testimonies will not suffice, hear
Bernard. Quia tam notum saeculis, Lib. 4. ad Euge.
quam proteruia and fastus Romanorum gens insueta paci, tumultui assueta. What
has been so famous as the frowardness and the haughtiness of the Romans, a
nation not acquainted with peace, accustomed to tumults. I am sparing in his
testimonies, because I produced one of them before. Pope Adrian confessed as I
have showed, that all mischeife came from Rome. I let pass the reformation of
the Clergy by Petrus de Alliac^. Picus Mirandula thus writes. Inorat. ad Leo.
Apud plerosque religionis nostrae primores, aut nullus, aut certe exiguus Dei
cultus, nulla been vinendi ratio, atque institutio, nullus pudor, nulla
modestia, nulla iustitia. Amongst the chief of our religion, there is no
service of God at all, or very small, no course of living well, no modesty, no
justice. Read his oration unto Leo the 10. Christian reader, if thou will see
the monstrous lives of Papists. Antonius Cornelius says to the Clergy of
Colon, that non decet tot scorta alere, it is an unseemly thing to nourish so
many whores. What should I speak of Nicholaus Clemanges his book written of
the corrupt state of the Church. It would make a man wonder to see the woeful
estate of those times. Gildas his complaint of the nobility and laity of
England is lamentable, Tom. 5.
he says that there was not only fornication, but omnia vitia quae humanae
naturae accidere solent, All vices which could happen unto man: and concerning
the Clergy he testifies, that it had sacerdotes multos impudentes, Many
impudent priests, wolves ready to devour the souls of men. The reading of
his inuectiues has not a little affected me, for to behold what things he has
written would draw tears out of a hard heart. Master Harding calls stews a
necessary evil. In 41^.
O notorious wickedness! I am loath to show how some Papists have written,
that no man is to be deposed for fornication except he continue in it. I only
say with Mantuan, Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma, omnia cum liceant,
non licet esse bonum: you that wish to live godly, depart from Rome, all things
are there suffered save godliness. Now I reduce your reason into a syllogism.

They which have holiness of life are the true Church. But the Papists have
holiness of life. ergo.
I answer to the proposition, that there may be external holiness in a false
religion, and so by consequent it is false, for the truth of the assumption,
let the authors before cited determine the same. Augustine opposes to the
continency of the Manichees, the co^tinencie of Monks, upon which Erasmus
has this note, vtinam mundus nunc haberet tales, I would the world had such
now, by which speech he shows what popish monks were concerning the lives
of protestants, I would that all which are professors were expressers. My
purpose is not to defend the loosenes of their actions, for my part I think
that these loose livers, are tanquam materia prima, as fit to receive popery as
any other religion. I say therefore with Augustine, Lib. 2. de mo. Man. cap. 34.
Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa religione superstitiosi
sunt, vel ita libidiuibus dediti, vt obliti sunt, quicquid promiserunt Do.
Seek not after the rude multitude, which are either superstitious in religion,
or so given to lusts, that they have forgotten their promise to God, but
touching the true professors of the Gospel, they shall be found in trial
always as honest as papists, where you say that loosenes issues out of the
bowels of our doctrine, and that our ministers are all naught, I doubt not but
that God will reward you accordingly for these your slanderous words, 2. Cor.
10.18.
Paul says, not he which commends him self is approved, but he which God
commends. We care not for your commendations Master Doctor, we desire to
approve our selves unto God; it is your Doctrine that admits loosenes of
life as I have showed, and now I will make it more plain. The Popes pardons
are a most licentious doctrine, Johannes Papa tertius and vicesimus plenariam
peccatorum remissionem indulsit his, qui ad tuenda^ ecclesiam arma induerant
pope John the 23. gave a full pardon of sins to those that took arms to
defend the Church. Who would not commit adultery and other sins, if the pope
can give him a pardon of all his sins for taking so small pains as to defend
the Church? Pope Boniface as it is to be seen in his Bull, gives plenissima
veniam peccatorum, a most full pardon of all sins, surely if the pope for
money will give such pardon, he may have catholics good store. The doctrine of
vows is also a sinful doctrine, as the wolrd can testify: and to what end
tends the popes forbidding of more degres in marriage then God has, and
dispencing with those which God has forbidden, but to maintain covetousness?
concerning the bloody tragedies raised in France although I love not to meddle
with such matters, yet know Christian reader that those of the reformed
religion, in taking arms to defend the laws and liberties of their country
against private persons, have done nothing but in the Kings service. The
bloody acts of Papists are notorious to the world. The rest of the Doctors
railing in this chapter is not worthy any answer. They pray forsooth whilst
our ministers play, they fast whilst we feast. Again (says he) are not some
of them hanged for robberies, for rapes, imprisoned for sorcerie, and for other
knaueries. Verily, M. Doctor, I doubt not but that you know many of your men to
have been hanged for treasons, and that your own conscience can tell you,
that our godly ministers pray whilst your Cardinals are in bed with their
harlots. If the Vicar of Waram had his trull from coleman hedge, let him answer
such a filthy fact himself, charge not our religion with his actions. I
lament, M. Doctor, from my heart, the usury and symonie that is practiced with
many, as also the excessive pride in apparel, the trains, verdingalls,
borders, periwingles, coronets, wyers and ruffes, which are spoken against by
the sincere preachers of the Gospel, and I know none practice these more then
Atheists or Papists: and it is utterly false that it came in with our Gospel.
The holy prophet Esai has sharply rebuked this intolerable pride, as you may
see in his 3. chap. will you therefore, M. Doctor say, that the doctrine of the
holy prophet was naught, because pride did so abound in his time? I hope you
will remember your self. But Erasmus, say you, Epistles.
condemns sins in Evangelical people; and so do we in whom soever they
are: as he condemns sins in the Evangelical people, so does he commend
Luther whom you say to have led a brutish life. Hominis vita (says he)
magno omnium consensu probatur, iam id non leve praeiudicium est, tantam esse
morum integritatem, vt nec hoste^ reperiant, quid calumnientur. Luthers life is
approved by the consent of all men, and that is no small praeiudice, that his
integrity is so great, that the enemies cannot slander it. Touching his
marriage, he married not to please you, but to please God in holy matrimony.
Augustine writes of virgins which are sorry for their vow, Cap. 39. de sanct.
virg.
vt melius nuberent, quam vrerentur. That they should do better to marry,
then to burn. and in his book de bono vid 8. and 9. chap. he teaches that
they which marry after a vow do contract true matrimony, though therefore he
married a Nun, yet was his marriage true whatsoever you bring from Iouinian
his laws, the Doctor (which I had almost forgotten) demands what woman is
married without touch of her honesty, yea says he it is well if she had not a
barn before. These questions Master Doctor touch your honest nearly, for
the world can controwle these vanites, as like wise other in the end of your
chapter, where you say that if a Seminary Priest turn to us, he drinks up
sin, as the dog lappeth up water, but on the other side if any do leave
the protestants, and become a Catholic, he does leave all his vices. These
untruths deserve not any answer, but grant them to be true, yet is religion
truth, whatsoever wickedness the men that profess it are given unto. And
whereas you have spoken of pride; Laurentius Valla de Constat. donat. says
thus: Existimo, etc. I think the devils would express the pride of the
Clergy, if they acted any plays in the air.

The 17. reason: Constancy in Doctrine.
That the doctrine of the Roman Church has ever remained without change, it
is as false as it is true that in the Apostles time the Romans faith was
reported through the world. To show that the Romish Church has swarued from
that faith which the Apostles spoke of, the Epistle it self is sufficient; who
lists to compare the doctrine which now the papists hold, with the holy
doctrine taught in that Epistle, shall see differences enough, to show the time
of the change and alteration is nedeles, for we see it with our eyes, but
because the Doctor says that noe man can prove that ever any pope or bishop
in any See, did at any time change in any point of religion of his predecessor,
I will name unto him one point changed. Gregory would not be called universal
bishop, yet his successor Boniface was so called, hear you have a pope which
alters a point in religion, August. 157. ep. Greg. l. 1. epist. 4^.
to give you another point, pope Zozimus held that Nemo redemptus dici potest,
nisi qui vere per peccatum fuerit captivus. Mo man can be called redeemed,
except he has bin in truth a captive in sin: yet Pope Sixtus taught the
Virgin Marie not to be conceived in sin, ergo she cannot be called redeemed.
To touch some other charges. Gregory says, it was heard that the subdeacons
of Sicilie should not be married, he gave them leave to marry, although his
predecessors had forbidden it. Yet is this thing again changed, for now
subdeacons have no wives. Pope Urban the 4. instituted the feast of the Lords
body and the solemn Precession. What should I speak of Images and the peoples
consent in election of ministers, that the people did give voices, it is plain
by Bellarmines confession, lib. de Cleric. cap. 17. and that in Gregory's time.
By these few examples every man may see a change, I will not produce any more,
because the Doctor named but one point. And why should we not think of a
change in points of religion, seeing one Pope would change the acts of another?
Stephanus did most cruelly persecute Formosus, and made all his ordinations
void: and says Sigebert, Sigebert.
Alia in eu^ horribilia dictu fecit. He did other horrible things to be named
against him. Pope John afterward confirmed Formosus his acts, then comes
Sergius and makes all void again, this says Sigebert is dictu nefas, a most
horrible thing to be spoken of. Thus M. Doctor you may see alterations in
Popes, if you will but read your own men. I could allege confessions out of
Bellarmine himself, but I have handled them in other places, and desire
brevity, I reduce your reasons into a syllogism.

They which alter some opinions are of a false religion. But some Protestants
have altered some opinions. Ergo:
I deny the proposition, for who can discommend this thing, that a man should
upon good grounds change his opinions. Nunquam, says the Orator, praestantibus
viris laudata est in vna sententia perpetua permansio. Excellent men never
commend perpetuity in one opinion. As constancy is good, so pertinacie is
badde. You will give the Poets leave, male tornatos incudi reddere versus: to
renew bad verses, and will you not give divines leave to change their opinions?
praestat recurrere, quam male currere, it is better to run back, then to
run a wrong way. Augustine an excellent Father, has written books of
Retractions, yet Protestants may not alter any opinions, but they are by and by
heretics. Whitak. co^^. Du.
Luther desires that his books may be read cum multa miseratione, with much
compassion because he was once a Monk, no marvel though he changed his
opinions, seeing he was traind up in blindness. And yet as the Doctor here
himself shows, he came from condemning one error in Popery, until he
condemned many. If Luther had changed his mind at his death, it had been
something, but seeing he continued constant against the Popish doctrine, it is
a sure argument of his settled mind against that religion, although he could
not see all errors at the first. Marvel not then M. Doctor, though by little
and little he taught against your erroneous doctrines. Augustine says that
nemo nisi imprudens, quia mea errata reprehendo, Lib. 1. Retract.
me audebit reprehe^dere. No man that is wise will find fault with me, because I
find fault with my self. Touching the alteration of the Communion book, we
have made no great alteration these forty years of it. And yet know we M.
Doctor that ceremonies and matters of indifferency may be changed so often as
the Church shall see cause. But say you, who so does observe daiely the order
thereof is a cold Protestant, or an Atheist for his labor. This sauoureth of
your accustomed railing, and therefore deserves no answer. As for the
communion in leauened or unleavened bread, hear your angelical Doctor Thomas,
non est de necessitate Sacraments, Tertia. P^. 74. art. 4.
quod sit azimus, vel fermentatus panis, quia in vtroque confici potest,
conueniens autem est vt vnusquisque seruet ritum suae Ecclesia. It is not of
the necessity of the Sacrament, that it should be either unleavened or
leauened bread, but it is convenient that every man observe the rite of his
church in the celebration of the Sacrament. That some in stead of wine, take in
the communion nappie ale, it may be true in Papists, but I know no protesants
that do it: and as for placing the Communion table, and praying with a man's
face either toward the south or north, be matters of indifferency. Walfridus
Strabo writes of this point thus, Vnusquisque su^ sensu abundet, Let every man
abound in his own sense. Yea he shows that the altars did not look all one
way: but there follows a great matter concerning reverend Jewel, who first
gloried that Christ's flock was little, but afterward vaunted much that our
doctrine must needs be true, because it was spread so largely. As though this
reverend man might not avouch Christ's flock to be sometimes little, See S^c^.
in his 5. book.
and sometimes to be large. But if this be such inconstancy, I pray you learn
M. Doctor, that your selves were wont to prove you to be the Church, because
of universality. But now your Rhemists seeing Antichrists kingdom lessended,
will needs prove your selves the Church, upon the 20. of the ^eue^.
because of the small number. Thus is inconstancy turned upon your own
heads, for indeed it seems that you care not what you write, to discharge
the Pope from being Antichrist. The same Rhemists will one while have the
revolt, of which Paul speaks, 2. Thessal. 2. chap. to be understood from the
Roman Empire, immediately they say it is very like to be from the Roman
Church. O admirable constancy! What should I examplifie your inconstancy,
how Saints hear our prayer; one whiles they hear them this way, another
whiles that way. These you may read in Bellarmine himself the constancy of
worshipping of your Images is vnco^stant as I can prove unto you. Luther his
change of opinions I have answered before: the old proverb may hear fitly be
used, (...), no one man sees all things: and (...), the second cogitations are
best.

I will requite the Duke of Saxony his speech, with another: it is reported
(says Gryneus) that he should say, Although I am not ignorant that there have
both errors and abuses crept into the Church, yet I will not embrace that
Gospel which Luther preaches. Thus the man as I think, with whose saying you
end your chapter M. Doctor, has done you more harm then good.

The 18. reason: False Prophets and teachers.
As the Prophets and Apostles and Christ himself foretold, that in the later
days there should come false Prophets, so we find it by experience. Now let us
see whether the notes of false Prophets agree to your selves, or unto us. To
prove that they agree unto us, you frame this reason.

They which come unsent, are false prophets. But the Protestants come unsent.
ergo.
The assumption is proved because we have neither ordinary, or extraordinary
callings. Extraordinar^e calling we have none, because we work no miracles,
that we have no ordinary calling it is plain.

I answer, that Luther, Zuinglius, and some others were ordained Elders by your
selves. And therefore they were called ordinarily. According to your calling if
they were Elders they might preach true doctrine, for I hope you ordained not
them to preach false doctrine. If they lost their ordination because they
renounced popery, then have you lost yours much more, because you have
renounced Christ's doctrine. But I think you will not say that they lost their
ordination, because of your indelible character, the Sacraments which imprint
this cannot be repealed, one of which you make Orders. But I would not have you
to think that we esteem so much of your calling, as that we regard it being
corrupt. The wicked asked Christ for his authority, Mat. 21. He that preaches
the Apostles doctrine has authority enough: the estate of this church being
corrupted so, that he cannot have that calling which he would. He that is sent
to preach may not hold his tongue, and tarry till your Lord the Pope and his
mitred fathers can inte^d to consent. But you require miracles. I answer, that
John Bapt. did no miracle. Thom. 3. 3^. quaest. art. 2. resp. ad. 2. gives
this reason. Si Johannes signa fecisset, homines ex aequ^ Iohanni and Christo
attendissent. If John had done any miracles, men would have equally attended to
him and to Christ. It is sufficient that our doctrine is confirmed by Christ's
miracles. Further M. Doctor our preachers were called by the Christian
Magistrates whose allowance they had, which to be warrantable your selves
cannot deny. But why do I follow this point any further? Coster a papist
confesses that, Quanquam plerique haereticorum Episcopi, presbyteri, and
doctores ex ordine munus and officium docendi acceperunt, nulli tamen facultas
data est noua decreta fabricandi, sed hoc tantum candide and sincere tradendi,
quod ei qui misit probatur. Although many Bishops, Elders, and Doctors of
haeretickes, have received orderly the duty to teach, yet to no man is power
given to make new opinions, but sincerely to deliver that which is approved
unto him that sent him. Wherefore you reject our calling, prove that we coined
new opinions. Eus^b. l. 6. 1^. cap.
Origin taught before he was ordained Elder, when the Church was sound;
Demetrius reprehended Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theodistus of
Caesarea for suffering him so to do; but they defend themselves and show that
it may be done, ad commodandum fratribus, to profit the brethren. If this might
be done in Constituta Ecclesia, in an established Church: bow much more might
it be suffered when as Ecclesia sit constituenda, the church is to be
constituted. Thus having defended the calling of protestants, let us see what
notes of heretics and false prophets the scriptures give. Paul in the first of
Tim. and 4. chap. gives these notes of false Prophets, to forbid marriages,
and to command abstinence from meats. Where are these to be found at this day?
in papists or protestants? in protestants no man will affirm. The Manichees
did not simply forbid marriage, neither condemned they simply meats. For
Auditores qui appellantur apud Manichaeos, and carnibus vescuntur, and si
voluerint vxores habent. Their hearers did eat flesh, and if they would had
wives. It remains then that these notes be found in Papists. Another note of
false prophets is to draw men to the service of idols, Deuteronomy. 13.2. Does this
agree any way to Protestants, who abando^ all monuments of Idolatry? to the
Papists it agrees, because they teach that the very wood of the Cross is to
be worshipped with divine honor. Polidor Virgil. lib. 6. cap. 13. speaking of
worshipping Saints images, says, Haec pars pietatis parum differt ab
impietate, this piety differs little from impiety. The third note of false
teachers is to despise Dominion as Jude speaks, verse. 8. does not the Pope
so, who will not be subject to the Emperor, no not to a general Council? as
Witnesses Eugenius who would not yield to the Council of Basil. Yea the
papists suborne traitors to murder their lawful Prince, as their own writings
prove. The book I have named before.

The fourth note of false Apostles is to teach justification by the works of
the law, as it is manifest by the Epistle of Paul to the Galat. Do we so, or
the papists? neither can the papists answer that Paul excludes the works of
nature only, and not of grace. For Paul excludes not only the works of
nature, but the works of the ceremonial and moral law, as it is plain. For
who can imagine that the Galathians being instructed in Christ, would wholly
exclude him from justification, and seek for justification either by the works
of nature, or by the ceremonial law without Christ.

Fifthly, the false Prophets speak visions of their own hearts. Ierem. 23.16.
so do the papists deceive people with lying visions and doctrines of men, as I
have proved. They teach that the Pope cannot err, that he is above Councels;
where has the Lord ever taught these things in his word? Not to stand upon any
more notes of false Apostles and Prophets, I desire thee Christian Reader to
judge even thine own self, whether the scripture has not set down these
notes, and whether they can any way agree to the Protestants or no.

The 19. reason: Liars, slaunderers, and reuilers.
The Protestants are here charged either to have no conscience at all, or else
if they have any, it is seared with an hot iron, because they are liars,
slaunderers and reuilers. Yea they make lying their help. These M. Doctor are
grievous accusations: but before I have done with you, I will turn them upon
your own head, and it shall be manifest who are liars, and who have no
conscience, whether Papists, or Protestants. I will first answer your lies
which you heap upon the Protestants. The first lie is, that Luther says
before his coming the Gospel lay in the dust, and was hidden under the bench.
M. Doctor, satin sanus es, Are you sound: to charge all Protestants with
Luthers sayings, shall one man's speech be the speech of all men? apage istas
nugas, out upon these follies. Luther had this meaning, that the Gospel lay in
the dust from the time that Antichrist did sit in the temple of God until his
time: and yet it did not so lie in the dust, but that many in those times
renounced the Pope: his speech is comparatiue, in regard of the clear
knowledge that now is, it lay in the dust. Behold now what a liar Luther is.
The second lie is this, Protestants charge the Papists with Idolatry, yea they
inculcate and dull the cares of the people, with often telling them of the
Idolatry of their elders. And why should we not do so? for proof of this, I
will deal syllogistically.

They which offer sacrifices unto Images are Idolaters. But the papists offer
sacrifices unto Images, ergo.
The proposition is plain, because Sacrifice is due only to God. Exodus 22.20.

The assumption is testified by Bellarmine. lib. 1, de sanct. Be^. cap. 13.

We offer says he sweet odours in the Church unto Images. Secondly, they
which put their hope in wood, are Idolaters. But the Papists put their hope in
wood, ergo.
The assumption is proved by Aquinas. 3. par. quaest. 15. art who says that
the Church prayed to the very wood of the cross thus. O Cross our only hope
create justice in the Godly, and give pardon to the guilty.

Thirdly they which dedicate Churches unto Saints are Idolaters. But Papists
dedicate Churches to Saints, ergo.
The proposition is plain out of Augustine lib 1. Read Lud. Vi^. i^ 9. lib. de
ciuit. cap. vlt.
cont Maxim Arrian. Episc. cap. 11. where he proves that the holy Ghost is
God, becaue he has a temple, the assumption is plain by Erasmus annotations,
who has noted in the margent. Hoc nunc fit quibuslibet Diuis. This is now done
to some Saints. The Doctor himself in his 20. chapter confesses that parish
churches are dedicated unto Saints. When you have answered these syllogismes M.
Doctor, you shall have more proofs of your Idolatry. Bellarmine ingeniously
confesses, that pictures of God are not delivered to the people without
danger, except they be instructed of their prelates, but the world knows
that in diverse places of Popery, like Priest like People to have bin, and
Priests have bin very Idols themselves.

The third lie is, that some protestants say that the Catholics hold that
Christ satisfied only for original sins, and that he ordained the Mass
for other sins which to be a manifest lie all the books written of this
matter by Catholic divines, do plainly testify. M. Doctor, for trial of
this lie these are Canus his words concerning Catharine. Amborsij Chatharini
deliratio patet, peccata ante Baptismum adonissa per crucis sacrificium
remitti, 433.
post baptismum vero, per sacrificium altaris. The dotage of Ambrose Catharine
is manifest, that sins before baptism are remitted by the sacrifice of the
cross; but sins after baptism, by the sacrifice of the alter. Mark M.
Doctor that your own man Canus charge Catharine with dotage, in that he held,
that sins only committed before baptism were remitted by the sacrifice of
the cross, thus the lie is turned upon your self. Remember also that your
schoolmen teach that Christ came principally to take away original sin, and
so does Bellarmine also lib. 4. de Romans pont. cap. 10. in fine.

The fourth lie is, the protestants assime that the Catholics do teach that
by choice of meats; and other humane constitutions, remission of sins is
obtained, I doubt not but they which have thus written could prove their
saying; but M. Doctor do you not make fasting to consist in choice of meats?
this you can not deny, Aquin 2.2.4^. art.
and yet you teach that fasting does satisfy for sins, Ieiunium says
Aquinas, assumitur ad satisfaciendum pro peccatis. Fasting is taken up, to
satisfy for sins. If men by fasting do satisfy for sins, then they
obtain remission of sins by it; but the first is true, ergo. Bellarmine has
proved that fasting satisfies for sin and deserves at Gods hands, and I
think not but that many simple people in popery, did think by abstaining from
meat, and by observing of humane constitutions they could deserve at Gods
hands, and satisfy for their sins. This some can testify at this day.

The fifte lie touches the Sinalchadicall articles which I have not seen,
therefore I cannot say any thing to it, but I think that they could prove
there assertion; if they could not, let them answer for themselves, yet thus
much M. Doctor I say, that if the Sacrament give grace ex opere operat^, of the
works done without any thing in the party receiving them, so be it he put no
hinderance, how can it be but that contrition, confession and satisfaction must
give grace, and so by consequent make a man just, though he had not faith, the
censure of Colon proves that baptism gives grace to children by the work
done without any motion of the heart, and say they why should it not do so in
men of years. If Baptism do so, then does penance and so by consequent
gives grace without faith.

The sixte lie touches not any one Protestant, but all we affirm forsooth
that Papists do worship Saints in stead of Christ, and do honor them as
Gods, which is a gross impudent lie as every man knows, is this a lie M.
Doctor? do you not pray to the virgin Mary thus? Maria matter gratiae, matter
misericordiae, tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. O Marie the
mother of grace, the mother of Mercy defend us from our enemies, and receive us
at the hour of death. What is this but to make her God? do you not build
Churches i^ Saints? which is to make them Gods as I have proved, yea you pray
to this Saint against the plague, to that Saint against the tooth ache, and so
in other diseases, is not this mere heathenisme? did not the heathen so? we
should pray to God against all diseases. Furthermore you pray thus unto Thomas,
by the blood of Thomas which for thee he did spend, make us O Christ to clime
whither Thomas did ascend. Many such blasphemous prayers might I recite: and I
answer that simple people have made such Gods. I cannot let pass an
intolerable prayer of some papists to the Virgin Marie. Roga patrem, iube
natum. Entreat the father, command the son. And again Iure matris impera
filio. By the right of a mother, command thy son, compel God to be merciful
to sinners. Thus M. Doctor by consequent you make Saints Gods.

The seventh lie concerns M. Haddon, for answer of which I refer thee
Christian Reader to M. Fox a man of famous memory, who has answered Osorius.
That the Abbot of S. Albons couenanted for a concubine, ad purgandum renes, to
purge the reins, a thing so notorious, that common lawyers can show it in
record. Vide Iuellum, 559. The Bishop of Arentine has a Florence ever of the
Priest that keeps a Concubin^.
And the reverend Bishop Jewel alleges out of your Rubricke this sentence.
Qui non habet vxorem, loco illius concubinam habere licet. It is lawefull for
him that has not a wise, in stead of her to have a Concubine. What should I
allege the common saying, as M. Harding calls it. Si non cast, caute. If
not chastely, yet warily. Stews in Rome are notorious to all the world: and one
calls them a necessary evil. If the Pope for money suffers Stews, why
should we not think that he will suffer Priests to have Concubines for money,
especially seeing that you hold that the Pope may dispense against the Apostle;
yet he forbids as you say Priests marriage. By these things every man may
see, what a lie it is to say that the Pope for money gives Priests leave to
have concubines, and thus have I ended your lies, which as you say, the
Protestants charge the Catholics with. Mark Christian reader, first that some
of them are but particular men's sayings, and therefore the whole church is not
to be charged with them. Secondly, mark the number in so many writings of
Protestants. Thirdly, mark the answer unto them, and thou shall find many of
them, if not all, no lies but trueths.

Before I set down lies of Papists, I will answer the lies which some
Protestants lay upon the Fathers. Melancthon said of Augustine, that he taught
original sin to be taken away in Baptism, not that it was not any more, but
that it was not imputed. Whereas Saint Augustine spoke not there of original
sin but of Concupiscence. M. Doctor are you so ignorant that you know not
original sin to be concupiscence? Aquinas in his 1. 2. quaest. 82. art. 3.
defends this point, that original sin is concupiscence. If original sin
be concupiscence, I hope by right conversion in Logycke, concupiscence is
original sin. If a man be a reasonable creature, then a reasonable creature
is a man. And if concupiscence be taken away, then is original sin taken
away, so as it is not imputed. Now M. Doctor upon your own doctrine, mark
how I conclude. If concupiscence be remitted in Baptism, so as it is not
imputed, then it was sin before it was remitted; but it remains the same in
the regenerate according to the substance of the thing. ergo: it is sin in
the regenerate. This argument is plain by Aquinas, who in 1. 2. quaest. 99.
art. 5. teaches that the first motions of sensuality are not deadly sins in
infidels, because the person does aggrauate the sin: if the person does
make the sin greater, then is concupiscence sin in the godly, because it
was so in the ungodly. Neither can you answer that that saying is understood of
voluntary sins, for the first motions are not so by your own doctrine.

The second lie is, some Protestants say S. Bernard recanted Monachisme at his
latter end, and why should not some think so, seeing he writes thus? Fateor
non sum dignus, nec proprijs possum meritis, regnum obtinere caelorum, caeterum
Dominus meus duplici iure illud possidens, haereditate patris, and merito
passionis, altero ipse contentus, alterum mihi donat. I confess I am not
worthy, neither can I obtain the kingdom of heaven by mine own merits, by my
Lord possessing it by a double right, by his fathers inheritance, and the merit
of his passion, being content with one of them himself, gives the other to
me. I wish all Papists and Monks for their salvation sake, were of Bernards
mind, and I think this is to recant Monachisme, for Monks look for
salvation by their merits and works. Lib. 2. de great. c. 15.
I will set down that excellent place of Luke, with Bellarmines gloss upon
it. Fear not little flock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom. Verbum complacuit, and nomen pater, and vocubula illa, pusillus grex,
indicant gratiam, non Justitiam. The word it pleases, the nowne father, and
these words little floke, show grace, not justice. Thus the kingdom of heaven
is an inheritance given us of our Father, not deserved by us.

The last lie is, some Protestants affirm the Fathers to have thought
otherwise then they wrote: this is true of Papists. For the Rhemists being
pressed with Chrysostomes authority, for the reading of Scriptures by Laymen,
say, that he spoke as e pulpit man, and not as a teacher: belike pulpit men
speak not that which they think. Let the Reader then judge whether you say
the Fathers spoke as they thought or no. For further trial of this, I refer
the Reader to that which I have alleged out of Bellarmine concerning the
Fathers in the Reason of Fathers. Hierom in his apology to Paumichius says,
that some things are spoken (...), alia (...), for exercise sake, and other
things for opinions sake: ergo, the fathers spoke not all things dogmatically,
but some things rhetorically. Nazianzen also bids his chair farewell. The
rest of the chapter concerns Luther, whose speeches have been somewhat
vehement; but not knowing the reason which he might have to use such, I can
neither absolve him, nor condemn him for them. I will now set down popish
lies. I begin with the Doctors, in the first chapter he says, that in England
it is manifest that all were Papists without exception, from the first
christening thereof, until this age of King Henry the eight. This as I have
proved, is a famous lie; witness Wickliffe who lived in England, and yet was
he no papist.

The second lie is, that heretics have ever taken their names of some one who
began that heresy: this is a lie, for some heretics, as the Catharists, are
called of their sect, and not of the author.

The third lie is in the third chapter, the Catholics have ever kept unity
and concord in such a peaceable manner, as never any one in England, or Ireland
dissented or disagreed in any point of doctrine, from him which lived in the
utmost parts of the East. This is such a lie as needs no manifestation of it.
Yet I will name one point more then I have before. Heart.
Some papists in England held that the Pope may depose Princes: others deny it.

The fourth lie is in the same chapter, where he says that all decrees of
lawful Councels, and Popes do agree in all points of doctrine, one with
another. This I have proved a lie.

Fifthly, in the 5. chapter he says that all countreies which ever believed in
Christ, were first converted to his faith by such as were either precisely
sent, or at the least wise had their authority from the Pope, who lived in the
time in which they were converted. This I have proved a lie.

Sixthly, in the same chapter he says, that Jesuits are executed in England
only in regard of their sacred function, which to be a lie, their own books
can testify, besides the confession of Papists.

Seauenthly, in the fifth reason he belieth M. Calvin, calling him a Sere backed
priest for Sodomie. For I will omit the lie of persecution only in England in
the same chapter.

Eighthly, in the tenth chapter, he says that Catholic Roman religion is
taught by all the ancient Fathers, of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth,
and six hundred years.

Ninthly, in the 13. chap. he says, that we meddle little with restitution of
goods, but leave all at large to our followers, without restraint of any such
crime.

10. In the same chapter, he says, the Protestant teaches the landlord to do
what he lists with his own.

11 In the same place he says, that we teach not reward of good and bad life
in the world to come: which all men can testify to be a lie; although we
disclaim the merit of good works, yet we teach the merit of sin.

12 In the 14. Reason he says, that we deny the perpetual virginity of
Marie, which is an untruth.

In the 15. Reason he has many lies, first that we have nothing but a number
of pelting objections taken out of Caluins Institutions, or out of the
Magdebursens, or some heretical pamphlet. Secondly he says, that we trouble
our selves with nothing, but with the controversies of this time. Thirdly, that
Protestants do scarce understand the terms of learned sciences, which others
do fully possess. Fourthly he says, that the Clergy in Queen Mary's time,
was more learned then now it is.

Fifthly he says, that the most learned Doctor of them all is utterly ignorant
of school divinity.

Sixthly he says, that the Protestant never medleth with cases of conscience,
but fraighteth his ship only with faith, and never beats his brain about
sins.

In the sixteenth Reason he says, that all the ministers now are naught, yea
he asks in the same chap. what woman is now married without touch of her
honesty?

I will gather no more lies, out of this Doctor, I will set down some out of
other Papists. The Rhemists upon the sixth of Luke write, that Protestants are
wont to say, All is very easy, which is a lie.

Again say they, the Protestants think that to burn, is to be tempted only,
which is a lie. 1. Cor. 7.

Thirdly upon the 9. chap. of the first epist. of Paul to the Cor. they say,
that protestants will not have men work well in respect of reward at Gods
hands: which is a lie.

I desire thee Christian reader to read the Rhemists annotatio^s, where thou
shall find many slanders, but I delight not in these things.

Bellarmine affirms that Calvin makes God the author of fin: again he
says, that Calvin holds that the saints departed are not blessed: he says
also, that he died calling upon the devil, which are monstrous lies.

Genebrard accuses Calvin of error, in saying that the son of God is God of
himself. Bellarmine defends Calvin against Genebrard: now let every man
judge of this syllogism.

They which are liars are of a false religion; But the Papists are liars: ergo.
Christian reader, I would not have used this term of lying so often, but
that I have been urged by the Doctor. For railing I refer thee to M.
Hardings works, as also to Doctor Stapletons writings against M. Doctor
Whitakers, in which thou may see the spirit of papists.

The 20. reason: Keeping in memory Gods benefits.
That the memory of Gods benefits is carefully to be regarded, we deny not M.
Doctor. The heathen have condemned ingratitude for a heinous sin. Beneficii
memoriam qui recipit, habere debet; he that receives a benefit, ought to
remember it. The Athenians made a law, that the unthankful person might be
sued as well as a debtor: this is so clear as that no man can deny it: and I
would it were as easy to persuade unto thankfulness, as it is to speak of
it. But I fear me it happens to the papist as it does to the usurer, who
speaks against usury, that he may practice it without suspicion: for the
papist inueyeth against ingratitude and unthankfulness, least he should be
argued of it. For this is to forget God, to break his laws. The Jews in the
32. of Deuteronomy. are charged to have forgotten God, and David in the 106. psalm
says they made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the golden image, they forgot
God their Savior which had done great things in Egypt. Yet did the Jews make
an image unto God, Exodus 32. and worshipped God in the Image, for Aaron
proclaimed an holy day unto the Lord, and can any man imagine that Aaron should
think an idol to be that God, which brought the people out of Egypt? He that
was to be high Priest, would he think the work of his hands to be God? Thus
you with the Jews in the very things which you say put you in remembrance of
God, forget God. Now I reduce your argument into a syllogism.

They that keep feasts and Images to put them in remembrance of God, are most
mindful of him; But so do the Papists, and not Protestants. ergo.
I deny the proposition, and say, that this outward pomp is fit for the Whore
of Babylon. We can remember god without these external rites. The preaching of
the Gospel crucifieth Christ before our eyes, the Sacraments ordained of God
himself do lively set forth Christ, and the blessings of God within and
without us, and of every side of us are so many, that men can hardly forget him
unless they forget the earth that bears them, the heavens that cover them,
the day that guides them, and the night that gives them rest. But that M.
Doctor you may see how well in this objection you agree with the heathen,
remember that Celsus obiecting to the Church the want of feasts, is answered by
Origin, Festum est facere officium, a feast is to do a duty. Origin numbreth
the feasts of Christians to be the Lords day, Easter and Pentecost. Hereby men
may see what cause we have to renounce popery, which takes part with the
heathens in their objections. Socrates in his 5. book and 22. chapter,
discharges festival days of the Apostles institution. Apostolis propositum
fuit, non vt leges de festis diebus sancirent, sed vt recte viuendi rationis
and pietatis nobis authors essent. The Apostles purpose was not to make laws
of feasts but to be authors of piety and of godly life. Erasmus upon the 10.
of Math. writes thus, Aetas Hieronimi praeter diem dominicum, paucissima
nouerat festa, nunc feriarum neque finis, neque modus, quae cum primitus ad
pietatis vacationem pauca essent institutae, nunc ad scelerum exclusionem tolli
debebant, nisi sacerdotum auaritia suis rebus consuleret potius, quam verae
religioni. Hieromes age besides the Lords day knew few feasts, now there is
no end, nor measure of holidaies, which were first instituted but few for
piety, but now to exclude vice they ought to be taken away, but that the
covetous priests, do rather provide for themselves, then for true religion.
The original of your feasts may be read in Fascicul. Temp. and others. But I
have spoken of these feasts in another book, and therefore I will not make any
longer discourse of them. By these testimonies every one may see what moment
the objection of feasts has. Touching Organs they were instituted 600. Lib. 1.
de
years after Christ as Bellarmine confesses, shall we think that Gods Church
forgot him so long a time because it had no Organs? But if we will see whence
this outward pomp had her beginning, let Bellarmine speak, lib. 4. de Eu.
cap. 4. Creuit honor sanctissimi sacramenti, deuotione interna decrescente, The
honor of the Sacrament grew, when inward devotion ceased. If people then have
inward piety and godliness, these outward ornaments are needless. Thus
Bellarmine discharges us of unthankfulness to God; and in few words gives
the reason of popish pomp. As for breaking of popish images in Churches, and
Crosses in high ways, we hold it lawefull to destroy Idolatry. Epiphannius,
when he saw a picture in the Church, brake it, and says it is an horrible
wickedness, and a sin not to be suffered, It is pretty that the Doctor
compares temples without images to ^arnes without ha^: as hay is fit for
beasts, so are Images fit for beastly men by his comparison.
for any man to set up any picture in the Church of Christians, yet the Papists
store all their temples, and each corner of them with painted and carved
images, as though without them religion were nothing worth. But M. D. I desire
to know how the christians remembered Christ, when they had noe temples at all?
you say that our Churches are like barnes, which men know to be a untruth, yet
the ancient christians had noe temple at all, as Bellarmine confesses. lib 3.
de. Romans Pont. cap. 13. Did they forget Christ when they prayed in private
families? take heed least you disgrace not the ancient christians as well as
the Protestants. Acams when he was accused for selling of holy vessels to the
use of the poor, answered that Deus noster nec disscis nec calicibus eget,
quia non comedit nec bibit, our God needs not cups, because he neither
eats nor drinks, so say I, our God needs not your goulden Images and
ornaments which indeed distract men's minds praying, and do not increase
devotion. Lactantius in his 2. book and 4. chap. speaks against the heathen
after this manner. In vain do men adorn Gods with gould and pearls, as if
they could take any pleasure in these things: after he shows out of Persius
that God delights in Justice, and in holy souls; so say I to the Papists,
God requires not Images and festival days at your hands, but he desires
inward holiness. Now Christian reader mark the Doctors follies in this chapter.
The first is this, God commanded the Jews many feasts, all which were
observed to himself, ergo. Christians may have feasts dedicate unto Saints.
What a pitiful conclusion is this? as though the Church might do whatsoever
God does. Yea what a consequent is this, God ordained feasts unto himself,
therefore the Roman Church may ordeyne feasts unto Saints. These arguments
hang together like ropes of sand. Secondly he confesses that parrish
churches were dedicated to saints, which is flat Idolatry, for only God must
have a temple and a church as I have proved. Thirdly he says that by means
of Images, pictures, and crosses, the most unlearned amongst the people know
more of the mysteries of christian religion, then some of our ministers know.
If this be so it is a horrible shame for ministers, for this I know, that some
unlearned people have worshipped Images, as gods, but indeed what is this, but
to contemn gods wisome and ordinance, who has not ordained Images to teach
the people, but his word to instruct them. Take heed M. Doctor of this horrible
sin, to make your selves wiser then God. Fourthly the Doctor says that we
have noe more warrant for solemnizing of the sunday, then we have for S.
Lawrence his day, for other reason or warrant we have none but the authority
of the Roman church, fie, fie M. Doctor that you should thus bewray your
ignorance. Bellarmine in his third book de cul, Sanct. and 11. chap. proves
the observation of the Lords day, by the scriptures, if you can prove the
observation of S. Lawrance his day by the same warrant, you may do well to
show us some of your arguments. Other things of less moment I let pass,
because I labor for brevity.

The 21. reason: The Protestants beginning and proceeding against their
consciences.
This chapter has many words to little purpose, first Luther is charged to
say that he could see into another man's heart or conscience: who will believe
Luther should speak thus, except he meant he could do it by plain words and
manifest deeds: and this M. Doctor you confess your self may be done. I hope,
if Luther say that he could see into another man's conscience, he had no other
meaning but by plain words and manifest deeds. Luther was not so sottish as
you would bear men in hand, to make himself a God. But M. Doctor, if your
reason be good, to prove that some Protestants speak and write against their
consciences, because they suspect others to do so (for commonly a man thinks
others to be as himself is) then you speak and write against your conscience,
because you are suspicious, yea upon ridiculous reasons and untruths, you
charge men to write against their consciences. This is your own reason and
argument, and therefore cannot be denied. For proof that you charge men to
write against their consciences, only upon ridiculous reasons, let the reader
judge, I will set down your arguments. Luther confessed that he began against
his conscience; ergo, he proceeded so. M. Doctor to admit your antecedent, who
will grant your consequent? for, here you say that he proceeded so far, as he
thought that by desperate necessity he must go on, and so compare him to
Julius Caesar. The truth is, he ended his life most heavenly, as M. Doctor
Whitakers shows out of Melancthon and Sleidon. We will not credit your
slanderous writings of him, but the writings of the forenamed men. From
Luther, the Doctor comes to Zwinglius, who is said to have denied secretly
the real presence, for many years before he brake off from the Roman Church,
but yet inwardly he dissembled his mind. What then if Zwinglius did thus, did
he therefore proceed against his conscience, because he remained sometime in
the Roman church, after he had seen the truth of the Sacrament? What honest
man would shape such conclusions? If this be to proceed against conscience,
Papists in England proceed against their consciences, for they continue in our
Church, though they secretly dissemble their opinions: many examples hereof
might be given. Touching Nemo the Anabaptiste, what have we to do with him?
The Protestants have most soundly confuted the sect of Anabaptists, when
Papists have taken their ease. And Christian Reader, I desire thee to behold
how the Doctor deals, (whether against his own conscience or no, I leave to
God) in charging us with Anabaptists speeches, whereas we renounce such lewd
sectaries, as he himself can testify. Thomas Bell is (as I think) alive, and
therefore can answer for himself. Wherefore I leave him, who has learnedly
written against Popery: and come to Melancthon, who is charged to proceed
against his conscience, because he was sad and gave himself to weeping. O M.
Doctor. how do you forget your self? is every one a sinner against his
conscience that weepeth and sorroweth, and that cannot by and by be comforted?
David was many times heavy, and his soul had not always comfort, yet was
David a man after Gods own heart. Concerning Carolastadius, I will not say any
thing, neither do I regard what any Lutherane has written of Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius. As for Bucer, it is a lewd slander that he had no religion at
all God will be revenged of you M. Doctor, for blaspheming his servants after
this manner. Bishop Iuell is charged to show himself without God and
conscience: he does rent in pieces the text of Doctors, and inuerteth the sense
of the same. If this reverend Bishop had done thus, his enemies would have
found it, and no doubt M. Doctor you would have noted some places, but seeing
you have noted no such corruptions, we account it a detestable lie. No no, your
own men change the words of Fathers. I will refer you to places, Bellarm.
lib. 1. de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 11. does shamefully corrupt Augustine,
as I have showed in another work, and in his 4. book de amiss. gra. and 9.
chap. he rendeth in pieces Hieroms saying. Again in his 3. book de cult.
Sanct. cap. 9. he does horribly cite Eusebius. So does he also in his 1.
book, de Sanct. beat. cap. 13. Thus he deals not only with Fathers, but
with Calvin in his preface, de libero arbit. and his first book de Sanct.
beat, cap. 1. and 2. de iustif. cap. 8. Read these places your self M. Doctor,
and compare them with the authors, and see who corrupt fathers. Many other
testimonies I could produce, but I desire not to be tedious. If you could
allege so many corruptions out of reverend Iuell, I think we should have
seen them. Thus I pray you consider your own argument.

They which corrupt Fathers, sin against their conscience. But the Papists
corrupt Fathers: ergo.
Page 10.
The assumption is proved by the testimonies alleged, and to give you one or
two more; Duraeus citing Augustine leaves out these words, Opera sequuntur
iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum. Works follow him that is
justified, they go not before justification. The Rhemists upon the 19. of
Matthew, pervert Augustine his words clean contrary to his meaning, affirming
no man to be excluded from the gift of continency: whereas Augustine his
meaning is, that both the will to be chaste, and the power to fulfill that will
is the gift of God Now I might follow your example of bitterness, seeing I
have given you so many corruptions, but I leave this course, and desire you to
remember your own argument. I come to Papists who seem to have proceeded
against their own consciences. One Papist in England, as testifies Arrias
Montanus, added to the 14. psalm, whole sentences, but this corruption was
soon espied: this was done to prove the Hebrew text corrupt, and to justify
the latin translation approved of Papists. Who almost but bold Papists durst
have coined scripture? I think this is to proceed against conscience. Latomus
a Papist blasphemed out of a pulpit, and was suddenly mad, and died in
despair. What should I speak of Franciscus Spira and others? Hasinmullerus
gives many examples of papists who have proceeded against their consciences.
The blessed deaths of Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Melancthon,
Bullinger, Cranmer, Ridely, Bradford, Philpot, Iuell, Pilkington, Grindall,
Dearing, and diverse other do manifest that Protestants proceeded not against
their knowledge. To return to Papists, out of the forenamed author, namely
Hasinmullerus, every one may behold the strange ends of these men. Stephanus
Agricola being an Apostata, drowned himself in the sea. One Gaspare Frank
confessed that he did, and wrote many things against his conscience. Turrian
wished that he had never read the Augustan confession, etc. Sadel his works;
when I found these things to be true, to use your words, I thought it better
to adventure my self with Christians who have quiet consciences, then with
desperate Papists who proceed against their consciences.

The 22. reason: Vnreuerent dealing.
The Papists reverence unto God, and Christ is such, as was that of the Jews,
who platted a crown of thorns, and put it on Christ's head, to make him a king:
even so the Papists make Christ a Savior, but they give not the whole work of
salvation unto him, which indeed is to dishonor Christ. But forsooth they
pretend to honor his Saints; if they do so, let them not make them
Saviors, for this in truth is to dishonor them. The Saints honor consists
not in false worship, but in giving all glory to God. That which Lactantius
writes of Angels is true of Saints. Nullum sibi honorem tribui volunt, quorum
honor in Deo est. They will have no honor given to them, whose honor is in
God. We honor Saints, by praising God for their virtues, and by imitating
them, but we make not their merits the treasure of the Church, neither do we
call upon them. As for reverence unto holy water, pictures, crosses, images, I
say with Esaias, who required these things at your hands? The Doctor in truth
having nothing to say against us, raileth spitefully, saying, that we enter
into Churches with no greater reverence, then men enter into Tauerns: not
contenting himself with this unchristian lie, he proceeds auouching, if any
kneel, it is but upon thorns, for full soon are they up again, and then
with their hats upon their heads they either iangle, or talk, or walk, as if
they waited to see when the plaiers would come forth upon a stage: or else
these good fellows go to the alehouse, (where now and then they find their
minister drinking his morning draught before he go to his service) to drink a
pot or two of nappie ale, that thereby they may the better hold out service
time. Christian Reader, to recite these reuiling speeches is to refute them,
and they which frequent the alehouse with us are Papists and Atheists, if any
Protestants do so, I wish them to amend, whether they be ministers or laiemen.
Besides he has many more railing words against the reverend Bishops, as that
Barons and noble men disdain their company: surely M. Doctor I bless God
that you have no sound matter to object against the Protestants, but such
vanities as the world can control. Our Bishops and ministers are as highly
esteemed with true Christians, as Popish Prelates with their favorites. Virtue
and learning makes a man reverend, which, in many Popish Bishopps to be
wanting, we see with our eyes. But let us now see how the Papists reverence
holy things, speaking of such, they usually say, the holy bread, the holy
Scriptures, the holy Gospel, and the holy Angels: it is well that you do not
so always, why then do you blame the Protestants, who do say the holy bible,
and use this word holy, when it is to be applied unto things that are so? if
they do not always so, you can not blame them, more then your selves, seeing
this word is not always added by you. Mark your reasons M. Doctor, and you
shall find them without this title holy. The Prophesies of the old Testament,
Scriptures, Fathers; if this be such a heinous crime, not always to add this
word holy, you are guilty of it your self. As for the French men, I think
they do not well to call the Saints after this manner, Mounsieor S. Peter,
Master Saint Peter, or my Lord S. Peter: for it is no term of civil or
temporal authority, but a religious and divine honor in religion. God is our
only Lord and Master, and we will not give salvation and redemption but only
unto him. The comparison which the Doctor makes of a countriman calling her
Majesty's Nobles, Treasurer, Keeper, Admiral and so forth, is not worth any
answer, wherefore I leave it and say with Bernard, Maria falso non eget honor,
honora vitae integritatem. Marie needs no false honor, honor her entire
life. So say I, honor the saints by imitating their virtues, the honor that I
desire to give to saints is to follow their virtues.

The 23. reason: Resembling in Doctrine and deeds old Heretics.
This Chapter is duly to be considered, because we are said to differ little
or nothing from old Heretics both in doctrine and deeds: if you could
prove this, then were the Protestants case very hard: but it shall be (God
willing) made evident, that you resemble old Heretics and not Protestants.

The first heresy is, that we hold with Simon Magus; what monstrous impudency
is this M. Doctor to charge us will Simo^ Magus his opinions? he held that men
were saved by his grace, if they did acknowledge him the Savior of the world.
Do we teach any such thing? we ascribe salvation to no other but only to
Christ. If you had that conscience which you pretend, you would not thus abuse
your self.

The second heresy is, we are Nouatians, because we renounce the Pope; I might
cry out upon these lewd and loud lies. Nouatius as Philastrius writes, 34.
chap.
taught, Non esse fideli post Baptismum locum aliquem paenitentiae. After
baptism there was no place of repentance for the faithful.

The third heresy is, that we deny freewill, with the Manichees: but the
Manichees taught that sin came not from freewill, but from a substance: which
doctrine we renounce, and teach that we have freewill to sin. Lib. 1. c. 6.
But you deal with us as the Pelagians dealt with the ancient Church. For
Faustus a Pelagian charged the Church with Manichisme, because it taught the
will of man to be made sound by mere grace, and not of it self. Thus would
you charge us with Manichisme as proud Pelagians.

The fourth heresy is, that with Arrius we deny prayer for the dead. I
answer, if Arrius took away thanksgiving for the dead, we hold not as he did;
but if he denied prayer for those that were in fained Purgatory, we hold no
such place. Philastrius charge him with condemning of marriage, and Augustine
with Arrianisme: these opinions we detest.

The fifth heresy is, that we make no difference of sins with Iouinian,
neither do we make virginity any better then marriage. I answer that we teach
a difference of sins, some to be greater, some to be smaller, but we
disclaim the opinion of venial sins. And if this be heresy, then as I have
proved, both fathers, and some papists are heretics. Touching virginity we
teach with Paul, 1. Cor. 7. that pure virginity is to be preferred before
marriage; although we hold that marriage is better then single life, where
virginity or chastity are not kept, but counterfeited.

The sixth heresy is, that we despise all holy relics of Saints with
Vigilantius. I answer first, that Augustine, Philastrius, and other, do not
reckon him amongst heretics. It is not eftsoone heresy, if one man calls it
so. Hierom calls Ruffinus an heretic, yet M. Harding says it is strange so
to do. Secondly I answer that if Vigilantius would have Saints relics cast
upon the dunghill, we hold not with him; as for tending of tapers, and setting
up of wax candles, Hierom imputes it to the simplicity of some lay men and
devout women, that had zeal, but not according to knowledge. Thus you
approve that which Hierom excuses. Lastly S. Hierom is so hot against
Vigilantius, that Erasmus is feign to say, Conuicijs debacchatur Hieronimus.
Hierom raileth without measure.

The seventh heresy is, that we deny with Eutyches the oblation of the
sacrifice, and the hallowing Chrisme. But therefore are we not Eutichians who
confounded Christ's natures, and turned his humanity into his Deity; as for
Pelagianisme, and Donatisme, we have nothing to do with them, for Pelagius
denied original sin, which we teach to be in infants; and the Donatists held
the Catholic church to be only in Aphrica, and to have perished out of the
whole world: we hold noe such thing. Now I have finished the doctrine of the
old heretckes in which christian reader thou may behold the slanderous
tongue of the Doctor, who without conscience, when he could not charge us truly
with heresy, has invented lies: for may part, these slanders drive me more
and more from Popery, and I beseech thee by thy salvation that they way
prevail so with thee. Hereafter I must speak of the deeds and manners of
heretics; first we are like to Paulus Samosetanus, who desired great applause
of his hearers; for proof that he did so, Eusebius is cited, but there is no
such thing in Eusebius. If this be the manner of heretics, then are Papists
heretics, who, as it is manifest by the Doctor, desire applause of men for
learning, in so much that they break out into their own praises after a most
insolent manner, as for the protestants they do noe such thing, and therefore
they resemble not this heretic, if he did so. Secondly we are like to the
Donatists who overthrew aultars; the truth is Christian Reader, the altars
which the Donatists destroyed were not of stone as Popish altars are, but were
tables of wood, such as we have. S. Augustine makes this plain in his 50.
epistle. Thus M. Doctor you see how your own quotations make against your
self. By this testimony we may learn what to think of the popish sacrifice;
as for the Donatists refusing to come to Councels, we do not so, but
unfeignedly desire a free general Council, and have given sufficient reasons,
why we came not to the Council of Trent. The cruelty of the Donatists toward
the Catholics, fitly agrees to papists, who after a most sauadge manner have
murdered protestants, as the Lord will one day make manifest to the world. As
for Claudius de sanctis his testimony we regard it not. The rest of the
chapter concerns the destroying of Idolatry, and Luthers arrogancy, with
other vain matters, as disputing of women, and finding fault with priests
lives, but I have answered sufficiently concerning Idolatry, and therefore it
is a wicked slander, that we are like unto Julian the Apostat^, as for the
disputing of women, let Theodoret answer, who plainly testifies that women did
dispute of divinity. That which the doctor counts a fault, Theodoret
approoueth of, saying, thou may see our opinions to be held of women and
handmaides: I wish that women were so cunning in religion that they could
mildly and christianly dispute of the same. But there remains a perilous
matter; old heritikes were inquisitiue and desirous to hear of the sins and
faults of priests, and of other Ecclesiastical persons: I will not stand to
examine the truth of this, whether heretics were so inquisitiue or no, only
know Christian Reader that this sauoreth of Manichisme, for the Manichees
said, Lib. 2. de Man.
as Augustine shows, non oportet omnino quaeri, etc. we must not inquire at
all what men they are that profess the Manichees sect, but what the profession
is. The papists would feign have their wicked lives hidden from men, but they
cannot, for as ignis tunica celari non potest, fire cannot be kept in the
garment, so sin cannot be concealed: in vain therefore M. Doctor, you go
about to have your faults concealed, the more you desire this, the more men
will enquire into your actions, because you give just cause so to do. Thus
having answered your accusation of heresy, I will set down no feign, dbut true
heresies which you hold. Bellar. lib. 2. de purg. cap. 6. houldeth that it was
true Samuel which appeared unto Saul, this Philastrius makes an heresy as it
is plain 26. haer. Where he proves that the souls of the righteous are in
the hands of God. Secondly the prodiants did use the book of Syrach,
Philastrius haer. post Christ. 9. so did the papists as it is manifest, in so
much that they make the book canonical scripture. Thirdly the heritickes
Angelici, did worship Angels. August. 38. haer. so do the papists, as it is
evident. Fourthly the heritickes called Apostolici, taught by practice a
community of goods, so do the Monks, for they possess not any thing.
Fifthly, the Euthits would not labor with their hands, no more will the idle
Monks. Sixthly, the Pelagians taught that a man may fulfill the law of God, and
so do the Papists, yea they use the Pelagians arguments and answers, as I have
proved in other places. Seauenthly, the Pepulians permitted priesthood to
women. August. 27. haeres. so do the papists permit women to baptize. Eighthly
Carpocrates did worship the Images of Jesus and of Paul, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24.
so do the Papists. Ninthly, the heretics called Apocryphi would not have the
Canonical Scriptures only to be read, but certain Apocryphal works.
Philast. haeres. 40. So the Papists will have Apocryphal books to confirm
their opinions, and to be read for proof of them as I have showed. Yea they
fly to traditions, which the heretics before named might also have justified,
if the Canonical scriptures had not been sufficient. Tenthly, the Manichees
used but one part of the Communion, for they would not have wine, so do the
Papists, as it is notorious to all men. I might mention many other heresies
held by Papists, but I have handled them in another work, therefore I will not
recite them here. Touching the manners of heretics, if cruelty be a badge of
heretics, then are Papists rightly mustered amongst heretics, for they
have most barbarously murdered many men, as I will show (God willing) in the
next reason.

The 24. reason: Peace and tranquillity.
It is a heathen Principle, that Legem sibi ipsis indicunt innocentiae,
continentiae, virtutumque omnium, qui ab altero rationem vitae reposcunt. They
which require a reason of another man's life, make to themselves a law of
innocence, continency, and of all virtues. To accuse men of tumults, when
they are themselves tumultuous, is intolerable. Quis tulerit Gracchos de
seditione querentes? who can bear it that Gracchus should complain of
sedition? that Verres should speak against theft, and Milo against murder?
who could think that Papists should speak against wars, cruelties, and
outrageous tragedies, when they have spilt exceeding much innocent blood? The
Spanish inquisitions, and French Massacres, have murdered men, women, and
children by thousands. Phocas murdered Mauritius the Emperor, by whose means
Boniface the Pope obtained that room, and should be called the head of all
Churches, as Gotfridus testifies. Here Christian Reader thou may see that
the Pope came up by murder. Pope Urban the fixed bound five Cardinals in a sack
and drowned them in the sea. He took the kingdom of Sicile from the Queen,
and gave it to others. Symachus and Laurentius did strive for the Popedom,
which contention lasted; years, cum effusione sanguinis multorum tam
clericorum, quam laicorum. With the shedding of many men's blood, both of the
clergy and laietie. Alexander 2. and Codulus contended for the Popedom,
which contention vsque ad homicidia prorupit, brake forth into murder, as
witnesses Sigebert. The histories are full of such examples: yet says the
Doctor the Catholic Roman religion, began with meekness, mildness, and
with all quiet and peaceable means. Whereas the Protestants both have begun
and hold on their course with seditious tumults. That you may know your
peaceable proceedings, hear what Wicellensis writes concerning Hildebrande,
Miscuit se plurimorum mortibus Christianorum, succendent vbique incendia
bellorum, per totum pene Romanum imperium. He thrust himself into the deaths
of many Christians, kindling wars almost throughout the whole Roman Empire.
John Hus was burned although he had safe conduct promised him. Certain men
called cruciatores when they should have gone against the Turk, having the
Popes indulgences defloured women, and murdered men to the number of three
score and ten thousand. Yea says Landgius, Scribi non potest quanta
crudelitate vsi sunt; It can not be uttered what cruelty they used. Concerning
the troubles in Germany, my purpose is not to speak of them, neither will I
meddle with the wars in France, or Scotland. Diverse countres have diverse
governments, the tumults of any subjects against their sovereigns, as we do
not allow, so we may not condemn the poor afflicted Christians our
neighbors, before we hear what they can say for themselves. I am a scholar
and not a soldier, a divine not a lawier. The circumstances of foreign wars
few know besides themselves, as also we know not the laws of those lands, we
will not therefore enter those acts which have so many parts, precedents,
causes concurrents. From foreign common wars you come to England, and are
very busy with king Henry the 8. and king Edward the 6. princes of famous
memory. It were best for you M. Doctor, to leave kingdoms and study
divinity, you are so drowned in policy, that you forget divinity, yet you can
without tears recount summarily the troubles of this land. So you may do in
regard of Queen Mary's times, when not only Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury,
Payne^ Bishop of Winchester, Barloe of Bath, Tailor of Lincoln, with diverse
other both Archdeacons and Deacons, were put from their livings, and wonderful
store of blood shed; these are the times that you should lament. Yet it is to
be lamented that any should be so obstinate on popery, as to die in the same.
As for Queen Elizabeth's gracious government, you are not ashamed also to
control it. Yet Papists themselves teach that it was both mild and merciful:
and had not her Majesty cause to deal with Papists as she did, when the Pope
excommunicated her, and stirred up the Northen rebels her own subjects to
rebel against her: Doctor Saunders did thrust himself into the Irish wars
against her Majesty. If the Pope had so dealt with the king of Spain, as he
has dealt with our late most renowned Queen, would the king of Spain have
taken it? When I weighed and considered these things with my self, I could not
but dislike the Romish religion, accompanied with tumults, insurrections,
ruins, desolations, and with all manner of tragical miseries, and cleave unto
this religion in England, which ever teaches peace, as our writings show. But
it may be M. Doctor your own men will bear some credit with you. Cardinal
Poole in his imagined oration to Charles the Emperor, calling back his
Majesty from the Turk, to leave all other affairs, and to bend his banners
against England, and encouraging the subjects of this realm boldly to rebel
against their Prince, speaks after this manner. English men are a people that
oftentimes have deposed their kings for lighter causes. This book as reuered
Iuell testifies was abroad, and might be seen; wherefore if peace will
prevail with you, call to mind that you have bin the firebrands fo sedition,
the truth is, you would force to religion, but you would not be forced.

The 25. reason: All kinds of witnesses.
Every man knows, or may know M. Doctor, that your tongue ouerreacheth when
you say we can bring nothing to witness our religion, but only the scriptures.
We have produced the fathers of the primitive Church to confirm the same; but
if we have the scriptures on our side, it is sufficient though all men were
against us, that Gods word is not contrary it is most true, but that your
practices are consonant to the same it is most false, as likewise that we will
admit noe expositors of holy scriptures, but the scriptures themselves; that
the scriptures expound themselves in matters necessary to salvation, I think
you will not deny your self Master Doctor, neither will you always take the
fathers expositions, Caietan confesses that the sense of the scriptures is not
tied to the Fathers exposition as I can show, but you demand why Luther
confesses that he could not deny the real presence, because the words were
so plain, and why has the text bin so tossed, that out of it alone there has
bin wrong four score different opinions? I doubt you can hardly show so many
opinions M. Doctor, but grant it, yet a plain text may not be understood of
every one, and if the text be so plain as you would have it, how comes it
to pass that there are so many different opinions also among your selves? for
you know not how to expound the word (this) as I have proved in an other
work. Scotus confesses that before the Lateran council transubstantiation
was no matter of faith, ergo the words, this is my body, prove it not.
Lactantius cries out after this manner, O quam difficilis est ignorantibus
veritas, quam facilis scientibus? O how hard is truth to the ignorante, but how
easy to the skillful? truth then may be easy in it self, though difficult to
some men. Upon this vain question you have made a foolish inference, that we
have noe witnesses at all of our new invented doctrine, but every one his
private fancy or conceit, whereas the catholic Roman religion has all things
in the world witnesses of it. This is a monstrous fable, are you able to prove
that all which are in heaven were the children of your church, and all that are
in hell were enemies unto it? to examine particulars: Ignatius you say was of
your religion, because in Ecclesiastical affairs, he would not have the king
equal to the Bishop, and because he wrotte Ecclesiastical traditions. To the
first I answer, that the true Ignatius would not correct Salomons speech, Prou.
24. My son, says Solomon, honor God and the king: but I say, honor God and
the Bishop as high Priest: the true Ignatius was a man of greater religion,
then that he would have corrected the scripture, but any thing is good enough
to patch up popery. To the second place I answer, that it being duly
considered overthrows the Papists opinion. For Ignatius thought it necessary
that the Traditions of the Apostles, that is, their doctrine, should be written
for fear of corruption, what then is become of unwritten traditions? For that
this is the true meaning of Eusebius, Grynaeus shows. Eus. l. 5. c. 23.
Next unto Ignatius is Irenaeus placed, who is so far from agnizing the
Papal authority, that he did Acriter Victorem reprehendere, sharply reprove
Victor the Roman Bishop, because he excommunicated the Churches of Asia, for
keeping the feast of Easter in a diverse manner from Rome. Would Irenaeus have
done this, if the Popes authority had been universal? As for Victor, if this
be your argument, he excommunicated the Churches of Asia, ergo, he was a
papist; you make a ridiculous reason. The next argument of Policarpus his going
to Rome, is of the same moment; for who knows not that many men's advise is
used, who yet have no authority over others? That Saint Cyprian, Syxtus,
Laurence, with infinite others, do witness the Roman religion I deny. Saint
Cyprian is so far from witnessing all points of popery, that as I have
proved, he is rejected of Papists. From men, the Doctor comes to women,
affirming thousands to have defended their virginity against devils, and men.
What then, were they Papists therefore? To come to speciallities, Helen you say
found out the Cross. Although that history may be doubted of, yet Helen was
no Papist, for she did not worship the cross, because that was an
heathenish error; if she had been a Papist she would have adored the
cross. But the Mother of Augustine, Saint Monica, was a papist, who after
death requested that she might have Mass said for her: here if you mean
popish Mass M. Doctor, you abuse your self most shamefully, for she desired
only a memory of her at the Communion. So had the Prophets and Apostles,
which were not in your fained Purgatory. By these few examples, you have
proved Protestancie, then popery; as for the rest which you name, Saint Paul
the Eremit, and others, when you prove them Papists, we will believe it. To
your question, demanding whether there were any Saints in heaven, before this
our age, which were not papists? I answer that there were, and therefore you
speak impiously, to say that heaven was empty, until Luther shook off his
hood, or if there were any they were Papists, who revealed these things unto
you M. Doctor. Take heed of the pride of Lucifer, who would ascend into heaven
to know secrets, they belong not unto you. The Apostles and Martyrs with
thousands, (I doubt not) were in heaven, which I am sure were no Papists:
witnes^e their writings. From heaven the Doctor comes to hell, I fear me
without repentance, a fit place for him. This jolly fellow, knows not only
matters in heaven, but also what is done in hell as it seems. The heathen
persecutors are in hell for persecuting the Catholic Church I doubt not, but
this Catholic Church is not the same with the Romish Church at this day, there
is ample difference betwixt these. And that Constantine gave great peace to the
Church, Theod. lib. 1. c. 7.
it is true also, but he was no Papist, for he says that the holy Scriptures
teach us plainly all things which concern divine matters. Lastly that all
Bishops under the cope of heaven were members of this Romish Church, is a
notorious untruth. The Doctor to fill up his reason numbreth many, but
proves not that which he says. The rest of the chapter is but a vain
flourish of words, in which I take no delight. To draw his reason into a
syllogism is needless, because in deed it has neither head nor foot.
Amongst many vanities, in the end of the chapter the Doctor says, that he is
a Papist, because the Romish religion is the most beneficial of all the rest.
Christian Reader, I fear me that this indeed is the true cause why many are
papists, namely their commodities. But this is sufficient to drive men from
popery, that in regard of preferment, by this Doctors confession, he is a
Papist. M. Doctor I have taken away your evidence for popery, for baptism
binds no man to falsehood. Wherefore I beseech you by your salvation, choose
rather, with Moses, to suffer affliction, then to be the Popes white son,
which, as it seems by your own confession you do, because the Romish
Religion is most gainefull. Out upon gain against conscience, the Lord open
your eyes to see the truth.

FINIS.
An admonition to the Reader.
I desire thee Christian Reader, if there be any faults of the Printer, to
impute them to him, not to the author of this book, for he could not be
present at the Press.


