CERTAIN REASONS OF A PRIVATE CHRISTIAN AGAINST Conformity to kneeling in the
very act of receiving the Lords Supper.

By Tho: Dighton Gent.

GAL. 6. 9. Let us not be weary of well-doing; for in due season we shall reap
if we faint not. Anno 1618.

TO AL PRIVATE CHRISTIANS Unfeignedly desiring to serve the Lord Christ, and
preparing themselves, gird up the loins of their mind, and wait for his
appearing, grace and peace be multiplied for ever.
BRETHREN, hearing what pains and labor many of your reverend and learned
Pastors (who sometimes were otherwise minded) do lately undertake in many
places, by their public teaching and example, by their private conference, and
all other means possible, to persuade to conformity; I am bold (lest they
should rejoice in your flesh) to present this my poor mite unto your godly
consideration, as casting it into our Lords Treasury, most humbly beseeching
those that are rich in grace, and have silver, gold, and precious stones
conferred upon them, to offer them freely and seasonably for the service of his
Sanctuary, even to build up the decayed places of the gates, bars, and walls
of the most holy City. Always provided, that nothing be done confusedly, or
at a very venture; upon the warrant of no ill meaning, or a supposed liberty,
as if it had been sufficient to bring wood and timber, stone and mortar, and
all other needful provision in all abundance, of any kind or fashion, length,
breadth, thickness or temper, even as the most learned and wise of those times
thought meet, and not to have every thing fitted and prepared by the Lords own
direction, so as there may need neither axe nor hammer, nor any tool of Iron
to be heard to reform and amend the same; 1. King. 6. 7.
but if any thing be not well, to put to or take from as occasion shall
require: No, no, all Gods outward worship, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and 32. 47.
and public or divine service, must in every part and ceremony or gesture
thereof, be so pure and free from all kind of mixture of any humane
invention, as all things of the very least moment whatsoever, being directly
ordered according to the pattern showed in the Mount of Gods holy word, every
believing heart may rejoice at the most comely order and holy beauty of Gods
own Ordinances, and adiudge it high presumption to tender any innovation by
farre-fetcht devices and novelties, or some old Tradition, or worme-eaten
Ceremony, full of incertainty, to the direct disabling of the all-sufficient
truth, and offense of tender consciences. In all humility therefore labor to
be able to give good and sound reasons why you dare not conform to the
questioned gesture and ceremonies, nor to any thing else which is not within
the compass of the most vn-erring pattern, the holy word of the
all-commanding God, and be sure to build your refusal safely upon the rock,
and not upon the sand; upon the commandment of Christ, and not upon your own
humors, or any men's judgment and practice, be they never so learned, zealous
and holy: yea, in whatsoever you have not Gods word for your warrant (Thus
says the Lord, thus did our Lord, or the Lord never tequired this at our
hands) therein submit your selves lovingly and peaceably, yea most readily to
them that are over you in the Lord. And in any case nourish not that most
pestilent humor of that man of Sin, a delight in opposition to superiority,
but in all humility, in matters that are but merely grounded on opinion, and
not on the Scriptures, think better of other men's judgments then your own:
for God gives no saving grace but to the humble, to the humble in deed, not to
the humble in show. Get this virtue therefore my brethren, for then the yooke
of Christ, Math. 11. 29. 30.
which now you are to draw in, will be most easy and without grief; and his
burden, part whereof you are presently to bear, light and full of comfort:
yea, though you be made the gazing-stockes of the world, and be hated and
scorned of all men, as the very offscouring of the earth, for bearing witness
to this part of the truth, yet shall you by humility be enabled with much
cheerfulness and spiritual consolations, to endure all things, and to suffer
all things; yea, consider I pray you, that the very true and most direct way to
reign with Christ hereafter, is of necessity to suffer for him in this evil
world; and to suffer for any part of the truth in Gods worship, is to suffer
for Christ. Believe it therefore as verily as you do any other thing, that God
has purposely predestined you to these particular trials, even in every
circumstance and instrument thereof. Seeing then you must drink of this Cup,
pray heartily that his name may be glorified, and then what matters it though
we be despised, disgraced, scorned and derided, so long as our Lord and master
may have honor thereby? Will not every true hearted subject suffer and endure
any pains, travel, or loss of goods and life for his King and Sovereigns
sake, yea and that most cheerfully with a manly and valiant courage? And shall
not we much more do the like for the King of Kings, who has done and suffered
a hundred thousand of millions more for us? he lost not an eye, a hand, or a
foot for us, but was content to give his whole body and soul also, yea he
spared not his whole person for us, and that also when we were his enemies;
Romans 8. 5. 10.
he suffered disgrace, not only before the Princes, but all manner of contempt
by the vilest, and of torment by the cruellest, yea and the most grievous
pains that the fierce wrath of God in all extremity of his justice, could
possibly inflict upon his soul and body. Do you think he has forgotten these
things? No my dear brethren, in that he suffered and was tempted,, he is able
to succor them that are tempted; yea assure your selves he puts every one of
your tears into his own bottle, observes every hidden device and close
practice of your adversaries, keeps a Register (not to be corrupted) of every
word, presentment, information or certificate, that is made, signed, put up,
exhibited or uttered against you, and sets down also every disgrace and
contempt that is cast upon you, and keeps a just reckoning of every penny for
fees that is exhausted from you for exactions, excommunications, absolutions,
and of whatsoever other open or underhand proceedings practiced against you,
and will assuredly call to judgment both you and all your adversaries, and
back or hollow friends, every one to give a particular and most strict account
of all these things, and to them that have done well herein, he will give
everlasting life and glory; but they that have done ill and unconscionably,
rather serving the time then the Lord, shall certainly go into eternal fire.
1. Pet. 1. 13
Gird up therefore the loins of your mind, and fear not them that have only
power to imprison your bodies, and take away your goods or lives, let neither
their persuasions nor threatenings cause you to conform to error (of which
nature is every thing not warranted by the word of truth) but fear him, who
when he has done as much as they possibly can, is able also to cast body and
soul into hell fire, Christ says unto us all, Luke 12. 4. 5.
Him fear, even fear to do any thing in his worship and service, but what you
have good warant for, under his hand and seal in the sacred Scriptures that he
will not be offended at it, but acceptably receive it at your hands, and so
bless the use thereof unto your souls. For else (at the very best that can
be said for it) is not this directly to tempt the Lord, and to dare him to his
face, when in his public worship we dare do some things of special note,
which he most carefully observes, and that before his face and most assured
presence, yet only upon the Canons or persuasions of sinful men not
consulting with the word whether God will be pleased or offended therewith or
no? Deuteronomy. 18. 19. 20.
There is difference (I confess) betwixt that which the Lord has expressly
forbidden, and that which he has not directly nor by any good consequent
commanded, but yet it is only secundum magis and minus, to conform to the
latter is to do wickedly, but to subscribe to the other, is to become
abominable. Therefore in such cases of extremity, the choosing of the less
sin may very well argue a most wise and carnal discretion, but not any
honest heart or sincere affection. You know brethren, that in the beginning the
Lord put an everlasting enmity betwixt the seed of the Woman and the seed of
the Serpent, distinguished afterward into the City or Kingdom of God, where
himself is pleased to dwell as supreme Lord and King peramount, ruling and
governing his people especially in his own service) by his own Spirit
according to his own Laws in his own Word; and into the Synagogue of Satan,
where he also sits upon a Royal throne (indeed not in his own likeness, but
most exactly trickt up and transformed into the similitude of an Angel of
light) teaching by his servants many things, commendable by the light of
nature, yea and commanding with great authority (of all possible learning,
reason, discretion, wisdom and Philosophical understanding, garnished with
the precious ornaments of most admirable Oratory) many divine and excellent
truths of the word, but enterlacing ever and anon some doctrines of darkness,
yet very covertly, always in outward show for holy ends and godly purposes,
and never undertaken but upon most grave and good advice, yea very learned,
sound, and divine deliberation, renouncing the Devil (forsooth) most directly
and professedly, out upon him naughty meat, what did ever any body mean to
bestow the sealding and plucking of him, the very savor or sent of him is
death irrecoverable; but retaining the broth wherein he was sodden, or the
principal brewisse, or some special part thereof, oh it is very good and most
wholesome diet indeed, (the holy father his benedicite light upon them that
saved it, for else all the fat had been in the fire) yea I tell you this with
good household bread is even Angels food, (full glad would they be the proudest
of them to lick their lips after the leavings of it) though indeed every common
understanding cannot diue into the deep mystery thereof: Separating from and
quite banishing for ever and a day, the grosser doctrines of Popery, the real
presence, praying to the Saints departed, the supremacy of the Apostolic Sea,
and such like, fie for shame, that any body should so much as once name them,
seeing without all question they are most damnable, and came verily from hell;
but yet retaining diverse gestures and ceremonies thereto appropriated, and
thereby first begotten, oh here be many rare bits and sweet morsels, even
admirable and most excellent uses of, such as the Holy Ghost could never for
his life foresee or think of, and therefore indeed it never came into the
mind of the Lord to require them, even because he did not prouidently enough
consider what decency and comeliness, what unity and much other undiscerned
goodness their general conformity would instantly produce. For seeing the
Devils to deceive the world with greater ease, and to be more free from
suspicion, will put upon them the likeness of Gods holy Angels, why should not
these again to be revenged on their enemies, transform themselves into the
likeness of Devils, by conforming to some of their ceremonies, that so more
powerfully they might draw the servants of Satan unto God? What if the damned
crew were guld a little, and some other fools made feign a while, yet were not
this an admirable piece of service, and do they not deserve all the pack of
them to be hanged up, yea by the very heels, that will not subscribe to the
lawfulness hereof? All which premises being most gravely pondered, and
carefully considered, certain nice and nimble wits, of a very deep diuing
reach, and most high soaring humor, are lately risen up, and now grown full
ripe, who have undertaken, not to dispatch all the labors of Hercules in one
hour, nor by their sweet melody to make the wild beasts, the sea hideous
monsters, the fell fowls of heaven, and all the huge mountains of the earth
in one instant to be silent, and at a trice to conform to their measures of
most indifferent mildness; but with great facility (though it be a very
strange wonder I tell you, yet do not think it incredible) to reconcile even
these two so contrary seeds, and by divine appointment directly opposite
Cities, (O what a blessing are these peacemakers worthy to have?) for the
speedier and more safe accomplishment whereof, they have most wisely provided
and discovered to all our horizon; the full perfection of their so learned
sufficiency, for they have most strongly builded and highly erected (even in
the very air) a very great, yea without all question the goodliest castle that
ever mortal eye beheld, called Saint Neuter-hall, or as the base vulgar speak.
Newt-hall, which is furnished with all store of every kind of warlicke
munition either for offense or defense, so that by the place it is
inaccessable, and by the power of it utterly impregnable, (all their
adversaries may cast their caps at it) the constituted Regent hereof is a most
sage and honorable grave person, Lorded out of their own loins, one Grando,
Magnifico, Cavileiro, Segnioro Indifferento, whose colors under the conduct of
two great commanders they have made full (not a man missing I warrant you) with
most able followers of an invincible temper, and indefatigable constitution,
neither hot nor cold, neither flesh nor spirit, but indifferently disposed (I
do not say for God or the Devil, but) as times and occasions do best serve for
their purposes. Now this is the man, and these be his forces and arguments my
brethren, that make strongest head against you: he perhaps will faigne
hypocritically, that he is at utter defiance with all the seed of the Serpent,
and would not for a world be a means to persuade you to conform to any of his
damnable devices, no not in the least circumstance whatsoever, because they all
come from one root, and flow from the same fountain; and to make this good, he
will not stick by Drum and Trumpet to proclaim open and intestine wars
against all their damnable courses and dissembling proceedings; yea, to give
you full satisfaction, he will take his corporal oath that his judgment is
directly contrary to them, though for some special considerations him
thereunto moving, his practice in outward show carries some image or
resemblance of them: yea and at the very worst he protests to take neither
part, but being of a most quiet and peaceable disposition, too too unwilling to
disturb the rest and ease of the Church in which he was bred and lives, but
rather to be conformable to the times, he pretends only to stand
indifferently minded, and equally disposed till matters be settled, and in the
mean season look which way the most take, 1. King. ^^. 6. 8.
he will incline, presuming they are absolutely in the right; yet trust him not
my brethren, for he that is not with Christ, will easily be hired by this great
man's two gallant commanders knight marshall Fear, and Lord general Favor
(men of exceeding prowess, and great experience) to take Arms against Christ;
yea all that are not professed and public friends to the City of God, will be
content (under pretense of preserving the Churches peace) at their request
secretly to labor, and underhand closely, yea most strongly to practice for
Satan's Synagogue, and when time and opportunity serves to show forth yea
openly to profess their dissembled malice. In the mean season learned
subtilty, and great shows of peaceable honesty, do but quite cover over gross
deformity, and most cleanly conceal vile and abominable hypocrisy. Stand
fast therefore and quit your selves like men, Ephesians. 6. 10.
take unto you the whole armor of God, but in any case beware of the weapons
of the Synagogue, 1 Cor. 2. 1. 4. 6.
Excellency of words, entising speeches of man's wisdom, and the wisdom of
this world, which will, seem most learnedly and fully to give any man
sufficient satisfaction, if he tie not himself precisely to the word of God:
for they have in them as intising allurements hereunto, as any beautiful
harlot in the world. Look you therefore unto Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the
author and finisher of our faith, and of all the means substantial or
ceremonial thereof, or any way circumstantially conducent thereunto, and is
gone up on high, and given gifts unto men, according to his word, even
whatsoever in calling, in doctrine, in ceremony, or in gesture is to be
conformed unto: he is gone I say to prepare a kingdom and an eternal weight of
glory to bestow upon every one of his Cittizes, who have fought the good fight
of faith, such honor shall all his Saints have in the very presence and sight
of all your Synagoguish adversaries that now so molest and trouble you, who
standing neither on the right hand nor on the left, but aloof off in their
ayrie Castle, even indifferently disposed betwixt both, shall find to their
cost, that whosoever is not in the right is verily in the wrong (be it doctrine
or gesture) and not being of the City of God, is certainly for the Synagogue
of Satan (be it for calling or ceremony) and he that is not directly for the
truth so far as he sees, is (at the very best) indifferently for error and
falsehood: yea and therefore whatsoever they pretend, all that love not the
Sheep of Christ, but woorry his Lambs, and persecute his servants, shall have
their full portion with the filthy goats. And as for my Lord Indifferent, who
will not loose his present wages of unrighteousness for the most assured hope
of future glory, unless his honor very nimbly bestirre himself, and retire
quickly into the old, or some new erected Purgatory; ten thousand to one, his
portion will be fearful in the euerflaming furnace, though now for the present
he triumphs and makes a most glorious flourish. Look therefore my brethren to
the last end of these things, and then shall you never do amiss. Now the God
of peace, who will shortly send our Lord Jesus to make trial of every man's
work, preserve and keep you, and make you wise according unto godliness,
that you may discern things that differ, and so be of one mind and of one
practice, and so may have peace, not with the world, for all that will live
godly, and conform only to him, must have tribulation therein; but with God,
and amongst your selves having your consciences pure within, and lives
outwardly unspotted in the world, for nothing is availeable but a new creature,
godliness is the mortar whereby the house of God is builded: all the gifts of
Art and nature without this, do pull down and not set up; yea, though they
have both zeal and knowledge. I beseech you therefore let this be well
tempered before any stone be laid, and then may we safely fall to building, yea
then shall the work prosper in our hands, let Tobiah, Shamballet, and all the
dissembling enemies of the truth do what they can. Therefore my brethren,
whatsoever in the worship of God, helps not by his own appointment unto
holiness, cannot possibly be of Christ. For is it not the fruit of the Spirit?
(if it be conformed unto) then must it needs be a fruit of the flesh, and
therefore lusts (though perhaps closely and secretly, yet most naturally and
constantly) against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
for these two ever were, are, and will be contrary one to the other: yea all
the Lord Indifferents in the world with all their learned tricks, and
artificial devices, can never reconcile them. Keep that therefore which by
the faithful ministry of our godly and zealous pastors has been committed
to you, take heed of curious, vain, and unmortified spirits, nimblenesse of
wit is no help to sanctification of the spirit. Seeing then you know the truth
of the things in question, beware lest ye also be ^lucked away with the
bewitching errors of them that are carnally minded, and so by little and
little, conforming first to this, then to that, at length by degrees you fall
from your former stedfastnes, rather strive to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, by cleaving more and more to Gods own
ordinances, and hating more and more all humane Inventions as most vain
devices and false ways. Psalm. 129. 128.
Conform therefore to nothing in Gods public worship, but what is revealed
in the word, which if you desire to know, Math. 7. 7.
seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, for to him
that has and uses it well, Mat. 25. 29. and 13. 12.
more shall be given, yea he shall have abundance. Decline not therefore, hide
not your knowledge, or any other Talent upon any cause or consideration, seem
it never so reasonable, but abstain from all things wherein there is any
appearance or likeness of evil; ye(...)form to nothing, be it gesture,
action, or ceremony in Gods public worship, (if it be not the commandment of
Christ) which has any resemblance of Idolatry in it, though the Idolatry it
self be sent packing, for verily such inventions have in them (though purified
never so often) an Idolatheous disposition. Have you no fellowship therefore
with them: and so I pray that the peace of God may be with you all that are in
Christ Jesus. Now unto him that is able to keep you that you fall not in these
times of trial, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of of his
glory, with joys unspeakeable and glorious, even to God only wise, be glory
and majesty, dominion, and power both now and for evermore, Amen.

T. D.

CERTAIN REASONS OF APRIVATE Christian against Conformity to keeling in the
very act of Receiving the Lords Supper.
THE Eternal son of God our blessed Lord spoke always to his church even
from the beginning and directed all his servants for their manner of worship as
well outward as inward, even to the fathers before the flood, to the Patriarks,
Prophetts and holy men of God after, and this he did in diverse and sundry
manners, but now since his coming in the flesh he has tied all Churches and
all persons that desire to have eternal life to the sole direction of his
word, Ioh. 5. 39.
which is his own and only personal voice and does testify of him
whatsoever is profitable for the Church to conform unto, 2 Timothy 3. 16
either for doctrine or government, or for whatsoever else that is any way or
in any degree helpful unto godliness, for this and this only is the
immortal seed or the seed of immortality, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
all other doctrins for any Religious uses raised else where, are merely
mortal, or seeds of death and therefore utterly incapable of any good use in
the public worship of God. Seeing then we must wholly and only depend upon the
scriptures for direction in all the actions of Gods public worship, which are
to be conformed unto, let us in these controversies about kneeling in the very
act of receaving the Lords supper, and whatsoever else is in question being of
Religious use, diligently give heed, Heb. 2. 1.
to the things we have heard and learned therein, being truly or evidently
grounded thereon, and by no means approove in any degree of any thing else, for
that will make us one time or other, in one thing or other to run out and fall
from our first love yea do what possibly we can to decline and scatter. Reu.
2. 4.
Harken therefore to that which the Lord Jesus himself did purposely speak in
this his own voice concerning this very point. I thank thee o father Lord of
heaven and earth because thou have hid these things from the wise and have
opened or (as Luk renders it) revealed them to babes, Mat. 11. 25
even so father because it so pleased thee. Luke 19. 21
Whence he gives all his ^ervants plainly to understand, that all the wit,
learning, discretion, experience, and Judgment in the whole world is not
possibly able to find out the mysteries of Religion, or to determine with what
ceremonies, actions, and gestures Gods public worship and service is to be
performed, no though they be Rabbis and Doctors or the most absolute teachers
in Israel, but that this is a special and peculiar privilege or grace
treasured up in the word and reserved purposely for such persons as will dig
and search for it and rather desire and labor to have dominion over all their
known corruptions and so to be glorious within then to exercise any outward
glorious and pompous domination in the world, Psa. 45. 23.
for those that rest them selves and depend on Gods holy and own ordinances,
Luke 24. 45
shall have their hearts or understanding thereby opened or enlightened and so
made able to know the hope of their calling, Act. 16. 14.
the riches of the glorious inheritance of the saints and the exceeding
greatness of Gods power toward al which believe, Ephesians. 1. 18. 19.
but those that depend upon the wisdom and learning of men can not possibly
attain hereunto; because Gods own ordinances, (though they do enjoy them, yet)
are not esteemed of them further then the excellency of the outward gifts
therein give content to their senses; Ezekiel. 33. 32
for though they hear yet they will not do or obey, and all such be they
never so wise and learned are in the flesh and therefore, Romans 8. 8.
cannot possibly please God, 1. Cor. 2. 15
but those in whom the Spirit of God does dwell shall be enlightened and made
able to discern all things, which the other, though of never so great
learning, and most admirable parts having even the very spirit of the world,
verse. 12. 13
in them, can not do, because they have but man's wisdom, and that perceives
not the things of God, 14
nay they are foolishnes unto him, here, therefore for distinction sake and
that every one might judge his own heart whether he be of that number to whom
God has revealed these things or no, our Savior calls them Babes, not in
sanctification of life and power of Gods spirit, but in their sense and feeling
being privy to their manifold weaknesses and ignorances, and therefore in all
humblenes of mind and meeknes of spirit they renounce their own wisdom, and
submit themselves to the word of God; as also being in the account and esteem
of the world, when they are compared with those that be contrary minded, no
better then very Babes, even base and contemptible persons not worthy so much
as to carry their books after them, and yet these are the people and thus must
they find themselves quallified, men, women or children, whom Christ has
chosen to Reveal his holy and divine mysteries unto. So that howsoever
learning and wisdom are highly to be reverenced as being very excellent gifts
of God ordained for special helps in the ministry of the Church both for the
finding out of the truth, and also for the deviding of it aright (therefore
they that despise them cannot be of God, 1 King. 22. 6. 10. 11. 12.
yet many times men of Belial do enjoy them, even false Prophets and profane
preachers who are many of them of most excellent parts, Mat. 7. 22.
so that from this place, Note.
it is most evident, that very often and not unusually, learned and wise, grave
and understanding men, yea famous and of principal note, even Chief Rulers
and principal pillars in the Churches of Christ, having as much in them for
all manner of learning in humanity, in divinity, and in whatsoever as nature
and industry can possibly attain unto are (notwithstanding all this and more
then this, if more can be) teachers, defenders maintainers of many gross and
horrible errors yea vise and damnable heresies, which yet Babes do separate and
fly from, if any be pleased to restrain these words of Christ to the doctrines
of faith and Justification (though every branch have intrest in the privileges
of the tree) I will not contend about it, but only presuming on their patience
be bold to conclude that if such worthy and reverent men even masters in in
Israel may not simply be relied on, or trusted unto, in those great things of
the Law. Wherein they are most exercised and take greatest pains, much more
probable it is that they may err in matters of ceremony which they count
trivial, and therefore do not half so carefully look into, so that
undeniably it follows, that it is no sufficient argument to bind the
consciences of Christians to conform to this or that gesture in Gods worship
because many grave and learned divines do hold it indifferent and lawful, yea
(as the cause stands) most fit and convenient: seeing as wise, reverend, and
learned as they are, have done as much for most horrible errors, as the
doctrine of Purgatory, Freewill, merit; yea and that most damnable heresy of
depriving of Princes. Neither is it any disparagement to the truth, because
those that profess it, and will not betray it, to conform to error (even men's
mere devices) are but Bibes, some of them ministers and perhaps preachers, but
of no Reputation or account in the world) seeing these, yea these only do see
and believe the truth when it is hid from the wise and men of understanding.
Unless therefore those Reverent and learned persons (the patrons of
conformity) do make it apparent, that they ground their persuasions and
practice not barely (though in seeming most strongly upon wit and reason,
antiquity wisdom or learning, but soundly and evidently upon the word of God,
there is no force to move or bind the conscience in all their arguments or
reasons whatsoever, yea much rather and more safely they are at the very best)
to be but esteemed of that number from whom the Lord has as yet hidden these
things.

In this case therefore, that most excellent and primcely saying of his
majesty concerning his laws may very fitly in my understanding be used, His
Majesty's speech in the star chamber, Page 17.
that special care is to be had to purge them from two corruptions
Incerteintie and Novelty. For if our church government or laws ecclesiastical
were freed from these, that we might be certain which are the true callings
and which be the true ceremonies, then let all perverse, and froward spirits,
that upon mere peevishnes or other refractarie humor will not conform and
subscribe, be irreuocably adjudged utterly unworthy the gracious protection of
so singular a souerainty. But surely if in his most princely care to settle his
subjects estates, and to prevent the miseries of endless and impouerishing
suits, he truly foresees the absolute necessity of reforming these two
corruptions in the Civil government; Let our lamentation find favor in his
ears who are daily subject to be most violencly traduced, scornfully entreated
and very greevously fined, even in the triple value of our whole personal
estates, yea and to be perpetually imprisoned without bail or main prise,
only because we dare not in Gods public worship conform unto men's
Inventions, nor bow down unto these devowring Cankers that do secretly
consume the special and most principal ministerial members of the Churches
of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 17
yea and have hitherto fed upon and are much strengthened or confirmed, by
every remedy which has been applied for their cure or remouall, for if
religion, or the outward part thereof consisting in Religious rites be subject
to these two Corruptions: Alas how can poor Christians with any comfort or
assurance of faith, order their outward serving of God seeing they have no
certain rule for their actions, gestures, and Ceremonies therein and
appropriated thereunto, but must either forsake the fellowship of the
Churches, or conform to the orders, canons and directions which the
Ecclesiastical governors in every age successively shall in their wisdom
and discretion think to be most fit for the times, and meet or convenient for
the occasions. Are not the outward actions and ceremonies ordained by the Lord
him self for his public worship, most certain seals, and assured evidences
of his very true and essential presence has our holy faith any other help
from the senses but by this means: and do not all they that hinder the
magistrate from establishing them, say unto God depart from us we will none
of these thy ways? and from the contrary, are not the Inventions or
traditions of men established in Gods outward worship infallible evidences, and
unerring testimonies of the real presence of Satan and do not they then that
hinder the magistrate from casting them out fall down and worship him.

The Reverent Bishops in King Edwards days, and all the first times of the
most famous and blessed Qu. Eliz. of holy and verlasting memory held it
necessary that the Ancient and primitive discipline should be restored and
therefore these controverted ceremonies to be only for a time retained, as by
the public decree of the whole state more at large does appear (which blessed
be God, Preface to the book of com. prayer.
is most religiously by our dread and sovereign Lord still retained and kept in
force.) Now the most learned and grave Bishops of this age profess, that the
King and state shall commit a greevous sin against the Lord if they do remove
any one of these things in question whatsoever, and their Reason is undeniable,
if they can make it good, viz. because they are every one of them ordained by
God, for so much directly does their Iure divino and no Ceremony no Bishop
being put together necessarily imply.

Now let our adversaries search all the the reporrs of the Common laws, and
see if it be possible to find any one case so full of contradiction and
manifest Incertainty for suppose the next succession of these seas (a thing I
tell your greatly to be feared) shall think it fit upon certain good causes
and considerations, to bring in Images into our churches, pressing only the old
pretense ornamenti gratia, and the cross into the Lords supper for Reverence,
spittle and salt into Baptism only for significancy and mystery, where shall
Incertainty have an end, unless of absolute necessity an unerring power be
established, for whose safe foundation they have in these things most wisely
provided; for can any doubtful matter possibly be of Faith, and may any thing
of religious use which is not of faith be conformed unto in the worship of God?
and can any thing of this nature have certainty for the lawfulnes of it,
unless it be evidently warranted by the word of God? I conclude therefore
that to conform to any thing of religious use, which is not commanded in the
word of God, or (which is all one) truly grounded thereon and so warranted
thereby, is to conform to mere Incertainty and Novelty, Ioh. 4. 22.
even to I know not what, which at the very best must needs be an ignorant
worship a gesture at Random and a ceremony at all a very venture; Mat. 12. 36


And if it be sin to use Idle words in our ordinary talk, Ephesians. 5. 11.
and if those civil works of our callings (be they gestures or other actions)
if they be unfruitful, not sauouring of the spirit of Christ, are to be
esteemed, Ephesians. 5. 11.
even the least of them in their degree, mere works of Darkness; must it not
needs follow even by infinite degrees that much more, it is horrible iniquite
to conform to or use idle words or gestures not comely in the most special
presence of our most holy God, Eccles. 5. 1.
even when we are at his own holy table; and is not every thing Rash,
hasty, Idle and uncomely which is not warranted by the word of God? Psa. 101. 1
must not the heart be prepared before the body or any part thereof can bring
forth any word action or gesture which is good, Mat. 12. 35
and can the heart possibly be prepared any way but by conforming to the
spirit of God according to the scriptures? yea is not every other conformity
parcel of that Evil treasure? Incertainty therefore and Novelty are very
evil yea most deadly corruptions and being thus justified in the public
worship of God, will corrupt and eat into all the civil procedings of the
state whatsoever. His Majesty's speech. page 18.
If then it be subject to his non fuit sic ab initio, though it be of never so
great antiquity, yea therein may be coryval with the real presence and though
the ordeyners thereof and pleaders for it had all the wit and learning of whole
universities and the most absolute wisdom of a national Synod, Math. 5. 32.
48. and 1^. ^
yet he that could not err has adjudged it to be a meare Novilty, was it
not so from the beginning of the sacrament, did this gesture or these
ceremonies, creep into the worship of God, after the Apostolical times
mentioned in the scripture? then with out all question though all the learned
men in the whole world, hold it and them lawful, yet it is a Novelty and they
mere and idle Incerteinties, for nullum tempus occurrit Regi, wherefore as our
said sovereign Lord and most learned King said to the grave and learned Judges
of the land, Remember you are no makers of law, Page 19.
but interpreters of the Law, according to the true sense thereof; even so I
beseech al godly pastors and learned divines (if they sincerely desire to build
up the house of God and not to break down the carved work thereof with axes
and hammers) be pleased to remember that they are not to make rules or laws,
cannons or constitutions in the Churches of Christ to bind the Consciences of
Christians withal, but only to interpret and divide the word of God aright,
being the only Cannon and sole rule of the Conscience, and that not after this
fathers or that Counsels opinion or Judgment, or the practice of later or more
ancient Churches, but according to the true sense of the spirit, always and
only evident in the scriptures. Page 7.
And is it the Kings office to protect and settle the true interpretation of
the law of God within his Dominions? (oh blessed and for ever blessed shall
such be) then questionles will our Lord and master, the great King of heaven
and earth protect all those that stand for the true interpretation thereof and
are ready to conform to any thing that is evidently grounded thereon, and
refuse not conformity unto anithing but what is not warranted thereby.
Therefore brethren all that seek the Lord with upright and honest hearts, let
them in these cases of Controversy not Run into this or that Corner or
country after an old Rabbie or a new Doctor but go directly and plainly to the
Law and to the testimony, Esaias 8. 20.
for, resolution truly given by the word of God does only bind the
consciences of men: And all Fathers, or Counsels, Doctors, or Canons, how
Ancient and universal soever, which Command or persuade to Conform to any
thing in Gods worship of Religious use, and do not speak according to this
word, it is most certain they have no light in them. Object.


But here my Lord indifferents light horsemen offer a light skirmish, and say
that these things not being forbidden in the word, Christians have liberty to
use or not to use as they think good, or as the magistrate is pleased to
command. Answ.


No says the holy Ghost, whosoever speaks not according to the word, that is
according to the doctrine of the word, or practice of the Church mentioned in
and approved by the word there is verily nothing but darkness in them, for
Christ is that light even the whole and only light of the whole universal
Church, Ioh. 8. 12.
and is not the light of his word in these things which are so pressed and
urged? then whosoever follows or conforms unto them walks in darkness, even as
those that conform to any thing truly grounded on the word, follow Christ and
so do not walk in darkness. Is not his light of the word then, but the darkness
of man's wisdom and humane learning only, in these things? then verily is the
Prince of darkness strongly and most firmly for them, oh how fearful (if he
prevail which the Lord of light forbid) must needs that darkness be, and who
dare conform thereunto; will the pretense of not being forbidden shift off
these things? If therefore your pastors cannot make it appear, that the things
which they persuade you to conform unto are according to the word of God, you
are bound in conscience not to yield unto them, because you may not have any
kind of fellowship with any actions gestures or other works which have no light
but Darkness in them, Ephesians. 5. 11.
and all things are made manifest only by the light of the word, 13.
likewise you know that Jesus Christ is that faithful and true witness we may
more falsely depend on his Testimony Reu. 1. 5. and 3. 14.
then on all the fathers and Counsels, Cannons and Doctors in the whole world.

But they say that all these do swear directly that kneeling even as it is
urged (and so all things else in controversy) is both lawful and Convenient;
but what says that vneerring witness, here our adversaries reply that as he
says nothing for the gesture so he has not one word against it or any of the
rest. I demand then, whether this gesture be a true gesture or a lying gesture,
they must needs say a true gesture; or else they shame all but can it possibly
be so, and that faithful and true wittnes never gave any kind of testimony unto
it, and we have a direct commandment to hear him in all things, Acts. 3. 22.
not in doctrines of faith only, but in doctrins of gestures and ceremonies
also, yea in whatsoever is in any degree of religious use? (do not stumble at
the next words, for they are all plain to him that will, Pro: 8. 8. 9
understand) for wherein consists the faithfullnes of Christ his Testimony but
in revealing or making known all things concerning faith or government
gestures or ceremonis, Ioh. 15. 15.
yea whatsoever the father would have the Churches at any time in his worship
and service to conform unto? but to use only his own words All things that
I have heard of my father, I have made known unto you, but he made known unto
them that a table gesture was the only true gesture in the administration of
this sacrament, (which at this very instant he immediately instituted and
delivered, for else he would never have used it.) Therefore by this his own
action, he has made known to all true Churches for ever, that he heard or
learned the table gesture of the father, and therefore they may not in any case
or upon any terms conform to any other* unles in like manner it be apparent
that it comes also from the father: also he never made known unto them, that
kneeling as it is urged was lawful therefore he never learned or heard it of
his father. And because the disciples should not forget this or any thing else
which by precept or practice he had told them, he promised to send the holy
Ghost unto them, Ioh. 14. 26.
both to teach and also to bring all things to their remembrance which he had
told them, now seeing they never used any other (for it is that most fearful
sin of presumption the mother of final Apostacy to suppose they used any thing
of Religious use needful for the Churches afterward to use and Conform unto
which the scriptures do not directly mention and approve) it is more then
evident, that they never heard of Christ that any other gesture was lawful or
mght in any respect be conformed unto in the act of receving the sacrament,
especially seeing he bears witness to the truth, Ioh. 18. 37.
even to the whole truth and not to some special parts only, if then this be
a gesture of truth, and the other be ceremonies of truth, though in the
lowest degree of Religious use Christ does certainly bear witness in the word
that they are good and lawful, and then indeed we ought to conform unto
them, seeing Every one that is of the truth hears his voice, that is obeys
his will, and is not the word his voice or has he any other. All therefore
that conform to any thing of Religious use, without safe warrant from the
word, are not of the truth, but directly of error. If then Christians are
bound to conform to any thing, yea for conscience sake, which yet Christ has
not made known in the Scriptures to be good and lawful then do your
Adversaries of necessity infer that Christ has not made known, All things of
necessary use (at some times and in some cases at least) in the worship of God
unto his Churches and servants, and so denying the faithfulness of his
prophetical office in this particular, they come near to that Apostaticall
heresy, 1. Ioh. 2. 22
even to deny that Jesus is that Christ, or that anovnted prophet whom we must
hear in all things, yea by this their stricte pressing of conformity they do
intimate that he is not the Lord, not Lord or author of the whole truth for
they say kneeling and the other things in controversy, are not lies or
novelties, fantasies or Incerteinties, but of the truth and and therefore to
be conformed unto, and yet for their hearts cannot prove that Christ is Lord
or author of them.

And even as he which denies the divine providence in the particular government
of all things even to the falling of the hairs of our head, Luc. 12. 7,
does say in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1.
or frames his affections and disposes of his Courses, as if God were otherwise
then he has in his word revealed himself to be, and so denying his
particular providence, sets up in his heart the Gods or Idols of Chance and
Fortune good or evil: so they that affirm that because Christ has not
particularly or expressly forbidden these things in the word therefore we may,
yea and being commanded ought to conform unto them, though there be no warrant
in scripture for the^; do in effect in these hairs (as I may say) or ceremonies
of his worship or as they count them the small and trivial matters of his
service deny that he is Lord in his Church, that is not such an absolute Lord
as the sacred Scriptures describe him to be, and so set up in their hearts the
Idols of Novelty and Incerteinty, or the Gods of humane Inventions and worldly
traditions, or the precepts and pleasures of men, and so dispose of Religious
ceremonies in Gods public worship as their occasions may happen or chance to
move them unto: so that though without any stop they readily take the oath of
allegyance unto Christ, yet by a mental reservation, they intend and mean
that Iure divino their callings with these appurtena^ces are not subject to the
supremacy of his word. Therefore let all Gods servants rather reason thus, what
profits the Image or any humane Invention* Abac. 2. 18.
Verily they are teachers of lies. Do they no good then do they much hurt?
teach they not the truth? (if they do then Christ in the word bears witness
unto them) then do they confirm error and falsehood. Woe therefore unto him
that says, that these devices are sufficient to teach the Churches and that
some good lesson or instruction may be gotten by them, verse. 19.
no, no, though they be laid over with gold and silver and have the most
excellent and learnedest wits in the world to Justify and defend them, yet
when they have done all that possibly they can there is no breath in them, they
cannot for their lives make them of any profitable use for the service of the
Church in the worship of God, but the Lord is in his holy temple only in his
own ordinances, verse. 20.
there is the blessing for evermore, and not in men's devices, therefore let all
the earth keep silence before him, and hereafter hold their peace, and never
open their mouths in the defense or excuse of these vanities. But why I pray
you will some say, Object.
should not Images, or this gesture, and these ceremonies or other like humane
Inventions, yield as much comfort and stir up as true devotion in our
conformity to them, as well as the Ark and Cherubins, or the table gesture and
other of the like nature?

Even because the Lord in his infinite wisdom and love has devised and
commanded these, Answer.
and therefore how silly or contemptible soever they seem to the wisdom of the
world, yet his divine power is always present, and does inseparably work in
the holy using and partaking of his own divine ordinances, but he never
ordained the other, and therefore all the power which is in them is from Satan,
and stirs up to error and superstition, or to schism and Apostacy. All the
teaching and preaching therefore and other payns whatsoever undertaken for
their justification and upholding is but in vain, utterly unprofitable for the
Churches of Christ, Math. 15. 9
for all the devotion Reverence and seemlinesse which these do beget is but
vain and deceitful, even only in seeming not in substance. For what are the
opinions and imaginations of the most wise and learned men in the whole world
not being truly grounded on the word of God, are they not absolutely Evil? and
that not now and then, Genesis 6. 5.
or only in some damnable points of Machiavelisme, Ier. 17. 9.
Mahometisme, Popery, or Arianisme, but continually even in all things,
especially much more in those that concern the worship and service of God,
till he have opened their understandings. Luke 24. 25.
To Conform then to any thing of Religious use without warrant from Gods word,
though learned and wise men, yea grave and godly preachers are verily
persuaded, that rather the^ the Churches should be untaught, or Christians want
and be deprived of the sacrament and other exercises of Religion we very
safely may so do, is absolutely (notwithstanding the said opinion of very
worthy men) to conform to Evil. Therefore it were far better for the true
Churches of Christ in this case, Reu. 12, 6,
to be driven into the wilderness, and so deprived of all public visibility in
the world (for even there is a place prepared of God, yea they shall verily be
fed there) then thus by conforming to Incerteinties and Novelties to be either
quite starved or most grossly infected. Every thing therefore of Religious use
which has not warrant from the word of God is directly Evil, and to contend
and to be zealous for it, is to go a whoring after our own Inventions. Psa.
106. 39


But here it may be said, there is as much verrue, Object.
reverence and devotion (if the affections be rightly ordered) in one gesture
as in another, in that of kneeling as in a table gesture, and so in the other
questioned: Ceremonies as well as in any other whatsoever.

Sure^y matters being simply considered by them selves, Answ.
and so compared together these men speak to very good sense and reason, yea
with very great judgment and understanding? Act. 10. 15
but yet The things which God himself has purified or set apart for Religions
uses, Mark. 10. 9
let no man pollute or separate by mixing any humane inventions therewith: And
from the Contrary, let no man (...)urifie or enjoin for religious use in the
worship of God any thing which (not being warranted in the word) God has
polluted* for they may as well defend and that with as good color and show of
natural reason and humane understanding, that there is as much divine virtue
in beer, ale or water, as in wine in the sacrament, and therefore also rather,
then to break the peace of the church in which we live, and not to have the
blessed sacrament administered; ministers and people were better to co^form and
subscribe to the use of them if they in like manner should be enjoined. And
with as good probability they may avow there was as much virtue in any other
rodd as in that which was in the hand of moses, Exo. 4. 2.
and in any other salt as in that wherewith the prophet healed the waters; 2.
king. 2. 21.
yet at the very best this is but a mere carnal or a proud Syrians argument,
2. king. 5. 1. 12.
and though it seem very probable, yea and to some the more they ponder on it
the more unanswerable it is, yet is it exceedingly leaprous and infections. To
make which good let them be pleased to consider the argument and manner thereof
which in the very like case the lord him self framed and pressed, yea and
purposely no^ contingently but in the most absolute perfection of his divine
wisdom committed the same not to tradition but to writing, for the use and
direction of all posterity in the like occasions, to be their president for
ever. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
For the whole Scripture, (and therefore also this part) is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach and defend all truth which is to
be conformed unto, either concerning faith or godliness, and to convince or
disprove all error for doctrine or ceremony, to correct all vice, and to
instruct in all righteousness, and therefore why should I fear to profess
that I verily believe that even this place which I urge, and every other
portion of sacred writ, was even therefore written that we might believe that
Jesus is the Christ (being some way helpful thereunto) and that in believing
we might have life tbrough his name, Ioh. 20 31.
as helping much therefore for the confirmation of our faith in the holy
Scriptures absolute and most perfect sufficiency, and for the assuring of our
hearts that we may not conform to any thing of religious use in the public
worship of God, but what is truly grounded on them.

Mark I pray you reverently and religiously the true reason why Nadab and
Abihu were so fearfully and miraculously consumed and devoured; Leu. 10. 1, 2
would not the fire think you, which they brought in their Censors, have
served well enough to have burnt up the incence? was there not as much natural
virtue in that fire, and as sufficient power (in any man's reason) to perform
that service, as in any other, yea and as in that which was upon the Altar? yes
verily, no indifferent man that hears and knows the matter, will say
otherwise: why then what need the Lord to have made so exceeding much ado
about a little fire, or others about a poor gesture, as if the very
foundations of religion had thereby been grievously shaken? Fire must be
absolutely had, and so they use it reverently, and carry themselves decently
and orderly (and here is no mention to the contrary) what can any peaceable
minded man say against them? Even this is said against them by the Lord
himself, the very God of peace, They put fire: what? which the Lord had
forbidden? No, the Lord purposely refuses to reason in that manner, to make us
able to meet our adversaries in the gate, and says, Tbey offered strange fire
before the Lord, that was a strange and remarkable presumption indeed, and full
worthy of a strange and remarkable punishment, to teach all posterity for
ever, whether Councels or Churches, particular or general, to take special
heed, that they never presume to bring any strange fire, strange gestures,
strange callings, or strange ceremonies into the public worship and divine
service of our most holy and jealous God, especially in the clear sunshine of
the Gospel.

But was this fire made by Philosophy, Object.
Alchimy, or Necromancy? For then it must needs be confessed that this were a
very foul fault in any, and most worthy of deprivation ipso facto? No such
matter; how shall we then know which fire or callings, which ceremonies or
gestures are strange, that we may take heed (whatsoever come of it) we never
conform unto them* seeing Nadab and Abihu, and men of eminent place and
excellent parts, do stand very confidently for the absolute lawfulness, yea
and direct fitness of these things of this nature questioned amongst us? Psalm.
119. 18
(Lord open thou our eyes, that we may see these wonderful things in thy Law.

To help us in this case against all cunning questionists and subtle
disputers, Answ.
which the Lord foresaw would even pester this last age of the world, he is
pleased to speak in words and sillables, that the simplest may understand if
they will not stop their ears, and most easily discern if they will not wink
with their eyes, and says in the first verse which he had not commanded them,
what could it advantage them to plead (as these men do) the Lord has not
forbidden it, therefore we may conform unto it, and seeing there is no ill
meaning nor any the least purpose to bring in Idolatry, or to confirm any
therein, but the clean contrary, as it is well enough known, why should any
be so precise to abridge us of our liberty? But the Lord foreseeing that all
the other eight commandments would not have half so much oppsition as this of
his outward worship, yea knowing that all the witty objections, and the very
quintescence of all the subtle distinctions that the bottomless pit could
possibly afford, would be set abroach in these last times under color of
unity and decency for the more easy making way to the breach thereof, this
being the very key to all the other following: for keep this sincerely, and
faithfulness and truth will flourish in all the rest; but suffer wicked men by
carnal devices to make a breach in this, and to justify the same, and there
will be nothing but carnal policy and dissimulation in all the rest. Now to
prevent this misery which all callings and conditions else will feel the smart
of, he teaches Magistrates by his own practice how to deal with their Nadabs
and Abihues (for every age will have some such) and by this his argument, o^
manner of reasoning, teaches al private Christians how to behave themselves in
these occasions, as if he had said, That fire which the Lord has not
commanded, is strange, or a novelty; that gesture in Gods worship, that
ceremony or calling in the Church which the Lord has not ordained, is strange,
and a mere Innovation. Is it a matter of religious use? yes. And has not the
Lord in the word commanded it? no. Then it is strange, and thou may not in
any case subscribe or conform unto it.

And lest the impudent importunity of these indiffrent ones should prevail in
his Churches, the Lord is pleased for our better confirmation, to afford us
this invincible reason, Ier. 29. 23.
Those that teach words in my name (he does not say which I have forbidden;
but) which I have not commanded, teacblying words; so that whatsoever is
ministerially taught and expressed in the Churches of Christ which God has not
commanded, is of a lying disposition, even of no other use but to oppose the
truth, and to justify error. Those callings then which the Lord has not
commanded, are lying callings. Those ceremonies and gestures which the Lord
has not commanded, are lying ceremonies and gestures, and ferue for no other
end, but under color to thrust out Gods holy ordinances and to bring in by
degrees even any of men's Inventions.

But here me thinks I hear one crying out, Object.
this is not to the point though they grant all that I have said, for Nadab
and Abihu were violent and unstaid young men and that which they did was the
friute of rash and green heads and they were never Enjoined by Moses to take
any other fire then that which was of Divine institution, and came down from
heaven but voluntarily and presumptuously without any danger of losing their
livings, or having any Ecclesiastical ordinance or allowance for the same,
they very unadvisedly, yea desperately ventred on it: whereas otherwise if they
had been grave and discreet persons, the action not being forbidden by God,
and the magistrate commanding it, and that otherwise they might not have
ministered at the Altar, but should have been deprived both of their places and
maintenance? In such a case rather then the daily sacrifice should cease and
the people be untaught, it were better a thousand times to take any fire, yea
and to wear a fools or a red pyde Coat in steed of the Priests garments and
to conform or subscribe to any thing whatsoever in cases of such desperate
extremity; and so there appears an exceeding great difference betwixt there
case and ours.

I must needs confess this to be true, Answ.
and he were worthy of a fools Coat and cox-combe too, that will not
acknowledge this so great a difference in many of you. But is it any other then
that, which was betwixt Ioabs killing of Abner in his own private quarrel, 2 Samuel 3. 27
voluntarily, 1 Samuel 22. 9. 18.
presumptuously, and of malice forethought. And of Doeg, that Edomite, his
running upon and slaying fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen
Ephod, by the direct, but most unjust commandment of Saul the anointed of the
Lord? He that voluntarily makes himself a Fool and a Knave, is worthy of
reprose: but he that is commanded to do wickedly, and damnably, as to take
away a man's living, good name, or life, by some Canon-shot, poison, or other
damnable practice, is not to be held any strange man, but by this strange
inference of these strange disputers, to be justified, because though to
break any of Gods least commandments, Math. 5. 19.
even the least branch of any of them wilfully against knowledge, and to
teach others so to do, or to persuade them to conform thereto, in cases of
extremity, will certainly keep out of the kingdom of God, in the judgment
or opinion of Christ; yet if the magistrate will have it so (says our learned
masters sweet inference) then any, even the greatest commandments of Gods Law
in any branch thereof, may very safely be broken, and without all danger
conformed unto. Is not this most horribly though most closely to vilify
supreme authority? let no son of Esau or cursed Amalekite gather that from
hence, which was never so much as Intended, as if I inferred that either such
an unlawful decree may in any fashion be resisted, seeing, all the servants of
Christ though in in such cases they cannot be obedient because it is not in the
Lord, yet of absolute necessity they must be subject; for the Lords sake, or
because David a man after Gods own heart, gave forth a commandment
(occasionally wicked) which yet being merely civil, 2. sam. 24. 2. 3. 4.
Ioab (unwillingly) obeyed, that therefore David is to be esteemed a Saul, a
persecutor, an hypocrit and a reprobate? God forbid, if it be a sin of the
second table (though great and filthy) yet with Shem and Iaphet cover it, Dan.
9. 6. 7. 8 10. 11.
but if directly against God, confess it if ever we look for mercy. Not, but
that God himself may dispense with any of his Commandments, but for us to
give this his glory or a special prerogative to any other is to blaspheme him
that made us. Moses therefore knowing the absolute necessity (in the ordinary
way to salvation) of the knowledge in this principal and fundamental point of
faith and Religion, viz. that the Lord will be sanctified (both by using his
own ordinances reverently and holily, and especially or principally in having
nothing in his public worship of religious use but what he has Commanded)
in them that come near him (and can we possibly come nearer him, then when we
are with him and he by his special presence with us at his own table) and
before all the people will be glorified, by an open and manifest declaration
of our conformity to him and not to men's devices. Does it not most plainly
declare to all generations for ever, that to do or conform to any thing of
Religious use in Gods public worship, which he has not commanded is a most
fearful sin which he will greevously punish, yea clean contrary even to
profane the Lord: for when we do not herein tie our selves precisely to keep
and do all the word of the Law (and those only) which are written (not in men's
cannons and constitutions but) in this book (even the sacred and inspired
scriptures) we do most plainly manifest, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. 59.
that whatsoever outwardly we profess, yet in our hearts, we do not stand
in awe of, or fear that glorious and fearful name* The Lord thy God, yea and
notwithstanding our saying (or often repeating) Lord Lord, Mat. 7. 21.
and making a most open profession of all fundamental points concerning the act
of Justification, nay, though it be granted that those excellent devices of
pomp and state and all variety of delicacies and most pleasing Inventions
ordained to have state in Gods public worship, do exceedingly work upon the
affections of carnal men, and draw them by these means to come near unto God
(in the place of his publik worship) with their lips (making outward semblance
of great devotion and reverence of his majesty which before they never
regarded; Esa. 29. 13.
yet seeing this fear of God (or religion) is begotten in them, not by Gods
own ordinances but by conforming to the precepts and cannons of wise and
learned men, it is only carnal and worldly (what holy devout and charitable
shows soever it makes) and is so far off from knitting or joining our soul to
God which is our greatest happiness, as it Removes ou^ heart (more and more)
from him which is our greatest misery. So that this Christian liberty which
these men do so boast of that if God have not forbidden it, then we may safely
conform unto it and so not tying our selves strictly to that only which is
commanded or written in the word, is a mere slavery and bondage, and the very
next, yea most direct way to bring us back again in these ships of humane
Inventions into spiritual Egypt, Deuteronomy. 28. 68.
where under color of most learned prophesying, Iezabel plays false even
closely professes spiritual bawdry the most abominable mother of that
damnable Idolatry.

All will worship then, even whatsoever God has not commanded, though it be
ordained by men of never so great wisdom, understanding and discretion, and all
other most excellent parts, and upon most wise considerations, good purposes
and holy Intentions, is notwithstanding nothing in all the world but mere
alluring enticementes to make the way plain for spirittuall filthiness, and
therefore by no means upon any terms to be co^formed unto, but to be held and
adjudged most unlawful yea execrable and therefore to submit our selves
thereunto especially in these days of knowldge, must needs at the very best
(though not in every one in the same degree) be but Nadabs and Abihues case.
For if will worship or men's Inventions be tolerable in these, why not upon
like consideration in any other? if in new Ceremonies, why not in new
sacraments? for if we acknowledge man to have privilege or prerogative diuino
Iure, in devising some Religious actions or gesture in Gods public worship,
do what they can, out of this seed by degrees, of absolute necessity will the
popes supremacy arise, seeing all the other Eight Commanments have a kind of
dependancie (for so much as concerns the outward man) upon the second, as all
the duties of the inward man have of the first, and therefore the conforming
to, and so Justifying the lawfulnes of the seed, must needs give strong
approbation to the goodness of the fruit. Seeing then the warrantie, virtue or
power of every Religious calling, action, ceremony or gesture, comes not from
the doer but from the ordainer, and that all the good Intentions or learned
Imaginations in the whole world can neither devise them nor make them lawful
or profitable; let us acknowledge that God only can take a Ribbe out of Adam
and make it a fit help for man, and that he only can ordeine callings
Ceremonies and gestures for his Church and worship, yea and make them
profitable helps for his servants therein, though he take them any where, and
from whence soever he pleases, yea though they had formerly been Idolized or
made blind, and lame, or leaprous, yet he (yea he only) can cleanse them and
make them holy, Luc. 6. 44.
for is it possible that an evil tree (humane wisdom) should bring forth good
fruit (any acceptable service?) Luc. 18. 19.
or is there any primarily good but God, Iam. 2. 17.
from whom Every good gift does come; Either the Lord is the author of the
calling, gesture and Ceremony or else of absolute necessity it follows, there
cannot possibly in any rerespect or to any intent and purpose be any goodness
therein at all. And therefore the Churches of Christ have no promise of a
blessing but absolutely of a Curse by conforming thereunto, especially seeing
all humane Inventions or traditions (of this nature,) assume by little and
little yea at length without blushing chalendge to themselves even by divine
right, that holy respect and religious reverence which is only due to Gods
ordinances, which sin al they do commit who teach for doctrines (concerning
the government of the Church, Mat. 1 (...)9*
or the ceremonies and gestures in public worship of God) men's precepts (even
the mere opinions or authorities of fathers, the grave Counsels or cannons of
learned men,) and not one divine drame of the holy and inspired scripture, and
thus by the alluring contentments which always accompany these humane devices,
they steal away the heart, and make it go a-whoring after them, with a most
violent delight in, and approbation of the^ far beyond Gods own ordinances,
even as the filthy (though snout fair or painted) harlot, steals away the
affection of the husband from his wife to her self, and therefore conformity
must needs be at least accessarie unto this sacrilege; are you not much bound
to your learned pastors, who take such pains to persuade you to it?

Now in the act of receiving the Lords supper at the Lords own table, some
gesture is absolutely and (for the former as I may say essentially) necessary,
but a wrong and a false gesture is utterly unlawful (will any in his right
mind deny either of these?) Therefore in the act of receiving we may only
conform to the true gesture, and not indifferently to any, unless they can
prove by Gods word, that every gesture warranted only by the precepts of
men, is the true and lawful gesture, the want of which warrant, and yet
pressing conformity to them, is absolutely to make the commandments of God
(concerning these things in question) of none authority) and to set up and
exalt in their steads men's mere traditions and devices. ^er. 6.


The maine question then is, which is the true gesture; for on all sides it
will be granted, that that only is to be conformed unto? Shall we take the
Reed of reason, or the Rule of man's wisdom and learning to measure this
withal? Romans 8. 5. 7.
verily no, for these savor not the things of the spirit, neither are they,
neither can they be subject to the Law of God. Let us look therefore what was
in the beginning, Our Lord and Savior used (without all question) in the first
institution of the Supper, whatsoever was essentially necessary either for
substance or dece^cie, but a gesture, yea and a true gesture in the institution
was essentially necessary (for a false gesture had been sin, and without a
gesture it could neither be delivered nor received) therefore that which he
used, was and is without all contradiction the true gesture; and therefore also
that which was and is only and for the action essentiallie necessary. Seeing
then he used a table gesture, and all they that did represent the whole,
universal, and particular succeeding Churches to the end of the world, did
receive the blessed Sacrament of the most precious body and blood of our Lord,
with a table gesture, unless like Divine authority for another gesture (as
well as for altering the time, place, and number of communicants) can be
produced; Gods holy word, and my blessed Saviors and his Apostles example, are
sufficient and sound warrant for my faith to believe, that a Table gesture is
the only true and lawful gesture, and that no other in any respect ought to
be conformed unto.

But here starts out a gallant company of most brave fellows, that have lain
close in ambush till fit opportunity served, and they set very hotly upon
the hinder parts of the truth, with a terrible noise crying out, Obict.
That this is utterly against the current of the Scripture, yea directly
against that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. gala. 5. ^.
For howsoever to conform to the Jewish ceremonies, is not only to be
entangled again with the yoke of bondage (for look whose ceremonies we use
or conform to, we make our selves thereby his bondmen) but to loose the whole
profit and benefit of all Christ his merits, ver. 2.
yea even to be utterly abolished from Christ, ver. 4.
and to fall from grace; (how fearful a thing therefore is conformity to
unwarranted ceremonies) yet notwithstanding in cases of conveniencie (though
nothing of the like extremity as ours) and for the preservation of the
Churches peace (as very now it fares with us) the same Apostle was content for
a time to conform himself to diverse of those very ceremonies, and therefore
where the like causes do concur, Acts. 16. 13.
we may yield to the like effects.

Here of necessity we must make a stand, they come on so hotly, as if they
meant to share the spoil forthwith, and making strong head against them, as
with a valiant crew of Targetteers of good proof. We refer therefore to
their learned consideration, first, that the Jewish ceremonies here spoken of,
were in their first original good and holy, being ordained by God himself, so
was never any of these things in controversy, but at the very first
unwarrantable, and therefore wicked and sinful; and secondly we give them to
understand out of the English long bow, that though these ceremonies were
indeed to be abolished, yet the time of their enduring was not fully expired
till that the Gospel was planted: and lastly, by the report of a Canon, their
security is to be admonished, and themselves informed, that the ceremonies of
the Law were to be buried with honor, and entombed in princely sepulchers; but
these of men's devising with all possible reproach, contempt, and disgrace, so
that here is no proportion betwixt the liberty of Paul, and that which they
pretend and brag of: unless therefore they can show that in some place where
the Gospel was planted, Paul did conform to some of the said ceremonies, as of
religious use in Gods public worship, they may very well lay down their
weapons; and betake them to their heels. What needs that (quoth a bold
Corporal) when a better man then ever Paul was, did absolutely conform in the
first famous Church that was called Christian, even Peter the Prince of all the
Apostles: Galat. 2. 11*
but good sir, the Holy Ghost his directly reproving him by PAVL for the same,
does fully answer all objections of that kind.

But here fearing a foil, Object.
they wynd about and make two half circles, and with one wherein the principal
of their force co^sists, they make quick reply and say, Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
that God commanded that in all matters too hard for us to judge, 9. 10. 11.
we must repair to the magistrate and priest and co^form according to that
which they shall inform and not decline to the right hand nor to the left, now
both these they say in this controversy about the gesture and the other
ceremonies do directly determine, that kneeling even as it is urged, is
absolutely the true and best gesture, and all the other things in question both
lawful and most convenient and therefore all that will do presumptuously and
not conform to these things ex animo ought not to be fined in thousands and
committed to perpetual imprisonment, 12.
but even to loose their lives, for that is to take away Evil from Israel.

Hereunto keeping our first ground without any alteration or disorder in our
Ranks, Answ.
we do say, that the Priesthood is quite remooved out of the Church, and ought
not so much as once to be mentioned in these days of the clear light of the
Gospel, as a title in any respect unbefitting the ministers of the word, yea
seeing that government is absolutely taken away, this law, being merely
political is utterly repealed.

The other 2 quarters or half circles having by this time well refreshed
themselves, thinking they had us now at a great advantage and in a strait, ioyn
with the former, and so make one full and complete body and making great show
of a Resolution even to set their rest upon it, Object.
they come forward with great courage and in very good order, and reply that
the Equity of that law is moral and binds perpetually and therefore by direct
consequent obliges us to conformity: Here the Corporal cries yield, yield.

But to this, Answer.
knowing that there is not one jot of manhood or true valor in them, and that
when it comes to the push indeed, they dare not for their lives abide the
trial by dint of the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17.
we join with them and receive their shock most joyfully, and tell them that
this is very true, and we do most readily subscribe thereunto; seeing then,
these and all other types were removed to Christ, Math. 17. 5.
this Equity being moral does perpetually bind all Christian Churches in
matters too hard, Act 3. 23.
and difficult, to hear him, Mark. 1. 11.
yea in all things, seeing he is that beloved Son in whom God is well (even
fully and perfectly and only) pleased; look what he determines that is good
and pleases God: but look what he does not approve (though he do not forbid
it) God will never accept it, so that now by their own Doom we must go to
Christ in this so hard a controversy, to know which callings and ceremonies
are lawful in the administration of the Church, and which gesture in the act
of receiving the Lords supper is unlawful or wicked, and every soul that will
not harken and be obedient unto him in these and all other things, Aa. 3. 23.
we confess ought to be cut off and destroyed out of the people, as well as he
that speaks in the name of other Gods, Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
or (which is all one) presumes to speak a word in the name of the Lord which
he never commanded him to speak, that is which teaches the lawfulness of
Conformity to some things of divine or religious use in the public worship of
God, which the Lord never commanded. Does not this full charged Canon most
evidently threaten utter and unavoydable destruction to him that desperately or
presumptuously without warrant from Gods word, will come in the very mouth of
it, to assault the City or sanctuary of our God, by pressing conformity to
ceremonies and actions, callings and gestures of religious use in the worship
of God, which the Lord never commanded.

Here they are pleased to come to parlee, and would fain persuade us that there
shall be a final peace concluded, and to that end a truce is taken and
afterward yea diverse times renewed, till spying some special advantage (which
they will never ouerslip they presently pyke quarrels at some thing publicly
taught or privately practiced, pretending forsooth that it is a violent and most
dangerous breach of the peace of holy Church, and then by some stratageme
(wherein they are admirable) by one devise or other, they put out by preferme^t
the eyes of some (most judicious) cut out the learned tongues of other by
suspension and the rest that will not wink and be as mute as fishes, shall be
certainly cast into dark and noisome dungeons, or into the deep and dangerous
seas, or exposed to a thousand other miseries, as woeful and very late
experience does manifestly testify, therefore what hope is there of all their
fair offers yet that the world may take notice that we desire peace upon any
outward terms whatsoever though never so unequal or prejudicial, so that we
may hold our inward peace with God we do most reverently and respectively yield
them audience. Now they being well acquainted (through their continual
experience) with our resolution, and being privy to their own consciences
that they are not able to stand before us, if the cause come once to be tried
by the Scriptures, yet being very unwilling that the world should take notice
hereof, they make solemn protestation, that they are most ready to refer the
censure of this cause in question unto Christ himself. And therefore having
submitted themselves unto him according to the Fathers appointment, they do
most diligently attend unto every word he has spoken, and search every
syllable, examine every letter, yea and try every root by the very original:
and yet cannot find (as they offer to swear upon all the books in the world
that he has forbidden kneeling (no not as it is urged) in the very act of
receiving the Lords supper in any place of holy Scripture, nor any other of the
things in controversy and therefore conclude that we may very lawfully, and
being commanded ought most readily (or else we sin greevoussy if we refuse)
to conform thereunto.

This had been a very pretty and witty shift in a young sophister, Answ.
and in controversies of their element tolerable, if not commendable; but
being in the holy matters of the eternal God, shifts and tricks of wit,
subtle evasions and nice distinctions, are in matters I say of religious use)
but like the witty excuses of the whoorish woman in the close carriage of her
most filthy practices, and therefore I will even refer it to the Lords own
censure, and for answer do say, that it is most true, that all that do
sincerely desire to take away evil from Israel (or the Church) must of
necessity take away all known presumptuous offenders, Dut. 17. 12.
either in the civil or Ecclesiastical estate, whether they be Hearers or
Teachers: Ver. 11.
For if they teach and urge that which the Lord never commanded, Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
or is not warranted by the Scriptures, and yet hold that for these and those
politic considerations, it may upon such and such terms or limitations, be
conformed unto, they speak in the name of other Gods, even that golden God
Policy, not that there is any intendment in pressing conformity to humane
inventions in Gods worship, to draw any from believing in the true and
everliving God, but that the Lord that made man's heart, and therefore knows
what means are best to reform it has ordained in the second commandment and
the branches thereof, the most absolute and effectual means, which in his
wisdom he saw to be best for the holy Ghost to work in, and by, and with, for
the effecting of this new creation or regeneration of the heart unto which only
(as I may say) he has entailed by his faithful covenant the effectual
working of his spirit, for that very end and purpose. As therefore those that
maintain and teach these things purely and unmixed do set up the Lord to be
their God, Deuteronomy 26. 17.
and by their holy partaking of them they may be assured of his love and favor
even to be sealed up against the day of redemption: so they that do not tie
themselves precisely hereunto, do verily serve other Gods, and have no promise
of any grace but what the Devil (whose power only does work where the Lords
is wanting) can bestow upon them, because they do not serve the true God
described in the first commandment for either he is God in every commandment
or in no commandment, therefore to teach the doctrine of the first
commandment never so soundly and purely, and to corrupt the doctrine of the
second commandment which concerns all things in the public worship of God
needful in any respect for being or well being of the Churches of God, (by
enioyning any Novelty or Incerteinty mere Inventions and devises of men,) is
directly to teach in the name of other Gods, and seeing the Lord never made
promise to be in such a worship no more then he has done to the devotions of
the Turks and Indians I would feign see a sound reason. How any of good
Indgement and sincere hearts knowing the unwarrantablenes of these things dare
conform in any respect unto them, but rather to subscribe that they that will
take evil away from Israel must of absolute necessity take order, that all
such proud Prophets or ambitious preachers, and all such profane and
presumptuous hearers as dare teach and will coform to men's inventions, be not
fined in thousands or perpetually imprisoned, but utterly deprived not only of
their livings and liberty but even of their lives also. And till this and the
other laws of Christ (ordained in the second commandment) be in force; all
the good that the most wholesome laws of most godly princes and Religious
states can effect; is only to make Ambition a little more wary and subtle,
more Cawtelous and dissembling, or else more arrogant, even to devise new and
more secret practices to hinder all means or purposes of reforming any thing in
the worship or Church of God, yea by proposing one thing or other by one or
other to have still in store such variety of fresh and most urgent occasions,
as there shall not be the least breathing time so much as to think of
Reformation. Much crying out there is (and that justly) of fearful
depopulations, and how can it be otherwise, seeing the house of God lies waste
and is trodden under foot, his faithful ministers suspended, his faithful
servants traduced and censured, Gods ordinances neglected, and men's Inventions
erected? Clients do greivously complain of delays, altring of orders,
reuersing of Judgments and the like, so that poor souls, they cannot tell when
they are sure of any thing they have, or that their suits will receive an end.
VVoe is me for them, but how can this be amended seeing the public worship of
God is so ^ul of direct Incerteinties and absolute Novelties. One says they
are indifferent and may be tolerated, another comes and proves them necessary
because they are commanded by humane authority, but at last starts one up and
with his divino Iure, makes all club sure that there is not a a word now to be
uttered against conformity to them, thus look what is sown in the first table
will bring forth fruit in the branches of the second. Whoredom and drunkenes
do every where abound, yea are grown to be but civil recreations, and does not
superstitious Atheism adulterate the holy things of God? yea is it possible
but that base and beastly gestures and and Carnal ceremonies in Gods public
worship, will fill the civil estate full of all uncleanesse and bastardies? is
it not become the glory of many to sport with Religion, even to scoff at
sincerity and to ierke and gybe at the upright in heart, have not the bastard
poets and players and like profane humors a great pride to be singular in this
pastine? Theft and deceit, oppression and cousenage, are grown to be great
trades and professed occupations, and can all the world tell how to mend it,
till the spiritual thieves who have securely made their dens in the very house
of God be driven from their unlawful Callings and courses? great lamentation
is made as for a most evil presage, that offices of Justice are bought and
sold (must not such of necessity proceed accordingly even for hyre or reward?)
but does not the buying of all spiritual promotions Justify and clear all
such Courses?

But to come to you that have so painfully searched all the words and sillables
of Christ, not to find out that which he has commanded (which is the study
and meditation of all that are sincere in heart, Psalm. 119. 77. 97. 98.
and therefore the whole word of God is often called the commandments of God,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. and 6. 6.
inferring directly that there ought to be no co^formity to any thing but to
that which is commanded) but to see what he has not forbidden for therein lies
all the peril, are not these think you worthy subjects that never care for
not so much what their sovereign Lord would have done, as very curiously
inquire and most painfully search out, what he has forbidden that so being out
of his reach and danger, they may follow their own devices. If any man will not
conform to their precepts, how is he reproched and Reviled; but to speak
against the lawfulness of them is petty treason. I heartily pray them
therefore to consider from the Lords own mouth whether it be not high
presumption to speak a word (ministerially) which he has not commanded
suppose he has not forbidden it in particular or express terms yet does he
not directly in the former verse requi^e absolute obedience to whatsoever that
great Prophet and shepherd of our souls shall teach us? Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
and does he not most plainly forbid upon pain of death in this verse, to
teach any thing which in the word he has not commanded?

How dare you then oh you men of learning, how dare you (I say) hazard your
precious souls in conforming to such things? do not object that you have good
warrant from the word so to do, because you are commanded to acknowledge them
that are over you and labor among you, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13.
for I confess, we must have them in singular love for their works sake, so
it be in the Lord, yea if they teach no thing but what he has commanded
them, Hebr. 13. 17.
we will obey, submit, and conform unto them, but if they will preach and
press things which Christ never commanded though they cover them in sheeps
clothing, Math. 7. 15.
even with words full of all excellent wisdom, and admirable learning, able to
ravish the hearers and to entise any man, 1. Cor. 2. 1. 4.
that has reason and understanding and is able to Judge wisely and discreetly
of matters, to conform unto them, yet not being in plain evidence of the
spirit and of power, we must esteem of them as wolves and false prophets
rather watching all opportunity to maintain their pomp, state and glory, and
to feed their own bellies by this conformity, then to feed the flocks or
churches of Christ over which he has made them overseers. If they say they are
greatly wronged by such imputations and no man whosoever, dare justify this
to their faces; for my part, I confess it will be much against my will if
ever I come before them, but yet as good a man, as great a scoller, as wise,
and as worthy, as holy and as godly (though perhaps not so great and Lordly) as
any of them be, has so taught and preached, and I will believe him before all
of them, yea I will set down his own words whatsoever come of it, and will not
alter one syllable, beware of falls prophets (alas how can we tell which are
they you shall know them by their fruits, Math. 7. 15. 16.
or doctrine which they teach, which not being the commandments of God are
absolutely evil, even of a woolvish and devouring disposition in all the
Churches of Christ; 1. Tim. 3. 14
for the word or comandements of God or writings of the holy Ghost were
sufficient to teach Timothy (a man not much inferior to the most of them for
the inward glory of the soul) how to behave himself in the house of God which
is the Church of the living God, Ps. 45. 13. verse. 15.
even what doctrins to teach and what callings, ceremonies, and gestures to
press conformity unto, if then in their cannons or constitutions they will
behave themselves otherwise then the word does require, can there possibly be
any safety in conformity to them? And as this concerns all our teachers, so
our blessed Lord and Savior lessons all hearers that as he has manifested
his love unto them in inviting them to his holy supper at his own table, to
partake of such heavenly comforts as the eye of man never saw; so if they will
prove them selves to be his Friends indeed and not only in show, John. 15. 10.
their carriage and behavior must in all things, but especially in the actions
and gestures of this sacrament (being at the very time of this intimation
instituted) be only as he has commanded and that must be done whatsoever
it be, 14.
so that not to do all that which he commands, or to conform to any thing
which he has not commanded, is to make our selves his enemies, Luc. 19. 27.
whereof a strange carriage or gesture is more then a most strong presumption.

But hereto they say that not only men whose fruits and doctrins may yield
some prejudice or give cause of suspision, Object.
but eve^ holy and godly men such as have approved themselves in Gods house to
be faithful, yet for the peace sake of the Church wherein they live, and
because they would not offend others though they wish with all this hearts that
all these things were quite taken away and do publicky teach that they sin in
it, they are content notwithstanding (under going it as a heavy burden) to
conform to the ceremonies of Rome when they are there, and else where as they
find them established; and therefore much more we ought to do the same rather
then to disturb the quiet estate of the peers of the Church, who have long
lived at ease and rest.

As though the practice of Gods own servants or true constituted Churches,
Answ.
were a sufficient warrant to my conscience to conform to ceremonies and
gestures of Religous use in the public worship of God? no, if Peter himself
that so loving and so much regarded an Apostle, will conform to gestures,
actions or ceremonies not warrantable (though a thousand times more as we
heard might have been said for him then for our ministers) yet must he be
withstood openly, Galat. 2. 11.
even to his face, yea in his so doing to be condemned because howsoever flesh
and blood can produce many strong reasons of indifferency, liberty, and (as
matters stand) conueniencie, especially in respect of peace and unity: yet the
holy Ghost says plainly, that whatsoever men pretend by preaching and
manintaining many excellent truths and sincerely confuting many gross errors,
yet this conformity to ceremonies of Religious use, (though it were not in the
face and presence of God at his own table) is not the right way to the truth
(or power) of the Gospel: ver. 14.
unless therefore we have warrant from the word of God for our so doing,
Conformity to the things in question is without all contradiction the wrong
way to the truth of the gospel* thou go the readiest way in the world to any
spiritual promotion) and (...) hinder the efficacy and effectual working of
the holy Ghost in the ministerial functions of the Gospel, yea in the Godly
and best quallified servants of God (it is not my collection but the plain
evidence of the spirit of truth) this kind of conformity (let the motives be
what they possibly can) savor most strongly of dangerous Hypocrisy; verse. 13.
because nothing can by any means be warrantable in Religion, Act. 10. 33.
but that which is commanded by God.

And therefore the crown of all ministers, yea the honor of all Chrstians
consists not in studying how to give content to the world, Acts 17, 11
but in searching the Scriptures (not once or twice over, but) daily, whether
the things be so or no, for that may be discerned at the seventh consideration
or perusing, which was thought before to be impossible (to bridle that unruly
conceit which naturally, excellency of gifts does always beget.) Neither
have any pastors (if they be sent of Christ) warrant to teach to their charges
or Churches, Mat. 28. 20.
and to exhort them to conform to, or observe any thing of Religous use but
what Christ has commanded, If they do, he tells them plainly he is not with
them, and therefore will not bless the ministry of such in their teaching
(teaching and commanding being indifferently taken in the Scriptures:) Math.
11. 1.
for if Christ have not commanded it, that is, if it be not taught in the
scriptures, Gala. 1. 6.
it is directly (whatsoever pretenses are set upon it) in the nature of another
Gospel, and the teachers, and iustifiers or excusers thereof do no less in
effect (take every one in his degree) then they that teach the Gospel of Saint
Thomas. And therefore as those that taught his Gospel, so certainly these
that teach and maintain the lawfulness of these unwarranted ceremonies and
gestures) intend to pervert the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS, verse. 7.
though not in doctrine of Justification, yet in the doctrines of Church
government, and other matters of religious use in the worship of God, and these
are they that trouble the Church, or break the peace thereof, though they are
most like unto him that is only guilty of the Fellonie, yet in the pursuit
cries out as mainlie as ever he can, Stop Thief, stop Thief, not caring
who is apprehended or imprisoned, yea and condemned as troublers of the
Churches peace, so they may go away with it undiscerned.

Is not here sufficient warrant then, not only to refuse conformity to these
things, verse. 8.
but even to hold those preachers accursed, Romans 9. 3.
or separated from Christ? who go about to preswade us in the least measure to
conform thereunto, yea though their gifts be most heavenly or Angelical; but
on the other side to think most reverently of our Religious pastors, who have
most sincerely, though to the loss of all that ever they have, taught us to
the contrary? when therefore they say Christ never forbad it, if you have no
other or better place of Scripture, remember this, that it is written, that
whatsoever is otherwise then that which the word preaches or commands, is to
be held an accursed doctrine or opinion, concern it faith or government,
ceremonies or gestures, or any thing of religious use whatsoever: yet do I not
say, that all preachers that persuade, rebus sic stantibus, rather to conform
in some things, then to stand out, do this out of malice, or any purpose to
cause their hearers to decline, and so by degrees to fall from grace; but that
whatsoever flesh and blood, wisdom and learning can devise for their defense
or excuse, yet the holy Ghost teaches us plainly, that though it cannot be
denied, but that these most strong and vehement persuasions proceed from true
and strong affections of carnal love, and (as it is to be hoped) that many of
them are the dear servants of God; yet in this particular of persuading to
conformity, we are to esteem them as Adve^saries unto Christ, Mat. 16. 22.
yea and all their wise and learned arguments* so full of discretion, and all
their conceited unanswerable satisfactions, ver. 23.
to be notwithstanding of a very Satanish descent, and mere divellish
disposition, a most sensible savouring the things that are of men, as how we
ought to pity our selves, our wives and children, and so prevent the
unavoidable evils of non-conformitie, but yet they understand not (in this
point) the things that are of God, namely, that rather then we should conform
to any thing in his worship which he has not in the word commanded, we must
forsake, yea we must hate (or deny in this case all affection of duty,
reverence, love, tender care, or whatsoever to) father and mother, Luc. 14. 26.
and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and our own lives also,
or else we cannot be the disciples of Christ. Must not these grave and learned
perswaders then, of absolute necessity be an offense unto every faithful and
tender heart? Go on therefore my brethren, and be of good courage, and assure
your selves that in suffering for not conformity to kneeling, you suffer for
the Lord Christ, and to yield against the light of your hearts, Mar. 8. 38.
is to be ashamed of him, seeing these things do directly follow from his own
words, even when for fear of men spiritually adulterated, we will conform to
things of divine use in his worship which he never commanded, but are only
warranted to our consciences by the advice of the learned or the precepts of
men, the traditions of the Elders and other like humane authorities. All which,
without warrant from the word even every one of them in particular, Romans 3. 4.
and generally altogether, are Liars: and therefore all the gestures or
actions, ceremonies or or callings of religious use in the worship of God which
they persuade unto without warrant from the word are lying gestures, lying
actions, lying ceremonies, and lying callings, not but (like the Devil) they
may speak, profess, and acknowledge some excellent truths, but that the maine
thing they aim at, is to maintain some error or other; and therefore all the
volumes in the world, filled with all the Art, learning, wisdom, and
discretion of the whole world, compared with, or set against one verse in the
sacred Scriptures, are to be esteemed most filthy and stinking dung.

But have we but one sentence in the Bible for a table gesture? which (yet were
sufficient against all humane opinions and authorities whatsoever) have we the
first institution only or barely mentioned? do not every one of the
Evangelists make mention of a supper, or a table, of rising from supper, and
sitting down, and of sitting even in the act of administering and receiving the
sacrament? yea do not diverse places in the Acts, and Epistles, plainly infer
the continuance of a table gesture, and therefore to be the direct ordinance
of Christ? But it seems an impudent generation is come up, who dare affirm that
the Sun of the Church must, (if they make such a charm or Canon) stand still
continually and not stir at all, as once it did for one whole day in Gibeon,
Joshua. 10. 12. 13. 14.
but the Moon especially not to move one inch, as for that time it did not, in
the valley of Aielon, further then they in their discretion shall think to be
fit, and so by their wit and learning are bold to defend that the earth is in
circular motion, all the world and the creatures therein turning round
continually, yea they are most confident, if they may have audience, to make
any indifferent hearer that comes without prejudice, to conform and subscribe
to ^his opinion. Does not the spirit of giddiness possess the heads of these
men; are not these the true successors of those learned Divines, grave Rabbis,
and great Doctors that still cried out to Christ, John. 2. 12.
Show us a sign, make it appear that there is a Sun in the firmament, prove
unto us that there is a God, or (which was as evident) that thou art the
Messiah.

Seeing then all things whatsoever of religious use, which the father would
have the Church to know and conform unto are treasured up in the word though
every one indeed can not come at them (deny this if they dare) it must needs
follow that either the gesture of kneeling as it is urged is a a humane
Invention, or as you would say in plain terms, a very stark lie, though
hansomlie lapped up: and therefore of the devil the father of lies, though
artificially painted perhaps by some of his limmers with the very best Italian
beauties;) or else if it be a truth and therefore to be conformed unto, then
there be some unwritten trueths or vereties which the Churches are bound of
conscience to believe and conform unto, and yet not commanded in the word of
truth, then it must needs follow, besides the scriptures, and either let our
learned adversaries make this large breach for the Jesuits at pleasure to
enter by, or else for stark shame discharge no more such furious Cannon shot
against our bullet-beaten fortress, The scriptures sufficiency. Is it not high
time to take away these presumptuous causes (which purposely teach and persuade
Conformity to such blasphemous doctrins) out of Israel, being the best seeds of
the very worst evils thereof? I conclude therefore it is far better to
expose our estates and bodies to the greatest malice of our greevous
adversaries by standing for a gesture without all exception then by conforming
to one which that Prophet never taught, Act. 3. 23.
no nor so much as once mentioned (in that manner and form as it is urged and
so to be by him Destroyed out of the people. For must we have his warrant, and
hear him only in the doctrine of the sacrament, and shall we not care for
his warrant nor regard what his word says for the gesture of the sacrament?

And for those who in these matters of God concerning his public worship,
insist so much and with such violence upon prohibitions (a service sometimes
not very acceptable to them) crying out unto us, show one place where the Lord
forbids these things and we will yield that it is a damnable sin to conform
unto them. I am bold (with their good leave) to Remember them of one other
argument, of the Lords own making, concerning this very subject of the actions,
ceremonies and gestures in this public worship and service, which he purposely
framed and committed also to writing for the use of all posterity even to be a
lantern of our feet, Psalm. 119. 105.
and an unerring light to our paths in these very occasions, and in most plain
evidence of the spirit it stands thus: By the light of nature all mankind knows
that there is a God, and therefore every one will worship him as well as he ca^,
though it be not according unto knowledge to glorify him as God, Romans 1. 91.
for that is impossible without direction from his spirit according to the
scriptures) but though they have excellent wisdom and admirable understanding,
yet even the learnedest of them when they profess themselves greatest Clerks,
prove themselves the veriest fools, verse. 22. 23.
because they become vain in their thoughts, and their foolish hearts are full
of darkness; for they turn the glory of the incorruptible God (even the glory of
his wisdom and love, of his goodness and power, of his mercy and truth, in
devising and ordaining the ceremonies callings and gestures appropriated to his
own outward worship, and making the same powerful and effectual to draw man's
heart unto him by working effectual faith) into such Images, similitudes,
resemblances and likenesses as they in their discretion thought fittest to stir
up devotion, to beget reverence, or to show humility and thankfulness; by which
in time by degrees will get a reverent estimation of Gods ordinances, even his
own attributes and titles, yea and will presume to profess that Iure divino,
these are thy Gods O Israel, that is, this is the true outward worship of the
God of Israel, these be true callings, gestures and ceremonies which by divine
institution are ordained to help to draw men to God through faith and
sanctification of the spirit and so to be esteemed.

Therefore the Lord makes it an ordinance for ever, that al his true Churches
and true servants must only conform to such things in his worship and service
as he has in his word Required, Esa. 1. 12.
but the Lord never required kneeling as it is urged, nor the other things in
controversy, therefore Gods true Churches and faithful servants may not upon
any never so reasonable terms conform thereunto. And here is either by direct
consequent a manifest prohibition, or else the Lord reasons most absurdlie,
which is fearful blasphemy to think or infer, for else they might, (with
the perswaders to conformity of these days) have replied, thou have not
forbidden it, therefore we may do it, and thou have no reason to find fault
with it, seeing we do it to good intents and holy purposes. But grant that
the things which there are reproved were forbidden, yet the manner of Gods
reasoning remains immutable. Is there no commandment in the word for it, or
(which is all one) does not the Lord require it? then does he absolutely forbid
conformity unto it, for the Lord hates whatsoever in the word is not required,
ver. 14.
as these words being spoken with detestation do most manifestly declare.
Seeing then there is not one word of God for kneeling in the very act of
receiving the sacrament, nor any example of any Apostolic or Primitive Church
for the practice thereof, Math. 19. 8.
but from the beginning it was not so, and seeing we have Christ his own
example for a table gesture, and the examples of all the blessed (and now
glorious) Apostles who even after his ascension delivered that which they
received of the Lord (which must needs be granted was a table gesture) and
seeing we have a direct commandment from the holy Ghost to follow them as they
follow Christ, 1. Cor 11. 23.
it being their special care so to carry themselves in all actions (of
religious use especially) as they might be Examples for all Churches and
Christians to follow (for so I take this place to be understood and not to be
restrained to that Church only, verse. 1.
or to any particular occasion therein.) 2 Thessalonians. 3. 9.
Yea seeing this gesture as it is urged, is not only the Invention of man, but
in the very first original establishment of it in the public worship of
God, the direct commandment of that man of sin; I refer it to every godly
heart to consider whether with safety of conscience we may leave a table
gesture, for the use whereof we have Christ and his disciples in the
Institution for a pattern, and the Apostles during their time, and all
Apostolic Churches after them for 220. years for example and conform to the
gesture of kneeling, never heard of in this kind, till the Real presence was
established. Is this to walk so as having the Apostles of Christ for an
ensample; Philip. 3. 17.
or is there not Just cause of lamentation and weeping to see so many worthy
men and of most excellent parts for some worldly respects to become hereby the
enemies of the cross of Christ conforming now to that which formerlie they
taught was to be abhorred? verse. 18.


You do very ill therefore most Reverent and learned men, in offering to deal
with us poor and private Christians, after the scholerlike manner of reasoning
both in your public teaching, pressing us continually with arguments and that
with such vehemency as if nothing were wanting to our perfection but this
conformity to kneeling, and in your private speeches tendering disputation,
when alas for pity all our faithful pastors having given up their lives for
the name of Christ, are taken from us, and if any remain, yet there is no
safety to speak or write of those things. If therefore you cannot procure
liberty for such a course, never yet obtained whatsoever you may pretend,
wherein freely and fully these questions may be handled according to that
modest offer of dispute long ago tendered, then I humbly beseech you, be
pleased either to confute that (or the substance of it) which has been written
and published against this ceremony, or else to set down with the like
conditions as the learned and godly men our late pastors have offered, your own
arguments and reasons for this conformity which you so eagerly press and
pursue; and (freeing the same from deceivable subtilties of that dissembling
sophistry and vain philosophy, the special ornaments of that so affected
kind of teaching, that we of the vulgar may see and conceive the force of
them, and whence it is drawn, from God or men, from the holy and inspired
scriptures: or from the writings and Canons of Councels, or Testimonies of
Fathers.)

We do solemnly pofesse (I dare speak in the name of all) that in whatsoever
we have no more for our warrant: but the grave counsel, learned opinion and
holy practice of our most reverent pastors (which yet being sealed with their
great and constant sufferings, ought highly to be regarded of us, for
whatsoever they be to others or to your selves, they are to us the most
faithful messengers, true and powerful ministers of Jesus Christ, since whose
deprivations we never heard men speak like them in that evidence of the
Spirit, and mighty power of the Holy Ghost, to draw from sin unto holiness.
O ye men of God, you are in our very hearts to live and die with you, your
memorial is precious, would God all that we have might redeem the liberty of
the Gospel in your ministry, notwithstanding (I say) we will freely for peace
sake conform unto you. But if we can evidently produce one word of God against
you, or that you do not bring his sacred warrant with you, let it not seem
strange unto you, that we run not for company into the broad and easy way
with you (which none in this point Papist or Athiest will ever unfainedly
oppose) but rather expose our selves by this our refusal, to open contempt,
grievous bands, and perpetual imprisonment, professing publicly thereby our
willingness, and most ready mind, yea hearty desire that that fire which our
Lord and master brought with him, Luc. 12. 49. 10. 54.
and with his own hands, and mouth kindled, might never be quenched, seeing
the unerring and burning light thereof is our only preservatiue through the
effectual working of the Holy Ghost, against that fear of our adversaries:
Math. 10. 28. to the end. Philip 1. 28. 29.
this grace of God being given unto us not only to believe in Christ, but to
suffer also for his sake in bearing witness to this part of the truth, and not
daring to conform to any other though it cost us full dearly* For thus only
in such times of trial are all (that be called thereunto) preserved against
all the powers and Principalities, Lordly Dominions, and other spiritual
wickednesses in the whole and most unholy (though most learned) kingdom of
darkness.

Thus am I bold to present my poor endeavors and private labors concerning
these things unto public view, private I say, not in regard of the truth
generally in all true Christian Churches received and professed, but by reason
of the danger of the times, I durst not receive direction from any who
otherwise might have been a great help unto me. Only to this end have I done
it (not to be famous in my person, for that were to be infamous in their
prison) but to give some taste that the Lord has many who have not bowed the
knee in this kind as it is urged, as also to publish to all that fear the
Lord, and yet do not see the sufficiency of our warrant for so resolute a
refusal to conformity, that it is not faction or humor, nor the judgment or
practice of good men (no not of our so endeered Pastors) or of the most holy
and best reformed Churches, nor of all these together, which we wholly rest or
depend upon, but that our consciences dare not conform to any thing of
religious use, especially in the public worship of God, but what is safely
and soundly warranted by the word of our God; and likewise to stir up others
who have receiceived more, and more worthy Talents, to put their helping hands
to the work of the Lord.

But me thinks I hear some black mouth roaring out, Object.
That this is neither so, nor so, but only an old patcht Cloak to cover a
peevish spirit withal, for (say such) you have the substance, yet through
frowardness because you may not have your wills you are not content, but
ensnare your minds, and bring your consciences into a needless bondage about
gestures and ceremonies or matters of Indifferency which Christ has fried us
from.

I most humbly pray and do hartelie beseech even by the mercies of God in
Jesus Christ, Answ.
all such seriously to weigh and consider, whether any thing of divine use in
the public worship of God can be indifferent; or if God have left it
indifferent; whether any mortal power can possibly make it necessary, was it
not the practice of that man of sin, first under pretense of Indifferency to
make things common, to be of Religious use, then to bring them (in some civil
respects) into Gods public worship, and at length to have a necessary state
therein, and so at last to be of Apostolical institution? Pro. 14. 12.
yet even this way seems right to our grave and learned adversaries, though
the issues thereof bring forth most deadly (what if I said damnable) effects,
Ps. 2. 2. 3.
even in all these Churches of Christ Jesus.

Break not, oh suffer not (you Christian princes) these men, thus scornfullie
to break the sacred bonds of the first table, lest you take away al conscience
of the duties of the second, for Christ has in them tied you and all under you
most strictly to precise and sincere obedience in all things belonging to his
public worship yet has he left full scope, even large enough (so far as is
fit for any mortal power) in the other six Commandments for your Regal
powers ad pl^citum to exercise, your high prerogatives most supreamelie in: Be
well content therewith, they that persuade you to incroach upon him, under
color of enlarging your soveraintie, do give that which you ought not take,
being directly against the crown and dignity of the Lord Christ, and in liew
thereof are bold to challenge that from you (even of divine right) which by no
means upon any terms you ought to part to them, they being withal persons
utterly incapable thereof.

And as for our adversaries, I entreat all that are godly minded advisedly to
bethink themselves, whether that substance which God be blessed, we have being
holy (and for which I confess we are nor sufficiently thankful) can make
that same Ceremony also holy, which in it first original was impure and
unwarrantable, yea most vile therefore and abominable; can any thing which is
primarilie evil ever possibly be made good, but only by the primarie
goodness himself? To make then that gesture, action, calling, or ceremony,
or the similitude and likeness of them good, which had their beginning, from
Antichrist and not bringing Gods word for it, and yet to hold it upon these
terms necessary in Gods public worship, even conscience to be conformed unto,
is directly to set up another God who must impart this goodness unto it. Does it
not plainly appear by this, that their Divino Iure did never descend from
Divine Jehovah but from some black limping Vulcan or Olimpian Jupiter, the
natural patro^ of all such durty Dianaes, yea I beseech them rather to
observe, whether more probably the ceremony being thus known to be of human
invention, and therefore of absolute necessity filthy and polluted (as every
thing of religious use is, which is not commanded by God, in the word) do not
make that holy substance which we have unprofitable and so unclean, also
unprofitable (I say) though not for information of judgment, Hagg. 2. 13. 14.
yet for sanctification of life to the obedience of faith. For if holy flesh
under the Law could non legallie sanctify every thing (no nor any thing which
was joined unto it) by touching of it; no more can the doctrines of faith and
justification under the Gospel truly taught, and publikly professed in all
the Churches of Christ amongst us, ever by any possible means make the
callings, ceremonies, or gestures in controversy, lawful or indifferent,
seeing these are not ordained by God, and therefore that ministry that spends
it strength for the justification of them, though it may perhaps continue some
measure of knowledge in the hearers, yet is it greatly to be feared, that all
those who freely conform thereunto, and wholly depend thereon, shall rather
scatter then gather any saving grace or sanctification thereby.

But to this it is said that these ceremonies callings and gestures are not
those of popery Object.
(for nullum simile est Idem) but the grave and advised ordinances of the holy
Catholic Church that has come from amongst them, and clean separated from
Antichrist, at least in all fundamental points of doctrine concerning our
Justification, and therefore without all question ought by every obedient
Child to be conformed unto.

Alas what means then the lowing of these Oxen and bleating of the sheep? Answ.
Yea I do friendly entreat these Merchants of experience in and with these
true west Churches of Christ, 1. Sam. 15. 14.
advisedly to view and take particular notice of these pleasant Revel. 18. 11.
14.
wares so full of delicacy, which their souls by reason of their excellent
fatnes, do so greedily yea most violently thirst or lust after, and sincerely
to consider whether they be not so like to those of popery as one naughty
egg can possibly be like another, though perhaps one be but addle, and the
rottenness of the other most offensiuely stinkes; the one most noisome, the
better very unholesome.

But here our adversaries will confess, Object.
that for the form they are alike indeed, as one partridge is to another, but
in their use and intention most opposite, even clean contrary.

But is not this I pray you, Answ.
some small parcel of the voice of that beast, yea is it not an apparent
branch of his great blasphemy, to assume authority, to ordain ceremonies and
callings for the public worship of God, and to appropriate unto them holy or
religious uses, and spiritual intentions, which power is only proper and
peculiar unto God himself; and yet even this divine authority do they dare
to assume, as their divino iure has publicly proclaimed to all the Churches
in the world. But to leave this to their better consideration, and to assume
that which which they must needs be willing to grant, that the things in
question are in their outward form like unto those of popery, but not in their
use (at least as it is preached.) I humbly desire them to consider whether this
be not (without any turning or winding) a direct and manifest breach of the
second commandment, where the Lord forbids all Churches under what climate or
government soever, (not simply as I may say to have, but) to make Images, or
any visible representations of the eternal love of God the Father, and of the
incomprehensible, and invisible grace of JESUS CHRIST shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost; but as if the Lord had said, I know it is absolutely
necessary in my outward and public worship, to have certain visible signs
and forms (subject to common sense and reason) which must have this heavenly
use, even to represent to the mind and understanding by the eye of faith,
these spiritual graces, for else the imagination being left at liberty, and
not preciselie tied to these set forms, and divine ordinances, will be so
full of wandering fantasies, in hearing, seeing, tasting, handling, and
meditating, as the soul can never possibly be edified: But yet (says the
Lord.) Thou shall not make or devise these: I do reserve that glory to my
self, and will not under Law or Gospel, give it (no not in the least
circumstance of public and religious use in my worship and service to any
other.

But (say our adversaries) we do not take that glory to our selves, Object.
therefore we have not broken this commandment.

I confess between the theife and the receauer, Answ.
the whore and the bawd there is indeed some manifest difference, and therefore
to avoid all manner of contention herein, it is as if the Lord had said in
plainer terms, Thou whoseuer thou art general counsel, or national synod,
civil magistrate, or ecclesiastical Ruler, or both together shall not make,
or being made, shall not command, or teach any to conform unto any thing of
Religious use, pertaining to my worship and service, which I may self have not
commanded, no nor the liknes of any such thing, either in form or use so that
if these things in question be but like popish devices and be not commanded by
God, we may not for any cause or consideration or in any respect whatsoever
bow down unto them, that is intertaine or show forth any reverent estimation
of them and so only in a good meaning, for peace and quietness sake coform unto
them in the worship of God. Unless therefore the very touching of holy things
in or by the soundnes of some doctrines in our Church and so as it were
carrying a part of holy flesh in the skirt of our garment or divine service be
a sufficient warrant to make any ceremony lawful, Hag. 2. 13.
yea though it be taken from the heathen poets, from the Turkish Alcaron, or
the Popes massebook, yet upon intentionall altering of the use, they may be,
very safely co^formed unto in the public worship of God? their argument of
haueing the substance, has no jot of substance in it at all. Therefore unless
their words, reasons, and arguments whereby they persuade to co^formitie, Ezekiel
3. 17.
come from the mouth of God we have sufficient forewarning, no not in any case
to conform unto the, but to esteem them as very chafe huft and puffed up
perhaps into a very great bulk making a goodly show in outward appearance,
Ier. 23. 28.
by excellency of words and art, but being winnowed or tried by the fan of
the Lord no corn of grace or one grain of goodness can be found therein, and
this is the very cause why the Lord threatens to be or to come against such
sweet tongued preachers that labor chiefly for a sweet deliverie, verse. 31.
and to that end steal the word, verse. 30.
never applying it to the right end and use, but as it were by force and arms
do take and carry away the true scence, intent and meaning of the scriptures
ordained only to maintain the truth, and by tricks of wit, and terms of art,
they enforce the^ (at least to seem) to maintain errors even the mere
Inventions of men, and this, in some false; in many flattering, and in most a
dreaming kind of preaching, is the only and main cause of error and schisms,
verse. 32*
diversity of opinons and sects that are among the people, not bringing any
other profit in the world unto their hearers, but either to nuzle them still in
ignorance, or to be utterlie out of love with the truth, from hence then have
we good warrrant to adjudge all their doctrins which are not according to the
word of God to be very lies, though they show never so great art and learning
and thereby give all good content to their auditorie. For that high (or large)
commission of all the true ministers of Christ extendes only to Teach the
Churches to observe and conform unto all things (not which they in wisdom and
discretion shall adjudge meet and fit, Mat. 28. 2^
or think not to be forbiden but only) what-whatsoever Christ in the word has
commanded, (and we will abjure whatsoever we cannot prove to be his
commandment) if then they press any thing which is not the commandment of
Christ they go beyond the limits of their commission, yea do more then ever
our Lord himself would do, for though indeed his (...)ctrines seemed very
strange yea impossi^^e to some and others marveiled or were astonished not at his
allegation of fathers or patriarchs, Ioh. 3. 4. Ioh. 7. 15. Mat. 7. 28.
of Councels or Rabbis and other learned authors, nor at his excellency of
gifts: but at his knowledge in the Scriptures for he taught as one having
authority and not as the learned Scribes, which he showed in opening the sense
and meaning of the holy Ghost delivering fit doctrines and making profitable
uses and applications from the word, so that he spoke to the hearts and
consciences of his hearers in the power of his ministry which they do not,
who teach the precepts of men, but speak only to the ears of their hearers, yet
always the motives that he used to persuade the^ to conformity was (not these
things are not forbidden, or they are the traditions of our godly Elders, or
they are most fitting this state and present government, or it is the pleasure
of the civil magistrate, or the Church Rulers hold it meet, though indeed
diverse learned men at that very time used such kind of arguments in their
ministry and teaching for that subscription which they required, but) his
Doctrine which he preached and the things he urged and pressed was not his own
but his that sent him, verse. 14.
it was not of his humane Invention (which yet was a great deall freer from
error then all the fathers and (...)cells in the world) but only such as
(...) (that sent him to preach and teach the glad tidings of salvation) was the
author of.

As whereas some might object unto him, these are thine own speeches, and in
the pulpit you have liberty to say what you list, and to gird at whom you
please, make it plain to our capacities, how we may know who is of God, and who
is sent of the Devil, for thou and the Scribes and Pharisees teach both of you
very learnedlie and zealously but in very many things, especially in the
ceremonies and callings, actions, and gestures of Religious use in the public
worship of God directly contrary one against the other, and therefore most
certain, that both of you cannot possibly be of God, he therefore gives them
a plain and an unerring Rule, whereby the simplest in a congregation may
discern which preacher teaches the doctrine that comes from God, and which
speaks only from men or the devil, verse. 17
first do the will of God, get a good and an honest heart, free from prejudice
and profanesse, ready to do whatsoever the Lord requires of thee in general
as thou art a Christian, or in particular as thou art a magistrate or subject,
minister or hearer, husband or wife, parent or child, master or servant, bond
or free, old or young, rich or poor, married or single, or of what condition
soever, for else if thou have never so much wit and learning, understanding and
discretion, and have not respect unto all his co^mandeme^ts, though thou fear
and reverence the faithful ministers of God, Mark. 6. 20.
yea hear them gladly, and reform thy self in doing many things which they
make plain to thy conscience, is not the will of God, yet if thou will not
captivare thy Judgment, and subdue thy will and affections to be obedient unto
all that God requires, it is impossible for thee to discern the truth or to be
preserved from error: but if thou will be sincere (which is Evangelical
perfection) and free thy heart from hypocrisy (and be that thou would seem
to be) then if thou would know indeed which preachers are worthy of double
honor, and which deserve shame and contempt; look not at their spruce
neatness in their attire, or excellency of gifs or degrees of learning, for
herein perhaps there will appear no great difference, both being grave, wise,
and understanding men, but he that is sent of God seeks his glory that sent
him. John. 7. 18.
Yea, but which is that? the same is true, you shall never hear him press or
teach novelties or incerteinties, but only such things as are plainly
grounded on the word of truth, whatsoever they concern, faith or government,
godliness or ceremonies, yea there is no unrighteousness in him nor any
unrighteous inference, in his ministry, but Christians may most safely
commit their souls to such a one, even to depend upon his ministry as a most
powerful means ordained by God to bring them to salvation; the other seeks his
own glory, that is a foul fault and he is a very proud fellow I warrant him,
what show soever he make, but how may we take true notice of him? he speaks
of himself, and seeks his own glory his manner of preaching is in one kind
or other very vain glorious using all possible means (though in some very
covertly) to set forth himself and to make known his great reading or
Judgment, his wit, art, and understanding in all manners or kinds of deep
learning and true schollership, and therefore he comes in Excellency of words,
1. Cor. 2. 1.
and studies most painfully and carefully for such Intising speeches witty
and well ordered sayings, verse 4.
pleasing passages, pithy sentences, and elegant phrases even whatsoever might
ravish the hearers, and by the admiration of the excellency of his gifts and
exquisitnesse of his Art might so prevail, that their faith might be in the
wisdom of men, verse. 5.
even to believe only so much as flesh and blood can disclose, a man by nature
may perceive, which kind of preaching with words and manner of handling, which
man's wisdom teaches, verse. 13. cap 1* 17.
makes the cross of Christ of none effect, and when excellency or grace of
words is more affected then the dignity or worthiness of the matter which is
entreated, then are their sermons beautified with most glorions speeches
wherein the focre and power of eloquence does show it self, to allure and
delight the hearers, but he that is sent of God, labors and strives to speak
in such words and phrases) seem they never so plain, base or contemptible)
wherein the power of God may be made manifest to the consciences of their
hearers; Verse. 18.
honor and reverence such, but it is most dangerous to commit thy soul unto
and to depend upon the ministry of the other, though he be as great a
scholar and as wise a man as is in all the World.

These courses therefore all those that desire to use their talents profitablie
in the ministry of the Church must purposely avoid, even as they would the
golden legend, 2. Pe. 1, 16.
or like Deceiveable fables, not but that those to whom God has given a
beautiful form of speaking may use it, as well as they that have comely shape
or fairefaces, but as they that be black must not paint themselves, so
preachers may not affect oratorie to the ear but to the heart, nor yet, that
rude and gross phrases are the only powerful manner of speaking, but that
every one is to use that gift which God has given him to the edification of
his auditorie, which consists in delivering the sense plainly in the evidence
of the spirit, and applying it powerfully to the conscience, and this dividing
the word aright that every one may have his portion seasonably, ought to be
studied for and affected of all faithful ministers, and not a painted or
pensild manner of speaking. But those that scorn this manner of handling the
word, are to be esteemed vaineglorious teachers, though their mouths even
run over whith all manner of art, eloquence, and learning. And as for those
that preach any thing which God has not commanded, or persuade to conform to
any thing which is not grounded on the scriptures, from these words of Saint
Peter, we may safely esteem them (whether they speak elegantly or rudely)
but fabulous fellows and Deceivable doctors, in taking upon them like young
masters, Iam. 3. 1.
or old Rabbis, Mat. 23. 8.
to teach, defend, or maintain any thing in Gods worship, which Christ the
sole Doctor of all things whatsoever of Religious use, and which his Churches
upon any cause and in any respect may conform unto, never commanded, taught, or
in the scriptures published, or so much as once mentioned by precept or
president, yea observe them well, and take heed of them, these are the teachers
of false Christ's, for they may as well teach, Luc. 21. 8. and Mat. 24. 5. 23.
24. 26.
that here is Christ, or lo he is there, as press Christians to conform to
this ceremony or that gesture, of religious use in the public worship of
God, which Christ neither here nor there, nor any where, ever taught, or in any
degree or respect commanded; so that if you hear any preachers teahing things
with great zeal and learning, which are not the direct commandments of
Christ, or grounded plainly in the evidence of the spirit upon the unerring
rock of the sacred Scripture; I will not deny but such may speak in the power
of a Spirit, but certainly not of Gods Spirit, John. 16. 13.
For he even the Spirit of truth, teaches nothing of himself (though he be the
very fountain of all truth) but only what he has heard in the word of the
Father, not that he needs any instructor or direction, but that the most
glorius and blessed Trinity (as the sole and only way to preserve all true
Churches or congregations in holy and heavenly unity) has tied himself (as
it were) or covenanted, that though there be many other things of most
admirable excellency, John. 21. 25*
yet to require conformity to nothing but those things which are written in
the scriptures; John. 20. 31.
seeing they are fully and perfectly sufficient unto faith or belief, and
therefore unto all manner of godliness, the fruits of faith, and so to
eternal life, the end or reward of faith through his name.

If any man therefore undertake to teach the Churches of Christ let him speak
as the words of God, 1. Pet. 5. 11.
and not as the cannons and precepts of men do enjoin, for as God is glorified
by those, so is he much dishonored by these* yea though they speak the wisdom
of this world which the great ones Commend, 1. Cor. 2. 6.
the learned approve, and all do generally admire: for the kingdom of God (or
preaching) consists not in word, 1. Cor. 4. 20.
in phrases, in elegancie of speech, excellency of uttrance, or in any other
endowments of Art and nature, but in the evidence of the spirit and of power,
1. Cor. 2. 4.
when the cosciences of the hearers by the right handling of the word shall be
wrought upon, by making manifest the very secrets of their hearts and so
enforced to humble their souls and worship God, and confess not that great
learning or reading is in the preacher, 1. Cor. 14. 25.
but plainly that God is in that ministry indeed, because it casts down
(and does not lift up as the word or doctrine of men does, 1. These. 2. 13.
because their manner of teaching is merely carnal even such as is approved by
men but not warranted by the word) strong holds or the Imaginations and
Inventions of men which in a high degree do exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God, 2. Cor. 10. 14.
even against those doctrines of ceremonies callings and gestures which God,
verse. 5.
has made known in the word, and set men's thoughts and consciences at liberty
from the obedience of Christ, according to the scriptures concerning these
things only under pretense of not being forbidden, and so by their
conformity to that which Christ has not commanded do most strongly repair
and fortify t^ose strong holds of humane devices concerning voluntary
religions, or ceremonies, which the Lord by all means labors (as being the
greatest hinderers of the peace of his kingdom, and fosterers of his
rebellious enemies) to have utterlie ruinated: yea, and as Christ has
ordained, Ephesians. 5. 26.
to sanctify and cleanse his Church by the obedience of faith, which is the
true conformity of the doctrines of the word: so these men by pressing
conformity to ceremonies, callings, and gestures, which have no warrant in the
word, do directly intimate (though they pretend the clean contrary) that
their religion is but a doctrine of the tongue, and not of the reformation of
the life. For if they subscribe and have understanding of the heavenly
doctrines, and be able to retain them in memory, and so at a trice can
discourse or reason of them, then are they absolutely qualified and excellent
Divines, though they make no conscience of that which they know and profess,
further then they see cause, and so indeed do most beastly pollute and by plain
intimation both of their doctrine and life, persuade their hearers to defile
the Church of Christ, and to take away the beauty and glory of it, verse. 27.
which is to be free from human inventions* and to fill it with all horrible
spots and wrinkles of worldly traditions, that so it may never be holy, but
full of blame.

Are you not ashamed you deceitful guides, Pro. 26. 18, 19.
to cast abroad these firebrands and mortal insinuations in your lectures,
sermons, or writings and co^versations, and yet protest you mean no hurt? is
not your fiery heat in these courses a fained madness, or do you make any more
conscience thereof, then of your play or sport?

Yea (say they) our purpose in so doing is to do much good, Object.
for we teach and press that in this conformity which we so persuade unto,
every one should come with a good and honest heart to perform these actions and
gestures withal, Pro. 23. 26.
for that is it which the Lord requires, yea he will pass by much infirmity
where he finds true sincerity.

So that belike if men seem to have good affections, Answ.
that shall be sufficient warrant to justify any strange or uncommanded
gesture or ceremony in the public worship of God; yea though it be never so
wickd (at least in appearance) and Idolatrous an action yet if they mean well
and believe as the Church believes, that these things are indifferent and
lawful, or not forbidden all shall be exceeding well: and what I pray you, if
the Jews with good and honest hearts even sincerely purposing and verily
intending to win them unto God do marry wives of Ashdod Amon and Moab,
Nehens. 13. 23. 24.
dare you say these marriages are lawful? or can their Children ever possibly
(for all this good meaning) speak the language of Canaan sincerely or trewly?
no verily; though you charge them upon pain of death to prepare them selves
thereunto never so heartily, yet do you but press them to a thing impossible,
be not wiser then God least it prove your confusion. Henceforth therefore I
beseech you persuade no man to conformity to religious actions without a
Religious warrant; no not upon any good meaning or holy intention but Reprove
them rather and profess your dislike of them, verse. 25.
yea curse and smite them and pull of their hear, and take an oath of them by
God, not to make any such marriages, but manifestly show your contempt of
them, and howsoever the wisdom of this world will censure such proceedings for
most uncivil parts and indiscreet actions, full of dangerous violence and
unseemlie rashness, ready to tumble down and overthrow all things that dislike
you; yet you may remember that you have good Nehemiah a most zealous and godly
prince, and Christ lesus the meekest of all the Lambs of God for your patterns
and presidents and therefore most worthy patrons of such zealous courses for
and in the causes of the house of God. Oh, how silly a part was it, (cry these
Cool, temperate discreet and indifferent persons) and very much unbeseeeming
the gravitie of his person, and holiness of his profession, yea rather Child
then Christ-like with a scourge, Ihon. 2. 15.
and that also (a hundred to one) of his own making to drive so many grave,
Ancient, and most Reverend fathers out of their holy offices and most
honorable functions, which they and their predecessors before them had long
even time out out of mind to the comfort of many godly and well affected
people peaceably and commendablie enjoyed; greevouslie and most dangerously
disturbing thereby the quiet and settled peace of the Church, which principally
consists in these spiritual callings and outward condition thereof, which
were largely allowed and highly approved of by the public consent of the
whole Empire as most fitting for that present government, yea and not content
herewith, to use them with most base unreverent and dispitefull terms calling
them (I mean these grave spiritual and reverent men) arrant thieves, Math.
21. 13.
and these their ecclesiastical callings very dens of theft, as if they had
harbored the veriest knaves and most greedy devowring cormorants, that
regarded nothing neither religion nor honesty but their ^own profit) in all
the world, yea as if these proceedings and courses did waste more of the
subjects estate and substance of the comminaltie, then all the taxations or
impositions of the civil magistrate (and yet I tell you in your ear, for I
would be loath to be brought to rehearsal for it, a great deal more might be
said for the justifying of the worst of these human inventions, and to prove
them far more convenient and every way by many degrees more tolerable then
the very best of these in controversy amongst us:) henceforth therefore (I
advise you) unless you will openly profess your delight in, and therefore
desire to have the speech of Ashdod still sounding in your ears, or dare
reprove the holy Ghost for inserting in the sacred Scriptures by way of
prophecy, his divine warrant (which always carries in it what form soever it
be of, the nature of a precept) for the zeal of all Gods servants in these
causes of his house or public worship, Ps. 69. 9.
I say for ever hereafter hold your peace and teach your people that they must
bind themselves by an oath by God never to make any such marriages, Nehem. 13.
25.
I mean to Conform any more to any such mixtures in the gestures or
ceremonies of religious uses in the public worship or divine service of our
holy God, for do not these words, for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God,
infer plainly that strange ceremonies and callings uncommanded gestures or
actions having state in Religious worship, are no more allowed of him but even
as hateful and abominable at least, as these strange marriages? Though therefore
your ministry abound in all excellent and admirable gifts that amongst many
nations, there be none like unto you for your multitude and all manner of
learning and other worthy endowments, yet as strange women caused even Solomon
himself most fearfully to sin? so these unlawful ceremonies and callings, verse.
26.
and the amiable but most strange preferments which in and by conformity to
them are obtained, do so entice and allure you, as they cause you (even many
that are of most excellent parts) to suscribe to very strange positions and
practices for the upholding the Reputation and credit of these Courses to put
in practice strange co^clusions. Shall we then obey you, verse. 27.
and do all this great evil and to transgress against our God even to marry
strange wives, or to conform to these strange or unco^manded ceremonies and
gestures in the worship of God; seeing though the Lord promises to show mercy
unto thousands yet it is only to those that keep his comma^dements; so that
unless these ceremonies, callings and gestures, be the commandments of God,
the Church has no promise of him for a blessing, what affections soever they
use the^ with all, but rather of a curse though their inte^tions be never so
good in their own persuasions) by conforming unto them. What then, though it
were true, that they be not forbidden, yet I beseech you consider whether not
being commanded, they be not (at the very best that can possibly be made of
them) a spice of Ephraims base mixture. Hose. 7. 8.


Indeed our substance or doctrine of the Church publicly professed, is as one
side of a cake upon the hearth, very well baked, but the other side of our
worship consisting of ceremonies and callings, actions or gestures, is very
dough, and was never yet thoroughly turned; who dare then have so base an
opinion of the Almighty, as to consent or conform in any respect to offer such
unsavory bread in the divine worship of our holy God, seeing all the wit, Art,
and learning in the whole world can never make it wholesome? What, are his eyes
grown dim, that he cannot see both sides? or is his taste so decayed, that
he cannot perceive our halfe-baked service? or is he no better, or no more to
be regarded, but that any thing is good enough for him in his service? The
watch, men of Ephraim should be with my God, Hose. 9. 8.
and teach nothing but what he has commanded, but the Prophet or Preacher is
as the snare of a fowler in all his ways, all his study and care is how he
may prevail with his hearers to ensnare their minds by conformity to men's
Inventions in Gods worship, and so bring hatred into the house of his God.

O foolish people, how long will ye be ignorant, verse. ^.
and commit your souls to spiritual men, that are mad, even without any
government of Gods spirit, or direction of the scriptures: for is all the
learning and wisdom in the world without these any better then lunacie? what
lovely grapes did your fathers times bring forth? verse. 10.
how many sweet clusters did flaming stakes afford? but you have separated
your selves by conformity unto the shame or similitude of the inventions of
Baal Peor, which are the Abomination as well as the idolatry it self,
therefore Ephraim thy glory decays, verse. 11*
yea flies away like a bird, there is none that do sincerely reverence thee,
Hose. 7. 9.
gray hairs are upon thee, though thou consider it not. Do not all men see
that thou have nothing but devices (mere tricks of wit though never so
dishonest) to defend their own Invention many altars thou do make (great
shows of devotion, Hose. 8. 11.
and exceeding care of religion thou do pretend) but all that thou do is
to defend thy sin even to gain estimation to thy carnal devices, which have
no warrant from the Lord; nay those that dare not comforme to thy Canons or
courses, verse. 12.
because the great things of Gods law, written in the Scriptures do not
require it (for all other writings are small in respect of these and and to be
regarded but as trifles) thou countest them strange men, it being a strange
thing with thee to loose any thing for Christ's sake, but to forsake their
livings and liberties, to loose their Credits and reputations, rather then to
conform to these humane Inventions, yea thereby to expose themselves by their
deprivation to open contempt, miserable poverty, bands and imprisonment,
seems to be one of the strangest wonders of the world, that any of sound
judgment should ever have so little wit in them, thus do thou glorify thy
self, though thou committest iniquity in Gilgal, for there is the cause why the
Lord does hate thee, even for the wickedness of thine Inventions in his
worship which there thou have set up in great pomp and state, Hose. 8. 15.
therefore will the Lord cast thee out of his house, or Church because all they
spiritual Lords or princes are Rebels, verse. 7.
justifying these carnal devises against the plain evidence of the scripture,
Increasing daily errors and lies, which in the end will be their own
Destruction, Hose. 12. 1.
which yet they hope to prevent by making a covenant or contract with Ashur and
carrying oil into Egypt, Refining and so refreshing their old Imagerie with
new painted devices, yet thou feedest thy self with this wind and art very
confident that these secret and hidden plots of thy close and subtle fetches,
shall maintain thy greatness, though thou grow graceless persuading
Christians yea compelling some to conform to offer unclean bread upon the
Lords Altar and yet would have us subscribe that this is not contrary to the
word of God. Mala. 1. 7.


And in great disdain they demand wherein have we polluted the Lord, or the
worship or service of God? alas when you press us to a gesture at the Lords
own table, which is not warranted by the word do you not say or directly
infer, the table of the Lord is not to be regarded: verse. 8.
for it matters not what gesture we use no say you, though our ceremonies be
lame, Object.
and our callings blind, and our gestures sick, yet it is no evil, for they
are ordained and have been long established by public decree, to be the
offerings and sacrifices of the Lord, and therefore ought with all reverent
respect to be conformed unto of all, rather then to disturb the quiet
possession and peace of the Church, Luc. 11. 21.
(which by a strong hand these armed men have obtained and keep as the only
entrance or rather maintenance of their glorious palaces.)

Is it no matter then for the outward worship, Answ.
so the inward be intended and professed to be good and sound? why do you then
condemn the papists for taking away the second commandment quite out of the
table, and you letting it stand take the effect quite away? give them but the
same liberty which your selves exercise, and they will quickly agree with you
for the substance of that which is inward I warrant you, for who can udge the
mental reservation, and you require no more but an outward profession and
subscription, at least though you teach the necessity of inward sincerity, yet
your own practices do manifest that the other without this, will serve the
turn well enough, but be pleased I pray you (if any thing possibly be able to
satisfy you) to hear the Lords own answer, go your ways and when you have
any purpose to show your love, and tender your service yea in a most special
manner unto your prince, offer him such presents, will he be content with
thee, or accept thy person says the Lord of hosts? yea when thou invitest thy
friends or neighbors to thy own table, do but serve them with such dainties
and diet-bread, and mark how they like it; nay see if thy horse will not blow
upon it and refuse it, though perhaps thy greedy dogs or grunting hogs will
accept it, yea though neither side were ever baked on the hearth; yet you teach
and preach, you profess and persuade, and spend a great deal of time (which
you had need to redeem) by many long and (as you think) learned arguments and
wise reasons, to prove that this is good enough for the Lord, that is, that he
will verily accept such a public worship and service at our hands, though no
body have any care to shut the doors, Mal. 1. 10.
to make due trial of that which is brought for an offering (as these things
in controversy) whether it ought to enter into the Lords house, as being
commanded or required by him, or whether it be the mere invention or
will worship of men, and so (what goodly and golden shows soever it make) to
have the doors shut against it, and not to offer abomination before the Lord:
but come who will come, and bring with him what he will, though it be not
according to the commandment and holy ordinance, yet if he will but come and
conform, presently you receive him, and most readily kindle a fire, and offer
up that which he has brought, though there be never so evide^t appearance,
similitude or likeness of Idolatry in it: Is not this directly to worship God
in vain? even to kindle a fire upon his altar to no purpose? verse. 1* ^
yea you grow weary of the Lords own ordinances, they do not give full content
to your senses, and therefore ye snuff at them as being too base for your
greatness, wanting pomp and state, and I know not what, and approve rather of
any thing never so absurd, ridiculous, and popish, even that which is torn,
lame and sick, should I accept this of your hand says the Lord? verse. 14.
but cursed be the deceaver, you that have my servants (the males in your
flocks) whom I have fully quallified to make the truth of these things known,
and who have faithfully spoken my word in my name and in this behalf, and
will deprive them, and purposely maintain (though if need require you know how
to make show of the clean contrary) Brokers of Corrupt doctrines, perswaders
to, and defendors of unwarrantable ceremonies, callings, and gestures, and so
deall deceitfullie with the Lords people in these great things of his law or
public worship, Hos. 8. 12.
teaching them in steed of these to sacrifice unto the Lord, a corrupt thing,
you I say, Mala. 1. 14.
shall certainly be accursed, for I am a great King says the Lord of hosts
and my name is terrible among the heathen.

Seeing then every David (Churches or particular persons after Gods own heart)
does banish such lame ceremonies blind callings, 2. Sam. 5. 8.
and sick gestures from all the parts of Gods public worship, as things which
his soul hates; Oh thou son of David smite them and deliver us from them
for our very souls do abhor them, and put it into the faithful heart of
thy friend and servant Jacob, Genesis 35. 1. 2* 3. 4.
to put away these strange Gods and earings, and so to cleanse all his
kingdoms, by burying these humane Inventions under the oak which is by Shechem.
John. 2. 15.


And you the faithful servants of that son of David, though the driving out
of the temple (or place or callings appointed for Gods* public worship) not
only the more gross abuses (which had been they will confess no more then
was fit and convenient) but even All humane Inventions which he found therein,
with the sheep and oxen (things commanded by God to be used in his service, yet
this manner of providing them and making them ready for the people of God, not
being commanded by the Lord made them abominable) and pouring out the changers
money, thereby discovering the gainfulnes of those places, which only kept and
held in these abuses) and overthrowing the tables. And the rest of our Saviors
carriage (who is Lord and blessed for ever) when he would manifestly and mightly
declare himself to be the only and sole king or supreme head of his Church:
in general, and of all the national* or several congregations therein in
particular by exercising dominion not only in the fundamental points of faith
and justification, but in every things of Religious use seem it never so
small even in these circumstances or appurtenances seemed unto flesh and blood
something rude and indiscreet, and that the business was not so carried as the
peace of that Church wherein he was borne and bred required, or as the
reverence of the Ecclesiastical persons in authority deserved, yea seeing as
carnal reason does think and censure) these matters were but things
indifferent; though there was questionles many excellent parts in him, yet his
discenting from the Church government, so ancient and so reverent, yea and by
general consent upon most grave and learned consultation with all possible
wisdom, with such good success so long established, must needs argue exceeding
great weakness in him (by our learned adversaries lovely oratory) because he
was so violent in these small trivial matters as if the very substance of
Religion had consisted in them, surely (goodmen) they seem to be hartelie
sorry that he overshot himself more in this then all the things that ever he
did in his whole life, and did not perform this action with such moderation
and discretion as was fit, and as a matter of such high consequence deserved,
notwithstanding all this, and whatsoever had been or shall be said against such
proceedings, I humbly beseech all such as unfeinedlie desire to serve the Lord
Christ to Remember, verse. 17.
that it is as a perpetual law to bind Gods servannts even all posterity for
ever, that, when the outward and public worship of God is thus corrupted and
defiled by men's Inventions in the ceremonies, Ps. 69. 9*
callings gestures and actions thereof, all those in whom the spirit of true
Zeal does abide must be so far of from conforming upon any terms unto these
things, or any of them as upon pain of Gods high displeasure (according as it
is written of them) they must in one degree or other manifest their Judgment
in the dislike of them and every of them yea though they expose their persons,
their credit and reputations to the like disgraces and Rebukes by so doing.

Finally you reverend and learned adversaries, seeing civil policy is the
strongest argument that can be pressed for that conformity, which with might
and main you do so eagerly persuade unto; Consider I beseech you the issue of
the very like course (a remarkable president) against our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. The Scribes and Pharisees, you know, though still they cried out
for arguments, and miracles, John. 2* 18.
reasons and signs to prove his divine authority, John. 3. 2.
yet it was well known among themselves, though they made outward show of the
contrary that he was a teacher come from God, but yet considering that his
doctrine (though holy and divine in all things) tended directly to the
overthrow of their Ecclesiastall policy and government, so that their
authority and dignity, their reputation and greatness, must of necessity
come down, if the truth which he taught were once received; they concluded,
(merely at first in civil policy) that though he were a holy man in life,
and of great power in his ministry, and did exceeding much good thereby, yea
and held nothing but what was truly grounded on the word of God, yet of
absolute necessity (upon the causes and considerations aforesaid, he must be
opposed; even because he must: and so from this seeming small beginning, they
fell to plots and devices how to bring his opinions into disgrace with the
state in general, and with some special persons that were of greatest and
highest account therein in particular, persuading them that they were his very
purposed plots, and crafty devices to cross their designs, and so by degrees
they came to a politic malice of his person (arising only from the hatred
of his doctrine) which was the mother of their most fearful and final
apostasy, never resting themselves till by flattering insinuations, false
accusations, open slanders, falsifying men's testimonies or depositions, and
like abominable practices (the particulars whereof are a most worthy work to
discover, and at length by false witnesses, and plain perjury, they not only
brought his doctrine and person into open and general hatred, but most
maliciously practiced, and perfidiously procured his cruel and bloody death.
If then in your ignorance you have spoken aagainst the Son of man in this
cause of his servants (who dare not conform to humane inventions, Luc. 12. 10.
but labor for reformation, that by the Magistrates authority al these
novelties might be driven away, and their favorers whipped out of the Temple)
upon your repentance it shall be forgiven; but if when you have considered
their arguments and reasons against conformity, you see the evidence of the
spirit according to the Scriptures appearing therein, and yet for these or such
like politic considerations you thereunto moving, Hebr. 10* 26. 27.
you persist willingly in the defense of conformity, your case is most
dangerous, and to be lamented. Take heed therefore of transgressing
maliciously, though it be never so pollitickly, the Lord of hosts, Psa. 1. 5.
the God of Israel will not be merciful unto such (the fervent prayer of all
the faithful is against it.) Enter not then into the Council or convocations
with the wicked, Ps. ^. 1.
how to justify and defend their courses, or if that be past, stand not
therein, be not stiff and resolute in such wicked proceedings: for if once you
sit down, or settle your selves (with resolution) to prove the lawfulness of
the seats of these scorners, or money changers, you are near unto cursing,
and far from the blessing, yea the Lord thinking upon his congregation which
he has possessed of old, verse. 4. 5. 6.
and on the rod of his inheritance which he has redeemed, and measured out for
himself, and on mount Syon wherein he has dwelt, will verily lift up his
strokes, Ps. 74. 1. 2. 3.
and destroy for ever every enemy that does evil to the Sanctuary. Even so be
it Lord Jesus.

If true Religion only knits our heart unto God, and all false Religions
separate our hearts from God, then whatsoever is of Religious use and to be
conformed unto in Gods public worship, must be true (that is truly grounded
in the word of God) or else it separats us from God.

But true Religion does only knit our hearts unto God etc. and the gesture of
kneeling as it is urged being of Religious use and to be conformd unto in Gods
public worship is not true, (that is not truly grounded on the word of God.)

Therefore to Conform to kneeling as it is urged is to separate from God.

All fear or Religion toward God, not taught by the Scripturs, but by the
precepts; of men, remooues the heart far from God, yea the defense and
justifying hereof works great wonders and marvels* the wisdom of such wise
men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid:
Esa. 29. 13, 14.

TO THE CHVRCH OF GREAT Britain in general, or to the several congregations
or Churches therein in particular, being the true visible Churches of Christ,
grace and peace be multiplied for ever.
IT is not unknown, how utterly unlawful, yea altogether impossible it is, to
serve or conform to two masters; Mat. 6. 24
as also that by our fall in Adam we have not only forsaken our first master
of Creation, who in our innocent estate did immediately direct, teach and lead
us into all truth, but have betaken us to a new master whose Inventions or
novelties we did most voluntarily subscribe unto, even Satan who now does
immediately in the estate of nature, guide and lead all the children of men
(as well in the Church as out of it) into all falsitie and error in all things
concerning God and his Church and yet also how every one naturally does most
willingly (though some perhaps more wisely or learnedly, and others more vilely
and desperately) yield their hearty obedience unto him, though not in their
purpose and intention, yet at least in error of their Judgment and corrupted
resolution. For the understanding being utterly blinded, we think in our
reason, wisdom and learning, that to be certe(...)ly good, which is directly
evil, Ps* 78. 5^. 57. 58. and 1. King 11. 4. to 12. and 2. Cron. 11. 15.
that to be clear light which is Egiptian darkness, that to be the service of
God which is the apparent worship of Devils, and so think and are verily
persuaded our master to be God, when in very truth it is Satan. True it is,
that wisdom, discretion, learning, and many other excellent parts and gifts,
(yea even in heavenly things) nature may and does still by industry attain
unto, but the saving or sanctfying graces of God which bring the heart unto
Christ, (that new or renewing master) are supernatural, even the immediate
work of the holy ghost, whose scholars or servants every one of necessity
must be that will be saved, and thus far I take it is agrreed on all sides in
all our Churches or congregations. (For I speak to none but to such among us as
profess themselves to be the scholars of Christ) now being matriculated or by
the blessed sacrament of holy Baptism Initiated into the school or
corporation or body of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I humbly beseech every one that does sincerely purpose ever to take the lest
degree of true holiness or sanctification (without which no man shall see God)
seriously to consider what books (whether historical, prophetical, political,
poetical, or Evangelical) or authors (as they term them) must here to this
purpose be learned and professed and these are all bound up together in one
volume of the canonical, sacred or inspired scriptures, and for their
excellency called the Bible, all other writers or authors diffring from these
in any thing concerning God or his worship, by teaching or pressing some things
which are not truly grounded upon these, are to be esteemed books of our
second master, Gal. 1. 8.
and therefore to be accursed how honest or holy soever their intention or
drift pretends or seems to be; yea of most absolute necessity it follows,
that all who do upon any terms learn their lessons from thence and so conform
unto them, do thereby conform unto Satan, who of all men (in their wits) is
acknowledged to be the author and teacher of all lessons or doctrines,
concerning religious ceremonies, callings, or gestures in the worship of God
which are not in evidence and power of the holy Ghost, plainly grounded upon
the word of God, for there be but two masters, who are by Christ opposed the
one to the other, All truth therefore is to be learned of the one, and to be
collected or gathered only out of his books or sacred writings, even from God
to whom only we must give credit in his word (for oportet discente credere)
whatsoever then is learned elsewhere, must needs be from that other master as
the proper lessons of his open and free school (wherein yet we confess all
the excellencies of of all arts, and all the deepenesse of learning do abound)
who must also in those arguments and reasons we ground or practice upon, be
credited and believed to be the author of that supposed truth which we make
profession of by our so doing.

Let us therefore bring forth those books, or authors into the open view of
the world, wherein this lesson of Conformity, or refusal thereunto is taught
and learned, that so every Scholar may be known by his own Master, and the
authors publicly taught in his school.

Now if any be ashamed to profess that he obayes or learnes this lesson of
any other then of God, then must he either show his warrant and authority out
of the sacred Scriptures, for the things he professes and practices in this
controversy, or else he plainly discovers whose scholar he is, for they only
are the fountain of truth that which comes from them is holy and sincere, but
if it be grounded upon men or Churches, though ancient and orthodox in many
other things, yet the filthiness of their channel, in all matters (especially)
of religious use will leave some infection behind it. Let us therefore try all
things, 1. These* 5. 21.
yea though they have been the received opinions or practices of the holiest
men and purest churches in the world (whose judgment yet is highly to be
reverenced, though it differ from ours till the word of God do evidently to
our consciences dicide the Controversy) and keep or conform to that only in
the divine service of God which is good, which nothing possibly can be, Iam 1.
17.
but that which comes from God, the sole author of whatsoever is good. For
howsoever it cannot be denied but that surely there is a spirit in man, Job.
32. 8.
and great excellency of learning, wisdom, government and discretion in the
subordinate tutors or teachers of this other master, yet the inspiration of the
Almighty (or the inspired word of God only, by the effectual working of the
holy Ghost) gives understanding, especially in all things of a religious use
in the public worship of God.

To ground religious conformity therefore upon any thing else whatsoever, is
directly to forsake the right way (and there is but two ways the one of truth
which is straight and narow, 2 Pet. 2. 15.
and but a few that will subscribe unto it) and to go astraie and follow the
broad way (or to learn the easy lesson) of Balaam the son of Bosor which
loved the wages of unrighteousness. verse* 2.
I judge none, Math. 7. 13. 14.
but entreat all to take heed of those swelling words of this other School
or Synagogue full of vanity, 2. Pet. 2. 1^*
least they be beguiled by them and so be wrapped also in their error,
especially to take heed of the second entangling: verse. 20.
for the latter end of such is far worse then the beginning, verse. 17.
to whom the black darkness is reserved for ever. Seeing then there be but two
chief masters, God and the Devil, and but two ways, grace and nature, and
seeing all that ground their conformity truly on the scriptures, are in the way
of truth, (though imprisonment and other grievances inflicted on them make it
some thing straight and narrow) and are verily taught of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
it must needs follow that all, that ground their conformity upon any thing
else, or upon these erroniously, are taught of the devil, which their manner of
reasoning and allegation of their best authorities does not obscurely discover.

But here perhaps one will strike me on the face and say, Romans 9. 20. 21.
why should the clay call the potter to account why he made it thus or so, or
why should our adversaries demand, why this gesture of kneeling should not be
as comely, and as comfortable as a table gesture.

Surely I, for my part can say no more but ipse dixit, our master, whose
teaching we only rely upon, has by his own practice openly and solemnlie
published and proclaimed in the word as with a silver trumpet to all Churches
and congregations for ever, the excellent and divine dignity thereof. The
other master, teaches from fathers, and counsels, from the precepts of men, yea
(as he bragges) from unity, Antiquity, and universalitie, as with the very
quintessence of Parnassus melody, that kneeling in the very act of receiving
the holy bread and wine in the Lords supper, is the most humble, thankful,
reverent and fittest gesture in the the whole world, yea far beyond that of the
table. Thus either master has and flows in a different sense, let every
servant, disciple or scholar therefore cleave fast to his own master, and
quite forsake, yea hate and despise the other, Luc. 16. 13.
but o man who art thou? are thou mortal, must thou come to Judgment, and yet
dare thou ask a question of the immortal son of God (in his members or
servants) why the gesture which he made choice of, and used and ordained should
be better then that which the son of perdition devised and exalted? may
thou not as well ask, why there should be any Sabbath or but one, not two, why
two sacraments and not seven, why he wrote to 7. Churches and not only to the
metropolitan? why wives should be subject to their husbands more then in name,
Ephesians. 5. 22. 23.
or the Church unto Christ further then in show? 2. Cor. 12. 5.
let us examine and try these things therefore whether they be of faith (for
else they are sin) yea no man can be ignorant of this, Romans 14. 23.
that if Christ do not warrant them by his word, they are reprobated and serve
for no other use but to bring some to reprobation, and to hinder others in the
means of their salvation, Gala. 5. 23.
for as there is no law or condemnation against any fruit of the spirit, or
against them in whom it is, yea though the world make a law against it, yet is
great consolation to be found in suffering for it: even so if these things in
question be the lusts or inventions of the flesh, Eshes. 2. 3.
then can they not possibly serve to any other use but to fulfill the will of
the flesh and of the mind, and so in their very nature are (as I may say) the
children of wrath as well as others, even as well as those damnable devises of
sacrificing for the quick and the dead, of disposing of crowns, of
dispensations with corporal and spiritual adulteries, or Incests and other
like hellish abominations or humane inventions, for they al com from one and
the same root, flow out of one and the same fountain, have all every one of
them as good warrant (by the doctrine of this second master) one as another,
even from the prince that rules in the air, verse. 2*
that spirit which works in whatsoever is not done in the obedience of faith
in all things of Religious use.

Dare we then conform in the Religious actions, or gestures of our body to
the ceremonies of that spiritual harlot, 1. Cor. 6. 15.
or to the likeness of them? especially seeing in this great secret or mystery
of our union with Christ, Ephe. 5. 32.
we are now joined in a far nearer bond unto God then in the innocent estate,
and therefore a far greater and stricter subjectio^ is required at our hand.
True indeed by creation we were the lovely sons and amiable daughters of the
most high, having no thing uncomely, nor any disposition thereunto in any part
of us, but by sin we made our selves strangers yea enemies, Ephe. 2. 12. 19*
most filthy, and even loathsome to look upon, yet even in this estate to look
upon, when he saw us polluted in our own blood (or filthy nature, verse. 4. 5.
when we were naked and bare, utterlie void of all goodness or any disposition
thereunto, Ezekiel. 16. 6. 7.
even stark dead by sin, in sin, I say in this hateful condition he
looked upon (...) with the eyes of his love, Ephesians. 2. 4. etc.
and covered, yea clothed our filthiness with the skirts of his own
righteousness, Ezekiel. 16. ^
and swear unto us, even entered into covenant with us, and so contracted us to
him self to be come wholly and in all things his, and his only, even flesh of
his flesh and bone of his bone, verse. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14*
therefore did he wash us in that fountain of the house of David and anointed
us with an ointment from that holy one, 1. John. 2. 20.
decking us with all spiritual ornaments of grace, and sanctification of life
so that his holiness in the Godly, though never so contemptible to the world, is
become as truly glorious and honorable as a kingdom, (even as wickedness makes
the mighty and great ones in the world ignominious and contemptible.)

Is it possible therefore to express what great and just cause we have to
forsake all other (how learned and reverent, Math. 19. 5.
how wise and ancient, how holy and universal soever) and in our conformity
in all matters of religious use, (especially in the public worship of his
name (which being the marriage bed) of necessity is carefully to be kept
holy and undefiled) cleave only unto him so long as we both shall live, being
tied to him not only by our creation, with the great bonds of loyal
subjection and cheerful obedience of loving and natural children; but in our
redemption, with that indissoluble love and most loyal affection of a dear
and faithful wife.

Seeing then our nature is thus inseperablie united unto the Godhead in the
incarnation of our Lord, how dear any true member of his mystical body, in
the religious actions of his divine service, conform to the devices of strange
lovers? and such are all whatsoever they be, as require any other ceremonies,
callings; or gestures, then Christ Jesus the Lord is author of. Does not every
wife (if she desire to be found faithful) ^are how she may bleas^ her
husband? 1. Cor. 7. 34.
Hearken therefore O daughter, and consider, yea incline thine ear, Ps. 45. 10.
and give diligent attention, for thou shall have many dissembling lovers who
will persuade thee to the contrary, but thou must forget thine own people and
thy fathers house, and not regard the customs and traditions of nature, the
devices of reason, or the innovations of wit and sense, though never so grave
and learned, but in the obedience of faith, conform only to the holy and wise
ordinances of thy Lord, yea in all religious actions give this honor and
worship one lie to him; ver. 8.
let all thy garments (ceremonies or callings) smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and
Cassia out of the Ivory Palaces (his own holy and glorious ordinances) which
make the heart of the godly to rejoice, and not stink of novelties and
incertainties out of the high places of men's precepts or devices, which make
heavy the soul of the righteous, so shall the king have pleasure in thy
beauty, verse. 11.
or in that worship which thou give unto him, when it is pure and sincere,
not painted or sophisticated with the Italian pensill, (whoori^h or carnal
inventions) for he is thy Lord God, and therefore thus Reverence thou him, even
perform every ceremony and gesture of religious use in his public worship,
according to his own commandment, and no otherwise, for else thou deniest
Reverence unto him, and give it to those whom thou do conform unto.

Remember how he washed thee from Popish Antichristian (that whoorish)
Idolatry, Eze. 16, 9. 10,
and clothed thee with broidred work (even the pure doctrine of justification
by faith working by love, and many other divine truths and sanctifying
graces) do not trust now in thine own beauty (or excellency of gifts) and
so play the harlot, 15*
presuming of thy renown; because thou art famous over the Christian world,
for thy wisdom and learning and other worthy endowments, ^owr not out thy
fornications on every one that passes by and makes love unto thee, let no
carnal respect ever kindle thy desire to such abominable courses; 16,
Deck not thy high places or Cathedrals, with diverse colors, bring not into
Gods holy worship those sweet delights of the senses, which are no better then
the alluring baits of an harlot, the like things shall not come, neither has
any sincere Church ever conformed to such abominations. Be not, I say, so
presumptuous, 17*
as to abuse those silver gifts and golden Jewels which the Lord has
conferred upon thee (to purge his worship and to preserve his service pure and
sincere from all kind of mixture of any carnal devices) to defend the
indifferency or lawfulnes of whoredom or humane inventions therein, 18*
offer them not thy brodered garments, neither set the oil and perfume of the
Lord. 19*
(Those divine truths which then teach purely) before them. Thou think in
the pride of thy heart that these will be sweet and sauorie unto them, 20*
and so by an enforced subscription causest those sons whom thou have borne
unto God, to sacrifice their studies how to give best content to these
strangers by mingling their abominations and Gods holy ordinances indifferently
together, 22*
is this they whoredom a small matter? Oh turn thee from all these most
grievous and carnal inventions, 30*
and remember the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and polluted in thy
blood, how weak is thy heart says the Lord God, seeing thou do all these
things, which are the works of a presumptuous whore, 38*
or a Lordly lawless, and overruling woman. Yet for all this it is schism to
deny that thou art a true Church, yea there is no doubt but when thy Harlots
and Bawdes with their carnal and fleshly devises, 58*
have borne the punishment of their wickedness and abomination; 60*
the Lord will remember his covenant made with thee in the days of thy youth,
61*
and will confirm unto thee an everlasting covenant, then thou shall remember
thy ways and be ashamed.

Oh our reverend and most dear mother, 1. Cor. 11. 7.
is it not the glory of the man to have his wife humble and obedient; why will thou then thus press us even upon thy blessing as we would not incur thy
displeasure and curse, to Conform to ceremonies, callings or gestures which
bear no Image or resemblance, of the most holy ordinances of our heavenly
father, but the direct similitude or likeness of that Character or mark of
the Beast? oh forget not thou fair one the most amiable love of that son of
his love, that we are the true or legitimate fruit of thy womb, is it possible
for thee to be unmindfull of this; can we ever forget those sweet instructions
and most heavenly consolations which we sucked out of thy beautiful breasts;
O thou sister and spowse of that holy one, call to mind what excellent graces
he so enamiled thee withal that he cannot but love and delight in thee,
unless he should hate himself, are all the gardens of the East, or living
fountaints of the west, or sweet fruits of Camphir, spikenard, Calamus and
Cynamon, with all the trees of Incencer mirr^rand Aloes yea all the chief
spices in the whole world possibly able to shadow out, that high excellency
and most sovereign dignity where with out of his own very prerogative he
has truly and Really endowed thee? why then by thy conformity to these
humane devices, will thou shut the door against thy well beloved and not suffer
him to enter into his garden to eat his pleasant fruit, but offers him grapes
which thou have gathered of these thornie Inventions, and figs which these
thistly traditions have brought forth? was it not thine own instruction from
our Creadle, that we must put of the old man with all his works and put on the
new, Cososs. 3. 9.
even be made conformable to the will or word of God in all things, both in
our tender years and stronger age, and oldest days? and must we now learn
another lesson or manner of perfection even to have our eyes opened, (...). 3.
5.
yea and be as Gods by conforming to these novelties? whose device is this?
mark dear mother upon my bare knees I beseech thee who that is that talks
such things with thee? Do we sell Advowsions, depopulate towns, or houses, do
we keep two benefices, or closely practice usurie, are we partners in
monopolies, have we a whore in a corner, do we dissemble and deceive, or are
we unmercifull, unjust or any way dishonest; then let thy holy Ce^sures cut us
of from that blessed Communion of they heavenly family, and divine society.
But oh thou sweetest among the loueliest who art the very choice of all the
fairest, Inioyne us not we beseech thee to forget the name of our God, or to
bow our knee or conform to any thing which is not truly grounded on his word,
some thing indeed may be in these courses which we cannot discern, but no
goodness or godliness can possibly be in them, unless they be his
commandments.

But thou say or rather thy minions inform thee, Object.
that the Lord did never forbid these things,

The clean contrary seems most plain to us and that out of thine own
doctrines, Answ.
but suppose he be pleased to be silent, to teach modesty and fear, shall
we be bold therefore to fall into presumption? Consider, (oh thou that bare
us the appointed months, and brought us forth in every ones due season) where
did he forbid Adam to eat that particular fruit? true indeed that the tree was
forbidden; and are not we in the same general terms directly forbidden to
worship him in any other manner in his public service then he has commanded?
is not this the very tener purpose and drift of the second commandment,
forbidden also to bow down or show any Reverent respect to the likeness of any
thing which in his worship man has devised?

Oh thou that are the mother of us all, pluck up: these fruits of distraction
even by the very roots, and suffer them no longer to breed divisions and
separations among thy true children, deall truly with thine own soul and mark
it well, though it come from such as excel all other in learning and wisdom,
Genesis 3. 1. 4. 5.
yet whether it be not a tare of that En^ious-man, Iohu. 8. 44.
and whether those Resolute disputers for the Justifying thereof be not his
professed Children, for thou have often taught us to take heed of sinning
against our knowledge or certain persuasion though it be but in a matter of
never so small consequence, but especially in all things of Religious use,
seeing disobedience yea and Rebellion appears as well therein as in the
grossest and foulest abomination of popery, yea this was the comely talk of
thy scarlet lips, Iam. 2, 10,
that whosoever keeps the whole law and yet fails in one point, he is
guileie of all, and therefore though we have cast quite away the grosser point
of popery, yet wilful conformity to any humane Innvention of Religious use
in the public worship of God, makes us guilty of the whole mass of that
damnable Idolatry; according to an other lesson which most carefully thou
did often beat upon, 1. Cor 5. 6.
that a little leaven does sour the whole lump, Ion. ^. 6.
yea whatsoever is borne of the very wisdom of the flesh, Romans ^. 7.
is notwithstanding very Enmity with God, Luc. 3, 39.
for howsoever Adam and all in his loins were by creation the sons of God,
and whatsoever gestures they used in his worship were most pleasing and
acceptable to him; yet now (by transgression) having changed their father and
nature, all the ceremonies, callings, and gestures which they can possibly
devise concerning the worship of God, or government of his Church are without
contradiction the very works of their new father and nature, John, 8 41,
for who can possibly be ignorant of this, Rom, 6, 16,
that to whomsoever we give our selves as servants to obey, his servants we are
to whom by conformity we do obey, whether it be to humane Inventions, or Gods
holy ordinances, and the same rule holds in all matters of Religious use, Rom,
10, 14, 15
if they can not tell how to preach except they be sent, nor we how to pray
or call upon God as we ought, Romans (...).
but by the spirit of God, according to the Scriptures, how is it possible for
all the learning and wisdom in the world to tell what ceremony, calling or
gesture is fit and lawful in the service of God but by the same spirit*

Seeing then these devices (at the very best, the mocking, yea some of them
persecuting sons of Agar) have no warrant from the word and spirit of God,
Genesis 21. 9.
what lets but that safely we may, Gal. 4. 29.
yea ought to esteem them. Vagabonds and Runnagates in the earth, howsoever not
in the highest degree able to murder (or make an absolute nullitie of religion)
yet not being borne of God, 1. John. 3. 9
or warranted by his word, they must of absolute necessity be confessed to be
unrighteous, because the Lord our Righteousness is not author of them, and all
unrighteousness (in substance or ceremony) is sin, John. 5. 15.
and therefore all that wittingly conform thereunto upon what terms of
considerations soever though in the lowest and most tolerable degree that can
be imagined) are (in the same degree that this their sin is of) verily and
most certainly of the Diuill, 1. Ioh. 3. 8.


Why should any wonder then or think it strange, Pro. 1. 20. 21.
that though wisdom hane cried out and vttred her voice like a trompet, in
pulpits, in prisons, in words, in writings, in fiery zeal, in most humble and
meekest manner, yet these carnal and worldly minded men love foolishnes (even
the devices of flesh and blood,) 22
and take pleasure in scorning whatsoever and whosoever is contrary to them
therein, and so despise all the counsel of the Lord: 25.
shall not the end of these things be bitter? yea will not Destruction ceize on
them at length, 26.
and will not the Lord rejoice and laugh thereat, even make joyful the hearts
of his people, to see their cruel adversaries eat the fruit of their own way,
31.
and be filled with their own devices?

Yea most dear and tender mother, have thou not often told us, that all that
are disobedient unto, Romans 10. 21.
or wilfully gainsay any thing truly and evidently taught from the
Scriptures, were to be esteemed of all that desire sincerely to fear the Lord,
stiffeneked resisters of the Holy Ghost? Act. 7. 51.
because by such proceedings they plainly proclaim that in their hearts they
say th^re is no God, Psalm. 14. 1.
or which is all one, that God is not so jealous of his worship, and every
ceremony, calling, and gesture therein, so as he esteems them only his
lovers and friends that subscribe only to his commandments therein; Exodus 20.
5, 6.
and holds them his enemies, yea such as hate him that conform to any thing
therein which in his word he has not commanded as in the second commandment
more at large it does appear? be pleased therefore to remember, from the very
word of our father thou have often instructed us, that though without all
contradiction there is a spirit in man (and therefore it may be that some are
called spiritual men) yet we should always find this to be true in all
controversies o^ proceedings about matters of Religious nature, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
not many such how excellent soever (much less the greatest part of them)
though most wise after the flesh, no though their counsel in their days be
esteemed as free from error as the oracle of God, 2, Sam, 16, 23,
are notwithstanding chosen of God to do any special good to his Churches, or
servants: for indeed though their titles be spiritual, Hose, 9, 7,
yet their ways and courses do plainly testify that their hearts are Carnal
and fleshly, Romans 8, 5.
and therefore they do not savor the things of Gods spirit no they seem mere
foolishness unto them, 1. Cor, 2, 14,
because indeed they are spiritually discerned, and therefore they esteem them
very fools and asses that will loose a good living rather then conform to
men's Inventions in Gods worship, thus do they assume that sufficiency to
themselves which is wholly of God Almighty whose inspiration only gives
understanding especially in all matters of Religious use, 1. Cor, 3. 5.
and yet will these aspiring spirits presume to set the H. Ghost to school,
Job, 32, 8,
and most presumptuously read large lectures of discretion unto him in his
servants, because they will not conform without his direct warrant, pretending
that there is great truth (and no lies) in the things they press, and yet
cannot possibly prove them to be commanded of God (as all truth necessary
for the Church to conform unto, is) as though if there were any kind of truth
in them the holy Ghost would not lead and direct us therein, Ioh. 16. 13.
and least they should put this off, as a peculiar promise to the Apostles he
has purposely by precept and practice expressly in all such occasions, John 5.
39*
tied us absolutely to the Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3. 17.
you have done foolishlie therefore in this, Math. 12. 2. to 10, and 19. 8.
O ye reverend and learned men, that ye^ have not rested on the word of the
Lord, in these thing in controversy which you so eagerly press conformity
unto but (as it were upon the host of the Aramits) on the Ancient fathers, 2.
Chron. 16. 7. 9.
general counsels, and canons, humane reason, and the learning and wisdom of
the world, hear therefore the word of the Lord henceforth you shall have wars,
one or other shall set upon your ceremonies and all other your humane
inventions, and never give that argument over, till all ordinances in the
Church which God has not planted by the authority of the Scriptures be
utterlie rooted out.

And this your Idol of conformity the ripe fruit of your proud hearts will
deceive you, Ier. 49. 16.
yea though thereby you are grown confident, because you have at length settled
your seats as safely, as in the clefts of the Rock and made your nests the
very next to the Eagle himself in the supremest mountains of the highest
Region, yet, will I bring you down from thence says the Lord, for though by
thy wisdom and deep policies or undiscerned subtleties thou have gotten thee
great riches and prefer(...)nts, Ezekiel. 28. 4. 5.
and have increased very greatly thy power and authority and so art lifted up
in thine heart as in a chair of security, conceiting thy self that thou art
wiser then Daniel and have more learning and wisdom, verse. 3.
greater reason and stronger arguments for thy conformity then all those that
are of perfect or sincere hearts toward the Lord, 2. Chron. 16. 9.
and are contrary minded, and therefore dare no way conform unto you, with
whom their fear even he whom they serve will show his strength) yet behold
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound you that are so
wise, 1. Cor. 1. 27.
yea vile and despised persons which in the opinion of the world being compared
with you, did not so much as seem to exist, 28
or bring to naught your strongest arguments for this your great goddess
conformity, and that by a plain demonstration of their vanity, yea though
they be neither prophets, or sons of the Prophets nor so much as brought up at
the feet of some prophet, but in comparison mere strangers yet they be as a
terrible nation and their arguments shall be as drawn swords against the very
beauty of thy wisdom yea they shall defile thy brightness, Ezekiel. 28. 7.
your so admired understanding, by laying open your most dissembling and
cunning practices, yea (in some of you) horrible and fearful blasphemies.

Many have had I confess, too religious estimation of your learning, and other
venerable endowments but finding it plain that in this Controversy with poor
Christians you have cast off the word of the Lord, Esa. 30. 12.
and trust in violence and wickedness, and stay thereupon, for the justifying
of your courses, not regarding the laws of God or man, but by one devise or
other will break through all, therefore there is great hope that this
iniquity which lies swelling within you, 13
will make you so top-heavie, as your very height, the only thing you so
wisely foresaw to be necessary, and therefore so providently by your deep
reaches have attained, will be an unavoydable cause of your sudden and violent
downfall, yea, and with that detestation, as no one humane invention seem it
never so tolerable, shall be left for the meanest use and office in the
worship and public service of the Lord, no not so much as a little sheard to
fetch fire or water: for as all Gods ordinances are good, so no humane
invention of religious use in Gods worship can be good, no not one. And whereas
it is objected yt the reverend Fathers of our Church hold the^ lawful and good
Iure diuino, in a tract beginning (...)ddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari etc
even so that Reverend father Deterano, Chamberlen to Urban 6. publicly taught
with great approbation of many great Divines, that the very meaning of Christ
in saying give to Caesar the things that be Caesar's, was but till his ascension
and that when he was lifted up he would draw all these things unto him, that
is, Baronies, Earledomes, yea and kingdoms too, even all that was Caesar's, and
that it is therefore of Divine Institution, that the ministers of the Gospel
might challenge and enjoy these things as their proper and peculiar right, both
revenewes and honors, and that it was grievous sacrilege for any prince to
withhold the same, or any civil authority from them, or to this effect was that
which he held, and which has sprung out of that slip which he then set, the
several plants whereof have wonderfully thriven in all christendom; so likewise
many great scholars and very learned divines have held it an invincible
argument, that the Popes government, Hierarchy, and supremacy is lawful,
because it has prospered and so long endured with good success, for else say
they, God would never have suffered it. Is it not also avowed by many wise and
reverent Doctors, In Canon. Ioco. frat. de consecra. did. 1.
that James the brother of our Lord according to the flesh, did bring in the
Mass and joined it to the scripture, and therefore that it is of Apostolical
institution and ought to be conformed unto? In like manner it is a received
opinion of great antiquity being one of the deep doctrines of divine
Durandus, that every sunday and holiday the souls do play in Purgatory: Are
they not worthy therefore to be presented that do any kind of work upon any
holy day, yea though it be not in prayer time, unless it be to go to the
Alehouse to be merry, and to leap and dance about the May-poule after a
bagpipe, or so forth, for that helps forward the foresaid merriment? yea our
own countryman Cardinal Poole, In his book upon the council of Trent.
a reverent Divine, and as great a Scholar as any of our great Adversaries,
held and taught that the meaning of Christ in making Peter a fisher of men,
was, that he would drive all Emperors and Kings, yea all the people of the
world into the Popes net, so that he might sees, broyle, or fry them in a pan,
even as his Holiness should think best to use and order them, and his Prelates
and their inferior officers also to make their best gain and advantage of
them, and many other strange opinions concerning callings, and ceremonies in
Gods worship, have been published by great Scholars, and confirmed by whole
Synods and Convocations; yea and general Councels, with as great probability
many of them, and show of all kind of true learning as all that is, which the
reverend fathers and learned Divines of this age have published, or can say for
these ceremonies, and the other things in controversy amongst us.

Seeing then the Church in her wisdom establised them as divine truths, though
not as necessary to salvation, yet profitable for unity, decency, and to try
the obedience of her children, why should not they be as well conformed to as
ours? were not their pure naturals as able to find out some things
commendable, yea necessarily to be conformed unto in the worship of God, though
they had no better ground for them in the Scripture, then as is formerly
mentioned, as well as the naturals of this pure or learned and spiritual age?
Degrees of Evil there is indeed, but nature admits not any one degree of
goodness, no not one, for it is stark dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.
1. and 4. 17. 18.
the mind vain, the understanding darkened, and full of ignorance, 1. Cor. 2.
14.
the heart haidened not perceiving the things of the spirit of God, nay it
thinks them to be mere foolishenesse, and more then needs; even most absurd
and against common sense: must it not therefore be granted of absolute
necessity, that all such spiritual persons, as well in these times as in
those (by what name or title soever they be called, though they have all the
learning and wisdom in the world; yet if they bring not the warrant of Gods
word plainly or truly for them in all their ceremonies, callings, gestures,
and other devices whatsoever of religious use, are to be held, reputed, and
adjudged liars, Romans 3. 4.
and therefore all such their opinions of the Devil the father of lies, and
therefore by no means upon any terms to be conformed unto? was not their
verbum non scriptum, consuetudo sanstae Ecclesiae, traditiones patrum, bonae
intentiones, constitutiones vel canones, as tolerable and necessary as ours?
was it not the practice of the serpent from the beginning, to prove by many
wise and learned arguments, that the only way to aspire to spiritual
preferments in this world, is absolutely to forsake and disclaim the warrant
of the sacred scripture in all matters of ceremony, and to depend upon
tradition, and the Catholic grounds aforesaid?

Oh our most dear mother, we can never forget these weighty instructions
which so carefully and constantly thou have taught unto us, first that all
manner of witchcraft is (in the degree) a direct forsaking of God, and a
uniting and knitting unto the Devil, and therefore no manner of Witch, Leuit.
20. 6.
white or black, good or evil, nor any that seek after them, ought to live,
(not that there is any of them good, but that like other humane or divellish
inventions they seem to do good, by maintaining diverse in unlawful callings,
and by helping some to their stolen or lost goods, 1. Sam. 15. 25.
or others of diseases in men or beasts, or the like.) Secondly that Rebellion
is as the sin of witchcraft, yea that a Rebellious transgression though it
be but in ceremony, calling or gesture is a wickedness not inferior to
Idolatry* for the same ground or foundation serves for both, and that it is
no^ garments, music, and such like complement that the Lord accepts or takes
any pleasure in (which yet he does in every thing of Religious use which he
would have his fervants in his worship to conform unto) but when his voice is
obeyed. verse. 22.
Now his voice is in nothing, but what his word does command; therefore thou
did conclude that he was not obeyed in any thing of religious use, which was
not grounded upon his commandment, according to his own words whatsoever I
command you (concerning my worship) that do, Deu. 12. 32
thou shall not add any thing (whether ceremony, calling, gesture or
whatsoever) thereto, for all counsels, or canons or whatsoever, that in Gods
worship require any thing of religious use which is not the commandment of the
Lord or his voice, Ier. 7, 23, 24,
is directly stubbornes of a wicked heart, which makes to go backward from God
and sincerity, to all profanes and Apostacy, ver, 28.
truth is perished and clean gone out of the mouth of such preachers as
maintain such things, and therefore thou did charge us for ever, to continue
(in our serving of God) in all things which are written in the word of God,
Gal. 3. 10. ^*
to do them; yea them only and not any Invention or noveltie whatsoever,
which unavoidably, especially being once known and yet Justified and defended;
will bring Gods greevous plague and curse. Romans 1. 17.
Is the Righteousness of the Church Revealed in the Gospel and that not torn
or patched, but perfect and complete? and is the worship and ceremonies,
callings and gestures, whereby the Church is made partaker of that
righteousness, and shows her thankfulness unto God for the same, but lamely
taught therein, or to the halues? part being left to traditions, unwritten
verities, and humane Inventions? verily as in that so in these, Romans 4, 2. 1.
if there be any cause of Rejoicing it is not with God, and therefore must
needs be with the Devil, for what, else can possibly be found concerning the
flesh (be it never so wise or learned) or any work, fruit, or device thereof
is not the Justifying of humane Inventions in Gods worship without warrant from
the word, a plain profession that they think though they be not more Just
then GOD, Job. 4, 17,
or more pure then their maker, yet verily there is some justice and purity in
their nature, whereby they are able to find out a holy use of these things
which God never commanded?

Is not this a very natural branch of that folly which being found was
punished so fearefullie in the Angels; 18
therefore did thou warn us also for ever to take heed of unstedfastnes, and
not to presume to conform to any invention of man (in this kind) seeing he
dwells but in a house of clay whose foundation is in the dust, 19
and therefore all his reasons and arguments are but dustie and dirtie, and
that fleshly liberty and carnal privileges which he claims proceeds but from
his fatnes even that abundance of earthly honors and preferments which pamper
him, Deuteronomy. 32. 15
and by security makes him better fed then taught, and so to fall from
sincerity and uprightness, and even to spurn with his heel at Gods
ordinances and servants, which in effect is to forsake God that made him, by
not regarding the strong God of his salvation, but despising his gracious
ordinances which he had made strong and effectual to bring him to the
assurance thereof by faith in Christ, he sets up his own inventions, and
magnifies his carnal devices, punishing most grievously all that will not
conform thereunto.

And thus by strange gods, or (which differs nothing in effect) by strange
ceremonies calings and gestures of Religious use in Gods worship which are
Abominations they provoke the Lord to Anger, how can this be otherwise, seeing
all such outward worship and service (though the Inward substance concerning
the doctrine of faith in the Messiah seem never so found) is a mere offering
unto devils and not unto God, eve^ new gods, newly come up, as every thing
which God himself has not commanded in the word is to be esteemed.

Can we with any honesty condemn the inventions of popery in their religious
worship whether they concern their callings, as their 7 orders of priests etc.
or ceremonies, as voluntary vows, and like devotions as directly coming out
of that smoke of the pit, because they thereby corrupt the true worship of God
with profane and carnal devices, and must we not needs thereby subscribe that
ours are of the same hatch, if they have no better warrant then they by the
word of God? Their civil magistrates allow and command those as best fitting
their government, and as having long experience of Gods blessing on them for
maintaining of them, and where is it forbidden in the Scriptures to have a most
reverent opinion of the Relikes of saints? suppose it be Joseph's breeches or
our Ladies smock which are with great devotion reserved at Aken, or in what
Epistle or Gospel is it prohibited that the town of Genua in Italy should
keep in a reverent memorial of Christ, the tail of the Ass which he road
upon to Jerusalem, which if any man will not believe me, he may go thither
and see very fresh and fair at this day, for ought I know not one hair
wanting.

Now may not they as well greevously punish and perpetually imprison) at least
till death set them at liberty) all that will not conform to these, and many
other as good as these, as having nothing in them contrary to the word of God,
as well as our adversaries for these in question among us? for what greater
decency can be found in a white shirt, or a well furd hood, then in these? Oh
Lord, did not these plants come from Gomorah, verse, 32,
which have such dragonish poison, and Aspish cruelty in them? 33
are not these their courses laid up in store with thee, yea are they not
sealed most safely (till their full rypenesse be accomplished) among thy
treasures? 34
shall not their feet (whose beauty does only consist in their golden buskens
and slippers) in due time slide? 35
Have they not some feeling already of the slipprinesse of their places, which
makes them so extremely violent in their mischievous Courses? yes verily, dear
mother, those that thus have abused thee and fed thy Children with corrupt
food, the very Day of their Destruction is at hand and the things, 36
that shall come upon them make haste, for the Lord shall judge his people, and
repent toward his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and no
man left either to speak or stand out for the truth, when men shall say, where
are their Gods, 37*
even that mighty God in whom they trusted, whom they did so rejoice with
their prophesyings; and days of public humiliations and reioycings, 38,
Let them rise up and help you, let him be your refuge, and if he will have
you, let him deliver you out of our courts, from our censures, from
excommunicato capiendo, from our bands and imprisonment. Esa, 66, 5.
Oh hear the word of the Lord all ye that tremble at his word, your enemies,
who termed themselves brethren, and hated you, which they evidently showed by
casting you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, and so he
will, for he shall appear to your joy, verse. 4.
and they shall be ashamed, for I will choose out their defusions wherewith
they have so blinded and deceived the Princes and the Rulers, and discover
their hypocrisy to all the world. For I know the thoughts that I have toward
my people says the Lord; Ier. 29. 11.
even the thoughts of peace and not of trouble, 12
to give you an end, and your hope; then shall you cry unto me, and ye shall
go and pray unto me, and I will hear you, and ye shall seek me, and find
me, because ye shall seek me with all your heart, yea you shall take up this
curse against your adversaries, 22
The Lord make thee like Zedechiah and Ahab, whom the King burnt in fire,
because they committed villainy in Israel, 23
even adultery with their neighbors wives, and have spoke lying words in my
name* which I have not commanded them, He says not which I have forbidden.
even I know it; and testify it says the Lord, though they walk so closely
as they think no body shall find them out; yea, I will visit Shemaiah because
he has spoken rebelliously against the Lord, 32
and has prophesied and I sent him not.

Thus we find it true (dear mother) which thou have often repeated, that a
little leaven in their corrupted minds being thus by ambition nourished,
brings this lamentable soreness to the whole lump of all their proceedings,
even a Rebellious wilfulness to break any of Gods greatest commandments, if
occasion so require, rather then to reform their fleshly and carnal devices,
the only supporters of their lawless greatness. Yet we must needs
acknowledge that howsoever diverse of our adversaries are exceeding violent, and
will not stand to hear reason, or to give any for the things they require, but
either conform, take the oath, or take him away Iaylor, or cast him out; yet
diverse of them take exceeding great pains, and with many deep reasons full of
learning and antiquity, discretion and wisdom, seem to say very much for
conformity, but for mine own part I still say, and for ever must say, that I
never heard or saw any dram of divine authority, nor any thing favoring of the
spirit of grace come from the^; and alas holy mother, thou have taught us, over
and over again, that we must esteem the most absolute perfection of the wisdom
of the flesh, Romans 8. 5^ 6. 7. 8.
to be unsensible of the things of God, yea mere Enmity against him, and
therefore in any case never to conform unto them, because in so doing we
cannot possibly be subject to the law of God, but must needs Rebel against the
holy Ghost by whose inspiration it was written. Act. 7. 51.


Rebel therefore no longer you learned men by walking in a way which is not
good even after your own Imaginations, Esa. 65. 2.
if you think it horrible blasphemy, that a priest of a piece of bread should
make his maker, then judge it at least some smatch of like Idolatry, for men
to presume without any warrant from the word, to creat any thing whatsoever of
Religious use for the service of their savior, but if you be persuaded that
those five words are of such efficacy, then hold on your course make more
cannons to strengthen your Conformity.

Lastly one word to you my dear brethren of the Separation and one word to the
wise is sufficient. There is no one thing that our adversaries do more greedily
desire, then how to raise divisions and dissentions amongst us, which most
willingly, though dissemblingly, they usually for a time give way unto.
Carefully looking what comes nearest to the truth; and therefore most directly
opposing their kingdom and that with force and arms, even by fraud, and all
abominable practices, they set against (which my trust is some good body will
plainly discover to their perpetual shame) but te^l me true in good sadness
did you never read the learned lege^d of that holy Nun, mother Hubberd, how
that an Ass is still an Ass, though he have stolen a Lions skin, and iets up
and down like an irregular monster, a learned master I should say, even very
so it is, I tell you a truth though indeed a great secret, they have bretrayed
our dear mother who bare us all, and because she would not yield to their
beastly lusts; by a trap door, yea in the place of holiness and that under
pretense of devotion, have caused her ere she was aware of their guilefulnes,
to fall in a most deep dungeon, and having stripped her of all her goodly
Raiment, they have power given them, there to detain her for a time, and so
have clad their common harlot my Lady (sa-reverence) Superstition in our
mothers best clothes, and painted her writhen face, filling up the pockholes
etc. with such excellent art and learned devices, as they have made the filthy
beast to seem ^erie like our holy mother, insomuch as a good while, we all
were persuaded that it was she, but some of our elder brethren hearing her
voice so strangely changed, began to suspect that some thing was in the wind,
and so observing more diligently, perceived her box and pensill, attendans
never to be from her, lest any accident should discover the knavery. Now you
know she always abhorred painting (as all honest women do) and so it is
evident that this filthy strumpet guls the world, and abuses all that are
sincerely affected, having such a Company of base and beastly followers, as
will swear and forswear any thing for the preservation of her credit, for if
her vizard be once plucked off, they know full well that they must be sent
packing with a vengeance.

My humble suite is therefore unto you, that in your wisdom you would be
pleased seriously to moralize this fable, and to Join with us in the means
of the redemption of our mother, who I do assure you, recommends her love unto
you, and desires greatly to embrace us all in her arms of unity and
sincerity. The dungeon is an entire Rock and so hard that no tool will pierce
it, only the tears of true Repentance, distild in a limbeck of a lively faith,
over a fire of a godly life, moderately kept burning with the bellows of holy
zeal according unto knowledge, will absolutely dissolve it, yea I may tell
you our mother is very confident that if you and we would lovingly join
together in this business without fainting, separating our selves from all
singularity, pride, love of the world, even all the works of darkness, her
sighs and groans have already so softened the inside, that the outside gapes as
it were for our mollifying medicine. Up my brethren stir up one another, and
let us never give over till by our earnest prayers and godly lives we have
procured her liberty, then shall we see these Inchanters, and witches children
with their goddess Conformity, sent home again to Egypt, where shortly
together with all of that litter, they are to receive their portion: pardon my
boldness dear mother, pass by my rudeness dear brethren, accept of my
service to my Saviviour, for I desire only his praise and glory.

MALAC. 3. 1. The Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple, even
the messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in, behold, he shall come, says
the Lord of hosts.

But who may abide his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he
is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap, etc.

I do most humbly entreat all Christians that are zealous of the Common
salvation, wisely, yea and earnestly to Contend for the maintenance of all and
every action, gesture, and ceremony of the faith which were once given to the
saints, and never to conform to any other.

FOR

No omission of any action is Sin, but only of those actions which GOD has
Commanded, or have warrant from his word, but the actions of the gesture of
kneeling and of the ceremonies in question in manner and form as they be urged,
are not commanded by God, neither have warrant from the word therefore the
omission of them is not sin,

Let our adversaries prove that they be commanded by God, or are warranted by
the word, and we will ipso facto conform unto them, but else their omission is
no sin, and therefore we are punished for well doing.

Be of good courage and do it, and the Lord shall be with the good. 2. Chron.
19. 11.
