A discourse of Man's life. Comparing him to things that quickly pass, As
bubble, shuttle, blossom, stream, and grass.
To the tune of Aim not too high.


NOw to discourse of man I take in hand,
In what estate his fickle life does stand,
He in this world is as a pilgrimage,
And makes have to travail to old age.
Man's life compared is unto a Flower,
That grows and withers all within one hour
And like to grass that grows in the field.
Or like true courage which is loath to yield.
The flower's cut, and now can bear no show,
The grass is withered which was green to view
True courage wronged by over many foes.
And death does make a man his life to lose.
Man's life is like the damask Rose you see,
Or like the blossom that grows on the tree,
Or like unto the dainty flowers in May,
Or like the morning that begins the day.
The Rose is withered and the blossom blasteth,
The flowers fade, and fast the morning hastes.
Even such is man whose thread is quickly spun,
Drawn out and cut, and suddenly is done.
Man's life is like the Sun, or like the shade,
Or like unto the gourd which Jonas had,
Or like an hour, or like unto a span,
Or like unto the singing of a Swan
The Sun does set, and fast the shadow flies,
The gourd consumes and man he quickly dies
The hour is short, for and the span not long,
The swan near death, man's life is quickly don
Man's life is like the grass that is newly sprung
Or like unto a tale that is newbegun,
Or like the bird which we do see to day,
Or like the pearlie dew that is in May.
The grass is withered, and the tale is ended,
The bird is flowne, and up the dew ascended,
Even such is man, who lives by his breath,
Is here, now there, still subject unto death.
Man's life is like the bubble in the Brook,
Or like a glass wherein a man does look,
Or like a shuttle in a Weauers hand,
Or like the writing that is in the sand.
The bubble's broke, and soon the looke's forgot
The shuttle's flung, for and the writings blot:
Even such is man that lives on the earth,
He Is always subject for to loose his breath.
The second part.
To the same tune.


Man's life is like a thought, or like a dream,
Or like the gliding of a running stream,
Or like a race, or like unto a goal,
Or like the dealing of a rich man's doale.
The thought is past, for and the dream is gone,
The water glides, even so man's life is done.
The race soon run, so is the goal soon won,
The dole soon dealt, man's life is quickly done.
Man's life is like an arrow from the bow,
Or like sweet course of waters that does flow,
Or like the time betwixt the flood and ebb,
Or like unto the Spiders tender web.
The arrows shot, for and the flood soon spent,
The time's no time, the Spiders web is rent:
Even such is man, and of as brittle state,
He Is always subject unto Enuies hate.
Man's life is like the lightning in the sky,
Or like a Post that suddenly does hye,
Or like a Quauer singing of a song,
Or like a journey that is not very long.
The lightning's past, for and the Post must go,
The Note is short, and so's the journey too:
Even such is Man the which does heap up sorrow
That lives to day, and dies before to morrow.
Man's like unto the snow when summer's come,
Or like a Pear, or like unto a Plum,
Or like a tree that grows fresh and green,
Or like the wind which can no ways be seen.
The Pear does rot, for and the Plum does fall,
The snow dissolues, and so we must do all,
The tree's consumd that was so fresh and fair,
The wind's uncertain that blows in the air.
Man's like the seed put into the earths womb,
Or like dead Lazarus that is in his Tomb:
Or like Tabitha being in a sleep,
Or like to Jonas that was in the deep.
The seed it springs, Lazarus now stands,
Tabitha wakes, and Jonas he has landed.
Thus are we certain life we shall obtain,
Though death does kill yet shall we live again.
God of his mercy grant to us his grace,
That we may lead our lives in such a case,
That when we are departed hence away,
We then may live with him in joy for aye.
Grant Lord that we may please thy will divine
Lord let thy loving favor on us shine,
And turn from us thy heavy wrath and ire,
And grant us mercy Lord we thee require.
Lord make us like the fruitful Vines,
To bring forth fruits in our due tides and times,
Unto the honor of thy glorious name,
Amen good Lord, grant we may dee the same.
Now to conclude, God bless our gracious Charle^,
With all his worthy Subjects, Lords, and Earls,
And grant us Lord, true faith, with love and peace,
And let thy Gospel more and more increase.
FINIS.
London Printed for H. G.


