THE PHILOSOPHERS SATYRS, WRITTEN BY M. ROBERT ANTON, of Magdalen College in
Cambridge.

Gaude, quod spectant oculi te mill loquentem:
Quicquid sub terra est, in apricum proferet aetas.


LONDON, Printed by T. C. and B. A. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at
his shop in Fleetstreet, over against the great Conduit. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, LORD HERBERT EARL OF Pembrooke, Baron of
Cardiffe, Marmion, and Saint Quintin, one of his Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter. Robert Anton
wishes a happy life militant and triumphant.
I Remember (Right Honorable, the whining complaint of the Poet concerning
virtue: Credo pudicitiam Saturno: rege moratam delapsum in coelis: It Is the
iron age, and virtue must have Estredge like concoction, or else die in an
Hospital for want of a Patron. It Is well she is stellified in heaven: for earth
is her local place of torment: I have been a sad spectator of her injuries,
and deplore her miserable exile; yet her eclipse by the interposition of vice
is not a total defect of her heavenly light, but partial and limited, yet how
prodigious it is, the tragical changes of this age can truly prophecy. Some
Surgeon might have begd a dead body from the fanges of execution, whose Anotomy
might have taught the age the constitution of vice, impostumated with murder
and hot raind affections. My prayer is more charitable, then Cynicall to wish
any plants of such an unfortunate tree, I have seen vice adored with her
superstitious Imagerie, and I wish all true Protestants to virtue rather to die
Martyrs, then revolt from her profession, in whose faith your honor is held a
most religious professor, the sects of vice are more then in Amsterdam, to
whose errors I oppose my book, as an eager disputant. The motions of this
planitarie satire are regular and presented in a mask of a seuenfold
uniformity. Appear Philosopher in thy undaunted humor of gravity, and spit
defiance in the face of scurrile satirrisme: lend heavenly whipcord, and borrow
correction from the Sun: fetch blood from the whole body of Nature, and the
six planets lay on load on the stigmatick shoulders of vice. This book was
conceived in dog-daies, and must bite, the sign is in Scorpio, and the planets
in their most critical mansion. Be as the world thinks you, virtuous, and
read this book with a more then laurel resolution. The thunder has no power
over a consecrated and virtuous mind, it smites only strong timbred villainies.
Kings have accepted roots from a Philosopher: the gift is small: yet it calls
you Lord, and me master. A satire is music worthy of Pithagor as his
opinion, especially, when the planets dance a heavenly lauolto, they are nimble
spirited and active, and only hope for the passive part of your noble
patronage.

Your Honors obliged Robert Anton.

TO THE COURTEOUS AND Judicious Reader.
WHo ere thou art, that art intellectual, be thou my Organist, and let thy
soul, which with Philosophers is but a harmony, keep time with this Musical
mask of the Spheres. I have labored here to present Art and Nature without
their ugly periwiggs of obsceane and shallow Poetry, and have distinguished the
confusion of time from a grave and methodical dialect. How poor and naked does
that labor appear, that has no other clothes, but the sustian of Apes, and
base imitation: how like a Bedlam looks a Poet by nature, that never writes but
in full Moons of surfets, and Bacchanalian quotations of young Gentlemen's
ruins and dice consuming Lordships: how poor a Graduate is learning, when it
keeps acts in tenebris, and murders the Press with fellonious Pamphlets stolen
from the imperfections of their dearest friends, nay, purloined from their own
scabbed dispositions, and vlcerous inclinations: I must confess my self to
be a sorrowful patient in my own defects, yet a physical proficient in
their remedies. I take no pleasure in the incision of other men. Only I read
an Anotomie lector of their vices. Comment upon me with judgment, not censure,
and thou shall find thy soul brimfull of emulation, but void of envy: for
others that are not borne with a generous infusion, I hold with Galen, that the
temperament of their souls, follows the temperament of their gross and
sottish bodies; and therefore basely incapable.

Thine as thy judgment is. R. A.

IN SATYRAS DIGNISSIMAS et vere Phylosophicas amici sui verissimi Roberti Anton.
INcipe, sis primus sophiae, qui mystica iura
In Satyras vertens crimina vera canit,
Phylosophus verus sis: nominis ellumon inde
Sit: tibi s^m philos, tu mihi (chare) sophos.
To his (...) friend. R. A.
DEesert and praise are Twins. The first being quick,
The second still is so; or if it die,
Then is the first too sound, or else too sick,
And so may dye in grace, or Enuies eye.
But this with wonder in my stomach sticks,
That Satyrs wrapped but in base Balladrie
Are praisd beyond the moon (of lunatickes)
As being sun-begot; so cannot die.
Needs must I hug the Muse, and praise the pen
Of him, that makes his Satires dance a brall
Unto the music of the spheres, even then
When as the planets footed it withal:
Thou sharply singst, but he the burden bears,
That would have song more sharp but for his ears.
I. D*

TO THE AVTHOR.
WEll may we praise those books, that bring us store.
Of profit with their pleasure: here to fore
The art of Astronomy was such tough meat,
It almost broke our teeth, ere we could eat.
^^t thou with quaint and curious dressing have
Made it melt now like hon^^ ^n the (...).
And since heauen's so far (...) one easily may
Go thither (for it is vphill all the way)
Thou, to save us the pain, of traveling, thus
(Judicious writer) bringst the heavens to us;
Makst the stars serve as letters, by which we
May read the secrets of Astronomy.
Yet winn'st thou not (grave tutor) more respect
When thou did teach, then when thou do correct.
The golden age is past, iron the worst
Is only left, and that is half eat with rust:
Rough files and corsiue waters, only may
(For oil does no good) fetch this rust away,
Well therefore have thou chose, with Satyricke rimes,
To whip and fetch blood from these Bedlam times,
So wise Physicians, when they see bad blood,
Open a vein, that they may make it good,
P. B. Medii Temp.

THE PHILOSOPHERS SEVEN Satyrs, aluding to the seven Planets. And first of his
Section of heaven.
THere was a time before all time begun,
When the proud Iennets of the radiant Sun
Were scarce delivered from the womb of night,
And backed by circular motion, when all light,
Soiourn'd with darkness, and this glorious ball
Had neither form nor soul Angelical,
To move those orbs above as some propound P^thagoras, his opinion.

With rauishing music, or such heavenly sound,
As that great distance of those rolling spheres,
Bars from the organs of all humane ears,
When neither Sea, nor bind coopt in a ring,
Keept their conseruatiue place, nor any thing
Had an essential form, or element,
Circle or Center had true complement
Of Art or nature: but when heaven and earth
Had from confusions bowels knawne the birth
Of this fair Child named Cosmos, the Mouers eye
Distinguished this fair object of the sky
From his disordred mass with all this globe,
And suited it in far more formal robe
Of quantity and figure. Then began
All lights to light the Makers darling (MAN:) The end of Man.

For which indeer'd creation and respect
This Microcosme of man was made errect
With upright speculation, lineally
To view this rich imbrodred Cannopie
Of those Celestial bodies; and begin
(...) cry, Heaven is my Country, Earth my Inn: Anaxagoras. Principle.

But leaving him to Heaven, of Earth we sing,
As being of the world, the perfects thing
In the Creations wonder, and the end
Of our aspiring hopes, which we ascend,
(...) to our local bliss, and natural place,
To end even there, where never ended grace.
Of Heaven.
THis glorious globe of heavens resplendent ball,
Trapt richly with his lights pontifical.
Fountain of motion, by which every star Motus raptus, Or contrary motion.

Is whirld from East to West orbicular
In four and twenty hours, as Shepherds say,
Trotting the circuit of the natural day,
Is of no frame nor form geometrical,
But round of body, and as Sphericall,
As the Egyptian Sages did compare
The winding Snake unto the circled year:
For of all figures this does best appear, Pliny lib. 1.

Every way showing a just hemis pheare,
Bending upon it self: most capable
To comprehend this frame so strong and able
To boulster up this load, and ponderous frame,
As it has neither joints, but still the same:
Keeping his active body aply sound
As it is iointlesse, pointlesse, endless, round:
Now whether this pure quintessence of nature
Be everliving, or a dying creature:
Or whether that divine intelligence,
That gives to heaven his turning excellence
Give essence, or assistance, as without,
The soul that moves it, it were still from doubt
Of what we call it now, as ships that scowre
The Oceans curled billows, by the power
And cunning of the Pilote: even to that clime
Where that great idol gold, Saint of the time,
To whom the Indian Pilgrims sacrifice
Such three years Hecatombs of widows cries,
Speaking in golden Oracles of dross,
The Brusses murmr and the Mariners loss,
And yet at last return with crazed slides,
With grasse-greene ribs furd with tempestuous tides
With two or three alive, the Pilotes hand
Guiding the sickely vessel to the land,
By which we see his form and name he saues,
Although the Pilotes motion plowes the waves
With card and compass: so in natural sense vt nauta naui it a intelligentia
coeli. Zab. lib. de motu coeli. Scalig. excer. 68. Sect. 1.

Heaven takes no form from his intelligence,
Which only, like a Pilote sweetly steeres
The harmony of nature in the spheres:
With power assistent, and their motions carry
With certain laws, and statutes voluntary,
That as when every element does strive
To move unto his place conseruatiue:
As being so imperfect and so base,
That they must pine and die without a place
And local conservation, yet is heaven a creature
Of such a perfect quintessense of nature, Heauenneeds no place of
conservation. Sol and homo generat hominem.

That it esteems not place for conservation,
But to another end of generation,
Moves with his powerful influence: whence began
Our Schools to ring the sun and man get man:
But leaving these to tread the thornie maze
Of Schoole-cram'd Sophistry: again we raise
Our haughty Muse to fly with sollid wings,
And search with stars and subcelestiall things:
For since we see, that by the loadstones might
The iron age is drawn; where with delight,
The readers eye does fancy, and men's wits
Like Bagpipes sound, no sound but pleasant fits:
We are resolved to pluck such fruits from schools,
And once to please Physicians, knaves and fools:
For to all these I know our book shall come:
Pack Doctor to thy urine, and be dumb
The sottish Empericke, only fools have land,
And so have countrey-knights: these, these command
The Muses sons with an idolatrous knee
To pray to Angels, or a noble fee
Of some poor Pamphlet. Hence bastards to your sire:
Whilst we revive our quick Promothean fire:
The number of these turning spheres of heaven, Ptolomies opinion.

Some say but nine, others affirm eleven:
Which all Divines more full of holy fire
Named sacred Hirarchies: where the blessed quier
Of heavenly Angels and true Martirs rides
That with triumphant wreaths shall judge the tribes.
The order of the Orbs caelestiall
Are numbered thus: the first imperial
So called of the Greeks, as being a place Empuros. Arist. Aquinas his opinion.

Most full of holy light and Angels grace,
Whose blessed souls from passion do survive
Their substance only being definitive:
Not circumscriptiue as our bodies be,
With the aires cincture or concauitie,
Their bodies free from any local span,
Of gross dimensions, or precinctes of man;
And therefore in one body spirits dwell
All in one place, more then large Art can tell:
For round about the just man's life and merits,
Million of Angels, and bright flaming spirits,
Shall at one time, and in one place unite,
Their most regardant powers infinite,
And vnextended in our bodies move,
With subtle motion from their place above,
Either to save with a protectors will,
Heavens glorious darling, or by their power distill,
With whippes of vengeance by their power divine,
In Legions name possessing men and swine. Math. Chapter 5.

This Heaven the seat of those most happy souls,
Whose summum bonum all true bliss enrowles,
Was that third heaven, whose glorious excellence
Most sweetly ravished Paul's admiring sense.
That steept in Loethe of so blessed a trice, In this heaven Paul was rapt.

He prays to be disolued to Paradise:
And gorged with holy raptures full of grace,
He sings the Abyss bliss riches of that place.
The second, is the primum mobile,
So called by Sages in Philosophy,
Because, as from so clear and crystal spring
Proceeds the birth, death, motion of each thing,
Being the first, that in his just Carrere,
Deriues all motion to each second Sphere,
And yet himself in golden mean does ride
Equal in motion, like the sacred guide
Of some prime reverent Prelat, whose great Sea
Is moved with hauenly Regularite,
Divine in motion, and Divine in place:
Free of his learned influence, rich in grace:
Oh pardon me dull age, if I proclaim
His venerable life, more then his name
Suparlatiuely gracious, bark Heriticks to see.
Such Metropolitan uniformity,
VVhilest your great fisherman in Tibers flood
Shall move in purple streams of royal blood,
And with disorderd orders turn the keys
To lock young fools in Limbo: and with ease
Martyr a fond Apostate, who reconcild
By a grave goate-like father lives exild,
In some Sulphurous troop of Jesuits:
Whose powder-treason-Collidges inuites
A Tiborne resolution: whether sent or come
Dies Traitors here, and halter Saints at Rome:
But with a certain order, moves our heaven,
Not swift nor slow, but paraleld and even:
From whence we truly know, and can define
Her motion heavenly, and write it in the line
Of Orthodoxall faith: which moving stands
On Peter's rock, and not on Peter's Sands.
The third in order of these things Divine,
Is that bright heaven transparent, Christaline,
Having no twinkling star, or glistering pride,
But like some waterie body clarified,
From whence some say, that when the world was made,
And that great Elohim the globes bases laid,
Dispersing darkness, and the tenebrous night
To forms of beauty, and celestial light, Genes. 1.

That then his mighty Spirit heaven did move
To separate those waters from above
From these below: and to this element,
To place his likeness in the firmament:
For since we see, that seaes with earth compare,
And heaven with earth in things that likely are.
The earth brings forth the dog, the foamie maine,
And Heaven it self equiuocates the same,
When with his singing and canicular beams
He bakes the earth, and dries the Crystal streams:
And therefore with Harmonious consent,
Heaven has proportion to this Element.
And thus we read in natures Characters
Like lives with like to shun intestine wars. Parescumparibus.

The fourth heaven is that glorious spangled globe
Embost with stars, and like a gorgeous robe,
Purl'd ore with natures Ape, and Zany-art
Trailes down his starrie train, and does impart
Day to black night, and with his grove of stars,
(Like candles) shine to wind wrackt Mariners,
Some fixed, some wandering in their tinsell'd Orb:
Whose number fixed, Philosophers record,
To be one thousand two and twenty clear,
Well known unto the Sea-cuft Ma^riner.
By these the iocund Boateson at first sight,
Soust with the Ruffin seaes, and scratch with might,
Whistle a maine, and from the hatches skip,
The nimble squires of the dancing ship,
And fearelesse kick the billows with disdain,
Tearing the curled bowels of the maine.
These give propension to each man's deffects,
And by their fatal influence and aspects
Besides that universal providence,
On whose great nod depends each consequence
Of second causes: from their crittick powers
At Caesar's birth acts Caesar's tragic hours.
But if their kind conjunctions smiling meet
Our first nativity, and with a sweet
And Iouiall dalliance in a golden shower.
Kindly embrace our first conceptions hour,
Then shall Augustus, though but mean by birth,
Sway seven hill'd Rome, and tax the verge of earth.
Foot-boyes shall perch with Kings, and Tanners ride
On great Seianus courser side by side
With some most Lordly Consul: Rearemice fly
By daylight with the Eagles majesty,
And will not reason mount Agathocles
(The Potters son) to the Piramides
Of honor and high state: what virtue marres,
And hates in fools shall prosper by their stars:
Yet fear not thou, whose crabbed fate suspends
Thy fortune progress, and whose learned ends
Aims at eternity, though whipped with need
And dogged censure; and whose wounds do bleed
With times incision stern authority
Dissecting Arts like an Anotomie,
Reading their physic lectures to the ears
Of our contempts to greatness, great in fears
And pale suspects, who iealious of deserts,
Do Sepulcher alive both Arms and Arts
For thou in spite of their maleuolent rage,
Times simony, and fury of the Age,
Ecclipses, and all Planetarie hate,
Like a Byssextile-yeere shall leap thy fate:
Wise men like sluices in the plague of wars,
Were made to rule, those only rule the stars, Sapiens dominabitur Astris.

Nor can base Gypses tell them of their fate:
Impostors, with their figures calculate
Of black futuritie: Astrology divine
The ascendent fortune of their heavenly sign:
For wise men are not borne as Midwiues be,
To wait on luckie hours, or for the fee,
Of Biscuit influence, their virtue bars
The superstition of such gossipping stars.
But more then man, his reason rules the skies,
His manhood shares a godhead, that is wise:
In this fair starrie Mirror of the sky,
Damaskt with beauty and variety
Of thousand constellations, whose clear flames,
Are known in maps by their celestial names:
For there the fair Oryon and the Bear,
Mayor and Minor grace this hemispheare,
Swift Pegasus and Perseus (radiant light)
Burnish the tan'd face of the blackemores night:
Bright Cassiopeia and Jove's Eagles shines,
Besides the constellations of the signs,
Which every fool in Physic can make good,
Their use in purges, pills, and letting blood.
And every Almanacke druggest poorly read,
Can tell what witless sign reigns in his head.
But leaving these beyond their yearly date
To smoke an Indian sulphur, we create
Again our hallowed Altars, and in fires
Of morrall vows our sacred Muse aspires.
Tell me thou grave and mighty Stagerite
Orac^lous Schocleman, whose deluding light
The loathsome Epicure and horrid sect
Of damned Atheism follow with direct
And eager sent: what genius could devise, A^st. lib. 1. de coelo. The world is
eternal.

To spread so large, such monstrous heresies,
That even besides grave Orpheus, and the rest,
Proclus and Pliny, and the learned breast
Of sharp Auerroes, Christian Atheists cry,
The world's eternal, and shall never die,
When by the state of stars we may discrie,
The world's firm ruin and mortality.
And Platoes creature having life and breath
As they decline, shall languish unto death.
And as a crazed body full of hours,
Renders his silver head, and vital powers,
(His radical moisture spent, and every part,
Gasping for motion, from the panting heart)
To natures disolution: so shall pass
Both heaven and earth unto their pristine Mars,
Although some say, that this great Continent,
And all this glorious guilt-hatcht firmament
Shall change his form, and accidental frame,
Although the part substantial be the same,
Alleging for their weak Philosophy,
This sacred place of sweet divinity.
Yet by the fall of stars our reasons prove
A total wrack of earth and heaven above.
For first we see the Sun, whose bright Carrier
Trots through the ring of time, and dates the year
In his diurnall progress: now declines,
More near the earth, then in the former times,
When learned Ptolome observed the stars,
Their houses, signs, and different characters.
Cheering old Ops, now doting with long days,
With cordial flames, and charitable rays,
That else in this consumption would exspire,
VVanting so bright a Nurse, whose cheering fire
Restores her health with his preservative cure,
Adding new life to her old temperature:
Besides infection of each element,
Corruption of the purest temperament:
Physicians now turn Satyrs, and complain,
That nature is a stepdame in the frame
Of this last Age: when croking Ravens sing, Theophrastus

Their lives large Charter merrier then a king.
The stately Stag a hundred years shall graze,
But man to worms meat turns in fewer days:
Pigmies for Giants, that with Babell power
Were wont to scale the high Olympiade Tower,
And wrestle with the Gods: now dwarfes are borne,
Never made to fight, but made to natures scorn:
The Arcadian Kings two hundred years did live,
But now the thriftie heavens do scarcely give Pliny.

Half of that pension to the noblest man,
His grave but six foot long, his life a span:
Which shows the world corrupted from his best,
Declines his settling progress to the west;
For since all things from their sincere creation
Covet absurdities in generation:
And every thing steals to his privative end.
Stars fall from their degrees, Planets descend
To comfort the poor Centers feebled veins
Drooping unto his Chaos, with long pains
And aged barrenness: man that noble creature,
Scanted of time, and stinted by weak nature,
That in foretimes saw Iubiles of years,
As by Endimions history appears:
Nay, which is more, even silly women then,
Lived longer time, then our grave graye beard men:
Aged Terentia learned Tullies wife,
Above an hundred years spun out her life,
(...) The politics of state, that from their hiue,
Distill sweet maxims, how great Kingdoms thrive,
Their stinglesse King, that reigns in sweet increase,
Swarming in Nectard provinces of peace:
Which when his honie-grace, in progress flies,
A busy guard, with Argus jealous eyes,
Attends their daily- King: in which we see,
Kings supreme heads, what subjects ought to be:
If then this silly emblem, in disguise,
And more sententious clouds can moralize,
Such high occurrences, and intricate,
To tutor Solon in affairs of State:
What fearful palsy should my pen confine,
Since the sunne's like a King: Kings, Sunne-like shine?
For, mark; the more this kingly planet goes
To his meridian Zenith, the more he throws
His warmth upon us; and the more erect,
In his bright Noone-carreer, he does reflect
His beams in double lines, the more does spring
And prosper Mines, Plants, each vegetiue thing:
Likewise to Kings, such virtue we apply,
Whose Royal progress of true Regencie,
In his meridian luster, is desired
Still to run higher, and to rule admired,
Not feared, but loved; a happy prop of state;
Love ties allegiance; fear, (but to God) is hate: Cic. Odimus quos timemus

Yet godly fear and love to Kings we own;
Who fears not them, for justice can love none:
Even Apes at full-moone dance; then why not more,
Subjects at fuller glory, Kings adore:
He whose fox't sense, of innouations dreams,
(...) (...) light; but die in dark extremes:
No longer shall our peaceful shadows run,
When in an equal circle, rides our Sun:
Which, while there is a Sun to measure time,
May our Sun shine, within this British Clime:
And with his Royal race, run through the Signs
Of Envy and black treason, of the times:
As at his birth, Dame nature has expressed,
Bearing the Sign of Leo in his Crest:
For by old sawes in prophecies foretold
The coming of this Northern Lion bold:
The Sign of Scorpio, and the Vipers-brood,
Gowries black treason ever shall make good:
And that, which last, this fatal sign does tell,
Was that Sulphurous practice, hatched in hell,
Which since our Sun has past; swim Peter's keys
In Tibers flood of your damned treacheries.
Since in the voice of God, the people cry, Uox populi vox Dei.

Live still our radiant Sun of Majesty:
And measure out the Autum, Winter, Spring,
In Libra's Sign: it is Justice crowns a King:
Give light and motion, unto each degree,
Only retain thy influence uprightly.
But those, like Artelesse masters, do commence
Masters of Art, though not Arts excellence:
Yet, like the Sun, Kings may their beams disperse,
With general freeness to the universe:
And shine on common weeds, and fragrant flowers,
Poor ruined houses: and more lofty Towers:
Give life to insect creatures, and create,
Of things corrupted, things to generate: Corruption vnius, generatio alterius.

There Is not a Fly, a Waspe, a Scarabee,
But shares the Sun, with Caesar's majesty:
Since then, the Sunne-beames are diffused to all,
And to the barbarous Moore, and Christian fall
In direct equal lines: what fool, precise,
Can question his free beauty how to rise:
If Oracles on Socrates bestow
A golden Trivet: who dare answer no.
Princes are Oracles, from whom no cause,
Can be demanded, only wills are laws:
Suns vnconfin'd, to shine where they shall please,
To hide- scorcht Indians: or the Antipodes:
Yet were they Gods, and infinite to sense,
Untied to circles; or circumference
Of mortal limitation: being divine,
Yet there are some things, that even them confine
From absolute freedom: as not to have a will,
To covet contradictions, or do ill;
Both which, so stint the universal grace
To perfect actions: that it leaves no place
To vnproportion'd freedom: which in Kings,
Infinite in power, finite conditions brings:
Besides, the Sun, does grace this Hemispheare
With Oriental beauty, bright and clear:
So, when our British Sun, rose from his East,
His Kingly beams, with triple honors blessed,
Burnisht our mufled darkness, with such rays,
As gave a spritefull length, to our black days:
The troubled air, ingrost with Icie-feares,
Daun'st at the music, of the iocund Spheres:
That then, if er'e Pythagoras did not lie,
In Diapasons, kept true harmony:
Full constellations, in his issue shine,
Whose sweet reflection, even to wealthy Rhine:
So dazels admirations feeble sense,
As if the Sun paid use for influence
From this bright treasure: and so, bankrout, run,
That years, and days, exchanged for such a Sun:
Whose beams, so furnished foreign climes with light,
That there our morning-starre, chaste ugly night The beauteous Princess
Elizabeth.

To his first black confusion: and the morn
Laughed with a roasie-cheeke: when first was borne
Light, from our light: still may our new hopes shine,
Like fixed stars orbd in the Palatine:
Here could my Muse turn Courtier, and direct,
Her motion, to their motion and aspect:
And with a glozing quill insinuate,
Into the breast of greatness, and of state:
And (Ianus-like) with complementall grace,
Gaze on these sunne-beames, with a dubble face.
But that my duty, bids me show my heart;
Ladies, not Subjects faces, study Art:
Which in this zealous Moral, I have done,
By Iacobs-staffe, to look on Jacobs Son:
But from the King of light I now decline,
To sing of lights, that by his lights do shine:
Lest in this ticklish point of State I tread
To much: such fears save many a noble head.


REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO Patri Domino Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primo and
Metropolitano, faustam and inexhaustam precatur, musarum par pusillus, Robertus
Anton, Salutem in Domino.
Of Saturn.
REuerentiae tuae, sanae, co^scientiae, fidei, et ceteris virtutis tuae dotibus
deuotissimus; minutissimus ego huius mundi atomus, gratiae tuae solare iubar
iubeo saluere. Inter tantam huius venenosae aetatis caligantem miseriam, ecce
quam diaphanum et perspicuum apparet tuae virtutis lumen, inter tant as et
prodigiosas honoris ecclipses, et defectus, sphaera tui solis nullam patitur
vim, aut conscientiae, aut famae: sed apud antipodes, et homines ecclesiae
oppositos, maximam consequitur laudem; et aeternum memoriae obeliscum. O
gloriosum monumentu^, quod nec aes Cyprium, sed virtutis extruxit artificiu^:
sed o tempora (clamant aulici) de veneno! Causidici deiure corrupto! Clerici de
beneficio! Quis Jupiter haec suspiria demulcet; sunt haec mortalium communia
(absit) vt sint prodigia in hac catholica lacrymarum Abysso, sympathia quada^
patior ego Academicus, quis satyromastix mordicus, non erit impatiens? ^u^
monstra haec cu^ tanto strepitu tam horrendum emittunt foetum; et terra, cum
coelo patitur violentiam: heu quanta patimur! cum musarum alumni fulmine hoc
attoniti obstupescimus: modulamur lepide, viuimus misere: non vbera porrigit
matter Academia: vae nobis apud ecclesiasticos darivacuum; apud philosophos
nequaquam clamitant vulgi, non esse motum generationis, sed corruptionis: haec
communis glossa populi; hinc lachrimae nostrae; hinc singultus, et gemitus
virtutis pene sepultae: quae adeo squalida, et pannosa apparet: vt nulla fides
fronti: Asylum tuum inter haec efflagito: tu qui Atheis strenue effulges
obstaculum, mihi adsis et opusculo, propugnaculum, quod scripsi, tua
venerabili, et paterna indulgentia, nullam patietur apostasiam, aut authorem
suum abnegabit: lurida aetas suauiorem non meretur fabulam, aut cantilenam;
quam vitiosam illius corruptelam acctoso plectro profligare; cetera sileo:
supplex pro tua in terris vita, in coelis corona, militans ego non triumphans
musophilos finem impono.

Gratiae tuae et summae pietati deuotissimus Robertus Anton.

THE PHILOSOPHERS SECOND Satyr of Saturn.
THe next above this kingly Planets place,
Highest of all, is Saturn's fullen face:
Pale, and of ashie color, male content;
A Catelline, to mortal temperament:
That would blow up the Capitol of man
With envious influence; melencholy, wan,
And much resembling, a deep plodding pate,
Whose sallow iawbones, sink with wasting hate
At others streams of fortunes; whilst alone
His shallow current dries with lasting moan:
And if there hate be in a heavenly breast,
This Plannet with that fury is possessed;
Suspending our propention, with bad fate,
Inspiring Tragic plots, of death and hate;
Torturing our inclinations (like a wrack)
To dismal proiects, ominous, and black
Prodigious thoughts, and deepe-fetcht treacheries,
Beating the skul with sullen fantasies.
And mark what downe-cast looks we see in Nature,
This Planet fathers for a fatal creature:
And each profound plot, drawn from sullen earth,
From Saturn's spirit, is inspired with birth:
And yet Philosophers affirmed thus,
That Saturnists were most ingenious; Arist. l. 4. probl. 15.

Who long retain their great Italian-hate,
Witty in nothing, but things desperate;
To glut revenge, with studious memory
Of shallow wrongs, or some slight injury.
Which if this be his wit to study ill,
Take my wits madman, leave me simple still:
Under this dogged star, the infected mood
Of discontented Graduates, hatch their brood,
Flying like swallows from the winters frost
To warm preferment, in a foreign coast;
And there vent all their long digested hate
In scandalous volumes against the King and State.
Flying from Tarsus to proud Niniuie,
Recusants both in faith and loyalty;
Apostates in religion when they please,
Bravely to mount the Cross, they cross the Seaes.
These from this humerous Planet suck their birth,
Leaving deep wounds upon their mother earth:
What cause has moved thee, thou deep malecontent,
To change thy faith with the aires Element?
If Angli, are called Angeli: Oh, tell, Animum cum coelo mutant.

Why has their pride, thrown these from heaven to hell?
Is it, because thou have sung sweet in all
The liberal Arts, and now through want do fall?
Or do thou wonder at pluralities,
Impropriations, or absurdities
Of a lay Patron, that does still present
An ass, before a grand proficient?
Why, marvel not at these preposterous crimes,
That very Heathen men in former times
Have scoft at, in excess of bitter jest,
And like true prophets thus these times expressed:
Give to thy Cook (says the one) full twenty pound;
To thy fool ten: but to a man profound,
As thy Physician, ten groates shall suffice:
Thus, thus appears a Scholars miseries.
For should blind Homer come to sing his song,
With Lyrick sweetness, or the Muses tongue;
Had he all languages that first began,
At the confusion to astonish man;
Yet with a Coachman, he durst not contend
For wages, though Apollo stood his friend,
For thrive they cannot by the sacred Arts.
A Coachman, Tailor, or the Faulkeners parts,
Dwell in the breast of greatness: but indeed
Time must have changes, though all virtue bleed:
Yet I could wish to turn the sullen tide,
Of their dull Planet, to a rectified
And more calm motion; and a while restrain
The turbulent billows of their sullen vain,
With temperat moderation; to appease
In Halcion-smoothenes, all those rougher seaes
Of passion, and sequesterd discontent,
No air so sweet as their own Element:
As death to fish, torn from their natural place,
Expires their waterie spirits: in like case,
That man, that from his natural mother flies,
Buried in strangers earth, his duty dies;
Yet time may calm that hot-spur'd violence
Of fugitive Saturnists, as in natural sense
We see in heavy bodies, thrown by force,
By strong compulsion, thwarting natures course; Zabarell lib. 1. de motu
grauium and leuium.

Chasing the air, with strong actiuitie,
Yet toward his end, the moving faculty,
Chaste with precedent motion, faints and dies,
And in consumption, to his center hies.
Which is the cause, why motions violent,
(Their spirits spent) creep to their Element,
Which first were made of motion, since at last
That virtue dies, by which he first was cast
As far from his beginning. So time shall change
Their violent passions, who are borne to range;
Transported with a furious discontent,
When all their Romish witchcrafts has near spent
Their violent motion, then with deere-bought pain,
They move unto their sweete-aire once again.
Yet trust not to the mercy of the years,
To reconcile, by time, that which appears
Times shame, in thy original despair;
Once fallen, heavens may (but wondrously) repair:
For though relapses, are not cured with ease,
He Is safe, that meets his first spice of disease:
Which to prevent, leave of that surgerie, Uenienti occurrite morbo.

That makes your soul a bare Anatomy;
And cuts the flesh, of your more bleeding land,
With Lions hearts, not with a Ladies hand.
In poisons, counterpoysons do contend,
Rather live here poor, then at Rome offend;
Use learning as a looking-glass, to see
What others are in thy infirmity:
But not as burning-glasses against the Sun,
To force a fire to thy ambition:
But as Archimedes his cunning plies,
That by reflection, burnt whole Argos eyes
With artificial glasses: so from each heart,
His Countries good, tithes the most punctual part
Of Art and Nature, whose divided ends, Non nobis solum nati.

Shares every man, to Country, Kings, and Friends.
The seven wise Sages of Philosophy,
Whom golden pages, keep in memory,
In spite of Envy, crowned Art with this praise,
Their countries wore the Olive, they the Bays:
Which shows, that Monarchies or Policy
Divided into this triplicity, Aristocrat^a. Democratia. Monarchia.

Then on a sollid base, did firmly stand,
When Art was pure restoratiue to their land:
And pricked no vein, of their own native clime,
But gave a temperet diet to the time:
Urging no foreign nations, to enforce
Their natural tempers, cross to natures course:
Then learning florisht, without Sophistry,
Or mixture of selfe-pleasing fantasy:
Reason, did check an high opinion'd mind.
And Scholars, like some wealthy men definde,
To be but simplex animal: that then,
Like citizens now, were held the surest men:
Virtue was then a habit of the mind
Without equivocation: and confinde,
To his true object of beatitude,
Divided from the world, or multitude
Of popular praises: Arts did then despise,
The secular habits of great vanities:
Lived richly reverent, in poor simple weeds,
Without Monasticke hoods, did Saint-like deeds:
Had neither pride, to envy, whom does rise,
Nor Patron, to bestow a benefice:
And did supply poor nature with poor clothes,
Drank when a thirst, and eat when hunger grows;
Gave no gratuities, but to present
A worthless Dunce, (to scholars discontent:)
And hire a simple Curate, scarcely paid,
With as much wages, as a laundry-mayde:
Lived without grumbling, or ambitious hate,
And slept contented with an humble fate;
The Arts contemned men of high swelling ranks,
And scarce to Alexander would give thanks,
For visiting their tub: so much their hate
Scorned the proud painted sepulchers of state.
Learning did then live pure in Paradise;
But since her fall, to pride and avarice,
And al diseases that infect, the Arts
Do rot and putrify their knowing parts:
Since these contagions, learning is possessed;
These make the music of a learned breast,
Jar in harsh discords, and vnrellisht strains;
And do corrupt the most refined brains,
With Saturnes snarling spirit, gross and dull,
Inspiring rage into a patient skull;
For when we see, that in the Muses chair,
Midas is Judge, and virtue must despair
Of a right worthy Patron; Faunius preach,
Where once Apollo did sweet music teach:
Arachne, with Minerua does compare;
Dunces with Doctors, and their betters far:
This makes the worthy Artist, dull and sad,
And rare deserts, most melancholy mad:
Yet thus much know you, whose deep Genius cla^^^
The honor of a Scholar, not the names:
When Jupiter took all the Arts of price,
To heaven with virtue: and left only vice
In stead of justice, and white chastity;
Unto the earth left bribes and symonie:
Yet in a box, he only hope did spare,
To wretched man, that never leaves him bare.
Another sort of these dull sectarists,
Are our most supercilious Humorists:
Who Saturnisde with this unkind aspect,
Goes (as a plodding Lawyer) circumspect,
As though his brain- pan thro'd of some great strain,
Tor i would from York, to London back again;
His eyes look like two soyled tablebookes,
In which are written most obseruant looks:
His formal brow, contracted to a frown;
Looks like the Mayor of some Puritan town,
Spic'd with austeerest schism; that scarce will see
A Maypole, to be nearer heaven then he:
As stern as Socrates, or Catoes grace,
That never was seen, to change their sullen face:
As crabtree brow'd as Judges at a Size,
That dart their hanging terrors from their eyes:
Professed deep politicians, these we call;
Yet far from state, and depth political:
Although their travels, well do understand
Sweet Sion: and the blessed holy land:
Iudeas ruins, and the raced Towers
Of great Jerusalem, by Titus powers:
The sacred relickes of that tomb, they made,
Wherein our Saviors body Joseph laid:
The worlds seven wonders, whom all times prefer
To be Mausolus stately sepulcher.
Egypts Pyramides the second is:
The third the Obeliske of Semiramis:
The fourth, the rich Colossi of the Son,
At Rhodes: the fifth the walls of Babylon:
The sixth, Dianaes temple (as appears)
That was in building two and twenty years:
The seventh and last, was that most curious frame,
Of Jupiter Olympus, known by Fame.
All which because they can with points relate,
They boldly challenge eminence in state:
And walk with mumbling, and a grim neglect,
As if each stone were bound to give respect,
With notice of their trauells, that have run,
Their progress through the world from sun, to sun:
As if the state (like Gray-hounds) thought men fit,
For footmenship, and not for searching wit:
A horse of Barberie, that scowers the ground,
Or Drake's fleet Pinnis, that did dance the round,
About the world, in travel can compare
With the most proudest traveler, that dare
Cut the burnt line: or with Trans-alpine state,
Contend in pilgrimage with Coryat.
It Is not bare travel that can make men wise,
But this from man, not from the Climates rise:
Gold makes not India rich, but India poor,
Since their men want, although their mines have store:
Though Alchimy do bear a glorious gloss,
Compared with gold, it is bullion, and base dross:
Things superficial, in state never agree,
Without dimension of profunditie:
Desert, and not opinion of their merit,
Shall grace a Scene of state: when as the spirit
Of a true information personates
In lively actions, both to kings and states*
Ability to show how kingdoms thrive,
And to be practicke, not contemplative,
Like Caesar's Parrat, these can only sound,
Aue to Caesar; but in talk profound,
And mazes of true politics of State,
That towse grave heads with windings intricate:
They Are like the gates of Myndus, built so wide,
As if Diogenes aloud had cride;
Ho, fools of Myndus, keep you in those straites,
Lest that your city do run through your gates;
Lord-like, these travel, and do spend the time
Only for fashions in a foreign Clime,
Without obseruant searching of the heart,
Of nations, customs, or the rational part
Of fundamental policy; and with fashion
Are more transformed, then formed in their creation:
Yet, like an antic mountibanck commends
The virtue of his drugges: and then pretends
Experience of his oils far fetched from hence;
How foreign States admired his excellence,
when he (perhaps) this task did entertain
For three to one at his return again:
Yet these Italionated antic shapes,
Transformed from men to immitationes Apes,
Like Hyppocentaures, or some monstrous creature,
Changed from pure English, to outlandish nature:
Or rather, in both sexes take delight,
Divided half, like an Hermophrodite,
From their own fashions, most do alienate,
Like monstrous births, and kinds degenerate:
When their fond travel at the dearest price,
Brought nothing home, but their ill fashioned vice:
Fond-medling- fools, that bear the character,
Of that poore-carping, and base-shoomaker,
That checks Apelles in his curious frame;
Go not beyond your last* lest to your shame,
Your sullen humors to that Orb aspire,
Where your pride burns you in your pollitick fire.
Pack to the center you dull-pated slaves,
And there in gross and melancholy caves,
^ie mischiefs with your Planet, and let state
Be left to him, that shares a worthier fate:
Those, whom bright honor and intelligence
Of their high secrets, crowns with reverence
Of age and sollide judgment: those whose pains
(Like Chimes at midnight seasons) strikes their brains
With vigilantest motion; whose desire,
Like to a Glassehouse, keeps continual fire
Of zealous flames, whose stately honors rise,
Even from the ashes of that sacrifice:
That in whose Hecatombes of loyal blood,
Their Noble houses ever have made good,
Unto their Prince and Country; such shall ride,
Like Ariadnes honors stellified,
Throughout the milke-white circle, and there shine,
To foreign nations in that golden line
Of Roman Curtius; till the marble heart
Of envy and detraction break and part
From his starved kar^as; and times Almanac,
With golden Epacts and new Moons do crack
The sturdie joints of Ephemerides,
With yearly Suns, and annual compasses:
Whose merit, even the voice of God proclaims,
With voice of all the people, in the names
Of our most reverent Senate; in which place
Our grave Patricians, more then the outward grace,
Stands like a Center, from whose point divine,
To Brittanis Circle comes an equal line
Of state and conscience; which but drawn from hence,
Makes up an honored state-circumference.
It Is not quick siluer'd-spirits that can run,
Throughout the vain of earth with motion
Of vnconcockted travels, that can merit
The name of a State-mettall; till the spirit,
By which his active nature still goes round,
Betempered with more massy stuff and sound,
That in the winding Laberynth of state,
Judicious ears may rightly terminate
The most large bodies of the ranging time,
To a confined and superficial line:
Not travel, but the minds grave residence,
That, like the Suns united excellence,
Collected to the center of the glass:
With greater virtue does the object pass,
Makes a true Statesman: as in natures course,
Not every motion can produce a force Omnis motus non est causa calorss.
Scaliger.

To be the cause of heat, as in the Sun
We feel more heat, when his hot beams do run
united, not dispersed: so fit for state
Are judgments settled, and most temperate,
Not errant like a Planet, but at rest
Like the Polestarre with in his constant breast.
Then thou that snarl'st at their transcendent rank,
And art thy self like some poor Mountibanke
Made up of drugges and tongues of every land,
More fit for Ordinaries, then command
In the Abyss of state: that with profound
And perpendicular judgments, plumbes the ground
Of every scruple, with deep beams divine,
Even to th'vnmeasured bottom of each Mine,
The infinite thought creates: repent thus far,
Curse thy Dog-daies, and rate thy sullen star;
Pack fool to French-Baloone, and there at play,
Consume the progress of thy sullen day:
For such light pastimes suite a giddy brain;
Or if thy muddy and gross feeding vain,
Must needs be spic'd with Saturn: walk More-fields,
The shades of malcontents; whose causes yields
Whole sholes of travelers: there may thine eyes
Surfeit, to see thy dull aspect arise,
And Planet-strike the Organ of thy sense,
With gross and melancholy influence,
Cast here and there with envious characters,
On lymping Soldiers, and wild travelers,
That sit a Sunning under some green tree,
Wondering what riches are, or rich men be.
But leaving these unto the silent night,
Raw aires and hayecockes: and the best delight
Of such poor Grasshoppers, that only sing
The Summer of their years with wandering,
Of fruitless voiages. Next we present
A gracious star, fair, and beneuolent:
Drope Saturn with thy sullens to the earth,
Whilst Jove's bright star gets more auspicious birth
Of Iubiter. TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES a long life, mortal and
immortal.
TO you sweet Prince I sacrifice these lines,
Princes should live by princely disciplines:
It Is most collateral Manna, Angels food,
It Is not so princely to be great as good.
Planets rule man: but Princes, as they are
Called gods, sway us; by virtue rule their star,
What almanaks have written in their praise
In you have greater power, that oreswaies
The doubt of art: for certainly we know
The full Moons of your virtues, how they grow:
I wish your life may run, as does your star
Orbd nobly, and most nobly regular,
Or rather more: for heavenly things above
If they but cross us, have more hate, then love
The teeming plowman thus will curse their powers,
When stars do promise more in show, then showers:
But you are far more prosperous, and shall shine
Blessed in your influence, mortal and divine.
Enough is said, in fine, this book shall tell.
It Is good to be borne great, best to do well.
Your graces poor Subject, R. A.

THE PHILOSOPHERS THIRD Satyr of Jupiter.
NOt Jupiter, transformed to many shapes,
His transmutations, or celestial scapes;
Amorous imbracings, and adulterate fires,
Hot scalding passions, and unchaste desires:
Nor of his tri-form'd thunder we describe,
That mauld the aspiring Giants for their pride:
But of a heavenly body, from whose merit,
Heroic actions draw a noble spirit.
Under this stately and maiesticke star,
Made happy by the reign of Jupiter;
Are all those royal actions sweetly sung
By our Welsh Bards: or the poettick tongue
Of rauishing Lyrickes; whose high Muses sings
Starre-kissing Poems, of the state of Kings:
The swelling tide of time, whose mighty flood.
Like to an Ocean, curled the streams of blood
Of Kings and Worthies, with true honor died,
Under this Princely Planet stellified.
True noble sparks, that can the soul define
In honored persons, in this Planet shine;
And gives essential forms to royal bloods,
Eternal to their names, more then their goods
Or fortunes can distinguish; and deriues
True honor not in name, but in their lives.
Gentilitie from hence so riches bred,
That like a silke-worme, it spinnes out his web,
That others might give arms, and wear his good,
More rich in virtues, then blazed forth in blood.
Young Alexander (whose triumphant hand,
Like some great earthquake shook the sollid land,
With warlike rufflings of his princely mind,
By this aspect was at his birth assigned
To honored enterprices: and from hence,
Imperial scepters draw their eminence;
And every noble action of high fame,
That gives to honor an immortal name:
To Chronicles and times, this star does bless,
With an eternal Trophie of success.
Which since his Princely flames scorns common men,
In a heroicke fury chafes our pen:
Tell me, thou Royal States man to the Sun,
Great signior of the worlds perfection;
High Treasurer, for honorable breasts,
That with imperial wreathes adornes their crests:
Where are those Heroes, whom Jupiter
Did canonize, even in their Sepulcher:
And after death blessed with thy influence,
Enspheard their souls with thy intelligence.
Crane up true honor through the horned Moon
That now usurps the day, and shames bright noone,
With their confused actions: where are those
That had more honor in their minds then clothes;
Great Caesar's Court did shine with warlick hands,
Ieer Atlas. Ieer, and laugh at yellow bands,
That now do stain the times. Tell Jupiter
The worlds mad after Safforn: and prefer,
A most sur-reuerence fashion (like a purge),
Before the conquest of the worlds large verge:
Gentilitie looks like some painted whore,
Whom wise men pity, though times-Bands adore:
Rather bright star of heaven drop from thy place,
And kiss the Chaos, then thy smiles disgrace
On their natiuities, that do pretend
Their lineage from the Sun, which loath does lend
His beams to such corruptions purified,
As that most noisome muckhill of their prides
Whose vapors sluffe the organ of man's sense
With such mortality of peslilence,
That each fantastic corner of the land,
Stinkes with infection of a yellow band:
And yet can boast their gentry from a star
Kind in conjunction, and familiar
To their high Fates. Laugh, Laugh Democritus,
Here Is a right Comedy, though vicious,
To stretch forth all thy powers to excess,
And fat thy heart with mortal foolishness:
These are those atoms of nobility,
Which in thy school thou taugh'st erroneously,
To be the worlds beginning. Laugh fond Sir:
Such moates of gentry makes a Usurer.
Rail foul-mouthed Cinick, lend thy lantern here,
That to thy candles brightness may appear
These Scums of gentry; turn my beagle-Muse
To lash these Butterflies, that do abuse
The name of that bright Planet, that shootes forth
More virtue, then their Tailors-billes are worth:
And if my Satyr, gently letting blood,
Might of true nobler breasts be understood,
What we call honor or Nobility;
Who knows not virtue is gentilitie: Virtus vera nobil^tas.

An habit of the mind, not of the clothes,
Which every poor Logician truly knows;
To be in diverse Categories placed,
The one in quality, the other graced
With Art and Situation: Courtiers then
Would scorn such gaudy Gallifoists of men:
And rather fill their honored train with stars,
Such whose unspotted virtues wears no Scarres
Of bankerout Citizens, that wears his own,
Like Byas still about him, and not grown Omnia mea mecum port.

To surfets with excess in suits of trust,
Filling his hot veins with insatiat lust,
To forms of alteration: yet at last
Is always poor in virtue, rich in wast.
The honor of this Planet shows the mind,
And not the cast-clothes of some fawning hind,
That by observance to his mighty Lord,
Has crept into good outsides by a word,
Bought before moud. For some poor office feed,
That now is fallen to help the busy need,
Of some poor Groom. Great Jupiter forbear,
To hurl thy influence from thy princely Sphere,
That these may claim their most abortiue birth,
Upon this leastall of this noisome earth.
From thy heroic flames, as from their sire:
But to right noble breasts, give nobler fire.
Let such adore thy rising in thy East,
That feel an honored fury in their breast,
Charm all ignoble-thoughts; and with the age,
Leave relics of his honored pilgrimage,
Even to his speaking- marble, that his stone
May swet with memory, and his dust bemone,
The liuelesse form of his dead Element,
Hearst up in death: whose living- Monument,
Can, with this heavenly Ecco, thus resound,
Prince (Henry's) steps has taught us the same ground
Of noble buildings: and since him succeds,
A Princely Jupiter* in noble-deeds,
And honored hopes: how then can honor er,
That shares the spirits of this Jupiter,
And Princely beams: whose motion most direct,
Treads worthy of so bright and fair aspect,
That trobled at his birth his princely rays.
Behold great Prince, what in these Antic days,
May make true honor current, and exclude
The ends of high bloods from the multitude
And fire of baser ranckes; that when your age
Shall come to understand the Bedlame rage
Of this distracted time, and ripely see
That not by reason, but base fantasy,
Reflext from our opinions: we define
Honors to be the fashion of the time:
Like colored Rainebowes that deceive our eyes
With superficial shapes of vanities,
And with mature and clearer beams of sight
Distinguish of all objects of the light,
In your perspicuous judgment; then your sense
Shall in one point unite the difference
Of what a long time, your too tender eye,
Your Organ not disposed, could never discrie:
Then all things rightly set, the Medium fair,
And the most gross parts of this sinful air,
Diaphanall and clear, your eye shall see,
That the true species of nobility
Is not the extreme and outward visible part,
But the profound concealment of the heart,
Exempt from outward fashions so applied,
As it is truly noble, without pride,
Or foreign imitation, but entire
To his own fashion; made not to admire,
But to attire poor nature, and to draw
The peoples hearts, with an obsequious awe,
Unto the Commons love: not common gaze
Of Player-like-fashions: for true honors praise,
Is like the blessed Hebrew tongue so strange,
That in confusions it did never change
His primitive pureness; and how unlike we be
To heavenly boaies in simplicity,
In motion and in forms: speak heavens in thunder,
And rate this mad world in a peale of wonder:
That ever since the order of thy frame,
Keeps still one fashion, and moves still the same:
Nor is the soul (as fond Pithagor as said) Pithegoeas his opinion.

Of a true noble man; to be conuai'd
By transmigration, or fantastic shapes,
Into the bodies of such Zainie-Apes,
As fashions make the English: but assigned
To the immortal virtue of the mind:
That Is not traduc'e, or mixed of elements,
But of the most infused temperaments,
Subject to no mortality of Fate,
Except base actions do degenerate,
From that immortal and pure quintessense;
That virtue gives us in our innocence;
From which, if honor by relapse digress,
We lose that paradise of happiness,
Where honor was created: and that place,
Where virtue did infuse original grace
Into a great man's soul: Princes may eat
Of every tree, that virtue made for meat,
Only that tree, in amidst of Eden spread,
The tree of vice: a touch of that strikes dead:
Think what it is, great Prince, that makes you live
Greater, then you were borne: when worth shall give
Unto your actions such a long-liu'd fame,
As to all ages shall enrowle your name:
And such is virtue, that can never exspire,
But like a Salamander lives in fire,
And fury of the times; and there never burns.
After the funeral ashes of our Vrnes:
For it is not that great title, that you wear
Of princely greatness, and a future fear:
That can make you controler of the stars,
Or write your name in endless Characters
To all posterities: nor is it applause,
Or popularitie, that can give cause,
To make you live for ever: but in fine,
It Is virtue gives a Godhead, makes divine;
Not Caesar's birth made Caesar to survive,
But Caesar's virtues, that are yet alive.
Great Alexander Homers Iliades read,
Whose virtues made him live, when he was dead.
A great man's vices dammes his fame so deep,
There Is no redemption, when his virtues sleep:
Actions crown virtues, and like Pulses prove,
Whether the soul of greatness sweetly move
With Natures harmony: which standing still,
Or faintly beating, shows them dead or ill.
All this (sweet Prince) is to instruct your youth,
Without equivocation to the truth,
Of honorable actions, that do rise
And mount by virtue, to possess the skies:
For mark but that divorce, that time has sude
From such a Kingly troop and multitude,
Of memory and fame, and with their toombe,
Buried their honors with an equal doom.
In silence and oblivion, you shall see,
That virtue reads the Art of memory;
And can do miracles even from the dead,
To raise true worth by time canonized:
And fetch new breath in princes, when our shame
And vice in Lymbo shall ram up our name,
What pen shall blaze that Epicures damned vain
That wished his licorish palate like a Crane
In surfets, and high sparklings healthes of wine.
Unless some Satyr with his lashing line,
Flea his abuse: or else the stage has stung
His life and vice with some base Players tongue;
When virtue shall command, like Orpheus strings,
Even senseless stones to follow when he singes.
The music of the soul, that sweetly sounds
The means of honor, and the virtuous grounds
Of our well fingered actions; and snall tell
In Oracles, how our best acts excel
The worst of envy; though her toadelike womb,
Burst in her venom, even within our tomb.
Then since great Prince, that time must bring you rage.
To act one part upon this earthly stage:
Oh let your virtuous actions keep such mean,
As Angels may applaud your life's best Scene:
Which you shall do, by acting what is good,
That when your riper years have understood,
That the chief seat of honor is the heart,
Diffusing motion to each princely part.
And like the soul, whom Schools hold all in all, Anima est tota^toto and in
qualibet part. Thales opinion of water to be the mother of all things.

In every member is essential,
Complete and undivided: not begot
Of Thales element to die and rot:
Then your experience with confession joined,
Shall hold that practick virtue of the mind,
Is your best summum bonum: and not stroule
To Platoes feigned Ideas of the soul:
Or Epicures sect, whose happiness,
Their Schools maintained to be voluptuousness:
And not in fortune, that all power can,
Or Stoicall necessity in man:
Or in this later heresy that grows,
That the best bonum countes the best of clothes.
But virtue put to action, which does keep,
And put a waking difference from sleep,
And drowsinesse in virtue: which though good,
If never in action, never is understood.
These cautions make you worthy of this star,
When others only hear of Jupiter:
That your bright honor ever may appear,
And move within an vnecclipsed Sphere
But now I mount unto the Soldiers star,
Some Cannon fire my pen to rage and war.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF ESSEX, BARON OF EWE: R. A. wishes all
grace with heaven and earth.
Of Mars.
NOble Lord, Themistccles desired the art of oblivion. I the practick of
memory, whose hell and heaven presentiue faculty cannot produce a fairer
form of eternity, then in the inimitable Idea of your Mars borne honorable
Father, the best of his fortunes I could wish were traduced to you, and the
best of his actions deserving a fixed constellation, as totally diffused through
every noble vein of your Honor as the best part of your essence is in your
body the contemplative part of time admits not a fairer prospectiue of Honor.
The character of Mars is but his counterseit, and I could wish it yours by
adoption, Arts and Arms should be like hypocrates twins reciprocal in their
first ingredience, and borne together with a most sweet and loving sympathy.
The merit of a Soldier and a Scholar hates poligamie, and are but one flesh. I
know you are nobly tutored in the one, and I could wish you Laurcated in the
other. The poison of the times has no better. Antidote then virtue: the least
doze of it makes honor nobly preservative. I have here prescribed it, and may
it work in you his physical operation: my duty bound to the stricktest, and
most peremptory remembrance of your Honor: administers this diet: digest,
and be a long liude patient, it is the Soldiers cordial, and a Noble
restoratiue.

Your Honors humble devoted, Robert Anton.

THE PHILOSOPHERS FOVRTH Satyr of Mars.
WHat by his nature moves, and would aspire
Under this Planet borrowes his hot fire:
What horrid fury bursts his chains in hell,
And frights the earth, does in this Planet dwell:
Blood, death and, tragic stories Mars does yield.
A Golgotha of graves: whose purple field,
Died crimson with his fatal massacres,
Craves bloody ink, and Scarlet Characters:
A pen, that like a bullets force would reele
A marble conscience, or a heart of steel:
But not of battles, or that Sanguine flood,
That at Phillipi Brutus stained with blood.
Nor of that cruel, and Barbarian war,
Wherein two Kings signed by a blazing star
To a prodigeous death, such horror won,
As with amazement, frighted Christendom.
Nor of that bloody siege, and tragical,
Made famous by our English General,
That in our age fell in the Belgian wars,
When like an Ocean, with red Massacres,
The moorish earth did tide up ore the brim,
As if the center did against nature swim:
But to another Posterne, drils our Muse,
Marching in martial Satyrs of abuse.
Tell me thou ragged man of Arms, that wears
Only thy Pass for service many years;
And by each petty Constable conueide,
As if thy wounds in peace were greater made
With Headboughes and Beadles, then grim war
Could through a grove of Pikes launch in so far.
Why are thy scars bought with such precious cost.
So tortured by a senseless whipping post:
But a more grosser time, that cannot see
In peaceful times, what want of Soldiers be.
The dull Athenians offered sacrifice
To Mars, when wars began to tyranize:
But when the fury of stearne war did cease,
His hallowed Altars lay untouched with peace.
Soldiers are Saints in steel, Gods in their beauers,
Adored like Esculapius in hot Feauers
Of blood and war: but when their steele-coates rust,
And their bright arms ore-cast with peaceful dust.
Behold you sons of thunder, the end of all
Are Usurers alms, and a poor Hospital.
Let Sacars, Culuerings, and Cannons sound
In honor of their bones, and rock the ground
With all your deafning terrors: for behold
The Balsum for your wounds, are rich men's gold,
Powder the world with wonder, and thus cry,
The Camel now may pass the needles eye.
The Jewish age grows holy and precise,
And builds a Sinagogue to sacrifice
Their charitable surfets, when they die,
That living, whipped away bright charity.
You hacksters flesht in bleeding Massacres,
Think on your maimed stumpes: your powerful stars,
That work this operation in proud man.
Misers live Jews, and die as Christian,
That el e in peace had laid, as if forlorn,
The bitter subject of the ages scorn.
The Stockfish to seuerest Justices
Beaten to death with warrants of the peace
And good behavior, martred with the rage
Of Constables, whose fury can assuage
Nothing but night and wine, that all things steep
In the deep Lethe of the god of sleep:
For see thou not, thou man of oaths and harms,
When Mars makes holliday, and allth' Allarmes
Of your Rock-braining Engines are struck dumb
By bright Astreas charms, and Union;
How arms are banished to his iron Mines,
And time grown banquerout of those disciplines,
That martial Pyrrhus to his Soldiers red,
Over the brave Romans in Phalanges led,
That then who cares for Soldiers, but forgot
In wars they lose their limbs, in peace they rot,
As if our blessings had so sure a Creed
Never to use Soldiers, for we scorn their need.
Or does our careless peace, like Scipio deem
Never less sole, then when it sole does seem
Without a Soldiers strong Atlantic power,
That on his shoulders props that starrie bower
And fabric of a State, as if a Lethargy
Had silence't up the eternal memory
Of Norris, Veare, and valiant Willobee,
That like three Commets bearded prodigy,
Amazed the world: besides the register
Of those Sea-Gods, Drake, Candish, Furbusher,
That like three Neptunes on the curled maine,
Danced with their Tritons in a martial vain
Who to a Tragic Muse has left their fame,
Scorning a Commick seckt to score their name,
The temple of the bifront God's not open,
As if the earth had universal hope
Of a most mild Augustus to sway the earth,
In whose great reign the King of Peace took birth:
Then vanish all your furies to black hell,
Duelloes, combats to the loathsome Cell,
of burning Ambriscadoes, cruelty,
Rape, ruin, horror and impiety,
Seconds in combats, challenges in wine;
Giving the lie, and all vilde discipline
Of senses, desperate distance; quarrels common,
For some damned Cockatrice, or Strumpet woman.
And all those rasors, that made France to bleed;
And England sad, in peace be well agreed:
For lo, an Olive Scepter swayes our land,
Not crushed to powder with an iron hand:
Which sooner may the Seaes forsake their bound,
Fire from the concaue lepp, and the fixed ground,
Be tumbled from the center: all that is made
Rome from his orderd fashion retrograde;
Eagles be finn'd, and swim the Oceans deep,
Whales mount the air, and Ducks with Dolphins keep,
Before this peace fall, and vnited-calme
Forsake the virtue of his sovereign Balm:
Soldiers turn Maunderers, and live to shame,
By Soldiers base attempts, a Soldiers name:
Riot upon this happy time of truse,
With pursing, cheating, and all base abuse,
Till millions of these Roarers, sise by sise,
Drop through the hang-mans budget, and so dies,
Before our Oliue-Scepter change his bud,
And graft it in a scarlet stock of blood.
Yet I could wish, that in this golden time,
A golden mean were kept, that in this clime,
Where the Hesperides of peace does dwell,
Though guarded with a power that does expel,
The doubt of civil and outrageous iarres,
Men lived, as if their very lives made wars
Against that peace, the heavens does earth assure,
Upon condition, that no man is secure:
Nor are our best of blessings but so lent,
As heaven may change, what men in peace misspent:
For time may come, ah, may it never come,
When the loud thunder of our yet mute drum,
May rail in martial marches, and their arms
May scarre this peaceful Island with Alarmes:
Invasion may rouse horror from his den;
And Soldiers then thought rather Gods then men,
That now art barkt at by each dogged Sir.
Poor fools, your selves may need a Soldier,
To chase hostility and hell-borne spirits
Of war and blood, by their triumphant merits
From your Percullic'd gates: oh then take heed,
He that scorns Soldiers, may a Soldier need:
For though all things in peace do symbolize,
As with a blessing, where all contraries
Are leagued with Gordion knots of amity,
And live in one united harmony:
The ravening Wolf, and the poor sheep,
Combined by supernatural blessings silly sleep,
Like two faith-plighted friends: the fruitful vine,
That near the Colewort is observed to pine,
Troubles the God of surfets sparkling juice:
The Oak and Olive kiss in calmes of truce:
The Masuue, scares not the Hyanaes sight.
The Mouse the Elephant does not afright:
The poysond- Henbane, whose cold juice does kill
His meat unto the Thrush, when wars grow still.
And all things that bears natural emnitie,
Conioyne their individual Simpathie:
In a most blessed coherence of their forms:
Yet such a time may come, when nature storms
And Plants, and senseless things grow discontent,
Their factious forms scorning this sweet consent,
Familiar concord turned to qualities
Of proud exceptions, and hot contraries,
And mutinous nature all things turns to hate,
That in sweet peace did most participate.
And if that old Philosophy hold sure,
That the Soul tracktes the bodies temperature,
Although all natural causes we confine Himmasequitur temperamentum corporis
opino Galen.

To the great Mouers power, and will divine;
Yet never had our temperaments more fire,
Nor never apter to the hot desire
Of wars and innouations; when our age
In Tauerns show the stabbing signs of rage.
Never more choleric constitutions known
So practick in revenge, as now are shown.
Hot bloods in every Courtyer boyles to fight:
No sooner graced, but he dares bark and bite,
New hot-spurre humors every day arise,
In cutting Ruffines borne to pandarize,
Fiery distempers in our bloods exceed,
Whch great Hypocrates could never read:
Each base Mechanic has a Fencers devil,
And feign would fight, although the cause be evil.
There Is scarce a Coward borne to the times curse,
But having sucked he roares, and kickes his Nurse:
Man from his Cradle now like Hercules,
Is borne to strangle, not to live at case:
When every Royster his twelve labors slight,
And hand to hand dares with his Lions fight:
Or tugge with that three headed dog of hell,
Or in a single Mona-machy quell
The hundred headed Hydra to conclude,
By whom we moralize the multitude.
If then, by natural causes we descrie
How our corrupted tempers do apply
Themselves to bloody proiects, and hot iarres:
Spurning at peace, inflamed still to wars:
Our blessings ought thus much to know in fears,
That Mine and Thine may set kings by the ears:
Which two poor words, as they have set on fire
The world with law, so to the world inspire
A quarrelsome nature, that even France and Spain,
By these poor syllables lost thousands slain:
And seuen-hill'd-Rome, whose victories have won,
Even time to canonize, what she has done:
Only with these two words, so pamperd fame,
That like a Iennet of a prowd-trust frame,
It paced the ample earth with such large pride,
As if 'twere made not to be rid, but ride:
Peace is not of an indiuidual size,
Like to a Phoenix, from whose ashes rise
Another of that kind, that can restore,
Succession to that peace, that went before:
And it may be the utmost date she bears,
Shall be confined within these peaceful years,
Wherein her Iocs merrily we sing,
Never was such a time, and such a King:
Or whether the great Genius of these days,
Has left to him the glory of that praise,
Sphynx cannot well vnridle or define:
For it may be, in him it may resign
Her utmost Royalties: then why d'we live,
Like the fond Megarenses, who did give
Such cost unto their houses, as if never
They thought of changes, but to live for ever?
Not like the wise Egyptians, who still gave
Less cost unto their house, more to their grave:
Since then these changes follow times aspect,
And peace like to the Moon does but reflect
His beams from others: who can then presume
That still her quarters hold full Pleni-lune:
Commit not then such fierce Idolatry
Unto this Saint: more then the Deity,
That gave her those bright virtues, though divine:
For Angels may fall from their blessed Shrine:
But now we sound a Parle and Rereate
From bloo ie Mars his Planet to the Seat
Of the bright Day Star: rise bright Venus, rise,
Whilst City wives prepare thy Sacrifice.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE Lady Anne Randyll, health in
both the Worlds.
Of Venus.
MAdam, behold, your virtues do entice
The best of art to write the worst of vice,
That as the beauteous form of crystal light,
Opposde to darkness seems more richly-bright:
So from the times worst objects you may spy,
How virtue shines best by her contrary,
And best does edify, when to our sense,
She seems to virtue in her innocence,
Like some clear liquid cloud against the Sun
In proudest forms of opposition,
Here shall you see the Anatomy of times
And imperfections bowelld with the crimes
Of brazen impudence condemned to death,
Like Traitors breathing an infectious breath.
From your sweet favors I began this book:
And hope a fair success from your fair look:
As earth to heaven presented to our sense
Seems but a point to the circumference,
Compared to his large body: so in show
Are these my studies unto that Iowe,
Unto your Ladyship: this mite shall speak
My Art and Heart both grateful, although weak,
As Dwarfes seem gracious, so may prove this elfe.
This book, though small, may teach great time it self.
Your Ladyships humble and poor Kinsman of his duty. Robert Anton.

THE PHILOSOPHERS FIFTH Satyr of Venus..
NExt unto blood and death, the Paphian queen
Of the inferiour-planets first is seen:
The harbinger of fair Auroras light,
Bright day star, sliking the rough brow of night,
Fair Citharaea: amorous flame of love,
That next unto the glorious sun does move:
Goddess of generation, that do give
A father to each Bastard how to live:
Make my Muse ramble, that it truly tell
The scapes of lust, that in thy influence dwell:
Appear you horned-monsters, that do swell
With high-brow-Antlers, that against heaun rebel:
And stumble against Taurus with your horns.
Behold the lustful Planet of your scorns:
By whose insatiate and hot lustful fire,
Your wives are strumpets, and your brows reared higher
Under this star bright Helena was bred,
That made her hushand higher by the head.
And Messalina by this planets power
Wife to great Claudius, Romes high Emperor,
Fall two and twenty times in one sole day,
Cornuted Caesar with her lustful play:
Here may thy Satyr riot with thy pen,
And lash to blood this crooked fate of men,
Whose shameleswiues, o'r warmd with bastard wine
Like Messalina breaks that sacred sign,
That holy wedlock in their vows has made,
By that lascivious and insatiate trade:
That nature grows so horrid and so full,
That, like Pasiphae, amored of a Bull
In any form of incest, or hot rape,
The sensual appetite affects his shape:
Preposterous motions in this planet reign,
Mothers turn Bawdes unto their Daughters gain:
Husbands have sold their wives like Galliflaues
Unto a strangers bed: whole streets of knaves,
Deep red in hot Adultery so confounds
The reputation of our honest grounds,
As if the world and Justices agreede,
To make a Chaos of their bastard seed.
Why frowns not Minos at that civil whore,
That in a Puritans habit dwells next door,
Unto his worship: and with Saintlike motion,
Minces the pauement with her pure devotion:
Whom some hot Tradesman keeps, and does disguise,
In Angels robes to gull the jealous eyes
Of shallow judgment, following Machauell
Cunning in sin treads warily to hell.
Why Carts not justice that old Dipsas Baude,
That with her sorcerous charms dispersed abroad
Among the vestall Virgins holy bred,
Has betrayed many a well-borne Maidenhead,
To the luxurious hands of riotous heirs;
Drowning their mothers happiness in tears?
Why do our lustful Theaters entice,
And personate in lively action vice:
Draw to the Cities shame, with gilded clothes,
Such swarms of wives to break their nuptial oaths:
Or why are women rather grown so mad,
That their immodest feet like planets gad
With such irregular motion to base Plays,
Where all the deadly sins keep hollidaies.
There shall they see the vices of the times,
Orestes incest, Cleopatres crimes;
Lucullus surfets, and Poppeas pride.
Virgineaes rape and wanton Lais hide
Her Sirens charms in such ear charming sense;
As it would turn a modest audience,
To brazen-fac'et profession of a whore.
Their histories persuade, but action more,
Vices well coucht in pleasing Scenes present,
More will to act, then action can invent.
And this the reason, unless heaven prevent,
Why women most at Plays turn impudent,
And yet not to their sex do we apply,
A Stoicall and stout necessity,
Of shameful sin to women in this kind.
But I could wish their modesty confined,
To a more civil and grave liberty,
Of will and free election: carefully
Hating this hellish confluence of the stage,
That breeds more gross infections to the age
Of separations, and religious bonds,
Then e're religion with her hallowed hands
Can reunite: rather renew thy web,
With chaste Penelope, then stain thy bed
With such base incantations: But why in vain,
Do I confound the music of my strain
With such vnrellisht Pantomimmicke slaves,
Whose lives profane a lashing Satyr craves?
Oh yet my grave muse be not to profuse,
Applaud their good, scourge only their abuse,
No, rather my keen pen with art dissect,
The Anotomie of woman, whose defect,
May read such Physic to their longing sex,
As what most horrid guilt of lust de^ects,
And cast aspersions on their Angels faces,
May salve their burning feauers of disgraces:
Not in a squibbing vain my pen shall task
Your feeble imperfections, but unmask
With far more reverent hand your slippery natures,
Since your first fall proves you backsliding creatures;
When heaven and earth from his confusion took
Proportion firm, and a more gracious look
Of order and creation, then was crowned
Man, the imperial Monarch of this Round:
Which being made of a gross element,
Unfit alone for Kingly government.
Woman as his adiutor was assigned,
That to their powers the earth might be confined.
And man, then one in number, therefore none,
In her might be more perfect then alone.
When she was made in that prime innocence,
Each element bestowed the quintessence
Of his best qualities: fire then was more remiss
With out hot lust, that now more ex'lent is.
Water did temper his moist quality,
Without the swetting palms of venerie;
The subtle parts of air did not inspire
A lightness to their body or desire.
The sollid parts of earth vpheld their frame,
That now falls back to ruinate the same:
Her harmony of nature most refined
From the dull Man's, an Angel in her kind.
Her face as beauteous as the Crysped Morn,
Struck from smudg'dnight: created and not borne,
To keep grosse-pated Adams from foul sin,
With adoration like some Cherubin.
Which not alone that naked Sill could do:
Except the mighty mouer had made two;
Both which had kept fair Edens royalties,
To their succession and posterities:
And then vncensur'd had the woman ben,
From the original cause of mortal sin,
Had not that Hel-bred Politician
Beguiled the woman, and the woman man:
But since her sacred reason was beguiled,
And she for him, and he for both exild
From that foure-riuer-running-Paradice,
To the large cursed center of their vice:
Behold this rare Idea of a woman
Made to admire beyond an object common,
Transformed into a loathsome mass of dust,
Salt tides of passions, and hot foming lust,
Keep their high floods, and wait on appetite;
As flowing Seaes attend the Queen of night,
Inconstant flames glow in their skittish breast,
And chastity runs like a man possessed
With Legion and his devils: and so raues,
As it scorns life in streets, but lives in graves,
As if all virtues unto heaven were fled,
And women scarce thought honest, although dead.
Nature is now grown monstrous to the earth,
That in excess creates this creatures birth:
Or those prime elementall-quali^ies,
That give our constitutions properties;
Turn pandars in the action of their life,
To make a fair face a dishonest wife:
Or else imaginations deeply wrought
By strong impression makes the age so naught:
As when some lust full blood swollen high with wine,
And stirring delicates, bears still in mind.
The object of her dalliance, to exchange
Her sacred bridal bed for sheets more strange:
Since the most simple essense of her soul,
Immortal and divine, now black and foul,
With more then Ethiopian graceless stain,
Never blushing at her sinful die in grain,
Tasted the Philtre compounds of sins harms,
With the sweet magic of her pleasing charms,
Since all their passions, that kept golden means,
Without the amorous flames of loves extremes,
Since women did corrupt their natural graces,
And by complexion did create new faces,
Since their proud sex did study to repair,
Robbing the dead: their own more comely hair,
Since their Apostate sex began to slide
From faith to super sttoion, and to pride,
Since all this metamorphosis began
Wo-man, you make a local hell for man:
he misery of man affords but this,
An Aristippus, and Semiramis:
Murder and lust like two insatiate twins,
Revels in surfets of our noble sins.
Well unto Cato, this the world did give:
"Oh Cato thou alone know how to live,
"That not in palaces, and princely bowers,
"Did st spend the last glass of thy aged bowers,
"Where Venus sports are like to tennis balls,
"Bandied from one to the other: till it falls
"Into the hazards of their honored names,
"The chases lost, are rumors and defames:
"Nor in the scalding Suburbs did thou dwell,
"Where lust appears in his hot shape of hell,
"The Devils whores, and the tormenting fire.
"The stewing steame of sulphured hot desire:
"Nor in that great Metropolis of Dames,
"That like to Dog-daies burn the earth with flames,
"As hot in their lascivious appetites,
"As Munkeyes: more luxurious in delights,
"Then amorous Flora, that Italian Whore,
"That proudly writ upon her painted door,
"Let none but Kings here enter: and as vild
In their loose purges of their bed defiled
With their adulterate lovers, as if trades
Did neither marry widows, wives, or maids.
Sooner may shameless wives hate Braindford feasts,
Albertus Magnus, or the pilfred Jests
Of some spruce Skipiack Citizen from Plays,
A Coach, the secret Baudihouse for ways,
And riotous waste of some new Freeman made,
That in one year to pieces breaks his trade,
Then wash the to adlike speckles of defame,
That swell the world with poison of their shame:
What Comedies of errors swell the stage
With your most public vices, when the age
Dares personate in action, for, your eyes
Rank Scenes of your lust-sweating qualities:
Why are your civil and domestic names,
Questioned by every Page, or grauer Dames
Censured by cuery Courtier in your streets,
Unless the speaking- figures of your Sheets
Could number one, two, three; and tell that trick,
Whereby you multiply Arithmatick,
And cast your false accounts in others beds,
VVhilest horns like siphers only show their heads
Of your neglected Pheares: or rather why
Are grauer heads so rich in policy,
Industrious and so cunning in their wares:
VVretched in nothing but in doubtful heirs:
And yet see not with what immodest croudes,
Their Turtles lie with Centaures in the clouds,
Why scowres the shallow Merchant the deep Ocean,
Even to the burnt line with his three years motion:
Leaving his dainty Pinnis on the land,
Like to a man of war well rigged and manned
By other cunning Pilots: Pirates rather
That robbes him of the honor of a father:
And nails not his profession to the Burss,
To save her shipwrackt honor dangerous,
From Rouers hands and lustful pyracie
Of this hot ru^ting age: whose luxury,
Even from the hoarie graybeard to the bold
And youthful beardlesse boy-wench we behold
Priapus Altars reake with smoke and fire
Of quenchlesse passions and untamed desire
The baudie times tutor their Goatish sense
In ribawld sciences, and do commence
Proficients in the art of Midwifetrie.
Pages can nonplus deep obcenitie
In Aristotle's Problemes: and in fine,
He Is best, that best disputes in Aretine.
And I much wonder that this lusty time,
That women can both sing and sigh in rhyme,
Weep and dissemble both in baudie meetre,
Laugh in luxurious pamphlets, like a creature
Whose very breath, some Ovid did create
With prouocations, and a longing fate
After some stirring meats: wives covet books,
Not penned by Artists, but the fruits of Cooks
Prescribing lusty dishes, to inflame
Their lusty fighting brood unto their game
Confections with infections of their kind,
Roth both their body, and corrupts the mind.
Ladies are turned Musk-cats, and do sent,
As if perfumers bought their excrement:
As though their imperfections so did smell,
As without Ciuet it would poison hell.
There Is scarce a face, as it was first baptized,
That keeps his Christian color: but disguised
With Lozinges and lotions: as if their hate
Found fault with God, and could regenerate
A better face with painting; when their forms,
May poison men, but never poison worms:
All these, as if an Academick sect,
Had studied new opinions to infect
The soul with fond mortality, define
The soul organicall, and not divine:
And of a physick-bodie the best part,
Misconstring physic for the Doctors art:
These vices flesh the hot rained time with lust,
And bake cold Phlegine to humors more adust
And hotter slipps of wedlock: the Romans Guise
To lillie-vesta, offered Sacrifice.
To Esculapius a cock they gave:
But now for Venus all our Henns we save.
Look you fond Doves chained to your goddess carre,
Those Roman sons, that have out-prim'd your star
In chaster beams, and with their motion run:
Til maids turn Turks, and leave their Christendom:
Hypsicrataea, and chaste Liuia score
For your examples, and with zeal adore
The memorable tomb of Portias name,
That eat hot flaming coals to keep her fame,
From the rough surgerie of scandalous tongues,
That time might sing with praise her funeral songs.
Which Antiquaries in a golden page
May name the gelded: not the gilded age,
Sweet meats and al your delicates of vice:
Pack to the Comfit-makers, there entice
The baudy midwife, and the pifering nurse
To rotten teeth and tatling: but thy curse
Light not upon the thrift of City wives
Life's sweet, good nam's far sweeter the^ their lives:
Perfumes and powders that make faces look
Like Sculs in Churchyards, that but late was took
From ghastly bones, as if the world did lust
Like Sextons to appear in deadmens dust:
As if their periwigs to death they gave,
To meal it in some ghastly dead men's grave:
And thus like Ghosts appear to humane sight:
As if a resurrection should affright
The weakness of our natures: which (indeed)
Should with diuiner use the morrall read
Of their own frailties: and like Phillips slave
Ring a memento of their ashy grave,
Just of that color: for in such a face
I read the horrors of that deadly place,
Where Golgotha was found: this must I tell:
Nor Schrichowses, nor the fatal passing bell,
Makes me remember pale necessity,
Eternal silence of mortality,
Nore often then powdered faces: oh there is grace,
They Are living graves, and have a saving face.
Hence then you horrid drugs that do consume
The noble ranks like graves: and yet perfume,
Your ugliness with pleasure to the sense,
Chasing their bloods with your hot excellence
Of lust and amorous charms: begone, grow dull,
And deck the forehead of one ghastly scull:
That our fair forms may in their beauties rise
Admired, for red and whites simplicities.
But now from Venus Nunnerie of Love,
Unto the god of shifts our sphere we move:
Charm earth great Hermes with thy Snaky rod,
VVhilest Englands Joy adores the shifting God.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND WORTHY GENTLEMAM Sir John Woodward Knight, R. A.
wishes the best temporal happiness, and future riches.
Of Mercury..
Worthy Sir, me thought I observed in you a Saintlike adoration of virtue, not
to her Image, but to her substance: your actions crowns your worthy
intentions, and speaks you more then Gentleman like formalitie: the eager
appetite of her beauty makes me present her to you unmasked, and unpainted with
adulterate complexion: your encouragements are massy, and this labor
Geometrically proportioned to your person. Your only character is to be
ingenious and generous: I have proved it, you may hap find your nativity
calculated under some of these Planets: when their influence shall in some of
them answer to your acute conceit, I stand bound to you, that have so nobly
espoused this labor for your bedfellow, as Alexander kept Homers Iliades*
under his pillow: this quintessence extracte^ from the Phylosophicall body of
art without quacke saluing poetry: may perhaps teach you more then Paracelsian
skill in the spirits of virtue: and make you more then a bare professor of
Alcumie, rich and wealthy in the practice of her: you know her grounds are
infallible: seek her therefore in these Satyrs, and prove rich in her Elixar.

Your worships to the best of art and power. Robert Anton.

THE PHILOSOPHERS SIXTH Satyr of Mercury.
WHen I observe how Alcumists disclose
The fallacy of art, with only shows
Of Mineral spirits, and with cheates present,
The alterations of each element,
And with their tricks like some most powerful iet,
Draw greedy fools to kiss the counterfeit,
Of the Elixar, as if art had done,
And made more gold, then nature or the sun:
Or their purse-purging-misterie of fire,
Could find more wealth, then Crassus could desire,
When I behold rich sweating Clownes bemone,
The loss of lands for the Philosophers stone:
Men of good worship gulld with oils and glasses,
Pawning their plate in hope of gold like asses:
Oh then, thou God of crochets, and sly tricks.
My yerking Muse adores thy politickes,
When I behold a peasant rich in clothes
Clad in a Tirian-die, and skarlet hose,
Obscure in parentage, and base in friends,
Having no lands to help, but fingers ends,
And a false bale of dice, and yet so roares
In Ordinaries with his band of scoares
And library of reckonings bravely paid
With a high festiuall-surfet, though displayed.
Then witty Hermes, tell, the age permits,
How many gallants only live by wits,
When I observe some Lawyer shift a case,
With Angels from his right from place to place,
Iuggle with by-clarkes, and with counterfees,
Of either party, stretch their practices
Unto an Ambodexter course of right,
Smooth up the weak, and fawn on men of might,
Then winged Mercury I do admire,
The active flames of thy most subtle fire,
When I behold so many slights of men,
Even from the scraping and rough Citizen,
Unto the loftie-climing-dignitie
Of some smooth Courtiers craving subtlety:
Then thou deep charmer of quick Argus eyes,
Thy art with thy bright planet do arise,
When I behold a Usurer ensnare,
The lavish issue of some hopeful heir,
Wrapped up in bonds for some commodities,
With his damned broker by his policies,
Procures for composition, then my brain
Adores the Engines of thy witty train,
But tell me (thou acute ingenious man)
That nam'st thy self a sly Mercurian:
Thou that like Scenica in memory,
Transcends the vulgar in capacity.
Thou whose rare virtues are unparalleled,
Whose words, like Delphos Oracles are held)
Thou that do censure Homer to be blind,
Both in his mole-eied sense, and in his mind,
And call'st thy self a wit at every feast,
That cares to loose thy friends more then thy jest,
Keep'st company at Tauernes, and can write
A baudie-pamphlet for a baudes delight,
Art critical on stages, and think Art,
To be diffused through every senseless part
Of thy weak judgment, like some great man's son,
Sent only unto Cambridge to begone,
Before he reads his elements aright,
A great man's learning only rests in sight.
Know thou not fend usurper of sharp man,
How art defines a true Mercurian:
Not every Brazier (though his art be rare)
Can equal skillful Mirons molten mare,
Whose brazen frame live Stalions used to cover,
As if to art proud nature were a lover:
Not every limmer of fantastic shapes
Can wear the name of Zeuxes for his grapes: Zeuxis an excellent Painter.

Not every slash of airs most subtle spirit,
Shall wear this planets influence with his merit:
Not every brickel Poet, that aspires,
And feign would fly with Sidneys noble fires
Into the breast of greatness, we insert
Into the laureat Chor us of quick art.
And though the Kalends of these days permits,
That every man will company the wits:
Scipio will have his Ennius to indite,
And great Mecaenas baudy Horrace write
A Pamphlet to I dolatrize their name.
Yet in the passage of immortal fame,
It Is not the stirring motion of the pen,
Nor the phantasticke humors of those men,
No, nor their flames begot in smoke and wine,
That can inspire their blockheads with divine,
And most inventions strains of rauishing fits:
Unless great Hermes charm their apish wits
With arts and deeper skill, then that which wine,
Brings forth to shame good byrthes with bastard rhyme:
Nor every Almanack-maker, that can tell,
How every Planet in his house does dwell,
The quarters of the Moon, and give the reason
To plow, to purge, to lib in every season:
No, nor a Gipses tricks in Palmestrie,
Can merit a true birth from Mercury.
No, nor a plodding Graduat, deep in art,
That searches even the center and the heart
Of every scruple, that with Snake-like twins,
Circles the earth with winding disciplines,
We call a right Mercurian, that so looks,
As if his soul were nailed unto his books,
Except his practick studies well do show,
Experience in the age more then to know
The literal sense of arts: for out of schools,
Your meerest scholars are the meerest fools.
Not he, that taken from his College teates,
And weaned from schools unto the nobler seats
Of Lordly houses: can sharp Hermes boast
The God of wits to be his sire and host:
If to his formal and more sollid vain,
He join not sprightfull carriage to his brain
To apprehend the times gross ignorance,
By application of each circumstance
Unto his noble charge he takes in hand,
That not a trick, but he can understand
Within his active spirit, and still tries
With his own Test the best of subtil^ies,
That can prove fatal: as for others then
They may teach scholars, but not Gentlemen,
Monastick-walkes, and circumscriptiue walls,
Are fit for plodding wits; when Lordly Halls,
And noble Pupils, fit men of those parts,
That know the world, and are more then the arts: Singulariae sensus
vniuersali^ intellectus. Aris. Topi. lib. prim.

For singularities best please our sense,
But universals give intelligence
In the whole kind of learning: such as these
Are right Mercurians in their practices,
That join with nature, art; and with their art
Experience, as a quintessentiall part:
Nor nature, nor experience joined in one,
Gives a Mercurian true perfection:
Except deep art do help to load his brain:
For both without some learning are in vain,
And far from politic influence: but he is best
That has all three joined in a complete breast:
For if instinct of nature make a man
With subtle tricks a right Mercurian:
I see not but the Ichnumon, Memphis God,
Should challenge in his kind sly Hermes rod: Ichnumon or Pharoahs rat

For in his natural gifts, he does excel
All other slights that men or stories tell:
For on his coat he wraps an earthen cake,
Which by reflection of the sun does bake
His hardened armor, and with such a slight,
Impenetrable he begins to fight
Against the Crocodile, and with a Wren
He shows more craft then most Fox-like men
Can pattern in the triumph of their foe:
For both with conquest join in overthrow
Of Nylus mons^r, and if only art,
Architas wooden Dove shall bear a part,
Of a most sly Mercurian; or that Fly,
That late a German made most curiously,
With busy motion and with iron wings,
Venting forth buzzing, and loud whisperings: Regdomontanus made a Fly of Iron
like a natural Fly.

And if alone experience make such men.
I see no reason, but our sailors then,
Such as have to wsde the seas with change of land,
And seen all fashions: but should understand
The Mazes of sly Mercury, who on shore
Are ruder then the winds their Sails have bore:
No, all those three joined in their sweet consents:
Like the sweet Music of the elements,
That do agree together in the frame
Of a sound constitution gives the name,
Of a most right Mercurian: and not fire,
Or water by themselves, without the quier
Of their sweet harmony distinctly fixed:
Can give a form unto a body mixed:
As neither Autumn, nor the spring alone
Can make a full years revolution:
Unless the frostie winter do conspire
To make it perfect with the Summers fire.
Nor art, nor nature makes our subtlest wits,
Except in one triplicitie it fits
Experience to them both: for in the mind
Those two like rougher Diamonds are resignd,
And pollisht by experience: and all three must
Like Diamonds cut themselves with their own dust:
Which nothing else can perfect but their own:
Diamonds being parted, never cut alone
Their proper bodies: and thus man's perfection:
Shines like a full-pact constellation:
Invention is an action of the soul,
Whose essence stars nor influence cancontroule:
Which Mercury himself can never carry,
Or take away but prosperously may vary:
In giving inclinations to our veins,
But art and ripe experience quicks our brains,
Or rather all three, like three faculties
Of sense increase: and reasons properties:
As in a foure-square figure may be wrought,
A triangle from the same body brought:
Rests so in man, and do include each other,
Nature with art, experience as their mother:
All which, if ever they did iumpe in one.
Or blessed man's reason with infusion:
Great Julius Scaliger in thy spectacle
I read no wonder but a miracle,
That with these three so blessed thy subtilties.
Scilfull in thirteen several languages,
That time shall sing thy sharp nativity,
Not under, but beyond bright Mercury.
Besides the mixture of the elements,
That sweetly play upon our temperaments.
Either in higher, or in base degrees
Of active or their passive qualities,
May add unto the temper of the scull.
Quick winding Scenes or plots more gross and dull:
The airie sanguine temper quickly stirrs,
And apprehends, like busy Scribelers,
That in a Term time, like to vintners lads,
Up stairs and down with nimble motion gads,
Subject to agitation, yet consumes
His slight impressions in his ayerie fumes:
Such are the idle motion of those men,
That with poetic fury of their pen.
Snatch at each shadow of a sudden wit,
Like Esops dog; that in the sunshine bit
The shadow of the flesh: like Oars or Sculs
That cry the first man, and so drags and pulls
At sight of a conceit: that scare their sense.
Losing their fare by offering violence.
The chollericke complexion hot and dry,
Writes with a Seriants hand most gripingly.
The Phlegmatic in such a waterie vain,
As if some (riming-Sculler) got his strain.
But the sound melancholicke mixed of earth,
Plowes with his wits, and brings a sollid birth:
The labored lines of some deep reaching Scull,
Is like some Indian ship or stately hull,
That three years progress furrows up the maine,
Bringing rich Ingots from his laden brain:
His art the sun, his labors are the mines,
His sollid stuff the treasure of his lines:
Among which most massiue Metals I admire
The most judicious Beaumont, and his fire:
The ever Colum builder of his fame,
Sound searching- Spencer with his Faierie-frame:
The labored Muse of Johnson, in whose loome
His silke-worme style shall build an honored toombe
In his own work: though his long curious twins
Hang in the roof of time with dainty lines:
Greeke-thundring Chapman beaten to the age
With a deep fury and a sollid rage.
And Morrall Daniell with his pleasing phrase,
Filing the rockie method of these days.
As for those Dromidarie wits, that fly
With swifter motion, then swift Time can tie
To a more snaile-like progress, slow and sure,
May their bold becham Muse the curse endure,
Of a waste-paper Pesthouse, and so rise,
As like the suns proud flower it daily dies.
Besides, another cause of wits rarieties,
Consists upon the climates formed varieties.
That from the Articke, to the southern Cape,
Alters our humors to a diverse shape,
The Northern Tike is fair, gross, dull and hard.
The Southern man more pliant does regard
The witty lays, and madrigals of arts:
But from the North, are men of tuffer parts,
Brawnie labourious Hinds for labor fit,
Come from that Pole, from the other men of wit:
Rough-hewne vntutord Grooms come from the North,
But virtues from the South of milder worth.
And from each Climates variation,
Proceeds the changes of both men and nation.
The Alman rutter in his wit more cold,
The French more sudden, and the Italian bold,
The Spaniard subtle, though with much delay,
Crafty in vengeance, witty to betray.
The Dutch potwittie, and the Irish man,
A most dissembling politician:
The Scotch man poor in wit, yet very thriuing,
Of a broad speech, yet subtle in contriuing.
The Englishman more poor then he is known
For wit and clothes, for neither are his own.
But here from Mercury again I run,
Bearing the pillars of Alcmenaes son
With ne plus vltra, in this planets praise,
Leaving the learned trophies of green Bays
To Jove's own nuncius winged Mercury,
To crown more worthier brows in memory
Of a more curious model, then my pen
Can limme out to the life in other men:
For not like Phoeeton I do aspire,
To melt my self in this celestial fire,
Or like vain Poets, listen to the air
Offond opinion, what it holds for rare:
But if this Satyr have erred ought in matter,
May his tongue blister, that will speak to flatter,
Yet thus much boldly to the contrary
I boldly speak, by leave of Mercury,
That though no ways, I can his influence merit,
My Muse beyond his stars shall mount in spirit.
And to a holier Hierarchy fly,
To sing a more diuiner history:
But now of Cynthia and her beams I writ,
T is now full-Moone, Apes dance in such a night.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD WINDESOR, R. A. wishes a prosperous
perpetuity of health and happiness.
Of the Moon.
MY noble Lord, I much applaude your contemplative election in retiring your
self with many worthy examples, as Cato to Picen, and Scipio to a Farm to a
contented country life. You see the poison of populous places, and the Babel
fall of popularitie, the vicissitude of times are full of pestilent perils. Let
your Noble virtues make you happy in knowing your self, and canonical in
making use of the greatest ruins of higher fortunes; my love and ancient duty
contend both to gratify your honor. Read here the mutabilitie of time, and
be reserving in your Noble nature: what you find doctrine and useful: it is a
handful, but infinite in my love and services. And I conclude with the Poet,
Non rebus exiguis vacat abesse Ioui.

Your Lordships in all service and love, Robert Anton.

THE PHILOSOPHERS SEVENTH Satyr of the Moon.
OF all the Planets, this appears most strange
In apparitions and inconstant change:
Sometime she like a sith her face does show,
That barbes the fields, when they uncivil grow:
Sometimes again she like a rounded-ball:
Her crumped horns appear most sphaericall:
Which forms the bright Sun (heavens imperial star)
Prints in her pale cheek with his golden carre:
Sometimes approaching with his stately head
But once a month, Lordlike his Ladies bed:
Which is the reason why her plumpe faced Rheumes
Swell man and beast, plants, mines in pleni-lunes,
As she is near or distant from the sun:
So diverse in aspects her courses run,
Empress of floods, that swelst as thou do please
The flux, and refluxe of the sturdie Seas:
Whisper to Nature that deep mystery
Of Neptunes mighty tides, whose sophistry
Made that great problem master dash his brain,
Against the billows of the curled maine,
Making the Ocean, with his spacious room,
At once his grave, his coffin, sheet and tomb.
His double motion (as some understand)
Was not received from Gods eternal hand:
Although his bounds the Mouer has assigned,
To which the headstrong Ocean is confined,
But from that glorious siluer-fionted star.
That gives high floods, or ebs, as pleases her:
But why, my Nectared Muse do thou distill
Such Rosie-adors from thy bitter quill:
And cease to advance unto thy Satyrs reed:
To nettle time and make abuses bleed.
Lanch the impostumed age unto the quick,
And (Dutchman-like) with desperate sencing stick.
Among all things that subject are to change,
There Is nothing fixed, but is inclinde to range: Copernicus his opinion.

Which made Copernicus this Maxim prove,
That the fixed earth did from his center move:
If nothing then in earth, in seas, or skies:
But (Proteus-like) to change it self applies.
Bright weather-cocke of heaven, let me vnstrip
The changing influence of thy Ladyship.
Woman, I could like bells thy changes ring,
And like a foule-mouthd Mantuan rail and sing
"Of thy inconstant words, uncertain vows:
"Change of thy smiles, thy passions, and thy brows:
"Change of thy heart, hand, tongue, and rolling eye:
"Change both in love, and hate setremitie:
"Change to all changes, and if more change may
"From Saint to devil, change even when you pray.
But I enough have dwelt upon your star,
Let it suffice, the world knows what you are,
A Bit-borne curse, an Eele, a Be to sting:
A Cockatrice to kill, Siren to sing.
But leaving you for man's eternal bane:
Bright Cynthia, let me sing the inconstant vain
Of these vncert aine times, and truly show
How all things change, and with thy beams do flow:
Nor woman, nor the change of elements,
Nor the Moons changes do more change present;
Then the inconstant monstrous multitude:
Whose giddy Hydra-heads all forms include,
Mark how the winds breaking their brazen-guard,
Changes each point of compass, or of card:
Sometimes full East, sometimes again full west.
So change the furies of the poopels breast:
Agreat-mans fortune, that like full-Moones rise
Like Dolphins, these adore; but when it dies,
And wants from fuller influence of Respect.
When his ambitious beams no more reflect,
Upon the baser bodies; then their tide
In shallow ebbes, and falling currents aside:
As greatmens misery, that like the Sun
Attended with twelue-signes their progress run,
when their bright honors do ascend the sky
Like Aries then they bear him company,
In comfort of his springtide and high state.
Adore the high Solstitiall of his fate:
But when his rising honors do decline,
Then with his fall falls the dissembling sign
Into Aquarius, and from their eyes
Drop only tears to shroud him, when he dies.
The Peacooketraine of heavens all-colourd bow,
Paints not more colors then these Iayes do show
That have the falling sickness: when such fall,
Moors at their East, Dogs at their funeral.
Oh Popularitie that cost more heads
Then there are worms within their shamed beds,
To eat their treasons with their honored bones
To their first elements, or weeping stones,
To wash their shame in tears: how have your charms
Betrayed the nobler parts of Arts and Arms
To an untimely grave, which time shall write
In bleeding characters to after-sight.
How many stately Cedars have you lopt,
Whose state cloud-kissing-branches ouertopt
The humble shrub, whose ruined timber lies
To build new hopes to their dead families.
Here could my Muse with history conclude
The fatal changes of the multitude.
And like a vizard to Nobility,
Fright their depending popularitie.
But this in brief true subjects shall suffice,
"He Is wisest, that by others harms grows wise,
When I behold the Queen of seas and night,
Shifting her forms in changes to our sight.
I see the world (Cameleon-like) pursue
Her changing humors and her diverse hue.
Sometimes me thinks I see a peasant ride,
In his full-moone, of surfeit and of pride,
As if he tilted against authority,
Defied his Tailors importunity,
Scornd his poor Saffron-laundresse and his host,
Beat his poor Shoemaker, and rid in post
To dicing-Tauerns, next day without fail
His moon is changed, he damned in a Iayle.
Sometimes I see some sacred retiques turned
To Theaters profane, and tapers burnd
For damned Comedies, where singing quires
At midnight cast their odoriferous fires:
Which to a devil would appear a change
Of most unchristian toleration strange:
Sometimes I see more then mine eyes would see
Steeples to stables turned, and Sanctity,
Changed into ravenous Roabes of policy.
That I more wonder at this transmutation,
Then at the Moons alturnate alteration:
Again, reflect mine eye upon the age
That was and is, I see times pilgrimage
Corrupted with such pestilence of evil,
That man to man turns wolf: nay more a devil.
I see ambition begging innocence
Well-landed, for a fool; as if all sense
Were tied to pomp or policy of state
That our best landed men are fools by fate:
Which makes me^ count a Scholar blessed in Schools,
Which though they beg: the'r seldom begd for fools
He Is got in an Eclipse, so weak by birth,
He lives by the air; has not a foot of earth:
This is a fatal thing, prodigious chance:
Great fortunes favor grossest ignorance.
Sometimes I see the euer-turning sphere
Of man and fortune like new-Moones appear.
Still waxing to a full increase of light,
Till it seem round full- circled and most bright
To all men eyes: till by the darkesome shade
Of some mischance, a black eclipse be made.
Thus have I seen inconstant Tradesmen floate
Now rich, to morrow broake not worth a groate.
It Is the condition of this glorious frame,
And all things that beneath the Moon we name:
Nay, even the things above her orbed- face,
Do covet changes from their natural place.
Till with mutations, all things think it best,
To melt unto their Chaos, and so rest.
When man is borne, and (speechless) prophesies
Of times successions, and his miseries:
He first begins to wax; then wanes to worse,
Sees many Moons, and then begins to curse
The changes of the times: which many years.
His vexed soul has marked the swift careeres
Of Sun and Moon, and notes the age turned Jew,
With tedious hours: then he bids adeiw
Unto his golden days, when in his rage,
His long lived tongue speaks of the wicked age,
Tells what a brave world it was, when Bullens towers,
Trembled like Aspen leaves at Henry's powers:
Observing not the world the same to stand.
When it is men's manners change and not the land:
Here could I fing the changes of all states,
Even from the conquering and victorious gates
Of Tyber-grasping Room, tell of her story,
Write of her changes and her waning glory.
Even to this mighty Western Monarchy.
Since first the Danes subdude her liberty.
But more then I can write, all things persuade.
What ever were, or is to be, shall fade.
And though the world were euiternall thought.
It Is not eternal, but shall change to naught:
But now I turn my sails from seas to land.
Here Is more then men will read or understand:
Though orderly next to the firmament,
These wandering planets do themselves present:
And next to them earth, water, air, and fire:
Succeed in place my spirit to inspire,
With matter of divine Philosophy,
To tell of every primate quality:
That with predomination does present
The Lordly pride of every Element
In bodies mixed: and first I should repair
To the three Regions of the subtle Air:
Tell of the fearful Comets in the sky,
Whose diverse forms give to the prodigy
Ten fearful several kinds: which so we name
As they are diverse in their forms or flame:
Of thunder, lightning, and their blasting might^
Of hail, snow, rain, and tempests of the night,
Of Fires, that haunt Churchyards and forlorn graves:
Of Winds by which our ships dance on the waves:
Of earthquakes, and the veins of every mine.
Of gold, for which we cut the burning line:
Of plants, of trees, and of their qualities,
How in their forms and place they simbolize.
And how again for envy and despite,
The vine and Colewort never do delight
To grow one by another: then to sing,
Of glistering Jewels, and each precious thing:
To tell the virtue of the Chrysolite,
The sparkling Carbuncle that shines by night,
The purple Hyacinth, whose stone imparts
Sollace and mirth to our griefe-nummed hearts:
The heavenly Azure Saphirs quality,
Whom Authors say, preserves chastity,
The green Smaragdus, foe to Venus reakes,
Whose stone in hot conjunction blushing breaks,
And many more, that by the glorious Sun
In the earths womb take their conception,
These in their order should my pen incite
Of Natures universal works to write,
And in sweet moral lectures to apply
The worlds abuses to their mystery:
But that I hardly can be brought, to think
The time loves gaull, by which I make mine ink,
Or have so much wit in their shallow brains.
To read and understand me for my pains.
For by this plague we ever are outstript,
When we whip others we our selves are whipped
By Carters, and poor silly senseless hinds;
Whose grosser bodies carry grosser minds
For understanding: such lend only looks,
And think of Poems as of coniuring books:
Where in they see brave circles to the eye,
But more admire then know the misteriee
Of Arts profunditie: I fear none but such:
My self has lived too long, and writ too much.
FINIS

