THE EXPLANATION. OF THE TRVE AND LAVVFVLL RIGHT AND TITLE, OF THE MOST
EXCELLENT PRINCE, ANTHONY the first of that name, King of Portugal,
concerning his wars, against Phillip King of Castile, and against his
Subjects and adherentes, for the recovery of his kingdom. TOGETHER WITH A
BRIEF HIstorye of all that has passed about that matter, until the year of
our LORD. 1583.

Translated into English and conferred with the French and Latin Copies.

By the commandment and order of the Superiors. At Leyden In the Printing
house of Christopher Plantyn. 1585.

The order of the Privilege.
MAurice Earl of Nassawe, Catzenellebogen, Vianden, Dietz, etc. and the
counselors of estate appointed in the provinces united of the low countries: To
all to whom these presents shall come greeting. Th'ambassador of the most
noble prince Anthony King of Portugal, Algarbes etc. has declared unto us,
that he has caused a little treatise to be made, in the Latin, French, and
Flemmish tongues, containing the justification of the said king Anthony, with a
brief historye of all that has passed between his majesty and the King of
Castile: until the taking of thislands of Assores, together with an
exhortation to all princes and potentates of Christiandome, how much it
stands them upon, to aid and succor the said king Anthony to recover his
kingdom. The which discourse the said Ambassador is desirous to cause to be
imprinted with as much expedition as possib^y he may, to wit in the Latin and
French tongs by Christopher Plantin, and in the Fle^mish tongue by Peter
Verhaghen printer of Dordright. Wherefore and for other causes us hereunto
moving, we have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant
unto the said declarer license, authority and permission to cause the said
treatise and book to be printed by the said Christopher Plantin and Peter
Verhaghen, and to put the same to sale in the tongues aforesaid. Wherefore we
command all men generally and particularly that they suffer the said
declarer fully and peacablie to enjoy and use this our present license
authority and permission, causing all troubles and empecheme^ts contrary to
the same, clearelie to surcease and be removed: Forbidding as hereby we do
straightly prohibit and forbid all other printers of the said provinces
united, to imprinte or imitate the said book in any of the said three
tongues or in any other language without the knowledge and consent of the
said ambassador, or his successor in office, to sell or distribute the same
either within the said Provinces united, or elsewhere, without the same, upon
pain of arbitrary correction and to forfait L. l. for a fine For so have we
found it convenient, Given at Delft the 15. of January. 1585 Ad Meetkerke.

In the absence of my Lord the Earl, by thorder of the counselors of estate
abouesaide. I. VAN, LANGEN.

(...)resent work. (...) the second his Cosen german,
(...)e vviues.
3 (...)ONOR, the sister of the emperor Charles the fifth, by whom (...)he had
one son named Charles that died in his infancy, and Marie that died
unmarried. 6 (...)LPHONSVS (...)o was made (...)rdinall. 7 HENRY, who was also
made Cardinal, and after king by the death of King Sebastian. 8 EDWARD, who
married Theodosia Duches of Bergantia of whom issued (...)ARIE who married
(...)nder Prince of Par(...) whom are issued (...) children. KATHERINE, who
married the Duke of Bergantia. Edward who died and was never married.
9 ANTHONY, who died in his infancy.
The explanation of the true and lawful Right and Title, of the most excellent
Prince, Anthony the first of that name, King of Portugal, as touching his
wars against Phillip, king of Castile and his Subjects and adherents, for
the Recovery of his kingdom. Together with a brief history of all matters
passed upon that occasion until the year of our Lord. 1583.
WHen John the second of that name, King of Portugal, was departed out of this
mortal life, without any issue of his body lawfully begotten, then living,
(For his only legittimate son Alfonsus, while his Father was living, dyed at
Santaren, by the fall of a horse.) The kingdom of Portugal descended, or
rather was given by election of the people, unto Emanuell the first of that
name, son of Ferdinando, who was uncle to the same king John. This was that
king Emanuell, which in the time of his Reign conquered and annexed to his
crown, a good part as well of the East as of the West Indies, together with
diverse Cities and Towns of Africa, which at this day remain subject to the
kings of Portugal. The which king Emanuell had three wives, the first
whereof was Isabell the eldest daughter of Ferdinando and Jsabell king and
queen of Castile. which queen Isabell wife of the said king Emanuell dyed in
childbed after she had brought forth her first and only son Michaell, who
when he was declared and sworn Prince of Castile and Portugal dyed in his
young years. whereupon the said king Emanuell took to his second wife, Marie
the second daughter of the said king Ferdinando and queen Jsabell his wife. By
which Marie he had nine children. The first whereof, was John the third, who
succeeded his father in the kingdom, and took to his wife, Catherine, the
daughter of Phillip, the first of that name, king of Castile, and Archeduke of
Austriche, etc. The second child was Jsabell who married the Empeorour
Charles the fifte, of whom isissued three children, to wit Phillip the second
of that name now King of Castile, Marie who married the Emperor Maximilian
the second of that name, and Jane who was married to John prince of Portugal
the son of King John the third of that name. The third child of the said
King Emanuell was Beatrice who married Charles Duke of Sauoy. The fourth was
Lodowike who (as it has been since found) was secretlye married to one
Jolenta of honest parentage, and of a singular beawtye, adorned with virtue and
good quallities, by whom he had one only son, named Anthony: (who is the
same party, of whom and concerning whose right and title this treatise
principallye makes mention). The fifth child of the said King Emanuell, was
Ferdinando who married a daughter of the Earl of Marialua in Portugal, by
whom he had two sons who dyed while their father and mother were living.
The sixte was Alfonsus who was made Cardinal and so dyed without issue. The
seventh was Henrye who likewise was made Cardinal and prymate of Portugal,
and after that King, by the death of King Sebastian, as hereafter in this
treatise more at large shall be declared. The eight child was Edward who
married Theodosia Duchess of Bergantia: by whom he had three children, that
is to say, Mary who married Alexander Prince of Parma of whom are issued three
children: also Katherine who married John Duke of Bergantia. And Edward who
dyed unmarried. The ninthe child and last son of the said King Emanuell of
his said second marryage was Anthony, who also dyed in his infancye. The
third wife of the same Emanuell was Eleonour sister to the Emperor Charles the
fifte, by whom he had two children, to wit, Charles, who dyed in his infancy,
and Marye who also deceased and was never married. When the said Emanuell was
deceased, John the third of that name, his eldest son succeeded him in the
kingdom as is aforesaid, who by Katherine his wife had many children the
which dyed all in their infancyes, except Prince John, and Marye; The which
Marye married Phillip, now King, and then prince of Castile, and dyed before
her said husband came to his Crown, leaving one only son whose name was
Charles. Whom (as the fame thereof is constante) his father King Phillip
commanded to be put to death in prison. When Prince John came to the age of
sixteen year, he married Jane the daughter of the said Emperor Charles,
and dyed about one year after leaving his wife great with child, who in the
sixte monethe after the death of her husband, brought forth a son whose
name was Sebastian, which young Prince when he came to about the age of four
years, succeeded in the kingdom by and after the death of the said John the
third his Graundfather by the fathers side.

Now when King Sebastian was come to the age of four and twentye years, upon
the intreatye and solicitation of Mulei Mahumet King (as he pretended) of Fez
and Marrocos, who by Mulei Maluco his brother was expelled and driven out of
his kingdom, the said King Sebastian at the last determined to pass into
Affryca with a great and puissant Army, to restore this Mulei Mahumet to his
kingdom. And for the better accomplishmente thereof, he prayed his uncle King
Phillip of Castile to voutchsafe some aid unto him in that beehalfe. The King
of Castile granting this petition, promised to aid him, with fiftye Gallyes
well appointed and furnished, and four thousand armed souldyours. King
Sebastian trusting thereunto, with all care and diligence prepared his army,
wherewith in the monthe of June. 1578. he departed from Lisbone and came to a
port of Castile near the streighte of Gibraltare called, el puerto de Sancta
Maria, where he stayed certain days for the Gallyes and men which the
King of Castile had promised to send unto him. But the King of Castile,
under pretense that the great Turk, prepared an Army for that year, not
only denied to perform his promise, but also (that is far worse) caused a
proclamation to be made and published thorowoute all Spain, subject to his
Jurisdiction, whereby all his subjects were commanded upon great pennalties
that none of them should accompanye King Sebastian in that Voyage, whereof
certaynelye there can no other conjecture be gathered, saving only that the
king of Castile by his unmeasurable ambition and insatiable desire to have
dominion, neither coueted nor hoped for any other thing then only that the
young prince king Sebastian his nephew, for want of sufficient force, should be
ouerthrown and come to destruction in the same Journey, so as thereupon the
said king of Castile might by that mean have opportunity to join the kingdom
of Portugal to his kingdom of Castile as it came to pass.

Nevertheless the said king Sebastian being a prince of great magnanimity,
when he had all things in a readiness, and employed infinite expenses upon
the furnishing of this army which was above a thousand Sail, determined to
pursue his voyage, and arrived in Africa and there landed all his army
amounting to about fifteen thousand fighting men. Thereupon in the end he
came into a plain field which bears the name of Alcazar, where the fifth
day of August in the same year, was fought a great and terrible battle
between him and the enemy, wherein the said young king Sebastian was not
only overcome but also slain in the field together with Mulei Mahumet whose
part he took, at what time neither did Mulei Maluco the king that fought
against them escape, For he, in the time of the battle being sick and wearye
of sitting his horse, was removed into his horselitter and there dyed during
the battle. A battle certainlye worthy to be had in remembrance, for in
the same dyed three kings together in one day, as in like manner there were
slain in the same above six hundred of the cheifest of the Lords and
gentlemen of the kingdom of Portugal besides the common soldiers, the most
whereof were slain in the battle, and the rest taken prisoners, amongst
which number Don Anthonio of whom this book specially treats was one of
the Captives. Further there be certain persons who affirm, that after the
death of the said king Maluco, there was found in his pocket a letter written
unto him from king Phillip wherein he assured king Maluco, that king Sebastian
nephew of the said king Phillip shounde have no aid at his hands. whereby
may be perceived agreat vnfaithfullnes of king Phillip against his own blood.

Now when as by the death of king Sebastian, the lineage of king John the third
his grandfather by the fathers side, was utterly extinct: it must follow of
necessity (if collateral succession, take place in this behalf,) that recourse
must be had to the lineage of the said Lodowike as second son of the
aforenamed king Emanuell. Which Lodowike (as is before aleaged) had one only
son called, Don Anthonio, who therefore (his lawful birth presupsupposed)
was the only lawful and rightful successor of the kingdom. But it fell so
out, that while he in the said discomfiture of Africa was taken prisoner and
there remained captive, (howbeit unknown of the enemy,) as it was always
before that time unknown, yea and that also to Don Anthonio himself, that he
was the legittimate son of the said Lodowike: Henry the Cardinal his uncle,
the fifth issue male of King Emanuell, was preferred to the kingdom being then a
very old man. within a little while after, by a wonderful mean, or rather by
the providence of God, the said Don Anthonio about forty days after the loss
of the battle, was delivered out of captivity, and returned into Portugal,
where he was with great joy received, not only by King Henry, but also by all
the nobility and principal gentlemen of the country, and most chiefly and
principally by the common people. For he was beloved of all men, as well in
respect of his noble and excellent disposition of mind, as for the singular
and rare virtues of his said Father Lodowike which most clearly shined in him.

Within a few days after Don Anthonio was arrived at Lysbone the metropolitan
City of the kingdom, he was advertised by one of his father Lodwikes ancient
servants who was a man of good calling and approved integrity, that his
father Lodowicke (as is before mentioned in this treatise) was secretlye married
to the said Iolenta. And how there were diverse credible witnesses yet living
that could testify the truth thereof. And besides that diverse men of good
credit and calling, had expressed and declared the same by their last wills
and testamentes for the discharge of their consciences notwithstanding that it
was always kept very secret through the endeavor of the said Lodowike as well
in respect of thine quallitye of the persons, as also for that the publishinge
thereof was not material at that time, for that Don Anthonio was brought up to
be a Priest and Churchman and for that also there were then many other heirs
of the kingdom that were nearer to the Crown then he. When Don Anthonio had
received the same advertisement, he opened the matter to King Henry his uncle,
and besought him to voutchsafe the examitation thereof, and to grant that he
might produce certain witnesses and poofes whereby the truth of the matter
might be found out and manifestlye known, for the auoydinge of all
controversies and wars which otherwise were like to arise between them who
after the death of the said King Henry might pretend Title to the kingdom.
For sith he was the only son of the said Lodowike second son of the
said King Emanuell (if his birth be proved to be legittimate) he
necessarilye excluded and barred all others that by title of consanguinitye
might aspyre or pretend title to the succession of the kingdom,
notwithstanding there were any of the children living who were beegotten of
the daughter of the said King Emanuell, which was elder then the said
Lodowike her brother, forasmuch as the kingdom of Portugal falls not by
succession to the woman nor any other descending of her.

When King Henrye had understanding thereof being a very old manne (as
before is aleaged) and fearing least himself should (in case Don Anthonio were
proved to be borne in lawful marriage) be deprived of his kingdom, he
conceived so great indignation thereat, that immediatlye he bannished Don
Anthonio, Thirtye miles from his court, with express commandment that he
should not presume to return thither until his Majesty should take
further order in that behalf. Thereuppon Don Anthonio yiedling his obedience
to the same commandment made his repair to the City of Columbria being
four and thyrtie miles from Lysbone where at that time King Henry kept his
Court. But yet nevertheless the said Don Anthonio left at Lisbone, the said
ancient servant of his fathers, from whom he had received the said
aduertisemente, who at the same time was in the service of the said King
Henry and very far in his favor. To this man, the said Don Anthonio at his
departing from Lisbone, gave a special charge, to sollycite his cause to the
King in his absence with all endeavor and diligence. The which the same
Minister promised with all fidelitye to accomplish, and made humble petition
to King Henry, that with his good favor and license, he might prosecute the
affairs of the said Don Anthonio. Which the King not only granted, but
also expressly commanded him so to do.

When the said Agent had received this answer of the King, he required
Emanuell Bishop of Almada, then conseruator of the privileges of the order of
the Knights of saint John at Thisle of Malta, competent Judge, of the said Don
Anthonio as prior of Crato of the same order: To receive and hear the
depositions of witnesses and certain documents and instruments whereby the said
Don Anthonio intended to verify and prove himself to be issued of a lawful
marriage: praying the said Bishop nevertheless to keep the matter very
secret least the King by understanding the same should conceive some new
displeasure. Whereupon the said Bishop proceeded in the examination of the
cause. Before whom were produced three witnesses, who perfectlye and with
lawful circumstaunces deposed that they were present at the celebration of
Marriage between the said Lodowike and Iolenta parents of the said Don
Anthonio. Also there was brought and produced before the said conseruatour,
the Testament of one Rui Celema, who while he lived was known to be a very
honest credible man, of approved integrity, and was servant to Don Anthonios
Father and in good estimation not only with him but also with King Henry. This
Rui Celema by his testament had declared that he always understood and
certaynelye knew, that the said Lodowike Father of Don Anthonio was secretlye
married to Jolenta, setting down therewithal diverse reasons which
sufficyentlye prove the same, and because he was at point of death, and for
that in time to comeit might be expediente and beehouefull to the common
wealth of the kingdom of Portugal to know that Don Anthonio was issued of a
lawful marryage, therefore and for the discharge of his conscience, he had
made true declaration thereof in his said Testamente. There was also exhibited
before the said Bishop, the Testament of the said Lodowike whereby he ordained
and appointed the said Don Anthonio his son his only heir, not only in all his
goods Patrimoniall, but also in certain patronall rightes of great
im-Portance which were left unto the said Lodowike by the testament of his
brother Ferdinando and his wife who (as is aforesaid) dyed without children.
Further there were produced before the said Bishop other witnesses of good
calling and credit, who deposed that King John the third of that name,
immediatlye after the death of the said Lodowike his brother, gave unto Don
Anthonio, the signet and Arms of his father commanding him to use the same
frankly and freely without bar or breach, in as ample manner as his said
father had the use thereof, as the said Don Anthonio has always since
accordingly done. Upon the proof of all these things, the said Bishop taking
unto himself certain other Judges of the same order gave sentence touching
the same matter: whereby it was pronounced and declared, that the said Don
Anthonio was the lawful son of the said Lodowike and Iolenta, the which
sentence was also pronounced and confirmed in the Chauncerie of the said
order, howbeit secretly for the cause before aleaged.

In the mean time, King Henry, assembleth the estates of his kingdom to
treat of diverse matters concerning the commonwealth and tranquillity of the
same, and specially to deliberate, who should be the next and meetest Heir to
the crown after his decease: and yet nevertheless gave express commandment
to Don Anthonio, not to come to the said assembly but to send some deputy or
agent that might represent his person there. Also the same king Henry being
very fearful least Don Anthonio should prove himself to be legittimate,
required the Pope of Room to voutchsafe to commit unto him the hearing and
examination of the cause touching the legittimation of the said Don Anthonio.
In the mean time the same king Henry proceeds with the convocation of the
said estates, and commaundethe, that these personages should be cited thither,
to wit Philip King of Castile as son of Isabell eldest daughter of the said
King Emanuell, which Isabell (as is before alleged) was married to the Emperor
Charles the fifth. Also the Duke of Sauoy as nephew of Beatrice daughter of the
same King Emanuell. Also Katherine Duches of Bergantia daughter to the said
Edward sixth son of the said King Emanuell, and lastly the prince of Parma
as father and tutor to his eldest son which he had by Mary daughter also to
the said Edward. All the which princes and potentates, were cyted by the said
King Henry to appear at a certain day to the intent every of them, by his
Ambassador or Agent might propound and set down in the said assembly of
thestates all such right and title as every of them after his death could
pretend to the said kingdom. Saying he was minded to determine the same cause
in his life time if possibly he could bring it to pass. But if death should
prevent his purpose therein, his meaning was to commit and appoint not only
certain persons to govern the kingdom, but also certain Judges to determine
who had best right, and title to succeed and enjoy the crown, alleging he
took that course, to avoid all controversies inconueniencies, and wars
which otherwise were like to happen.

Whereupon all the said princes and potentates thus lawfully cyted, sent
their Ambassadors or deputies, with sufficient instructions on their behalf to
propou^d in the said assembly of thestates their several rightes and tytles
which they pretended to the said kingdom, Except only Phillip King of
Castile, who answered, he neither had, nor acknoledged and Judge in earth, but
only in heaven. And therefore would not commit his right and title to the
determination of any Judges that should be appointed concerning that matter,
adding withal how he was sufficiently informed by his best learned lawyers
in his own kingdom, that there was no other personage in the world saving
only himself that had lawful right to succeed in the said kingdom of
Portugal after the death of the said King Henry, which right in case it
should be denied unto him, that then he would obtain the kingdom by force
of arms.

When the most excellent pryncesse Katherine de Medicis the french Kings
Mother, was advertised of these matters, namely that King Henry had commanded
all them to be cyted which pretended auy title to the kingdom, she sent into
Portugal for her Ambassador the Bishop of Comminges to propound in like manner
on her behalf in the said assemblye of thestates, the right which she
pretended to the said kingdom, grounding her title, upon her descent from
King Alfonsus brother to King Sancho the second of that name, who before he
was King, had married in France, Mawde Countess of Bulloyne, by whom he had
two sons, one of the which was married in France, of whom the said
Katheren de Madicis descended, the other of the same sons deceasing in
Portugal without issue: and the plea exhibited on the behalf of the said
Kathereine de Medicis, was received by the said King Henry in the said
assembly of the-states.

Also when the people of Portugal understood the right of succession of the
kingdom was committed to examination, and considering themselves had lawful
power and right to elect and choose a King for and in default of a lawful
heir Masle descending directly of the Masculine line, therefore they exhibited
a supplycation to king Henry, that his majesty would voutchsafe to grant them
license to propounde and allege their right in that behalf and to exhibit a
plea which they had made thereof, containing in substance and effect as
follows: To wit. That the people of Portugal had made and chosen for their
King, Alfonsus the first King of Portugal, son of Earl Henry. Also that
the same people had deposed from the administration and government of the
kingdom, King Sancho, the second of that name after he had Reigned by the
space of five and twentye years, and that thereupon the same people committed
the administration and government of the kingdom to his brother Alfonsus
Earl of Bulloyne who had married Mawde the Countess, and after the death of
Sancho, they elected the same Alfonsus to be their King. Further that the same
people had elected and made their king, John the first of that name, the base
son of King Alfonsus the fourth, notwithstanding there remained living two
legittimate daughters of the same king Alfonsus. Which King John, the same
people of Portugal did confirm in the royal seat and mainteyned and
defended him, against John King of Castile also the first of that name who
pretended title to the succession of the said kingdom of Portugal, for and in
the name of his wife eldest and legittimate daughter of the said King
Alfonsus. Whereupon there grew sharp war between the same two Kings
concerning that matter, wherein the King of Castile in the end was overthrown
in battle, about a certain town of Portugal called Algibarotta. Moreover
that the same people had created their King, Emanuell the first, for that King
John the second had left no issue male descending of the right Masculyne
line. Lastly that they had made the said Cardinal Henry their King after the
decease of King Sebastian who was slain in the battle of Africa leaving no
lawful issue of his body to enjoy the Crown. By all these reasons the said
people concluded, that their power and right to make the said election, was
offarre greater force and effect, then the right and title of succession,
whereupon the other pretenders grounded them selves, and the same people added
withal, that by the Law, called the mental Law, made by the said King
John the first of that name, no woman can nor ought to inherit any goods
or possessions depending of the Crown, and therefore neither might they who
descended of the issues female as all the said pretenders did, saving only
the said Don Anthonio. Upon thunderstanding of all these matters so propounded
and set down on the beehalfe of the people, King Henrye likewise admitted
their plea.

Hereuppon while the states of the Kingdom of Portugal were assembled
treating upon the nomination and election as well of those persons which after
the death of the said King Henrye should have the administration and
government of the kingdom, as also of such as should decyde and judge the
question and controversy touching the succession of the crown, Thagent of Don
Anthonio was informed that one Alphonsus of Alburquerque an advocate of the
City of Lysbone was subcrned and won by some of the King of Castiles
fautors, and that he had manifestlye declared his advise and opinion to
certain great men of the kingdom whereby it euidentlye appeared that he
was altogether bent and enclyned to the King of Castiles part. Wherefore the
same Agent propounded and put in against the same Alfonsus a plea or byll of
recusation to the intent he should have no voice in thelection neither of the
said administrators or governors of the kingdom, nor of the Judges that
should have the hearing and determination of the cause touching the succession
of the crown, and also the same Agente auoutched how he would declare
sufficient causes that moved him to make the said recusation in case the
said Alfonsus would not admit the same. Whereat the said Alfonsus conceived
great displeasure and made grievous complaint thereof to certain special men
that favored the King of Castiles part, at whose hands he obtained so
much favor that they went with him to king Henry, to whom they declared this
matter as they thought most fit for their own purpose, alleging unto his
majesty that Don Anthonios Agent had propounded this scruple of recusation for
no other intent but only to hinder and diuerte thelection of the said Judges
for this purpose that Don Anthonio after the death of the said king Henry
might with the more facillitye attain to the kingdom. This complaint wrought
so effectually in the mind of the said king Henry, that forthwith without
hearing the said Agent in his answer and defense touching the same he
commanded him to be cast into close prison where he was detained by the space
of nine days until the said Governors and Judges were ordained and
established according to the kings will and mind. Upon the accomplishment
whereof, king Henry caused the said Agent to be delivered out of the prison
where he remained, commau^ding him nevertheless immediatlye to repair home to
his own house, and not to return to the Court, without his Majesty's special
license. Whereby the same king most manifestlye uttered his extreme hatred
against the said Don Anthonio being his own nephewe, since before that time
(as is before alleged in this treatise) he had given his consent to the said
Agent, yea and expressly commanded him freelye to prosecute the cause of the
said Don Anthonio.

Within a while after: the king commanded Don Anthonio then remaining at
Colimbre, to repair to his Majesty to Lisbone to take an oath to obey the
Judgment, that should be given, touching the right of the Crown, by the
Judges in that behalf appointed. Affirming that the other pretenders would
do the like, by themselves their Ambassadors or agentes. Upon this
commandment, Don Anthonio came to the king, and when the said oath was
offered unto him he answered he was ready to take the same in case the king of
Castile would do the like, but if he refused it there was no reason why
either the said Don Anthonio or any of the other pretenders should be
constrained thereunto. Notwithstanding king Henry persisted and in great rage
commanded him to take his oath, in so much that in thend he did so, with this
protestation first made in the presence of certain of his friends, that he
took not the same oathe with a frank and free will but by compulsion and
commandment of the king.

The next day after, Don Antonio had taken this oath, king Henry caused the
Popes letters pattents to be showed unto him whereby the same Henry was
constituted to take notyce and information of the cause touching Don Anthonios
legittimation, and theruppon commanded him to appointe his procurer to plead
his cause before his majesty as judge. And that yet nevertheless, within four
and twentye hours the said Anthony should depart again thirty miles from
the Court. Whereunto Don Anthonio answered that the King could not be Judge
in the cause for two reasons: the one for that he was party himself, the other
for that in his former actions he had plain elye showed a great hatred against
him, alleging a fresh example thereof, in that the said King Henry had lately
before imprisoned his Agent, for prosecuting his cause as he thought convenient
by order of law: And that therefore he doubted he could not find any other
that would take upon him to pursue and follow his business. Upon this
answer, the king with all expedicion sends word to the said Agent that
he might freely come to the court and prosecute the cause of Don Anthonio
denying expressly, that himself was party therein, and therefore signifying
how his will and meaning was to proceed therein, yea and that he would
proceed against the said Anthony as contumax for defaulte of answer in case
he refused to plead his cause before him and to inform him therein as should
be meet and convenient. Wherefore King Henry granted unto the said Agent his
lybertye and commanded him to prosecute Don Anthonios cause.

Now when the said agent was returned to the Court, he prayed one of the
kings confessors, to be a mean to his majesty, that sith he was by the
kings commandment urged to take upon him the prosecution of Don Anthonies,
cause, he might therefore freely employ and endeavor himself in the same as
he should think to be most meet and convenient for the safegarde and
preservation of his masters right and title. And that his majesty would
neither be displeased nor take in evil part if he proceeded in the same
sort that he did when (as is before recyted in this treatise) he sought to
remove the said Alphonsus of Alburquerque as a person suspected. But if he
might not prosecute the cause freelye as appertayned, then he besought his
majesty to voutchesafe to discharge him of that burden and to grant him
license to return again to his own house where he dwelt when King Henry
commanded him to be sent for to take the charge and administration of those
goods which Don Anthony possessed in Portugal when he remained in Aphrica.
When the King was advertised hereof, his majesty gave in commandment again
to this Agent to prosecute this cause freely before him in as good and ample
sort as he should think most behouefull.

When Don Anthony saw himself thus pressed to plead his cause before the
king and that his majesty purposed to give sentence against him for default of
answer, he commanded his Agent to nominate the witnesses which were there at
hand protesting he had yet further proofs to produce, whereupon having given
perfect instructions to his Agent, Don Anthony departed from the Court within
the time appointed by the king. Then the king commands those three witnesses
to be called before him which were produced before thaforesaid Bishop and
conseruatour of the privileges of thorder of the knights of S. John at Malta,
Who being come before the king persisted in their former depositio^s made
before the said conseruator, to wit, that they were present when marriage was
secretly celebrated between the said Lodowike and Jolenta. The king upon the
hearing thereof, used great threatening speeches unto the^, saying he would
cause them al three to be hanged in case they would not upon their oaths
confess, they were wo^ne by promises and otherwise, by Don Anthonio or some
other in his behalf, to give thaforemencioned testimony before the
conseruator. And when two of those witnesses affirmed that no body had induced
or persuaded them thereunto, and that their deposition therein was according to
the plain and simple truth, the King caused them to be committed to prison,
and the third witness for fear revoked part of his former deposition saying he
was not present when the said marriage was privily had and concluded, but the
truth was, he had heard it by report of others by reason he was household
servant to Iolentaes parents. The King by reason thereof was moved immediately
to sent for all the Acts, depositions of witnesses and instruments exhibited
on the behalf of Don Anthonio before the said Bishop and conseruator to prove
his matter, together with the sentence given thereupon, all the which being
brought before him he caused to be cast into the fire, and would not admit any
other witnesses and profes which the said Agent offered yet further to produce
in the same cause amongst the which were diverse religious men of good calling
who had bin confessors to the said Lodowike, besides diverse other witnesses of
good credit and estimamation. Howbeit the king contemning and rejecting all
the same, contrary to all order of law gave sentence whereby he pronounced the
former sentence before given by the said bishop and conseruator to be void and
of no force or effect. And thereuppon gave order to the high marshal of the
kingdom called Edward de Castle branco (whom since the King of Castile has
made one of the chief Treasorers of the kingdom) that he should bind and
bring Don Anthonio to the Court as Captive and prisoner, and commanded that
the two witnesses which remained prisoners should be bannished, but
contrariwise, greatly rewarded him that had altered his deposition grau^ting
unto him a crossado of the knights of thorder of Saint James withal the rent
and revenues thereunto appertayning, but Don Anthonio being in due time
advertised of all these things removed immediately from the City of Colymbre,
so that the marshall came thither in vain and so returned to Lisbone.

As Soon as the said sentence was given Don Anthonies Agent, sent a
supplycation to the bishop of Rome, complaining of the great injustice done
to Don Anthonio by the king, beseeching the said bishop to voutchsafe his aid
to Don Anthonio by remedy of law against that sentence so wickedly given, and
also to inhibite the King that by force of the same he should proceed no
further nor execute any thing against the said Don Anthony. Upon the
exhibiting of this supplication, the Pope with all expedicion caused his
letters pattents to be dispatched whereby he declared the said sentence of
King Henry to be altogether void and of no force, most specially for that he
had rashly proceeded to to sentence diffinitiue, without commission or
authority, forasmuch as the former letters by virtue whereof he proceeded
against the said Don Anthonio contained no other matter saving only that he
might hear and examine all the witnesses, and receive therewithal all
instruments and such like things whereby Don Anthonio meant to prove his
cause, and that upon the hearing of the witnesses, and the cause duly pleaded,
all the acts instruments and proofs should be sent to the said Bishop of
Room that he might Judge and determine of the same as he should think to
be most convenient. Expressly commanding the said King Henry to proceed no
further nor attempt any thing against Don Anthonies person by virtue of the said
sentence given against him by the same king Henrye, but to send unto the Pope
all thactes instruments, and proofs produced before king Henry on the beehalfe
of Don Anthonio, to the intent the cause might be decided and Judged by the
Pope himself or such Judges as he should appoint. When these letters were by
the Popes legate denounced to king Henry: immediately theruppon the same king
commanded Don Anthonies Agent, within ten days, upon pain of death to depart
out of his kingdom, because the king understood the Popes letters were
obtained through his industry and and diligence, by reason whereof the same
Agent upon this commandment departed presentlye from Lysbone to a
monastery of Castile adjoining to the borders of the kingdom of Portugal.

Now when king Henry, by reason of the Popes inhibition, could proceed no
further, nor attempt any thing against Don Anthony by virtue of the said
sentence: he determined to take another course for thexecution of his rancour
against him. Whereupon, under pretense and color that Don Anthony had come
within six miles of his Court contrary to his commandment, he commanded him
likewise upon pain of death to depart out of his kingdom within fifteen
days, declaring and decreeing with all that by the same occasion he had
forfaited all his right which he pretended to the kingdom, commanding
moreover that none of Don Anthonies servants upon pain of death should attend
and serve their master in that extremity. This most hard and rigorous
sentence he presently caused to be signified to Don Anthonio then being at the
said town of Colimbre, whereof when the Burgesses of the town, and chiefelye
the scholars of thuniuersitie there amongst whom remained many of the
nobilitye, were advertised, there arose such trouble that they put them selves
in arms, crying every where in the town, how King Henry doting with age and
moved with hatred against Don Anthony, would deliver the kingdom of
Portugal into thandes of the King of Castile, and for the same occasion, had
given this rigorouse sentence against him, Wherefore they would not suffer him
in this manner to be expelled out of the kingdom. Offering themselves to be
his valiant and faithful defenders herein, and ready to spend their lives
and goods for his safetye. Nevertheless Don Anthonio not mynding to stir
up any tumulte in the Realm for his cause, gave great thanks to the
multitude for their ready good will and affection toward him, desiring them
to pacify and content themselves. For he was wholly determined to obey the
kings commandment, in hope that when his Majesty had better weighed the
matter, he would at the last revoke the same sentence, whereupon having by
this mean pacified the tumulte and dismissed thassemblye, he departed toward
the kingdom of Castile, and went to the same place whither his Agent within a
few days before was gone, which was a monastery of Franciscan Friars
distant one mile from the town of Valentia of Alcantara.

When the king of Castile understood of Don Anthonioes bannishment out of
Portugal, he sent letters forthwith to all Governors, Majors, and other
high officers of his towns, Castles Borowghes and Villages bordering toward
Portugal, to show unto him in case he resorted thither all manner of
courtesy and honorable entertainmente, but yet nevertheless to take heed and
have special regard, that he returned no more into Portugal. Thereuppon the
said Agent upon aduertisemente to him thereof given, required a special
friend of his then remaining in Portugal near the confines of Castile, to
spy out in those quarters some secret place far from the common passages,
where Don Anthony might saelye remain for a certain space. In the mean
while when thagent understood what day Don Anthony would come to the
monastery, he caused a notarie of the said town of Valentia to come thither
the very same day, by whom as soon as Don Anthonio was come, he caused a
certificat or testimonial to be made wherein was contained that he was then
come to the said monastery, causing the same testimonial, for the better
credit of the matter to be subscribed by the chiefest religious persons of the
said monasterye. This instrument thagent sent forthwith to tharchbishop of
Lisbon to be showed to the King, and wrote withal to the said Archbishop, how
Don Anthonio was already departed from thence for thaccomplishmente of a
pilgrimage which he had vowed to make when he was captive in Aphrica. But
contrariwise Don Anthonio dismissing a great part of his train which he had
brought thither, went the same day accompanied with his Agente and only two
servants to the secret place prepared for him, where he continued the space
of about twentye days, but his Agente in the mean while returned presentlye
to the said Monasterye.

Within few days after: letters were brought to the said Agent, wherein
certain of Don Anthonios friends wrote, that it was not convenient for Don
Anthonio to absent himself far from the Court, least after King Henryes death
(who was very sickelye and full of infirmities) the people should be moved
to choose the Duke of Bergantia for King. For as touching the King of Castile
he was to be feared in no respect saving only thinuasion of the Realm by
force and violence, further for as much as King Henry had in all places
appointed spies, and likewise the Duke of Bergantia, and the King of Castiles
Ambassadors, who made dilligent search whether Don Anthonio stayed secretlye
within the limits of the Kingdom of Portugal, to the intent, (in case he did)
he might then be apprehended and put to death by virtue of that latter and
most rigorous sentence given against him by King Henrye. Don Anthonios Agente
upon thunderstanding thereof appointed one of his said masters servants
called Sebastian Figueira; then remaining in the said Monastery, a very
trustye and faithful man, to hyer a Bark in a town near thereunto called
Brantos situate upon the River of Tagus, and to furnishe the same with
victualles and all other necessaries, that Don Anthonio by the space of
certain days might be kept secret in the same upon the said River and
so escape thandes of the spies, so when the said Barque and all things
serving thereto were in a readiness, Don Anthonyo, not without great danger
to be known and intrapped in the way, at last came to the said Barque, and
goes aboarde the same, wherein he was carried up and down and River, about
the space of eyghte or ten days without arriving in any Haven, but in
the end being weary and sickelye, he came priuilye to Lisbon and secretlye
conveyed himself into a Priests house, where his Agent had informed him he
might continue in safety.

About the same time or shortly after, the King of Castile sent a gentleman
of good calling to the said Agent, to the monasterye where he remained,
requiring him to exhort Don Anthonio, to compounde with him touching the
controversy that was like to arise beetweene them about the succession of the
kingdom, and for the better bringing to pass thereof, the same gentleman
required the said Agent to go with him to Madril to the King of Castile. But
thagente suspecting all that was propounded on the King of Castiles behalf,
answered how the same course was not in any respect conueniente for the King
of Castile himself, as well for that the people of Portugal upon
thunderstanding of Don Anthonios treatye about agreement with his majesty
would be quickelye moved to elect the Duke of Bargantia for their King, as
also for that the said Agente could do nothing therein without express
commission from Don Anthonio whom the matter concerned, saying he would with
speed repair unto him about the same cause, and in the mean time the said
gentleman might make his return to the King of Castile.

Heereuppon this Gentlemanne returned to the King of Castile, and the Agente
in great danger came secretlye to Lisbone where he found Don Anthonio in
the Priests house. And having signified unto him, what had passed beetweene
him and the Gentlemanne aforesaid Don Anthonio answered he was very glad
his Agent had thus escaped the king of Castiles hands. And as touching the
making of any accord with the same King, it was far from his meaning, but
his determination was rather to expecte what should be resolved and
determined by the Judges therefore ordained. Within a little while after Don
Anthonio was advertised, how King Henry was informed of his secret being in
Lisbone, and had already serched many howses for him. Upon thunderstanding
whereof, he repaired secretly with his Agent, Didaco de Carcamo, Anthony de
Sosa, and Anthony S^^res, into a Barque which his said Agent kept always
ready for a need in the haven of Lisbone. Wherein after he had been by the
space of a few days conveyed again up and down the river, he received news
that King Henry was dead, Which happened about the beginning of February
1580.

When Don Anthonio was more certainelye advertised of these news, he came
forthwith to Lisbone, giving notyce of his coming to the governors and
Captain general of the same City, who resorted presently to him to
congratulate his coming, offering to make him king. Whereunto he answered very
discreetely that king Henry was but newly deceased and how thestates, and
governors of the kingdom were assembled to dispose of the succession of the
same, and that there were also other princes and potentates pretending to have
right and action thereto, and therefore he determined to expecte what should
be Judged therein by way of Justice.

The next day Don Anthonio withdrew himself into a monastery near the City
of Lisbone, called Belen of thorder of S. Jerome, half a mile from the same
city, where his grandfather king Emanuell and the other two kings descending of
him were buried. And having there accomplished his devotions, he repaired to
Santaren a mile from Almerine where the said Gouernoures of the kingdom were
then assembled: who being suborned by the King of Castiles ambassadors and very
desirous to deliver the kingdom into his hands, took it in very evil part
that Don Anthonyo came thither, since by king Henry's commandment he was upon
pain of death bannished the realm. Wherefore they commanded him to depart ten
miles from thence until King Henry's testamente were opened, thopening
whereof, they intended to de^^^^^, (...) the Ambassadors or deputies of the other
Princes ^^^ending ^yt^e to the kingdom, were come. Hereunto Don Anthony
answered, he supposed the rancour and hatred of King Henry against him, had not
taken so deep root, as that he did persevere therein to the end, but rather
before his death had showed some toke^ of repentance thereof. And therefore
very instantly prayed them to open the said testament without further delay,
that it might be manifest what king Henry had ordained, touching the succession
of the kingdom: insomuch that the governors moved therewith, commanded the
kings last will and testament to be opened, in the presence of thambassadors of
the king of Castile, the dukes of Sauoy, and Bargantia, and of the Prince of
Parma: whereby it was found, how King Henry had ordained, that the Judges
appointed to determine the matter, touching the succession of the kingdom,
should proceed no further nor decree any thing therein, until the cause
concerning Don Anthonyes legittimation were decided by the Judges therefore
authorized by the Bishop of Rome, which sufficiently proves all the rigorous
dealing of king Henry against Don Anthony, to have proceeded rather through
diffidence or for fear of the king of Castile, then otherwise of any reason
grounded upon right and justice. Upon the sight of this testament, the
governors declared to thambassadours, of the other pretenders, how they could
not now determine any thing touching the succession of the kingdom, except
the cause of Don Anthonies legittimation were first decided. Wherefore they
sent word to Don Anthonio to prosecute the cause touching his legitimation,
before the Judges thereunto authorized, namely the Popes nuncye then being in
Portugal and tharchbishop of Lisbone.

In the mean space, the king of Castile (having since the death of king
Sebastian, by little and little gathered a mighty army together, under
pretense of attempting some enterprise against Aphrica,) not minding to stay
for judgment in the matter of Don Anthonies legitimatio^, nor in the cause of
the succession of the crown, commanded all his men to join together under
the Duke of Alua captain general over the same army, about the town of
Badaioz in the kingdom of Castile, bordering upon the limittes of Portugal.
Upon notice whereof, the governors and Judges authorized to decyde the cause
of the succession of the kingdom, sent certain deputyes to the King of
Castile, praying him to voutchsafe to leave the way of arms and take the
course of justice since there were Judges ordained to hear and examine the
cause and to Judge and determine the same according to right and equity. To
whose Judgment the other pretenders were ready to stand: Informinge him
withal that by proceedinge to obtain the kingdom by force of Arms he
stood in danger to loose all his right and title thereto by means of a
decree made for that cause by King Henry, whereby it was ordained and
provided, that every of the pretenders goeing about by force of Arms to
get the kingdom and refusinge to stand to the judgment of the Judges
aucthorised to decide the cause, should thereby lose and forfaite all his
right and title which he had or might pretend to the kingdom.

Howbeit the King of Castile, (who as is before mentioned) had long before hand
declared, how he would not submit his right to any man's judgment,)
trusting upon his own power, and thendeuour of the said governors and other
noble men whom he had won to his side by gifts and fair promises, without
any regard of that information, commanded the Duke of Alua with his army
(which he had in a readiness) to proceed and invade the kingdom of
Portugal by force. Upon notice whereof, the governors forthwith departed
from Almerin to Setuball fifteen miles from Santaren fearinge least the
people of Portugal upon knowledge of the Duke of Aluaes coming to invade the
realm, would first fall upon them and then proclaim Don Anthonio King.
Within a short space after the departure of the governors from Almerin, news
came to Santaren how the Duke of Alua had taken two towns in Portugal
bordering upon Castile, to wit Eluas and campo mayor. Whereat the Citizens of
Santaren being greatly moved first took counsel together for the fortifying
of their town against the violence of thennimy, and therefore went in all
solemnity with the clergy and nobillity to survey and vewe the walls, and give
order for the beginning of the work. After that they resorted all together in
great multitude to Don Anthonyo then remaining in a monastery not far from
thence, where ill with one voice salute and call him king leading him from
thence to the principal church, and then to the townhowse, instantly
rerequiring him to accept the royal name and dignity and to bind them to him
by oath. Howbeit Don Anthonio contrariwise aleged unto them how the cause
touching the succession of the Crown was in controversy between him and
other Princes pretending title thereto, wherefore he would not accept the
royal name, but rather expect the determination of the Judges therefore
authorized. But if they would use him as their defender he was ready to spend
his life and goods for them and the common liberty of the country. Whereunto
the Citizens of Santaren answered again how their resolution was to make him
King, since the people of Portugal (as is before expressed) might lawfully do
it for defaulte of heirs masles in the right line. Which they were the more
desirous to accomplish, for that the king of Castile in contempt of all other
Judgment, would be his own judge and went about to possess the kingdom by
violence and force of arms. Thereupon when Don Anthonio could no longer resist,
he was sworn, King, by the three members of the same place, namely, the
Clergy, the nobillitie, and the common people, with erection of the Kings
standarde and all other solemnities according to the ancient custom of the
country, being conducted from thence with the said standarde to a Chapel
of great devotion, called Sancto Milagre and other accustomed places and last
of al to the royal Palace. Of all which things public acts were made and
subscribed by the said three members, and thereupon registered in the townhowse
of the same city. Upon thaccomplishment whereof Don Anthonio protested openly in
the presence of the same three members and many others that he accepted the
royal name more by force, then of his own accord, and that therefore he
determined to lay down the same, and expect the Judgment of the Judges, in
case the King of Castile would call back his army which he had already sent
into Portugal, and submit his cause to the judgment of the judges authorized as
aforesaid, of which protestation he caused a public act to be made and
enrolled the same amongst the records of Santaren.

Within three days after, Don Anthonio went to Lisbone where within a mile
from the city, he was met by the ordinary garrisons of the realm with their
Captains, and many of the chief of the nobility, amongst whom were Peter Dor
a French gentleman agent for the most excellent Princess the french
queenemother and M. Edward Perin each of them with a goodly company of
strangers. When he came to the gate of the city, there stayed for him the
religious men of the three orders of the Friars minors, who received his
majesty with great devotion and reverence, and in form of procession marched
before him singing Te Deum laudamus. etc. In this sort the king was first
brought to the Cathedral Church, and in all places where he passed, the people
showed themselves so joyful, as the like thereof was never seen before at
thelection or receiving of any of the said former Kings. When he came to the
Cathedral Church, he was there received with great honor and reverence by all
the Clergy, with the celebration of all ceremonies thereunto by custom
appertaining, and from thence was conduced to the Regal Palace. The next day,
the governors and magistrates with the most noble and principal men of the
city together with the three estats of the realm, caused the royal standard
to be carried before them, through all the principal streets of the city,
crying aloud, God save king Anthony, and grant him long life. In thend they
came all to the said Palace, where they swore him for King, binding themselves
to him by other: whereof likewise public acts were made. Don Anthonio making
protestation thereupon in the like sort that he had made at Santaren, when he
was there chosen and sworn for king: whereof also a public act was made and
enrolled as abouesaid.

Now when it came to the knowledge of the governors of the Realm then
remaining at Setuball, that Don Anthonio was chosen King, the greater part of
them withdrew themselves into Castile, to wit, John Masquerennas, Frauncis de
Sa, and Diego Lopez de Sosa, the other two, namely tharchbishop of Lisbone, and
John Tello de Meneses came within three miles of Lisbone, and sent to King
Anthony, beseeching him to voutchsafe to receive them into his favor: which
they easily obtained at his hands, since the one of them namely John Tello de
Meneses had always showed himself to bear a good affection to the common
wealth, and tharchbishop had always showed himself a neutre, where
contrariwise the other three which were fled into Castile, being won and
corrupted by the king of Castile with gifts and promises, had always openly
maintained his quarrel: and yet in the end did penance for their horrible
treason. For shortly after they dyed al for very grief and melancholy that
they had sold their country, and could obtain little or nothing of all that
had been promised unto them on the behalf of the king of Castile by his
ambassadors.

Within certain days after, king Anthony departed from the city of Lisbon,
to Setuball, where still remained the deputies of the towns, with the high
Chauncelour, the principal Counselors of the realm, and many of the
nobility: By whom he was likewise created and sworn King with all
solemnities thereunto convenient. Where the third time he made the like
protestation that he had made before in Santaren, sending two of the said
deputies from thence to the king of Castile, with commission to declare unto
him, that if he would desist from force of arms, and submit his cause to the
determination of the Judges thereunto authorized, that then he would do the
like, and lay down the name and dignity of king. And having first given order
for the defense of a town called Monte Mayor (which was in danger to be
besieged by the duke of Alua) he returned from thence to the city of Lisbon.
In the mean while the king of Castile, how much the more he was moved by Don
Anthonio and others to commit his cause to be determined by way of justice, so
much the more he endeavored to get the kingdom by force, making great offers
notwithstanding to Don Anthonio, in consideration that he should yield up the
royal name, and renounce his action to the kingdom. But nevertheless Don
Anthonio seeking the liberty of his country, more then his own benefit,
would never yield to accept any conditions, how great soever they were.

Now when Don Anthonio was come back to Lisbon, he dispatched letters
immediately to all cities and towns of the kingdom, and to the towns and
castles of Aphrica, and thylandes and firm land, subject to the crown of
Portugal, certifying them how he was chosen and sworn king, and therefore
required them all from thenceforward, to take and knowledge him for their king,
the like also was written to all the said towns, Castles, Islandes and firm
land, by the said governors and magistrates of the city of Lisbon. Immediately
upon the delivery of these letters, Don Anthonio was in all places
acknowledged and proclaimed king in all solemnity, and that so greatly to the
joy and contentation of all thinhabitantes as is scant possible to be
believed. In the mean space king Don Anthonio ceased not to provide as far
as lay in his power, for the defense of the said City of Lisbone, (which is
the chief City of the realm,) for that the Duke of Alua approached from day
to day with a great army which he brought by land and sea, amounting to
about six and twenty thousand fighting men as well horsemen as footmen, all
old soldiors and well appointed, the most part of them coming by land and
the rest by sea in fiftye gallyes and about as many great ships. At last
these two armies coming by land and sea, met and joined together at the
town of Setuball which was quickelye brought under the power of thennimie by
reason it was neither any strong town, nor provided of gunpowder, which in
great plentye together with thartillerie and other munitions of war had been
before that conveyed into Castile by the said governors under color of
thexpedition which was pretended into Aphrica.

The Duke of Alua having thus taken this town of Setuball, caused the most
part of the footmen to be imbarqued in the gallyes, and the rest in the
great ships wherewith he went to the town of Cascais standing by the Ocean
sea, seven miles from Lisbon, having in his company Anthony de Castro lord of
the same town, who a little before yielded him self to the said Duke. Through
this man's labor and industry, the Duke in few days easilye got this town
into his hands, where Diego de meneces a gentleman of a noble house was
governor, who after the yielding up of the town was beheaded by the Duke of
Aluaes commandment, and one of the Captains called Henry Perera hanged upon
a gibette notwithstanding that each of them had yielded himself.

After the taking of this town of Cascais the Duke of Alua removed his camp
to the strong castle of Saint John within three miles of Lisbone, wherein
Iristan vaz de vegna was captain, a man very notable in militarye experience
having made great trial of his valiauncye in theast Indie, and now when the
said Duke by the space of one day had beaten the Castle with great
ordinance, without doing it any harm, the next day the said governor
though he wanted neither munition nor any other necessaries, yet after parle
with the Duke of Alua, yielded the Castle into his hands upon the Dukes
promise that the King of Castile should yeilde unto him a great pencion
yeerelye during his life, but even as traitors by gods just judgment are
commonly paid according to their desert, so this man was so far from having
promise kept with him, as that contrariwise he was presentlye by the King of
Castiles commandment bannished into Africa for the space of ten years there
to serve against the Moors because he had withstoode the Duke of Alua a whole
day and yielded not the Castle at the first somonce but after by composition,
whereas he had before promised and written, that immediatelye upon the Dukes
coming he would yeilde up the Castle. Wherefore he purchased the name of a
Traitor without reaping any commoditye thereby as it often happens to
traitors.

When this Castle was thus yielded (whereby the free passage of Gallyes and
Ships to Lisbon was greatelye hindered,) The Duke of Alua removed his camp
to the subburbes of the Cyty of Lisbon where King Anthony then remained in the
subburbes called Alcantara, with his Army consisting of about six thousand
footmen, and eyghte hundred horsemen of his own kingdom, the greatest part
thereof being smallye experienced in feats of arms. Wherefore although it
seemed not sufficient to resist so puissaunte an army as the Duke of Alua
brought, yet King Anthony more regarding the common wealth and lybertye of his
Country, then the safety and preservation of his own person, determined to
hazard the battle rather then lightlye and ignominiouslye to yielde himself
and his people into thandes of the Tyrants, hoping for the like good success
that in time paste King John the first, of that name had who with six
thousand Portugalles in a very like quarrel overcame John King of Castile
the first also of that name, with his Army of thirty and two thousand men,
in a battle fought beetweene them near the village of Algiba Rotta But
after certain skirmishes, wherein two-thousand Castillians were slain, it
fortuned the same day that the said king Don Anthonio thought to have joined
battle with the king of Castiles power (which was the xxiiii. day of August)
early in the morning, many of them that were with him, seeing thenemie
approach, began to fly: whereof certain went to thenemies, specially the
horsemen, a great part whereof (as afterward manifestly appeared) were
corrupted by the king of Castile, besides there was great want of gunpowder in
King Anthonies camp: for at that time by the default and treason of the said
governors (who as is before declared) had conveyed a great quantity of
gunpowder into Castile, there could not be found above two thousand pound
weight of the said powder in all the city of Lisbon.

Upon consideration of all these things, King Anthonies most principal and
faithful servants counseled him to provide in time for the safety of his
person, for as long as it was safe, there remained some hope of the recovery
of the liberty of the country, which in case he were lost, was utterly
unrecoverable for ever. Which advise by his majesty well weighed and
considered, he determined with many of his noble men and others that were very
faithful unto him, to break through a squadron of horsemen, whereby thenemie
supposed to have cut away from him all possibility to escape away. And
thereupon without delay causing the Kings royal standard to march before him,
they all set spurs to their horses, and so furiously assail thenemies, that
straitghtwaies they drove them from their place, and so with their weapons
procured their passage. Wherein King Anthony himself received two great
wounds in his head by staying (and that not without effect) to help
Ferdinando Valeroso out of the hands of thenemies. And although the King was
greatly troubled and weakened by means of those wounds whereout the blood
ran in great abundance down his eyes and face: yet more by Gods providence
then by man's strength or industry he escaped from the ennimies, and yet not
once but diverse times was driven to break through the midst of them with
four or five horsemen that continually followed him (of the which number was
Fraunces of Portugal Earl of Vimioso) the residue of those that help to make
the said passage being turned another way carrying the Kings standarde before
them. Now when the king had passed through all the Cyty, of Lisbone, meeting
his enemies in diverse places, at last he came to the shoreside of the river of
Tagus which runs by thest end of the Cyty where he found Emanuell of
Portugal Uncle to the said Earl of Vimioso, already imbarqued to fly to the
City of Santaren. Who as soon as he knew the King, caused the Barque to be
brought to the shore, that his Majesty might be received thereinto and so
pass away with the said Earl and others amongst whom was Simon Masquerennas
deane of Ebora who came to the king at that very instante when he was ready to
enter the Barque.

Now as the king was sailing up the river in the said barque toward
Santaren, his Agent (having followed the standard) came presently by great
chance to the same place where the king was taken into the barque, and
understanding his Majesty to be therein seeing the same a far off, and
perceauing how certain of the king of Castiles galleys pursued the same very
near discharging store of harquebush shot thereat, he galloped after by the
river side in all possible haste to overtake the barque and being come right
against the same, ceased not to make signs from the shore side that it should
come to land in the place where he was, and as it was coming toward him, he
caused two of them that were in his company to alight their horses namely
Anthony de Sosa, and Jerome de Sylua, appointing the best horse to the King,
and the other to therle of Vimioso and Emanuell of Portugal his uncle, and
taking Simon Masquerennas behind him upon his own horse. In this manner they
galloped away all as fast as they could through Olive trees and other
unfrequented places, till they were in some better safety. But scarsely was
the King with the other three lords aforenamed landed, when the barque was
presently assailed and taken by one of the Gallyes so as the rest that
remained behind could not come to shore, the greatest part of thennimies
leaping into the water where it was shallowe for the easier taking of the said
barque, where they took many prisoners, amongst whom the chiefest were
Emmanuell de Castro and Anthony Botado and other the Kings servants.

When the duke of Alua was entered into Lisbon, supposing Don Anthonio had hid
himself there, he made no great search after him in the fields. In so much
that while the soldiers were busy in spoiling the subburbes, and search was
made in the town for him, the King with them of his company came first to a
Village three miles from Lisbon, where after he had stayed a little to dress
his wounds he passed further from thence by unfrequented ways, and came that
night to a house of pleasure a mile from Santaren, belonging to Peter de
Menezes one of his treasourers who ouertooke his majesty in the way, flying
also from thennemye in the company of the Bishop of Guardia. The next day after
his majesty's coming to this place, he sent his Agent to Santaren to declare
to the governor and Magistrates of the Town, how he was determined to come
thither, praying them to receive and defend him in case thennemy pursued him
thither. Whereupon the governor and Magistrates, upon notice of the Kings
coming, went with a great company of the Citizens to meet him half a mile
without the Town, and there very humblye received him not without great
lamentation for that which had happened at Lisbon the day before: and so
conducted him to the royal palace of the City, offering all with one accord
to spend their lives and gooddes in his defense if he would stay there. Bur
for that the Town was not very strong nor conuenientlye furnished, with a
garrison, munitions of war and other necessaryes, to abide a siege, he stayed
there only two days to heal his wounds, and then took his journey toward
Porto of Portugal a sea town indifferent strong, about fifty miles from
Lisbon, (whither the Duke of Aluaes army easily could not pass) where the
King might have convenient place and opportunity to repair his army and stay
for aid, which he hoped for out of France or England. In this journey the
king Don Anthonio was accompanied, by the Bishop of Guardia, the Earl of
Vimioso, Emanuell de Sylua then governor of the said City of Santaren, Peter
de Meneses, and his majesty's Agent, being all of his privy counsel, with
many other Lords, Gentlemen, and other persons of great worship and calling
to the number of about two hundred horsemen and a thousand footmen. And in
the same by reason of his wounds became so weak and feeble, that he could
not abide to sit his horse nor be carried in his Litter, but was driven to be
borne upon men's shoulders. Then coming to the Town of Montemaior not far
from Col^mbre, his majesty stayed there six days to refresh himself and cure
his wounds, gathering men together in the mean space, to about the number
of eyghte thousand wherewith he martched to the City of Auero and was in all
places as he passed through the country received and acknowledged as King,
notwithstanding that the King of Castile had already subdued Lisbon the
chief City of the kingdom. When the said King Don Anthonio drew near to
this City of Auero he sommoned thinhabitantes to take his part and topen the
gates of their City unto him according to their oathe. Upon refusal whereof
on their behalf madehee gave in charge to therle of Vimioso (whom after that
he made Counstable of Portugal) to do his endeavor to take it by force,
giving also the spoil of the City to the soldiers. And though it were well
furnished with munitions of war and other necessaries, yet the greater part
of the Citizens refufed to make resistaunce against King Anthonies men,
insomuche that the Town was taken easily by scaling the walls and otherwise,
and so brought under his obedience and sacked. But yet upon the taking of the
same, his majesty gave such order that the soldiers exceeded not in their
insolency, so that all things were soon in quietness, his majesty lodging
there first in the monasterye of the dominican freres by the space of three
days, went from-thence to a very fair large house pleasauntlye situated
upon the river and beelonging to Francisco de Tauares a gentleman who a little
before was gone to the king of Castile to sue for pardon because he had saluted
and acknowledged king Anthony for king. When King Anthony had caused certain
traitors in this Cyty to be executed by order of law, he continued his journey
toward the said town of porto of Portugal, likewise sommoning the citizens
of the same to acknowledge him for their king, and to open the gates of their
cyty unto him. In this town was then governor Pantaleon de Sa brother of
Frauncis de Sa one of the three governors, which presentlye after Don Anthony
was chosen King, fled to the king of Castile. This governor being likewise
won to the King of Castiles side, was a mean with other of his accomplices
that entrance into this town was denied to King Anthony, his majesty
conceauing great displeasure thereat assembled men from all parts
thereaboutes to increase his army and made al possible preparation to pass
over the River and take the town by force. When all things necessary for the
siege were in a readiness, as the king was marching with all his host against
the town having in his camp about twelve thousand men, and yet the most of
them unarmed, the Citizens began presentlye to rise in such a mutiny against
Pantaleon the governor and his complyces who pretended to resist Don Anthonio
and his men, that the said gogouernor and his pertakers had much a do to save
themselves by flight from the furye of the people, whereby it came to pass
that all the religious and clergy men of the town camme forth to meet the
King, beseeching his majesty to pardon the Cytizens in that they had not
yielded the town into his hands upon the first sommonce according to their
alleagence and the duty of their oath. Whereupon the King in thend, was
content of his natural cleme^cie to pardon their offense upon condition they
should compound with the soldiers to whom he had granted the sacking of the
town. By reason whereof the Citizens promised for the safegarde of the same
from sacking, to give the souldioures a hundred thousand Ducats. And so the
King at his entrance into the town was honorablye received by the Citizens,
whereupon his majesty presently sent the Bishop of Guardia from thence with all
speed to the next province called Enter dueroe Minho to encourage thinhabitans
and gather men and victuals for thaugmenting and provision of his camp, and so
stayed certain days in the same town expecting aid and gunpowder from
France.

Now the Duke of Alua (understanding how King Anthony was come to Porto and
there encresed his army) feared least his Majesty should receive aid from
France, and therefore in all have sent Sancho de Auila (sometime governor of
the Castle of Antwerp) with two thousand horsemen and eight thousand foot men,
Artillery and all other munitions and necessary provision of war to besiege
the said town of Porto, who arrived there about thirty days after King Don
Anthonio came thither. Now when the said King Don Anthonio was informed of
thenimies coming he gave order to all towns where they should pass, to give
them free passage without resistaunce for that his majesty could not defend
them by reason he wanted horsemen and gunpowder, and that the greatest part of
his soldiers which served him in the getting of Porto, were retired hoame to
their own houses. When Sancho Dauila was come before the Town of Porto, he
stayed with his army and planted his artillery upon the farther side of the
river of Dureto over against Porto, from whence he began to batter the walls
of the town with his artillery, but forasmuch as he got little this way by
reason of the great space which was between him and the town, he determined
to pass over the river to that side, which lies next Porto. And in the end
accomplished his determination with certain barques and boats, which for the
same purpose he had procured from all parts. For King Don Anthonies men were
not able to hinder the said passage, by reason they were for the most part
unarmed and unexperienced.

King Anthony seeing his affairs in these hard terms determined to make his
retrayte to the town of Viane, a port also of the sea, intending there to
embarque himself for France, with many noble men and others following him, to
about the number of five hundred, with whom he came to Viane very late in the
night, weary and evil at ease, and not yet thoroughly healed of his wounds. In
this place, he prepared five ships the next day, and furnished them with
victualles and all other necessaries for the said embarquement. Now when all
things were ready thereunto, and the king and his company almost all
embarked, there chanced a great tempest with a contrary wind out of the sea,
whereby the ships were all stayed and could not depart out of the haven. In the
mean space Sancho Dauila sending his horsemen before, came after himself with
the rest of his army to besiege the town. Wherefore King Anthony fearing
least the ships would from the the land at last be vexed and suncke with the
artillery of the enuemie, and seeing he could not sail out of the haven by
reason of contrary wind, determined (while he had time) to save him self from
so apparent a danger, before thennemie had hemmed him in on all sides. And
therefore in all have forsaking the ships, with great grief, he took his
leave of the principal noble men, and others that were about him, exhorting
them, every man to provide for their safety by the best means they could:
amongst whom the chief were, the said Earl of Vimioso, the Bishop of Guardia,
Emanuell de Sylua, Peter Fernando, and Diego de Meneses, with many other of
the ancient nobility, prayinge them to be all of good courage, hopinge at
last fortune would so change that he might give them honorable recompense
for their good services done unto him and which he hoped to receive at their
hands in time to come.

Thus King Anthony with all possible speed passed away on foot up the river
side, having in his company only his said Agent, and one of his servants
called Thomas Cachero, with two honest Burghesses of the said town of Viane
who knew the coasts of the countreye, sending his treasurer before him with
about forty men attending the same. But having in this manner passed but a
little way, they spied upon an hill not far off, a troop of the ennemies
horsemen being fifty in number or above, who seemed to come down into the
plain field, and directlye to take their course toward the king.

Wherefore for the avoiding of so present a danger, by his Agentes counsel,
he caused the company attending his treasoure to depart from him and to
martche and pass with the same over the plain field, whilst him self with
his Agent, Thomas Cachero and the said two Burghesses of Viane held on their
way by the river side. This devise took good success, for the ennemy
directed his course straight toward the greater company, making none accoumpt
of the smaller number which passed by the river side. Insomuch that while the
enemy spente his time to pursue and take the treasure (amounting to little
less then a million of gold) The king found mean (when he was got a good
way of) to save him self (with those four that were in his company) by
wading over the said river where it was shallow, but yet the water came up to
their breasts as they passed thorough.

When they were thus come to the other side of the river being that side where
the town of Viane is situate, they spied a far off, other troops of
horsemen and foot men who (by all likelihood) sought also for the King, for
which cause his majesty and his company thought good to go over the river
again to the same side from whence he came. Upon the accomplishment whereof
they hid them selves amongst bushes and young trees by the water side, where
they aboade all the same day which was the twelfth of October fasting and
wette, for it scant ceased from rayning all that day. At night they went a
foot from thence by paths and otherwise as they could, to a Village about
two miles from Viane, being there received into a poor wydowes house where
he rested all the same night and the day followinge. The next night he
departed from thence to other places thorough unfrequented ways and desartes,
taking with him to the company he had before, a fifth man whose name was
Jasper de Gran, whom he found upon the shore at his first passage over the
river. This Jasper was one of his old and most faithful servants, who was
the greatest mean that the King had, so happily escaped out of the Moors
hands when he was captive in Aphrica.

Now for that Sancho Dauila could not find the King in the ships, neither
in the Town of Viane nor elsewhere there aboutes, he gave order to all his
horse men and foot men to disperse them selves in diverse troops, and to
pass into all places and Villages of the province adjoining, called in the
Portugal tongue, Enter Dueroe Minho, to seek for King Anthony, promising
great and ample reward to whosoever should bring him prisoner: and wrote to
the Duke of Alua remaining still at Lisbone to appoint sufficient watch and
ward in every of the sea ports to watch diligently that King Anthony
embarked not him self to depart out of the kingdom.

Also the Duke of Alua him self and Sancho Dauila withal, wrote to the like
effect, to all towns and places of the Kingdom of Castile bordering upon
Portugal. In so much* that great and curious search was made in every place
for King Anthony. Besides, many Spaniardes and Portugals were hired and
appointed to that business, by the Duke of Alua and other of the king of
Castiles ministers. But the king of Castile not so content proclaimed in all
places that whosoever could bring king Anthony either dead or alive, should
have five and twenty thousand Duckates of gold for his reward. Whereof open
proclamations were set upon the principal Church doors, and also upon the
gates of the City of Lisbon and other places of Portugal and Castile, and
besides all this, the King of Castile grieuouslye punished whomsoever he knew
or suspected to bear good will to King Anthony, some by death, some by
perpetual exile, not sparing many men and women though they had let slip but a
word only in favor of King Anthony.

Yet notwithstanding the king of Castile got nothing by all these more then
tyrannical devises and means. For King Anthony being (more, by Gods
providence and sufferance then by man's industry) preserved about the end of
seven months wherein he had wandered about by rocks desartes and other
solitarye places, at last found means to embarque him self for France the
tenth of May 1581, near the before said town of Setubal, in a ship of Holland
of the town of Anckbuysen whereof wasmaister Cornelius de Egmont, and arryuod
at the Port of Callais in France the ninthe of June following, having in the
preparation of his embarquemente, very great help and furtheraunce at
thandes of a diligent and faithful wydowe whose name was Beatrice Gonsalues
dwelling near unto Setuball, whose picture, after the matter was discovered
and she fled away, was hanged by the king of Castiles appointment. There
accompanied King Anthony in his passage to France Emanuell de Silua (whom
his majesty's afterward made Earl of Torres Vedras and governor of Th^sles
of Assories,) the Kings Agent, (whose name is purposelye concealed in his
book for a certain consideration) Thomas Cachero, Diego Roys, Constantine de
Britto, and Diego de Quaresma the kings ministers, Dominicke Gonsalues brother
to the said Beatrice, and Ferdinand Martines a man of the country whose help
and service the King had used to provide his victualles, and other necessaries,
during the time that he secretly remained amongst the Rocks and desartes.

But if all perils and discommodities which King Anthony suffered while he
thus wandered in desartes and solitarye places to escape thandes of his enemy,
should here be expressed and set down, scarce would a large volume suffice
thereunto. Yet this is to be noted, how all this happened to his majesty when
he was above thage of fortye years, and not in perfect health, in the midst
of winter, and coldest country of all Portugal, where he was constrained to
spend many nights in the plain fields and that very often in snow and
rain all the night long, without either fire or other remedy against the
cold, being for the most part all the whole day without meat or drink, for
his food (such as it was) for the most part was brought unto him in the night
by the said countriman Ferdinando Martines. (Yea his majesty thought
himself happy when he could put his head under some roof, and rest
himself upon a padde of straw, which kind of lodging the countrymen use
in those parts of Portugal without either beds or sheets (specially where
there be no through faires) so that his majesty was driven commonly to lie
in his apparel wrapped only in a couerlet which the said Thomas Cachero
always carried with him for that purpose. Many times also his majesty was
almost apprehended by his enemies who left no place vnsifted for him,
insomuche that the spaniardes often came to the very same place where the King
had been, within an hour or thereabouts after his majesty's departure from
the same, where they miserably afflicted the poor husbandmen that had harbored
his highness, executing some by the cord, and burning their houses. But yet for
all that, other husbandemen refused not to harbor his majesty in their houses
when occasion required, notwithstanding they knew his person very well, for
they were so well affectioned toward him, that none of them ever bewrayed him
to the Castilians, and yet were they not ignorant of the great quantity of
money which the king of Castile by open proclamations had promised to whosoever
could deliver him dead or alive. In all these so great and incomparable
dangers the said king Don Anthonio has always showed so cherefull and
constante a mind as though no misfortune at all had chanced unto him, always
encouraging and comforting those that were in his company, setting always
before his own eyes a steadfast hope not only to pass and overcome all these
dangers and toils but also in thend t'attaine to the recovery of his kingdom.

Here also is to be noted, that whilst King Anthony was tossed in all
these dangers and misfortunes he omitted not any thing that might further his
escaping from the tyrants hands. For four times he attempted to take shipping
for France, before he could bring it to pass, having every time made
convenient preparation, defrayed the charges of his shipping, and made all
other necessary provision for his voyage, first at the town and port of
Auero, the second time at Lisbon, the third time at Villa Noua of Milfontes,
the fourth time at the Haven of Sizimbre nere Setuball, but the number of spies
and traitors as well Portugalles as spanyardes was so great, and their awayting
and vigilancie so extreme, that these the Kings attemptes were frustrated
(although most secretlye handled,) yea his majesty was not far from his
apprehension at what time he first prepared for his embarquing at Lisbon, for
he was there almost entrapped as more particularly hereafter shall be
declared. Besides his majesty in the month of December sent secretlye into
France Jerome de Silua a gentleman of a noble and ancient house to signify
unto the most Christian french King and the most excellent princess the
Queene-mother that he was yet living and in good health, for that he
understood, the King of Castile had written to many Princes of christiandome,
how he was dead.

Now when the king of Castile had established his affairs in Portugal
according to his pleasure, he sent incontinentlye lettres to all the towns of
Aphrica, of the East Indyes, the country of Brasile and other countries and
Islandes depending of the Crown of Portugal, requiring them from thencefoorth
to acknowledge him for their sovereign Lord and Prince, which he easily
obtained at their hands, by reason there ran a rumor that King Anthony
was dead, and for that they saw no lykelyhoode how he could ever recover his
kingdom, and besides these countries and towns cannot want the traffic of
Portugal from whence they have their provision of victuals, munitions of
war and other necessaries. wherefore in thend they submitted themselves into
the king of Castiles hands more by necessity, then for any good will. The
King of Castile also wrote to the like effect to thisles of Assores where at
that time remained governor Cipryan Figueredo de Vascogoncelos established
there by king Sebastian before his going into Aphrica, in respect of his great
wisdom and experience linked with a singular and commendable constancy and
fortitude of mind and courage. After good and mature deliberation had
thereupon the same governor together with thinhabitants of the Islandes
answered how they were bound by oath to king Anthony, and in regard thereof
could not acknowledge the king of Castile for their sovereign lord nor do
homage unto him before they were certainly advertised and sure that king
Anthony was dead, and therefore resolved to defend themselves against all
force, (wherewith the king of Castile threatened them) until they should
receive, certain news of king Anthonyes death, or express commandment from
him to yeilde them selves into the said king of Castiles subjection and
obedience.

With this answer the king of Castile was highly offended, and therefore
within short space after prepared an army by sea amounting to about three
thousand men, whereof Peter Baldez was Captain, who arrived with his navy
well appointed in the beginning of June 1581 near thisle of Tercera the
strongest of of all thislandes of Assores, and albeit the same Islande remained
unfurnished not only of soldiers but also of armor, gunpowder, and other
necessaries fit for the wars, yet by Ciprian Figueredo his virtue and
industry (whom the inhabitants of thisland had chosen for their Captain)
thennimie was repulsed with the loss of about seven hundred of his spaniards
all old soldiers and amongst them many of the chief gentlemen that first
set foot on land who were all presently slain, which spectacle cast such a
fear into the rest of tharmy remaining in the ships, that none of them durst
come a land, insomuche that Baldez with this foil was driven to return into
Portugal to his great shame.

About the same time, when King Don Anthonio was (as is aforemencioned) come
to Calais, he stayed not long there, but passed with all expedition into
England, from whence he presentlye dispatched a Carauell, toward the said
Islande of Tercera with letters to Ciprian de Figueredo aduertising him of the
success of his voyage, and how he was arrived in health in the realm of
England. Upon the receipte of these letters, Ciprian himself and all
thinhabitants of thislande conceived such joy as is scant possible to be
believed. For many of them thought his majesty had been either dead or fallen
into thandes of his enemy notwithstanding the Constable, and Anthonye de Britto
Pimentill had persuaded certain of thislanders, (who repaired into France to
inquire news of him) how his highness was come thither and for a certain
respectt kept himself secret in a Castle, whereat thislanders greatly
rejoiced, whom Cipryan confirmed in this good opinion, although he supposed
the same to be cunningly invented (as in truth it was) by the Constable and
Anthony de Britto to encourage the people and keep them in good devotion
toward his majesty, who came not into France till a good while after. But it
fell so out that this was no small furtherance to thobteyning of the victory
whereof mention is before made. Ciprian and the rest of thinhabitantes of
thisland sending back the carauell to his highness certified him of the
victory obtained, which was gotten but two days before the coming of the
Carauell, offering their ready service to spend their lives and goods for the
maintenance of his majesty's authority, and preservation of thislance as they
had already done. At the return of this Carauell into England, King
Anthony was there still preparing an Army wherewith he purposed to meet the
fleet which was to come that year to Spain and Portugal from thest and west
Indies. But But for as much as it was after known to be then to late to execute
thenterprise, it remained in suspense, without any thing effected that year.
Wherefore King Anthony departed out of England and in the month of October
following, arrived at the haven of Diepe and passed from thence to Parris,
where he was honorably received as well by the most Christian king, as by the
Queenemother.

The King of Castile (considering how greatelye it stood him upon to subdue
the said Islands of Assores, and specially Tarcera as the most principalle and
chiefest amongst them that he might thereby better assure his navigations from
the East and West Indies,) determined to prepare a great and puissant army by
Sea for the year following 1582. Upon notice whereof King Anthony gave
advertisement of the same presently to the queene-mother She for the repression
of the King of Castiles purpose gave order for the preparation of another
army by sea in France for King Anthony, appoynting her cosen the lord
Phillip Trossi general of the same, and the county of Brissake for his
lieuetennant. This army consisted of seven and fiftye ships of war as well
great as small and four or five thousand soldiers, with about six hundred
french gentlemen of name and arms, and certain Portugalles. King Don Anthonio
determined to go personally in the same army, to see the said Islandes of
Assores and thank his good and faithful subjects thinhabitantes of the same,
for their duties and loyaltye thitherto showed unto him, and withal most
principal to maintain militarye discipline amongst his soldiers, meaning
also by the way to take thisle of saint Michaell, one of the greatest of
thislandes of Assores and then possessed by the King of Castile. Whereupon
about the end of June 1582 his majesty sailed from Belisle with his said
army, and arrived before saint Michaels Isle the three and twenty of July
following, which presentlye yielded to his highness by reason thinhabitantes
were well affectioned toward him saving certain traitors, who were constrained
with the spaniardes that lay there in garrison to about the number of eight
hundred to flyinto a strong Castle there. In which Island King Anthony landed
with the principal heads of his army and many of his Captains and soldiers,
where his majesty was well and humbly received by his subjects according to
their duties. But the third day after they spyed approaching toward the said
Islande the King of Castiles navy under the conduction of the Marquis of saint
Cross bringing therein about nine or ten thousand fightinge men. By occasion
whereof it was thought necessary for all them which were gone a land, to
repair back to their ships and to prepare themselves for the battle,
howbeit the lord Strossi, the Constable, and others of aucthoritye,
counseled, and entreated king Don Anthonye to absent himself from the
battle, and to rytire into thislande of Tercera and not to hazard his person
in a doubt full battle, since thereof depended the liberty, not only of the
people of Portugal, but also of all the rest of Christiandome. The King was
against their advise a good while, but in the end (over come with their
reasons) he resolved to follow their counsel, and in a little Carauell
together with his agent, Edward de Castro, and certain others was conveyed into
the said Isle of Tercera, leaving in tharmye the Constable with about two
hundred Portugalles as well gentlemen as others who came to his Majesty into
France.

The next day being the six and twentieth of Iulye, the Lord Strossi having
set his army in order, determined himself first of all to aborde thenimie,
and therefore coming out of a great and mighty ship of seven hundred tonnes
which served for thadmirall of his army, he shipped himself with the
Constable and many gentlemen as well Frenchemen as Portugalles in an other
ship of smaller burden which sailed well, wherewith having overcome and
sonke certain of thennimies ships, he set so fiercelye upon the Marquis his
viceadmirall conducted by Don Lopus de Figueroa, that he slew about six
hundred spanyardes therein, and had her rendered unto him, howbeit at the very
same instant he was so furiously assailed by the marquis of saint Cross
himself (coming in a very great and strong ship called the galeon saint
Martin,) that in the end he was vanquished for want of aid; For he was not
aided by any other saving only the said Earl of Brissack, who fighting
valiantlye with two ships greatelye endomaged thennimie, but yet at last
seeing himself sore wounded and that he labored in vain being not seconded
by others as was convenient, he made his retrait in time retourning into
France with the loss of many of his men and his ships in evil plight.
Duringe this great battle the Lord of Sansolenne viceadmyrall to the Lord
Strossi, and the lord of Fumei captain of five ships, for want of wind,
(as they pretended) never invaded thennemies. These two lords, when they saw
the lord Strossi overcome, retired with twenty ships to king Anthony into
thisle of Tercera. His Majesty upon notice of thill success of the battle,
conceived great sorrow, (as he had good cause) and that most specially for
the deaths of the lords Strossi and the Constable both lords of great
valor, and took it in very evil part, that Sansolenne and Fumei had so
miserablye forsaken them in the battle. These lords of Sansolenne and Fumei
shortly after by his majesty's license retired into France, leaving in
thislande about two thousand and five hundred french souldioures for the
defense of the Kings person in case thennemye would assalte thisle. But the
Marquis of saint Cross having lost in the battle about two thousand of
his best soldiers durst attempt no further against thislande of Tercera but
only stayed for the fleet which came out of the East and Weste Indyes, and
when they were joined with him he took them under his conduction and so
returned presently toward Spain with all his atmye.

Upon the advertisement whereof King Don Anthonio with all expedition
gathering together all the ships as well french as others which were at the
said Islande of Tercera and other places there aboutes to the number of seven
and thurtye ships, embarked himself with two thousand french souldioures
and as many Portugalls, to the intent to pass therewith to thislande of Madera,
belonging to the Crown of Portugal, but then holden by the King of Castile.
But when the monethe of October was come (at what time the sea begins
greatelye to swell in those parties) there arose so mighty and furious a
tempest in the midst of their journey with a contrary wind that it was
impossible for the^ to pass any further, and for their ships to keep
company together, but being dispersed diverse ways, arrived with great
travail and danger, part in France, and part with the King in thisle of
Tercera. After the King had soiourned there about twentye days, and set
such order in thislande as was conuenyente, he departed from thence with five
ships toward France and arrived there with the help of a favorable wind
within twelve days, taking in his company Ciprian de Figuereds (who till then
had governed the said Islandes of Assores), and appointing in his place
Emanuell de Silua Earl of Torres Vedras (of whom more shall be spoken
hereafter;) His majesty being arrived in France, was there again very
honorablye received as well by the most Christian king, as by the
Queene-mother who then offered to give him any assistance to prevail against
his enemy and as time and occasion should serve to restore him to his
kingdom, naminge unto him shortelye after, the Duke of Ioyence for general of
tharmies. Which for that cause should thereafter be prepared.

But in the mean time the king of Castile (seeking all possible means for
the cause before alleged, to bring the said Island of Tercera and the rest of
thislandes of Assores under his subjection,) appointed therefore, to be
prepared for the year following another myghtie and great army of many
gallyons, galeies, and other vessels both great and small to the number of a
hundred and twentye. Of which nauye the Marquis of saint Cross was appointed
general again. In the mean space King Don Anthony understanding thereof,
omitted nothing that might tend to the defense and preservation of thisle. For
by the favor and assistance of the queenemother, he prepared a Nauye and
levied two thousand french soldiers to be for that cause employed under the
conduction of Mounsir de Chartres a noble gentleman and of great valor, of
whom the queenemother had made special choice (amongst many) for that
service. This Mounsyr de Chartres with the said navy and number of soldiers
about the beginning of spring time, departed toward the said Isle of Tercera
to furnishe it with a strong garrison and defend it against thinuasion of
the King of Castile, and arrived there with a favorable wind without any
misfortune.

Now when the King of Castiles army was ready, amounting to a hundred and
twenty sails, and ten or twelve thousand fighting men, the Marquis of
saint Cross departed with the same from Lisbone about the end of June. 1583.
and arrived before the said Isle of Tercera, the four and twenty of July
following, and having spent two or three days in viewing where to land his men
best, upon the third day after by the^lpe and benefit of his Galleyes
which (contrary to many men's opinions) he brought thither, he landed his men of
war in a certain place, least suspected by the captains and inhabitants of
thisland, where remained but a very small garrsion. By reason whereof it came
to pass that before the principal body of the garriso^ which was two miles
of, could come thither, then'nimy had leisure to land almost ten thousand
fighting men, and had half entrenched them. First therefore Mounsyr de
Chartres came thither in all expedition with his regimente of Frenchemen and
hotlye skirmished with the enemies, wherein many were slain on either side,
but specially of the Spanyardes. At last also came therle of Torres Vedras
gouernoure of the Isle with a good number of Portugal souldioures and men of
the Islande well armed and sufficientlye trained. And perceauing in what case
things stood, treated with Mounsyr de Chartres touching the joining of present
battle with the ennemy. Hereupon they all prepared themselves to fight, and
the squadrons being set in order are appointed to march against the ennemy. But
for that the Marquise had twice as many men in his army as were in King
Anthonies, and also it seemed very late in the day to give this battle, the
said Earl propounded to Mounsyr de Chartres to differ it till the next day,
and that in the mean space he would cause victuals, gunpouder, munition, and
other necessaries to be brought into a convenient place amongst the rocks of
the Isle, to the intent to make their retraite thither to stay for aid out of
France or the other Islandes, if they fortuned to loose the victory:
Alleging withal that the enemies army could not stay long about the said
Island for want of a haven, and specially how the galleis could not abide the
Ocean sea when it began to swell, which happened commonly about the month of
August then being at hand: further how the enemy with all his army could
not long remain there if the commoditye of victuals were taken from him. When
Mounsyr de Chartres had conferred with his captains about these matters, some
were of advise to give present battle, others and the greater part resolved
with the Earl to differ it till the next day.

The Earl being advertised of this resolution, called before him certain of
the chief Portugal captains, declaring unto them what had passed in this
matter, exhorting them to keep diligent watch that night, that none of their
soldiers departed from the camp. But when the Portugals (who before were
willing to join battle) understood the differring of the same till the next
day, their hearts began to faint, insomuch that by little and little they
forsook the camp and went home to their houses. Upon the understanding
whereof, the Earl distrusting the victory, conveyed him self about midnight,
with ten or twelve of his company out of the camp, to the intent to save him
self by flight (as appeared afterward by certain barques which he had
prepared for that purpose,) yet faining to make present return. But on the
morrow after thinking with his company to be embarked, he was disappointed by
certain women dwelling about the place, where the barques lay, who brake
them in pieces to stop his passage: Then seeing him self in this adversity
and deceived of his expectation, he went in despair, and hid himself in the
best sort he could among the rocks.

Now when it was light day, Mounsir de Chartres hearing no news of therle,
and perceiving how in a manner all the Portugalles were gone from the camp,
thought no other but that therle had withdrawn himself with his Portugalls to
the rocks, according to his speech had the day before: Whereupon presently
the said Mounsyr de Chartres setting al his men in order of battle, marched
straight to that place which therle had before nominated unto him, But
forasmuch as he found there neither the said earl, nor victuals and other
necessaryes which he had promised to conuaie thither, Therefore he assembled
all his Captains and officers with the chief of the Portugalles which yet
stayed in the camp, to consult what was best to be done. Thereupon they al
concluded how it was best to agree with the enemy, Insomuche that upon
conference had between him and them, at last a conclusion was made, whereby it
was lawful for all the soldiers, as well frenchmen, as Portugalls to depart
with bag and baggage out of the Island, whithersoeuer they would, leaving
behind them their armor, Ensigns, and Drums. Also the enemy promised to
furnish them with ships and victualles for their passage. Howbeit the said
earl of Torres Vedras and certain natural borne subjects of thisle were
excepted out of this treaty and agreement, whose pardon thennimie would in no
wise yield to grant. After this composition thus made, all thisle was
miserably sacked by the space of 3 dais, many of thinhabitants hanged and
Emanuel Serradas beheaded, (who a little before, by king Anthonies commandment
had taken and sacked thisle of Caboverde) neither could therle of Torres vedras
escape his fortune, for the 3. day after thagreement made, he was found among
the rocks, by means of a maid-slaue bewraying him, and thereupon was also
beheaded.

And although the loss of this Islande of Tercera with thothers depending
thereof, was unto the said king Don Anthony a great and lamentable misfortune,
yet for all that, never abating his courage, he has always reposed his
confidence in God, and thuprightnes of his just cause, hoping by the grace of
almighty God, and good assistance of Christian princes, at last to recover his
kingdom which the king of Castile has tirannicallie taken from him, as we are
taught by many histories, how the reign of tyra^ts lasts not long. And this
is the very reason that hitherto the said King Don Anthony has refused all
manner of composition with the said king of Castile, notwithstanding he has
had very large offers at his hands of some of the which and specially of the
cheifest, it shall not be from the purpose here to make rehersall. It is
therefore convenient to be known, how the king of Castile by Christopher de
mora, his ambassador in Portugal, offered unto Don Anthony yearly (before he
was created king), 500 thousand ducats and the gouernorship of Portugal
during his life, with the free disposition of all offices, benefices and
dignities as well ecclesiastical as temporal falling void in that time within
all the kingdom of Portugal, upon co^ditio^ that he should renounce his actio^ to
the kingdom of Portugal. Afterward when Don Anthony was ouerco^e and wa^dred
in great danger in deserts and vnfreque^ted places: the king of Castile gave in
charge to Ieronimo de mendoza, a ge^tlema^ and co^mander of thorder of the
knights of S, James, to endeavor by all possible means to come to the speech of
Don Anthonies agent, to propou^d some other mean of agreement. Therefore this
Jeronimo de Mendoza, taking in his company Emanuell of Portugal, a special
friend of the said agent, and uncle to therle of Vimioso, came to the wife of
the said age^t to a house of his about 8. miles from Lisbon, delivering unto
her a safe conduct from the king of Castile, for the surety of her husbands
person with particular letters directed to him and desired her to send them to
him, as soon as she could learn where he was, telling her it was a matter of
very great importance, which he had to treat upon with him, where of depe^ded
the wealth and tranquillity generally of all the kingdom of Portugal, and
particularly of the said Don Anthony, and her husband his agent. It fortuned
that within 8. days after the said agent ignorant hereof, came fecretly to
his wife, to thinte^t to take order for the said king Don Anthonies first
shipping, which he thought to have taken at Lisbon, leaving the same king Don
Anthonio 2. miles from thence in a secret place (where he was to stay) til al
things were ready for his embarking, in a ship which the^ vnladed at Lisbo^
being covertly sent thither for that purpose, by the said queen mother, with
master Peter Dor a gentleman of great wisdom, and discretion, who always
had been well inclyned to King Anthonies side, and had express commandment
to inquyre whether he were dead or alive. Now when the said King Don Anthony
understood by his Agent what Ieronimo de Mendoza propounded from the king of
Castil, he was very unwilling to consent that his said Agent should enter
into any communication with him, fearing it was but a drift to entrap his said
Agent and yield him prisoner into the King of Castiles hands, but yet the
said Agent more regarding the Kings preservation then his own safety, very
earnestly intreted his majesty to permit him to confer with the said, Ieronimo,
since it would be a good mean to further his highness embarquing, which was in
hand to be prepared. Insomuche that King Don Anthony at last consented
thereunto. Therefore the next day the said Agent signified as well to Jeronimo
de Mendoza, as to Emanuell of Portugal that he was come to his wife to the
place before said, and therefore they might come and declare what they had to
say. First therefore came Emanuell the next day to the said Agent, and they
concluded to meet Mendoza the day following in a place half a mile from the
said Agents house. Now at the hour appointed meeting together, the said
Mendoza declared to the said Agent how the King of Castile would give unto Don
Anthonio the Kingdom of Naples, upon condition that he would yield himself
into his hands, and renounce his right and action which he pretended to the
kingdom of Portugal, promising also large recompense on the King of Castiles
behalf to the said Agent in case he could procure king Anthony to accept this
offer. Hereupon the said Agent to lengthen this business and win time, fained
he knew not where King Don Anthonio was, but yet told Mendoza he was well
content to break the matter to his master as soon as he could understand where
to find him, alleging how his majesty never stayed two days together in
one place. At which communication the said Ieronimo de Mendoza made earnest
entreatie to go in the company of the said Agent to confer with Don Anthonio
when it should be known where he was. Whereof the said Agent did put him in
good hope and held him in suspense about the space of twentye days space,
applying nevertheless in the mean time the business of his majesty's
shipping, which being ready the said agent returned to king Anthony,
certifying Mendoza thereof, and sending him word how he would with speed,
advertise him what resolution the said king Don Anthonio took in those
matters which the said Mendoza had propounded. But the said agent thought
nothing less then to return to Mendoza, fearing least he would by so^e
pretense either deteine him captive or not leave til he had brought him to king
Don Anthony. Moreover the king of Castile commanded many other most ample
and beneficial offers to be made on his behalf to king Don Anthony, after his
arrival in France, yea and after the taking of thisle of Tercera, which for
breuities sake are here omitted.

Now when king Don Anthonio understood what offer Mendoza propounded unto
him, he made none account thereof, but went by night with his agent, and others
of his train to a secret place not far from Lisbon, adjoining near the
sea, there staying for a bark which was to come from the said city of Lisbon
to carry him aboard the ship wherein he was to sail away. This bark was
partly prepared by the care and diligence of Peter de Alpoen Doctor of the
laws, a man of great learning and integrity having always constantly
maintained king Don Anthonies cause, wherein he purposed himself with
certain of his friends and kindred to meet king Anthony and pass into
France with him. But this matter being discovered by the treso^ of one Peter de
Oliuera (to whose charge king Anthony had also committed this business)
certain galleys of Castile lying in wait for the said bark in the sea, in
the place where it was to pass, assaulted and took it, wherein Peter de
Alpoen with his uncle and nephue, and two religious men, and certain other
persons were taken, and all put to the torture to confess whither they went.
But it happened by Gods permission that before the bark was taken, Bastian
Figuera (one of the Kings servants before mentioned) passed along the sea side
to seek for his majesty, and spied the Galleys there dispearsed about the
same place where the bark (that his highness stayed for) was to pass. And
brought present word thereof to his highness, who immediately took horse and
in great have returned with his company to his accustomed pilgrimage until
about two months after it was his hap to be embarked in deed and to come
into France as is before declared.

This also is not to be omitted in this place, how king Don Anthonio in his
passage from Lisbon toward France, was driven by contrary wind about two
hundred leagues from land toward the west, where he met a great and mighty
ship of war, whereof Ambrose de Guyar was captain, who had the conduction, of
about 300 Spanish soldiers, to place in garrisons in the said Isle of Saint
Michael. This ship (as the manner is) had a carauel with her, which came to
aboard the ship wherein his majesty was. The men of the carauel demanded of
the master of his highness ship, from whence they came, he answered from
Calice in Andalousie. Being demanded, what news there, he answered, how the
people died of the plague, and some of his mariners were already dead and
others yet very sick of the same disease: Upon thunderstanding whereof, they of
the carauell abandoned the kings ship, taking their course toward the said
ship of war.

When the King of Castile understood how King Anthony was arrived in France,
he was so highly offended therewith, that he caused Peter Dalpoen to be
forthwith beheaded, and his uncle and nephue to be perpetually banished the
realm, condemning the 2. religiouse men to the galleys, who^ nevertheless
afterward (changing his sentence) he condemned to close prison for many years.
causing the wife of King Anthonies agent, with his children and his cosens (of
whom he had the bringing up) and his mother in Law, and 3. religious sisters of
his, of thorder of S. Clare, to be all brought into Castile, and put into
diverse monasteryes. Likewise appointing to be brought into the said kingdom of
Castile the Countess of Vimioso mother of the said constable with 3. sons
and 7. daughters, together with the wife of Emanuel de silua, the^ governor of
the said Isle of Tercera, whom he detained there until the said Constable and
Emanuel de silua had lost their lives, as is before mentioned. Also it is not to
be passed in silence, how the King of Castile, even since king Do^ Anthony
arrived in france, has used al practices possible, to procure the said king
Don Anthonio his cousin german, to be murdered, sending many castilians and
Portugalls into France for that special purpose. Of which the first and
chief was, Edward de Castro, a man of base birth, though very rich, a portugal
borne, who notwithstanding had in former time done much good and faithful
service to King Don Anthonio in Portugal. This man faining himself to be
malcontent toward the King of Castile for detaining him prisoner a certain
time, came into France to K. Anthony, to whom at his first coming (for the
better cloaking of his treason) he declared how for his delivery out of prison,
he had promised the King of Castile to assay by all manner of means to kill
the said King Don Anthony: Or if he could not bring that to pass, how at
least he would find the mean to procure certain french companies or other
strange soldiers (over whom he hoped to be appointed captain) to rise
against his majesty at such time as he should be ready to join battle, or
in hand to execute any like enterprise, or else would do some such thing as
should cast the person and camp of the said King Anthony into some notable
danger: wherein the very truth is, his meaning was to have kept promise with
the said King of Castile. For it came to pass within a little after, when King
Anthony was overcome in a sea-battail at the Isle of S. Michael, while the
Marquisse of S. Cross remained in the same Isle, that the said Edward de
Castro being with King Anthony in thislle of Tercera, earnestly persuaded the
french companies which were there in garrison (whom he had won to him by gifts
and otherwise) that the Portugalls went about to murder them all suddenly,
showing to them for proof thereof a letter written by King Anthonies agente,
which (though falselie) he vouched to contain such matter, and likewise made
the portugalles on the contrariside believe, how they were in the like danger
at the French men's hands. When he had laid this foundation, he went about to
put the matter in execution, and so handled the same that one day the Frenchmen
first made them ready to set upon the portugalles and slew Anthony Baracho a
gentleman of portugal. But as each party began to put themselves in arms, it
came to pass by the great dexterity and wisdom of a portugal Captain, who
in time smelled this treason, that the matter proceeded no further, but all was
well pacified and the Traitor apprehended. Who upon the falling out of the
matter otherwise then he expected, would presently have retired into the
said Isle of S. Michaell, to the Marquis of Sayncte Cross in an English ship
which he had hired for that purpose for a great some of money. Thus the traitor
being taken and convict of his treason as well by his own confession in the
prison, as openly upon the scaffold, was at last beheaded. Yet the said king
Don Antonie in remembrance and consideration of his former services, would
have pardoned him had not the common people and soldiers made great instance
for the open punishment of so great and dangerous a treason. About the same
time Sebastian Caruaillo another Portugal was executed in the said Isle of
Tercera for enterprising to kill the said king Don Anthonio. Also for the like
cause, a Castilian gentleman of thorder of the knights of Malta, was
afterward executed in France, Further, for the like offense, John Francisco,
and John Rodrigues desosa were prisoners in France, and upon their conviction
were sent in captivity to the said Islande of Tercera a little before the
taking thereof, by means whereof they recovered their liberty contrary to their
deserts, But the said John Rodrigues had never escaped from execution in
France, had not the most excellent princess the Queen of England (with whom
he had been king Anthonies Ambassador) made intercession for him.

Whosoever therefore shall rightlye consider all these dangers and great
inconueniencies which the said King Don Anthonio has endured and escaped,
may easilye judge that all this came not to pass without gods peculier
providence and divine sufferance and that some great matter of importance is
hid thereunder, namely a great hope is to be conceived thereof, that almighty
God, will use the said king Don Anthonio as a fit instrument, to break the
great power and force of the King of Castile, whereby through his excessive and
unmeasurable ambition, he would else in tract of time, invade not only all
christiandom, but also all the rest of the world, and that under the fair
color of maintaining the Catholic Romish religion, under pretense whereof he
has thus many years afflicted thinhabitantes of the low countries,
otherwise a good and courteous people, that in former time had always been good
and faithful subjects to him and his ancestors: to the intent that upon the
subduing of the^ according to his fa^tasie, he might easily and freely spread
his armies over England, Germany, France and other nations, either for that
they receive, or at least permit in their countries any other religion the^
only the catholic Romish religion, or else under some other kind of pretense
whatsoever. This is the mark he shoots at and will easily hitte except
the other christian Princes (before theuill creep any further,) have special
regard to oppose themselves to his power and force by ayding the provinces
united of the low countries now greatly afflicted, and also and that most
specially, the said King Don Anthonio who with thayde of some reasonable
navy of ten or twelve thousand men furnished with victualles, munition, and
other necessaries, may in short time without any great difficulty recover
his kingdom. Whereunto thincredible affection which the Portugalls bear
always to their King and natural prince, together with thauncient hatred they
have always borne to the Castilians their ancient enemies, would serve for
a great furtherance. As the like mean served the prince of Oranges for a
great effect in the said low countries, to mainetayne wars there so long
against the forces of the said King of Castile. Further if King Don Anthonio
had recovered Portugal and driven away the castilians, he might also easily in
short time as well reduce into his power and dominion the towns of Aphrica with
the towns and countries of the East Indies, and Brasile (where the garrisons
consist all of natural Portugalles) as also take from the king of Castile, his
power by sea consisting chiefly of Portugal ships and Mariners. Who without
doubt for the natural affection they bear toward their King and Country,
and the rather because their wives, children, lands, and goods remain in
Portugal: and for the natural hatred they bear to the Castilians (under
whom they serve against their wills) will easilye come and yeilde themselves
to the said King Don Anthony, as we have seen the like example in the said
low countries, when the wars began, for the driving away of the spanyardes.
Also it is to be noted, how the people of Portugal bear a general hatred
against the king of Castile and his Castilians not only in respect of their
ancient enmitye against the said Castilians but also and most principally for
the great injuries and indignities which they have suffered at their hands
since the said King of Castile by force and violence possessed their country.
Whereby all men's minds are so bent and inflamed against him and his
Castilians, that their chief wish and expectation is for the said king Don
Anthony (by the aid of some Princes) to enter into Portugal with an army,
not only for their delivery from the yoke and bondage of the Castilians (whose
garrisons there exceed not the number of three thousand men) but also to
invade Castile in revenge of the said injuries whereinto there is long and wide
access and entry out of Portugal without any strong place to hinder free
passage into the said kingdom of Castile. Moreover the hatred of the
Portugalles against the Castilians, is grown so far, that they which before
were addicted to the said King of Castile, and corrupted with money and
promises to deliver their native country into his hands, do now secretly
favor King Don Anthonio, auouching how they will rather yeilde their lives and
goods to his majesty's mercy, then live any longer under the tyranny of the
King of Castile. Who has them in no estimation, neither will perform what he
promised when he solicited them to be authors to procure him the kingdom.

Although all men know how small account the king of Castile makes to
fulfill his promises to such men as he has used in like kind of affairs, and
most specially when he has no more need of them: yet it shall be worth the
noting in this place, how he has dealt with them that were the principal
authors to bring his matters so easilye to pass in Portugal. These men, when
King Don Anthonio was ouercom and discomfited, and the King of Castile in peace
able possession of the Kingdom of Portugal, and of the realms lands and
countries depending thereof (saving only the said Islands of Assores which held
a good while as is before recited for king Anthony) exhibited a supplication to
the said King of Castile declaring at large their services done in his behalf
for thobteining of the said Kingdom of Portugal, beseeching his majesty to
voutchsafe the performance of those promises which his ambassadors, the Duke of
Ossuna and Christofer de Mora had made unto them on his behalf, exhibiting
writings withal to prove the said ambassadors promises. Whereunto the King
commanded answer to be given, that this supplycation with thambassadors
writing, should be sent to his counsel called in the Portugal language, Mesa
da conscientia. Whereupon followed a decree touching that matter, of the tenor
or effect ensuing Forasmuch as the king of Castile, is true inheritor of the
kingdom of Portugal: it was not lawful for the suppliants to sell the same for
gifts nor promises, but rather they had incurred the penalty of death for th^s*
of their own accord, and without these promises, they delivered not the kingdom
to the said king of Castile: But if the kingdom perteyned to Don Anthonio, then
they could not sell it to king Phillip, wherefore the king was no way bound to
perform the promises which thambassadors made to the suppliants, but of his
benignity and clemencye he absolueth the supplyants from the capital
punishment, whereunto for this cause they had endaungered them selves. A
notable reward surely, yea and that such a one, as commonly all traitors
receive, and as the King of Castile accustometh to bestow upon all them that
do him service in like affairs; Which may serve for an example to all men,
that for gifts or promises they attempt nothing against their duty nor
consciences. For God is a just judge that never leaves wickedness unpunished,
nor well doing unrecompensed.

Sith therefore it manifestly appears by the premises, that the fayd King
Don Anthonio has a rightful and most just cause: it is to be wished, that al
christian princes or the more part of them would of their own accordes, offer
them selves to aid and succor him to recover his Kingdom whereof he is so
unjustly and tyrannouslye spoiled by the king of Castile, as it also
appertains to all princes to help them that be afflicted and oppressed by
tyranny. Whereunto truly they ought to be the more forward and moved, for
that it seems the only way and mean to deliver themselves and their
posteritye from the tyranny of the Spanyardes, which otherwise in the end
they shall hardelye avoid, as more particulerlye has been declared in this
treatise.

FINIS.

