A brief and short discourse of the Virtue and Operation of Balsame, With an
instruction for those that have their health to preserve the same.

Whereunto is added Doctor Bullins Diet for Health.

Imprinted at London for John Perin, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard. Anno
Domini. 1585.

The virtue and operation of this Balsame.
HOW this Balsame may be used to ye health and profit of the buyers, it must be
always kept close, and the vessel wherein it is, must be very well stopped, for
else it will consume and wast away.

ANy person which has his sight beginning to fail him, let him continually
smell unto this Balsame, and they shall be helped, and their sight shall be
preserved.

Make this Balsam warm, and rub therewith the Nose within and without of all
those which have a moiste and cold brain, so shall they be preserved in
great health thereby.

And whosoever has a coldrume discending from the brain, let them use to
rub their Nosethrils with this Balsame three times a day, morning, noone,
and night, and it helps them.

SUch as are heavy hedded, dull witted, and forgetful, let al those use to
anoint the hinder part of their head with the Balsome, and it comfort the
wit, and refreshes a man exceeding well.

Give one drop of this Balsame in a sponeful of wine, Beer, or Ale, fasting,
to all those which has no apetite, and it helps them. Also all they which
use to drinck of it are long preserved in good liking: And causes a man's hear
to keep his color, and not to wax white:

IF any person have a slimie stomach, let them use every morning fasting to
take one drop of this balsam, in wine, beer, or ale, and it expulseth the
fleame, and comfort ye stomach. Also whosoever has abundau^ce of coruptio^
in their stomach, which is cause of great feeblenes, let them use as it
aforesaid, every xii. or xiiii. day to purge himsefe, so may one shortly be
helped, which might their life time live and suffer great pains.

Being taken every morning one drop in a sponefull of wine, beer, or ale: It
preserves one from poisoning the whole day after: Also, it preserves a man
from corupte or poysned air, and is especial good to be used in the time of
Pestilence.

SUch as are poisoned, let them incontinent take one drop of this Balsame in
a sponefull of water, and so continue in taking of this Balsam xii. hours
after, that is every hour a drop, so shall they be helped.

ANy person which by chance falls and is bruised on any part of the body,
let them straight way annoint the same place therewith, and it aswageth the
swelling, and puts away the blackness of the sore, also when a man has a
stitch in the side, anoint it therewith and it helps.

NEither any old or young folk which have a stinckking breath, so that the
stench come out of the stomach, but it helps, if it be received every
morning fasting one drop with a sponefull of wine, the space of xiiii. days,
and fast ii. hours after they have taken it.

ONe drop of this Balsame put into a Fistel every day the space of xx. days,
heals and stops the fistell, also it heals all wounds old and new, laid
into them twice a day according to the quantity of the wound.

Four drops of this balsam put upon a broad Pustel which comes of cold and
gross humors, in the space of xii. days it will be made whole.

MAny which are sick by occasion of cold and dry humors, which causes
consumption, may drink every morning and evening one drop of this Balsame
with wine, and they shall recover their health again.

ANy body which has a postimation which comes of wind and moisture, which
would settle it self in any place of the body, anoint the said place with
this Balsam three times a day, and in the space of eight days it will be
healed.

REadely does this Balsam help al sores which chau^ceth in ye hands, legs,
arms, or any part of the body, if they be anointed with it three times a day.

PEaceably and very quickly this Balsam swageth al swellings which is not of
the dropsy, if the swelling be anointed three times a day with it, and Linnin
clothes laid upon them wet with the said Balsam.

Every person that is taken with the Palsy, let them morning and evening
drinck a drop of this Balsame in a sponefull of wine, and also anoint the part
which is taken with the said Palsy ii. times a day, and theyshall be healed,
and it comfort yt parts maruelously.

THis Balsame heals all pains in yt joints, so that ye wash the ioints
therewith, and also plaster ye said ioints with a linen cloth, wet it in the
said Balsame, this must be done twice a day.

HE or they which have their sinowes drawn together let them wash the^ with
this Balsame, and they shall be restored with their former health and strength.
Also it helps the Emroides when they are very grievous. Also it is good for
the sickness which chances in the Arse Gutte which is named Tenasmos, if a
linen cloth be wet with the said Balsame and put therein.

For those which have their Health.
HE which has his health and would so continue, I wish him either to forbear
or little to use those things which greatly digress from that constitution,
or mediocritie in which man is created. Our Physicians do call every thing hot
or cold, in the respect of ye nature of man. For if it be somewhat hotter the^
his nature, the^ it digresseth, and they term it hot in the second degree,
and in like manner to the third and fourth, which because it does so far
exceed his constitution, by daily proof is found to be unto him flat poison,
the like consideration on the contrary side have they of cold things, whereby
you may gather how like always desires like, and abhoreth the contrary. The
things which are like, and best agree with the nature of man, are good wholesome
usual meats and drinks, a dry fresh and sweet air, moderat sleep and travel
or labor, which although it were allotted unto us as punnishment by GOD. Yet
mercifully withal he has made it a mean to preserve our health, the things
which greatly disagree are wines, spice, salt meats, and al very hot things,
which thou shall know by taste, for either they bite like Peper, fret like salt,
or else show some great manifest heat in the mouth. Also on the other, side,
all raw fruits and cold herbs, with diverse things of like nature, much use of
Sawses devised by belly gods, whom God has punished as much by want of
appetite, having meat at will: as the poor by want of meat having good
apetite, to live in a thick foggy air, to live idly and to exceed in
eating and drinking, sleeping watching or venery. I would not have any man to
think that I do utterly condeme al very hot and cold things, but seeing they
are rather of the nature of medecin then nutriment: I wish them to be very
discretly and moderatly used, for hot things are to be used when a man's body
is very cold, and cold things when his body is over hot, but to use either
the body being not distempered, is mere madness. Now further for as much as all
men are subject unto death, and our bodies as yelding thereunto, from time to
time always gather coruption, to preserve our health as much as may be, until
we have run that race which God has appointed. I comende unto you this
receipt.

Take Borage and Parsley in like quantity, boil them in Whey clarified and
keep it in some earthen vessel, use of it warm in ye spring, especialy every
morning fasting a good draught, and in every draught take so much of a polion
as will give thee two stools a day more then ordinary, some may use it ten
days together some fifteen or twenty as the body does require, by this
means thou may prevent many disseases and keep thy body in very good
state, it makes women apt to conceive, if during the taking thereof they live
chaste, and it has many other special virtues which for breuities sake I will
omit. Their is yet one dissease wherewith our wantons here of England are much
trobled for not resperting the force or help of nature, if they feel never so
small or light a grief, they must presently to Physic, until they have so
filled their Bodies with drinks that they are sicker of their Physic, then of
any dissease, in this grief a little more wit will be a present help, for so
shall they have he auier purses lighter hearts and sou^der bodies.

Doctor Bullins Diet for Health.
BEware of coldness both of the air, as misses, wind, thin clothing, unclean
lodging, with open windows in yt chamber, or lying on thy back or nere the
ground, but use sweet warm air with a small fire not near at hand, it will
help ye matter to ripe, whereas coldness will bind and drive back the matter and
kill the pacient suddenly, suppe clean broth of chickins, eat but little and
often, couit to sleep in the might vi. or vii. hours for sleep is a great
friend to nature, if sleep come not in yt night* then refuse not sleep in the
day, sitting in thy Chair with thy head upright after meat two hours, walk
not much up and down, for rest with warmnes is agreat nourisher of the humors
specially blood and choler, be rather laxatiue on the day, then the night.
Beware of carefulnes for wordly things Look not into the glass of
desperation, with Agony and heaviness of mind. Hope ever for the best, for a
good stomach drives away many disseases: but when the spirit is vexed: who may
abide it. A merry heart is the life to the body but rancor consumes the bones.
Heaviness does bring sickness, and they which have heavy countenaunces, with
continual agony, are either to rich, to poor, too sick, too folish, or to
sore opressed. Therefore commend gladness, because a man has no better thing
under the sun, then to eat and drink betime and to leisure, and to be merry
for that shall he have for his labor, all the days of his life, which
almighty God has given him under the sun, for there is nothing better then
gladness, honest^ of life, love to each o^^er, and do as we would be done
unto. Thus fare you well.


