A Disswasive FROM POPERY, CONTAINING TWELVE EFFECTVAL REASONS, BY WHICH
EVERY Papist, not wilfully blinded, may be brought to the truth, and every
Protestant confirmed in the same: written by Francis Dillingham Master of Arts,
and fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, necessary for all men in these
times.

Lactant. lib. de vero dei simulachro. cap. 20. Quid facies? maiores ne, an
potius ratione^ sequeris?

What will thou doer follow thy ancestors or reason?

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1599.

The sum of the book.
1 The first reason of Antichrist. 2 The second of truth. 3 Of haeresie in
general. 4 Of particular haeresies. 5 Of popish dissolute, and discomfortable
doctrine. 6 Of Idolatry. 7 Of popish blasphemies. 8 Of the Papists own
confession. 9 The ninth, of the Practice of the primitive Church. 10 Of
Scripture. 11 Of popish Contradictions. 12 Of the original of Popery.
TO THE right Honorable, and my very good Lord, Oliver L. S. John, Baron of
Bletsoe, Grace, and peace, with increase of honor, etc.
II is not unknown (Right honorable and my singular good Lord) that man is not
borne for himself, but for the benefit of others. To this principle agrees
the Apostles precept, Romans 12. 1. Pet. 4.10.
that every man according to his gift, should endeavor himself to do good.
And to this precept, the practice of nature is answerable: in Similitud.
Vt luna (says Erasmus) quod luminis accepit a sole mundo refundit: ita donum
a deo acceptum in commodum aliorum est conferendum. As the moon gives that
light to the world which it receives from the sun: so every gift received
from God ought to be bestowed to the profit of others. All which excellent
sayings, are spoken of every good, and therefore by consequent of knowledge, of
which Seneca writes thus: Nulla me res delectabit licet eximia sit, qua^ mihi
vnus sciturus sum. I delight not in any thing, which I my self know and none
other. And again: Nullius boni sine socio iucunda possessio est. It is no
pleasure to possess any good without a companion. The consideration of these
and like speeches, have caused me to set pen to paper, against the mystical
and secret impiety of Popish religion, although unfit for so great a work in
many respects; as namely in regard of my health. For I may truly say with
Seneca, Nulla mihi secura lux affulsit, Jn Thebaid.
I have had no good day. This being a most certain truth, how unable I am to
undergo this business, the similitude used by Tully may declare. Quemadmodum
scalarum gradus si alios tollas, alios in^^^^s nonnullos male haerentes
relinquas, ruinae periculum struas, non ascensum pares, sic tot malis tum
victum, tum fractum studium scribendi quid dignum auribus, aut probabile potest
afferre. If thou take some rounds of the ladder away, and cut other, and leave
the rest loose, thou endangerest a downfall, and causest not an ascension: so
the endeavor of writing being vanquished with so many miseries, what thing
ca^ it bring forth worthy, and worth hearing and reading. This misery has
another attendant, namely poverty and want, which (as one says) is onus
miserum, and grave, a woeful and a grievous burden. The renowned Philosopher
could say that felicity needed outward good things. For, (...). It is
impossible, Ethic. 1.8.
or very hard for him that wants instruments, to do any famous work. But
not too much of this matter, least I seem to be impatient, being my self a
preacher of patience. Only this, I fear that the cause, why many are
perverted by Papists, and diuerted to popery, is the hope of preferment, which
is not wanting in that religion. Sublatis studiorum pretijs ipsa studia
pereunt, (says Cornelius Tacitus) Take away the rewards of learning, Annal.
l. 11.
and learning it self decaieth. But I leave this complaint being a misery
incident to the despised estate of Gods Church in the sight of the world,
howsoever most glorious in the sight of God. Thus (Right Honorable) you see
the cause that moved me to set forth this treatise. Now in that I dedicate it
unto you, I have many reasons. For (to omit private respects, as namly your
honorable and singular favor toward me, and all my friends) such is your
desire to further Christ's kingdom, such is your care of religion, your love to
learning, that for these causes you are most worthy of this duty. And in
these singular and admirable graces of Gods spirit may you more rejoice then in
any worldly thing. Aristotle (as Plutarch writes) writ to Antipater
concerning Alexander, that he should not be proud because of his kingdom,
because he that knew God, has as much cause as he: his meaning is this, that
the knowledge of God is better then worldly honor.

The Lord bless you and your wise, virtuous, and honorable Lady with all
heavenly and worldly honor.

Your L. ever bounden Francis Dillingham.

A preface to all English Papists whatsoever.
The. act. 11.
IT is not my purpose to use any long discourse unto you, that please your
selves in the name of Papists, yet I pray you let me first crave an answer to
this my dissuasiue, or else submit your selves to gods truth. Secondly, I would
be certified what should cause you to continue in the Romish religion. Does
the universality of which you were wont to vaunt your selves? why then do
your Rhemists in their annotations upon the 20. chap. of the Revel. prove the
Pope not to be Antichrist, because his kingdom is daily lessened, and
Antichrist during the time of his reign shall be greater then Christ's flock? yea
some of you have written that the Church in his time shall utterly perish as
your selves know. Again if universality chalketh out the church, why did the
Arrian Emperor say to Liberius. Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Quota pars tu es orbis terrarum, qui solus facis cum homine scelerato, and
orbis terrarum, and mundi totius pacem dissoluis? What part of the world art
thou that only take part with the wicked man, and dissoluest the peace of
the whole earth? Liberius answers, Non diminuitur solitudine mea verbum
fidei, nam and olim tres soli fuere qui edicto resisterent. In that I am left
alone the word of faith is not diminished, for in times past there were only
three that resisted the kings edict. But it may be your unity is of some force
with you; for your satisfaction in this point, see my motive of your
dissentions. Also consider that there may be some diversity of opinions in
lesser matters, and yet a true church, for else the ancient Christians should
have been no church, amongst whom there were many dissentions, as you may
see in the 8. book of the tripartite history, and 12. chap. Themistius wrote
to Valens that he should not be cruel to the Christians, Propter discordiam
Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum: for the variance of Ecclesiastical opinions. For
amongst the Pagans there were more then three hundred sects. To come now to
succession, does not Bellarmine your Pythagoras teach that it proves not
always a church. Secondly, Atheists, Heretics, Sorcerers, and a woman have
been Pope, and that interrupteth your succession. Thirdly, your plurality of
Popes, during your two and twenty schisms disanulleth the same. Lastly, many
Popes have not been Canonically elected. To proceed to antiquity, see your
selves stripped of it in this my treatise: and yet you are not greatly wise
men to allege bare antiquity: for as Lactantius says in his 2. book and
7. chap. Tanta est apud insipientes authoritas vetustatis, vt in came inquirere
scelus esse ducatur. Amongst fools antiquity has that authority, that it is
counted a heinous thing to inquire into it. Lastly concerning your miracles, I
say with Augustine in his book, de vnitate Ecclesiae cap. 16. Let them not say
it is true, because Donatus, or Pontius, or any other man has done these, and
these miracles: Again, whether they hold the church or no let them show, no
otherwise, but by the Canonical books of holy Scriptures. I will not spend any
time in painting out of the odious and infamous life's of Papists: but come to a
conclusion namely that seeing those things that they were wont to brag of,
are taken from them, let them embrace the truth, let not the world seduce them
against their own consciences. For what are ungodly rich men, but (as Plutarch
says) asini ligna ferentes, asses bearing burdens. The Lord open your eyes to
see the truth.

To the Christian reader.
ALthough I had many motives to set forth this my treatise in latin, yet
regarding the good of those that are ignorant in that tongue, I have written it
in English, with as much shortness and brevity as I could possibly. I confess
I might have made a great volume of it, if I had insisted upon the
amplification of every reason: but for diverse respects, I have comprehended it
in this small manual. And as I have dissuaded men from popery by these twelve
several reasons, so did I once think to have adjoined more, but for causes
known to my self, I have yet concealed them. Their senseless paradoxes, and
witless arguments, with which their books are fraught, have caused me so to
abhor their religion, that I may protest in simplicity of a good conscience,
I could never read any argument to persuade me to papistrie: yet have I read
their writers without any praeiudicate opinion at all, being never forestalled
with this religion, in which through Gods grace now I stand. And Bellarmines
corrupting of fathers, his foolish distinctions, his co^tradictions with
himself, and with other Papists, his senseless sophismes, his wresting of
holy writ, have in them (as I think) this force to persuade his readers from
his religion. Now it remains (Christian reader) to desire this of thee, to
weigh these my motives with an indifferent mind, and if thou receiuest any good
by them, to be thankful to God, and to commend me in thy prayers unto him.

Catalogus authorum.
ALcoranus franciscanorum. Alexander de Ales. Alphonsus de castro. Ambrosius.
Aquinas. Arias montanus. Arnobius. Augustinus. Bellarminus. Bernardus.
Buckingerus. Catalogus testiu^ veritatis. Censura Coloniensis. Catechismus
Coloniensis. Clemens Alexandrinus. Chrysosthomus. Cusanus. Cyprianus. Cyrillus
Hierosolymitanus. Duraeus. Durandus. Epiphanius. Erasmus. Euripides. Eusebius.
Fasciculus temporum Freculphius. Gratianus. Gregorius Episcopus Romanus.
Gregorius Nazianzenus. Gregorius Martinus. Hentenius. Herbranaus. Hierom. Hugo
Cardinalis. Index Expurgatorius. Irenaeus. Iuellus. Justinius. Lactantius.
Lombardus. Lyra. Macrobius. Maierius. Mathaeus Paris. Melchior Canus. Origines.
Picus Miranaula. Plautus. Polidorus Virgilius. Psalterium Romanu^. Rhemenses.
Roffensis. Ruffinus. Scotus. Sleidan. Socrates. Tertullianus. Tullius.
Turrianus. Wolfgangus Herma^nus. Zozomenus.
THE FIRST REAson of Antichrist.
IN times past (Christian Reader) the question was whether Christ appointed the
Pope to be head of this church, but now (blessed be God) it is not without
cause demanded, whether he be Antichrist or no. From which as the title of
servus servorum, that is, the servant of servants, will not excuse him, being
indeed the title of cursed Cham, and so fit in Gods just providence for the man
of sin: so these circumstances following being laid together will firmly
conclude the same.

The 1. Circumstance.
Antichristianisme is a mystery, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. (...), that is, The
mystery of iniquity does now work: out of which place of holy writ, I
argue, that neither the open blasphemous haeretiks, nor the Turk can be that
Antichrist, because they are not dissembled, but plain and open enemies to
Christ. Yet as Hierom says on the 24. chapter of Matthew, Omnis Haeresiarchia
est Antichristus. Every Arch-haeritike is Antichrist, but not Antichrist (...),
that is, that singular Antichrist. Marvel not then though all men perceive and
understand him (namely the Pope) not to be that Antichrist seeing it is a
mystery: for as few know the Gospel because it is a mystery, so likewise
little is the flock to which this Antichrist is revealed: pray therefore with
David to open thine eyes, that thou may behold the secrets of God: for as
Augustine says, Epistola 11 2.
Qui didicerunt a Domino Jesus esse humiles and mites in cord plus proficiunt
or ando quam audiendo and legendo; that is, They that have learned of Christ
meekness of mind, and humility of heart, profit more by prayer, then by
hearing and reading.

The second Circumstance.
Antichrist is not called (...), an adversary to God, although he does band
himself against him, but (...), that is, an adversary to Christ in aemulatio^
of like honor. For he arrogateth to himself those things that are propper to
Christ, as namely remission of sins, which I prove out of Bernard, who
says, 11. sermon ad Milites.
Vnde scimus quod Christus potest dimit tere peccata? quia deus est. vnde scis
quod deus est? miracula probant. That is, How do we know that Christ can
remit sins? because he is God. How do thou know he is God? his miracles
prove the same. Out of which testimony I frame this syllogism: he that
remitteth sins is god: but the pope remineth sins, therefore he is god: and
by conseque^t Antichrist.

The third Circumstance.
Those things which the Papists write concerning Antichrist are ridiculous.
First the Rhemists say and affirm that he shall come of the tribe of Dan,
which opinion Bellarmine strongly refuteth by this reason: Namely, because the
tribes are so confounded that no man can say this man is of this or that Tribe.

Secondly, they say Antichrist shall be the Jews Messiah, but he must spring
of the tribe of Judah: ergo, Antichrist the Jews Messiah cannot descend of Dan.

Thirdly, they teach he shall be one singular man, which is impossible: for it
is written in the second to the These. 2. cap. verse. 7. The mystery of iniquity
now works, but he that works from that time till the coming of Christ is
no singular man: ergo Antichrist is not one singular man.

The further proof of this, that he is not one singular man, Saint John says:
1. Ioh. 2.22. Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is Christ: the same
is Antichrist that denies the father and the son: every one that denies the
son has not the father. This note as it does agree to all haeretiks, so
principally to the Pope, who denies the offices of Christ, as other
haeretickes have done his person. Read the 2. of John and the 7. verse: also
the 4. of John and the third verse, Ireneus says it is a kingdom. Lib. 5.

Fourthly, they teach that he shall reign but three years and a half, which
Hentenius a papist in his preface to his translation of Arethas overthrows,
saying, it is unpossible that Antichrist in so short time should obtain so
many kingdoms and provinces. Secondly Christ his coming to judgment shall be
known so soon as Antichrist is revealed, for if he shall be slain of Christ,
then it will be easy to cast the time of three years and a half, and so
consequently to tell the very hour of Christ his coming to judgment.

Fifthly, they teach he shall sit at Jerusalem which is overthrown and is not
easily reedified. 2. it cannot be called the temple of God. 3. The Rhemistes
themselves out of Augustine incline to think that he shall not sit there: but
more of this in the 4. circu^sta^ce.

The fourth circumstance.
Antichrist shall sit in the Church of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. cap. verse. 4. So says
says saint Hierom. Antichristus sedebit in Ecclesia Dei. 11. Epist. quae. alga.
Antichrist shall sit in the church of God, not in the true Church, but that
which is so called, by which the argument of Bellarmine is answered, who goes
about to prove by this circumstance that the church of Rome is the true church.

The 5. Circumstance.
Gregorius lib. 4. epis. 34.
Quicunque se vniuersalem Episcopum appellat is Antichristus est. Papa
vniuersalem Episcopum se appellat: ergo. whosoever calls himself universal
Bishop, he is Antichrist, but so does the Pope. Ergo. And least they should
answer, that the proposition is not to be understood of the Bishop of Rome,
hear what Gregory says: Est nomen blasphemiae, it is a name of blasphemy:
And again Petrus non vocatur vniuersalis Episcopus. Peter is not called
universal Bishop.

The 6. circumstance.
In his 38. demonstration.
Antichrist shall sit at Rome, so does Sanders confess, and the Rhemists do
not contradict this in their Annotations upon the 5. ver. of the 11. chap. of
the Revelation: for the proof of which I thus join in argument with them. 1.
That which was Babylon in S. John's time is the same that he prophecieth to be
the chief seat of Antichrist: but Rome was then Babylon: Ergo it is the same
that he prophecieth to be the chief seat of Antichrist. 2 The fathers
affirm Rome to be Babylon when they wrote: out of which thus I conclude. In
the days of the Fathers viz. Augustine, Hierome, etc. Rome was not heathenish,
but by them it is called the seat of Antichrist, Ergo not heathenish Rome is
the seat of Antichrist.

The 7 Circumstance.
Papa dispensat contra verbum Dei. Gratian. ^ar. 1. page 76.
The Pope dispenses against Gods word: Again, Praecepta moralia sunt per
Ecclesiam mutabilia. The moral praecepts may be altered by the church.
Further he maymeth the Sacrament in taking the cup from the people, yea the
Sacrament which he pretends to honor as God is carried before him on an
hackney when he rides on men's shoulders: his throne is also above the altar.
In the Jubilee he beats open the gates of Paradise with a golden hammer. The
cross honored with divine honor is cast at his feet, out of which I
conclude he exalts himself above God, or at least wise makes himself equal
to God: for no law can be dispensed with all, but by the same authority by
which it was made, or by a greater.

The 8. Circumstance.
In the time of Antichrist there shall be a general departure from the faith,
Rhem. in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
so do the Papists themselves confess. Now let us see whether this Apostasy
does agree to them or no. To decide this controversy who is better then Saint
Paul who prophecieth of thappostasie. The same Apostle in the first to
Timothy, and fourth chapter gives such evident signs and notes as agree
properly unto them, for they forbid meats and marriages in hypocrisy, other
heretics in open blasphemy: well says Saint Hierome upon the eleventh of
Daniel: Nota est Antichristi prohibere nuptias. It is a note of Antichrist to
forbid marriages.

The 9. Circumstance.
The ninth Circumstance is taken out of the 13. of the Revel. from the eleventh
verse, and so forward. He is Antichrist that has two horns like a lamb, and
speaks like a dragon: Again he that causes the earth to worshipp the first
beast is Antichrist, also he that does work wonders is Antichrist, with many
more notes and marks, that there follow: but all these does the Pope, Ergo he is
Antichrist.

The 10. Circumstance.
Antichrist is called 2 Thessalonians. 2. cap. 3. v. The man of sin: which fitly
agrees to the Pope, for what monsters of men have bin Popes. Silvester was
made Pope by the help of the devil. Auxilio diaboli factus est Papa. Page 71:
Fasc. Tem.
John the twelth abused his fathers concubine, gelded one of his Cardinals,
drank to the devil, and at dice called for help of Jupiter and Venus. Boniface
the seventh robbed S. Peter's church of all the jewels and precious things. Read
their own stories because I purpose brevity. Page 1166. and 1168.
Matthew Paris monk of Saint Albons records that the bishop of Lincoln
proved the Pope to be Antichrist by this reason and writes thus.

Eius auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis,
Eius luxuriae meretrixnon sufficit omnis.
That is to say, The Popes covetousness and whoredom are not satisfied with
the whole world. To come therefore to a conclusion, I desire thee (christian
Reader) to lay all these circumstances together and so to conclude this matter
in question whether the Pope be Antichrist or no: do not loosely of any one
gather any thing, but bind them together and then there will be not a
threefold but a tenne-folde cord, which is not easily broken.

The second reason of truth.
IN handling this motion or reason it is not my purpose to define or to
distinguish truth, but briefly to set down some properties of the same which
cannot possibly agree to Popery, only I desire thee (christian Reader) to
pray to Christ who is truth that thou may conceive and embrace it.

The first property.
Truth has this property, that it is simple, and needs not many
interpretations and expositions: so says Euripides, (...). But Popery to
defend it self uses many expositions, Vide rever. Bilson. de Sacram.
and yet knows not what to hold. For the proof of this, consider their
interpretatio^s of the first word in this short sentence: this is my body.
contra Ploretum lib. 4.
Gerson affirms that it signifies the substance of bread, and contra
Diabolic. sophist
Steven Gardener sometimes thought so also: notwithstanding afterward he
changed his mind, and came to Individuum vagum, as if Christ had said, This
(what it is I cannot tell, but it must needs be somewhat) is my body. in 4.
of Sen^ did. 13.
Occam and other say the pronoune this, must be referred to the body of
Christ, as if our Savior had said, This my body is my body. de Conse. did.
2.
Their gloss resolves this question on this manner. Solet quaeri quid
demonstretur per pronomen, Hoc. It is a common question what is meant by the
pronoune, This. To this demand I say nothing is meant, but it is there put
materially without any signification at all: thus they turned and tossed the
words of Christ, till they brought all that the Lord said at his last supper to
plain nothing. Tomo 2.
Duraeus and Bellarmine teach that by the word (this) is meant the whole
substance which Christ had in his hand. I demand then what this substance was,
whether it was bread, or the body of Christ; if bread, then there was a figure,
if the body of Christ, then there must be transubstantiation before these
words were pronounced, which plainly fights with their fancies. This
property being clearly avouched, if it please thee to consider (gentle
reader) the Caluenists expositions (as they call them) thou shall find them to
be all one: namely this signifies, or this is a sign of my body: let
Carolostadius and the Lutherans answer for themselves.

The second property.
The second property of truth is that it blusheth to be hid, Lib. aduersus
Valen^^.
so says Tertullian, Nihil veritas erube scit nisi solummodo abscondi, that
is, truth is ashamed of nothing but of concealing, Math. 10.27
and our Savior Christ says, Whatsoever I show you preach on the house
tops: but they hid their traditions from the people, as Bellarmine himself
confesses, which argues that they were not truth. I will not here confute his
answer to the saying of our Savior Christ, because I shall deal with it in
the Motive of Haeresies. If they retort this property against us because our
Church was [as they call it] occulta, that is, hid for many years; I first
answer, that they must distinguish betwixt the time of peace and persecution:
Romans 12.
truth in persecution may be driven into the wilderness, but in peace who
knows not, but that it ought plainly to be taught. Secondly I answer that
the Papists have always felt our Church (as testifies Reinerus a popish
Inquisitour, Catolog. test. very.
) and so I pass to the 3. property of truth.

The third property.
The third property of truth is, that it is magna and praevalet, it is great
and prevails: read the third of Esdras for the confirmation of this, where
truth is proved stronger then wine and women; and indeed Acts the fifth and
39. If it be of God, it cannot be destroyed: this declares then most
apparently, that it could not proceed but of some divine power and
super-naturall assistance, that amidst the contradictions and oppositions of so
many adversaries, among the whippes, swords, and tortures, of so bloody and
cruel Caniballs as the Papists are, our poor, simple, and feeble congregation
should pierce through and augment it self strongly, especially if we consider
the outward means of this increase where there was nothing to allure or content
man's nature, nothing gorgeous, nothing delectable, nothing to please or
entertain sensuality: by which is answered their cauil, that truth rests
with them because of their great multitudes, for had they not had murders,
Revel. 9.21.
sorceries, fornication, and thefts, (which are as I will prove (God willing)
four pillars of papistrie) they had never come to that primarie: yea who
knows not that with Cyrus they power forth Gold to their slavish sect by
heaps and weight, and not by number and account.

The fourth property.
The fourth property of truth is to be steadfast and perpetually like it
self, for which cause in the Hebrew tongue it is called Emeth of the root
which signifies stabilitie, so do the Latins call that verum which is
immutabile, and per omnia sibi simile, immutable and like it self every way:
but in popery there is no steadfastnesse; is not prima and secunda
iustificatio, the first and second justification a new devise? Censura collon.
Ex consilio Tridenti.
can any Papist resolve the certenty of Peter's sitting at Room: read
Bellarmine, here he disagreeth from Onuphrius, and Onuphrius from the rest of
the Papists in this point, which is the foundation of Popery: and is the
greatest point of Papistrie so uncertain that they know not what to hold?
Does not Allen confess in his book of purgatory, that there is no text
brought to prove the same which might not be otherwise applied? Nay have not
the Rhemists and Bellarmine himself left school conceits, and brought in
their own devises, witness their own writing. Tell me thou learned Catholic
who succeeded Peter? Tertullian affirms, that Petrus Clementem Episcopum
Romanorum ordinauit, Lib. de praes.
that Peter ordained Clement Bishop of Rome. Lib. 3.
Ireneus places next to Peter, Linus, Ancletus, and then Clement. Read Hierom
and Augustine, and thou shall find greater diversity. Answer me papist, how
or with what kind of worship Images are to be honored, Bellarmine himself is
not assured of this point, as thou may read in his tractate of Images.
Lastly, (because I cannot be long) answer me how Saints hear our prayers if
thou can: Bellarmine himself must needs yield to thee, for he is ignorant
of that point, and therefore answers uncertainties, as he does in the
defense of purgatory being pressed with Theophilactes authority, now making
it a part of the hand of God which is a place of all just men's souls: and in
the next words a part of hell. Thus Christian reader like wandering travelers
out of the way, the learned papists know not where to rest: yea like
drunkards they stagger to and fro, but thanks be to God it is not so with the
Caluinists who coin no new distinctions, for truth is always the same.

The 5. property.
The 5. property of truth is that it is subject to persecution, Obsequium
amicos veritas odium parit. Friends are the children of flattery, and hatred
is begotten by harmless truth. Peruse the whole book of God, nay all
histories and thou shall find this thing most clearly confirmed: what then
caused Bellarmine to teach that temporal prosperity is a note of the church:
Christ and his Apostles are much beholding to him, who suffered exquisite
torments and therefore by his divinity are to be exempted from the number of
Gods Saints, but they that have better learned Christ hold otherwise. Now to
return to the matter, Read the book of Martyrs.
have not the Papists bin drunken with the blood of Gods Saints: so I come to
the sixth and last property of truth.

The 6. Property.
Idverum quodcunque primum, id adulterinum quodcunque posterius: Tertullian
adv. Prax.
That is true which is first, that is adulterous which is an after intention:
but their opinions are not first but latter devises: did not the lay people
receive the cup in the Apostles time, no Papist although he has lost his
forehead can deny it. To wind this up in a word: Master Jewel (that reverend
and renowned bishop his challenge in the 27. articles is not answered. Totis
iam triginta annis Catholici omnes Iuello nostro nondum fatisfecerunt, that is,
All the Papists in thirty years space and vpvvard have not satisfied M.
Jewel. And therefore I constantly conclude all these 27. opinions are new and
no ancient doctrine thus: they that cannot show 27. of their opinions in the
compass of six hundred years are mainteiners of new doctrine: but the Papists
cannot do this: therefore they maintain a new doctrine and by consequence a
false doctrine. Now as in the former circumstances of Antichrist, so likewise
in these six several notes of truth, I desire thee to combine the^, and thou
may be able to maintain this, that truth is not lodged in the Popes breast.

The third reason of haeresy in general.
AS touching the definition of haeresie, I might spend many words and much
time, Lib. de veili ta^e cred.
but I refer thee to Augustine, and come to particular notes and marks of
haeretickes, which I doubt not but most evidently to prove that they agree to
papists after a kind of Excellency, Aristo^. i^ Metap.
for so I have learned to speak by metaphysicall philosophy.

The first note.
The first note or badge of haereticks is to mayme the sayings of Fathers.
Counc. 8. Constant Juelius act. 4.
The eight Counsel of Constantinople and the eight act has these words. Non
conuenit orthodoxis ita circumtruncat as sa^ctorum patru^ voces deflorare
haereticorum potius hoc proprium est. Is it not meet to mayme the sayings of
Fathers, it is the point of haeretiks to do so. That the Papists do mayme the
sentences of Fathers, I might show by many examples. Duraeus in his tenth page
citing Augustine his testimony out of his book de fide and operibus, and the
14. chap. leaves out these words which plainly overthrow his defense: namely,
opera sequu^tur iustificatum non praecedunt iustificandum, that is Works follow
him that is justified, they go not before justification. Harding so deals
with the testimony of Gregory in the article of the popes primacy: but I will
convince them by their own testimony, out of their Index expurgatorius, page
11. Although (say they) we make no great account of this book viz. Bertramius
and therefore we would not greatly care, if either it were no where extant, or
utterly lost yet seeing that in other ancient Catholic writers we bear very
many errors and extenuate, and excuse the^, yea very often by devising some
pretty shift we deny them, and do feign some commodious sense unto them, when
they are opposed against us in disputations, or in Conflicts with the
Adversaries, we do not see why Bertram does not deserve the same equity. Thus
far the papists themselves, whose own words declare that they are void of
al truth and honesty. What should I speak of Cyprian, who to establish Peter's
primacy is falsified by Pamelius contrary to the ancient editition in print,
yea the very argument of the place is directly contrary unto it.

The second note.
The second note of Haeretickes is, not to stand to only scriptures, so says
Tertullian, aufer haereticis quae cum ethnicis sapiunt, vt de scripturis solis
quaestiones suas sistant, Lib. de resurrect. carnis.
and stare non poterunt: take from the haeretickes that which is common to the
heathen with them, that they propound their questions only out of scripture and
they cannot stand. Out of which testimony I reason thus: they that dispute not
out of scripture alone, are either haeretickes or Ethnickes, but the Papists do
no so dispute: Ergo they are either Haeretickes or Ethnickes. I will conclude
this property with the History recorded by Master Sleidon in his sixth book
at the disputation at Berne, when Conradus Tregerus an Augustinian proved that
he must dispute out of nothing but scripture, he by and by fled, and so in that
place popery was destroyed: so Lord, let papistrie perish in every place.

The third note.
The third note of haeretickes is to accuse the scripture of uncertainty.
Haereticks (says Iraeneus) cum ex scripturis arguu^tur, in accusationem
ipsarum scipturarum conuertu^tur, quasi vary sunt dictae: and quia non possit
ex his inveniri veritas, ab bijs qui ne sciant traditionem, non enim per
literas traditam illam sed per vivam vocem etc. When they are convicted out of
the scriptures, they fall to accusing of the scriptures themselves, as though
they were diversely uttered, and that the truth could not be found out of them
which know not the traditon, for that was not delivered in writing, but by
word of mouth. Besides in the same place he has these words: they accuse the
scriptures, quasi non recte se habent, neque sunt ex authoritate, as though
they were not right an a perfect, or not of authority sufficient. Whether the
papists hold not all these points mentioned, I appeal to their own conscience,
though I know it to be corrupt. Did not Syluester affirm that, Sleidan. lib.
1. fol. 3.
ab authoritate papae vis omnis scripturae pendet, all the authority of the
scripture depends on the pope? Does not Cusanus write that the scriptures vna
cum tempore mutantur, are changed with time? Epist 2. vid. Whitak. cont.
Duraeum. p. 161 and 117.
Who but Wolfangus Herma^nus blasphemed, that the scriptures without the
church, are of no more worth then Aesops fables? and as touching traditions do
not they teach that we have not the fence of holy writ, because we do not
embrace the truth of their traditions? so then gather of all these that they
are haeretikes, as well as those against whom Iraeneus did write.

The fourth note.
The fourth note is to conceal their doctrine from the people, dicunt (as
testifies Iraeneus) no^ opportere ip sorum mysteria effaeri, sed in abscondito
contineri per silentium: Lib. 1. c. 23.
They affirm that their mysteries and secrets are not to be uttered, but to be
concealed which is directly contrary to our sauiviour Christ his words, Matt.
10.27.
who commands those things which he taught to be published on the house
tops, to which place Bellarmine answers, si opus est if it be needful. de
tradit.
I doubt not but if he had been furnished with a better answer, we should have
had it, but pardon error which has but fig leaves to hide her filthiness:
may not the Atheist say, when he is commanded to believe, and keep gods
commandments, si opus est, If it be requisite I will do them. To show now
that the papists conceal their secrets from the people is needelesse, seeing
it is confessed by Bellarmine in his tractate of Traditions. And why is their
service in an unknown tongue? why are the scriptures forbidden the lay people,
Clem. Alex. lib. 3. cap. 2.
but to hide their errors: so that I may fitly compare the Romish religion to
the temples of Egypt, which without were decked with gold, but within had most
loathsome sights.

The 5. note
The fifth note is, to vaunte and to boast themselves of their pretended and
falsely called knowledge, 1. Tim. 6.20. dicunt se [saith Iraeneus] non solum
presbyteris, Lib.
sed etiam Apostolis existentes sapientiores synceram invenisse veritatem: they
say that being wiser then the ancient and Apostles, they have found out the
sincere truth. 1. Tim. 6.
This note is so evidently eminent in all haereticks that the Rhemists
themselves have made made it a badge of an haereticke; but how shall we prove
that the papists like empty vessels make the lowdest and the greatest sound.
Cap. 5.
The maker of their Apology does it for me advance their fellows in this
insolent manner. Our wits, says he, are from God in as plentiful manner as
theirs, our foundation in all kind of faculties requisite for the study of
Divinity is as deeply laid as theirs; our diligence rather more then theirs:
our times both for age and study more complete, then theirs commonly can be:
Our order, method, and course of Divinity much more profitable then theirs: we
have more disputations, lessons, conferences, examinations, repetitions
instructions, catechizings, resolutions of cases both of conscience, and
controversy: methods and manners to proceed to the conversion of the deceived,
and such like exercises in our two Colleges, then they in their two
Universities containing near hand 30. goodly Colleges, as for the Masters and
Professors in our Colleges specially the Roman readers, we may be bold to
say they be in all kind the most choice and cunning men in all Christendom for
virtue, learning, etc. Would not this odious and arrogant comparison rather
beseem boys in the school, then divines in the church: thus the Papists
themselves have made both the proposition and assumption, so that if so be
they be not wilfully blind, they may infer the conclusion.

Tht 6. Note.
The 6. note is to refuse the common name of Christians and to choose
themselves several names. Hierom in dialogo contra Lucifir: Sicubi audiueris
eos qui dicuntur Christi non a domino Jesus sed ab alio nu^cupari, vt puta
Marcionitas, Valentinianos, scito non Ecclesiam Christi esse sed Antichristi
synagogam. If thou hear any where such as be said to be of Christ, not to
have their names of our Lord Jesus Christ (as Marcionites, Valentinians,) know
thou that they belong not to the Church of Christ, but to the synagoge of
Antichrist. Have not the Papists peculiar names as Dominicans, Franciscans,
Jesuits, Thomistes and Scotistes maintaining al one grand heresy of Popery:
yet having their diverse opinions among themselves and each sect envying other,
and swelling against the other, which caused Anselmus as Heerbrandus reports
to break out into this speech. Quis non contemnat religionem tot varietatibus
subiectam: Who would not despise a religion subject to so many sects.

The 7. Note.
The heretics in all ages have by allegories vpholden their errors, and
allegories have bin their stro^gest instruments to work withal. Epiphanius
makes mention of a beastly kind of heretics, who by allegories defended the
sin of the Sodomites not only as a thing that might be suffered, but as a
duty that must be done, most shamefully racking to the defense of that
shameless opinion these words of Christ. Verily I say unto thee, Matt. 5.26.
thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing
(...) that is, they say that what soever are thought evil amongst men, are not
evil indeed, but naturally good, for nothing is naturally evil. The heretics
called Priscillianistae did avoid by allegorizing whatsoever was brought
against them, August. de Haere.
In suos sensus allegorizando vertunt quicquid in sanctis libris est quod eorum
euertat errorem: whatsoever is found in the Scripture that overthrows their
errors, by an allegorical exposition they make it to maintain the same. So
do the Anabaptists and Familistes now in our days. As for the Papists have
not they plucked their purgatory out of the same text above named by an
Allegory? Do not they prove their free will by allegorizing the parable in
the tenth chapter of S. Luke, which is concerning the man half dead. By which
we see it common to heretics and not peculiar to any one by allegories to
abuse the holy Scriptures, to be abbetors of their absurdities. Many more
places might I have alleged out of the Papists to prove this, Vide Dur. de
sopis.
but the truth is so clear and manifest that they cannot deny it.

The 8. Note.
The eight note is to enjoin the lay people those things that are to be
performed by the Ministers. Tertul lib. de praescrip.
Laicis sacerdotalia iniungunt; ipsae mulieres haereticae quam procaces quae
audent tingere, ordinationes eorum leaves and inconstantes etc. they command the
people priests, duties, their women are so bold as to baptize, their
ordinations of ministers are light and inconstant. These properties do lively
paint out the Papists. Their Mid-wiues use to baptize, their ordinations and
consecrations are they not of the basest of the people. I would we had not had
experience of this cursed practice of Jeroboam.

Ordo sacerdotum fatuo turbatur ab omni:
Labitur, and passim Religionis honos.
Every fool with the Papists are priested, by which religion comes to ruin,
nay I dare avouch, that they have consecrated shriuelings that are not borne ad
Aram, but ad Haram, not to serve at the altar, but at the swine-stie. Here I
might have added more properties of heretics confessed by the Rhemists
themselves, Upon Iud.
as contempt of authority, the cruelty of Cain, the covetousness of Balam,
which aptly agree to the Papists: for the Pope will be subject to none, no not
to a general Council: witness Martine the 5. and Eugenius the 4. who would
not stand to the decrees of the Councels of Constance, and Basil. As touching
murders the streets have overflowed with the blood of Gods Saints: For
covetousness let Erasmus speak Chiliad. 1. Cent. 9.12. Non datur Baptismus,
non licet fieri Christianum nisi numeres, non comprobant Matrimonium
nisinumeres, no^ audiunt poenitentium confessiones, nisi sperent praemium:
sacrificant co^ducti, non psallunt gratis, non orant gratis: non impertiunt
corpus Christi, nisi numeres: quin vendunt sepulturam, idque in alieno solo. In
English it is thus much. It is not lawful for thee to be baptized except thou
pay: Matrimony without money is not ratified: the Confessors hear no
Confessions without reward: O inexplebilem auaritia^.
they sacrifice for hire: they neither sing, nor pray, nor give names freely:
No they will not minister the Sacrament without wages: they sell sepulchers in
another man's soil. O the exceeding dropsy of covetousness: Aulular.
may I not cry out with Plautus. Tenaces dominos nostra aetas tulit, quos
Harpagonas, Harpyas, Tantalos appellare soleo, in medio Oceani gurgite
sitibundos: Non Midae, non Craesi, non omnis Per sarum copia tartaream eorum
ingluviem explere potest. This age has gripple Lords (which I am accustomed to
call Harpagons, These were Monsters.
Harpyes, Tantalusses thirsty in the midst of the Ocean sea: their hellish
gorge is not satisfied with the money of Midas, with the coin of Craesus, nor
with the pomp of the Persians. Ob.
But they will here object that they have not been condemned by any general
Council, and therefore are not for these properties (though all laid together)
to be accounted heretics: Sol.
which objection how frivolous it is, I hope to make manifest. Were the
heretics in thappostles time condemned by a general Council? they might have
defended themselves by this objection as well as the Papists. Ebion and
Cerinthus against whom Saint John wrote his gospel, who dare deny them to be
heretics? Tertullian in his book de praescriptione, and Irenaeus aduersus
haereses mention multitudes of heresies not then condemned by any general
Council. I dare not allege the authority of Jews who call the Christians
minim and cophrim bagnikkar: that is, Heretics and denying the foundation,
though not condemned by a general Council, least they accuse me of Iudaisme
as they do the Protestants, because we do deny Images.

Lastly how can it be of the essence of heresy to be condemned by a general
Council, seeing as Augustine confesses that former plenarie Councels may be
amended by latter, which must needs be understood of error: for the condition
which Saint Augustine repeateth in the first endures to the last. Si quid
forte a veritate deuiatum est. If in ought they swerue from the truth, and
except that be understood he answers not the thing that was objected by the
Donatistes: they opposed the Council of Cyprian in a matter of doctrine not of
discipline, S. Augustine replieth Bishops might be deceived and so might
Councels, in what then but in matters of doctrine? And so I proceed to the
fourth Reason taken from particular heresies: with this admonition that this
was the very objection of the Pelagians as may be seen in Augustine tomo 7.
lib. 4. contra duas epis. Pelag. in fine libri: to whom he answers, Quasi
nulla haeresis damnata sit, etc. as if no heresy were condemned without a
Council.

The fourth reason of particular heresies.
IN the recital of particular heresies, considering that I aim at no long
discourse in this my treatise, I will begin briefly with Pelagianisme making
this sillogisme: they which hold the same opinion with Pelagius and use the
same arguments that Pelagius did, are Pelagians, but the Papists hold with
Pelagius and use his arguments: Ergo, they are Pelagians. The assumtion I
prove out of Hieroms works against the Pelagians, who hold (as he testifies
ad Ctesiphontem,) that Mandata dei are possibilia, Hierom. lib. 2
Gods commandments are possible to be kept: and prove the same by our savior
his saying: Iugum meum suaue est: my yoke is easy, and mandata eius non sunt
grauia, and his commandments are not grievous: to which the learned father
answers, Levia sunt ad comparationem Iudaicae superstitionis, they are light
in respest of the Jews superstion. Secondly they thus dispute, Si in operibus
meis deus mihi adiutor extiterit, non mihi debetur merces sedei qui in me
operatus est: if my good things come from god, then there is no revvard for me
etc. To which he answers thus: Contra Deum arma linguam tuam: arm thy tongue
against God, and so forth: are not these the very arguments of Papists? Read
the Rhemistes upon the places remembered, also upon the second of the Corinth.
5. cap. 10. where thou shall find this blasphemy, that heaven is as well the
reward of good works, as hell is the stipend of evil works: which is the
drift of the argument of the Pelagians. I will adioyne some other sayings of
the same Father, by which every one may further see the truth of this my
charge. Facilia dicis dei mandata and tamen nullum proferre potes qui vniuersa
compleverit: thou affirmest the commandments are easy, and yet thou can not
bring forth any that has kept them. Again, Tunc iusti sumus quando nos
peccatores fatemur: and iustitia nostra a non ex proprie constat merito sed ex
dei misericordia, dicente scriptura Iustus est accusator sui, in principio
sermonis. Then are we righteous when we confess our selves sinners, and our
righteousness consists not of our merits, but of gods mercy, seeing the
scripture says: The righteous is the accuser of himself. To let pass the
rest of his most excellent sayings I come to the heresy of Montanists.

The 2. haeresie of Montanisme.
The Church in Tertullians time taught, that fasting was restrained neither to
certain days, nor to certain meats: which opinion Tertullian being a
Montanist confuteth in his book aduersus Pseuchicos. That the Church so taught
I prove out of his second chapter, where he sets down the arguments used
against Montanus and confuteth them: The Church is brought in speaking thus:
Indifferenter ieiunandum ex arbttrio, pro temporibus and causis vniuscuiusque,
sic and Apostolos dicunt obseruasse nullum aliud imponentes iugum certorum and
in commune omnibus obeundorum ieiuniorum. We must fast as the cause of every
one requires, and the Apostles did thus observe it, laying no yoke of certain
and determined fasts upon men. You see how the Church plainly speaks against
the restraining of fasting to certain days, and as plain is her speech
immediately after against the restraining it to certain meats. Xerophagius
vero novum affectati officii nomen and proximum Ethnicae superstitioni. The
eating of certain dry meats is a new name of strange and affected office
near to the superstition of the Heathen. Again, Apostolus est detestator
eorum, qui sicut nubere prohibent, ita iubent cibis abstinere a deo conditis.
The Apostle himself detesteth them that forbid to marry, and command to
abstain from meats created of God. The verdict the Church gave concerning
fasting which in that book Tertullian as a Montanist would confute: out of
which testimonies I thus conclude. They which restrain fasting to certain
meats and times, hold not as the ancient Church held, but with Montanus:
the Papists restrain fasting to certain meats and to certain times: Ergo, the
Papists hold not with the ancient church, but with the Montanists against the
same, and as they do hold with them concerning fasting so do they likewise in
the marriage of Ministers, as may be proved out of his book Monogany, and 12.
chap. which he wrote being a Montanist: the Ministers were as he speaks
digami, twice married: omnia licent episcopis, all things are lawefull for
bistops, which he co^futeth by the text of the 1. of Timothy: and 3. chap. A
bishop must be the husband of one wife, so that I may say in these two points
Non ovum ovo similius, quam Papistae Montanistis: the Papists and Montanists
are both alike. And so I pass to the third haeresie of Cainisme.

The 3 haeresie of Cainisme.
The haeresie which teaches that he which before baptism had a wife and she
dying, the party marrying another, ought not to be consecrated bishop, is by
S. Hierom in his Epistle to Oceanus called Cania Haereses, The haeresie of
Caine: In which epistle he answers the place of the 1. of Tim 3. cap. That a
Bishop must be the husband of one wife, saying, praecipit ne sacerdotes bina
aut trina coniugia sortiantur more Iudaeorum aut Patriarcharum, He commands
that priests have not two or 3 wives, after the manner of the Jews and
Patriarchs. Now who is so ignorant that knows not the Papists to hold this
haeresie of Caine, and to abuse the place of Timothy to that purpose: hanc
haeresim sequitur Romana Ecclesia, says Erasmus, this haeresie is embrased of
the Romish Church.

The 4. heresy of Manicheisme
Although I might be very long in this haeresie, showing where in the Papists
agree with the Manichees: yet I will reduce their agreement to three heads:
first the Manichees hold the scriptures to be corrupt, Augustine lib. 1. de
Morib. cap. 29. which opinion he confuteth in these words: si Pauli epistolam
ad Romanos scriptam corruptam esse contendis aliam proferas incorruptam, vel
alium codicem potius in quo eiusdem epistola eadem syncera and incorrupta est,
if for example thou contendest, that S. Paul's epistle to the Romans is
corrupt; thou must show another incorrupt, or rather another book of the same
Apostle wherein the same epistle is sincere and vncorrupt. Canus Lindanus and
Reinolds for my own part I think the^ nothing inferior to these Haereticks
in this point, nay have not the Papists corrupted this same Epistle? leaving
out the 11. cap. 6. v. all this sentence, but if it be of works it is no more
of grace, or else works were no more works. For it clean overthrows their
grand Haeresie: here for the same accusation of divine scripture I charge them
with Helvidianisme, for Helvius held the same, as Hierome witnesses in his
book against him: tibi stultissime persvasisti graeocs codices esse falsatos:
O fool in the highest degree thou have persuaded thy self that the greek
coppies are falsified. And again, Tu mira impude^tia haec in graecis codicibus
falsata esse dicis thou with wonderful impudency say these things are
falsified in the greek books. Thus the Papists join with Helvidius, and
therefore by Hierome his verdict as they are full fools, so have they brazen
faces. Secondly they permitted their hearers to marry, but not their elect as
they called them: August. lib. 2. de Mor. Mani. cap. 19. Auditores vestri
quorum apud vos secundus est gradus ducere atque habere vxores non prohibentur:
your hearers which are in the 2 degree are not forbidden to marry: out of
which place I gather that they did not condemn marriages simply, as the
Papists would make them, and if they did can any one speak more
contemptuously of marriage then the Papists do.

M. Martin in his discovery, Cap. 15. sect. 11.
calls it a profaning of sacred orders. Innocentius and Syricius disprooue
it by these 2. places: be ye holy because I am holy: and again: they that are
in the flesh cannot please God: and these arguments are still maintained by the
learneddest Papists, by which they conclude that marriage is an enemy to
holiness, and a friend to filthiness: the Lord rebuke them for these their
blasphemies,

Thirdly in fasting they are right Manichees, for as Augustine says lib. 2.
cap. 13. they did nihil carnium gustare, and yet did eat exquisitas and
peregrinas fruges multis ferculis varietas, they did eat no flesh, and yet did
eat many and strange fruits varied in many dishes: yea (as Augustine says)
if one of their elect should but anoint his lips with bacon, or but take the
savor of it, as a breaker of his fast, or abstinence, he shall be condemned to
hell fire; is not this the right popish fast? therefore I say to the Papists
as he did to these heretics: quaeso aduertite errores: I desire you consider
your errors.

The 5. heresy of Colliridianisme.
Lib. 3. and haeres. 79.
The Collyridians as Epiphanius writes worshipped the virgin Mary: against whom
he writes thus: (...), let no man worship Marie, the word used signifies to
cast himself down, and so to worship with religious Honor. To prove that the
Papists worship Marie not with (...), that is, service, which they grant, but
with (...), that is, religious service, which they deny, I use their own
testimony upon the 2. of Luke, and 39. verse, where Anna is said to worshipp
the Lord by fasting and prayers: their note is this, that fasting is an act of
Religion, whereby we do worship God as we do by prayer, then by their own
doctrine they worship Marie with (...), religious worship; for they fast and
pray to her. Their own words are these in their Psalter, made for the praise
of Marie according to the Romans manner. In omni tribulatione and angustia
succurrat nobis Maria: in all affliction let Marie help us: And again, Solue
vincula reis, perfer lumen caecis, mala nostra pelle, bona cuncta posce,
monstra te esse matrem: that is, Loose the bonds of prisoners, give light to
the blind, drive away all our evils, obtain al good things for us, show thy
self to be a mother. Lastly, Per virginem Mariam consedat nobis Dominus
salutem: that is, the Lord save us for the virgin Marie her sake: what greater
things can they desire at Gods hands? Nay, what christian heart can abide these
blasphemies? if this be not to honor Marie, what is to honor her? I end this
heresy with Epiphanius his question, Quae Scriptura aliquid de hac re
narrauit? what Scripture speaks thus?

The 6. heresy of Angelisme.
Iraeneus lib. 1
In regard of brevity I will knitt up many heresies together: the Carpocratians
worshipped the Images of Jesus; the Valentinians the cross: the Heracleonites
prayed for the dead. Epiphan. 14. Haeres.
Elxay the horrible heretic taught prayer in an unknown tongue. Nemo quaerat
interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec dicat: Let no man seek for
interpretation, but only let him pray thus. I will therefore in this sixth
particular heresy briefly speak of Angelisme: Haeres. 39.
Angelici (says Augustine) in angelorum cultu sunt inclinati: the Angelists
were inclined to the worshipping of Angels. Iraeneus likewise shows the
practice of the church against this worship. Lib. 2. cap. 59.
Eeclesia non facit aliquid inuocationibus angelicis sed munde and pure dirigit
orationes ad Dominum qui omnia fecit: The Church does not any thing by prayer
to Angels, but purely directs her prayer to the Lord that made all things.
Lib. de vero dei simul. cap. 17.
Again Lactantius writes thus. Non est in Angelis quicquam nisi parendi
necessitas, itaque nullum sibi honorem tribui volunt, quorum honor in deo est.
There is nothing in the Angels but necessity to obey, therefore they will have
no honor to be given to them whose honor is in God. And in his first book
and seventh chapter? Ministri Dei coli non volunt, quippe qui nihil praeter
iussum, and Dei voluntatem faciunt. Gods attendants will not be adored, for
they do nothing but his commandment and will. If these men were alive, what
would they have written against the Papists who maintain the adoration and
worshipping of Angels?

The fifth reason of the popish dissolute and discomfortable doctrine.
IT is not unknown how the Papists without all shame accuse our doctrine of
loosenes, whereas all our writings, sermons, and exercises tend to holiness of
life: for we preach mortification of the flesh, continuance in prayer, and in a
word all holy duties: we permit no filthy stews, neither by rash vows cause
incontinencie and fornication, which are notorious and known things amongst
the Papists Vrbs est (says Mantuan) iam tota lupanar, the whole city is a
stews, speaking of Rome. And as the lives of the Papists have been odious to
God, and to man, so I doubt not but in this motive to prove that their
doctrine tends to horrible dissolutenes, and hellish horror. In Aquinas his
supplement art. 2. quaest. 2. it is taught that no man ought to be contrite in
heart for original sin, which is a licentious and carnal doctrine: did not
the prophet David in the 51. psalm, confess that in sin his mother
conceived him: and S. Paul cries out, Romans 7.
O miserable man that I am, who shall redeem me from this body of sin? out
of which places we may gather the grief that those holy men of God conceived
for their natural corruption. The Papists reason why we must not be contrite
for original sin, is worthy of consideration. Non est voluntarium: it is
not voluntary, say they. The syllogism is thus to be made: We are not to be
contrite but for voluntary sins: but original sin is not voluntary: ergo
we are not to be contrite for it. I answer to the proposition, they might as
well conclude that it is no sin: let Augustine dissolve this knotte, who in
his 1. book of Retract. and 13. chap. writes thus: Nullo modo peccatum est
nisi sit voluntarium, peccatum quippe illudintelligendum est quod tantummodo
peccatum est, non poena peccati, quamvis and illa, quae immerito non voluntaria
peccata dicuntur, quia vel a nescientibus vel a coactis perpetrantur non omnino
possunt sine voluntate committi, quoniam and ille qui peccat ignorans,
voluntary quoque peccat, etc. It is no sin except it be voluntary, this
speech is to be understood of sin which is simply sin, and not a punishment
of sin, although those sins which are unfitly called sins against our
wills (because they are either committed by constraint, or by ignorance) cannot
be altogether without the consent of will, for he which sins of ignorance,
sins willingly. Thus has Augustine answered the popish reason to the full.

Secondly the Papists teach, that some sins are venial of their own nature,
that is deserve not eternal death, which must needs cause men to cast off the
bridle and reins of holy life: why does Basil in his shorter Definitions and
10. rule, prove that every sin is deadly by this place, The wages of sin
is death. But to withdraw men from the opinion of the lightness of sin, well
says Hierome ad Caelantiam: Tanto facilius abstinemus a quocunque delicto,
quanto illud magis metuimus, nec etiam tito ad mayor a progreditur, qui etiam
parva formidat. We abstain so much the more easily from sin, by how much we
fear the same: neither does he make have to greater sins which fears the
lesser.

Thirdly the Papists teach, that the sacrament gives grace ex opere operato, of
work wrought without faith: for howsoever Bellarmine requires it as a
disposi^ion, yet the Censure of Colo^, which knew the Romish doctrine as well
as Bellarmine reasons thus: pueris extra omnem dubitationis aleam sacramenta
prodesse nemo sanae mentis dubitare potest, in quibus tamen nulla est fides,
nulla cordis motio, nullus peccatorum dolor, aut gemitus, and sane si in pueris
easit Sacramentorum natura, cur non erit similis omnino in alijs maxim? eum
neque Christus, nec Ecclesia vnquam vel vllam diversitatis fecit mentionem.
Without all controversy children receive benefit by the Sacraments, in whom
there is no faith, no motion of the heart, no sorrow for sin, and why do not
others likewise so? seeing neither Christ nor the Church mentions any reason
to the contrary. What is this, but to cause men to come without repentance to
the sacraments? for if thou be not a murderer, a thief, or an adulterer, etc.
the sacraments will replenish thee with grace: but (Christian Reader) take
heed of this dissolute and loose doctrine, for he destroieth himself, and
damneth his soul, that comes to the Sacraments without faith and repentance,
and he is so far from receiving grace, that he purchases Gods eternal wrath
and irefull displeasure to himself.

Fourthly the Papists bind their votaries, prelates and priests to keep their
vows, which yet burn in filthy lusts, yea are not those vows ungodly which
cannot be kept without inco^tinency? 1. Tim. 5.11.
If widows (as S. Paul says) wax wanton against Christ being warm, idle,
and well fed, and so lust after husbands, what do many papists more warm,
more idle, and better fed then those poor widows were, that S. Paul speaks
of? What do they I say lust after? but with them this divinity is current, si
non cast, caute tamen: if not chastely, yet warily.

Fifthly the papists teach that the pope may give pardon de paenitentijs
iniungendis, Fulk aganst Allen.
that is, of penance to be performed, Ergo a man may have a pardon before he
sin, which is to open a gappe to all sin, yea the rich man may boldly
transgress, because he is able to give largely for pardons.

Sixthly, Ferus upon Matthew. confuteth it. Aquin. 22.25. q. 9. ar.
they teach that the love of a man's enemy is counseled by our savior Christ,
not commanded, so that a man is not bound to love his enemy by Gods
commandment, O carnal and lice^tious libertines, what is more easy for man
then to love his friend? what is more against the proud spirit of a man the^
to love his enemy? And so from dissoluteness of doctrine I come to the
discomfort of the same.

No man ought to be assured of his salvation by faith, Cens. col^^.
but by hope (says the papist) resting upon his own merits, which is to rack
and torment a christian soul, for every on must say with Hierom in his
dialogue against the Luciferans, Credo Domine and tamen secundum fidem mea^
fieri nolo, sic enim peribo: I believe Lord, yet let it not be according to my
believe, for then I perish: and with Augustine, 10. lib. con. and 29.
tota spes mea non nisi in valde magna misericordia tua: my whole hope is only
in thy great mercy: but more of this in another motive, and therefore I oppose
their own Catechism against them which excellently confuteth this desperate
doctrine: Cat. col.
profecto neque in aignitatem fidei, ne que operum meorum, vt me certum facia^
recte respexero. Verily for certainty that god is merciful to me I must
neither look to the dignity of my faith or of my works, sed in passionem tuam
o Christ oculos mentis defigam, but O Christ I will fasten the eyes of my
mind upon thy passion, cum defecerit virtus mea non diffidam, quia si sanguis
tuus interpellet pro me salvus ero, when my goodness is eclipsed I will not
distrust, for if thy blood entreat for me I shall be saved.

Secondly they teach that by contrition and sorrow for sin, Stapl. A. quae.
7. ar. 2.
the guilt of sin is wholly taken away, but because a man can not be assured
of the sufficiency of his sorrow, therefore he must both confess and satisfy
Gods justice for his sins: O hellish device of man! If no man can be assured
of the sufficiency of his contrition and sorrow, how can he certify his soul
that his Confession and Satisfaction are sufficient? if he can not be assured
of one, he cannot likewise be assured of the other, and so must needs be
swallowed up in the gulf of despair. Hold this therefore (Christian soul)
that thy reconciliation depends not upon sufficient confession, contrition,
and satisfaction, but upon the merit of Christ; and say as the gloss does upon
Gratian, page 376.
that these do not cause and deserve forgiveness of sins, but only Gods
mercy is the cause thereof; and that true sorrow is a sign to thee of the
forgiveness of thy sins. And as the doctrine of Satisfaction is desperate, so
it is a most loose and dissolute doctrine: for, Si dederis marcas, and eis
impleveris areas,

Culpa solveris quacunque ligatus eris: that is, If thou fillest the Popes
coffers with money, thou shall be loosed from all thy faults. Alas, alas, what
will not a man give for the redemption of his soul? Job 2. Mich. 6.
thousands of rivers oil; yea he had rather cause his sons to pass through
fire then to perform true repentance.

The sixth reason of Idolatry.
IN Philosophy there was almost no opinion so void of reason, but it found
some patron, and as it was in philosophy, so now it is in Divinity; for else
how could the Papists defend the worship of images? Of these popish idolaters
I say with Lactantius, Lib. de orig. erroris. cap. 3.
Venia concedi potest imperitis and ijs qui se sapientes non fatentur, his vero
non potest qui sapientiam professi stultitiam potius exhibent. The ignorant may
be pardoned, but to those that professing wisdom manifest their folly, pardon
cannot be granted. But let us see how they excuse their idolatry.

First Bellarmine makes a difference between an idol and an image: Lib. 2.
cap. 5 de Imag.
an idol is an image of that which is not, but an image is a figure of that
which is: to take his grant I will first conclude out of his own words that
the Papists are idolaters, and then by invincible arguments disprooue this
distinction. They which worship images of those things that are not extant, are
idolaters: but the Papists worship the images of those things that are not
extant: Heerbrant^. com.
ergo they are idolaters. The assumption I thus prove: Christopher, George,
and Katherine were never extant, but they worship their images: ergo they
worship images of things that never were. For the disproofe of his distinction
I will use his own arguments, and confession against himself. First (says
he) the Scripture never calls any true image an idol, this I disprooue out
of his 13. chap. where he confesses that the Jews worshipped God in an image
or idol. That in which the Jews worshipped God, is an idol: but the Jews
worshipped God in an image: ergo an idol is an image. Secondly (says he) the
scripture calls Idols elilim, that is Nothing, and uses other names to the
same purpose. If this reason be good, then because the scripture calls Idols
pesilim, and by other like names, it must of necessity follow that they
represent something: if any demand, why the scripture calls Idols nothing,
and vanity, and lies, I answer because of their effects, so says Kimhi:
dabar she eno mognil that which profits not, is called elil, for in truth
they neither help the worshippers of them, nor can they help them, and so are
mere vanity: and by this reason is answered his argument taken out of the
Corinthians 8 chap. where an Idol is called nothing, nothing it is in regard of
profitte and commodity, yet may it represent something: His fourth reason is,
because the Fathers called Heresies Idols: as an haeresie is a false
immagination, so [saith he] is an Idol a false Image: thus indeed the fathers
speak, out of which I thus dispute. Hierom. Hosea 4.
An heresy is an false opinion, and imagination of some thing whereof there is
a truth, Epiph. Haer. 50.
as for example, the Anthropo morphits that thought god was in shape and
proportion like a man, did they not conceive a false imagination of a real
thing whereof there is a truth, Ergo, by the Jesuits own argument an Idol
may represent a thing, that has a being and subsistence: but there is a
plain and evident demonstration why the Fathers call haeresies Idols, because
to serve God as we list, and not as he will is Idolatry: he neither takes nor
requires any thing at our hands, besides his worship and that according to his
will, who requires this at your hands, (says the Prophet Esaias:) unless
therefore they can prove that God will be served with material and artificial
Images, and is content to accept that honor as done to himself, that is
yielded unto them, their adoring them makes them idols, and themselves
Idolaters. His last reason taken out of Tertullian clean overthrows his
cause, (...) (says Tertullian) graece formam sonat, ab eo per diminutionem
(...) aeque apud nos formulam fecit, igitur omnis forma vel formula idolum se
dici exposcit. This word (...) in greek signifies a shape, whence (...) is
derived as a diminutiue, and with us signifies any shape, and therefore every
shape or likeness may be called an idol. If every shape may be called an idol,
then a shape of a thing that is exta^t may be so called: but by Tertullians
opinion every shape may be so called, Ergo a shape of a thing that is extant
and has a subsistence: now whereas the Jesuit in fine and in conclusion out
of Eustathius says that an Idol is inane spectrum, and phantasma, a vain
fa^cie such as we frame in our imaginations, and as the shadows and ghostes
of the dead are, does it not as well prove that for the matter it is nothing,
as it does that it represents nothin? yes verily, for in truth those things
are as he speaks vmbrae, shadows, and cavae imagines, images without any
solidity, so that he might by this argue an Idol to have no matter, and no
bodily subsista^ce, as he does that it is nothing formally, that is
represents nothing. Having retorted his arguments against himself, I will now
briefly show that an Idol represents something. The 2. Commandment shall
help us with the first argument, in which, as the Papists confess an Idol is
forbidden, but that which is there forbidden, is a similitude of something, as
of things in heaven and in earth, Deuteronomy. 4.15.16.
or under the earth, so says Moses, thou shall not make the form of a man, or
of a woman, or of any creature in the earth.

Secondly I disprooue their distinction out of the 14. of wisdom, verse, 1.
where (...), the beginning of whordome is (...), the inventio^ of Idols, what
does he call an Idol? read the 15 verse and thou shall find that the father
sorrowing for his son, (...), works his Image, and so worshippeth the dead
as God: by which every man may see that an Idol and an Image are there put to
signify both one thing, except he will hold that the Image which the father
makes of his son represents nothing: which no Papist though exceeding
bold and blind dare affirm.

Thirdly I demand whether the Images which Carpocrats worshipped were not
Idols? if only idols be forbidden in the 2. Jraen. lib. 1 cap. 23.
com. the^ the Images there forbidden must be idols, yet were they Images of
Jesus. I let pass the images of Paul, Epiph. 24.
Pythagoras and others which every one know to represent something. The
Melchizedechians also worshipped the Image of Moses, Epiph. 55.
yet can no man deny that to be an Idol, out of all which it is easy to
conclude, that an Idol is not always an image of that which is not.

Fourthly, Baal himself, which the Scripture detesteth as a most infamous
Idol was nothing else but a corporal Image erected unto God, by which the
people dreamed they served and pleased God, as may be gathered by Hosea in his
2. chapter: At that day says the Lord, thou shall call me no more Baal: And in
Elias time, 1. King. 18, the Israelites haulted between two opinions, partly
serving God, partly their Idols; likewise the Gentiles which the king of
Assyria placed in Samaria (2. King. 17.33) feared God and worshipped their
Idols. Lastly the Jews swear by God and their King, Sophon. 1.
that is, by their Idols, for they called their Idols Kings, some expound it
as if it were a proper name, they swear by God and by Malchon, but that can not
be, because of the affixe and pronoune that is joined with it, for proper names
are not compou^ded with affixes and pronounes, as Elias proves; by all which
testimonies it is evident and plain, that all the Jews were not so seduced as
to think their Idols to be God, for then they would not have bin like a cake
half baked, Cap 7.4. ver.
(as the Prophet Hosea speaks) now serving God and then their Idols.

Fifthly, the Heathen did not think their Idols to be God, which I prove out
of Lactantius: Lib. 2. de vero dei sim.
Non ipsa inquiunt timemus sedeos adquorum imaginem ficta, and quorum nominibus
consecrata sunt: We do not reverence and worship the Idols themselves, but
those which are represented by them, and those to whom they are consecrated:
what is more direct then this against Bellarmine, who would have men believe
that the Heathen did account their Idols to be God, and therefore reuileth M.
Calvin a man of famous memory not being able with any probability to take
away his arguments. And if that opinion of Macrobius be true, that all the
heathen Gods are to be referred to the sun, 1. Satur. ca 7.
as Apollo, Capis, Serapis and others, how ca^ it enter into the heart of any
learned man to imagine, that the Gentiles were so ignorant as to think their
idols to be God, except they could not distinguish between them and the Sun:
their idols then representing the Sun, of necessity it follows, that they
represented something; except the Sun be nothing. Thus the Papists defending
Idolatry, go about to take the Sun out of the world, making it nothing, and
so prove themselves unworthy the light thereof. And so having disprooued his
distinction, I will proceed to other of his assertions, and then set down
Lactantius his reasons against Images, which are as directly opposite to the
Papists, as if he had of purpose written against them. Bellarmine confesses
that in his 8. chap. that Idiotae qui vident picturas, and non possunt legere
scripturas, possunt ac debent a praelatis and Concionatoribus institui,
alioquin fateor non sine periculo exhiberi imperitis eiusmodi picturas. The lay
people which see and behold Images and can not read Scriptures, ought to be
instructed of their prelates and preachers, else I confess that Images to the
ignorant are not without danger delivered. This is as much as to give a mad
man a sword, and then to watch over him least he hurt himself: but have the
Papists preachers to teach the people? yea, their priests for ignorance are
very Idols, many years ago was this complaint uttered that in times past
there were golden priests and treene cups, B^^.
but now golden cups and treene priests, but of this see more in a former
motive: and whereas he says that lay people may read the Scriptures, does he
not bid defiance to other Papists, Cens. Col.
who by might and maine mainetaine that the Scriptures are not to be read of
the ignorant. But now let us see what the people are to be taught, Bellar. 20.
they are to be taught, that Images are to be worshipped by themselves not
accidentally or improperly, so that worship is due to images themselves, and
not only as they represent some other thing: are the people able to reach this
divinity? nay the very Papists themselves cannot possibly conceive these
distinctions, yea they are flatly opposite to other learned papists: and lastly
the Heathen never taught so grossly of the worshipping of their Images. To go
a little further, the people must not be taught that Images are to be
worshipped with the highest kind of worship which is due to god, cap. 22. and
23
as touching their manner of speech and words, but, si de re ipsa agatur
imagines improprie coluntur eo genere cultus quo examplar ipsum, if it be
concerning the matter and thing it self an Image accidentally must be honored
with the same honor wherewith the thing represented is worshipped and
honored. Is not this to speak mysteries to the people, Bell. cap. 6.
yea to speak lies in hypocrisy? Alphonsus de Castro a learned Papist
accounts Serenus Bishop of Massilia, and Epiphanius enemies to Images,
because they brake them in pieces, and yet we may not do so without haeresie
(for says Bellarmine) when Serenus brake them, the people: being near
converted to the faith worshipped the^ for gods: it were hard for Bellarmine to
prove the truth of this sentence, namely a true Christian to worship an image
for God, but if Serenus did well for breaking them, because the people
worshipped them as Gods, why may not we break them without any hurt, for it is
well known that the ignorant papists amongst us have taken them for gods? Thus
having gathered out of Bellarmine his garden some sweet flowers and nosegaies,
nay rather poysonful herbs, I come now to Lacta^tius his reasons against
images, which whether they conclude not against the Papists as well as against
the Heathen, let any indifferent man judge. Postquam Deus praesto esse caepit
(says Lactantius) iam simulachr^ eius non est opus, Lib. 2. cap.
supervacua enim est hominis imago, cum homo praesto est. When God is present
there is no need of his image, for the image of man is superfluous when man
himself is present. cap. 8.
Yet Bellarmine will needs defend the image of God, although he be present
every where, because he is not seen, and so cutteth the sinews of Lactantius
his reason: and here I would have the Reader to note that Bellarmine proves
that images of God may be made, and as he proves the same, so it is their
practice to paint the Father like an old man, because he so appeared to Daniel,
yet it is not certain (says he) in the church whether images are to be made or
no, out of which confession I conclude, that he teaches uncertain doctrine,
yea that their Church practices those things which they are not sure of, and
therefore deals Antichristianly with the people. But I would know of
Bellarmine, why the Father may be painted like an old man, and the holy ghost
like a Dove, seeing he condemns the image of the Trinity painted in form of
a man, having three faces, these images (says he) are monsters, and are not
the other so? if you disprooue this, then ye likewise disprooue the other: for
the painters may as well defend the one as the other. To return to Lactantius
in the same chap. and book, he thus writes, Dei in aeternum viventis vivum
and sensibile debet esse simulachrum, it aque simulachrum Dei non est quod
digitis hominum fabricatur. God which lives for ever ought to have a living
and sensible Image, therefore it is not Gods image which is made with men's
hands. Again, it images are to be worshipped, then the makers of them are much
more to be worshipped. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Nam non potest esse quicqua^ artifice matus. For there can be nothing greater
then the workman, who is always better then his work: to which Bellarmine
answers, that images are to be worshipped not for themselves, but for the
things which they represent, as if the heathen might not have said as much and
shaped the same answer: yea he is not ashamed to confess and grant that man
may be worshipped, if he meant of civil worship we would not contend, but
seeing he means religious worship, we detest his doctrine; for the reason
being strong against the heathen, it is as strong against the papists: and
therefore I thus conclude it, if images may be worshipped with religious
worship: then may man who is a true image of God be so worshipped; but man
ought not so to be worshipped: Ergo, neither images. I will adioyne more sayings
of Lactantius, Lib. 1. cap. ^^
Religio and veneratio nulla alia tenenda est, nisi vnius Dei, no religion and
worship is to be embraced but of god only: Quidigitur opus est tantos sumptus,
vel finge^dis, vel cole^dis imaginibus impe^dere? What need the^ is there to
bestow so much cost in making of Images, and worshipping them? For, Nihil
colendum est quod mortalibus oculis cernitur: Lib. 2. cap. 3.
Nothing that is seen with the eyes of man is to be worshipped; and that the
Papists may see how well the Gentiles and they agree, hear the Gentiles
defense: Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Non ipsatimemus sedeos ad quorum imaginem ficta, and quorum nominibus
consecrata sunt, cur igitur oculos ad coelum non tollitis? cur ad parietes
spectatis? We do not adore the Images, but those, whom they represent, and to
whom they are dedicated and consecrated, why then do you not lift up your
eyes to heaven? and why do you gaze upon the walls: Out of this defense of
the heathen (as I said before) every one may gather, that they did not defend
their Idols to be Gods, as Bellarmine would make them; yea we may learn that
the Papists go further, then they did, for Bellarmine holds that the Images
themselves are to be worshipped, and that they do terminare venerationem,
worship goes no further then the image not to the thing which is represented
by the image: Thus I have set down Lactantius his arguments, which I desire
all Papists to consider without a preiudicate opinion for favor of them:
before I finish this reason I will set down a syllogism or two, which I would
have them likewise to think upon: Bellarmine confesses that images may
accidentally be worshipped with the same kind of worship, that the things
represented by them are to be worshipped with: out of which I conclude that
accidentally there may be many Gods; that which accidentally has divine
worship, is accidentally God, but images of God accidentally have the same
worship that God himself has: ergo they are accidentally Gods: and if this
argument cannot move them, yet let the^ consider that the man cannot be
excused from treason that gives the proper titles of the kingdom to any under
this pretense, that he does it for honor of the King. The Lord (says Esaias)
will not give his glory to another, and yet the papists say, Cap. 42.
he is content that images by accident have the same glory, yea why might not
the Collyridian heretics by the same shift excuse their idolatry, and by as
good reason offer cakes to the virgin Marie as the papists do candels to her:
and howsoever Bellarmine minceth this point by this sophistical distinction of
accidental worship, yet does their church worship the image of Christ and his
cross with the same worship wherewith Christ himself is worshipped, so says
the fortress of their faith, Crux Christi and eius imago venerari debet
veneratione latriae, and haec est opinio Thomae, Lib. 3. cons. 4. art. 24.
The cross and image of Christ ought to be worshipped with such honor as is
due to God, and of this opinion is Thomas. Holcoth indeed contradicted this
opinion, but the church took part with Thomas against him, Communis opinio
tenet oppositum, The common opinion holds the contrary: And why does their
church sing on this manner to the cross, O Crux ave spes vnita, auge piis
iustitiam reisque dona veniam: Hail cross our only hope, increase in the
godly justice, and give thee guilty pardon: But to give that honor which is
due to Christ to the cross: For who is so simple as to rest in Bellarmines
answer that by Cross is understood Christ himself, or else there is a
rhetorical figure, called a faining of a person, this is but to feign an
untruth: if their church were asked, especially the vulgar people, Vide Aqui.
3. par. quae. 25. art. 4.
they know no such meaning. The second syllogism shall be this, they which go
on pilgrimage to images, worship images themselves: but the papists go on
pilgrimage to images: Ergo they worship the images themselves: to this
Bellarmine answers, Peregrinationes ad imagines rariores sunt in Ecclesia,
Pilgrimages to images are not often now used in the church, what they are now I
will not dispute, the little freque^ting of pilgrimage cannot dissolve the
argument seeing the thing is granted. I leave the practice of the Jews who
knew the meaning of Gods commandments, and yet [as Cornelius Tacitus
witnesses in his 5. book of histories.] Nulla simulachra in templis sunt:
they have no images in their temples: Only I wish the reader to consider that
Epiphanius is rejected of Bellarmine, Augustine is answered that he wrote
against images when he was first converted, and yet he never retracted his
opinion: Two Counsels of Constantinople, one of Franckfurte, and the fourth
Council of Eliberis must all give place to the idolatrous Council of Niece:
well may Bellarmine by these aunswers persuade his besotted disciples to be
idolaters, but except he has better arguments and aunswers every learned man
will easily epsy his weak defense, and in my judgment it had bin better
both for his credit and conscience that he had never defended the worshipping
of images, for I doubt not but by reading of him every one not forestalled may
be moved to the truth.

The seventh reason of Blasphemies.
HAving evicted the Papists to be guilty of many grievous crimes; as
Haeresies, Idolatry etc I come now to Blasphemies which are uttered by men of
no small account amongst them: these blasphemies without the rest of the
arguments here propounded, I doubt not but being thoroughly weighed by the
reader, will leave such an impression in him, that he shall have just cause to
take part with God and Christ against the Pope who arrogateth to himself a
certain Godhead. I begin first with Bellarmines blasphemous argument: si nullo
modo legem possemus seruare, Lib. 2 de Mona cap. 13.
Deus esset omni tyranno iniquior and crudelior: if we cannot possibly keep
the law of god, then God is more cruel, and unrighteous the^ any tyrant. What
dog would thus bark against god? for that no man can perfectly fulfill Gods
commandments I shall prove by such arguments and testimonies as he cannot
accept against. To love God with all our heart, with all our mind, soul, and
strength, is angelica perfectio, an angelical state of life: but no man can
come to angelical perfection: Ergo, no man can fulfill Gods commandments.
Secondly we are but viatores in this life, 1. trauellors, so that if we can
perfectly fulfill all Gods commandments, there is no difference betwixt the
life that we shall lead in our country, which is heaven, and this pilgrimage
in which we now are, for being in heaven we can but love God in that manner
and measure which he requires. Well says Nazianzen, (...), not to sin is
above the reach of man, and Bernard is directly apposite to Bellarmine, In his
50 sermon in canti.
saying, Ergo mandando impossibilia, non praevaricatores homines fecit, sed
humiles, vt omne os obstruatur and accipientes quippe mandatum and sentientes
aefectum clamabimus in caelum and miserebitur nostri deus: God by commanding
impossible things made not men transgressoures of his law, but humbles them
that every mouth may be stopped, for receiving a commandment, and feeling our
inability to keep it, we cry unto God and he will have mercy on us. What is
more plain then this that god requires impossible things at our hands? To
Bernard agrees Augustine. In mandatis est etiam quod iubemur or are remitte
nobis debita nostra, Lib. 1 Retr. cap. 19.
omnia ergo mandata sacta deputantur quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur. In
Gods commandments we are bidden to pray, forgive us our sins, therefore all
Gods commandments are accepted as done, when that which is not done is
pardoned. But why do I heap up testimonies of the Fathers? Let their master
of Sentences himself speak, Lib. 3. and. did. 27.
cur praecipitur hominibus ista perfectio? Why are me^ commanded this
perfestio^? he answers out of Augustine, quia non recte curritur, siquo
currendum est, nesciatur: because we cannot run well except we know whether
we must run. 2. 2 q. 44. art 8.
So does Aquinas use the very same answer by which it is apparent to all me^
that God commands impossible things, and therefore by this blasphemy must be
more cruel then any tyrant, but this might have been better borne withal, if
they had uttered no more blasphemous arguments. The Rhemists upon the first of
Timoth. chap. 4. wanting reasons for their prohibition of meats and marriages,
know not how to defend their practice but by an argument a pari, taken from
equality: God in paradise did command abstinence from one certain tree, and
also did forbid in the time of the Law certain degrees of marriage: ergo so
may the Pope do: O unanswerable, nay rather blasphemous consequents! if ye
thus dispute without all peradventure in the end ye shall have the victory.
From Bellarmine and the Rhemists I come to their angelical Doctor, who in his
supple. 25. quae. art. 1. concludes thus: Christus potest, Ergo Paulus potest,
Ergo papa potest: Christ can do it, therefore Paul can do it, therefore the
Pope can do it. Make the syllogism and then the argument will be of greater
force: whatsoever Christ can do, that can Paul do, and whatsoever Paul can
do, that can the Pope do: but Christ can do this: therefore Paul, and the
Pope can do it. But why are Paul and the pope joined together, seeing his
authority is derived from Peter? when Peter's keys will not serve, then Paul's
sword must save. To let pass these sensles disputers, hear what is written in
the first part of the 6. book of Decretalls, and 6. title de electione, fol.
44. Papa non est homo, sed vicarius Dei, expressius acus, The pope is not a
man, but Gods vicar, more expressly God. In the proheme of the Clementines and
3. folio, I find the notation of the pope to be this: Papa, id est,
admirabilis, nec deus es, nec homo, quasineuter es inter vtrunque. The pope is
called so because he is wonderful, thou art neither god nor man, but as it
were a neuter betwixt both. Again in the Extravagants fol. 16. tit. 3.
Supposit a plenitudine potestatis iuxta quam papae dici non potest, Domine, cur
ita facis. Presupposing the plenarie power by which no man may say to the pope,
Master, why do thou so, no not though (as it is in an other place) he lead
innumerable souls with him by heaps to the devil of hell. Now let
Panormitan play his part, Papa and Christus faciunt vnum consistorium. The pope
and Christ make one consistory, excepto peccato omnia potest quae deus,
excepting sin he can do all that God can do. Also, papa potest quicquid vult,
the Pope can do what he will, and therefore co^tra novu^ testame^tu^ potest
dispensare, he may dispense against the new testament. From the Canonists I
come to the Alcora^ of the Franciscans taken out of their book of
Conformities, nihil fecit Christus, quod Franciscus non fecit, imo plura fecit
quam Christus, vngues Francisci tentationem propellunt, Christ did not any
thing but Frances did the same, yea more then Christ, the nails of friar
Frances drive away temptations. Sicut Ade Deo non parenti omnis creatura
libellis extitit. Sic Fra^cisco omnia praecepta diuina implenti creatura omnis
famulata est, omnia Deus subiecit sub pedibus eius, etc. As every creature
rebelled against Adam disobeying God, so all of them served Frances who
fulfilled gods commandment: God has put all things under his feet, he has
made him ruler over all the works of his hands, and he may most worthily say
that which is written in the Gospel, All things are given me of my father:
Can the devil himself speak more spitefully against the God of heaven and
earth? I wonder how the Pope can suffer those things, seeing he applies the
same scriptures to his authority, and therefore says, Omnis potestas mihi
data est in terra, all power is given me on earth: To proceed in the same
book thus they speak of the mass, Celebratio vnius missae tantum valet,
quantum Christi passio, The saying of one mass is as profitable as Christ's
passion. And again, si quis devote audierit missam non incidit in peccatum
mortale, if any here mass with devotion he cannot fall into mortal sin, if
this be true why have the priests so many harlots? nay why are Popish geldings
become stone horses? These (Christian reader) are not the tenth of their
blasphemies which they have vomited, but I dare not load thee with any more,
least I should he offensive: I will end this reason in a word: that religion
is a blasphemous religion which makes not God merciful, and just in the
highest degree, but the Popish religion makes not God merciful and just in
the highest degree: Ergo it is a blasphemous religion: the assumption is thus
proved, if the only mercy of God be not the only cause of the pardoning of
our sins, and the alone satisfaction of Christ answers not to Gods justice
then may a finite thing, as man's satisfactions answer the same, and so he shall
neither be sum misericors, nor sum iustus, neither have perfect mercy, nor
perfect justice: but the only mercy of God is not the only cause of the
forgiveness of our sins, neither is his justice fully satisfied by Christ,
but by our own satisfaction? and therefore he is neither perfectly merciful,
not perfectly just. Let god be then as he is is most rich in mercy and absolute
in justice, and the Romish religion cannot stand, for it detracteth from his
infinite mercy and justice, therefore without all controversy is a blasphemous
religion.

The eight reason of the Papists own Confession.
AMongst the properties of truth, this as I proved was one, that it was great
and prevails, and indeed thorough Gods omnipotent power it is so great that
the Adversaries against themselves confess the same: so that I may say with
the Orator in his oration pro Quinctio: quis nostrae causae testis idem qui
accerrimus aduersarius in hac re inquam adversarium citabo testem: Who bears
witness to our defense, even he that is the fiercest adversary in this defense:
I say I will use our adversary for a witness, for although I may say to him as
the same orator does in an other oration pro Fonteio: Tuum testimonium quod in
aliena re leve est, in tua quoniam contrate est gravissimum esse debet: Thy
own testimony which is of small credit in another matter, in thine own
because it is against thy self ought to be of exceeding great weight: upon
these triumphs as it were the Christian Reader will be desirous to hear the
Papists testimony, not to hold him therefore any longer in suspense, this is
Bellarmines confession in his 7. chap. and 5. book of Justification. Propter
periculum maius gloriae tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia
and benignitate reponere: by reason of the danger of pride and vain glory, it
is safest to put our whole confidence only in the mercy of God, not in our
merits or good works. And this he proves out of the 9. chap. of Daniel, we
pray not in our righteousness, but in thy manifold mercies: and out of the 17.
of Luke, when you have done all that you can, you are unprofitable servants:
nay out of their own prayers, Deus qui conspicis quia ex nulla action nostra
confidimus: O God thou see that we trust not in any of our actions or
works: and least these his proofs should not be weighty enough, he quoteth
Chrysostom in diverse places, as namely in his 3. homily upon Matthew writing
thus: Noli mercedem poscere vt accipias mercedem, require no reward that thou
may receive a reward. Next follows Ambrose, Non sic vixi, vt me pudeat
vivere, nec mori timeo quia bonum Dominum habemus; I have so lived that I am
not ashamed to live, neither am I afraid to die, because I have a merciful
Lord. After Ambrose follows Augustine, Gregory, and Bernard: and lastly he
uses this reason: vel homo habet vera merita vel non habet, man has good
works in truth, or else he has the^ not in truth but in appearance only, if
only in appearance then is he dangerously deceived, if in truth then he
loses nothing, for his trust is only in God. This is to disanull all his
former doctrine, for before he proved that a man might put his confidence in
good works, because they deserve eternal life; but now he confesses that it
is best to put no confidence in works, but only in Gods mercy: out of which I
conclude, that it is safest to disclaim our own merits in the attaining to
salvation, and by consequent to be a Protestant. The syllogism shall be thus
framed. It is safest to put no confidence in works: but this is the
Protestants constant doctrine: ergo it is safest to be a Protestant: and
indeed it has been always judged the part of a wise man to incline in eam
partem quae cautior est, into that defense which is best, but our defense is
best by the adversaries own confession: ergo it is the wisest part to hold
with the Protestants. So now I may justly use the Orators exclamatio^ in his
oration pro Coelio: o magna vis veritatis quae contra hominu^ ingenia,
colliditate^, solertia^, etc o mighty power of truth, who does defend it self
against the wit, craft, and subtlety of men. I will end this reason with some
sayings of Hieron, because his authority has not bin yet used in this matter:
in his 3. book against the Pelagians he writes thus, Nec in sapientia nostra,
nec in vllis virtutibus confidendum, sed in solo domino: We trust neither in
our wisdom, nor in any virtues, but only in the Lord: and in his dialogue
against the Luciferians, Credo and tamen secundum fidem meam fieri nolo, si
etenim sit peribo: I believe, yet I would not have it be according to my
belief, for then I perish: So must every Christian say if it be according to
our works we perish, but we trust only to the mercy of God: therefore look
and wait for salvation. To this confession of Bellarmine I might likewise have
adjoined Steven Gardiners, but Bellarmine being the papists Pythagoras shall
serve in stead of all. And now for a conclusion of this point and reason, let
any papist answer me what harm can come of the Protestants doctrine? if they
say good works are come to a downfall by it, I would have yielded but that S.
Paul in the 2. of the Galat. ver. 17. many hundred years ago has answered
this rotten and stale objection, If we that seek for justification by Christ,
be found sinners in Christ, is Christ the minister of sin? God forbid, etc. by
which place of holy Scripture this frivolous cavil is so plainly confuted,
that the Papists (except they cannot resolve the Apostles argument) might as
well have charged Paul's doctrine with dissolutenes as they do ours, therefore I
desire all men to hold that which is safest, which is the part of a wise man
to do. But it is safest to hold as we hold, and it is the part of wise men to
defend the best part, which is ours: Ergo, it is safest to hold with: and why
was the Pharise condemned us but for putting his confidence in works? he
acknowledged them to come from God, Luke 18. v. 11
saying, I thank thee that I am not as other men are, I fast twice in a week,
I give tith of all that I have. If we give thanks to god for those his good
actions and works, then by necessary consequent it may be concluded that he
ascribed the^ not to himself, but to the giver and fountain of all good
things, yet has he Christ's own testimony against him for what the^ but for
his affiance in his works. Thus the Papists by their own doctrine of
confidence in works become Pharisees: also I see not why they may not say to
god as the Jews did, why do we fast, and thou do not regard us? why do we
afflict out souls and thou do not acknowledge us? Better it is to pray with
the Prophet David, Enter not into judgment O Lord with thy servants, Psalm.
143. v. 3
for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. To which place of Scripture Bellarmine
answers that it is to be understood, Tom. 1. lib de Mona. cap. 13
ad comparatione^ Dei, in comparison of God, and so contenteth himself with
the answer of Pelagius as I prove out of Hierom in his book ad Ctesip. Non
iustificabitur in conspectu Dei omnis vivens quod testimonium sub nomine
pietatis eludunt, aiunt enim ad comparationem dei nullum esse perfectum, quasi
hoc dicat scriptura, quando enim dicit in conspectu tuo hoc intelligi vult quod
etiam qui hominibus sancti videntur, dei scientiae atque notitiae nequaquam
sunt sancti. No man living shall be justified in thy sight, which testimony
under the pretense of piety they delude, for they say that no man is perfect in
respect of God, as if this were the meaning of the scripture, for when it says
(in thy sight) it gives us to understand, that those which seem holy to men,
in gods sight and knowledge are not holy. Out of this testimony it appears
that the papists accepting of Pelagius his answer, join not only with the
Pharisees in this point, but also with the Pelagia^s of whose heresy I have
spoke before, I dare not stay any longer in this reason, lest I forget my self
promising to have ended it before, but the laying open of the Papists
Phariseisme and Pelagianisme I hope will ad some weight to it, and therefore I
have dwelt a little the longer in it.

The ninth reason of the practice of the Primitive Church.
ALthough I might be very long in showing the practice of the primitive Church
to be repugnant to popery, yet I will eude this reason with all possible
brevity. Eusebius in his 4. book of his Ecclesiastical history, and 14.
chapter, writes thus of the people of Smyrna, who by the malicious Jews were
esteemed as worshippers of Policarpus: Iudaei nostros intentis oculis
observarunt, ne eum aflammis adhuc ardentibus raperent ignorantes, quia neque
Christum aliquando possemus derelinquere, qui mortem pro totius mundi salute
sustinuit, neque alium quenqua^ colere quoniam eum verum deum, and qui solus
colendus sit noverimus, martyrs vero tanquam descipulos diligimus quasi
integre fidem magistro servants and domino, quorum nos quoque in fidei
perseverantia and charitatis optamus esse participes. The Jews watched us
diligently least we should have taken him out of the fire being ignorant, that
neither we can leave Christ which has suffered for all that are saved in the
world, neiworshippe any other, for him we adore as being God, but the Martyrs
as disciples and fellows of our Lord, we love worthily for their exceeding
good will unto their king and master, of whose charity in faith and
perseverance God grant we may be partakers. This testimony shows how the
Papists are departed from this practice, who do not only love, but most
superstitiously adore the relics of Saints: the christians were charged as
you may see in Iustins 2. apo. to be (...), that is, Atheists, not to worship
God, to whom he answers, Profitemur nos quidem talium qui habentur deorum
esse expertes and atheos, sed non verissimi illius dei patris videlicet
virtutum expertes, verum hu^c ipsum and qui ab illo venit filium, and spiritum
propheticum colimus and adoramus cum ratione and veritate venerantes. We
profess our selves to be without such as are accounted Gods, and indeed to be
Atheists, but not without the most true God the father of virtues, for we
worship and adore him and his son, and the holy ghost in truth and as reason
requires. Out of which answer I gather that the Christians did not worship
Saints, Angels, or other things, for then Iustine might have answered that the
Christians worshipped many Gods, as the heathen did, especially if they
worshipped as many as the Papists who exceed the Gentiles, or at leastwise are
nothing behind them in their idolatry: and if these two will not content the
Papists in this point. 8. Book contra Celsum p. 937.
let Origin speak: Solus Deus adorandus est, preces offerendae soli vnigenito
Dei verbo, qui vt pontifex eas ad Deum suum and Deum nostrum perferat. God
alone is to be adored, to the only begotten son of God our prayers are only
to be offered, who as high priest offers them to his and our God. And
again, Oblitus cum Christianis se agere soli Deo per Iesum preces
offerentibus: He forgets himself that he has to do with Christians who
offer their prayers only to God by Christ Jesus. These testimonies of Origin do
evidently manifest unto us, what was the approved use of the church in his
time, viz. that their prayers were not made unto Angels nor Saints, but only
to God in the name of Jesus Christ, neither have we the practice of the
primitive Church only in this point but in many more, which I will in a word
declare. The Christians were charged by the Pagans for having no images, and
they not only confessed so much, but also defended it as most agreeable to the
law of God. Origin, Contra Celsum lib. 8. Page 934.
posthaec Celsus ait nos ararum, statuarum, templorumque dedicationes fugere,
non videns pro aris suam esse mentem cuique ex qua sursum feruntur vere and
intelligibiliter suaueolentes suffitus, simulachra autem Deo dicanda sunt non
fabrorum opera, sed a verbo Dei dedolata and formata in nobis, viz. virtutes ad
imitationem primogeniti totius ei naturae, hae sunt statuae Deo dicatae.
Furthermore Celsus affirms that we have no dedication of Altars, standing
Images and Temples, not knovving that every man in steed of an Altar has a
mind, out of which are sent spiritual svvet-smelling perfumes, and as
touching Images such are dedicated to god as are not the works of artificers,
but are framed of the word of god in us, namely virtues to the imitation of the
first begotten of every creature, those are the images that are dedicated to
god. Again in his 7. book page 928. Multa adeo nos prohibent ab aris and
simulachris, vt emori citius iubeant, quam contaminemus nostram de Deo fide^
talibus impietatibus. There are so many prohibitions against Altars and Images,
that men are commanded rather to die, then to defile their faith which they
have of god with such impiety. Out of which two testimonies as I conclude
against images, so may I likewise against Altars, and then what will become of
the popish sacrifice of the mass? Not to rest only in the authority of
Origin, hear what Clemens Alexandrinus says in his exhortation to the
Gentiles, (...), etc. Nobis non est imago sensilis de materia sensili, sedquae
percipitur intelligentia: We have no image that is material and seen with
eyes, but only such as is conceived with understanding: I let pass Lactantius
his testimony because I have bin long in it before, and use Arnobius authority
in whose 8. book, the heathen do move this question, Cur nullas ar as habent
nulla te^pla, nulla not a simulachra, why have they no Altars, no Temples, no
known Images? of these testimonies I may say with the Orator, Aut hoc testium
satis est aut nescio quid satis est, Either these are sufficient witnesses, or
else I know not what is sufficient. But I come now to a third practice of the
church repugnant and opposite to popery, which was to have public prayers in
a known tongue: Iustine in his second apology (...), and in solis qui dicitur
die omnium qui vel in oppidis, vel ruri degunt in eundem locum conuentus fit,
and commentaria Apostolorum, aut scripta Prophetarum leguntur, quo ad tempus
patitur: On the day which is called Sunday all that are in towns or villages
meet together in one place where the writings of the Apostles or Prophets are
read as the hour permits us. When the reader cease, the parson warns
and exhorts us to imitate the good things that have bin read unto us, then
arise we all and jointly make our prayers after which ended, bread and wine
with water are brought to the place, and he that is chief amongst us gives
thanks in the best manner he can: and a little before, Perfectis precibes and
gratiarum action, populus omnis qui adest been dicit dicens Amen: at the end
of his prayers and thanks, all the people that are present do bless and say
Amen. Amen in hebrew signifies as much as God grant it may be so. If they
desire plainer words let them hear Origin lib. 8. cont. Celsum page 941.
Sciant quod germane Christiani, ne vsitatis quidem Dei nominibus in sacra
scriptura vtuntur inter precandum, sed Graeci Graecis, Romani Romany,
singulique precantur in propria lingua, deumque celebrant pro viribus, and
omnium linguarum Dominus, omni bus linguis precantes exaudit tam vary
loque^tes haud secus ac co^sonos etc. Let me^ know that true Christians do
not use in their prayers the names of god which are used in holy scripture, but
greeks do use greek names, Romans use Latin names, and men of every nation
pray and praise god with all their might in theit own mother tongue, and the
Lord of al tongues does hear them praying in all tongues understanding them
that speak diversely no otherwise then if they were men of one speech and
language. I might here allege the 15. Canon of the Council of Laodicia which
ordained that none should sing but those that were Canonically elected, and qui
de Codice legunt, and those that read out of their books, by which it appears
that some of the people could read the Psalms and by consequent had them in
their own tongue. But let Basil end the third difference, who writes,
Epist. 80. ad Caterineo.
that in the church the people did (...) that is, answer one another in
singing: and this was the manner and custom of all churches, (...): mos qui
nunc obtinet omnibus Dei Ecclesiis consonus est and consentaneus: the custom
which now prevails is agreeable to all churches: and after this he
rehearses the Egyptians, Thebans, Arabians, Syrians, and Chaldaeans. So then
now I hold it needeles in so clear and manifest a matter, to quote mo
testimonies, for I might have used Augustines, Chrysostomes, Hieromes, and
Ambroses authority for the proof of this practice, but eschuing tediousnes I
will now propound the fourth Difference. The people in the primitive Church
were not deprived of the cup in the Communion, so testifies Clemens
Alexandrinus, Lib. 1. (...).
(...). Some distributing the Eucharist do suffer the people as the custom is
to take part. This testimony also overthrows the priests private Communion,
which I might have made an other difference, but that for brevity sake I spare
to speak of it. To Clemens I adioyne Iustine in his 2. Apol. qui apud nos
diaconi vocantur dant vnicuique eorum qui adsunt partem panis pro quo gratia
actae sunt and vini and aquae participandam: they which we call deacons give to
all that are present a part of consecrated bread and wine mingled with water to
be received. Here I might abound with testimonies, and time would sooner fail
me then proofs, and therefore I take and accept the confession of Duraeus, who
being pressed with the authority of Gelasius, who commanded that sacraments
should be either wholly received or wholly omitted, confesses that for four
hundred years it was so used in the Church, I will not stand to show that it
was longer continued, but I demand why that which was so long practiced in the
Church, should be disanulled by the Counsel of Constance, were the Fathers in
that counsel wiser then all the Christians in so many ages, yea then the
Apostles and Christ himself? The fifth difference is that the Christians were
hot burdened with many festival days: 936. p.
Celsus obiecting to the Church the want of feasts is answered by Origin,
Festum is facere officium id est, a feast is to do a duty, and proves it out
of the fourth of the Galat: that days are not to be kept excepting the Lords
day, Easter and Pentecost, what then is become of the multitude of the Popish
festival days wherewith the Church is grievously burdened, concerning this
point Erasmus writes thus upon Matthew 11. cap. Aetas Hieronimi praeter diem
dominicum p^^ ifsima noverat festa. In Hierom his time there was very fevve
festival days besides the Lords day. And in the tripartite history in the
ninth book, and the thirty eight chapter I find these words, Men's fuit
Apostolorum non de diebus sancire festivitatem, sed conversatione^ rectam and
Dei praedicare culturam: It was not the Apostles meaning to give laws
concerning festival days, but to preach a holy conversation and the worship
of God. To leave this practice and come to the sixth difference namely of
fasting. I find likewise that the Church left it free, and imposed no
necessity upon men to observe the Lent fast, Quidam says Eusebius) putant vno
tantum die observari debere ieiunium, alii duobus, Lib. 5. cap. 24
alij vero pluribus, nonnulli etiam quadraginta, ita vt horas diurnas
nocturnasque computantes diem statuant; some thought they ought to fast one
day, some two days, some more, some forty days, and counting the hours of
the day and night, make up the day. Also, Ieiunii dissolentia fidei vnitatem
commendat. The diversity of fasting commends the unity of faith. To
Eusebius agrees Socrates saying, in ipsis ieiunijs aliter apud alios obseruari
inuenimus, Romani enim tres ante Pascha septimanas ieiunant, tota Hellas,
Alexandria quoque sex septimanas ante ieiunant. We find difference in the
observation of fasts themselves, the Romans fast three weeks before Easter,
all Greece and Alexandria 6. weeks. Memorable is the practice of Spirid. in
the same hist. 1. lib. 12. cap. who said that omnia munda mu^dis, al things are
clean to the clean: and therefore in quadragessima edebat carnes porcinas, In
lent he fed upon bacon. Lastly good is the advice of Nazi. in his oration of
Baptism: Christus quadraginta dies ieiunavit, nos nostris viribus men suremus
(...). Christ fasted forty days, let us measure it according to our ability.
Out of all these testimonies it is apparent to all men that there was no
uniformity in fasting, and therefore the Papists are degenerate in this point
also from the primitive Church, because they impose a necessity of abstinence
from flesh permitting fish, for (as we may read in the places before cited)
some used to feed on flesh in the time of lent. Many more differences, as namely
the liberty of ministers in marriage, the reading of the scriptures etc. might
I have stood upon, but for breuity sake hoping that these differences here
recited will satisfy a Christian, I leave them, and say with our Savior
Christ, It was not so from the beginning, Mtah. 19. v. 8
as the Papists would bear me^ in hand, and therefore they are to reform
their religion, for as Cyprian says ad Pomp. con suetudo sine veritate
vetustas erroris est: custom without truth is but an ancient error.

The tenth reason of Scripture.
IF I should in this reason prosecute all things that argue the desperate case
of popish religion, my treatise would exceed the measure of the volume which I
propounded to my self: therefore in a word I come first to the abusing of
Scripture by ungodly translations. In the 1. chapter of the epistle to the
Hebrews, and 3. verse, it is said, that Christ purged our sins by himself,
which words (by himself) are clean stricken out, as overthrowing their
blasphemous doctrine of satisfactions: for they teach, that Christ satisfies
by the repentant, whereas the Scripture says, that he satisfies by
himself. In the same Epistle, the 7. chapter, and 28. verse, it is written,
that the law appoints priests men that have infirmity, but the word of the
oath which is after the law, the son for ever perfected: where by the
opposition it is most clear, that Jesus Christ is a Priest as he is God. Yet
they contrary to their latin translation have left out the word [men] that
the opposition might not appear. Again, in the thirteen chapter and 16.
verse: their translation is thus, with such hosts God is promerited: does not
this make for their doctrine of deserving at Gods hands? where as it is in the
greek fountain, (...): that is, with such sacrifices god is delighted, or
well pleased. To what a desperate estate are these me^ grown, which so
wilfully against their own consciences, in favor of their heresies, translate
the Scripture. Is there no difference betwixt pleasing of God, and meriting?
All the substances and qualities of things natural, please God because they
are good, yet do they not deserve at God his hands. Again in the fourteen
chapter of Saint John and the twenty six verse their translation has it
thus, Suggeret vobis omnia quaecunque dixero vobis, which they finely english
thus, Shall suggest unto you whatsoever I shall say unto you, when they know
the greek has (...), all things which I have spoken unto you. Is not this
translated to maintain the traditions of their Church, and decrees of Popes,
and counsels? That it is so, it appears by their note, referring the reader
to the 16. chapter, and 12. verse. Upon which they have gathered their
traditions: but Saint Augustine upon that verse answers them, Cum ipse
tacuerit, when he himself has not uttered these things, which of us can
say, these, and these they are? or if he dare be so bold to say, how does he
prove it? In the tenth chapter of Luke and the thirty five verse, the vulgar
latin has it thus, Quodcunque superogaueris, ego cum rediero, reddam tibi,
which they have translated thus, whatsoever thou shall supererogate etc. Hence
are gathered works of supererogation, it is in the greek: whatsoever thou
spendest more. These (to speak the least of them) are both supererogant
collections, and superarogant works. To proceed in the 11. of the Romans and 6.
verse, these words are omitted, but if it be of works, it is no more of
grace, or else were work no work, the dashing out of this sentence, helps
their doctrine of merits, let it alone in the scripture, and grace and merits
cannot stand together: for here we may gather, that gratia non est vllo modo
gratia, nisisit omni modo gratuita, grace is not grace except it be every way
free. In the 5. to the Ephesians. they translate Sacramentum hoc magnum est, this
is a great Sacrament: Out of which the master of the Sentences lib. 4.
distinct. 26. proves marriage to be a Sacrament: the greek is, This is a
great mystery, or secret, which Saint Paul speaks, and means of Christ,
and his Church. (Not to quote many testimonies) let Cyprian that famous Martyr
speak in his 2. book of Epist. the 8. epist. Cum Apostolus dicit Sacramentum,
hoc magnum est Christi, pariter and Ecclesiae vnitatem indiuiduis nexibus
cohaerentem, sancta sua voce testatur, When the Apostle says this is a great
Sacrament he testifies the unity of Christ and his holy Church knitt
together, with vndiuisible bonds. I cannot let pass that intolerable
translation, Romans the seventh and the 25. verse. Where S. Paul crying out,
O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? in the
next verse they translate, the grace of Christ, concluding out of it, that
grace is sufficient to resist temptations and to vanquish sin, where the
Apostle says no more, but I thank god, yet they make the meaning to be this,
who shall deliver me from this body of death? the the grace of God by Jesus
Christ; whereas there is no such meaning: for Paul having sorrowed for his
sin, rested in the hope which he had placed in Christ. Furthermore in the 1.
to the Corinth. the ninth cap. and 5. verse, they have perverted S. Paul's
words, whereas he says, a sister, a wife, or (as they would have it) a
sister, a woman, they make it to be a woman, a sister, expounding it against
the Apostles wives, whereas no man would say a sister, a woman, because the
word sister implies a woman. We read indeed that certain women did follow
Christ, we read not that he led them about. vide Euseb^um lib. 3. ca. 30.
Concerning this matter Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus. An and Apostolos
improbant? Petrus enim ac Philippus vxores habuerunt. Do they disalovv the
Apostles? for Peter and Philip had wives. And it grieueth not Paul in a
certain epistle to speak of his yoake-fellow, which he did not lead about
with him, that he might be more ready to preach the gospel. But to come to a
weighty matter indeed, they translate the 2. verse of the 3. chap. of Matthew.
Do penance, which cannot be so turned, and that I prove by these reasons:
First penance Aquin. 3. p. q. 68. ar. 5, 6.
yet they must repent: therefore to confess and satisfy, is not to repent.
The Christ did penance, therefore a man may do penance without sorrow for
sins, or else Christ repented of his sins which resipi scentia dicitur, L.
6. cap. 24.
nam mentem quasi ab insania recipit. The Greek word is called Repentance, for
it recouereth the mind (as it were) from folly. Fourthly, Act. the 5. chap.
and 31. verse. they translate it themselves, Repentance, and again Mark the 1.
chap. and 15. verse, be penitent. I will not stand upon any more places in the
new Testament, but come to a few of the old. In the ninth of the Preacher
and second verse they have these words, Omnia in futurum servantur incerta,
All things are reserved as uncertain for the future time: there is no such
thing in the Hebrew, yet out of this place is proved the uncertainty of
salvation and final perseverance. O most wretched and vile doctrine that must
coin scripture to defend it self! In the 98. psalm and 5. verse they
translate, vvorshippe his footestoole, for it is holy, and from hence conclude
the adoration and worshipping of creatures, whereas it should have been turned,
at his footestoole he is holy, lahadom the same thing being repeated in the
last verse. In the 8. of Genesis toward the end of the chap. where it should
be, the thoughts of man's heart are evil, in their translation it is prone to
evil, as if there were no difference betwixt prone to evil, and evil, If I
should affirm a papist to be prone to evil, and treason, do I say that he is
evil, and treason it self? nothing less: even so there is a difference
betwixt pronesse to vice, and vice it self. In the 14. of Genesis, and 18.
verse, they have it thus erat enim sacerdos dei altissimi, for he was a priest
of the most high God, in favor of their sacrifice: where it is, and he was a
priest of the high God, neither let them answer me that the conjunction (vau)
does sometimes signify (for) that is not the question, but whether it so
signifies in this place. And because they vaunte of antiquity, in this point,
Freculph. in the first book of his history, and 42 chap. says, that
Melchizedech, in refectionem ipsius Abrahae, panem, vinumque protulit.
Melchizedech brought forth bread and wine for the refreshing of Abraham. I will
follow this matter of translations no further at this time. By this every one
may gather why they forsake the pure Hebrewe, and Greek fountains, and drink
of the corrupt Latin streams.

I come in the second place to the denial of plain Scriptures. In the 3. of
the Galat. and 10. ver. it is thus written, for as many as are of the deeds of
the law, are under the curse: for it is written, cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do
them: in which words the Apostle does thus reason, They which cannot fulfill
the law are under the curse:

But no man can fulfill the law: ergo.



If this be not the Apostles assumption, the Galatians might have answered
Paul, that they could fulfill the law, and therefore were not under the curse.
Yet the Papists teach, that man may fulfill Gods law, and so cut the sinews of
S. Paul's reason. Secondly in the 4. to the Romans and 11. verse, circumcision is
called a seal of the righteousness of faith: out of which place we gather, that
we are not justified by the sacraments. The Papists to elude the place, answer
it follows not that it is so in all, because it was so in the patriarchs;
this answer disioynteth the Apostles argument, which is this: As Abraham was
justified, so are all men justified:

But Abraham was justified without the sacraments:

Therefore all men are so justified.



In the 6. of the Romans and 27. ver. it is said that the gift of God is
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. S. Paul's speech is corrected by
the Rhemists, saying, the sequel of the speech required, that as he said,
death or damnation is the stipend of sin, so life everlasting is the stipende
of justice. To see papists sit as it were in judgment of the Scriptures, to
allow, or disalow sentences at their pleasure, is the most notorious example of
Heretical pride and misery that can be. Again, in the 6. to the Romans and 12.
v. concupiscence is called sin, yet denied by them to be sin. If the
scripture had so said, they might well have expounded it as they do, namely
the occasions and matter of sin. But cannot one thing be properly sin, and
the occasion of sin? let Augustine then be controlled, who in his 5. book
contra Iul. Pelag. and 3. chap. writes thus, Sicut caecitas cordis, and
peccatum est, and poena peccati, and causa peccati: it a concupiscentia, carnis
and peccatum est, quia inest illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis, and
poena peccati, and causa peccati. As blindness of heart is sin, and a
punishment of sin, and a cause of sin: so likewise is concupiscence sin,
because it disobeieth the rule of the mind, and a punishment of sin, and a
cause of sin. Augustines syllogism is this: That which is disobedience to
the government of the mind is sin: But concupiscence is disobedience to the
government of the mind: Therefore concupiscence is sin.

Also in the 5. of the Roman. and 14. verse. Paul proves all men to be
sinners, because of death; yet is the virgin Marie exempted from sin, which
strengthens Pelagius his opinion. For he might deny the argument; Infants
die, therefore they are no sinners, because Marie died, and yet was no sinner.
In the 1. to the Corinthians and 10. chap. S. Paul beats down the conceit of
the Corinthians concerning the sacraments. For the Jews did eat Christ in
their sacraments. Yet the Papists will have our sacraments to give grace ex
opere operato, of the work wrought, and so make the Apostles argument to be of
no force. For the Corinthians might have replied, our sacraments give grace to
them that receive them, therefore we cannot be dismayed, with the examples of
the Israelites. Furthermore in the 9. of the Hebrews the 25. verse. Christ is
said to have offered himself but once, because he suffered but once. The
Apostles reason is this: Christ died but once: Therefore he suffered but once.

Lastly, Hebr. 10. and 8. ver. the Apostles conclusion is, seeing there is
remission of sins, there is no more offering for sin. Therefore it
follows inuincibly, that the mass is not a sacrifice for sin. Yet the
papists assertion must needs frustrate both these arguments of the Apostle.
From the denial of scripture I come to the addition of the same, which argues
extreme despe^atenes. The Council of Laodicea 59. canon rejects the books
which we do and commands ne aliqui praeterea legantur, and in authoritatem
recipiantur, that non besides be read, and received into authority. Ruffinus
likewise in his exposition upon the Creed, rejects the same, and will not
have them alleged, ad authoritatem fidei confirmandam, for the confirmation
of faith. Cirill of Jerusalem in the 4. book of his Catech. writeteth thus.
Lege scripturas sacras nempe viginti duos veteris testamenti libros, read the
holy scriptures, namely the two and twenty books of the old testament. I
pass over Hieroms authority, and Nazianzens, with Eusebius, Epiphanius, and
Lyraes: If al these will not move them, yet let their Angelical doctor Thomas
Aquinas be of some force with them, who in his first part. 89. quaest. 8.
artic. resp. ad secund. regards not the authority of Ecclesiasticus.
Fourthly and lastly the concealing of the scriptures from the people, what end
has it, but maintenance of the Idolatry, pomp, pride and covetousness of the
popish priests and prelates, (as Erasmus says) Quis non intelligat istos,
sacras literas ideo velle paucis esse notas ne quid decedat ipsorum authoritati
questuique? who knows not that these men would have the scriptures known but
to few, least their authority and gain should decay? How could men be deceived
with Images, and robbed with Purgatory, if they were conversant in the
scriptures. Thus Christian reader I have given thee a taste of
foure-notorious-crimes, namely corrupt translations, denial of plain
scriptures, addition to them, and lastly concealing them from the people: a
taste I say I have given thee, for I could not prosecute them as the things
require. If any Papist could show the like in the Calvinists, what
exclamations should we have? Master Martins discovery of our translations
argues either blind ignorance or extreme malice, as I offer to prove to any
Papist. Campian in his first reason obiecteth diffidence, and distrust, because
we deny scriptures, therefore it is a sure conclusion against them, they add
to the Scripture and so distrust their cause: otherwise they could not add any
Apocripha books, as they do: but enough of this.

The eleventh reason of popish contradictions.
THe number of popish co^tradictions is so great (as by reading of Bellarmine
himself every man may gather) that I may say with the Orator, In hac causa
oration nemini de esse potest, In this matter no man can want words, and
therefore, non tam mihi copia, quam modus in dicendo quaerendus est, In
speaking of this thing I must seek for a just measure, not for plenty and
variety of matter. Chrastouius in his book, called Bellum Iesuiticum, the
Jesuits war, besides contradictions concerning Antichrist has gathered two
hundred and fifty about the Mass. Thus the Papists like the Madianites wound
on another, and indeed, Non tanta nobiscum, quanta secum est contentio, The
controversy is not so great with us as with themselves, and this agrees to
the wonted and accustomed dealing of the Lord: who did, Haereticos inter se
committere, set heretics together by the ears: For (as Hierome says) Amos
the 9. Nisi superbiam haereticorum suo dominus calcauerit pede, and peruersam
sceleratamque doctrinam, spirituali mucrone percusserit, and magistros eorum
qui in capitibus accipiuntur, inter se diui serit, atque in bonam partem
occiderit, non possunt discipuli viuificari, Except the Lord tied down the
pride of heretics with his foot, and wound their perverse and wicked doctrine
with his spiritual sword, and set their masters which are counted the
principallat dissension, and slay them for the most part, their scholars
cannot be restored to life.

The first contradiction.
The Papists teach that the Pope, as he is Pope cannot err in giving of
sentence, although he may err as a private person, yet Alphonsus who wrote
bitterly against Luther, Lib. 1. cap. 4.
when it came to this point, gives the Papists both the crime of impudency,
and flattery. Non credo aliquem adeo esse impudentem papae assentatorem, vt ei
attribuere hoc velit, vt nec errare possit: I cannot think any man to be so
impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as to attribute this unto him that he cannot
err: out of these words I gather first that the papists are the Popes
flatterers, Secondly, that their flattery is joined with impudency, which are
two no small faults: to go foreward in Alphonsus Caelestinum papam errasse
circa matrimonium fidelium, quorum alter labitur in haeresim, res est manifesta
omnibus, neque hic Caelestini error talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae imputari
debuit, ita vt illum errasse dicamus veluti priuatam personam, and non vt
Papam, quoniam huiusmodi Caelestini definitio habebatur in antiquis
decretalibas, etc. It is a thing manifest to all me^ that Pope Caelestinus
erred touching the marriage of the faithful, when either part fell into
heresy, neither was the error of Caelestinus such, as ought to be imputed
only to negligence, so that we may say he erred as a private person, not as a
Pope, because this definition of Caelestinus was in the ancient decretalls,
which I my self have seen and read. In this sentence Alphonsus confuteth the
distinction used by the papists, namely that the Pope may err as a private
man, but not in a definitive decision of a matter: but I would gladly know the
cause why they hold that the Pope cannot iudicially err? Is it not by reason
of Christ's prayer? Luke 22. verse 32. who prayed that Peter's faith might not
fail; such senseless disputes are not worth an answer: yet if they will be
satisfied let Cyprian satisfy them, who writes thus in his 4. book of Epist.
and 4. Epist. Adeo autem pro nobis deprecabatur, vt legamus in alio loco, Luc.
12. Dixit Dominus ad Petrum etc. Quodsi ille pro nobis ac delictis nostris
laborat and prec. etc. He prayed so for us, as we read in another place, namly
Luke 12. the Lord said unto Peter, etc. If he does pray so for us and our
sins, how much more ought we to continue in prayer? By this exposition and
collection of Cyprian we may gather that no christian can err iudicially, if
that were the intent of Christ his prayers to free the Pope from giving any
definitive sentence against the faith, for Christ prays for all Christians
and therefore we thus conclude.

He for whom Christ prays cannot err: But Christ prays for all true
Christians:

Therefore no Christian can err.

No papist I am assured will grant the proposition seeing the assumption cannot
be denied, being so plainly avouched by Cyprian: but I proceed to the second
Contradiction.

The 2. Contradiction.
The Papists now teach that the Pope is above a council. Qui tradunt (says
the Turrian) concilium esse supra papam illi naturae repugnant, quum hoc nihil
aliud sit, page 294.
quam partem toti praeferre. They that deliver this doctrine that a council is
above a pope, cross nature, seeing this is nothing else but to prefer a part
before the whole. If this be true, then the counsel of Basil opposes it
self to nature, for I find it written in the 33. session. Veritas de
protestate concilii generalis vniuersalem ecclesiam representantis, supra papam
and quemlibet alterum declarata, per Constantiense, and hoc Basiliense
generaliae concilia, est veritas fidei Catholicae. The truth of the power of a
general Council, representing the universal Church, above the Pope and every
other person, declared by the general counsels of Constance, and this of
Basil, is the verity of the Catholic faith. And to retort Turrian his
reason, thus may an argument be framed: The whole is above the part:

But the general Council is the whole representing the universal Church:

Therefore it is above the Pope.



The 3. Contradiction.
The Papists teach that necessary arguments may be drawn from traditions,
cou^cells, Popes decrees, and I know not what, and therefore wanting arguments
against us, obtrude their pelf of traditions, which have no warrant in the
book of God: yet Aquinas writes otherwise, Sacra doctrina authoritatibus
canonicae scripturae vtitur, ex necessitate argumentando, part 1. q. 1. art.
8. resp. ad 2 um.
authoritatibus autem aliorum doctorum ecclesie quasi arguendo non ex propriis,
sed probabilibus: Divinity uses the authority of the Canonical scripture,
arguing out of it by by necessary arguments, but the authority of other
church teachers, arguing as it were by proper, not by probable arguments. I
wish the Papists would attend to their Angelical Doctor in this point, which he
proves soundly out of Augustine: Solis enim scripturarum libris qui Canonici
appellantur, didici hunc honorem defer, vt nullum authorem eorum in scribendo
errasse aliquid firmissime credam. For I have learned to defer this honor
only to the Canonical Scriptures, to believe most steadfastly that no Author
of them has erred in any point. If this were the opinion of all papists, many
controversies would be compounded betwixt them and us, yet this is in truth to
honor and reverence the Scriptures, which were good for all papists, and not
to disgrace them as they do.

The 4. Contradiction.
Praefat. To^ia.
Postquam auxiliante deo (says Lyra) scripsi super libros Canonicos sacrae
Scripturae, incipiendo a principio Genes. and progrediendo vsque ad finem,
eiusdem confisus auxilio super alios intendo scribere, qui non sunt de Canone,
lib. Sapientiae, Ecclesiastic. Judith, Tobiae, and Macchabaeorum, etc. After
that by Gods assistance I have written upon the books of Canonical scripture,
from the beginning of Genesis and so forward to the end, trusting still unto
his help, I purpose to write upon those that are not Canonical, as the book
of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, and the Maccabees. This is Lyra his
opinion concerning these books, which he proves out of Hierom, and yet the
Papists plead for them to be numbered amongst the Canonical Scriptures, yea
(as thou heardest before) Campian in his first reason proves that we distrust
our cause, because we deny them to be of equal authority with the other
books; I pass by the authority of other Papists, as namely Hugo the
Cardinal, and Caietan, who with Lyra cut these books from the body of the
Bible, yet we may not do so without heresy, and accusation of mayming the
holy Scriptures; let them now turn their pens against their own fellows.
Here I might have made an other article of dissension about the corruption of
Scriptures: for Lindanus and other Papists hold them to be corrupt, but the
contrary is learnedly taught by Isacke, and Arrias Montanus, two famous
Hebricians, and by Gods assistance I offer to defend it against all Papists,
that are of another mind. Bellarmines reasons are blown away with a blast.

The 5. Contradiction.
There are so many opinions of Papists about marriage, that they themselves are
uncertain what to hold. This is witnessed by Melchior Canus, lib. 8. cap. 5.
fol. 245. in initio. Lege Magistrum, Diuum Thomam, Scotum, Bonavent. Richard
Paludan. Durandu^, caeterosque scholae theologos, and nisi statim pendentes and
vacillantes eorum animos deprehe^deris, tum vero me aut stultum, aut temerarium
iudicato, nam and cum quaerunt, an matrimonium conferat gratiam, idque eo loco
maxim finiendum erat, non definiunt tamen, sed in his referunt, quae in
hominum opinione posita sunt. In materia aute^, and forma huius sacrame^ti
statuenda, adeo sunt inconstantes, and varii, adeo incerti, and ambigui, vt
ineptus futurus sit, qui in tanta illoru^ varietate, ac discrepantia, rem
aliquam certam, constantem, and exploratam conetur efficere, quod si in forma,
and materia sacrame^ti, etc. Read the Master of Sentences, Saint Thomas,
Bonaventure, Richardus Paludanus, Durandus, and the rest of the school
divines, and if forthwith thou do not find their wavering and doubtful
minds, then judge me either a fool or a rash fellow: for when they dispute
whether matrimony gives grace, that which was especially to be determined,
they do not determine at all, but only make relation of men's opinions, and in
setting down the matter and form of this sacrament, they are so inconstant,
so variable, so uncertain, and doubtful, that he shall be judged indiscreete,
who in such a variety, and descent, goes about to frame any certain and
constant matter. But if they be so doubtful about the matter, and form of the
sacrament, which is a matter of exceeding great moment etc. Thus the Papists
bare witness one against another, concerning their pretended sacrament of
marriage: and whosoever reads Bellarmine, out of this point, tom. 2. shall
find more variety.

The 6. Contradiction.
Peter Lumbard the master of sentences, Lib. 40. did. 18.
teaches that priests only have power to manifest and declare, that men are
bound, and loosed from their sins: and therefore he is reprehended by Doctor
Allen in his book of the power of priesthood. I will set down their masters
reasons: Non ergo postmodum per sacerdotem, cui confitetur, ab ira aeterna
liberatur, a qua liberatus est per dominum, ex quo dixit confitebor, he is not
afterward delivered from aeternall wrath by the priest, to whom he makes
confession, from which he is delivered by the Lord, even then, when he said I
will confess. His syllogism is this.

He that is delivered by the Lord, before his confession, is not absolved by
the Priest.

But the repentant is delivered by the Lord himself before his confession:

Therefore not by the Priest.

Next follows Ambrose his testimony. Verbum dei dimittit peccata, sacerdos,
and iudex, sacerdos quidem officium suum exhibet, sed nullius potestatis ius
exercet. The word of God namely Jesus Christ forgiueth sins being Priest,
and Judge, the Priest indeed does his duty, but he practices not the
right of any power: To Ambrose is adjoined S. Augustins saying. Nemo tollit
peccata nisi solus Deus: no man takes away sin but only God: Afterward in
the same distinction he proves it, because the Lord first cleansed the
Leapers, and then sent them to the Priests. He likewise first raised Lazarus,
and then offered him to the disciples, and in the end after Hieroms notable
testimony he concludes thus, Et in remitte^dis, vel in retine^dis culpis id
iuris and officii habent Evangelici sacerdotes, quod olim habebant in lege
legales in curandis leprosis, The Evangelical priests have that power and
office in forgiving and retaining of siinnes which in times past the legal
priests had in curing of the lepers, now every man knows that they did but
declare them to be healed.

The 7. Contradiction.
Picus Mirandula in his first question about Christ his descent into hell,
affirms that, Scotus in sacris literis non parum exercitatus dicit, quod ex
sacra scriptura non habetur, quod Christus descenderit ad inferos: Scotus being
well studied in the Bible teaches that it is not proved out of the holy
writ that Christ descended into hell: yet it is notorious to see how the
Papists do lustely pull and hayle the Scriptures to prove this matter. The
same Picus in the before named question, brings forth Durandus testimony,
first concerning his learning, and then setting down his words, Videtur quod
Christus secundum animam non de scenderit ad infernum, quia idem finitum non
potest simul esse in diuersis locis, sed anima Christi cum esset creatura
finita, and statim post mortem fuit in paradi so cu^ anima latronis, cui dictum
est Lucae 23. hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, ergo tunc saltem non potuit esse in
miseria. It should seem that Christ in soul went not down into hell,
because the same finit thing cannot be at one time in many places: but the
soul of Christ being a finit creature, was by and by after death in paradise,
with the thieves soul, to whom it was said Luke 23. this day thou shall be
with me in paradise: therefore then it could not be in hell. Again, Quae
Christus fecit, and passus est in natura assumpta, ordinata fuerunt ad salutem
humanam, sed ad hanc non profuisset, quod Christus ad inferos descendisset
quiaper passionem quam Christus in hoc mundo sustinuit, liberauit nos ab omni
culpa and poena. Those things that Christ did, and suffered in his assumpted
humane nature were ordained for man's salvation, but it furthered not this that
Christ went into hell, because by his passion which he suffered in this world,
he delivered us from all guilt and punishment. The conclusion is that Christ
descended not locally into hell, but by operation and effect.

The 8 Contradiction.
Melchior Canus in his 12. book of common places and thirteen chapter, page
450 teaches, that in Christi voluntate intellectuali, (quae proprie voluntas
est) non tristitia modo sed summa and maxima fuit. In Christ's intellectual
will, which is properly will, there was not only sorrow but exceeding great
heaviness: and this he proves thus, In hostia pro peccato potissimum
desideratur voluntatis tristitia, sacrificium quippe deo spiritus
contribulatus, In the sacrifice for sin is desired especially the sorrow of
the will, for a troubled spirit is a sacrifice unto god, his syllogism is this.

Christ offered the most acceptable sacrifice unto God.

But the most acceptable sacrifice to God is sorrow in the will: Ergo

Secondly he proves it because that Jesus Christ did those things for us,
which do especially manifest his love, but herein (namely in suffering in
soul) is his love especially manifested: Ergo, Other reasons for this purpose
are alleged by him, but in the end he concludes, that Christus was
derelictus a deo, omnique penitus destitutus solatio, that Christ was forsaken
of god, and altogether destitute of all comfort. If Galuin had written so, how
should he have been reviled and taunted by the papists? who accuse us of
blasphemy because that we say he suffered in soul. Notwithstanding Ferus upon
the 27. of Math. goes further, and teaches that Christus desperationem piorum
in se recepit, Christ took upon him the despair of the godly. Yet now who
knows not the contrary is held by the papists, namely, that Christus non
grauitate suppliciorum, sed actionum pondere iustitiae divine satisfecit, that
Christ satisfied Gods justice not by sustaining any grievous punishment, but by
the weight or excellency of his actions.

The 9. Contradiction.
Aquinas in his 2. 2 quaest. 91. artic. secundo, responsione adquartum, writes
that, instrumenta musica magis movent animum ad delectationem, quam vt per ed
formetur interius bona dispositio. Instruments of music do rather stir up
the mind to delight, the^ frame any good disposition in it, and answers the
Papists arguments brought for them In veteri Testamento vsus erat talium
instrumentorum, tum quia populus erat magis durus, and carnalis, vnde erat per
huiusmodi instrumenta provocandus, sicut and per promissiones terrenas, tum
etiam quia huiusmodi instrumenta corporalia aliquid significabant. In the old
Testament there was use of such instruments because the people were hard and
carnal, whereby it comes to pass, that they were to be excited by such
instruments, as by earthly promises, and also because such corporal
instruments did praesigne some thing. How this agrees to Bellarmines defense
of them, let the Papists themselves judge. The same Aquinas also in the same
place says, Nobilior modus est provocandi homines ad devotione^ per doctrinam
and praedicationem, quam per cantum. It is a more excellent kind of way to
excite and provoke the people to devotion by doctrine and preaching, then by
singing. And therefore praelati non debent cantibus insistere ne per hoc a
maioribus retrahantur. Prelates ought not to insist in singing least men by
this thing should be drawn from greater matters.

The 10. Contradiction.
The Counsel of Basil 36. sessio: holds that the Virgin Mary was Immunis ab
omni peccato originali, free from all original sin: and forbids all men to
preach the contrary. So do many more Papists hold, yet Aquinas proves the
contrary 3. part. quaest. 27. artic. 2. first because that sanctificatio non
est nisi emundatio a peccato originali, culpa autem non potest emundari nisi
per gratiam, cuius subiestum est sola creatura rationalis. Sanstification is
nothing else but a clensing from original sin, now sin cannot be purged but
only by grace the subject whereof is only a reasonable creature. Secondly
because, sola creatura rationalis est susceptiua culpae, only a reasonable
creature is capable of sin: if Mary had no sin, then she should have
needed no Savior: but Christ saved the people, and therefore Mary. Thus whiles
the Papists pretend to honor Mary, and so Christ, they rob Christ of his
glory, and honor, which is to be Mary's savior.

The 11. Contradiction.
It is held by Papists that in Purgatory satisfaction is made to God for man's
sins but Aquinas tells us the contrary in his supplement, quaest. 5. artic.
3. for being urged by this reason that paena purgatorii ad satisfactoria pro
peccato, sed satisfactio habet efficaciam ex vi contritionis, ergo contritio
manet post hanc vitam: the punishment of purgatory satisfyeth for sin, but
satisfaction has his efficacy from contrition, therefore contrition indureth
after this life. The force of this argument drives him to this answer, paena
illa quam animae in purgatorio sustinent, non potest proprie dici satisfactio
quia satisfactio opus meritorium requirit, the punishment which the souls
sustain in purgatory cannot properly be called satisfaction, because
satisfaction requires merit. But there is no merit in purgatory: therefore no
satisfaction. And if his argument in the same place be good that there is no
sorrow for sins in purgatory, because sacramenta non manent post hanc
vitam, the sacraments endure not after this life. Then is therefore no
satisfaction in purgatory, because satisfaction is a part of their sacrament of
penance, as well as contrition.

The 12. Contradiction.
Aquinas in his third part. quaest. 25. articulo 3. holds that, Imago Christi
est adoranda adoratione latriae. The Image of Christ is to be worshipped with
the same worship that Christ himself: and proves it clarkly (I warrant you)
out of Aristotle his book de memoria. I will not stand to set down his reason
being fully answered by Picus Mira^dula, that great learned man, to whom I
refer the reader concerning this question. The contrary is held by many
Papists, as may be seen in Picus before named, and in Bellarmine himself.
Behold unto what Idolatry Papists are grown, to worship a creature with the
same honor which is due to the Creator himself.

The 13. Contradiction.
In the Censure of Colon we are taught page 89.
a certain vain kind of difference betwixt faith and hope. Faith (says that
Censure) is of general propositions, as, Quicunque crediderit, and baptizatus
fuerit, salvus erit: Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. But
it is not of these propositions: ergo advitam aeternam ingrediar, aut mihi
peccata remissa sunt. I shall enter into life everlasting, or my sins are
forgiven me. page 139.
The Catechism of Colon teaches contrariwise, that ad iustificationem
requiritur, vt singuli credant sibi remissa peccata per Christum: It is
requisite to justification that every one believes that his sins are
forgiven him by Christ; Sermon. 1. de Eunuch.
and proves the same by that excellent testimony of Bernard. It is not
sufficient to believe that thou can not have remission of sins, but by Gods
mercy: and thou can have any good thing except God gives thee it: and that
thou can not deserve eternal life by any works, besides these which are but
initiu^ fidei, the beginning of faith. Hoc etiam addendum, vt credas quod per
ipsum tibi peccata condonentur; this moreover is to be added, that thou
beleeuest that thy sins are forgiven thee by God; and this is the testimony
which the holy Ghost does assure thee of in thy heart, saying, thy sins are
forgiven thee. Out of this testimony of Bernard, we may gather, that to think
of the Popish faith the contrary is constantly maintained by the Papists,
namely, that no man is to believe the forgiveness of his sins, which
doctrine is plainly confuted by their own Catechism, as we said.

The 14. Contradictions.
Spes (says the Master of sentences) est cum fiducia expectatio futurae
beatitudinis, Lib. 3. did. 26
veniens ex dei gratia, and meritis praecedentibus: Hope is an expectation of
the blessedness to come with an affiance proceeding of Gods grace, and our
precedent merits: yet the same Catechism of Colon, page 138. and 140. places
all our affiance in God his merciful promise. But no more of this
contrariety, because I have spoken of it in the reason of dissolute, and
discomfortable doctrine.

The 15. Contradiction.
The same Catechism teaches out of Bernard that we are justified only by
faith, page 141.
hoc est non per merita propria, sed per misericordiam dei, quam sola fides,
accipit, and apprehendit, that is, none by our own merits, but by Gods mercy,
which only faith does apprehend. What Protestant teaches any otherwise?
Bernard his words are these, Quisquis pro peccatis compunctus, esurit, and
sitit iustitiam, Sermon. 22 in Cantic.
credat in te, qui iustificas impium, and solam iustificatus per fidem, pacem
habebit apud Deum. Whosoever is pricked in his heart for his sins, and
hungreth and thirsts after righteousness, let him believe in thee that
justifies the ungodly man, and being justified by only faith, he shall have
peace with God. Here I might have also alleged the testimony of Albertus
Pighius for justification by imputative righteousness. The same Catechism also
fol. 85. teaches that justifying faith is inseperable from hope and charity,
and answers the place of the 1. to the Corinth. and 13. chap. by the
testimonies of Chrysostom, Theophylact, Basil, and Ambrose: how well the
papists agree in these 2. points with this their Catechism, let their own
writings witness.

The 16. Contradiction.
Scotus in the first book of sentences, and 27. distinct. proves that good
works deserve, opera merentur tantum ex pacto, works deserve only by reason
of God his covenant and promise. His argument is this, Meritum non est nisivbi
est dignum: at non est dignu^ respectu intrinsecarum actionu^: there is no
desert but where there is a worthiness: but in respect of our inward actions,
there is no worthiness: ergo. His assumption is thus proved, tunc enim deus
non possit non retribuere beatitudinem, if there were any worthiness in the
works themselves, then God is bound to give unto them happiness and
blessedness: but God is not bound. Ergo. Read Bellarmine in his 5. book of
justification, and thou shall not only find Scotus his opinion misliked,
whose argument is unanswerable, but Durandus also reprehended by Bellarmine,
such is the harmony betwixt Papists in substantial points of religion.

The 17. Contradiction.
Roffensis in his 32. article against Luther, agrees with Luther about venial
sin, namely that none is venial of it own nature, but only by gods mercy,
Quod peccatum veniale solum ex dei misericordia veniale sit, in hoc tecum
sentio: that a venial sin is only venial through Gods mercy, therein I do
agree unto thee. Read more Papists of Roffensis his mind in Bellarmine lib. 2.
de purgat. cap. 4. yet we know that Aquinas and generally all Papists do teach
otherwise.

The 18. Contradiction.
Aquinas in his prima 2. 109. quaest. artic. 6. teaches that man without
grace, cannot vitare peccatum, avoid and eschew sin; and answers three
reasons brought against this opinion. The first reason is thus framed. He that
cannot avoid sin but sins necessarily, sins not at all. The second
argument is this, It followe^h of this opinion that reprehensions are
needless. Thirdly, and lastly Eccles. 15. it is said, that ante hominem est
vita, and mors, before man is life and death. These three arguments are all
answered by Aquinas, and yet they are the papists pillars of free will as every
man knows: if it were needful I might quote the authors that use them.

The 19. Contradiction.
Alexander de Hales part 4. quaest. 24. denies that confirmation was
instituted by Christ: his reasons are these two, Quia Christus quando instituit
aliquod Sacramentum, determinat elementum, when Christ does institute any
sacrament, he determines of the element, and matter of the Sacrament, but he
has not done so in this Sacrament: Ergo it was not instituted of him.
Secondly, in Sacramentis vna forma est, in the Sacraments there is one form of
words, but in this there is not one form of words; for in diverse churches
they have diverse forms: Ergo it was not instituted of Christ. Hence it may be
concluded that it is no sacrament, because all Sacraments were ordained by
Christ Jesus, as Aquinas holds 3. part, quaest. 72. art. 1. resp. adprimum,
where also we may see that some held, (as Alexander de Hales holds) namely,
that it was not instituted of Christ, and by consequent it is no Sacrament.

The 20. Contradiction.
The Contradictions about the Sacrament of the alter, and real presence are so
many, that I will not enter into them, because I eschew tediousness, only I
will set down Aquinas his opinion in his supplement, 83. quaest. art. 3.
responsione ad quartum: namely that on body cannot be locally in two places at
one time, for it implies a Contradiction, but now the Papists care not for
Contradiction: so they may make the body of Christ present locally in the
Sacrament. Many more Contradictions might I have set down, as namely the
certain knowledge that a man is in grace, and such like taught by Papists, but
it shall suffice to have proved that in the weightiest points of controversy
the Papists are on our side. Let them now brag no more of unity, for the
spirit of dissension is sown amongst them. Did ever the Caluinists teach the
weightiest points of popery, as the papists do the greatest opinions of
Caluinisme? I know they do not. Thus leaving this reason to the indifferent
reader to judge of, every man may see what cause there is to disclaim and
renounce the Romish religion.

The twelve reason of the Original of many things taught and held in Popery.
FOr as much as in one of my former reasons I have by sufficient testimonies
proved the practice of the primitive Church to be repugnant to Popery in many
weighty matters, I shall not need to be long in the Original of the Romish
religion; certain it is that it was not all hatched at once, Te^. de p^esc^^p.
and that it it not a thing necessary to show the beginning of every point in
popery, seeing that ipsa Papistarum doctrina cum Apostolis comparata ex
diuersitate, and contrarietate sua pronunciabit, neque Apostoli alicuius
authoris esse, neque Apostolici. The Popish doctrine it self being compared
with the Apostles will by the variety and contrariety that is in it,
pronounce that neither Apostle, nor any Apostolical man was the author of it.
Notwithstanding both because it helps much for the satisfying of some, and
also because diverse abuses are noted by Papists themselves, I will set down
some things concerning the Original of popery: and first hear what
Bucchingerus an arch Papist in his Ecclesiastical history writes, page 217.
Res est plena horroris vel legere, vel meminisse, tantam tyrannidem, inter se
exercuisse mutuo Pontifices Romanos: o quantum degenerarunt a maioribus suis!
and fieri non potuit in tanta crudelitate, vt pietatis Christianae ratio
haberetur ne cui mirum sit interim, siqui abusus and perversae opiniones in
Ecclesiam irrepserunt. It is a thing full of horror either to read or to
remember the great tyranny the Bishops of Rome have practiced one toward
another: o how are they degenerate from their auncestoures! and it cannot be
that in such cruelty their should be had any regard of Christian piety: let no
man then marvel if some abus^s, and badde opinions have crept into the
church. Lo here three things noted by a Papist him self. First the cruelty of
the Romish Bishops, 2. their degeneratio^ from their ancestors, and thirdly
that certain badde opinions by this means are crept into the Church. For
proof of this last point, I will begin with purgatory, because that it has
warmed the popes kitchen. Concerning which let Roffensis a papist speak,
artic. 18. contra assert. Lutheri, fer in ini^sed Graecis etiam adhunc vsque
diem, non creditum est purgatorium esse: legate quicunque velit Graecorum
veteru^ commentarios and nullum (quantum opinor) aut quam rarissimum de
purgatorio sermonem inveniet. Sed neque Latini simul omnes huius rei veritatem
conceperunt, and rursus, non absque maxima spiritus sancti dispensatione factum
est, quod post tot annorum curricula, purgatorii fides, and indulgentiaru^
vsus, ab orthodoxis generatim sit receptus, quandiu nulla fuit de purgatorio
cura, nemo quaesivit indulgentias, nam ex illo pendet omnis indulgentiarum
existimatio. The Greeks to this day do not believe that there is purgatory,
read who list the Commentaries of the ancient Graecians, and he shall find
either very seldom mention of purgatory, or none at all. Neither did the Latin
Church conceive the truth of this thing at one time. And again, neither was
it done without the great dispensation of the holy ghost that after so many
years, Catholics both believed purgatory, and received the use of pardon
generally, so long as there was no care of purgatory, no man sought for
pardons, for of it depends all the aestimation that we have of pardons. Out
of this testimony I gather first that the Greek Church acknowledges no
purgatory. Secondly that the ancient Latin Church did not believe it. Thirdly,
that these opinions grew by little and little in the Church. Fourthly and
lastly that pardons depend upon purgatory, and so are new devises of man's
brain. Therefore let pardons and purgatory pickpurse go. From purgatory I
pass to the Popes primacy, which is an after invention (as I prove out of
Socrates in the 7. book of his Ecclesiastical history, and the 11. chap.)
Episcopatus Romanus non aliter atque Alexandrinus, quasiextra sacerdotii fines
egressus ad saecularem principatum iam erat ante delapsus. The Bishops of Rome
and Alexandria going beyond the limits of priesthood, went into a secular and
worldly dominion. For proof of this, when Victor [as Eusebius writes lib. 5.
cap. 23. Ecclesiastic. histor.] would have excommunicated the Churches of Asia,
he was resisted by Iraeneus. To pass over that, Policarpus would not yield to
Amcetus. We know that before Boniface the first no Bishop of Rome was called
universal bishop. Lastly as testifies (Fasciculus temporum) anno 704, in
Gregory the second his days, Domini Papae plus solito erant in temporalibus,
The popes grew more in temporal matters then they were wont. Thirdly,
concerning ministers marriage, Bucchingerus (before named) says, page 104,
that Calixtus nemini in sacris ordinib. constituto, licere superducere vxorem,
conubialique vinculo se constringere statuit. decreed that no man being in holy
orders, might marry a wife and bind himself with the marriage bo^d. Ioha^nes
Maierius in his book, de differe^tiis schismatum, page 136. professes his
ignorance in this point, namely, who did first prohibit it, yet says, that
some refer it to Calixtus upon these ridiculous, and barbarous verses.

O bone Calixte nunc omnis clerus odit te,
Olim presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti,
Hoc destruxisti quando tu Papa fuisti.
Ergo tuum festum nunquam celebratur honestum.
O Calixtus thou art hated of all the clergy, priests might marry in times
past, which thou did take away being Pope, therefore thy festival day is not
honorably celebrated. O hers refer it to Syricius the Pope: certain it is,
that it was not from the Apostles, (as is proved out of Gratian: part. 1.
distinct. 56. Cenomanensem.) Coniugia sacerdotibus ante prohibitionem vbique
erant licita, and in Orientali Ecclesia vsque hodie licere probatur, Marriage of
ministers was lawful before the prohibition thereof, and in the East churches
they are lawful unto this day. See Polydore Virgill in his fifth book de
inuentoribus rerum, when it was restrained in the West churches. Howsoever it
is not certain who first restrained the marriage of ministers, yet it is
certain that, Calixtus instituit ieiunium quatuor temporum, appointed the fast
of the four times, namely in March, May, September, and December, Bucchingerus
in the same place. Fifthly, Innocentius the first, anno 404. statuit, quod non
solum presbyteri, sedomnes Christiani deberent vngi oleo infirmorum, decreed
that not only Presbyters, but al Christians ought to be anointed with the
oil of the sick. Fasciculus temporum, folio 50. Ergo, extreme unction is no
Sacrament, being invented, and devised by a Pope. Sixthly, anno 654. Festum
purificationis institutum fuit, the feast of the purification of Marie was
instituted. Fasciculus temporu^, folio 55. Seventhly, anno 654. Vitellianus
ca^tum organorum instituit, Pope Vitellian ordained Organes in the church.
Fasciculus temp. fol. 60. Eighthly, anno 614. Bonifacius instituit festum omnium
sanctorum, ordained the feast of al Saints. Fasciculus temp. fol. 58. Ninthly,
anno 484. Festum visitationis Mariae institutum fuit ab Vrbano, The feast of
the visitation of Marie was ordained by Vrbanus. Fasciculus temp fol. 86.
Tenthly, Festi dies instituti sunt a Foelice primo, festival days were
instituted of Faelix the first. Bucchingerus 130. page Eleuenthly, Pelagius
horas canonicas instituit, Pelagius appointed canonical hours. Ide^ page 167.
Twelfly, Gregorius primus Letaniam auxit, Gregory the first increased the
Letanie. Idem page 173. And because I might abound in these particulars, read
this author, and thou shall find the Original, of every thing almost in their
Mass: the worshipping of Images was not concluded (as Alfonsus witnesses)
before the Council of Nice. Transubstantion in the Laterane Council was
determined under Pope Julius. Iuell in the defense of the Apology page 35. the
cupp was taken from the people by the Council of Constance. But these shall
suffice to show the Original of popery: by them every man may judge of the
rest, neither let any man say these are trifles. For the Popes primacie,
purhatorie, marriage of ministers, extreme unction, images, transubstantiation,
and the cup are matters of exceeding great moment. And for a conclusion
(christian Reader) I say with the Orator, in his 2. book de natura Deorum, si
singula haec te non mouent, vniuersa tamen inter se connexa, and coniuncta
mouere debent. If every one of these severally can not move and persuade thee
to relinquish popery, yet all of them joined and coupled together ought to
persuade thee.

FINIS.

