A DISCOVRSE AGAINST FLATTERY.

PER. SAT. PRI. Ne te Quaesiueris extra.

SENECA EPIST. 77. Intus te ipsum considera, non qualis sis alijs credas.

LONDON Printed by Will. Stansby for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard. 1611.

TO THE HONORABLE GENTLEman the Lord Bruce, Baron of Kin^osse.
SIR,
IT is ones proper right to challenge that for his due, for whose sake, and at
whose commandment is was first undertaken: which being granted, this can
rightly belong to none but your self, from whom it first spr^ng, and at whose
desire it was first undertaken. I can promise nothing in the behalf of it, but
as at the first it was the work of your will, so now I refer it to your
judgment. This good office at the least it will perform, either put you in
mind of that you knew before, or else confirm you in that opinion, wherein I
assure my self you are already settled; if it perform any thing more, I shall
attribute it rather to your good nature, and opinion, then to any efficacy in
it self. But howsoever it is, I commit it to you as that which is brought
forth under you protection. Thus wishing but my ability answerable to my will,
that I might do you service, I commit this to you, and you to the Almighty.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I do present unto thee this small treatise, discoursing of a
vice that is now adays so vulgar, usual, and much in request, that it has
almost lost the name of vice, and gotten the reputation of a Virtue: it has
cast off his old name of deceit, and is now covered with the title of Wisdom:
it has quite lost his ancient attribute cousenage, and has gotten it self
graced with the name of Policy. I only desire to bring him to his former
colors again, lest the outside deceive: and I hope you will not blame me, if
perhaps I may discover him, whom you now think to be your greatest friend,
your most dangerous enemy. If you get profit and knowledge by it, I have my
desire: if neither, the time of your reading this Treatise will not be so
long, but that you may return to your flattery again. And thus leaving this
to your consideration, and by this Treatise desiring you to consider of them; I
leave you and them together, still wishing your separation.

A DISCOVRSE AGAINST FLATTERY.
FLattery says S. Ausle^, Tom. 10. Hom. 20.
is fallaci laud seductio, a thing that with over much praising deceiues us,
and causes an ouerliking of our selves, by our selves. And Flatterers are they
that defile the souls, and make a spoil of the goods of those that have to
do with them, such as both in word and deed apply themselves to another
will; that conformity of theirs being falfe and fained, not faithful and
true, but with the only intent to deceive, or receive, and make some profit to
themselves: whom Chrysostom thus defines. Adulatores sunt qui colunt aliquem
vt auferant ab eo aliquid boni Temporarij. Hom. 6. ad Philip. 5.
For when we praise any for that he deserves not to be praised, or more then
he desires to be praised, for some private end to our selves, that is
Flattery, which is Excessus delectandi alios verbis vel factis, An excess in
pleasing both in words and actions, to the end to wind our selves into the
familiarity of those, out of whom we mean to make a commodity to our selves.
This flattery is a sweet poison, a thing that naturally is very pleasant to
us, to hear our selves commended. And the humorist that in this must please
our aims, but be blandus, a smooth enemy, a wolf in sheep clothing, and
therefore the more dangerous, and more need of looking to; for their bait is
mel venenatum and venenum mellitum. This flattery, says one, is nothing else
but false friendship, fawning hypocrisy, dishonest ciuility, base merchandise
of words, a plausible discord of the heart, and lips: he is bleare-eyed to ill,
and cannot see vices, and his tongue walks ever in one tracke of unjust
praises, and can no more tell how to discommend, then to speak truth. His
speeches are wondering interiections, all his titles are Superlatiue, and this
very seldom but in presence, and to very few but such as out of whom he may
suck some commodity. I may therefore say of them as Diogenes did to
Aristippus: Quod diuitum sunt Asseclae. I dare warrant those that have wealth,
have little want of such: For they are shameless creatures, and so base, that
they are more near the nature of beasts then men: and therefore Diogenes knew
no fitter Epithet to give Aristippus then canis Regius the kings Dog. For men
(I might say beasts) of that kind are more fitly to be compared with the
fawning nature of Dogs, then worthy to be honored with the title of men. This
is that which the Prophet calls in the Psalms, Oleum peccatoris: for says
he, Emendabit me iustus and arguet me, oleum autem Peccatoris non impinget
caput meum. Meaning thereby that he had rather be severely corrected, and
reproved by the just man, then praised and commended by the flatterer, who as
Isay says, ^ap. 3.
Felices vos dicunt, and in errorem vos mittunt. You see our Prophet will have
no dealing with these kind of people, but by all means avoid them. Now for such
as are made proud by these Sychophants and Flatterers, it may well be said of
them, Creuit caput, for Impinguatum est oleo peccatoris. And of this unction,
one says very well, Quid est adulatotis vnctio nisi Domorum emunctio? Quid
commendationis allusio, nisi eorum, delusio? Quid laudis arrisio, nisi eorum
derisio? They use much dissimulation, and there is a great difference, between
their countenance, and there will, their words, and their minds, their speech,
and their meaning. For abroad and in their presence, they give great applause
to all their actions with great respect, but secretly they mock and abuse they
with great derision outwardly they show themselves with the face of friendship,
within they have more malice and venime then the stinges of Scorpions. Abroad
they seem to be sowers of peace, but are privately the closest breders of
mischief malice, and detraction in the world. They are like a certain great
man that was very eloquent, and spoke well, but was more in words the^
performance, more flattering the^ bountiful: of whom it was said Quod been
loqueretur, and male faceret, he spoke well, but did ill. And this indeed is
flattery where the tongue and heart do not agree: whose flattering faction and
disposition is excellently well painted out unto us by Martial, Lib. 12. in
Pontilianu^.
in this Epigram.

Mentiris? credo: recitas mala carmina? Laudo:
Laudas? canto: Bibis Pontiliane? Bibo:
Pedis? dissimulo: gemmavis ludere? vincor.
Res vna est sine me quam facis, and taceo.
Nil tamen omnino praestas mihi. Mortuus, inquis,
Accipiam been te: nil volo, sed morere.
In English thus.
Thou lie, yet I believe thee still:
I praise thy rimes, though they be ill:
Thou sing'st, and strait I echo thee:
Each health thou drinkest is pledged by me:
Thou crackst full loud, and sour do vent:
I hear no sound, nor smell no sent.
Playest thou with me at any game:
I purposely do loose the same.
Some tricks there are which thou do act,
I neither do nor tell the fact.
Thou naught auailest me for all this:
Say, when thou die thou will not miss
To recompense me: Therefore I
Will ask but this, that thou would die.
And Terence likewise paints us out his fashion of life, Eunuch Act. 2. Scen. 2.
and means of living as follows.

Omnia habeo, nec quicqua^ habeo, nihil cu^ est nihil desit tame^*
But by what means? He tells you.

Est genus hominum qui esse primos se omnium volunt,
Nec sunt: hos sector. Hisc^ogo non paro me vt rideant,
Sed his vltro arrideo, and eorum ingenia admiror simul.
Quicquid dicunt laudo: i^rursum si negant, laudo id quoque
Negat quis nego: ait ai^ Postremo imperaut egomet mih^
Omnia assentari: is quaest^ nunc est multo vberrimus.
In English thus.
I all things have, where each thing seems scant
Though naught I have, yet nothing do I vant.
By this means.
Some men most complete do themselves esteem
But yet in truth they are not what they seem.
These I observe, yet keep my self thus free,
That sure they shall not fasten jests on me.
I smile at them, and eke their wits admire.
Speak they? it is good, the same that I desire.
If they unsay what they affirmed before,
Its better still, I Will praise them evermore.
Affirm? deny? as they say, so say I,
And this I hold bes^ thriuing Policy.
Lib. 7. cap. 2
Pliny writes that there are a kind of creature called Androgyni, of a double
nature, resembling both sexes, male and female Flatterers are of a double shape
as well as these though not in their body yet in their minds. For sometimes
they are valiant, sometimes cowardly sometimes Philosophers sometimes fools:
sometimes pleasant, sometime^ sad: sometimes friends sometimes enemies. For as
the parties with whom they deal do change, or as their fortunes do change,
so do they. Carisophus Dionysius his flatterer, was of this kind, who seeing
Dionysius in company, laughing, and very merry, he laughed too, though he knew
not the cause. Dionysius perceiving it, asked him why he laughed, because said
he, I think that which moves you to laughter is worth laughing at. And this
for the most part is the sign of a flatterer. Sometimes also it is the mark
of a fool. This flattery is the sweet bait of envy, the cloak of malice,
the great pestilence of the world, a monster ugly to behold if it might be
seen: very dangerous to trust, if it might be known. It has as many heads
as Hydra to invent wickedness: as many hands as Briaraeus, to commit evil: as
many eyes as Argos to behold vengeance: as swift legs as Thalus to go to
naughtiness, entering into every man's house, with a tongue as sweet as honey,
having his heart as bitter as gal, of whom the old Proverb is spoken, Mel in
ore verba lactis, fell in cord, frausin factis. This flatterer is one as Ovid
says, that denies with the negative, and affirms with the affirmative:
weepeth with him that is sad, and laugheth with him that is merry. As sometimes
Clisophus when his master Philip king of Macedonia, and father to Alexander the
Great, halted, because he had the gout, he would halt likewise: and when the
King was merry in his drink, Clisophus would not be sad: and whatsoever
Philip did take in hand Clisophus would maintain. Aristippus the Philosopher
could better please King Dionysius with adulation, then Dion the Siracusan
could pleasure him with Philosophy and truth. Cleo could better accomplish the
desire and lust of Alexander with forged flattery, then Calistenes his
counselor, could prevail with him by his counsel: Who could move Caesar to
any thing so much as Curio the Parasite? not Pompeius his son in law, nor his
only daughter Iulia, nor all the Senators of Rome might make Caesar friend or
foe so much as Curio. These kind of men deal with us, as Achabs false Prophets
dealt with him, for they assured him of great luck, and good fortune to come,
but it fell out otherwise: even so, they use to flatter us, and put us in hope
of very good fortune and success to come, and in the mean while they pass
with silence the truth present. Adulatoris verba, says one, sunt iniquitas and
dolus, The words of a flatterer, are wickedness, and deceit, it is a cancred
disease, and such a one as grows upon us, and though at the first it seem
but little, yet for all that it takes deep hold, and pays us home at the
latter end. These are the Sirens, that with their sweet inchaunting music,
cause some to fall upon Scylla, some upon Charibdis: These are the whores
daughters of Megara, soothing men in their faults, as they did the daughters of
Proserpina. These are the infernal Priests dissuading from all good proposed,
and from all right intended, and from any thing that is pleasing to God: But
contrarily perswaders of all uncleanness, wickedness, obscoenitie and
injustice, and as one says well, Incipiunt a placebo, sed in fine sepeliunt in
peccatis. There are of this wicked crew some sorts, who so they may please,
care neither why nor what they praise. Solomon counts these no fit Company for
us. The wounds of a lover are faithful, Pro. 27. v. 6.
but the kisses of an enemy are to be shunned. He also tells the flatterers
their reward, Pro. 27.14.
He that praises his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning,
it shall be counted to him as a curse. And these flatterers for the most part
use this trade either for hope of favor or gain, and therefore you shall
find the^ most commonly in the company of such men as are in dignity, and
place: wherefore, as one says well, These sort of flatterers are worse then
crows, for they feed only upon dead carrion, but these upon living men. For
as no vermin will breed where they find no warmth, no vulture sleep where
there is no prey, no flies swarm where there is no flesh, no pilgrim creep
where there is no Cross, so there is no Parasite, or flatterer will lurk where
he finds no gain. And in these flatterers you may observe two great faults:
The first is, whatsoever they praise, say, or do, they do it ficte, non vere,
fainedly not from the heart, and therefore they are a dissembling and
unthankful kind of people. Secondly whatsoever they say or do, they do it not
to the glory of God, or good of their neighbor, but to their own private
ends: and in this respect they are servile. And certainly, these kind of people
are most hurtful and wicked: wherefore I could wish that all men were of
Achilles mind who as Homer reports, Hated not the gates of Hell so much as he
did them that spoke otherwise then they think. But what mind soever we are of
we had need thus to hate them: for they are of this nature that though they be
rejected they will please; though they be thrust out of doors they will be
received again: they are such as hang upon us, while our fortunes be good,
but if they change then they leave us, and therefore they are unprofitable, and
wicked companions. Of this sort were the Eunuchs of Iezabel, who whilst she
was in prosperity, 2 King. cap. 9. verse. 35.
served and followed her with great diligence and care; but when she was in
adversity, King Iehu had no sooner said the word, Cast her down, but they cast
her down. They are most diligent obseruers of the time, then to vent their
flattery when men are most likely to give ear unto them, and therefore then
above all times we need to be most watchful over them, for if they take but
the least hold, they will hardly loose again. Dolus (says S. Augustine)
duplicat cor, adulatio duplicat linguam, Tom. 10. hom. 20.
deceit makes a double heart, flattery makes a double tongue: these two in this
vice can not be separated, for where the tongue says one thing and the heart
thinks another, when the heart thinks one thing and the tongue speaks an
other, or as one says well, When the thoughts go West, and the tongue East,
there is the disease. Therefore flattery cannot consist without dissimulation,
nor dissimulation without flattery. Now seeing flatterers are so smooth and
false a kind of people to deceive, and intrappe us, we need to be very
careful in the choice of our company, our friends, and our Counselors, and
to choose such as are Timentes Deum, and veritatem amantes, Fearers of GOD, and
lovers of the truth, such as so desire to please their friends that they may be
thereby profited, and not hurt: such as with the Apostle, Had rather please God
then men. Gal. 1. v. 10
And seeing is is hard to find out such a one, let us follow the counsel of a
wise man, Action in Verre tertia.
Amici tibi sint multi, consiliarius autem vnus, though our friends be many,
let our counselors be but few. And let them be such as are haters of this
detestable vice, which Diogenes calls Lethale mulsum, poison in a cup of
Gold: a beautiful whore fair without, but foul within: and which Tully calls
Mercenarium praeconium. Simonides compares these kind of men to cooks, who do
sweeten with sawces those kind of meats which of themselves be bitter and sharp:
eue^ so flatterers verbis coquinarijs (that I may use the proverb) do sooth us
in those things which indeed ought to be rebuked and reproved, and with their
well cooked and dressed words, do as it were make us to have so good an opinion
of our selves, that we count those things to be virtues in us, which indeed
are vices, and worthy of much reproof: for it is a nurse to sin, and the
practisers of it are hateful, servile, and base. Quintus Curtius says, that
more kings and kingdoms are overthrown by this close flattery then by public
enemies. It is a poison dangerous to every particular person, but indeed far
more dangerous, to the person of a king and state. It is worse then false
witness, for that corrupts not the Judge, but deceiues him only, causing him
to give an ill sentence against his will and judgment; but this corruptes the
judgment, inchauntes the Spirit, and make us unapt to be further instructed in
any good. If the corruption of this vice, once take footing in any great man,
this mischief necessarily follows, that all that live about him, if they
desire to be in grace and favor, must necessarily be flatterers, it being a
thing as pernicious as truth is excellent, for it is the corruption of truth,
and a base vice as ill beseeming a man, as impudencye a woman.

O sucking Serpent of cankred malice, whose best fruit is death and danger. If
king Antigonus had known the flattery of his fained friend Apollophanes he had
not been deceived as he was: if king Astyages had thoroughly known Harpages
his servant, he had not been so shamefully murdered amongst the Parthians. How
did Aeneas the Trojan Prince deceive Queen Dido, but with flattery? How did
Demopon the Grecian beguile Queen Phillis, but with adulation? And how many
such Kings, Queens, and great persons have been allured by this fair speech
and flattery we have it recorded: and that in such it still runs the same
current experience will show. Who murdered Caesar that worthy Emperor in the
Senate house at Rome? Brutus and Cassius those flatterers that he loved most.
Who poisoned that mighty conqueror Alexander in midst of his triumphs at
Babylon? Those that flattered him most, his own cupbearer Iola and his kinsman
Antipater. Who betrayed that famous Roman Cicero unto his great enemy Marcus
Antonius? even Popilius, whom before Cicero had defended and saved from death.
And finally, who betrayed Christ both God and man unto the Scribes and
Pharisees? His own purse bearer that flattering Judas, embracing and kissing him
as flatterers use to do. This flattery was the first vndoer of us al, and the
devil the serpent, put it in ure to deceive Eve: for where is there greater
deceit practiced, then where courtesy is most tendered? where more falshoode
tried then where trust is most reposed? This is our domestical enemy, and it
has a poison, though the poison be hid, for it hurts most where it is least
feared. These flatterers are the greatest nuslers up of pride that can be;
these be they that go under the name of friends, and therefore should be a
means to withdraw us from vice, whereas by their flattring praises they
increase and settle them in us, like those that Ezekiel speaks of, who sow
pillowes under our armeholes, Cap. 13. verse. 18.
and with their fair words and flattering speeches so please us that we may
sin more sweetly. To these as the Prophet says, Cap. 13.18.
so say I, Woe unto them: for as oil cause the fire to flame, so this flattery
does minister nourishment and food unto errors. Wherefore it is very dangerous
to believe a flatterer: for under the person of a sweet friend he is a most
bitter enemy, who increases all vices, and settles them in us, either by
consent, approbation, or extenuation* as calling anger severity* fury: zeal,
rashness: boldness: pride, fortitude: pusillanimitie, humility:
covetousness, parcimony, or the like. These are the chafe that God will
separate from the good corn at the latter day: and these kind of men we need
carefully to avoid as hypocrites, deceivers, and impostures. These are the
devils Angels that can transform themselves into Angels of light; such as
only have the outward show of good, but are most vile, and dangerous. This
flattery has only in the frontispice of it, the name of friendship for it is
only outwardly in show, not inwardly, in the heart. And it is a common
practice amongst them, rather to counterfeit, the^ not to imitate the vices of
those men with whom they have to do. And as tyranny is hidden in the secret
bowels of envy, so is envy cloked under the filed phrase of flattery, and
therefore may be very well compared to the Crocodile of Nilus, or to the Sirens
of the Seas, the one weping and mourning, the other singing and laughing: the
one with moan: the other with mirth study how to annoy us: still conforming
themselves to that which they take, to be most pleasing unto us. And of this
kind were King Xerxes flatterers, who marching toward the Greeks with a huge
army of soldiers, called some of this sort unto him; and demanding of them
what thing was most to be feared in his journey; One says, I do fear that
when the Greeks do hear of your power they will fly and not abide your band:
another said, he doubted all Greece was not able to lodge nor receive them into
their Cities: A third said he feared most that the Ocean was not enough for him
to pass over: A fourth feared the air had not room enough for the arowes, which
they would shoot off. The King by this being extremely puffed up with pride,
demanded at last of a certain Philosopher named Damaserus, what he doubted
most in that war. The thing that I most fear ( says he) is this, thath these
flatterers will deceive you. And this indeed is most certain, for his base mind
is well matched with a mercenary tongue, which is a willing slave to another
man's ear: and cares not how true, but how pleasingly he speaks: his art is
nothing but delightful cosenage, whose tales are smothed and guarded with
perjury, whose scope is to make me^ fools in causing them to overthrow
themselves, still tickling his fre^d til death. This man is a porter of all
good tales, and mends them in the carriage, one of fames best friends and his
own, that helps to furnish her with those things that may advantage her
self. Honestly to him his nice singularity: Repentance, superstitious
melancholy: gravity, dullness: and all virtues an innocent conceit of the base
minded. In short he is the mouth of liberal men's coats, the earewig of the
mighty, the bane of Courts, a friend and slave to the trencher, and a good for
nothing, but to be a factor for the devil: one compares those flatterers unto
Wolves, for as they by tickling and stroking of Asses do use to devour them,
so flatterers by their tickling and smoothing of men in their humors, do draw
them into many dangers and mischiefs. Others compare him to the scorpion, and
some to the Be. To the Scorpion thus: as he goes creeping low and softly, but
strikes with his tail; even so do al flattering, and malicious persons, who
before our faces seem to be lowly and serviceable, but when time and occasion
comes they strike us with their tail, in doing us all the mischief that in
them lies, in laying us open to our enemies, and in disclosing those secrets
which they by their glosing flattery have drawn from us, and the like, and to
the Be they may be thus compared, for as he has mel in ore, in aculeio
caudae vulnus, so they will sweeten their mouth with fair words, when their
heart is stuffed with the poison of malice: which Solomon well notes saying, Pro.
26.25.
A false tongue hates the afflicted, and a flattering mouth causes ruin. For
as Actaeon was murdered by his own Dog, even so they who nourish and make much
of Flatterers are by them undone and overthrown. Wherefore let us follow
Salomons counsel, Pro. 26.29.
Though he speak favorably believe him not, for their are seven abominations
in his heart: for then this there is nothing more dangerous: especially in the
Courts of Princes, for it works deeply under the slew of friendship: therefore
as of this said a father, so may I, Blanda est sed Aspera, dulcis sed Amara.
And where Flattery bears the sway, honesty has no being: It was the only
cause why Pythagoras that noble Philosopher forsook his country Samos: the
only occasion that worthy and learned Solon fled from Athens: The chiefest
matter that made Lycurgus to renounce Lacedaemonia: and the greatest cause that
made Scipio Nasica to forsake Rome. Wherefore this is most, certain where
flattery is esteemed there truth is banished, where flattery is advanced, there
truth is oppressed, and where flattery finds friendship, there truth finds
hate: and seeing this is the chief cause of so many eminent mischiefs, and
dangers that befall us, let us endeavor all our means to avoid them; and pray
with David, Psalm. 28.3.
Not to be drawn away with the wicked and workers of iniquity that speak
friendly to their neighbors, when malice is in their hearts. Therefore where
flattery bears the sway, there expect nothing but danger: for the world is
more dangerous when it flattereth, then when it threatens, and more to be
feared when it allureth us to love it, then when it enforces us to contemn
it. For even as Judas by a kiss betrayed his Master, so the world is a very
Judas it means most falsely when it embraces most kindly. And yet now it has
gotten so much the upper hand of the world, and is a vice so common, that he
who cannot Flatter is either thought to be Envious or Proud. But we if we did
well, we should be so far from desiring to be Flattered, that we should
think it far better to be reprehended by any then commended by a Flatterer,
for you shall never find any honest man fears to be blamed for the truth,
but this take for a general rule that Flatterers seek to confirm and settle
you in errorus: And besides this his false praising, dissembled love and
affection, he does quite subvert nay subdue our minds from the love of truth;
whereby we may find Saint Augustines saying to be true, August. in Psalm. 69.
tom. 8.
Quod plus persequitur lingua Adulatoris, quam manus persecutoris: Which
agrees well with Solomon, who says, Pro. 28.23.
He that rebukes a man, shall find more favor at length, then he that
Flattereth with his tongue; But now the times are come to that ill pass, that
as the comicall Poet does say, Obsequium amicos, Terent. Andria.
veritas odium parit. Flattery procures friendship, but truth hatred. But be
sure of this that by their flattering, and deceitful speeches, they very much
corrupt you, and make you have a marvelous good conceit and opinion of your
selves, for those things which rather deserve reproof, then praise: and yet
we by reason of our weak nature are easily taken with these praises; never
truly considering with our selves what we are, but what we seem to be to
others. Neglecting the truth and carried away with the self opinion of our
selves; seeking as it were testimony of our good parts, not from our own
consciences, but from others reports. And though our own consciences do tell
us, that those things for which we are praised deserve no praise, yet this is
so great an adversary to a good conscience, that when she is about to play her
just part of accusation, he stops her mouth with good terms, and well near
strangles her with shifts; with well painted and dissembled persuasions, for
poison is not given us but in a sweet potion: We like well to be praised, but
it would be far better if we would seek to deserve those praises. What was
it that made Ptolemaeus to put on the masque, or as it were the habit of a
piper? What was it that caused Nero Caesar, to mount up the stage and act
Tragedies with a visard on his face, and buskins on his legs? was it not the
praise of Flatteries? If he be drunken you honor him with the name of Bacchus,
the God of wine: and if he do but wrestle or try any feats of actiuity, they
style him with the glorious addition Hercules. What think you? are you not
persuaded that by this gross flattery, men are brought to great dishonor and
shame: yes certain, it is the only way to cast us headlong into mischievous,
sinful, and ridiculous actions: for we suffering our selves to be flattered,
and that once taking hold of us, our estate is so dangerous, that we are made
certainly to believe and make account of our chiefest vices, as our greatest
virtues: and account virtue to be vice: so that it is impossible for any good
man to win his favor; from whence as I said before, this Proverb comes:
Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. The reason is this, by reason that now
we for the most part do seek such as please our humors and blame us least, and
contemn the other, for he always praises his Lords vice with resemblance of
some virtue near unto it: but the true friend never seeks to smooth up our
faults, but lays them open unto us, thereby that we might more easily see our
vices, and amend them. Happy are they that have such friends, and they most
unhappy that give ear unto these false deceauers: Wherefore we need to
withstand it in the beginning, for it is so dangerous that whomsoever is
willing to be soothed up, it hurts not only for the present, but leaves the
relikes and remainder of it in our minds, that although they be gone from us,
yet still the ill remains with us, like them who hear Music, though that be
ended, yet carry with them the harmonious sweetness of the sound, that takes
impression in their minds even so the wicked and flattering praises of
flatterers, remain longer with us then the time of our hearing them: and as it
is not easy to put out of our minds a sweet and pleasant sound, and although
sometimes we forget it, yet oftentimes it comes into our head again: so
fares it with flatterers, we should therefore be deaf to their ill voices,
and avoid them in the beginning. We had all need to be careful of this, both
fathers and children: for they waying the old age of the one, and youth of the
other, present to both by their lewd and wicked counsel, an inevitable bait,
namely pleasure, wherewith for the most part they are sure to be caught: and
seeing that if it once but take hold, it is so dangerous, and if so dangerous
to all, then in a far greater measure more dangerous to youth: therefore all
fathers need to be most careful in the bringing up of their children, to keep
such out of their society and company; for there are no kind of men do more
hurt to them then these flatterers. Fathers exhort their sons to sobriety:
these to drunkenness: Fathers persuade to labor and travel; these to play and
idleness: Fathers persuade chastity and co^tinency: these provoke lust and
looseness of life: Fathers persuade sparing and thriftinesse: these spending
and wastfulnesse: And thus you see how Fathers good hopes are bereaved by these
wicked and cursed generation; Hypocrites pretending friendship, but full of
false and deceiptfull dealing* those as sooth and flatter the rich, contemn
and despise the poor: such as are so base that though they be free borne, yet
choose voluntarily to be slaves: Therefore all fathers shall do well to keep
their children from these, who are enough to corrupt, mar, and spoil the best
natures in the world: a people that are hurtful and dangerous to al sorts of
men, deceiving the credulous, and back biting the absent. They are the only
snare that wiseme^ are deceived with al; I now speak not of the palpablest sort
of flatterers, but they who make lest show of it to them are most dangerous:
Such as cloak their flattery under show of friendship, as in provocation of
mirth, officiousnes in our business, and in conformity of manners: all which in
a true friend are tokens of friendship and love, but in him are only the
shadows of friendship and love, that he may thereby the more cunningly and
craftily deceive those he has to do withal. These kind of men are like the
Dog of a certain shepherd, who was set by his Master to keep sheep, and
before him seemed to be very careful in the looking to them, and therefore by
the shepherd was kept very well to the end he should not need to feed upon
his sheep, and by him was put only in trust: and yet for all this the dog at
his fittest time killed, and stale the sheep; The sheep heard at last found it
out, and threatened to kill his dog; who thus pleaded for himself, saying, you
will not hurt, me for I am one of your household servants, you should rather be
revenged of the wolf, that continually does you this hurt and damage: Nay
(quoth the sheepeheard) I think you more worthy of punishment then he, for he
professes open war unto me, but you under pretext of love and friendship,
continually decrease my flock. By this fable you may see that they far more
deserve to be punished, who hurt us under show of love, then they who denounce
public enmity unto us: the one we know his ill mind unto us, but the other we
take for our friend, though indeed he be far otherwise, and comes no more
near it, then like glass a thing of no regard, which resembles crystal a
matter of great worth; so he by his flattery which is vile and wicked, only
imitates friendship which is precious and dear: and now the reason why
flattery is so hardly discerned is this because that in every motion of the
mind it is glosingly entermingled with friendship, though if you truly unmask
him they have no resembla^ce. And yet for all this it is strange to see how
wonderfully wise and great men are overcome by this and deceived. As for
example Nero, who when Tyridates his enemy and Prince of Armenia, was conquered
by Corbulon, and brought unto him; He falling down upon his knees, said, I
Tyridates nephew of Arsacus, and brother to King Vologesus and Pacorus am your
servant and came hither to worship you my Lord and God as the Sun: for you
are my fate and fortune. This his flattery did so far work with Nero, that he
did not only restore him to his former Kingdom, but also sent him away laden
with many gifts, which as my author says, amounted to the sum of two
million of crowns. Xiphilinus.
Thus you see that these flatterers as they are hurtful to all, and profitable
to none, yet of all sorts of men most dangerous to Princes, and yet by them
chiefly accepted. For these great men, it now adays being such a means to get
credit and preferment, shall have their kinsfolks, friends, and principal
officers, who profess this mystery, and such as they could not well avoid if
they would. By such as these was Alexander that great King and Philosopher
deceived, for by these they are so assaulted, that though they withstand it,
yet it pleases, and though they oppose themselus against it, yet they ca^
hardly shut it out of doors, Vnde saepe exclusa nouissime recipitur: but now
these great persons are so far from avoiding it, that whatsoever they do they
will do it uncontrolled, and whatsoever comes into their heads, they will
headlong go through with all, and whatsoever they do by these flatterers, you
are sure to be soothed up, so that these are his only companions, counselors
and friends, and none but these or such as these, custom has brought him to
that habit, that he will endure to have about him: who under the shape of
humanity bear sway and rule, for who is now more made off then he that ought
least to be esteemed? Who is now more trusted then he that deceives soonest?
Who is heard more at all times, then he that ought least to come in sight at
any time? who has more of all men then he that deserves least of all men? and
to conclude, who is more beloved in every place then he that ought most to be
hated in all places. The Medes and Persians, who kneeled unto Alexander, and
made him the son of Jupiter, were more esteemed for their flattery, then the
nobles of Macedonia for their truth. These kind of men are not only dangerous
to great men, but women also had need to have an antidote against them: for to
them this is exceeding dangerous, and no more ordinary way to corrupt their
chastity the^ by this means, by feeding and entertayning them with the
commendation of their personage, beauty, behavior, discourse, or the like: for
they by their natural inclination are full of vanity, and desirous of praise.
Moreover what has done greater hurt to commonwealths, then these flatterers?
therefore these generation of vipers ought to be extirped and rooted out. The
City Troy which Agamemnon, in ten whole years could not subdue, poor Sinon
with his flattery allured the mind of King Priamus, deceived the Nobles, and
intised the Citizens by his adulation, to their utter confusion and ruin:
That ancient and renowned City of Babylon, when King Darius with all the
power of Persia, long wars, loss of men and his own strength and force, was
not able to vanquish any part of it, then Sopyrus a Citizen borne, through
forged faith and filed flattery, betrayed the City unto king Darius; That
famous City of Olinthus which the puissant Prince Philip of Macedon, could
never destroy, yet Lasthenes with flattery overcame and gave them to their
enemies hands King Philip. To speak of the most ancient Lacedaemonians for
their wars, the most famous and worthy people of the world, whom neither Medes,
Persians, Macedonians, nor all Greece, could vanquish before, are now deceived
by the flattery of Phrenitius. The people of Samos were deceived by false
Apollonius: Menelaus was beguiled by the flattery of Paris: Dion of Syracusa
was slain by his flattering friend Calicrates: Thus you may see how flattery
and adulation is to Princes, and Provinces, utter ruin, desolation, and decay.
By flattering of the Prince, they lead and keep him in his vices and errors,
to his great shame: by flattering of the people they make themselves popular,
and so by that means strive to devise a way, to set themselves up, by the
deposing of their lawful Prince: Therefore Princes need to be very careful,
neither to suffer flatterers about themselves: nor allow any to make themselves
popular by flattering of the people. What a shame was it think you to Edward
the second, to suffer such a base fellow as Pierce Gauestone, wholly to rule
and govern him? what credit was it for the same King to suffer himself to be
led away to all wickedness, by two lewd and wicked fellows, Spencers, both
the Father and the Son? But Princes must have a double care, not only to
keep themselves from being flattered, but their people also: and to observe
who seek popularity of their people, for this is a true maxim, that
whatsoever subject does seek popularity does never desire it with any good and
honest intent. What was Absolons means in his treason against his father, was
it not his making himself popular, by flattering of the people? if you read
the story you will say so: 2. Samuel cap. 15. From the second Verse to the
sixth.
Verse. 2. And Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the entering in of the
gate, and every man that had any matters came to the King for judgment. Him
did Absolon call unto him and say, Of what City art thou? And he answered, thy
servant is of one of the Tribes of Israel. 3. Then Absolon said unto him, See,
thy matters are good and righteous; but there is no man deputed of the King to
hear thee. 4. Absolon said moreover, Oh that I were made Judge in the land,
that every man which has any matter or controversy, might come to me, that I
might do him justice. 5. And when any man came near unto him and did him
obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him and kissed him. 6. And on this
manner did Absolon to all Israel that came to the King for judgment: so
Absolon stole the hearts of the men of Israel. What was it that raised Caesar
to that great height and dignity that he was in? Suetonius reports, that it was
by his exceeding great popularity, in winning the hearts of the people. What
was it that set up Henry Bullingbrooke in stead of the lawful King? Was it not
his flattering and soothing up of the people? What was it that set up Richard
the third, that Tyrant and usurper? Was it not his flattering, and pleasing of
the people? the like being done by his friends, the flattering Oration of the
Duke of Buckingham, and a Sermon of Doctor Shawe.

Thus you see you shall hardly find any treason either against Prince, or
State, but this was the chief way and means: and this being so dangerous; as
I said before, so I say again, every King that desires his safety, need to
be as careful as he can, not to suffer any subject to make himself popular,
by flattering of the people. How dangerous this is to all estates, Prince and
people, Country and City, man and woman, it has already been showed:
therefore we had all need to take very good heed in avoiding them; which if
we have an open ear, is hard to be done, for then we are sure to be
catched. And of this indeed we need to be most careful: for, Ovid. Eleg.
as the Poet says, Vile poison lurketh under the sweetest Honey. And if we do
not avoid them in time, they will so increase upon us, that when we would we
cannot: and yet for all this, we still love to be flattered, and still are more
desirous of commendations by others praises, then to deserve them in our own
conscience. And if yet we will not leave these flatterers, we shall in time be
made such fools, as to think our selves worthy of those praises vhich are so
unjustly laid upon us. And therefore by how much the greater we be, the more
need we have to look into and avoid these Flatterers, and with a deaf ear
to sail besides their songs, as the entisements or dangerous Rocks of
Sirens, which ascrib those things unto us that we neither ought to take nor
deserve, then which there can be nothing more pestiferous to great men:
wherefore we should rather hear those that admonish us of our duty, and put
us in mind that we are but men, which is the part of a true friend, then to
lend our ears to such impostors and deceivers as these, who as Solomon says,
Pro. 20.19.
Goes about as a slanderer, and discovers secrets, therefore meddle not with
him that Flattereth with his lips; We had need follow this counsel of
Salomons, for their only Art and cunning is to deceive the rich, and contemn
the poor. Now they who for all this will still take delight to hear
themselves Flattered, I can say of such no otherwise then Saint Ambrose speaks
of them, Ignauiae videtur, Off. lib. pr. cap. 42.
it shows they are of sluggish and effeminate spirit. But now above all times
we need to be most careful in taking heed to them, for they are come to
that excellency in their profession, that they will color their Flattery so
with the show of friendship, they will usurp the Offices, the voice, nay even
carry the name and counterfeit of Amity so artificially, that you will say it
is the same they study to content and please, to honor, commend, and
acco^modate themselves to the humors of men; nay it takes upon it the highest
part of friendship, free reprehension. He will seem to exceed in love to him
he flattereth, whereas indeed there is nothing more opposite to love, not
injury, not professed enmity, not detraction, it is the plague and poison of
true amity, and therefore avoid it: it has with it these companions, hatred,
deceit, treachery, lying, cousenage and hatred of honesty. Wherefore we should
have our cares shut to these Flatterers, and as the ancient wise men did
bar such from the company of Princes; so we should bar them our company,
and follow S. Ambrose his counsel, Offic. lib. 1.
Neque adulantes nos, nec adulandos cuiquam exhibere, alterum enim calli
ditatis est vanitatis alterum. Let us neither Flatter, nor suffer our selves to
be Flattered. For the one is sign of craft, the other of folly, and what a
happy man is he that neither Flattereth nor is Flattered, deceiues nor is
deceived; neither does hurt, nor receives hurt? Happy indeed shall we be if
we understand this, more happy if we repel it, most happy if we be of Saint
Austines mind, not to think those happiest, who have most praises, but those
who deserve those praises. But now that we do not in seeking to avoid
Flatterers, reject friends, or in hoping to get a friend entertain a
Flatterer, Let us consider how they may be discerned the one from the other.
The first thing, the Flatterer does is this, to insinuate himself into the
council and affairs of him whom he Flattereth, and as much as lies in his
power, to keep him from being inward with any other, and to have none about
him, but such as are of his own stamp, void of all honesty: and then as a
shadow follows a man continually, whatsoever he does, so will he follow and
affect, whatsoever it be that his Lord applies himself unto. He has salues
for every sore, to hide them, not to heal them, Complexion for every face,
Sin has not any more artificial Broker, nor more impudent Baude, there is no
vice has not from him, his color, his allurement. And his best service is
either to further guiltiness, or smother it. If he grant ill things
inexpedient, and to be errors, he has yielded much. Let his friend say it is
hot, he wipes his forehead and vnbraceth himself; if cold, he shiuers and
calls for a warmer garment: when he walks with his friend he swears to him,
that no man else is looked on, no man talked off. That whomsoever he vouchsafe
to look and nod to, is graced enough, and that he is ignorant of his own
worth lest he should be too happy; Whatsoever he says he yeeldes, give his
consent and approbation, though it be to things that are out of his own
belief. Thus by all these things before specified, you may find him to be a
Flatterer, who as Suidas says, is full of deceit, avarice, and a great enemy
to all Religion, and especially to Christianity: and that you may the better
discern him, do but observe, first whether those he commend be present, or
absent; you shall find him always pleasing before your face, never commending
the absent, but for the most part backe-biting and slandring them. Secondly, do
but observe whether those things which he approues so much in us, he allow
in himself, or not; if you set any other then your self to ask him, you shall
find that he is of a clean contrary mind, unless he know that he be set on
by your appointment. Thirdly, observe whether the praises they bestow upon you,
for such, and such things, they only give to you and no others, or to you and
all others; you shall find that those things they commend you for, they will
discommend in others, and those things they commend in others, they will
dislike in you. Fourthly, observe whether whatsoever we say or do, they hold
the same opinion; and for that give us praises and commendations, and you shall
find that let us now say or do one thing, we shall have their praise and
commendation for it; and sometime after let us be of a quite contrary opinion,
or do quite contrarily, we shall still have their commendations: And lastly,
but look into your own consciences, you shall find that those things for the
which they so higly extol you, are vile and wicked, and such things as,
notwithstanding their commendations, you often repent and are ashamed of.

Moreover these Flatterers usually set themselves to follow such as are great
in the time, with such you shall find him always: and though perhaps before
he were a follower of this man's greatest enemy, yet if he see this man's
fortune to go higher and that any thing is to be gotten by leaving his old
friend, he will not only leave him, but turn to his enemy, and do him all the
mischief that he can: but for his new great Master, whatsoever he either
likes or dislikes, approues or disauows, loves or hates, he is of the same
mind. Again, at any public Assembly, where many are to speak of some one
matter, whatsoever the flatterer speaks, it is to please some private person,
not for the public profit; making sure that his great Master shall have first
spoken, that he may be sure not to differ from him, but that whatsoever he has
spoken, be it good or badde, may by him be applauded: and if that in any thing
that he has spoken before, any thing has slipped from him that has not
pleased, he thanks his Reformer, and his note is quite changed; and as it were
out of his great love will extol this man beyond measure, for things that
peradventure deserve reproof: and do like him that went about to persuade
Justinian the Emperor, that he should never die, but be carried to heaven with
his natural body in the flesh. Or like Varus Seminus the great Orator, who
amongst many other his flattering speeches to Augustus, said, that they who
called him Caesar* knew not his greatness; and they that called him not
Caesar, were ignorant of his humanity. This man you shall always find to be in
a uniformity with all your conditions; do you but sometimes alter your course in
show, you shall find him to go as the wind does lie; and if you change into
forms never so contrary, he will change too; for he has no uniform aequality
in all his actions and intentions, because he has no permane^t seat of his
manners, no settled opinon in any thing, because he has wholly set himself
over to content and please others; no uniform course of life, because he is
never like himself, but variable and changeable from one form to another. But
this is somewhat open and plain flattery, and therefore does the less hurt,
because it is sooner found out and avoided. But there are other flatterers more
cunning, and therefore more dangerous. For plain flattery is easily
discerned, as plainly to affirm or deny, according as another does the same;
so that any may see this fellow plainly, when perhaps he cannot discern the
other, who when he flatters seems to reprove, and when he most flatters
seems to be most opposite against it: therefore this fellow we had need to be
most careful of, and to search narrowly into all his shifts, and devices, lest
he deceive us. Of this sort was Agis Argiuus, a cunning flatterer, who seeing
Alexander to bestow great gifts and rewards on a certain ridiculous fellow,
exclaimed that it was a very absurd thing for Alexander to bestow gifts on
such a fellow as this; Alexander hearing his voice, demanded what he said?
Indeed (says he) I must needs confess, that I cannot endure to see, that
all ye that are descended from Jupiter should be so much delighted and taken
with flatterers. For as Jupiter had Vulcan for his fool, and Hercules
Cercopes, and Bacchus took great delight in Syllanus, even so, such as these
are in account, and respected by you. Tacitus also recites a very good example
of a flatterer in this kind: Tacitus.
Tiberius the Emperor coming into the Senate, there rose up a certain
flatterer, who said, it was fit that every one should speak freely, and in
things belonging to the Republique, no man ought to hold his peace. Tiberius
and all the rest expected what he should say; Hear (says he) Caesar, a thing
that we much blame in you, though none dare confess it openly: you spend your
self too much for us, wearing your body with daily and nightly labors, in
cares for the Republique, never respecting your own health and safety, but our
good and profit. This kind of flattery, which comes so near to the color of
franckenesse and liberty of speech, is indeed most dangerous. For who knows
not that franknesse and liberty of speech is a remedy against flattery? and it
that which should be remedy against it, be used as a means to flatter withal,
it cannot be but very dangerous, and these that do thus, if they find out
any petty faults, they keep a great coile, and cry out against us for them,
but if we have never so many great and gross faults those they wink at.
Which kind of flattery as Plutarch says, Plutarch.
may very well be compared to Hercules in a play with his great club, which
shows to be heavy and massy, though indeed it be but light and filled with
nothing but wool, or such like stuff. Even so this kind of free speech which a
flatterer uses, will be found to be light and of no force to give a blow: as
for example, if your clothes be not of the new fashion, or your beard not of
the new cut, your band not stiff enough, your pecadill ill made, your cloak
not brusht, or the like, here they will find great fault with you, for
neglecting your self, that have so handsome and proportionable a body, being so
careless to set it forth. But say that a man should set naught by his parents,
neglect his children, abuse his wife, despise his kindred, spend wastfully and
consume his goods, none of all these would touch or move him, here he is mute
and has not a word to say, these he will take no knowledge of nor reprove:
and amongst these sort of flatterers they are most cunning, who reprove men for
the contrary vices to those that are in them, and so still feed them in their
own: as to a miser, if they can by any means spy any spark of spending, for
(as the Proverb says) Whose feast so great as a misers? presently with great
ferue^cy they blame him, for his great spending and prodigality, and for that
he has so little care of his own estate. To a sla^derer whose pleasure and
delight is (through spite and envy) to backe-bite and wrong his neighbor, if
so be that at any one time he chance to commend some worthy person, they
presently in a great seeming rage say thus unto them, This is a fault you ever
have, to co^me^d persons of no worth: why should you commend him, what good
have you ever received by him, or what good parts do you know in him? and the
like; again, if there be any variance between friends, brethren, or
kinsfolks, they seek not to appease or remedy it, but still stir the coals,
saying thus, It is well enough, you will never see nor know who you are, you
are the cause of all your self, self do, self have, you were always so
pliable and so submisse toward them, that you are now but right served. And
thus after this manner, those vices that we have inhabitant within us, they
seek to ingraffe and settle for ever removing. There are some other flatterers
as cunning in their kind as these, some will not praise a man himself, but
inue^t some good thing, which he faines he heard some body speaking of him
abroad, which he will say he was very glad to hear, herein imitating the
Rhetoricians, who many times in their Orations use the third person for the
first; another will invent some ill which he faines he heard spoken of you,
which when he tells you, you knowing it to be untrue, and denying it, then he
takes liberty to praise you, falling into your commendations, showing how far
you ever were from such and such vices, as he reports you were taxed withal;
others if a man be given to any vices, they will not commend them, but approve
them by disco^mending the contrary virtues, as calling temperance rusticity,
and such as live within their estates misers; and so forward toward the
maintayning of any vice, they think a man has a mind to. One that is well
conceipted of himself and his own judgment, thus they assail. They will
make an errand to him for his counsel in some weighty affairs or business of
theirs, as esteeming his wit and judgment far above their own, and his
opinion being heard, be it what it will, he will fall into admiration of him,
preferring his counsel and opinion before any that he has heard. But if a
man suspect this in any one, the way to find him out is this, to give him some
absurd counsel, and he shall find he comes prepared to commend it whatsoever
it be. Therefore, all these flatterers let us avoid, and be careful in the
choice of our friends, lest in stead of an honest friend, we find a false
flatterer, and that we be not deceived, let us observe the difference betwixt
them both. Friendship takes no pleasure to be employed in ill and dishonest
actions, but in any thing that may be for the profit and good of his friend,
none so willing as he. But the flatterer is quite contrary, whose friendship
is far worse then open enmity, for from them we may get or gain something,
but from the flatterer nothing is to be gotten, but reproach, mischief, and
damage. Therefore, it is not good to keep such friends as shall raise
themselves by our fall and hurt, nor such as love our meat and means in a
higher degree then they love our selves; for none of these sort longer then our
purse persuades them, will be your friends. But he that is a true friend has
his affection grounded upon love and virtue, and no waves of contrary ill
fortune will alter or stir him; Where as the flatterer leaves us in the lurch,
flies to our adversaries, and commonly is the chief cause of our ruin and
destruction. Again, a true friend imitates not all he sees his friend do,
nor commends any thing but that which is good, whereas a flatterer contrariwise
like a Camelion that can turn himself to all colors but white, can frame
himself to any thing but good. A friend orders and frames all his actions to
the good of his friend, but a flatterer bends all his actions to his own proper
good. A true friend modestly blames his friends vices in his presence, and
praises his virtues in his absence; but a flatterer always exaltes him in his
presence, rather for his vices then his virtues, and behind his back blames
him, and defames him, makes his vaunts that he only possesses him, gouernes
him at his pleasure and makes him do what he will. The true friend serves for
a healthful medicine, but the flatterer is as a sweet poison. A true friend
preserues a man in his estate and wealth, but a flatterer precipitates him to
ruin and destruction. Flattery for the most part respects it own particular
benefit, and thereby is known, but friendship seeks not the good of it
self. The Flatterer is diverse in his judgments, like wax or a looking Glass
that receives many forms, he is a Camelion, a Polypus, feign to praise, or
dispraise, always commodating himself to the mind of him he Flattereth; A
friend is firm and constant, a Flatterer vexes himself too violently in all
that he does in the view and knowledge of him he Flattereth, ever praising
and offering his service, Non imitatur amicitiam sed praeterit, he has no
moderation in his outward actions, and contrariwise inwardly he has no
affection, which are conditions quite contrary to a true friend. A flatterer
always gives the victory to him he Flatters, always applauding having no
other end then to please, whereas a true friend respects not so much, how he
may please as how he may profit: A friend always respects, procures, and
attempts that which is reason, honesty and duty. The flatterer that which
belongs to passion, and pleasure, and that which is already a malady in the
mind of him that is flattered, therefore he is a friend to licentiousness, and
an enemy to all plain dealing and honesty. Every man by nature has these two
parts within him, the one part is given to truth and honesty, the other to
untruth and withal passionate, the true friend ever assisteth the better part
in giving counsel and comfort, the Flatterer applies himself to the other
part, which is void of reason, and full of passion, still feeding and pleasing
it by devising some vicious and dishonest pleasures, that they quite divert it
from the rule of reason, and they are like some kind of meat, which neither
breeds good blood, nor engenders spirits, nor adds vigor nor strength to
any man, but all the good they do, is either to provoke lust, or breed some
fogges and rotten humors, that are neither fast nor sound: So if a man look
narrowly to a Flatterer he shall never find any good to com from him, but find
them to be sowers of dissensio^, breeders of envy, exasperaters of men to
lewdnes, nursers of prodigality, perswaders to diffidence, and distrust in our
friends, to base and servile timiditie, always making us worse, and apt to
conceive ill, still soothing us up in our own ill humors. Art thou angry with
one, punish him says he; have thou a mind to any thing, buy it and no more a
do: Desire thou this or that wench, spare no cost for her says he, win
her and wear her. Suspectest thou any thing believe it confidently says he:
And thus he behaues himself still soothing us in those things, that we have
but the least inclination unto. For the Office which a Flatterer seems to
perform, has in it nothing true, nothing just, nothing simple, nothing
liberal: for it desires only to be employed in shameful and dishonest
actions; friendship only in honest ones; a Flatterer seeks to pleasure us in
those things that are unjust: And thus you see a man cannot both be a friend
and a flatterer, that is as much as if I should say a friend and no friend, for
one friend is to stand to another, to assist him in doing and not in misdoing;
in consulting and not in complotting and conspiring; In bearing witness with
him of the truth, and not in circumuenting one of falsehood: to take part with
him in suffering calamity, and not to bear him company in doing of injury.
But before I go farther I must answer two Objections: The first is, whether it
be impossible to praise without Flattery, and whether it necessarily follows,
that all praysers consequently must be Flatterers. The second is, an answer
to an Objection to those who think it lawful to Flatter, because they think
it is no sin, and if they should advantage themselves and sin not they see
no reason why they should not use it. But first to the former Objection,
whether it be impossible to please without Flattery: This is my opinion; that
if we truly and moderatly commend any for those things which justly deserve
praise: our praises tending to the glory of GOD: or good of him that is
praised: that the virtue for which he is commended may increase in him: or for
the encouragement of those that hear to the like virtues: and not for any
private end or profit to our selus: He I say that praises thus and with these
cautions cannot be termed a Flatterer: For thus Saint Paul commendes the
Thessalonians, Colossians, Philippians, and Ephesians; And as Saint Paul did it
to their good and Gods glory. It was Charity, not Flattery, it was the mark
of true friendship, and not of fained love. The second is to resolve the
Question whither it be a sin or no: for if it were one, why does S. Paul
say, Give no offense, etc. even as I please all men in all things. 1. Cor.
10.32.33.
Seeing that to please all men in all things, cannot be without Flattery: and
if it be not a fault to dispraise an ill man, why is it not good to commend a
good man? To these it may be answered, that neither to praise nor to please in
themselves are Flattery, but may be made so by their ends and circumstances,
and so S. Paul expounds himself in the latter end of this verse, meaning that
he would have us please all men in every lawful thing, seeking not thereby
our own glory and profit, but the glory of God, and good of our neighbor:
And if we do thus neither pleasing nor praising can be called Flattery, more
then the just reprehension of him that is faulty, can be called detraction.
And now to return again as I have said before, that nothing is more dangerous
to a Prince and State then these deceivers, it will not be amiss a little to
show unto you the curiosity of wise men in ancient time for the abandoning
and punishing of these Flatterers, to the intent that they might be safe, and
for the safety of their Countries and states. Wherefore I would all Princes
and Potentates would say unto Flatterers as Christ did to the devil, Avoid
Satan, so they, Auaunt Flatterers. And to proceed to tell you how many great
and good men had diversely used diverse means to avoid these, it would ask a
far larger discourse, but a few I will now name to encourage others by their
example to do the like; Some have punished them by banishment, so did Augustus
Caesar, and Alexander Seuerus, who were so strict against Flatterers, that if
any (though he did but extraordinarily bow himself) or used the least
flattery toward them, they were by them presently commanded to be banished,
and thrust out of doors.

The Lacedaemonians no less strict in this point, so much feared flattery, that
they banished Archilogus for his eloquence, only in a book he had made. This
vice also was so hateful in Rome that Cato the Censor expelled thence certain
fine Orators of Athens, lest with fair speech and flattery, they should annoy
the State of Rome. Sigismond the Emperor to one that extremely flattered him,
gave a box on the ear. Why smite you me, says the flatterer? Why bite you
me, says the Emperor? There was a certain Nobleman of Moscouia, who for some
crime being imprisoned, in hope of his pardon and delivery, fained that he
dreampt the King of Poland to be taken prisoner, and brought captive to the
Duke of Moscouia. The Duke hearing of this, and knowing it proceeded from his
intention to flatter him, commanded he should be kept more close prisoner,
til he saw the event of his dream. Suetonius reports, that Caligula calling
home a certain man banished in Tiberius time, giving him his liberty, demanded
of him what he did all the time of his banishment? I did nothing (says he)
but pray that Tiberius might die, and you succeed. For this his flattery the
Emperor commanded, he should presently be put to death. After this sort David
punished the young man that brought news of Saul and his childrens death; who
desiring to flatter King David, was by him commanded to be put to death.
Wherefore if Princes will avoid these their vndoers, let them show how little
they desire their praises, and what small confidence they put in them; as
Canutus King of this Island did; who, as Polidor Virgil reports, Lib. 8.
walking not far from Southampton, and having his soldiers about him, they
applauded him, calling him King of kings, commander both of Sea and land: the
King amazed at this flattery, and being willing to show how little he was
addicted thereunto, commanded himself to be stripped, and sat down close to
the water, saying unto the waves, I charg you touch not my feet; they after
their ordinary course, beat upon the shore, and washed him. He presently came
back, and said, You call me King of kings, and Lord of Sea and land, and yet I
cannot command these waves from touching me. Wherefore you see it is no
mortal that deserves that title, but only God, by who^ all things are
governed: Wherefore him alone let us worship and praise, who is indeed King of
kings, Lord of Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, and every thing, and let us confess
him alone to be, and besides him profess no other. To such as these Homers
verse would be a good Antidote: Nullum ego sum numen. quid me immortalibus
aequas?

For indeed if we observe the end of a flatterer, he never cares how falsely
or unjustly he praises you, so he may please and gain well. Such as these were
the flatterers of Alexander the great, who persuaded him, that he was the son
of Jupiter: but one day in his wars, being hurt, he said, Omnes jurat me esse
Iouis filium, sed hoc vuluus me hominem esse clamant. You all swear that I am
the son of Jupiter, but this wound shows, that I am but a man. We knowing
this, it may be a great remedy, if we to keep our selves that we be not
praised, do but consider how false and deceitefull they are, even in this
respect; that for those things that deserves greatest reprehension, they
attribute most commendation: and when they should blame us for ryote, they
commend our temperance; when we deserve to be blamed for folly, they praise
our wit: and if we well observe how many of our wickedest actions they applaud
for virtues, our own conscience will tell us, that they are but Impostors and
deceivers. And if we will be free from them, let us say to such, as Seneca
counsels, Vos dicitis me esse prudentem ego autem scio quam multa inutilia
concupiscam, nocitura optem, you call me wise, but it is otherwise; for I find
that I covet many things unprofitable, and wish for many things that are
hurtful. And this will be a great remedy against it, if we can but perceive
how they flatter us, making our vices virtues, and commending us for such
things, as deserve no no co^mendations. Wherefore let us be careful in the
observance of those things they praise us for, whether they be in us or no, or
whether they speak to humor us, and not from our desert, or whether they praise
us for such things as deserve truly to be praised, or for their own profit.

Therefore consider well thy self with thy self, and let us not be such
fools as to judge of our selves by the opinion of others, within thy self
behold well thy self, and if thou will know what thou art then give no
credence to others, follow Apollonius counsel, who being demanded how a man
should quietly enjoy him self, answered; Si paucis credideris, if you trust
but few: but let your own conscience be your own praiser, and be not so
simple as to be carried away with things that are not, and take heed you be not
to partial in the judgment of your self, but as your own conscience tells
you, may be justly attributed to you and no further, and this is the safest
way, for as Seneca says: Si vera sunt coram magno test laudatus es, Not.
quaest. l. 4. Praefat.
si falsa sine test derisus es. Now if we will avoid this Gorgon, repel this
monster, exile this murderer, let us love, desire, and always be content with
the hearing of the truth, and then we shall be sure for ever taking delight
in being flattered: and moreover let us put our full trust and confidence in
God, for they that love to be flattered never do so. For if they did, then
surely they would never seek applause for their wickedness from men, but rather
think with themselves, whether that they did were permitted by God or no.
Therefore if we will have a remedy against flattery, let us not put our trust
in men, but in God and in him only. Again, let us be very careful lest the
cloak of friendship, or friendly carriage, give some color to the insinuation
of flatterers, but these if you well look and search into, will be found to be
like false gold, that only has the representation of true, and such as if they
were tried, will hardly abide the touch; these let us avoid, but of true
friendship let us make great account, and much esteem. Counting them like the
salt that was commanded in the ancient sacrifices, and flatterers like the
honny forbidden in them, for the salt of reprehension is good and profitable,
but the honny of flattery is vile and abominable. Again, if you will avoid
this, being flattered, we must not trust our selves to much upon the
prosperity of this tra^sitory life, for this is the greatest way maker for
flattery that can be: for we extremely flatter our selves, whilst we wholly
rest upon the prosperity of this transitory life. This was the cause of the
ruin and destruction of the Sodomites, who though they lived in all
wickedness, yet had an opinion that they were in the right way, still
continuing their ill course of life in pleasure and ease, whilst their
arraignment was a making in heaven. And now to conclude, if we can master our
selves and our own affections, that our self loving inclination do not cause
us desire to be flattered, then we shall be able to master these unmatchable
monsters: for to who^ is it so dangerous, as to such as are desirous of
praises, and willingly receive such as commend them? but if indeed we will
have a remedy against them, let us be deaf to all these, and suppress our
own self love which is the greatest advantage to a flatterer that can be: for
we are so much enamoured with our selves, that we are easily taken with those
things, which tend to our own praise, and so much addicted to this good
co^ceipt and opinion of our selves, that nothing so much delights us as to
hear our selves praised, and commended for those virtues, of the which we were
never guilty, but most impatient to hear our selves blamed for any vices,
though we know them to be inhabitant within us: and this most commonly is the
nature of high spirits, and haughty minds, not guided by judgment and reason,
but lifted up with the favors of fortune, or Nobility of birth, which does
flatter us within, and possesses our minds before hand, whereby we are exposed
and lie more open unto flatterers, finding us thus prepared, and so ready to
work upon; but if we have any desire to avoid this, that it should not
entrap nor endanger us, let us look into our selves, and search into our own
natures, where we shall find an infinite number of defects, vanities,
imperfections, and faults; mixed in our words, deeds, thoughts, and passions,
and so we shall find out their false dealing in praising and soothing us for
those things we so little deserve: And as I noted before, Adulationis vnctio to
be Domorum emunctio, commendationis allusio, eorum delusio, Laudis arrisio
eorum derisio.

FINIS.
Errata.
EPistle to the Reader, lin. 31. for Flattery read Flatterer. p. 2. l. 18.
for. desires, read deserves p. 3. l. 18. for. aims, r. veins. p. 6. l. 12.
for. impinget. rea. impinguet p. 7. l. 11. for adulatotis. r. adulationis. p.
8. l. 8. for they. r. them. p. 9. l. 13. for. faction. r. fashion p. 9. l. 19.
for Laudas. r. Cantas. p. 13. l 2. for vant. read want. p. 14. l. 6 for
creature. r creatures. p. 28. l. 5. for is. r. it. p. 35. l. 15. after praises,
put in the rather p. 41 l. 20. for honestly. r. honesty p. 42. l. 14 for
those. read these. p. 44. l. 4. for aculeio. r. aculeo. p. 44. l. 15. for
Dog. r. Dogs. p. 52. l. 18 for you. r. they. p. 87. l. 5. for crying, r. to
be. p. 94. l. 7. for Senius. r. Seminus. p. 97. l. 6. for Arginus. r. Arginus.


