A direction concerning the Plague or Pestilence, for Pooore and Rich.
THe Plague which is called of the Greeks Epidemia, and in Latin Lues pestis
or pestilentia, and I a stranger and a German who many times have been
employed in this sickness, as at Cullen, Ostend, Amsterdam and many other Towns
more, may with great credit bear me witness of it; so I can say and write of
this fearful disease more then any other can. The cause is evident, that it
is a punishment from God, whereof many examples may be set down, which I leave
for breuity sake: for it is a matter which belongs to Divines; the other cause
is, that the upper parts have infected the Astris with a Distemperature where
through the Plague has his domination into our bodies, whereof we leave this
besides to our learned Philosophers. Now to come to my intent which is out of
love, more then for gain, for to take such a dangerous matter upon me in mine
old age (The which God be thanked have no great need of, but being first
moved to it, by diverse of this City, for to do something in this time of
sickness, I have said nothing all this while (but finding the sickness
increasing more and more, do determine to show my best skill for it, thus
through my experience, where I have in former times (putting my trust in God
and with his helping hand) saved many a man's life. First, pray to God to
forgive your sins, and after use the natural means which God has ordained
to every sickness, and as well for this sickness, as for any other, I have a
preservative which every body shall find by me. Also a certain precious Pill,
to keep in your mouth, when you go abroad or perceive any danger.

1. First several Antidotes for the preservation of man's body from the Plague
with certain directions.

2. Secondly a certain Elixar, or a water for them that are infected, besides
certain orders and directions for the perfuming of their houses, chambers and
rooms; for to alter the air, to preserve their houses; besides for those
houses that are already Infected to cleanse them, with certain directions,
washing them with waters wherein certain herbs are boiled, and after stroying
the house with herbs, fitting for this sickness, and perfume. Now after many
and several medicines both in Physic and Surgery, which are necessary in
this sickness, as Cordials, Iulips, cooling waters Conserues, Oils, Ointments,
smelling or smooking balls, as Pomanders, Quilts, with other Chirurgicall
medicines for Carbonckles, Antraxs or other swelling as Byles, and Impostumes.
The Professor has Poultesses, Balsomes, Oils, Plasters and all things else
belonging to this dissease, besides it is necessary for every one to be solible
in his body, or to take some convenient purge by directions from the
Physicians. Likewise Fountenell or Issues, are very commendable, the which I
have made in Germany and other places, in vehement Plagues, as a preservative
against Infection. Such people are not apt to be Infected that have any running
sores, as Vlsers, nor those which are troubled with other maladies which run.
There are certain rules to be observed, as to forbear to go in stinking
places, and not too go abroad till the Sun be up, principally in moist and
foggy weather; in the evening avoid the streets, and go not to late abroad,
which is principally hurtful for Children, and young people, ouerfill not your
bodies with meat which is hard of disgesture, for it breeds ill humors. All
these medicines every body may have in his own house for a reasonable price,
with certain directions in print. This I take out of ancient writers, which
have bin many times approved; this I do through and with counsel of diverse
learned Physicians, some of the Kings Majesty's, and others of my friends,
although there will be some Calumniating night-Oules, perhaps, will speak
against my intent. Let them show a better or else let this alone.

Viuat Rex. The Professor hereof dwells in Great Woodstreete at the Sign of
the Mere Maid near the corner of Maiden Lane.




