A GEOMETRICAL Practice, named PANTOMETRIA, divided into three Books,
Longimetra, Planimetra and Stereometria, containing Rules manifold for
mensuration of all lines, Superficies and Solides: with sundry strange
conclusions both by instrument and without, and also by Perspectiue glasses, to
set forth the true description or exact plat of an whole Region: framed by
Leonard Digges Gentleman, lately finished by Thomas Digges his son.

Who has also thereunto adjoined a Mathematical treatise of the five
regulare Platonicall bodies, and their Metamorphosis or transformation into
five other equilater vnifoorme solides Geometrical, of his own invention,
hitherto not mentioned of by any Geometricians.



Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman ANNO. 1571.

To the right honorable my singular good Lord Sir Nicolas Bacon Knight, Lord
keeper of the great seal of England.
CAlling to memory right honorable, and my singular good Lord, the great
favor your Lordship bare my father in his life time, and the conference it
pleased your honor to use with him touching the Sciences Mathematical,
especially in Geometrical me^surations, perusing also of late certain volumes
that he in his youth time long since had compiled in the English tongue,
among other I found this Geometrical practice, which my father (if God had
spared him life) minded to have presented your Honor vvithall, but untimely
Death preventing his determination, I thought it my part to accomplish the
same, asvvell for the satisfaction of his desire, as also to shevve my self
not unmindful of so many good turns as your honor from time to time most
abundantly has bestovved on me, having therefore supplied such parts of this
treatise as were left obscure or imperfect, adjoining thereunto a Discourse
Geometrical of the five regulare or Platonicall bodies, containing sundry
Theoricall and practical propositions of the manifold proportions arising by
mutual conference of these solides Inscription, Circumscription or
Transformation, and now at the last fully finished the same, I am bold to
exhibit and dedicate it to your honor, as an eternal memorial of your
Lordshippes great favor toward the furtherance of learning, and a public
testimony of my bounden duty: hoping your honor will rather respect the
good will vvherevvith it is presented, than the worthiness of the present,
not agreeable I confess to the excellent knowledge vvhervvith your Lordship
is endued, even in the very fountains themselves whence these conclusions as
springs or branches are derived. And yet such as I nothing dout your honor
will both accept in good part, and also at vacant leisure from affairs of
more importance, delight your self vvithall, the rather for that it contains
sundry such nevve invented Theoremes, and other strange conclusions, as no
Geometers have hitherto, in any language published. Whereby your Lordship shall
not only encourage me hereafter to attempt greater matters, but also as it
were with a sovereign medicine prevent the poisoned infection of envious
backbiting tongues: for as the verity of these experimentes and rules shall
never be impugned, being so firmly grounded, guarded, and defended with
Geometrical demonstration, against whose puissance no subtle Sophistry or
crafty colored arguments can prevail, so think I there is none so impudently
malicious, as will or dare reprove them for vain or improfitable, when they
shall perceive your Lordshippe, (whose learned judgment, gravity and
wisdom is sufficiently known to the world) does allow and accept them
as fragrante flowers selecte and gathered out of the pleasant gardynes
Mathematical, meet to delight any noble, free, or well disposed mind, and
profitable fruits serving most commodiouslye to sundry necessary uses in a
public weal, and such as shall thereby receive pleasure or commodity, must
of duty yield condign thanks unto your Lordshippe, under whose protection
and patronage I have not feared to send abroad (as a vvandring pilgrim) this
Orphane and fatherless child, the which as I perceive of your Honor
favorably accepted, so mean I, God sparing life, to employ no small portion
of this my short and transitory time in storing our native tongue with
Mathematical demonstrations, and some such other rare experiments and
practical conclusions, as no forrayne Realm has hitherto been, I suppose,
partaker of. In the mean time I leave longer to detayne your honor with my
rude and homely tale, from more seriouse and vvayghtie affairs, committing
your Lordshippe to the tuition of the Almighty, who grant you a long
healthful honorable life, accompanied with perfect felicity,

Your Honors most bounden Thomas Digges.

The Preface to the Reader.
ALthough Geometry for the certayntie thereof have such a privilege as few
other Sciences, being so fortified with Demonstration that no Precepte or Rule
thereof for the verity can be reproved, yet least some, either of ignorance
or malice should affirm it unprofitable, not serving to any necessary use in
a public Weal, I thought good somewhat to say thereof, and first the
sentence of Plato written at the entry into his Schole comes to my
remembrance, (...). thereby excluding al such as were ignorant of Geometry as
unable or unmeet to attayn higher secrets or mysteries of Philosophy.
Aristotle also entreating of Moral Philosophy, in the fifth Book of his
Ethikes, with geometrical Figures most beautifully paynteth out Justice,
discerning and severally comparing sundry parts thereof with Geometrical and
Arithmeticall proportions. But his Interpreters, whose works are yet extante,
for want of skill in these matters, have so blemished, darkened and defaced his
meaning, that scarcely any resemblance thereof shall to the Reader appear. In
sundry other his works also of natural Philosophy, as the Physikes,
Meteores, de Coelo and Mundo. etc. ye shall find sundry Demonstrations, that
without Geometry may not possibly be understood. And to leave Philosophy,
how necessary it is to attain exact knowledge in Astronomy, Music,
Perspectiue, Cosmographie and Navigations, with many other Sciences and
faculties, who so meanly trauayleth therein shall soon find. But to omit
talking of Geometry in general, and to speak privately of this Treatize, I
think good first to open the order and effect thereof, and then somewhat to
say of the applyances. Like as every body geometrical is environed with
Superficies, and every Superficies enclosed with lines, so that it consists
of these three, Longitude, Latitude, and Profunditie, and without consideration
of these three no solid may be measured: so is this Treatise also divided into
three Books. The first entreating of lines shows sundry means to measure
all manner lengthes, heightes, distances, and profundities. The second termed
Planimetra settes forth diverse means and rules to measure manyfolde
superficies, plain Conuex and Concaue, whether they be compounde with
straighte or circulare lines, or mixte of both. In the third named
Stereometria, is set out the exact mensuration of sundry solides,
replenished with a number of rules and precepts, gathered out of Euclide,
Archimedes and Appolonius Pergeus his Conykes, wherein the Reader shall not a
little delighte himself with the finenesse and subtlety of their inventions,
especially if he endeavor himself to search out the reason, cause and
demonstration of them. And now somewhat to speak of the commodity of these
conclusions, as the skillful in Architecture can apply the Stereometria to
serve his turn in preordinance and forecasting both of the charges, quantities
and proportion of all parcels necessarily appertayning to any kind of
buyldings: so Planimetra may serve for disposing all manner ground plattes of
Cities, Towns, Fortes, Castles, Palaces or other edifices. The Marshall of
the field shall also most speedely thereby appoint place convenient for his
Camp, distributing every part thereof according to the number of his men,
horse, carriage. etc. Also in suruaying, parting and dividing of Lands and
woods, it is most requisite as well for exact as speedye dispatch therein, and
thereof we have notable record in Histories how much this science auayled the
Egiptians when as by the inundation of Nylus their whole country was so
drouned that with slime of the water all their Bounds and marks were defaced:
Yet certain wise men aided with knowledge in this science, found out and
distributed to every man his own. The other part named Longimetra the
ingeniouse practizioner will apply to Topographie, fortification, conducting of
mines under the earth, and shooting of great ordinance. So that as there is no
kind of man, of what vocation or degree so ever he be, but shall find matter
both to exercise his wit and diversely to pleasure him self, so surely for a
gentleman especially that professech the wars, as well for discoueries made by
sea, as fortification, placing of Camps, and conducting of Armies on the
land, how necessary it is to be able exactly to describe the true plattes,
symetrie and porportion of Fortes, camps, towns and countries, coasts and
harboroughes, I think there are none so unskillful, but will confess these
Geometrical mensurations most requisite. But if any there be so rude,
ignoraunte and unlearned, or so much blinded with self liking, that can not be
content to acknowledge any thing requisite in a perfect soldier that is
wanting in them selves (for such surely they are that most arrogantly will
maintain this fond opinion) let them but regard and mark the renoumed
Captain Alexander the great, who had this knowledge in such high estimation,
that he seldom or never in his manifoulde conquests would attempt any thing,
whether it were fort, town or country, but first he would have the exact
Topographie thereof, and thereupon inuente, devise and after execute his warlyke
Polycies. On the contrary side, for negligence of this knowledge we may read
how Aniball the most worthy and famous Soldier that ever has been (all
circumstances duly wayed) was by that paynefull, grave and right valiant
Captain Quintus Fabius Maximus led and trained into a field enclosed with
stepe hills and deep rivers, where this noble Consul had so environed his
Host by fortifying of two mountains, that he with all his Army were in
maruaylouse ieopardie to have perished for famine, had not the crafty wit of
Aniball invented a present policy to escape such imminente calamity. Cyrus
also that great King and mighty Monarche, was he not through ignorance of
Topographie, even in pursuing of victory intrapped and discomfited with all his
power by the Scithian queen Thomiris at the river of Oaxis? I pass over
innumerable examples of all ages, manyfestly declaring the great advantage or
disaduauntage a Captain may receive, as well inuading as defending by the
strong or weak situation of places, and by the foreknowledge or ignorance of
them: neither is there any liberal or free mind, whether he be of profession
Warlike or Civil, that will not take great delight and pleasure to see how by
Art a man may measure the distances of places remote and far a sunder,
approaching nighe none of them, and that as well, yea and far more exactly than
if with Cord or pole he should paynfully pass them over. Hereupon did the
Poets feign Atlas of such huge and mighty personage, sustayning and
upholding the earth and mighty Mass of heavenly spheres, for that this man
notwithstanding he were imprisoned in a mortal carcass, and thereby detayned
in this most inferior and vilest portion of the universal world, fardest
distante from that passing pleasant and beautiful frame of celestial Orbs,
yet his divine mind aided with this science of Geometrical mensurations,
found out the quantities, distances, courses, and strange intricate
miraculouse motions of these resplendent heavenly Globes of Sun, Moon,
Planets and Stars fixed, leaving the rules and precepts thereof to his
posterity. Archimedes also (as some suppose) with a glass framed by
revolution of a section Parabolicall, fired the Roman navy in the sea coming
to the siege of Syracusa. But to leave these celestial causes and things done
of antiquity long ago, my father by his continual paynfull practices, assisted
with demonstrations Mathematical, was able, and sundry times has by
proportional Glasses duly situate in convenient angles, not only discovered
things far off, read letters, numbered pieces of money with the very coin and
superscription thereof, cast by some of his friends of purpose upon Downs in
open fields, but also seven miles of declared what has been done at that
instante in private places: He has also sundry times by the Sun beams
fired Powder, and dischargde Ordinance half a mile and more distante, which
things I am the boulder to report, for that there are yet living diverse (of
these his doings) Oculati testes, and many other matters far more strange
and rare which I omit as impertinente to this place. But for invention of
these conclusions, I have heard him say, nothing ever helped him so much as
the exquisite knowledge he had by continual practice attained in Geometrical
mensuratio^s. And for science in great Ordinance especially to shoot exactly
at Randons (a quality not unmeet for a Gentleman) without rules Geometrical,
and perfect skill in these mensurations, he shall never know any thing: thus
have I partly declared the pleasure and commodity that any well disposed
mind may reap by these three books of my fathers. But somewhat to say
concerning the last Treatize of the five regulare bodies and their
Metamorphosis adjoined by my self, for that I know some, yea many shall there
be that will not spare to say, as they have done by others, it is a fond toy,
a meare curiouse trifle, serving to no use or commodity: surely I mean not
greatly to labor to attain the good opinion of such* having learned how the
disprayse of the ignorant and vitiouse is no less commendation than the
praise of the wise and virtuous, being a precedent infallible from the
beginning and always contynuing that ignorance enuieth knowledge, and vice
virtue. Every man disliketh or extolleth things accordingly as they are
agreeable or repugnant to his appetite, and rather would I enioyning the company
of Euclide, Archimedes, Appollonius Pergeus, and other geometers writing of the
like toys and curiosities be condemned, than in publishing matter agreeable to
such men's fantasy and conceypt, be of them highly commended, and of the
learned laughed at or contemned, but howsoever Epicurus, Midas, or their like,
given only to lucre and worldly pleasure list to think thereof, I nothing
mistruste of such as covet the understanding of matters hard and difficile,
desiring the knowledge of things somewhat passing the reach and capacity of
the common sort, wherein only the nature of man surmounteth beastly kind, or
by proof and assay in cases of like difficulty able to judge them selves,
this Treatize shall not be mislyked but thankfully received, and for the rest
persuasions are but vain, for as no words can add stomach or make the
cowarde valiant, so surely such two footed Moules and Todes whom destiny and
nature has ordained to craule within the earth, and suck upon the muck, may
not possibly by any vehement exhortation be reduced or moved to taste or savor
any whitte of virtue, science, or any such celestial influence, my hope is if
any fault escape, as in such long and intricate tediouse calculations of
irrational numbers may happen to be some, the discrete and modest Reader will
rather of courtesy amend it, than with enuiouse cauillation, vngratefullye
requite my paynefull trauayles, whereby I shall be provoked not only to
publishe the demonstrations of these and many more strange and rare
Mathematical Theoremes, hitherto hidden and not known to the world, but also
to imprinte sundry other volumes of my fathers, which he long sithence compiled
in the English tongue, desiring rather with plain and profitable conclusions to
store his native language and benefit his Country men, than by publishing in
the Latin rare and curiouse demonstrations, to purchase fame among strangers.

Elements of Geometry, or Diffinitions.
A Point I call which cannot be divided, whose part is nothing.

A Line is a length without breadth or thickness, whose extremities are two
points.

THe shortest drawn between two Points is a straight line, the contrary are
crooked lines.



A Superficies is that has length and breadth only, being bounded or
determined with lines.

A Plain Superficies is that which lies equally and euenly between his
lines or bounds.



A Plain Angle is the inclination of two lines lying in one plain
Superficies, concurring or meeting in a point.

IF those lines that contain the Angle be straight, it is called a right lined
Angle, and those two lines his containing sides, but if a third straight line
be drawn cross the former from one to the other, that shall be called the
subtending side.



OF straight lined angles there are three kinds, the Orthogonall, the Obtuse,
and the Acute Angle.

WHen any right line falls Perpendicularly upon an other, that is to say,
making the Angles on either side equal, each of those Angles is an Orthogonall
or right Angle, and that falling line a Perpendicular.



BAC the right angle contained of the Perpendicular, and one part of the ground
line equal to BAD the right angle contained of the Perpendicular, and the
other portion of the ground line, and therefore both Orthogonall.

The Broad or Obtuse Angle is greater than the Orthogonal.



The Acute or sharp, is lesser than the right angle.



A Figure is comprehended within limits and bounds, whether it be one or many.

A Circle is a plain figure, determined with one line, which is called a
Circumference, in whose mids there is a point named his Center. From the which
all right lines drawn to the circumference are equal.



A Semicircle or half Circle, does contain both the Dimetient and Center of
his circle, with the precise half of his circumference.

A Right line drawn through the Center unto the Circumference of both sides,
is named his Diameter or Dimetient, the half of it is called his Semidiameter.



ALl Straight lines besides the Diameter in any Circle pulled from one part of
the Circumference to the other, be called cords.

THe portion of the Circumference from that cord comprehended, is named an
Aroke.

A Touch line is that touches a circle in a Point.



Among Right lined figures, such as have only three sides are Triangles,
whereof there be sundry sorts bearing several names, according to the
diversity of their sides and Angles.

IF the Triangles three sides be every of them of like length, it is called an
Equilater Triangle.

ISoscheles is such a Triangle as has only two sides like, the third being
unequal, and that is the Base.

Schalenum has three unequal sides.



A Rightangled Triangle is such a one as has one Right Angle.

AN Obtusiangle Triangle has one obtuse angle, and is called Ambligonium.

Oxigonium has all acute or sharp Angles.



THere be also four sided Figures called Quadrangles, whose Opposite sides and
angles are equal, such are named Paralelogrammes, whereof there are but four
sorts.

IF all the sides be equal, and all the angles right, than is that
Paralelogramme called a square.

IF one side containing the right Angle, be longer than the other containing
side, then is that figure called a Rectangle.

IF all the sides be equal, and no angle aright, then is it called Rhombus.

BUt if it have only the Opposite sides equal, and the other that contain an
Angle unequal, it shall be named Rhomboides.



All other quadrangles are Trapezia.

POlygona, are such Figures as have more than four sides, whose angles if they
be all like and equal, they are termed Equiangle Polygona.



AL other plain Superficies, whether they be environed with straight or crooked
lines, shall be named irregulare figures.

WHen two right lines drawn in one plain Superficies, are so equedistantly
placed, that though they were infinitely extended on either side, yet would
never meet nor concur, they shall be called Paralleles.



A Quadrant is the fourth part of a Circle, included with two Semidiameters
commonly divided in.90. portions, which parts are named grades or degrees.

The first Chapter. How Perpendiculares upon any straight line are ereared,
ADmit AB were the line to be crossed, (...) that ye desired a Perpendiculare
or plumbe line in C, open your compass, put the one foot in C, make of either
side the line one prick, D.E. Now extend the compass to the wideness of
both, or shorter, putting the one foot in D and the other immovable, making
an arcke over and under C. This done discretely, remove the compass from that
Center to E (remaining so opened) there fix one foot, with the other cross
the arc before made above and beneath C, where make two points, or these
letters FG. Then take a Ruler and lay him upon both the points crossing the
center C. Thus draw your plumbe or squire line FCG. In like manner any line
may be divided in half, or circle in four equal parts. See the example on
the side following*



The second Chapter. How perpendiculare or hanging lines are drawn from a
point assigned to any right line lying in the same plain Superficies*
SUppose C the point from whence I would let fall a Perpendiculare to the
straight line A.B. open therefore your cumpasse of such wydnesse, that placing
the one foot in C. ye may reach with the other beyond the line A. B. and
drawing an Arc, note where it makes intersections with the same line, which
in this Figure are marked with the letters D. and E. then placing one foot of
your cumpasse in E draw an arcke directlye under C. and then fixing one foot
again of your compass in D. cross the former arcke in F, finally draw the
straight line CF. for that is a perpendicular to the line AB.

PIthagoras invention might here take place, who did find these numbers 3.4.
and 5. or like joined measures to make a right angle.

The third Chapter. From any point assigned to extend a Parallele to any other
right line lying in the same Superficies.
FRom the point assigned let fall a perpendicular to that line, and from some
other point in that line ereare a perpendiculare, as ye were in the last
Chapters taught, then opening your compass to the length of the
perpendiculare let fall from the point assigned, measure out the like length in
the perpendiculare ereared, beginning from the ground line: then laying a ruler
to the point assigned, and the end of that length draw a straight line, for
that shall be a Paralelle to the other.

Example.
ADmit A the point assigned, BC the line AD. the perpendicular let fall from A,
CF. the perpendiculare ereared from C. my compass opened to the wydnesse of
AD, I set one foot in C, cutting CF, with the other in E, then applying my
ruler, I draw the line A E, which is a Parallele to B.

The 4. Chapter. To divide any limited right line into as many equal parts as
ye list.
FOrasmuch as hereafter in drawing of plattes and mensuration of ground by
instrument, the division of right lines into many equal parts is required, I
thought good to give instruction thereof before I entreat of those matters: ye
shall therefore upon either end or limite of the diuisible line, ereare a
Perpendiculare, the one upward the other dounwarde, and opening your compass
at adventure, measure out so many parts in either perpendiculare, as you would
make divisions in your line, and drawing right lines from the points in one
perpendiculare to the points in the other, beginning from the first of the one,
to the last of the other, ye shall divide the line given, into so many equal
parts as there be divisions in your perpendiculares.

Example.
ADmit the line AB which I would divide into 7 equal portions, I ereare upon
A and B, the perpendiculars AC, BD, as you may behold in the Figure: and
opening my compass at adventure, I measure out 7 parts ending at OF. then
drawing lines from the divisions of the one to the divisions in the other
(beginning from the last in one perpendicular, to the first in the other) you
may behold in the Figure the line A B, parted into 7 equal portions, in this
manner may you proceed infinitely to divide it into as many portions as you
list.

The 5. Chapter How equal angles are made.
Fix one foot of your compass upon the concourse or meeting of those two
right lines that contain the angle whose like or equal you would make, and
opening your compass at pleasure, describe an arc cutting the two containing
sides of the angle: then draw an other right line and placing one foot of the
compass (remaining immouable) thereon, with the other describe an Arcke rising
from that last drawn line, then resort to your angle, and open your
compass to the wydnesse or distance of the two intersections made by the arcke
in the two containing sides, and transporting the same distance to your second
arcke, set one foot of the compass at the beginning thereof, I mean where
it ryseth from the line, with the other cut the last described Arcke, then
laying your ruler to that intersection and to the center of the arcke, draw a
right line till it concur with the other: thus have you a new angle equal to
the former.

Example.
SVppose BAC, the angle whose like or equal I desire, DE, the arcke drawn
with one foot of my compass, while the other remained in A, the compass
immouable, I set one foot in the line FG, drawing with the other the arc KI.
This done, I open my compass to the distance of DE, and placing one foot in
K, with the other I cross the arcke in I, finally, laying the ruler to I and
F, I draw the line FH. and thus have I made the angle HFG. equal to the first
angle BAC.

The 6. Chapter. To make a triangle equal to any other right lined triangle
assigned.
First, as ye were taught in the last proposition make an angle equal to
some one angle in that triangle, it forces not which of them it be. Then
extend out those straight lines that contain this angle till they be of
equal length with the containing sides of his corresponding angle in the
triangle. This done, couple ye ends of those two right lines together with a
third, and so have you framed a Triangle equal to the former.

Example.
THe triangle assigned is ABC, to his angle at B by the former problem I frame
an equal or like, contained with the lines DEF, extending ED and OF, till they
become of equal length with AB and BC, which I may easily do, by extending
my compass first to AB, BC, and after transferring those distances or lengths
to DE and OF. Finally applying my ruler to the ends or limits of those lines, I
draw the subtending side DF, and thus have I framed a new triangle DEF, equal
to the other ABC.

I Think it not amiss before I entreat of Geometrical mensurations, to
premise certain Theoremes whereby the ingenious may redily conceive the
ground, reason, and demonstration of such rules as shall ensue.

The first Theoreme.
Any two right lines crossing one an other, make the contrary or vertical
angles equal.

The second Theoreme.
IF any right line fall upon two Parallele right lines, it makes the
outvvarde angle on the one, equal to the inward angle on the other, and the
two inward opposite angles on contrary sides of the falling line also
equal.

The third Theoreme.
IF any side of a triangle be produced, the outvvarde angle is equal to the
two inward opposite angles, and all three angles of any triangle joined
together, are equal unto two right angles.

The fourth Theoreme.
IN equiangle triangles, al their sides are proportional as well such as
conteyne the equal angles, as also their subtendente sides.

The fifth Theoreme.
IF any four quantities be proportional, the first multiplied in the fourth,
produces a quantity equal to that which is made by multiplication of the
second in the third.

The sixth Theoreme.
THE visible beams falling on plain conuese or concaue glasses, are reflected
in equal angles.

The seventh Theoreme.
IN right angled triangles the square of the side subtending the right angle,
is equal to both the squares of his containing sides.

The eight Theoreme.
AL Parallelogrammes are double to the triangles that are described upon their
bases their altitudes being equal.

The ninth Theoreme.
AL like or equiangle Figures retain double the proportion of their
correspondent sides.

The tenth Theoreme.
IF from any angle of a triangle to his subtendent side, a perpendiculare
descend the square of that subtendente side, or basis added to one of the
containing sides square, surmounteth the square of the third side, by a
rightangled Parallelogramme contained of the whole base and double that his
portion, which lies betvveene the perpendiculare and the last named third
sides subtendente angle.

The.7. Chapter. The description of the Quadrant Geometrical.
FIrst ye must make a common simple large quadrante thus, with your compass
draw an Arc or Circumference, that may be more, or at the least sufficient
for a quadrant, then put both the feet of your compass in that arc, making
two Pricks. Now the distaunce of these two points divided in two equal
parts, adding one portion to the aforesaid circumference or distance, shows a
precise quadrant, ye ought then to pull of each side from the center a line to
the vttermoste points, which be the extremes of your quadrant. Again draw a
line from your center A to the mids of the quadrants circumference C, and if
ye list ye may divide that quadrant into 90. grades thus: First in 3. parts,
then every third in 3. so have ye 9. portions: Now every of them in 2.
rises.18. Then each in 5. equal parts makes.90. degrees.

Of the Scale.
FOr the Scale ye shall draw from either side of your quadrant a right hanging
line (as is declared) touching the middle line in one point, so have ye the
sides of your scale each to be divided in 12.60.100.1000 points all marked from
the center A, the mo the more commodious. Forget not to have two equal fine
plates of brass persed in the mids (for your sightes) and placed on the side
AD, as ye see OF, with a line and plummet falling out of the center A. I call
the scale in this quadrant the two sides within divided in certain portions or
parts. And those.12. parts next to your sights I name points of right shadow:
the other side of the scale portions or points of contrary shadow: better it
were, yea and more for the purpose if each side had.60.100. or, 1000. divisions.

The.8. Chapter. The use of the Scale, showing perpendiculare or direct
heightes by their shadows.


Convey the left side of your quadrant Geometrical toward the Sun, the
threade and Plummet having their free course moving it up or down, until
both your sightes have received the sun beams. Then if your thread be
found in the twelfth part, shadows of all things (being perpendiculare
elevated) be equal with their bodies, if the plummet with the thread be
perceived cutting the parts next to the sightes, which I call right shadows,
then every thing direct is more than his shadow. By that proportion which 12.
exceeds the parts where the thread was found: if it fall on the first
part of right, take the shadow 12. times to make the heigthe, if it chance
on the second portion six times, on the third four times, on the fourth
thrice, in the fifth twice and two fiftes of the shadow, in the sixte point
twice, in the seventh once, and five seuenths of the shadow, in the eight
portion once and a half, in the ninth once and the third part, in the tenthe
once and the fifte part: in the eleuenthe point ye shall take the shadow once
and the eleventh part of that shadow: or in few words, multiplye the length
of the shadow by 12. and the producte divide by the parts in which you
found the threade, your quotient shows the height: but and if it be in the
parts of contrarye-shadowe, augment the length of the shadow with the parts
declared by the Plummet, and the increase divide by 12. so comes the altitude
also. Ensample, in the figure that goes before it is plain to be perceived.
When the thread falls on 12 portions, the shadow is equal with the thing it
self. In 6 of right it is but half, in six of contrary it is twice the
height: So to conclude, ye may see as the side in right exceeds the parts,
so does the altitude or body the shadow, and contrary in contrary shadow,
behold your figure how the threade cutteth 6 parts of contrary shadow in the
Quadrant next to the right hand, the shadow BC then being 210 foot,
multiply (as I have said) the length of the shadow 210 feet, with 6 the
parts cut by the threade, increases 1260, that divided by twelve, rises 105:
the altitude of such a body which had a shadow then 210 feet. Thus of all
such like.

The.9. Chapter. Of Vigetius concerning heigthes.
HE affirms by any certain measure directely standing (whose shadow is
known) the height of any other thing the shadow then measured not to be hid,
performed by the rule of proportion. Example.

Suppose the shadow of any thing 210 feet. Now say 20 the shadow of a thing
known gives 10, what shall 210, rises 105: the height.

The.10. Chapter. Without shadovve or any supputation by your quadrant
geometrical to take heigthes approchable.
Lift up ingeniously your quadrant exactly made toward the thing to be
measured, looking diligently through both the sightes, going back or forward
as occasion is given until ye see the top, so that your fine or subtle
thread fall justly upon the twelfth point. Now if you measure the distaunce
from you to the base (which base here I call the point directly under the
top, then have ye the altitude of the highest summitie to the right point or
base in heigthe equal with your standing, adjoining unto it the height of your
eye downewarde. Ensample, The line and plummet in the figure before falls
precisely in the twelfthe portion, the space then being from you to the base,
which is from A to C 15. foot. To this ye must add the height of your eye
(here ymagined 5. foot) so have ye 20 feet, the true altitude from A to B. As
the length of the cord from the eye to C shows the measure to be laid
back: so does the touch of the line and plummet in C, declare where ye must
begin to lay the measure back.

The.11. Chapter. With the aid of two places to search out improcheable
heightes.
Seek two stations going hither and thither, yea toward or from the thing ye
intend to measure, so that in the one place the thread may fall in 12, the
other station in 6. points of right shadow, then if ye double the distance of
both places, the summitie shall appear from that part of the thing measured
which is equal in height with your eye, or if your standing be even with the
base, joining to that doubled distance the height of your eye, ye have the
whole altitude from the ground, etc. If the one room cause the thread to fall
in 12. the other in 8. of right shadow, then triple the space, so have ye the
height also. Or the one in 12. the other in 9. of right shadow, then
quadruplate the distance: yea the one under 12. that other 6. of contrary
shadow, then the space between both stations is equal with that you measure,
ever understanding from your eye upward. Or if the plummet be enforced to fall
under 6 points of the contrary shadow, the other under 4 parts of the same,
or in 4 and 3 of contrary, in all these the distance of the place is equal with
the altitude. So then in measuring the space between the two places ye have
gotten the height from your eye up, putting unto it (as I have said) the length
from your sight dounwarde, the just altitude of the whole appears: the Base
being even with your standing. Example, This Figure declares the falling of
the thread under 6 of right, and 12. Also under 12 and 6 of contrary, by
doubling the space between the two first places, the altitude appears. In
like manner the distance from the middle standing to the last, brings the
height from your sight.

How lengthes in height are known.
I Would not have you ignorant here how to know lengths which be in height
not easy to come unto, first by your art before mentioned get either height,
subduce the less height out of the more, of force your desired length
remains. Or thus, let the plummet fall under 12 portions, mark your place,
go in toward the thing (the threade as it was) until ye see the base of that
length, so the distance between the two standings is undoubtedly the length:
here needs no Example.

The 12. Chapter. How by your Quadrant with calculation speedely to know all
heightes accessible.
YOur Quadrant as tofore is said handsomely elevated against or toward the thing
to be measured, perceiving through the sights not more than the top. Mark well
the divisions of points touched in your scale, if they be of right shadow,
multiply the distance from you to the base by 12, and divide by the parts of
your Scale which your thread made manifest. But and if they be of contrary
shadow, work contrarely: that is augment by the parts, and make particion by
12, remembering ever to add the height of your eye dounward to your Quotient,
so have ye your desire: the Base being equal with your standing.

Example.
Admit the thread with the plummet note 6 parts of contrary, as ye may see in
this Figure: the distance from the base A to your standing B 115 foot,
multiply that by 6, so have ye 690, the which divided by 12, yeldeth 57 foot:
to this adioyne five foot (being the height of your sight to the ground)
conclude the Altitude 62 foot.

Here ye shall note that in mensuration of heightes with this instrument, it
shall be requisite first to find what part of the Altitude is level with
your eye, which you may thus do:

CAuse the plummet and thread to fall upon the side line of your quadrant where
the degrees begin, and then searching thorough the sightes, that part which
you can epsy of your Altitude, (the plummet hanging upon the foresaid
laterall line) is level with your eye, the height whereof from the base
compared with the altitude of your eye, discovers the inequality or
difference of the ground: that is to say, how much higher or lower the base of
the thing to be measured, is than the ground at your station which difference
as ye shall see cause added or detracted from your heights found as is before
declared, yeldeth most exactely the true altitude, and thus shall you be
assured never to err, how uneven or vnleuell so ever the ground be.



The.13. Chapter. To get inaccessible heightes by supputation (with the help
of two places) supposing either side of the Scale divided, 100 parts.
IF your thread in the first station fall upon 50 points of contrary, with
those divide 100, so have ye 2. In ye other place (going right back or forward
no way declyning) admit it note 25 of contrary, now 100 divided with 25 rises
4, withdraw 2 from 4, 2 is left your diuide^t, mete the space between both
standings, and divide that by 2, your divisor, so have ye the height from the
eye up. Note, if the difference of the Quotient be 1, the space between the
standings shall be equal with the desired height, adding your stature. If 2,
the space is double to the altitude, if 3, threefolde, etc.

Or thus work: Reduce the parts of contrary shadow unto portions of right,
and then do as you would with points of right: that reduction is made thus,
multiply 100 in him self, so have ye 10000, the which divided by every part
of contrary shadow, so shall they be as points of right shadow. And if you
have made two stations, pull the less Quotient from the great, the rest
waighe as you have been instructed. No end has the Geometer in finding true
measures, many I might say infinite mo ways heightes are found, by any two
equal things orthogenally joined, by staff, cord, squire, triangle glass,
etc. as breefly follows.

By any two things of one length joined thus in right Angle, Altitudes are
found.
THe end C applied to your eye, go backewarde or forward as you shall see
cause, till you can epsy the top and base of your Altitude, by the extremes
AB: so doing the distance between your foot and the base, is equal to ye
height, without adjoining the altitude of your eye, which in all the rest
before showed is required, only here ye shall take heed so to couple AB and
CD, that in beholding the altitude, your line AB may depend perpendiculare or
equedistant to the height. In like sort may you mete the distance of any two
things in sight, and that exactely, if you use discretion in placing AB, that
it be always parallele to the line measured.

The 14. Chapter. Heightes are ingeniously searched out by a staff.
IF any staf be erected, the measurer upon his back beholding ye top of the
thing, the distance of the eye from the foot of the thing shows the height.
Or thus receive my mind more largely, prepare a right staff divided in 12 or
mo equal parts, yt done, set it right up a certain distance (as ye list) from
the height which you will measure. Now go right from that staf some space at
pleasure: laying your eye to the ground equal with the base of the thing to be
measured, moving back or drawing near to that staff, until ye may rightly and
plainly see the very summitie or vpmost part of the thing to be measured, by
the top of your staff, which performed make a mark where your eye had his
place: Now measure the distance or space from the staff to your eye with the
staff it self, and note what proportion the staff has to the distance, the
same shall your heigthe have to the length from your eye to the base of that
Altitude. Ensample. The staff CD (in this figure) and the distance CE are
equal, therefore affirm the height AB to be equal yea so long as the
distance between your eye and the base of that required height which is AE, if
otherwise according to the proportion before mentioned, ye may by the rule
(called the golden precept,) bring the just height thus, meet the ground
between your eye and the staff suppose it 12 foot, then the distance from
your eye to the base 200 foot, your staff 5 foot, say of 12 comes 5, what
shall come of 200, so have ye 83 feet and your exact height.

The.15. Chapter. Ye may also hereby redely measure all lengthes standing in
height as the altitude of any Tovver standing on a hill, or the length of a
steeple above the battlements, or the distance betvveene story and story in
edefices, your self standing on the ground.
FOr Example I would measure the distance between B and G, suppose the line
visuall EG cut your staff (which I would wish divided in 12 parts) upon the
fourth part from the top. Then work by the rule of proportion: saying 20
parts the distance between the eye and the staff gives 200 foot, the
distance of the tower, what yeldeth 4 parts, thus shall you find the fourth
number proportional 40 foot, which is the exact length of BG. And thus may you
measure only by a staff divided in 12 equal parts (without any other
instrument) any altitude, how so ever it be situate.

Behold the Figure on the other side.
The like is brought to pass by the Squire, behold the Figure.


Always DC will retain the same proportion to DE, that BF does to AB, so that
BF measured, you may by the golden rule attain the height of AB, or contrary
if you know the Altitude AB, you may proportionally learn the longitude FB:
Pleasanter to practice is this than the former and most exact for Altitudes.
But where as some do use it as well for longitudes and distances, making the
staff a side common of the greater and lesser triangles: though demonstration
bear it, I allow not of it, the angle made with the squire and staff, grows
so acute, and insensible, that great error ensues the least mistakyng.

The.16. Chapter. By a Glass heighthes may be pleasantly practiced and found
on this wise.
CAst a glass on the ground, so it may lie equal, yea even in height with
the base of the thing to be measured, your eye on the glass fixed, go from it
until ye see no more than the very top of that thing of which ye require the
height. Then let a Plummet with a line come from your eye to the ground, mark
the fall of that Plummet, look what proportion the distance bears (from the
said Plummet to the Center of the glass) compared to the length of the cord,
the same shall the space between the glass and the base of the height, have
to the altitude desired.



THe precept of proportion may be as well here used as before, and so to
attain heightes. Behold the figure, as the distance DC from the fall of the
Plummet to the center of the glass, is equal with the line ED, falling from
the sight E so the length CE from the glass to the base of the tower, swarueth
not from the desired Altitude AB.

The.17. Chapter. To measure the deepenesse of any well by the Quadrant
Geometrical.
Now to return to the first instrument Geometrical and so to end, the breadth
or Diameter known, set your Quadrant on the end of your Well in the very
top, then lift up or put down this Quadrant until ye see the bottom on the
contrary side, mark the points cut, look what proportion the parts have to
the whole side, the same shall the Diameter have to the length or deepenesse.
Therefore by the number of the points form divide 12, so the Quotient utters
how often the (...) of the Well makes the depth, or multiply the breadth by
12, the (...) divide by the points found, the depth also appears. Ensample.
In (...) figures following there be 3 points of the Quadrant cut etc. 3 in 1^
is contained four times, so is the Diameter in the length or profunditie. In
like manner of proportion (as is declared) ye may gather the length of things
ascending some high Turret. Farther note whatsoever I have said of the Quadrant
appertaining to heightes know that to be spoken of the square Geometrical,
which here shall be put forth for lengthes only, one reason one ground serves
them both. As easy also is it to know how much water, I mean how many
quartes, gallons, or other measure are contained in these Wells, or in any
other Regular excauate body, which shall plainly appear in the last kind of
Geometry in place due.

By this instrument also ye may know from any spring or fountain, whether
the water may be conveyed by Pipes or otherwise, to any other place or places
how far distant so ever they be, yea though there be many hills and valleis
between.


I Would not have you ignorant that the nature of water is such, as by pipes it
may be rered above the fountain he, and carried over hills or mountains how
high so ever they be, so that the vent or end where the water must issue out of
the Pipe be inferior to the Fountain whence it is derived: neither need you
care though there be many valleis in the way, for experience teaches that the
lower your water falls, the more freely it will run, and the more pure and
wholesome it shall be. Always it behooves you to have consideration of the
Fountain whence it proceeds, and the Sestarne, Well, or other place
whereinto it falls* that this be lower than the other. It is also to be wayed
how this difference of highness and lowness is to be accounted, some suppose
that all places lying in a straight leuel line from the spring head, are of one
height, which opinion is erroneous, because the water (being an heavy body as
the earth is) presses and tends always to the center. And in all his courses
(being not violently forced contrary to his nature) moves downward, or at the
least uniformly and equodistantly from that center. Whereby it is manifest that
no spring can of his own nature run in leuel or right line from his head, for
this equidistant course to the center, is an arc or portion of a circle. But
every leuel right line (considering it is a contingent or touch line) is carried
above the circumference, and the farther it is extended, the farther dista^te
it is from the Center, so that either the water must make his course upward
utterly contrary to his nature, or else it shall decline from this leuel right
line. In deed the globe of the earth and water being so great, any small Arc
or portion of their Circumference will not sensibly differ from a straight
line. And yet in conueying of waters any great distance, very experience will
bewray an error. The mean therefore to attain perfection heerin, is to find
the difference between this straight and Circular line, whereof hereafter I
shall entreat more at large: only here will I open how without any error
sensible, (sufficient for any Mechanical operation) by the aid of sundry
stations ye shall accomplish this purpose.

First it behooves ye diligently to mark at the fountain head the Superficies
of the water, and if the ground so serve that ye may place your eye even
therewith, take your Quadrant, and turning your self toward the place whether
you mean to convey this water, (if it be within sight) epsy the same through
the sightes of your Quadrant, meting diligently the fall of the Plummet, which
if it cut any of the Degrees, ye may conclude it is not possible for the
water naturally to run thither. But if your Sestourne or place be not to be
seen at the Spring head, then epsy some other mark through the sight of your
Quadrant on either side toward your place, always causing the threede and
Plummet to fall directly upon the laterall line where your Degrees begin,
then removing and situating your eye at the point or mark which you last
espied, find through your sightes a new mark, causing your Plummet and
thread to fall upon the aforesaid laterall line, and thus proceed from
station to station, till you come to the sight of your last place, then if your
Plummet and thread cut the Degrees, ye may conclude as before* but if the
ground at the Spring head be such, as you cannot conveniently place your eye
as I have said, then let fall from your eye, or some place of equal height
with your eye, a string and Plummet to the brimme of the water, measuring the
length thereof. If at your last station your Plummet and thread hanging as I
have tofore said, your visuall line passing through the sightes of your
Quadrant fall above the Sestourne where this water should issue out, erreare a
Pole or such like thing to the height or length that the string was at the
Fountain head: and if your visuall line reach higher than the top or
summitie of that Pole also, ye may conclude that this water may be derived
thither. And if from that part of the Pole your visuall line cutteth, ye abate
the Perpendiculer from your eye to the water at the fountain head, and for
every Mile travailing 4 inches, the point where you leave is exactly level
with the Superficies of the water, and so high it may be brought, and not
above. It behooves ye also to take order that your stations be not above 200 or
300 pace at the most a sunder, otherwise error sensible may ensue. Ye may also
(if need require) at every station erecte an high Pole, and so may you pass
over both mountains and valleys, always noting at every station, what portion
of the Pole your line visual does cut, reserving them to be added or
subtracted as you see cause, at your last station. Superfluous, yea rather
teadious should it be to use more words in so plain a matter, the ingenious
Practisioner will find sundry ways to healpe himself as occasion requires
by sight of the ground. etc.

The.18. Chapter. To get the length or distance of any place or mark in sight,
be it never so far, and that without instrument.
AMong many practices I find six ways principally be had in estimation, the
first ensuing without any instrument, other requiring aid of instruments,
whose name compositions and use follow as seems meet. Although in measuring
of lengthes after the minds of many writers the avoiding of hills, and in few
words most plain has bin desired, least great errors should ensue, here
such things shall not be required: Only it shall be needful at the time of your
measuring to have ground at liberty on the one side. This commodity had the
ground leuel or otherwise work thus, at the beginning of your length set up a
staf^ or mark which may be seen a far of, then go from it Orthogonally ^
squirewise of which side ye will 200 foot, or as ye list, the more ground^ the
better, put up there a staff also: Now convey your self to the first staff
or mark going back from it 300 foot more or less at your pleasure, set up
there the third staff, so that the first mark or staff and it agree^ in a
right line from your sight to the farthest point of your length by the
judgment of your eye. Now go sidewise from thence as before in a right angle
until the second mark offer it self aright between the extreem^ part of
your length and sight, there put up the fourth staff. All this performed,
seek out the distance between the first staff and the second that name your
first distance, then the length between the first and third staff, call that
the second distance. Again the space between the third and the fourth staff
is the third distance, subduce the first distance from the third, so remains
your Divisor, then multiply the third distance by the second, and the product
divide by your diuident or divisor, the Quotient shows the true length from
the third staff to the fortress or mark desired. For more plainness behold
the Figure.



Example.
HEre this letter A represents the fortress Castle or mark which is the
extreme or fardest part of length to be measured, B is your first staf, C the
second staff, differing from B the first orthogonally 100 foot, D the third
staff being distant back from the first in a right line with the mark 133
foot. E is the fourth staff running sydewise orthogonally or in a squire from
the third, until the fardest part of your length or mark is perceived in a
right line with the second staf, being distant from D the third staff 120
foot. Now by subtraction subduce 100 from 120, there remains your divisor
20. Then multiply 133 with 120, so ryseth 15960, which divided by 20 comes
798 foot the true distance between D and A.

But forasmuch as this conclusion is to be done without instrument, and here
orthogonall motion sidewise is required, it shall be requisite also to declare
how an orthogonal or right angle is upon the sudden to be made, ye shall
therefore (according to Pythagoras invention mentioned among the diffinitions at
the beginning of this Book) take 3 staves, cords or such like, making the one
4 such parts as the other is 3 and the third 5: This done conioyne their ends
together and the angle subtended of the longest staff is a right, which
first placed at B, and after at D, directing one of his comprehending sides to
A, the other shall guide you to C and E, or if you desire with more expedition
to dispatche and not tarry the proportioning of the cords or such like to this
Pythagoricall rule, take any 3 staves, sticks or threades, and conioyne them,
making a triangle, it forces not of what form or fashion it be: then placing
one angle thereof at B, turning one side to A, direct your self sydewise by
the other, alway^s remembering to place the same angle at D, and departing
sydewise again in like manner, in all the rest do as before is declared. Thus
using any mean diligence, ye shall most exactely measure any distance.

The 19. Chapter. With halbardes, pikes or staves having no other
instruments, you may measure the distance between any two marks lying in a
right line from you, not approaching any of them.
YOu shall first (as was declared in the last Chapter) prepare an angle with
joining any 3 staves or such like together, which you must (at your standing)
place in such sort that one of the sides co^tayning the Angle, may lie
directly toward the mark: the^ setting up a staff, pike or other mark there,
depart sidewise as the other side of your angle shall direct you, so far as
you list, the more ground the better. And there set up your second staff or
mark, then go directly back from your first staff (always keeping it
exactly between your sight and the marks) as many score again or pike
length as ye list, setting up a third staff. This done, you shall place the
same angle you used at your first staff, now again at your third staff,
in all points as it was before: The one side of the angle lying directly
toward the first staf, the other side will show you whither you shall go to
place your fourth staff, for passing on still in a right line with that side
of your angle, you shall at the last find the second staff justly situate
between you and the fardest mark, there set up the fourth staff, then remove
your angle again to the second staf, and placing there as before the one side
even with the first staff pass on in a right line with the other till you
come directly between your nearest mark and the fourth staff, there pitche
up the fifth. Now shall you measure how many pace, halberd or pike length is
between your first and second staff, deducting that from the distance
between the third and fourth, and this remain you shall reserve for a
divisor. Then multiply the distance between the second and fifte staff in
the distance between the third and fourth staff, the producte divided by your
reserved divisor, yields in the quotient the true distance between these two
marks.

Example.
AB the two marks whose distance I would measure, C my standing place where I
set up my first staff, I my triangle made of three stauos, halberdes, bills,
or any such like things, KLM, the angle which I will now use in this practice
N, first placed at C, secondly at D, thirdly at E, at C and D, the situation is
all one, but at E, it somewhat differs as you may behold in this figure,
which I would have you note lest happily ye be deceived in your practice, the
first staff C, the second E, the third staff D, F the 4, G the fifth staff,
CE the distance between the first and third deducted from DF, the distance
between the second and fourth there remains HF your divisor, which measured,
I admit 50 halberd lengths. The distance between GE 3^ halberde lenghtes, the
space between DF 100 pike length. Now, 100 multiplied in 30 produces 3000,
which divided by 50 leueth in the quotient 60, I conclude therefore the distance
between AB 60 pike lengthes. This one thing is specially to be noted, that
whatsoever you mete the space GE withal, whether it be halberd, bill, arrow or
staff that ye use the same in measuring HF, and as for DF, it forces not what
you measure it withal, marry what soever it be, your quotient shall bear the
same denomination: precisenes is to be used in placing of your triangle, and in
measuring EG and HF, otherwise error may ensue, especially if DF be but a small
distance, and the angle at B very sharp, there needs in this matter no
further admonition, small practice will resolve all doubts.



The.20. Chapter. To measure the distance betvveene any two marks howsoever
they be situate, though there be rivers or such like impedimentes betvveene
you, as ye cannot approach nighe any of them, and that without instrument also.
Your angle as before has been said, prepared of any three staves, you shall
first at pleasure set up one staff, and applying thereunto your angle in such
sort, that the one containing side lie directly to one of your marks (which
here for distinction I will call the first) go backwarde to and fro till you
find your second mark precisely covered with your staff, noting what part
of the side subtending the angle is cut by your line visuall, and there make a
fine notche, or mark upon that subtending staff, which done you shall go
sidewise from the first erreared staff, as the other containing side of your
triangle will direct you so far as ye list, and then set up your second
staff, yet pass on from thence in a right line as many foot pace or other
measure, as you will, setting up again the third staff, now at your second
staff situate your triangle in all respects as it was at the first, and pass
on from thence in a right line with that containing side of your angle that
rises from your staves, and comes somewhat toward the mark going so far
till you epsy your self justly between your third staff and the first
mark, there set up the fourth staff, then resort to your angle again, and
standing behind that second staff, note whether a right line from the angle
to that notche (before made on the subtendent staff or side of the triangle)
will direct you, for that way precisely shall you go on till you come in a
right line with the second mark and third staff erecting there the fifth
staff. This done you must measure the distance between your second and
third staff, reserving that for a divisor, then multiply the distance
between your first and third staff in the distance between the fourth and
fyfte staff, the producte divided by your reserved divisor, yeldeth in the
quotient the true distaunce between the two marks.

Example.
AB the two marks whose distance I would mete C, my first staff, I my
triangle made of 3 staves placed thereat, as you may see in the figure
directing with the one containing side to A, the first mark, and with the
other to D and E my second and third staves, H is the fine notche or mark
upon the side subtendent to my angle, where the line visual from C to the
second mark B passes, my triangle I situate now at D as it was before at C,
the one containing side lying even with the errered staves, the other directs
to my forth staff F, placed in aright line with E, the third staff, and A
the first mark. Again my line visuall proceeding from D to H the subtle
notche in the subtendente side of the angle, extends to my fifte staff G,
situate exactlye between E the third staff, and B the other mark: This
done, I measure the distaunce between my second and third staff, finding it
20 foot, likewise between the fourth and fifth staff 72 foot, finally
between the first and third staff 65. pase, so that according to the rule
before given, multiplying 65 in 72, I have 4680 which divided by 20 yeldeth in
the quotient 234, so many pase is there between A and B. I have not here set
out the figure in just proportion, answering to these numbers, for that is not
requisite, but in such form as may best open and make manyfeste the
situation of the staves and triangle, wherein consists all the difficulty of
this practice.

A proof or demonstration Geometrical of the former conclusion.


TO avoid tediouse recitalles of the premises, I suppose the figure in all
respects made as it was before: the proposition that I will here demonstrate
shall be, that DE retayneth the same proportion to EC, that GF does to AB,
which admitted or assumed as a Lemma, the rule before given of multiplying FG
in EC, and dividing by DE, to produce AB may two ways be approved
geometrically by the 16 proposition of the 6 book of Euclides elements, and
arithmetically by the 19 proposition of the 7 book of the same elements, wherein
I mind not to use mo words, considering it is nothing else but the calculation
by the rule of three, whose demonstration has been handled by diverse, and
well known to any, meanly in these matters trauayled. But how these DE and EC
become to be proportional with GF and AB has not ben by any hitherto proved,
this Lemma therefore or proposition I mind to demonstrate. First it is
apparante that DF is equidistante to AC by the 2^ propositon of the first of
Euclides elements, the words are these.

(...). And may thus be englished, if any right line falling or passing through
two other right lines, making the outward angle equal to the inward opposite
on the same side, or the two inward angles joined together equal unto two
right angles, those two right lines are parallele: but here the line EC passing
through the lines AC, DF makes the outward angle FDE equal to the inward
opposite on the same side ACD by supposition, because they were both made with
one angle of the triangle, I may therefore conclude by this Theoreme, that DF is
equidistante to CA, and farther infer by the second Theoreme of the sixth
book, that AF to FF has the same proportion that CD has to DE, the
proposition is this. (...) (...).

If a parallele line be drawn to any side of a triangle it shall
proportionallye cut the two other sides, and if two sides of a triangle be
proportionally divided the line that coupleth those divisions shall be parallele
to the other side. It is manifest by the first part of this theoreme that DF
being as it was before proved parallele to AC one side of the triangle ACE that
it does proportionally divide the two other sides CE, EA, in the points FD the
like shall be proved of DG, for seeing the right line CE falls on the two
right lines DG, CB making the outward angle HDE equal to the inward and
opposite angle HCD on the same side of the line CE which in the construction of
the figure was supposed, it must needs follow by the 28 proposition of the
first book of Euclide tofore recited, that DG is parallele to CB, and
forasmuch as in the triangle BCE, DG is drawn parallele to the one side CB, it
shall by the second proposition of the 6 book of Euclide (before also recited)
divide the two other sides CE, EB proportionally, so that BG shall retain the
same proportion to GE that CD does to DE, and so consequently the same that AF
does to FE, as it is plain by the eleventh theoreme of the fifth book of
Euclide: his words be these.

(...). The sense thereof is this, that any two proportions being equal or
agreeable to any one are also equal between themselves, as here first it was
proved that AF to FE bare the same proportion that CD to DE, and now that BG to
GE retains the same proportion that CD to DE: therefore by the theoreme last
recited AF to FE and BG to GE, shall be proportional: so have you now two sides
of the triangle AEB proportional with two sides of the triangle FEG, and the
angles contained of those sides equal. Therefore by the 6 theoreme of the 6
book those two triangles are equiangle, the words of that theoreme are these.

(...).

If two triangles have an angle in the one equal to one angle in the other, and
about those equal angles the sides proportional, those two triangles shall be
equiangle, and those angles, equal whose subtendent sides are proportional,
Euclide also in his 4 proposition of the same book says thus.

(...).

In equiangle triangles as well the containing as the subtending sides of equal
angles are proportional, I may therefore affirm (seeing the triangles ABE, EFG
are equiangle) that AB has the same proportion to FG, that AE has to FE, but
before it was proved that AF and FE were proportional to CD and DE,
conioynedly therefore AE to FE, shall retain the same proportion that CE does
to DE, by the 18 proposition in the fifte Book of Euclide, saying thus: (...).

If magnitudes disioynedly or seperatly be proportional, conioynedly or
compounded, they shall also be proportional, whereupon I may finally infer
by the 11 proposition of Euclides fifte Book tofore recited, that AB to GF
retayneth the same proportion that CE does to DE, because they both observe the
same proportion that AE does to OF. And thus to conclude, it is manifest that
AB, FG, CE, DE, are 4 quantities proportional: whereof three known, the
fourth AB by the rule of proportion is to be found. Very like unto this is the
Demonstration of the other, and by the selfsame propositions to be proved, and
therefore superfluous to use mo words.

The.21. Chapter How ye may most pleasantly and exactely with a plain glass
from an high cliffe, measure the distance of any ship or ships on the sea
as follovveth.
THE best kind of glass for this purpose is of steel finely pullished, so
that the Superficies thereof be smoothe, neither conuexe nor concaue, but
flat and plain as may be possible. This glass it behooves ye to hang up
above the top of the cliffe with the pullished side dounwarde equedistant to
the Horizon wherein you must use great diligence, for if there happen any error
in the situation thereof, great inconvenience may follow in your
mensurations. This done, let a plumbeline fall from the center of your glass
to the Superficies or ground platte on the top of the cliffe: (which ground
platte) also you must use some diligence in the choice thereof that it be as
level and plain as ye can find any, but if it be not altogether even or
exact level, ye shall supply that want as I shall hereafter show you: but
to return to the purpose, your Glass thus situate, turning your face toward
the ship or other mark on the sea, whose distance ye desire, go backwarde,
always having your eye fixed on the glass till such time as ye can see the
ship, or rather the very hull next to the water therein, that done let an
other plumbe line fall from your eye to the ground, then circumspectly measure
both the length of these plumbe lines, and also the distance between this
plumbe line and the other that fell from the center of the glass, this done ye
shall deducte the length of the perpendiculare from your eye, out of the
length of the other perpendiculare from your glass, and the difference
reserve for a divisor, then multiply the distance of the two perpendiculare
lines, by the height of the cliffe, I mean from the water upward to the
glass, and the producte divide by your reserved divisor, the quotient will
show you the exact distance to the ship or mark. But if your ground be
not leuel, ye shall by your quadrant search the difference or inequality
thereof, and if it be lower at the glass than at the viewing station, you shall
deduct the difference from your divisor, but if contrariwise, the difference
shall be added to the divisor, and then shall ye work as I have before declared.



Example.
SVppose a ship on the sea C, whose distaunce I desire to know standing on
the cliffe GFE, your glass A equidistantly eleuate, AB the perpendiculare line
72 inches, E your viewing station, DE the altitude of your eye 69 inches, BE
the distance between your two perpendiculare lines 20 foot, FG the height of
the cliffe from the sea 96 pase. Now by deductings 69 inches the altitude of
your eye from 72 the length of AB, the plumbe line from the glass, there
remains 3 your Divisor; if the ground be level, otherwise ye must add or
detracte the difference or inequality according to the rules to fore given,
but here supposing your ground level your divisor remains 3. then resolve
20 foot into inches, and multiplye the same in the altitude of the cliffe up
to the glass 98, so have ye 23520, which divided by 3 yeldeth in the quotient
7840, which is the exact distaunce of that part of the ship which ye did
espy from the center of your glass.

YOu may on this manner from an high hill or mountain, having any plain or
level ground on the top, not only measure the distance of any mark that
ye can see, but also set forth the true platte and proportion of an whole
Country, with all the Towns, Coasts, Harboronghes. etc.

For if you mean circularely about your glass, always when you espy any mark,
setting up a staff, writing thervppon the name of the place ye see, whether it
be village, port, road, or such like, ye shall in the end situate as it were
the whole country in due proportion upon your platfourme, so that measuring
the distaunce of every staff set up from the middle line perpendiculare
falling from the glass, and the distaunce likewise of every staff from other,
ye may (working by the golden rule) find out the exact distaunce of every
town, village, port, road or such like from your platfourme, and also how
far every one is distante off from other. Thus much I thought good to open
concerning the effects of a plain Glass, very pleasant to practice, yea most
exactlye serving for the description of a plain champion country. But
marueylouse are the conclusions that may be performed by glasses concaue and
conuex of circulare and parabolicall fourmes, using for multiplication of
beams sometime the aid of glasses transparent, which by fraction should
unite or dissipate the images or figures presented by the reflection of other.
By these kind of glasses or rather frames of them, placed in due angles, ye
may not only set out the proportion of an whole region, yea represent before
your eye the lively image of every town, village, etc. and that in as little
or great space or place as ye will prescribe, but also augment and dilate any
parcel thereof, so that whereas at the first appearance an whole town shall
present it self so small and compacte together that ye shall not discern any
difference of streates, ye may by applycation of glasses in due proportion
cause any peculiare house, or room thereof dilate and show it self in as
ample form as the whole town first appeared, so that ye shall discern any
trifle, or read any letter lying there open, especially if the son beams
may come unto it, as plainly as if you were corporally present, although it be
distante from you as far as eye can discrye: But of these conclusions I mind
not here more to entreat, having at large in a volume by it self opened the
miraculous effects of perspectiue glasses. And that not only in matters of
discovery, but also by the sun beams to fire, powder, or any other
combustible matter, which Archimedes is recorded to have done at Syracusa in
Sicilie, when the Roman Navy approached that Town. Some have fondly surmised
he did it with a portion of a section Parabolical artificially made to reflect
and unite the son beams a great distance of, and for the construction of
this glass take great pains with high curiosity to write large and many
intricate demonstrations, but it is a mere fancy and utterly impossible, with
any one glass whatsoever it be to fire any thing, only one thousand pase off,
no though it were a 100 foot over, marry true it is, the Parabola for his
small distance, most perfectly does unite beams, and most vehemently burns
of all other reflecting glasses. But how by applycation of mo glasses to
extend this unity or concourse of beams in his full force, yea to augment
and multiply the same, that the farther it is carried the more violently it shall
pearse and burn. Hoc opus hic labor est, wherein God sparing life, and the
time with opportunity serving, I mind to imparte with my country men some
such secrets, as has I suppose in this our age ben revealed to very few, no
less serving for the security and defense of our natural country, than
surely to be meruailed at of strangers.

The.22. Chapter. The making of an Instrument named the Geometrical square.
YE shall prepare a fine plain Plate, or a clean four square planed boarde,
yea, for want of them, four equal, smooth, and well tried rulers, of what
length, breadth or thickness ye list, the longer the better, yet in my fantasy
to avoid painful carriage, it is most commodious that every of them be but a
foot and an half in length, one inche in breadth, a quarter or more thick,
ye must join them by the help of some Artificers squirewise, upon those
rulers plate or boorde justly joined, draw four lines perpendiculare or
squire the one to the other: Now divide the two fardest sides from the center,
each having 1200 portions at the last, mark all from your center, forget not
to have an index, not with commune sightes, but thus, let the nearest be a
thin plate half an ynche broad, and 3 inches in height, and in the mids a
fine slytte, the second and fardest from the center of that length, a streigth
pynne with a little knobbe in the top. These sightes must be justly set upon
the line fiduciall of your Index. This Index I would wish also marked with
2000 such divisions as the scale side has 1200, it has place in the ce^tre,
and there made to tarry, so that with ease it may be turned from the first to
any point. The exact handling of this instrument with most comlynesse framed,
I commit to the diligent maker. For more instruction, behold the Figure, ye may
commodiously describe a quadrant in your square the making of which is declared.

The.23. Chapter. You may redely hereby without Arithmetike mete the distance
of any mark.
THis instrument handsomely placed upon his staff or otherwise, lay the line
fiduciall of your index upon the beginning of the degrees in your Quadrant,
and turn your whole instrument (the index not moved) till ye may espy
through the sightes your mark then remove the index to the contrary side of
the quadra^t, placing the line fiducial on the side line where the degrees
end, and looking through the sightes, ye shall epsy a mark sidewise, some
certain number of scores, the more the better. This done, set up a staff where
the center of your instrument was, and placing it again at the mark last
espied, set your index on the beginning of the degrees, moving your whole
instrument, till you find through the sightes the ^^af at the first statio^,
then remove your index (the quadrant keeping his place) till ye may again
epsy through the sights your mark, which done, note the degrees cut by the
line fiducial: and then work thus, upon some even smothe superficies whether
it be board plate or paper: draw first a straight line, and opening your
compass to some small distance, call that space a score and make so many such
divisions in your line as there is scores between^ your stations. Then ereare
upon the one end of your line a perpe^dicular, and fixing the one foot of your
compass at the other end, opening it to what wydnesse ye think good, draw an
arcke rising from the same line that represents your stationarie distance,
and dividing it into degrees (as you were taught in making the quadrant)
extend from the center to the number of grades cut by your line fiduciall a
right line, till it concur with the perpendiculare before ereared. Then see
how often that space (which represented the score in dividing your stationarie
distance) is contained in the perpendiculare, so many score is the mark off
from your first station, and by dividing the Hypothenusal line, you may in like
manner find the distance from the second station.

Example.
A the first station, C the second, D the mark, AC four score pase: degree^
of the quadrant cut at the second station, 71: H the unity or measure
representing one score, OF 4 parts, GF 12, GE 12, or near there about. Thus
may you conclude the distance of the mark from the first station 12 score
pace. The Hypoth^nusal line or distance of the mark from the second statio^ 12
score and 13 pace.



The.24. Chapter. How with your square Geometrical to tell any length so
far as ye may see by supputation.
YOu shall disagree from those writers that have declared the use of the square
in the Latin tongue, other than this which I shall now open unto you. So order
your Geometrical square, that al sides may be of like height from the ground,
to avoid grass, mole hills and such other impediments, precisenes in this
ordering is not so requisite, call to reme^^rance that your square has two
principal lines, one squire unto the other running from the ce^tre of either
side to the beginning of your points: ^et your index* yea the line fiduciall
upon one of those lines, that side lying ^long with the index toward the
mark. Now, the extreme part of ^our length perceived through your sightes,
turns the index (the square ^ot moved) to the other principal line, squire to
the first, looking again through the sightes, and noting some mark a good
distance from you the ^ore ground the surer: This done and a staff pitched up
where the cen^re of your instrument stood, convey that instrument to the second
mark, ^urning it and your index to the place where you first were, the index
being in the principal line as before, even so soon as ye can epsy your first
^tation through the sights, remove that index until you may see ye extreme
^art of your length, your sight receiving it diligently note the points
tou^hed: Now if the index fall on the left side of your scale, I mean ye side
which falls perpendicular to that side of the square issuing from the cen^re,
whereon your index was first placed, then must ye multiply the space between
the first and second place by these parts cut, and divide by 1200, the
quotient is your desire. But if the index fall on the right side of the scale,
then shall you work contrary, multiplying the space between your stations in
1200, and dividing by the parts cut, or ye may reduce ye parts of the right
side, to parts proportional of the left, and work with them according to the
first rule thus: Divide the square of 1200 by the parts cut in the right side
of your scale, the quotient is the parts proportional, which increased by the
distance of your stations, making partitio^ by 1200, the quotient is the true
distance of the mark from your first station.

Example.
A Is the place to be measured, B, the mark where I first disposed mine
instrument, from it I go orthogonally to C the index cutting there 400 in the
right side of your square, the distance between B and C, I have supposed 80
pace, wherefore multiply 1200 by 80, so there comes 96000, which divided by
400, declares unto me 240 pace, the true length from B to A. Or by dividing
1440000 the square of 1200, with 400 the parts cut, you shall produce in the
quotient 3600, your proportional parts found by the rule of reduction, which
augmented in 80, yeldeth 288000, and that divided by 1200, brings in the
quotient 240, which is the longitude AB, agreeing with the former operation.
This manner of reduction, I would wish you diligently to note, for it shall
hereafter in diverse conclusions be used.



The.25. Chapter. How to mete any line Hypothenusall as the distance from your
eye standing in a valley to the top of an hill or high turret. etc.
FIrst, if the hill or turret be steep up, so that the foot be visible lying
perpe^dicularly under the top, ye shall first measure the distance of the base,
either by this instrument or otherwise as was before declared: and also the
height of the top or summitie of ye same hill or four: which done, ye shall
square as well the longitude as the altitude, joining together the productes, the
root quadrat of the whole number, is the desired distance or line
Hypothenusal: you may in this manner (approaching nighe any town of war) tell
the just length of the scaling laders that shall reach from the brym of the
ditch or edge of the counterscarfe, to the top of the wall or curtein, by adding
the square of ye ditches latitude, to the height of the curteyne above the
leuel of ye outward banck, for the root of the producte will be the true
length of the scaling ladder.



A the top of the hill, B the foot, C my station or the place of mine eye, A
B 60 pace, CB 200 pace, the square of 60 is 3600, the square of 200 is 40000,
these two joined together make 43600, whose Quadrate root being about 208 pace
3 foot is the Hypothenusall line AC. Likewise AB the breadthe of the Ditche
being 30 foot, and BC the altitude of the curtain 20 foot, there two squares
added together bring forth 1300, whose Quadrate root being 36 foot very
nighe, is the length of the scaling ladder AC. But if the base of your
mountain be not visible, then ereare up your Geometrical square, the index
placed (as was before declared) toward the top of the Hill A, and removing
the Index (your square standing immovable) epsy your second station
Orthogonally at D where ye must place the Center of your Instrument, and so
situate your square again, that you may behold both your station and the
mountain top without stirring of the square, only removing the Index: in all
the rest do as is before already sufficiently declared, behold the Figure,
there needs no other Example. The last Chapter well understood, opens this
most plainly.

To measure the distance between any two marks that lie in one right line
from your eye.


YOu may resolve this by the former, measuring how far either is Distant
from your self, and then deducte the one from the other, Or thus an other
way, the side of your Geometrical square directed toward them, depart
Orthogonally (as is tofore declared) 100 or 200 paces as ye list, the more the
better, then place your Instrument again, turning the side toward your first
station, removing the index to either of the marks, noting what parts at
either place the index does cut of the scale. And if the index at both times
fall on the left side, deduct the less from the greater, with the number
remaining, augment the distance between your stations, and divide by the whole
side of the Scale, your Quotient is the distance. If the index at either time
fall on the right side, then must you by the rule before given, reduce them into
parts proportional, or if at one time the index fall on the left, at an other
time on the right, then shall you only reduce the parts cut on the right
side, which done, deduct as before is said the lesser from the greater, and
with the remainder multiply your distance stationary, the product divided by
1200 yeldeth how far one mark is beyond the other.

Example.
Admit AB the marks in a right line from C your first station, D the second
station Orthogonally situate from C, where your square being placed, suppose
your Index first cut 800 parts on the left side, and after 900 parts on the
right, these 900 of right ye must reduce, dividing the square of 1200 by 900,
as was taught in the former Chapter: so will your Quotient amount to 1600,
from which if ye withdraw 800 the parts cut on the left side, there will
remain 800 which multiplied in 200 pace the distance stationary CD, there
amou^teth 160000 This divided by 1200 yeldeth in the Quotient 133 the distances
therefore of AB your marks is 133 pace, one foot 8 inches.

The.26. Chapter. To measure the distance betvveene any two marks lying in
one plain level ground with your eye or station how so ever they be
situate without supputation.
MEasure by the rules tofore given, how far either mark is of from you, then
placing the index upon the side of the square, turn your instrument til you can
epsy through the sights one of your marks, the square so remaining stedy,
move your index toward the other mark, and when you have found that mark also
through your sights, note what degrees of the Quadrant, the line fiducial
cutteth, this done, ye shall upon some plain board, plate, or such like,
draw a straight line, then open your Compass some mean wideness, and fixing
one foot at the beginning of the line, with the other make an intersection.
Now if the marks be many Miles off, you may term that portion a Mile, or if
the distance of the marks be small, a skore, but if they be very near at
hand, this little line shall represent a pace only, herein you must use
discretion, respecting the distance of the marks, and so proportioning your
line which is the unity of the work, that your Plate or board may receive
the rest of your operations: then proceed with your compass, making so many
Divisions in your drawn line, as there are Miles, scores or paces in the
distance of one of your marks from your standing, this finished, open your
Compass at pleasure, fixing the one foot at the end of your line, with the
other draw a Circumference or Arc, and this Arc you shall divide into
Degrees, as was taught before in the making of the Quadrant, beginning at your
drawn line, and so passing on, till you come to such number of Degrees, as
was cut by the line Fiduciall, then laying a Ruler to the Center, applying it
to that end of the Arc, draw an other straight line, and your Compass
again opened to the length of your little line, (which I term the unity of
your work) begin at the foresaid Center, making again so many Divisions in
that latter line, as there was Miles, scores or paces in the distance of the
other mark from your standing: And if it fall out that in those Distances
there be any odd score, pace, or feet, ye may divide one of those little lines
or unities of your work, into mo parts accordingly, and so set forth
proportionally the exact Distances of the two marks according to the measure
first found: this done, ye shall couple together the ends of the two straight
lines with an other straight line, finally opening your compass to the length
of the unity, beginning at the one end of this last drawn line, measure how
many of these unities is therein contained, for so many Miles, scores or pace
(according to the Denominatio^ of the unity) may ye say there is certainly
between those two marks. But if at the end of this latter mesuring, there be
any portion left less than the unity, you must as I have tofore said by
Division of the unity search out what portion it is. For more plainness
behold the Example.

Example.
Admit I would mesure the distance between AB two churches, my self standing on
a hill at C, first I suppose CA 10 mile, CB 13, the arc of the quadrant cut by
the line fiduciall.30. degrees, then resorting to some plain boorde such like,
I draw the right line OF: My unity or mile I make D, and ope^^ng my compass
to that measure, I tell on 13, making an end at F, then ope^^ng my compass at
pleasure, I make the arc HI, one foot of my compass ^^stned in E, and
beginning at H, I number toward I 30 grades, ending at K: ^^en draw I the line
EK, forth to G. which with my compass extended to the ^^ngth of D, I divide
into 10 parts, and, finishing at G, and with a right line ^nioyning GF, I
measure again how many unities is therein contained, I find ^ or therabout,
herefore I conclude between these two churches 6 miles, this ^ude of measuring
is good for the unlearned, but such as have Arithmetike, over rules most
exact shall ensue.

The.27. Chapter. The composition of the instrument called Theodelitus.
IT is but a circle divided in 360 grades or degrees, or a semicir^^ parted in
180 portions, and every of those diuisio^s in 3 or rather 6 smaller parts, to
it ye may add the double scale, whose single composition is mentioned. The
sides of that scale divided in (...) 60, or 100 parts. The index of that
instrument with the sightes etc. are not unlike to that which the square has:
In his back prepare a vice (...) to be fastened in the top of some staff if it
be a circle as here: let you^ instrument be so large that from the center to
the degrees may be a (...) in length, more if ye list, so shall you not err in
your practizes, the ba^^ side must be plain and smooth to draw circles and
lines upon, as shall (...) declared: for a farther declaration of that I have
said, behold this fy^gure following.



The.28. Chapter. To search the best proportion or simetrie of many places
with the true distance approchyng near none of them by the instrument named
Theodelitus.
THis instrument upon his staff or otherwise in the field placed the index
being in his diameter, let it direct your sight to some one place which ye will
mesure. Truly in my fantasy it were more commodious if his dimetie^t or diameter
were first laid in a straight line, bringing the sight to ye uttermost place
toward the left hand, so conueying your index to every (...) or mark on the
right side, noting diligently the angle or angles of (...) upon some state
stone or table prepared, which angles here I call grades or degrees from the
dimetient apparently cut by the line (...) whilst he is brought to every
mark. This performed, resort to back side of your instrument where
necessity requires a circle or a ^^^icircle to be made, divided exactly in
360, or if it be an half circle in degrees or portions, even as your
Theodelitus here is, from whose (...) must finely draw those angles of
position noted before in your (...) taken by your instrument, so that after
your purpose had, they (...) be clean put out, then pull the index the
instrumente unmoved to^^^d the right hand, at pleasure observing through the
fights some mark (...) yardes from you or less as ye list. There shall be
your second (...), notyng upon your slate the angle of position from the
dimetient (...) line fiduciall, directing to the second place or mark, which
^word must draw in the back side from the Center at large even as you (...)
it in your instrument, then convey your Theodelitus from thence to second mark
or standing place, causyng the diameter justly to note (...) first abiding.
And here even as tofore ye must search Angles of (...) again, and mark them
in the table or slate, which done, resort to the (...), and upon the last
angle being the line directing to the second stan^^^g place, draw a circle as
far or near to the other as ye list: Or a (...) duided in 180 degrees. Whose
diuisyons must take their begyn^ge at the line which is Diameter of the
semicircle. Now draw (...) visuall lines or angles of position last taken by
your instrument ^arge, and see where the lines meet, or a like touches his
like. So (...) you the due proportions, for the distaunce ye shall work
thus, (...) the line that goes from the center of the one circle or semicircle
to the other, in as many portions as ye think mete, or rather in so many (...)
find certain measure, and by those parts divide the lines betwixt eue^ry place
of which ye require the length. Then multiply the portions that are between
any two sections or places in the distance of your two stati^ons, which I
imagined here.300 pace, and make partition by those part^ that are betwixt the
two centres, so have ye the true length or distance (...) two such places. In
like manner ye must do of the rest.



Example.
Whereby all thing may better appear, ABC are the marks in the field to be
measured, D the first abiding or standing place, where ye shall set the center
of your instrument, his diameter lying directly against A the first mark
EFGH the four visuall lines running by the angles of position of the
instrument unto all the marks: the first noting no degree or portion: the
second 20, the third 40, the fourth 90 degrees of the instrument, which
directs to the second station M, where ye shall now set the center of your
instrument, the diameter lying right against your first abiding. here the lines
visuall IKL running to the marks: out new angles of position again. The first
notes 55 degrees, the second 74, the third 85 grades. Now, if ye mark
diligently where these lines cross the other, there is the true proportion of
such places, from those sections or crossings draw right lines as appears by
the Figure. Now to get the distance, ye shall seek out the space between the
two stations DM: being 300 pase or yardes, notwithstanding it is divided but
into 18 parts: also between the marks or places A and B, are contained 11
such parts. Seeing that I am ignorant what number of yardes be contained in
those 11 portions, I am compelled to work by the rule of proportion thus, 18
brings 300 yardes, what shall 11 bring me? your quotient shows 183 and 2/6
that is, which makes a foot: so between A and B are contained 183 pases and
a foot. Thus of all other as well of DA, DB, DC, MC, MB, MA, as of CB, CA, the
Reader must not be ignorant that even as I have supposed by this figure, the
instrument in the field placed and all things performed by it with all
diligence marked upon a slate or such like, so ought it to be exactly drawn
on the backeside of your instrument, eauen as the Figure before declares.

Certes most excellent and far passing all other is this kind of measuring,
requiring great exercise, the distance of one place had I am brought into the
knowledge of many with the best proportion.

The.29. Chapter The construction of an instrument Topographicall serving most
commodiously for all manner mensurations.
Having already plainly declared the making of the Quadrant Geometrical with
his scale therein contained, whose use is chiefly for altitudes and
profundities: the composition also of the square and planisphere or circle
named Theodelitus, for measuring lenghtes, breadthes and distances. Yt may
seem superfluous more to write of these matters, yet to finishe this treatise,
I think it not amiss to show how you may join these three in one, whereby
you shall frame an instrument of such perfection, that no manner altitude,
latitude, longitude, or profunditie can offer it self, howsoever it be
situate, which you may not both readely and most exactly measure. You shall
therefore first prepare some large four square pullished plate of Latin,
wherein you may describe your Geometrical square, his sides divided in 1200
parts at the lest, with index and sightes as was before showed: describing also
within the same square the Planisphere or circle called Theodelitus, then must
you upon an other fine pullished plate, draw your Quadrant, or rather a
semicircle divided justly into 180 grades, and within the same a double scale:
every side containing at the least an 120 parts, finally, fixing on the
dimetient thereof two sightes perpendicularly reared, and equedistantly persed,
so as the line visuall may pass parallele to that diameter. You have a double
Quadrant Geometrical with a double scale, which you must by the aid of some
skillful Artificer, so place over the other plate wherein your square
Geometrical and Theodelitus was described, that his center may exactly rest
in a Perpendicular line from the center of the planisphere or circle named
Theodelitus his circu^ference depending dounwarde. And this double Quadrant or
semicircle, must in such sort be connexed to the Perpendiculare erected from
the center of the planisphere, and alhidada at the foot thereof, that what way
so ever the Diameter with sightes be turned, the Alhidada may always remain
exactly underneath it, directing both to one vertical circle or poincte of
the Horison: this perpendiculare whereunto the semicircle s center is fastened,
ought also to be marked with 200 parts equal to the divisions of the scale
beginning at the center, so proceeding dounward til you come to the end of
those 200 portions: more I need not say of this instrument, considering the
construction, if every part has been severally de^lared sufficiently before,
for the placing and ^onioyning of them, behold the Figures.



IKLH the square Geometrical, MN his index with sightes, GEFO Theodelitus, GF
his Alhidada er index with sightes AB the line perpendiculare from B dounward
noted with 200 parts, equal to the divisions of the scale, DRC the semicircle
having on his Diameter two sightes fixed as was tofore declared. This is also
to be noted, that the double scale is compound of two Geometrical squares, the
one serving for altitudes, the other for profundities. The square which the
line perpendicular cutteth when the Diameter is directed to any marks lying
lower than your station, I call the scale of profundities, the other shall for
distinction be named the scale of altitudes.



THis semicircle ought so to be placed that the center B hang directly over the
center A and that the diameter DC with his sightes may be moved up and down,
and also sidewise whither you list, always carrying GF about directly under it.
You must also prepare a staff pyked at the end, to pitche on the ground with
a flat plate on the top to set this instrument upon. It is also requisite
that within Theodelitus you have a needle or fly so rectified, that being
brought to his due place the cross diameters of the Planisphere may
demonstrate the four principal quarters of the Horizon, East, Weste, North
and Southe: And this may you do by drawing a right line making an angle (with
that one diameter of your instrument representing the meridiane) equal to the
variation of the compass in your region: which in England is 11 grades or
near therabout, and may be redely observed in all places sundry ways. But
thereof I mind not here to entreat, forasmuch as it appertains to
Cosmographie, and nauigatio^, whereof I have co^piled a treatise by it self,
touching ye fabricatio^ this may suffice. Now for ye use great heed must you
take in pitching of the staff whereupon this instrument is placed, that it
stand perpendicularely, which by a line and plummet ye may try, also when
the ^nstrument is placed thereon, ye shall by a line and plummet fixed on ^he
center of the semicircle discern whither it be rightly situate: for if the
thread and plummet hanging at liberty fall close by the perpendicu^are, then
is it well: otherwise ye must move the staff to and fro till ye find it so.
This done, it behooves you also to set this instrument on your staff, that the
needle have his due place, so as the semidimetientes of Theodelitus may direct
unto the four cardines or quarters of the Horizon, then what soever mark you
espy, whose distance, altitude or profunditie you desire, turn the dimetient
of the semicircle to and fro, ^p or down, till through the sightes thereon
fixed you have espied it, ^lway the circle or Theodelitus remaining immovable:
finally you shall note both what degrees the Alhidada cutteth of the circle,
and the perpendiculare of the semicircle, and also what parts of the
perpendicu^are is intercepted with the scale, these numbers thus found, you
shall ^iuersly use as shall hereafter be declared. This is farther to be noted
that ^he double scale is compounde of two geometrical squares, the one serving
for altitudes, the other for profundities. The square which the line
perpendicular cutteth when the diameter is directed to any mark lying ^ower
than your station, I call the scale of profundities, the other shall for
distinction be named the scale of altitudes.

The.30. Chapter. By this instrument to know how many miles or pase any
Ship is distante from you, your self standing upon an high cliffe or plat
form by the sea coaste.
YOur Topographicall instrument equedistantly situate to the Horizon, (as was
before declared) turn the diameter of the semicircle toward the ship, and
when you have espied through the sights the wall or lowest part of the hull
next the water, note exactly what part of the scale is touched with the line
perpendiculare, the^ measure the height of the cliffe, or rather the center of
your semicircles altitude above the sea, and multiply the same in the hole side
of your scale, dividing by the parts touches of the perpendiculare line in
your scale, the quotient is the distance of the ship from the basis or foot of
the cliffe lying perpendicu^arely under the center of your instrument, but if
you multiply the parts of the perpendiculare intercepted with the Scale in the
cliffes altitu^e before measured, and divide by the parts of the scale cut,
he quoti^^t will show the line Hypothenu^al, or distance of that part of the
ship which your line visuall touched from your eye, or adjoining the square
of the longitude first found to the square of the altitude, the root quadrat
of the product is also the true length of the line visuall.

Example.


ADmit I stand on the cliffe A, and see the ship B lying at rode in the sea,
I desire to know how far of she is from me, mine instrument conveniently
placed at C (as is tofore declared) I turn my dimetient of my semicircle
toward the ship, moving it up and down till I espy through the sightes ^he
wall of the hull next the sea, and therewithal I find my perpendiculare
cut^^ng the third part of my Scale, then measure I the altitude of the cliffe
above ^he sea OF, finding it 59 pase, whereunto I add one for the altitude of
my in^^rument DC, so have I 60 pase, the height of the semicircle above the
sea, which ^ultiplyed in 120 the side of the scale, there amounts 7200,
which divided by 3 ^eldeth in the quotient 2400 pase, that is two miles, 3
furlongs, 25 pases, the lon^itude HB. Now square 2400 pase, se have you
5760000, whereunto if you ad^^yne the square of HD the product will amount to
5763600, whose quadrat ^^ote is the longitude of your line visuall, represented
by DB, being not fully (...) foot more than HB.

THis conclusion serves most commodiously for all such as shall have
committed to their charge any platfourme with ordinance, for here^y you may
exactly at the first view, tell the distance of any ship or ^arke, so that
having a table of Randons made, mounting your pieces ^ccordingly, no vessel can
pass by your platfourme (though it be without ^oynte blancke) but you may with
your ordinance at the first bouge her and never bestow vain shot. This
instrument serves also no less ^ptly to be situate on the rampire or mount
within any town of war, whence you desire with shot to beat the enemy
aloof of, before he shall ^pproche nighe. But to give full instruction for
shooting great ordinance, and for the variation of Randons, having respect to
the length of the ^eece, waighte of the Bullet, force of powder, proportion of
the concaue Cylinders, and distance of the mark, it would require a long
discourse: I have thereof in a book by it self very largely, and I dare be
boulde ^o say, sufficiently entreated: for conferring and conioyning
Geometri^all demonstration, with my long continued painful practices, I have
^t the last reduced that most irregulare course and circuit of the Bul^et
(framed and compounded of violent and natural motions) within ^he bounds of
numbers and arithmeticall rules, which whether it be dif^iculte or no, they
only know that have or shall attempt to do the like. This surely I will say,
that as the ignorant in Geometrical and Arithmeticall proportions, shall never
attain perfection, though he turmoyle ^n powder and shot all the days of his
life: so the Geometer, how excel^ent so ever he be, lening only to discourse of
reason, without practice (yea and that sundry ways made) shall fall into
manyfolde errors, or ine^tricable La^erinthes. Among many that I have read
concerning that matter, I note one Nicholas Tartalea an Italian, who surely for
his singular invention and perfect knowledge in Geometrical demonstrations,
few or none in our time or many ages before may be compared with him: and yet
handling this Argument, he has erred even in the principal, and as I might
term them the veriest trifles: I mean touching the uttermost Randon and
circuit of the Bullet, which he affirms to be made of a circular and right
line: others have supposed it to be compact of many right lines, making several
angles proportionally to the several mounts of the piece, or hollow Cylinders,
and many like opinions and manifest errors have diverse well seen in Geometry
for want of experience admitted and mainteyned. But of these in due place. Now
to this purpose.

The 31. Chapter. To know how much higher or lovver any mark is than the
level from your eye, although there be such impediments between, that you
can neither approach nigh unto it, nor see the base.
HEre shall you use great diligence in the placing of this instrument, that it
be situate precisely equedistant to the Horizon, which done you shall turn the
Diameter of your moveable semicircle to and fro, till you can through the
sightes espy the mark, noting therwithall the points or parts cut in the
scale and perpendiculare, then measure the distance of the same mark from your
eye, as you were taught before, which multiplied in the parts of the scale, if
you divide by the parts of the perpendiculare, the quotient is the difference
how much the mark is higher or lower than your eye. Also if you add the
square of the parts cut in your Scale, to 14400. reserving the producte for a
Divisor, and multiplye the Square of the distaunce Hypothenusall in the Square
of the parts cut in the Scale, dividing the ofcome by the reserved Divisor,
the root quadrates of the quotient is the foresaid difference or inequality
of leuelles. And thus may ye also find how much any one mark is higher or
lower than an other, although they be far a sunder, and either of the^ remote
from you by comparing their altitudes found in this sort together.



Admit B, my station where I place mine instrument A the mark whose altitude I
desire above the level of mine eye, though I may not by reason of sundry
impedimentes approach nyghe unto it, nor see the base. First I measure the
Hypothenusall line AB, by the precepts tofore given, which I suppose 500
pace. then perceiving thorough the sightes of my semicircle the mark A, I
find 10 parts in my scale of altitudes, intercepted with the perpendicular
line, the square thereof ioygned to 14400 produces 14500 my diuisoure. Then
do I multiply the square of 500 in 100, the square of the parts cut in the
Scale, so have I 2^^00000, which divided by 14500, the divisor before
reserved, your (...) quadrate root will he very nighe 41 pace 31 inches, and
this is the true difference or inequality of level between the mark A, and
the center of your semicircle B, so that if a well be soonke of such deapthe
that the bottom thereof were lower than A 41 pace 31 inches, as I admit the
line AC, then may you certainly affirm, that C the bottom of that well is
level with B, and yet may you not thereby, infer that from a fountain
head, lyinge of equal heygth with B, you may naturally d^rya^ water to C, for
the level of waters is circulare, as I have before in the book declared: And
here I think it not amiss to give you a precepte how to find the
diversity of these leuelles, whereby ye may exactly resolve sundry questions
perteyning to water works, wherein diverse have greatly erred, obseruyng not
this difference.

The.32. Chapter. To find the difference between the straight and circular or
true water level from a fountain at any place appointed.
THis difference is nothing else but the length of a pendicular line falling
from the level right line of a fountain to the water level of the same, as
in the figure followynge A is your station, D the fountayn whence I would
convey water to the forte B standing on a hill, C a point by imagination
conceived directely under B within the earth in a level right line from the
fountain D, or rather the Superficies of the water therein contained. E the
water level, that is to say, the highest poyncte that any water will
naturally run at, beeinge conveyed by pype from D. The line CE is this
difference of leuelles which you shall thus attain. First it behooves you
to get the distaunce of the fountain from the place whyther you would
conueye your water, which distaunce you shall multiply by it self, adding
the offcome to the square of the earthes semidimetiente, and out of the
producte extracte the root Quadrate, from which root if you withdraw the
foresaid Semidiameter, the remaynder is your desired difference or live CE.

Example.


Admit the distaunce DC 10 miles, the semidiameter of the earth, 5011 Italyan
miles, every mile containing 1000 pace geometrical, the pace being 5 foot: the
square of this semidiameter is this number of pace 25110121000000. Likewise 10
miles the distaunce squared yeldeth 100000000 paces, this added to the square
of the earthes semidiameter produces 25110221000000 paces: Now if from the
root quadrate thereof ye subtracte the somidiameter, there will remain 9
pace, 4 foot, and 11 inches: so much you may assuredly say, that the water
level E is under the other level at C. Now if you would know standing at A
by the fountain not approchyng nyghe the Castle how deep it were requisite
to sink a well there to receive this water you may thus do, first measure
the line BC, that is to say, how high the ground platte of the Castle is
above the level right line of the fountain D, for this you are taught how
to do before, then search out the difference between the straighte and
water level of the same fountain by the rule given in the last chapter, these
two ioygned together, do produce the profunditie BE, that is how many pace
foot and inches you shall synke a well at the Castle to receive water from
that fountain. Herein there need no example, the premises well understand,
this conclusion is manifest.

The.33. Chapter. You may also by this instrument meet the distance betvveene
ships on the sea, or other marks on the land, how so ever they be situate,
with the aid of Arithmeticall supputation.
First measure the distance of either ship from your station, how soever it
be, which you may do by sundry means before declared, then taking off the
perpendicular and semicircle, and fixing the Index of the square Geometrical
upon his due angle first place it on the side of the square, whence the
^^^isions of the Scale begin to be numbered, and turn the whole plate (^he
Index keepyng his place) till you can espy one of the ships through ^he
sightes. That done move it toward the other ship, which when you can also
espy, note the parts of the Scale touched with the line ^^ducial, and also
the parts of the index, cut with the side of the scale, then shall you thus
work. Multiply the parts of the Scale by the distaunce of the ship which
you last espied through your sightes, and divide by the parts of the index,
the quotient note, for it must serve you to double use, first square it and
square also the distance last viewed through the sightes deduct one of these
squares from the other, the root square of the remaynder ye must compare with
the distaunce of the first ship, I mean that which at the first your
index lying on the side of your square Geometrical ye espied, detractyng the
lesser from the greater, the remaynder ye shall again square, and add it to
the square of your reserved quotien^ DE, the root quadrate of the producte is
the exact distaunce between the two ships.

Example.


I stand in the Castle A, the two ships, whose distance I require B and C, AC
measured as is tofore declared 2000 pace, AB 2500, the parts of the scale
touched with the fiduciall line of the Index 50, the parts of the Index cut
with the scale 130, B the ship first viewed, while the Index rested on the side
of the square Geometrical, C the ship last espied, when the scale was cut
with the line fidutial of the index, I multiply therefore according to the rule
above given, 50 in 2000, so have ye 100000, which divided by 130 yeldeth 769
3/13 whose square detracted from the square of 2000, leueth 3408284 4/169,
whose Quadrate root is 1846 2/13 which deducted from 2500 the distance of the
latter ship from the Castle, there remains 653 31/13, whose square added to
the square of 769 3/13, the Quotient tofore reserved, produces a number, whose
root is near unto 1009, these two ships therefore ye may conclude 1009 pace
a sunder.

The.34. Chapter. To dravv a platte of any coast or country, containing the
true proportion and Symetrie thereof, in such sort that you may readely tell
how far any place is distant from other, and that without Arithmeticke.
YOu shall ascend on some high Tower, Hill, Cliffe, or other place, from
whence you may commodiously behold on every part the whole Country round
about adjacent in your Horrizon, there set up your Instrument Topographicall on
his staff, and in such sort place it by aid of the needle, that the four
Semidiameters may lie East, West, North and Southe, every one answering his
like quarter of the heaven, then turn the Diameter of your Semicircle, to
every Town, Uillage, Haven, Rode, or such like, espying through the sightes,
the middle or most notable mark in every of them, noting therewithal in some
Table by it self the Degrees cut by the Alhidada in the Circle, which I call
the Angles of Position, and so make you a table of your first station. Then
search out your eye, viewing round about, some other lofty place, from whence
you may behold again all these places, for that shall be your second station:
and turning thereunto the Diameter of your Semicircle, note also what parts of
the Circle is touched with the line fiduciall of the Alhidada: This done,
situate your Topographical instrument, in all respects as was before said, and
turning the Diameter of your Semicircle, espying through the sights, all such
marks as you saw before, note again the Degrees cut, or Angles of position,
writing the name of every place, and his Degrees by it, so have you an other
table of your second station: with these tables you shall resort to some
plain smoothe Superficies of board, parchement, paper, or such like, and
thereon describe a large Circle, dividing it as you were before taught, into
360 parts, like to the Circle in your instrument. Then from the Center thereof
to every Degree noted in your first table extend straight lines, writing upon
every of them the name of his place, and upon that line that represents your
second station fix the one foot of your Compass, opening the other at
pleasure, draw an other large Circle, dividing it into 360 Grades, and from
the Center thereof, extend right lines to every Degree noted in your second
Table, writing as before upon every of them the names of their places or
marks, whereof they are the sight Angles. Finally you shall note diligently
the concourse or crossing of every two like lines, making thereon a Star or
such like mark, with the name of the place correspondent. Now if you desire
to know how far every of these towns, villages. etc. are distant from
other, you shall thus do, measure the Distance between your stations by
instrument or otherwise, as you have bin before taught, and divide the right
line between the Centres of your Circles into so many equal portio^s, as there
are miles, Furlongs, or Scores between your stations, then opening your
compass ^o one of those parts, you may measure from place to place, always
affirming so many Miles, Furlongs or Scores (according to the Denomination of
that one part whereunto you open your Compass) to be between place and
place, as you find by measuring there are of those parts. Some consideration
you must have in placing the Center of your second Circle, so conveniently
distant from the other, that the concourse or meeting of semblable positionall
lines, may be within the Compass of your Paper. etc.

Example.
There is a sea coast having sundry harboroughes, towns, villages, castles and
such like situate thereon, whose platte in due proportion I require, with the
exact distances of every place from other, having therefore elected a lofty
seat, from whence I may behold all these places, (mine instrument situate as
is declared) removing the index to the fardest being a Castle standing in the
mouth of an Haven, having received it through my sightes, the line fiduciall
of mine Index, cutteth 30 Grades, thence removing it to the next, being a
village or fisher town, the Index cutteth 50 degrees, again at the next being
a City, it cutteth 75 grades at the fourth being a great Baye I note both the
entrances, at the Esterne side of the Baye it cutteth 75 Degrees, at the
Western 100 Degrees, finally at the fardest place Westward, being a fort
within the land, the Index does cut 130 grades. Thus have I the Table of my
first station, as follows.

The Table of my first Station.
The Castle 30 Degrees The Uillage, 50 Degrees The City, 75 Degrees The
Esterne head of the Baye, 95 Grades The Western head of the Baye, 97 Grades
The Fort within the land. 130 Grades
This done, I behold an other high Hill, from whence I may in like manner
view all these places, and turning my Index thereunto, I find the line Fiduciall
lying upon 180 degrees. Then carrying my instrument thither, and placing it in
all points there, as it was at the first station, I turn my index again to
the first mark or castle, finding it to cut 15 grades, at the second 25
degrees, at the third 40 grades, and so to the rest as appears in this Table
following. And as I have done of these few, so might I how many notable marks
so ever there were, writing their names severally with their Degrees noted, as
ensues.

The Table of my second Station.
The Castle 15 Degrees The Uillage, 25 Degrees The City, 40 Degrees The
Esterne head of the Baye, 50 Grades The Western head of the Baye, 55 Grades
The Fort within the land. 80 Grades


With these Tables repair to a plain smoothe Superficies, drawing therein a
fair Circle as you see divided in 360 parts, and from his Center A, I pull out
right lines to every Grade noted in my first table* AC the line (...) ^e
castle, AD of the village, AE of the city, and so forth of the rest, ending
(...) the line AB, cutting 180 degrees in my circle, then making B a center I
(...) a circle divided as the other at A, and from his center pull out straight
(...) to all those grades that were noted in my second table: now marking the
^^^course of semblable lines, that is to say, where the line of the castle
issuing from A (...) with the line of the Castle proceeding from B, I note it
with a star as (...) may behold at the letter C, and thus prosecuting the
like in the rest, always (...) a star or like mark upon the concourse of
correspondent right lines (all (...) intersections not regarded) I have finally
situated al these places in due pro^^^tion, noting them with these letters
CDEFGH: as in the figure you may see. Now to learn the distance between every
of them, I divide the space between B into 5 parts, for so many miles by
mensuration I find between my two (...), then drawing right lines from C to D,
from D to E, and so from every one (...), opening my compass to one of these
parts, I measure how many times it ^onteyned in every of these right lines:
whereby I conclude the number of miles between every of them, as appears in
the table following.

The Table.
The distance of every mark from the stations.
C 5 miles, 1 furlong. D 5 miles, furlongs. F 5 miles, 3 furlongs. G 6 miles, 1
furlong. H 6 miles, 3 furlongs. C 9 miles, 6 furlongs. D 9 miles, 1 furlong. E
8 miles, 3 furlongs. F 7 miles. G 7 miles, 2 furlongs. H 5 miles.
The distance of every mark from other.
CD 1 mile 6 furlongs. CE 4 miles furlongs. CF 5 miles 5 furlongs. CG 6 miles 1
furlongs. CH 9 miles. DE 2 miles 3 furlongs. DF 4 miles 1 furlongs. DG 4 miles
4 furlongs. DH 7 miles 4 furlongs. OF 1 mile 7 furlongs. EG 2 miles 2 furlongs.
EH 5 miles 5 furlongs. FG 5 furlongs. FH 3 miles 6 furlongs. GH 3 miles 4
furlongs.
Thus passing or changing your stations, you may make several plattes,
containing the true proportion and distances of towns, villages, ports,
rodes, hills, rivers, and all other notable places through ^^ whole Realm,
but then how to reduce them all into one fair card or map you shall be
taught hereafter.

The.35. Chapter. How to reduce many plattes into one, and to make a fair
card or map of an whole province or region, and that in as large or small
room as you vvil assign, without any arithmeticall calculation.
I Mind not here to set forth the manner how to situate places in their due
longitude and latitude, neither how to furnishe your map with Meridians,
Paralleles, Zones Climates, and other circles correspondent to the heavenly
sphere, for that apperteyneth to Cosmographic, only in this place shall you
learn Chorographically to make a card, whereby you may redily know the true
distance and situation of places one from an other, having therefore as is
tofore declared (by sundry plattes made in every several Horizon or Kenning)
found out the true distance of every notable place from other, you shall make
one entier table of all, containing the number of miles, furlongs etc. between
place and place, beginning at the East, and so proceeding on till you come to
the farthest Westwarde. This table thus finished you shall upon your Parchement
paper or other plain whatsoever it be, fit for this purpose, draw one
straight line directly through the middle thereof, crossing the same with an
other perpendicularly, again as you were taught at the beginning of this book,
then write at the ends of these lines the four principal quarters, East,
West, North and South. Now it behooves you to consider (conferring your
plattes together) how far distante the most Eastern place is from the
Western, and likewise the Northern from the farthest Southward, that you may
accordingly so proportion your mile, as all these places fall within the
compass of your card: now by the one side of your superficies, draw a
straight line of competente length, then opening your compass to the wideness
of that measure which ye will call your mile, mark out 20 of them in your last
drawn straight line, which you may garnish with other Parallels, dividing
eue^^ mile into his furlongs, this shall be called your scale, Now must you
^^eyne guess (as near as you can by comparing your plats) which is the
^iddlemost place of this country that you describe, and the same shall ^^u
situate upon the intersection of the two former drawn lines, making ^^ere a
star, and writing the name thereof, whether it be city, village, ^^stle or
such like, then search out in the same plat what other notable ^^ace or mark
lies east, west, north, or south from it. And if you espy ^^y resort to your
table prepared as I have tofore said, searching out the ^^stance between these
places, and to so many miles or furlongs extend ^^ur compass in the scale last
made, then keeping your compass immo^^able set one foot thereof upon the
intersection or middle place, exten^^ng the other to that quarter wherein you
found the place situate, make ^n intersectio^ with the straight line, and there
likewise make a star or ^^her fine mark, writing the name of the place: But
if you find no no^^ble mark lying precisely east, west, north, or south from
that foresaid ^iddle place, then take some other what you list in your plat,
and note both ^^e distance and also the angle that it makes, with the
middlemost already marked in your card, that is to say (if it lie not in one
of these principal ^uarters from it) how many degrees it declineth, and
describing upon ^he intersection a circle divided into grades, pull out from
the center a ^ight line to the like number of degrees that you found in your
plat: final^y opening your compass to the like number of miles in your scale
that ^ou perceive in the table to be between those places, fixing one foot in
^he intersection with the other, cut this last drawn line, and at ye section
make a mark, writing thereby his name, thus have you two places. Now for all
the rest one rule shall suffice, whatsoever it be that you will next mark,
search out in your table his distance from both these already ^oted, and
opening your compass to the like number of miles in your scale, placing the
one foot in either of the places already described, make an arc with the
other, and where those arkes cross there is the situation of the third place.
And thus may you proceed to all the rest, only taking heed that having
opened your compass to the number of miles you fix the foot in his
correspondent place, and so shall you (passing on from one to an other) exactly
situate them all, as by the example following shall more plainly appear.

Example.


BDCE the Parchment, paper or other plain whereon I would describe the
country whereof I have already taken the plat or plattes, as was before
taught, BC and DE the two cross diameters, making intersection at A, I the
line which I term a mile, HG the scale containing 20 of them, this mile if I
list to make a large card should be divided into furlongs, yea and every
furlong into parts, and therein you must use consideration, appoynting the
length of your mile according as you desire to have your charte great or
small. Now it behooves you to resort to your plattes, searching out as nigh as
you can by estimation the ^iddlemost place. And that in my last platte (which
here I mind to use for ^xample sake) was my first station, here placed at A,
then find I directly ^este from thence 5 miles my second station. Extending
therefore my Com^asse to so many in the Scale, and setting the one foot in A,
with the o^^er, I make a section in AC at K, and that is my second station.
Now will I place the Castle which I find in my platte or table made by it,
^^stant from my first station 5 miles, from the second 9 miles. First
there^^re I extend my Compass in the scale to 5 miles, and fixing the one
foot in (...), with the other I draw an arcke, then opening my compass to 9
parts in ^^e scale, and setting one foot in K, I cross with the other the
arcke tofore ^^awen in L, in like manner opening my compass again to 5 in the
Scale, which is the number of miles between the Village, and my first station.
The one ^^ote in A, I draw an arc, then extending the compass again to 2
miles lac^^ng part, the distance between the Castle and Village, I cross the
foresaid ^^cke in M, there is the Village. In this manner you shall proceed
to the rest, ^aking fine pricks or other little marks for the true places of
them, then ble^ishing all the arkes, circles, and other lines, which I suppose
drawn with black ^^ad or such like, that you may easily put out or raze
away, you shall finally ^autifie it with images and Figures, as you think
most agreeable and fit to ^^presse and represente the pattern, I mean the
country it self that you de^^ribe, as by drawing a Castle at L, a Village at
M, a City at N, a Har^^roughe at OP, and so of the rest. Even in like manner
may you describe any Town, Forte, Camp, or Palace, and set out the true
ground platte of all man^er Edifices, altering your Scale, and in stead of
miles, dividing it into scores, ^ace, foot, and such like small measures.

A note for sea Cards.
YOU may also if you will divide the circle at the mids of your map into 32
parts, pulling out straight lines fro the ce^tre to the uttermost bounds of
the charte representing ye 32 winds, and upon the same ce^tre describe an
other circle so large as your map can conteyne, the circumference thereof
will be parted into 32 equal portions with the foresaid lines representing ye
winds. Now, if upon every of these intersectio^s as a center, you describe a
circle dividing every of their circumferences into 32 winds, exte^ding from
their ce^tres straight lines thoroughout ye whole map as before you shall make
a sea card wherein you may by the former rules Coasts, Harboroughes, Rocks,
Sands, Shelues, Channels, Rodes, with their soundings and depthe of ancorage,
etc. But of these matters here I mean not particularly to discourse,
referring the more ample declaration of them to an other treatize of
Cosmographie and navigations, wherein I shall not only discover the manifold
errors that Mariners fall into by using their commune Chartes and rules, but
also set forth true exact and easy precepts for them, with sundry rare
conclusions hitherto not practiced of any.

A note for Mines.
MOst commodiously also serves this instrument to conducte Mines under the
earth, for noting the Angles of position in the Planisphere or Theodelitus, and
also Angles of altitude or profunditie in the semicircle or scales appropriate
thereunto, measuring the distances from Angle to Angle, you may make by the
former precepts most certain plattes of your iorneis, and thereby always
know under what place you are, and which way to direct your Mine to approach
any other place you list. Whereof an infinite number of strange and necessary
questions might be moved. It were an easy matter in such sort to make great
volumes. But who so well understands the premises, (I mean not by reading
them only, but by practizing also) shall not need farther instruction in
these or like cases. I might enlarge this book with sundry instruments, and
many mo ways and rules to measure, but as the premises are of them selves
sufficient, so the diligent practizioner (searching out the reason and
demonstration of them) shall be able of him self to invent manifold means to
resolve the like or other stranger questions, whereof infinite may be proponed.

The end of the first Book.
The second kind of Geometry called Planimetra.
HAVING accomplished the first part called Longimetra, containing sundry rules
to measure le^gthes, breadthes, heigths, depthes, and distances: I think it
meet now to proceed to the second kind named Planimetra, wherein ye shall
have rules for the mensuration of all manner plain Figures, to know their
content superficial. And forasmuch as there is no Superficies, but is
environed with lines either straight or curue. And all Figures comprehended
with straight lines may be resolved into Triangles: It seems most meet,
first to teach the measuring of Triangles as follovveth.

The first Chapter. Of Triangles.
AS there are three kind of Angles, so is there also three kind of Triangles:
the first is called Orthogonium, having one of his angles a right: the other
Ambligonium, containing one obtuse angle: the third kind is called Oxigonium,
whose three angles are all acute. Of right angled Triangles also there are two
kinds, for either it has two equal sides, and then is it called Isoscheles,
or three unequal, and that is Scalenum.

The right angled Isoscheles is thus measured.
Multiply one of the equal sides in it self, the half of the producte is
the Area or superficial content.

Example.
ADmit ABC an Isoscheles right angled triangle, having the sides AB and BC that
contain the right angle B equal, either of them being 10, I multiply 10 in
it self, thereof arises 100, the half 50, is the Area of that Isoscheles
right angled triangle.

A right angled Scalenum you shall thus mete.
MEasure the longitude of two sides containing the right angle, augmenting the
one by the other, the half thereof is that triangular superficial content.

Example.
Suppose the right angled Scalenum ABC, his two sides that contain the right
angle AB 10, BC 16, the one augmented by the other, yields 160, whose half
being 80, is that triangulare Area.

In every of these right angled Triangles you shall not need to measure more
than two of their sides, for any two known by supputation the third may be
found, whereof I shall give you rules with examples.

The second Chapter. Any two sides of right angled triangles known by
calculation to find the third.
EVCLIDE in the 47 proposition of his first book of Elements, has proved by
demonstration, that ye squares of the two co^tayning sides joined together, are
equal to the square of ye Hypothenusa, or third side subtending ye right
angle: whereby we may redely (any two sides being given) find ye third thus:
(...) the two sides comprehending the right Angle be known, add their ^^uares
together, and the Radix Quadrate of the Product, is the Hypothe^^sa, but if you
know the length of that Hypothenusa, and one other side, (...) shall subtract
from the square of that Hypothenusa, the square of that ^^her given side, and
the root Quadrate of the remainder is the third side ^^sired.

Example.
In the Triangle ABC, AB is 6, and C ^, their squares joined make 100, those
root is 10, and that is the Hypothe^usa. In the Triangle DEF, the Hypothe^usa
is ^3 DE, 5. I desire the length of OF, (...) the square of DE, subtracted
from 169 (...) square of the Hypothenusa, leaves 144, those Quadrate root 12,
is the side OF.

Of Obtuse angled Triangles, there are also two sorts, Isoscheles and
Scalenum.

The.3. Chapter. Ambligonium Isoscheles is thus measured.
YOu must first find out the Perpendicular line, from the Obtuse Angle to the
contrary side, by deducting the square of half the side subtending the Obtuse
angle, from the Square of one whole side containing the same angle, the Root
Quadrate of ^he Product is the Perpendicular, which multiplied in the half of
the for^ayd subtending side, produces the Area.

Example.
ABC the Isoscheles Ambligonium, AB ^0, BC 16, 10 squared is 100, 8 squared
yeldeth 64, which deducted from 100, leaves ^6, whose Quadrate root is 6, the
Perpendicular AD: which multiplied by 8, produces 48, and that is the Area of
this Obtusiangle Isoscheles.

Ambligonium Scalenum, you shall thus measure.
FIrst you must search out his Perpendicular line in this manner, square every
side, then add the square of the side subtending the Obtuse angle, to one of
the other squares, from the offcome abating the third square, the half of the
remainder divide by the forsaid subtending side, the square of the Quotient you
shall deduct from that square which before you did add to the square of the
subtending side, and from the remain, extract the root Quadrate, for that is
the line Perpendicular, which multiplied by half the forenamed subtending side,
will produce the content Superficial of ye triangle*

Example.
ABD the Triangle, AB 20, AD 34, DB 42, the square of AB 400, of AD 1156, of BD
1764, 1764 added to 400 makes 2164 from which subtracting 1156, there remains
1008, the half being 504, divided by 42, the side subtending the Obtuse
angle, yeldeth in the Quotient 12, so much is the line BC, which squared makes
144, that subtracted from 400, leaves 256, whose root Quadrate being 16, is
the Perpendicular AC. Now multiply 16 in 21, the half of the forsaid
subtending side BD, so have you 336 the superficies of that Ambligonium
Scalenum.

The 4. Chapter. Of Acutiangle Triangles called Oxigonia, there are three
kinds.
FOr either the three sides are equal, and then is it an Equilate^ Triangle,
or two sides only equal, which is Isoscheles, or al three unequal, and that is
a Scalenum.

Of Triangles Equilater.
You shall multiply the square of the side in it self, and the offcome in 3,
the Product divide by 16 the root Quadrate of the Quotient is the Area, or
multiply the Cube of half the Equiangle Triangles side in the Semiperimetrie
of the Triangle, the Quadrate root of the Product is the foresaid Area also.

Example.
Admit the Triangles side 6, the squared square is 1296, which augmented by ^
yeldeth 3888, and that divided by 16, brings in the Quotient* 243, whose
root Quadrate being 15, and between 1/^ and 1^/31, is the superficial
content of that Equilater Triangle. The same number is found by the second
rule, for the Cube of 3 is 27, which multiplied in 9 the Semiperimetry yeldeth
243, whose root Quadrate is the Area of that Triangle agreeing with the former
supputation.

Of Isoschele Acutiangle Triangles.
From the square of one of the equal sides subtract the square of half the
base or unequal side, the Quadrate root of the remainder multiplied in ^^lfe
the base, produces the content superficial.

Example.
AB and AC the equal sides of the Isoschele Trian^^^, either of them 6, the
base BC 4, the half thereof 2, ^^ose square deducted from the square of 6,
leaves 32, ^^ose root multiplied in 2, brings the root of 128, which ^^ery
nigh 11 7/2^ the Area of that Triangle.

Of Oxigonium Scalenum.
To find the Area of Acutiangle triangles that have side equal to other, it
behooves you to search out (...) line Perpendicular falling from one of the
angles the contrary side, and multiply the same in half the base or side
whereon ^alleth, the Producte is your desire. But to get the line
Perpendiculare, (...) shall thus work: square every side, then add the square
of the base, to (...) square of one side, deducting fro the Producte the third
square, half of (...) Remainder divided by the base, the Quotient you shall
again square (...) deduct this number from that square which you adjoined to
the square your base, the root Quadrate of the remainder is the line
perpendicular.

Example.
(...) Acutiangle triangle Scalenu^ ABC, AB 13, BC 14, CA 15, the square of AB
169, of BC 196, of CA 225, 169 added to 196, pr^duceth 365, from which 225
detracted, leaves 140, whose medietie being 70, divided by 14, yeldeth 5 the
line BD, the square thereof abated from the square of AB, leaves 144, his
root^ Quadrate is 12, the Perpendiculare AD* which augmented by 7 the medietie
of the base, brings 84, the Area or Superficial content of that Triangle.

Finally I think it not amiss to give you one Rule universal to measure all
manner Triangles of what sort so ever they be, and that without any regard of
the Perpendicular.

The.5. Chapter. A rule general to measure all manner Triangles according to
their plain.
Add all the sides of that Triangle together, taking half of the number which
surmounteth. Now out of this half, you must pull by Subtraction every side by
it self, noting diligently the differences, that is, how much every side
differs from that half, multiply the differences the one in the other, and
the Product in the third, with that which rises augment the half above
mentioned, then seek of that sum the Quadrate root, so have you the true
content Superficial of that Triangle, the example shall ensue, whereby all that I
have said, shall the better appear.

Admit the Triangle whose sides you have measured ABC, of whom the left side
AB i^ 12, BC 16, AC 20, these sides joined together, make 48, whose half is
24, from whom BC 16, differs 8, AB 12, AC 4, so the differences are 8, 12,
4. Now multiply 8 with 12, rises 96, the which augmented with 4, comes 384,
that multiplied in 24, the half if 48, surmounteth 9216, of this sum the
Radix is 96, which is the very content of this Triangle.

Of Quadrangles (that is to say plain figures, having four Angles and four
sides,) there are five sorts, as appears in the Diffinitions, the Square,
the Rectangle, Rhombus, Rhomboides, and Trapezia.

The.6. Chapter. Of Squares.
FOr the square you shall only measure one side, multiplying the same in it
self, so have you the Area or content superficial.

Example.
I find AB the one side of the square ABCD 10, which augmented by it self
rises 100 the Area of that square.

Of rectangles or right angled Paralelogrammes.
In right angled paralelogrammes ye must measure the two unequal sides,
multiplying the one in the other, the product is the content superficial of
the figure.

Example.
I suppose the two sides AB, AC of that right angled Paralelogramme. ABCD the
one 45, the other 110, these two multiplied together yield 4950 the Area.

Of Rhombus and Rhomboides.
THese two figures have one rule, it behooves you to measure one side, and the
perpendicular falling from one of the opposite angles to the same side, these
multiplied the one in the other produces the Area.

Example.
Admit ABCD the Rhombus, whose Area I desire: I measure the ^^de BD finding
it 20, then must I measure also the length of a line perpendicular falling
from A upon BD, which I suppose here 16, these two multiplied the one in the
other bring 320, the superficial content of the Rhombus. Likewise in the
Rhomboides suppose I find by mensuration the side BD 42, the line
perpendicularly falling from A upon BD 16, multiply these numbers, I produce
672, the Area of that Romboides ABCD.

But because it may seem somewhat difficult to get the length of those
perpendiculars, because it is uncertain on what point of BD the perpendicular
line shall fall, I think good to prescribe you a rule how you may exactly and
redily get all such lines perpendicularly falling, and that not only in these
figures, but also in triangles, which shall be no small ease and discharge of
laborsom trauayling, when you shall measure great fields, or champion playnes,
etc.

The.7. Chapter. For measuring of lines perpendicular.
YOu shall prepare a right angle by conioyning three staves proportioned
according to these numbers, 3 4 and 5, as you were taught in the former book,
the one of the staves containing the right angle you must place directly upon
that side of your plain figure that subtendeth the angle from whence your
perpendiculare should fall, marking therwithall whither the other containing
side directs, if it lie even with the foresaid opposite angle, then is the
right line between your station, and that opposite angle, the perpendicular.
But if it direct not justly to the angle, you shall move to and fro in that
subtendent side, till you find it so, then by the precepts given in the
fornier book, you may sundry ways measure the distaunce of the angle opposite
from your station, whereby you are brought in knowledge of this perpendiculars
length.

Admit ABCD the paralelogramme, or ABC the triangle, whose per^^ndiculares
falling from A to the contrary side I desire to measure, but because (...) know
not to what point in BC, or BD, these perpendicular lines from A will (...), I
take my right angle made of the three staves GEF, placing OF in the (...) BC,
and BD, passing to and (...) in those lines till I find EG (...) directly with
the angle A, then (...) I that a straight line from A, to (...) station or
angle E, is the perpen^^cular, whose length I may mea^^re either by Quadratum
geome^^icu^, or otherwise, without instru^ent, as in the first book is
decla^^d. Or thus deducting the square (...) EB, the distance of my station ^o
the end or angle of either field (...) B, from the square of the line A^,
rising from that subtendent side (...) the opposite angle, the root qua^rate
of the remaynder shall be the (...) perpendicular, which multi^lyed in BD,
yeldeth the Area of that paralelogramme: or in half BC, so ^aue ye the
superficial content of the triangle ABC.

The.8. Chapter. To measure Trapezia.
YOu shall measure the length of a diagonall or cross line extended to
opposite angles through the Superficies of the Trapezium and likewise the
length of the two perpendicular lines, falling from the other angles upon the
said cross line as you were ^aught in the last chapter, then add those two
perpendiculars together, ^ultipling the half of the product in that diagonall
line, so have ye the Area of that Trapezium.

Example.
ABCD the Trapezium, CB the diagonall or cross line extnded fro the angle C,
to BE and F, the two points where the perpendiculars shall (...) from the
other angles A, D, upon the cross line CB, these points I find with my right
angled triangle, as was taught in the last Chapter. Now to attein the Area,
I measure the length of BC 20, AE 8, FD 6: 6 and 8 joined make 14, the half is
7, multiplied in 20, the line diagonal produces 140, and that is the content
superficial of that Trapezium.

The.9. Chapter. Rules to measure all equiangle superficies how many sides
soever they have.
First you must get the center of your figure, then from it pull a
perpendicular line to the mids of some side, see how many perches or other
measures it conteyneth, add all the sides together, multiplying half the
sum in the perpendicular or han^ing line, so have ye your purpose.

Example.
Imagine this figure BCDEFG and every side of length 12, the center A found,
draw a line perpendicular from it to the middle of the side BC, this line
being 10 multiplied in 36 the half number of the sides, brings 374 the
superficial content of that figure.

An other Example.
FGH is here a Superficies being 5 square, every side 10, Now from your
center to the mids of the side pull the perpendicular line which is 6 22/25
this multiplied in 25, the semiperimetrie of that Figure, yeldeth 172, and that
is the Area of this pentagonall superficies.

A note to find the centres of those equiangle Figures.
THe center is found drawing lines from one angle to the contrary, or from the
middle of some side being odd to the opposite angle, the cutting or concourse
of those straight lines shows the place of the Center: and thus as is
declared, you may readely measure all equiangle figures, what capacity or
number of sides soever they be of.

The.10. Chapter. To measure the Superficial content of any rightlined Figure
of what form so ever it be,
THe best rule I can perscibe, is to resolve it into Triangles, by drawing or
ymagening lines from Angle to Angle, and so measure every Triangle severally:
Finally, adding all the productes together, ye shall have the Area or content
Superficial of that whole Figure, which although it be of it self (the
premises well understand) plain enough, yet to avoid all doubts, I shall
adioyne one example.

Admit ABCDE an irregular pentagonum, whose side AB is 20, BC 30, CD 16, DE 24,
EA 18 this figure you may divide in three tria^gles, by drawing the two lines
BE BD, thus by the rules tofore given, I measure first the Area of the triangle
ABE, which I find 144, likewise BED, 312, the third triangle BDC 240: these
three numbers joined together, produce 696 which is the true Area or content
Superficial of that irregular Superficies.

The.11. Chapter. A ready mean to find the content superficial of any great
field, or champion plain, how irregular of form or fashion soever it be,
without painful trauayling about it, only by measuring one side.
YE shall, as I have taught in Longimetra (either with Theodelitus or your
Topographicall instrument) draw upon some level, smothe plain superficies,
the exact platte and symetry of that field, then either by your instrument, or
otherwise: measure how many rod or perch, is contained in some one side of
that plain, so many equal divisions shall you make, opening your compass
accordingly in his correspondent side of your platte. This done, note well the
fashion of the field, and drawing lines from angle to angle, or otherwise,
divide it into tria^gles, or other regulare figures, as you shall see cause:
then opening your compass to one of those divisions, you may therewith
measure every side, and line, in that figure as exactely as with cord, or
pole, ye should paynfully pase it over, whereby with the aid of these former
precepts, you shall severally measure every triangle or other regular figure,
and joining together their contents the resulting sum is your desire.

Example.
Suppose GHIKL that irregugular pentagonum, the true platte of some great field
or plain made by one of the instruments Geometrical, as is before in the first
book declared and that by mensuration I find the side GL 120 perches in
length, opening therefore my compass accordingly, I divide GL into 120 equal
portions, and proceeding on to every side I find GH 90, HI 100, IK 150, KL 80,
then beholding the form thereof, I see it may aptely be parted in three
Triangles by lines drawn from I, 60 G and L. In like manner I search how
many such Divisions there are in them, finding either of them 170 perches in
length. Finally, by the rule general of Triangles, I search the Area of every
Triangle, finding the first that is IHG 360, IGL 780, IKL 600, all three ^^yned
together, makes 1740, so many perches you may conclude the Area of that
Figure, which reduced 10 Acres dividing by 160 brings 10 Acres 3 R^odes.

A note for Wooddes.
THIS way shall you most speedely and exactly measure all manner Woddelande
which otherwise is very hard and tediouse preciselye ^o do, forasmuch as ye
can not at one view behold every part thereof, nor measure such Diagonall
lines passing thoroughe it in sundry ^laces, as were requisite in irregular
Figures, but with the aid of your ^nstrument Topographicall encompassing it
round about, always no^ing the Angles of Position at every station, you may
first make an exact platte thereof, and after measure as you were instructed
in the former Chapter, the Superficial capacity.

The.12. Chapter. How you may from an high Hill, or Cliffe, measure how
many Acres, Roodes, or Perches, is contained in any Field, Park, VVood, or
other plain Superficies, in the country round about you, not approaching
nighe them.
CALl to remembrance how you were taught in the first Book by the Instrument
Topographicall to set forth the true platte of an whole Country, and every
part thereof, which, for as much as it is there at large set out, it were
here superfluous to recite again, admitting therefore, (by the Art there
taught) an exact platte form of the Field, Woodde, or other plain made, ye
shall with your^ Compass divide some one side thereof into 40, 60, or 100
equal parts, as you list, and keeping your Compass immouable, measure all
such other lines Perpendiculares, etc. as shall seem requisite to attain the
Area thereof, and by the former precepts, dividing it into Triangles,
Rightangled Parallelogrammes, or other regular figures, ye shall measure the
contents superficial thereof, that is to say, how many of those small
squares, whereof every little division was a side, is contained in that
superficies or platform. This done, ye must also with your square
geometrical or other instrument from the hill or cliffe, measure ye length of
that side in the field, that the first divided side in your platte did
represente, I mean how many rod or perch it is long then square as well the
number of perches in the side of the field, as also the number of divisions in
his corresponding side of your platte, the number proceeding of the perches
squared, ye shall multiply in the Superficial content of your platte tofore
found, and the Producte divide by the square of the Divisions in the side of
your platte, the Quotient will be the number of perches, which divided by
160, and the remain by 40, the Quotientes will show the Acres and roodes
contained in that field, park, or woodde, you measure.

Example.
Admit ABCDEF the platte or proportional pattern of a park which from some
Hill or Cliffe a far off I have drawn by the aid of mine Instrument
Topographicall, as was declared in the first Book, and for that it is a
Figure of many sides, I search how it may best be resolved into regular
Figures, which (as you may perceive) is readely done withdrawing the two
lines, AC and FD, which parts the whole Figure in two Triangles and one right
angled Parallelogramme, then opening my Compass to some small distance, I
divide some one side (for Example the side AF) into 40 parts, and keeping my
Compass immouable, I measure how many of those Divisions are contained in AC
and FD, finding either of them 60. Now, to measure the Triangles ABC, DEF, I
draw Perpendiculares from B too AC, and from E to FD, finding BG 20, and HE
16, Now 40 multiplied in 60, brings 2400, the right angled Parallelogramme
AD, 20 the Perpendicular in 30 half the Base yields 600, the Triangle ABC, 8
half the other perpendiculare, in 60, the base arises 480, the triangle DEF,
these three joined together, produce 3480, the whole content of ABCDEF, now as
was taught in Longimetra, with my square geometrical, I must measure from the
hill or cliffe the length of that side of the park represented here by AF,
which I admit found as is before said 356 rod or perch, whose square
being 126736 augme^ted in 2400, the content of my plat brings 304166400,
this divided by 1600, the square of the side AF yeldeth 190104, and this
divided by 160 produces in the quotiente 1188, and the remain is 24. I
conclude therefore that there is in that park 1188 acres, and 24 perches.

In this sort with small exercise using industry, in making your plattes you
may most exactely and speedely surueye an whole country, with all his
pastors, meadows, marshes, woddes, and every perticulare enclosure, whereof
although I might propound an infinite number of examples, and filt many leaves
with variety of rules, yet considering the premises to the ingeniouse will
suffice, I think good to pass them over, referring the rest to the
practisioner, who shall by his experience (well understanding the premises)
invent manyfold mo, even as occasion shall be offered in viewing the ground with
situation of places.

The 13. Chapter. A note how to survey an whole Region or plain champion
Country by the aid of a plain pullished glass.
IT behooves you to resort unto the first book where you were taught by the
aid of a plain pullished glass of steel) upon an high hill or leueled
platfourme) to set forth the symetrie or proportion of an whole country with all his parts. Ye shall therefore by the art there showed, get the proportion
or plat of that field, wood, marshe, or other enclosure, which you desire to
survey, and therewith work even in like manner as you were taught in the last^
chapter, to do with the platte drawn with your instrument Topographicall, one
ground, one reason, and like operation serves them both, the former well
understand makes this so manifest as it needs no other example, only this
I must give you warning of, that you attempt not this kind of measuring, but
only in champion and plain level Countries, for in vnleuell and hilly
places, without most exquisite observation and learned handeling great error
may ensue.

Thus having declared several rules for every kind of rightlyned Superficies,
it seems meet somewhat to say of such plain Superficies as are environed
with curue lines or mixte of both, and first of the circle and his parts.

The.14. Chapter. Of Circles.
BEfore I entreat of the mensuration of circles, it shall be requisite to
declare Archimedes rules, concerning the proportion of the circumference to his
diameter, and of the Superficies to his dimetientes square. The rules ensue.

The first Theoreme.
(...).

EVery circle is equal to that rightangled triangle, of whose containing
sides the one is equal to the semidiameters, the other to the perimetrie or
circumference.

The second Theoreme.
(...).

THe proportion of every circle to the square of his dimetiente is as 11 to 14.

The third Theoreme.
(...).

THe circumference of a circle is more than triple his diameter by such a
part as is less than 1/7, and more than 12/7^ thereof.

How the Area of a circle is found.
BY the former Theoremes ye may collecte these rules. Multiplye the
circumference of any circle by 7, and divide by 22, your quotient is the
circles diameter, whose medietie multiplied in half the circumference yeldeth
the Area, or multiplying the square of the circles dimetient by 11, and
dividing the ofcome by 14, your quotient will declare the same.

Example.
Admit the circumference of the circle 44, which increased by 7 yeldeth 308,
this divided by 22 brings in the quotie^t 14, the diameter, whose medietie
being 7 augmented with 22 the half of the circumference, produces 154.
Likewise the square of 14 multiplied in 11, makes 2156, which divided by 14,
brings 154, the superficial capacity of that circle.

Of the half circle.
Even as I have declared that in multipleing the half diameter of any circle
in his half circumference, the producte to utter his content, so by
augmenting the half diameter in the fourth part of the circumference, that is
in half the arc of the semicircle, ye have the whole sum of that half
circle.

Example.
ADmit the semicircle DEF were to be measured, whose diameter DF drawn by the
center C is 14, as before, the Arcke DEF 22. Now multiply the semidiameter 7
in 11 rises 77, the plain of that semicircle, even so of all portions or
parts of a circle. Although to the witty this may suffice, yet to satisfy
also the mean witted, I shall not think it tediouse to propounde an other
example.

Of the fragments or parts of a circle.
SVppose GHIA were a portion of a circle to be moten, the whole circumference
of the circle whereof this is a portion is as before 44. Now you shall multiplye
7 the semidiameter HA in the half arc 15, so have ye 105, which is the
superficial content of that portion GHIA, If you desire to know the Area of
GIB, contained of the cord GI, and arcke GIB, ye must add to the number
before found, the Area of the triangle GIA which I suppose (found by the rules
tofore given) 22, that makes 127 the Area of the segment GHI to the cord GI,
which subtracted from 154, the whole circle leueth 27 the area of the segment
GIB.

I think none will doubt how these figures following are measured, because they
are made of parts or portions of a circle, whose plain is gathered as I have
already declared. In the left figure there is at each end a semicircle, every of
them containing (found by the art before mentioned) 77, which added make 154,
the quadrangle has 84, as the rules of quadrangles declares, that joined with
154, brings 238, the whole sum of that figure.



The other are but two such segmentes as GIB, which measured as is before
showed and joined together brings 54, the Area of that figure. Likewise ye
last figure called a Lunula, ABCD is mesured by deducting the segment ADC
(found by the former rules) 27 from ABC known in like manner 56 4/^ there
remains 29 4/7 the Area or Superficies of the Lunula ABCD. Forasmuch as it
is necessary in measuryng of these portions or segmentes of circles to know
the diameter of the whole circle, whereof they are the fragmentes. I think it
not amiss hereunto to adioyne a rule for the same purpose.

Admit ABCD a portion or fragment of a circle, I desire to know the longitude
of his circles diameter, first I measure AC which I find 12, likewise the
length of the line DB from D the middle of the straight line to B the middle or
highest poincte of the arc which I suppose 4, Now divide the square of AD
that is 36 by 4* so have ye 9, which added to 4 brings 13, and that is the
length of the circles dimetient, whose part or fragment this figure ABCD is.

These precepts well noted there can no plain Superficies offer it self
whether it be regularor irregular, framed of right lines enuironned with
circular or mixte of both, but ye shall readily by dividing it into triangles
and cular fragmentes, find out the Area and content superficial thereof. I
will now therefore only, adioyne certain questions for the partition and
division of ground. And so pass on to the third kind of Geometry, where
you shall have rules to measure, not only the solid, but also the
superficial contents of all manner bodies, but to return to these partitions
my first question shall be of triangles, and so on to figures of more
difficulty.

The.15. Chapter. There is a trianguler field having on the one side a well or
fountain, this field must be equally divided between two partie^, and that
in such sort that either of them may have commodity of that fountayn, not
coming on the others land. I demand how that partition shall be made.
Let ABC represente the triangular field, having on the side BC a well or
fountain at D, from whence I would direct a hedge or ditthe in such sort
that it parts the Triangle in two even parts, first therefore I search the
myddle of the side BC, which I suppose E, then my instrument Topographicall at
the fountain situate as he ought to be, I turn the Ashidada till I can
espy thorough the sightes the opposite angle here represented by A, then
remouinge mine instrument to the foresaid middle at E, the Ashidada remaining
immouable on the degrees tofore cut, the instrument again duly situate, I
view thoroughe the sightes what part of the side AC I can espy, Admit it F.
Now say I that a hedge dyke or other partition runnyng from D the fountain to
F the mark espied in the side AC, will divide that triangular figure exactely
into two equal portions, and thus may you without supputation only by the
aid of your instrument Topographical divide any triangle in two equal parts,
and that from any part or poincte in any of her sides assigned.

The.16. Chapter. To cut off from any triangular field as many acres, rod or
other measures, as shall be required, and that by a line drawn from any angle
assigned.
YOu shall first measure the side subtendyng the Angle assigded which here I
will call the base. Secondely, you shall measure the Area of the whole
triangle: Then multiplye the number of Acres or Rods which you would cut
off from the triangle, by the length of the base, and the producte divide by
the Area of that Triangle, the Quotiente shows how many pearches you shall
measure in the base from one of the Angles to cut of your desired number of
rods*

Example.
Suppose ABC a triangular piece of ground, having his three sides AB 30* AC 40,
CB 50, my desire is with a right line from the angle A to cut of one ^cre of
ground, to perform this by the ^rte before taught, I search the Area of that
figure which is 600 rods. Now because I would cut off from that figure one
acre, and an acre co^teineth 160 rods: I multiply 160 in 50, the whole side
subte^ding the assigned angle, the product being 8000, I divide by 600 the
triangles Area, my quotient is 13 1/^ so many perches I reckon in the base BC
from B to D, finally extending a line from A to D, I conclude the Superficies
ABD one exact acre, and this is there from that triangular field one acre cut
of with the line AD.

The.17. Chapter. To cut off from any triangular piece of ground what
quantity of perches ye list with a line equidistant to one of the sides.
TO perfoorme this conclusion it shall be requisite to search out what parts of
the other two sides this equidistant line shall cut, whereof I will give you two
rules, forasmuch as this partition may two several ways be made: for the
portion to be cut of either is adjoining to the parallele side, and then is it
a quadrangular figure, or else to his subte^ding angle, and then is it a
triangle. For the triangle ye shall thus do, square the sides that the
parallele line shall cut, and the products severally multiply in the number of
perches to be taken away, the surmountyng sums divide by the Area of the
whole triangle, the roots quadrate of the quotientes is the number of pearches
to be accounted in the correspondent sides, from the angle that subtendeth the
Parallele side. But if ye would have the portion cut off, lie adjoining to the
paralele side, then shall you first deduct that portion from the whole
triangular Area, and with the remainder work in like manner as ye were taught
in the former rule, so will your quadrate roots (accounted from the paralele
side his subtendente angle) show to what part of either side the line shall be
drawn, to cut of the forenamed portion.

Example.
Suppose ABC the triangle from which I would cut off one acre, that is to say
160 rod by a paralele line to the side AB, first therefore I measure the Area
of that whole triangle as was before taught in this book, fynding AB 50 perch,
AC 120, BC 130, and so consequentely the Area of that triangle 3000 rod, the
square of AC is 14400, the square of BC is 16900, these augmented by 160, bring
2304000, and 2704000, and these divided by 3000, produce in the quotientes 768
and 901, the root of 768 perches) being 27 perches 12 foot) I mesure out in
the side AC, beginning from C, admit it end at D, likewise the root of 901
perches is 30 pearches, and between 4 and 9 inches, measuring therefore 30
perches from C in the other side CB I set up a mark at E. Now if you draw
a straight line from D to E it shall be a paralele to AB, and the piece of
ground, represented by DEC, an exact acre. But if you desire to lay out
this acre at one of the sides as ye may see in the figure signified by the
quadrilater Superficies ABGF, Then must ye deducte the aforesaid 160 rods
fro the Area of that triangle, the remain is 2840, which I multiplye as
before in the square of AC, so have I 40896000, Likewise the same 2840
augmented by the square of BC produces 48016000, these products severally
divided by 3000, the Area of the whole triangle will yield in the quotientes
13632 and 16005 their quadrate roots are 116 perches 12 foot, the length of
the line CF, and 126 perches 8 foot, the line GC, Or if ye deducte those
roots from the whole sides AC, and BC there will remayn 3 rod 4 foot from A
to F, and 3 rod 8 foot from B to G And thus may you in all Triangular pieces
of ground, exactly lay forth an acre, ^r any other quantity of ground ye will
require, and that either against the side (...) Angle, even as you will desire.

The.18. Chapter. For partition of Paralelogrammes what kind so ever they be
of, note these Rules ensuing.
Because partition may sundry ways be made according to the several situation
of the line wherewith it is divided, I will first entreat of that division that
is made by a Parallel unto two of the Paralellogrammes sides.

Admit therefore ABCD the piece of ground which by mensuration I find to
contain 65. Acres 16 Perches, and that I would cut of with a Parallel to AC 5
Acres, as ye may see done by the line OF, which were easily brought to pass
if I knew the quantity of the lines AE or CF, for knowledge of them therefore
I work thus, first with my square Geometrical or otherwise as has been
declared in Longimetra, I find the length of AB 308 rod, I multiply
therefore 800 for so many rod are there in 5 Acres, by 308, there amounts
246400 which divided by 10416 the number of Perches contained in the whole
quadrangle, yeldeth in the Quotient 23 Perches 11 foot, the length of the two
lines AE and CF. Thus by making the partition OF, the portion AECF, shall
conteyne exactly 5 acres, this rule is general for all quadrangular pieces of
ground, whose sides be parallele, whether it be square rectangle, Rhombus or
Rhomboides.

But if you desire to make like partition by a right line issuyng out of one
angle you shall thus woork: first consider whether the portion ye would cut of
be greater or less than half the parallelogramme: if less multiply as before
the number of perches, that ye would separate from the quadrangle in one of the
opposite sides to that angle whence your dividing line issues, and the product
divide by the medietie of the Area, the quotient will show on what part of
that opposite side your dividing line will fall. But if the aforesaid portion to
be separate be greater than the medietie of the Parallelogramme ye shall deduct
it from the whole Area thereof, and with the residue proceed in like manner as
was before taught.

Example.
Admit ABCD a Quadrangular piece of ground, which being measured, is found to
contain 50 Acres, and that my desire is to cut of 10 acres from that figure,
with a right line passing foor^he from the Angle C, first therefore I measure
the length of the side AB, finding it 200 rod, 200 therefore I augment by
1600 the number of Perches in 10 acres, there arises 320000, which divided by
4000 the number of rod contained in half that figure, your Quotient will be
80, the number of Perches from A to E, so that by the Partition CE, ye shall
separate the Triangle ACE containing exactly 10 acres, but if the sum of
acres had been greater than half, ye should have deducted it from the whole
Area, and with the residue work in all respects as ye have done with this,
the only difference is, that at the end of your operation, whereas here the
Triangle ACE is the portion separate, there it should be the residue or
Quadrangle ECDB, for that there is no difference in the working, it were
superfluous to use mo Examples.

The.19. Chapter. To cut of from any Trapezium or Quadrangular piece of ground,
what part thereof ye list.
Example.
Admit ABCD a Trapezium, or Irregular Quadrangle, and that I would cut of a
quarter of his Area, with a line issuing from the Angle A, first by the Rules
tofore given, I measure his content superficial, which I suppose 72 acres,
secondlye I meet the Area of the Triangle ADC, finding it 50 acres. Now
because I would cut of a quarter of that Trapezium, I divide his content that
is 72 by 4, my Quotient is 18, and that multiplied in DC, (which here I
suppose found by mensuration 146 Perches,) produces 2520, and this divided by
50 the number of acres in the Triangle ADC, yeldeth in the Quotient 50 Perches
6 foot, which measured out from D in the line DC, shows where the line of
partition issuing forth of the angle A shall fall: and thus may you conclude
that ADE, is the foresaid quarter of the whole Trapezium, and contains 18
Acres.

The.20. Chapter. To divide the superficies of any irregular Pollygonium, with
a straight line proceeding from any one of the Angles assigned in such sort,
that the parts shall retain any proportion appointed.
WHen any proportion is given, there are two Numbers wherewithal it is
expressed, and they are called Termini, those two you shall add together,
reserving the Producte for a Divisor, then measure the Area of that whole
Irregulare Polligonium, which you shall multiply in the lesser of those
Termini, the Producte shall you divide by your reserved Divisor, the Quotient
is the content of the lesser Portion, which Deducted from the whole, leaves
the Superficies of the greater part. But to draw the line or Partition that
shall divide this Pollygonium, it were necessary first to learn on what side
and part thereof this line should fall, which you shall thus do: Draw or
imagine right lines extended from the assigned Angle to every Angle on either
side, so shall ye make several Triangles, whereof by the Rules tofore given,
you must search the content Superficial. This done, ye shall compare the Area
of the first triangle, with the Superficial content of the lesser portion found
as is before declared. If the Triangle be greater, then may you by the
precepts before given, cut of from that Triangle so many Acres or Perches as
that lesser Portion should contain, but if the Triangle be not greater, ye
shall deducte it from the foresaid lesser portion, and the Remain compare
with the next Triangle, which if it be greater than that Triangle also,
subtract from it the Superficies of the triangle, and so proceed on til ye
find a triangle greater than your remayn, then may you say, that your
partition or dividing right line proceeding from the assigned angle shall fall
on the base or side subtendent of the assigned angle in that last triangle, but
to know on what part thereof, you must work with your last remayn and the Area
of your last triangle, as you were before taught in the division of triangles.
And in like manner draw your dividing line which shall exactly, separate that
Irregular Polligonum, in two Superficies retaining the prescribed proportion:
for more plainness peruse the example ensuing.

Admit ABCDEF, an irregular Hexagonum which I would divide with a right line
issuing forth of the angle A in such sort that the greater part might be
triple to the lesser; this proportion triple may be expressed with these two
numbers 3 and 1, and they are called Termini or bounds of that proportion,
these two added make 4, wherewith divide the whole Superficies of that
Pollygonum, which I suppose by mensuration found 64 Acres, my Quotient will be
16. Admit also I find the Area of my first triangle ABC 12 acres, and the Area
of the second ACD, 18 acres. Now comparing 16 with the Triangle ABC, I find
it greater, deducting therefore the one from the other, there rests 4 Acres,
which forasmuch as it is less than the Area of the Triangle ACD, I conclude
the partition or dividing line shall fall on the side CD, but to learn on what
part thereof, I work as I was taught in the partition of Triangles thus, first
with my square Geometticall or otherwise, I measure the side CD. Admit it 36
Perches, which multiplied in 4 the last Remain brings 144, and that
divided by 18 the acres contained in the triangle ACD, produces in the
quotient 8, so many rod length shall you meet from C to G, in the side CD,
finally extending a right line from the assigned angle A, to the point G, you
may conclude AFEDG Triple to AGCB.

The 21 Chapter. To divide any irregular Pollygonium into as many equal parts
as ye will desire, with right lines drawn from any point within the
superficies thereof assigned.
First get the Area of the whole irregulare Pollygonium, which you shall
divide by the number of parts, whereunto ye would disseuer it, and the quotient
reserve, then from your point assigned deducte or imagine lines to every angle
of that figure, so shall ye part it into sundry triangles, then compare your
reserved quotient with some one triangle beginning where ye li^te, and if ye
find the triangle greater, then cut of from it a portion equal to your
quotient, with a straight line proceeding from the angle adjacent to the
assigned point, but if your quotient be greater than the first triangle,
deducte the one from the other, and compare the remain with the second
triangle, which triangle if ye find greater, cut of from it a portion equal
to your remain, with a line issuing out of the angle joining to your assigned
point, and then compare again your reserved quotient with the remaining
triangle, if your quotient be greater, separate from the triangle next ensuing
a portion equal to the excess or overplus, and that always with a lyn^
issuing out of the angle adjacent to the point first given. Thus proceeding
till ye have circulate the figure, always drawing straight lines from the
point assigned, ye shall in the end depart the whole figure into as many
equal portions as ye determined. This one thing is to be noted, that so often
as your remain or reserved quotient falls out equal to any of the
triangles, then shall you not draw any line from the asigned point, for the side
of that triangle serves for the partition or dividing line.

Example.
LEt ABCDEFG represent an irregular Pollygonium, or seven sided piece of
ground, which I would divide with straight lines issuing out of the point H
into three equal parts, first therefore I imagine straight lines from H to
every angle, so is it divided into 7 several triangles: now by the rules tofore
given I mete the area of every triangle, finding HAB 5 acres, HBC 5 acres two
roodes, HCD 4 acres, HDE 6 acres 1 rode, HEF 5 acres, HFG 5 acres 12 perches,
HAG 4 acres 2 roodes. Thus by adding all these triangles together you shall find
the area of that whole figure 35 acres, 1 roode, 12 perches, which resolved
into perches yeldeth this number 5652, and that divided by 3 brings 1884
perches, and that is the content of every portion that this figure should be
parted into. First therefore comparing it with the triangle ABH, I find the
triangle the lesser, the one deducted from the other, there remains 1084
perches, and this remain I find likewise greater than the triangle CHB,
detracting therefore the one from the other, there remains 204, which
compared with the third triangle CHD, forasmuch as it is less than the area
thereof, I search by the rules tofore given in division of triangles, on what
part of the base, CD the dividing line shall fall that proceeds from the
angle H: admit it cut CD in the point I, from I to H extend a right line, and
that shall be the first partition. Now seeing HID joined to DEH the fourth
tria^gle, is less than 1884 perches my reserved quotient, I deduct the one
from the other, so there remains 448 perches, I search therefore by the rules
tofore given on what part of OF the line shall fall, proceeding from H to cut
of 448 perches from HEF: but here you must consider that this portion of 448
rods or perches must be adjacent to the side HE, because the quotient does
excede the triangles by so much. This considred admit the partition HK. now
because my desire was to divide it only into three parts, I need proceed no
further, for those two lines do exactly depart that whole irregular
Pollygonium into three equal parts, whereof the first is that rightlined
figure IHABC, the second is IHKED, the third is KHAGF, and this partition is
made with right lines issuing from the point H assigned, which was required.
In this manner you may divide any Superficies into as many equal or unequal
parts as you list, or into what proportion ye will desire, as by these few
examples the ingeniouse will redily conceive of any other: manyfolde rules
might I give you in these and like partitions, but knowing the premises to the
witty are sufficient; I will only adioyne certain questions of some more
difficulty, with the resolution of them, and so finish the second kind of
mensuration.

The.22. Chapter. To divide any circle whose semidiameter is known, with an
other circumference concentricall, in two such parts that the one portion to
the other shall retain any proportion assigned.
WHen any proportion is given, it consists of two numbers, as I have before
said, that are called Termini rationis, those numbers ye shall add together,
reserving the producte for a divisor, then multiply the square of these
midiameter known by the lesser of those Termini, and the ofcome divide by the
reserved divisor, from the quotient thereof, resulting, extracte the quadrate
root, for that is the semidiameter of the concentricall circle, whose
circumference shall divide the former given Circle in two parts, retayning the
proportion assigned.

Example.
ADmit 120 the semidiameter of the circle, BCDE, whose area I would divide with
a concentrirall circumference in such sort that one part might be triple to
the other, this proportion consists of 3 and 1, which added together make 4,
now the square of the semidiameter being 14400, augmented by 1 the lesser of
those Termini, produces the same sum again which divided by 4 tofore
reserved for that purpose yeldeth 3600, whose quadrate root is 60, so much is
AF the semidiameter of that inward Circle, whose circumference has divided
the Circle BCDE in two parts, the lesser is the circle FGH, and the greater is
the anular Superficies contained between those circumferences, the one being
triple to the other. In like manner may you divide that anular Superficies into
three other, every one of them equal to the same inward circle, whereof it
were superfluous to adioyne any farther example, forasmuch as the proportion
of the parts once known, the operation is in all points agreeable with the
former.

The.23. Chapter. The three sides of a triangle known, by supputation to get
the greatest circles semidimetiente that may be described within that circle.
YE shall first add the two shorter sides together, reserving the producte,
then substract those sides the one from the other, the remain multiply in the
former product, and the amounting sum divide by the third or longest side,
the quotient detracte from that longest side that was your last divisor, the
medietie of this remain you shall multiplye in it self, and deducte the
ofcome from the square of the shortest side, the root quadrate of the
remaynder is the perpendiculare falling from the greatest angle to the greatest
side, which retayneth the same proportion to the semidiameter of the inscribed
circle, that the perimetrie of the triangle does to the base or greatest side,
working therefore by the rule of proportion by three known, ye may redily
find the fourth.

Example.
LEt ABC be the triangle, AB 36, BC 48, AC, 60, now to get the greatest
circles semidiameter that may be described within that triangle, I work thus,
first 36 added to 48, brings 84, then 36 detracted from 48 leueth 12, which
multiplied in 84 brings 1008, which divided by 60, the longest side yeldeth
in the Quotient 16. This deducted from 60 the Divisor, the remain will be 43,
the medietie thereof is 21: whose square de^ucted from the square of 36 leueth
829 11/25, Therefore do I conclude {powerof2}829 11/25, ^he perpendicular BG,
for the semidiameter OF, I use the rule of proportion ^aying 144 the permetrie,
gives 60 the base, what shall {powerof2}829 11/25 by multiplica^ion of the
latter and division with the first, ye shall find the fourth proportional
number 12, and that is the line OF or semidimetie^t of the greatest circle that
may ^e described within that triangle.

This is also to be noted, that the medietie (whose square ye subtracte from
the square of the left side to get the perpendiculare) is the line AG: which
deducted from the whole base, leueth the other line GC. and those two parts of
the bases are called Casus.

The.24. Chapter. To find the greatest squares side that may be described
vithin any triangle whose sides are known.
Sundry rules might be given to resolve this question, but to avoid
confusion, I will only declare the easiest: ye shall therefore (as is before in
this book taught) search the perpendicular line falling from the greatest
angle to the longest side: this perpe^dicular it behooves you to divide in such
sort, that the parts retain such proportion as does the base or longest side
to the said perpendiculare, so doing the greater portion is ye squares side.
But Arithmetically to attain the quantity of this longer portion, ye shall
thus work: Multiply the perpendicular in it self* and divide the producte by
the Base or longest side of the triangle and the perpendicular joined together,
the quotient detracted from the whole perpendiculare leueth your desire. Or
multiply the base in the perpendicular, and divide by them both joined
together as before, so shall your Quotient produce the squares side also.

Example.
ABC is the triangle whose sides are known, AB 24, BC 40, AC 32, the
perpendicular found, a^ is tofore declared, is 19, which divided at I, in
such sort that DI to IA retain the proportion of BC to DA, DI shall be the
side of the greatest square that may be made within that Triangle: but too
find the length of DI, you must multiply 40 the base BC in 19 the
perpendiculare, so have you 3840/5 which divided by 206/5 the perpe^diculare
and Base joined together, yeldeth 12 36/37, the line ID. Likewise, if ye square
the perpendicular, the mounting sum will be 9216/25 which divided by 196/5
the former divisor brings in the quotient 6 ^2/185, which deducted fro 19 the
perpendicular, there remains 12 180/185, the side of the greatest square
agreeing with the former operation. In like manner if ye divide BD, whose
longitude you were taught by the last Chapter to find, and also AB, the left
side of the Triangle in such sort, that the greater sections to the lesser
retain the same proportion, that the base does to the perpendicular, the
squares of the two greater sections one deducted from the other leueth the Area
of the greatest square that may be described within that Triangle. Also, if ye
divide any of the two lesser sides in two parts retayning the foresaid
proportion of the perpendiculare to the Base, the lesser of those Portions
augmented by the base and the product divided by the side brings in the
quotient that greatest squares side. Thus also an other way, you may attain
the same: Divide both the Casus, that is ^o say, BD, and DC the distance of
either Angle from the perpendicular, in like manner as has been said of the
Perpendicular, then add both the smaller sections together, the resulting
sum is the squares side: Every of these ways working, ye may resolve this
question, great pleasure shall the Arithmetrician (especially if he be seen in
surde and radical numbers) receive, when he shall perceive so diverse
intricate and different operations always in fine to produce the self same
certayntie.

The end of the second Book.
The third kind of Geometry named Stereometria.
IN THIS third book ye shall receive sundry rules to measure the Superficies
and Crassitude of solid bodies, whereof, although an infinite sort of
differente kinds might be imagined, yet shall I only entreat of such as are
both usually requisite to be moten, and also may sufficiently induce the
ingenious to the mensuration of all other solides what form or figure soever
they bear. And forasmuch as in setting forth their several kinds, I have
chosen to use the accustomable and ancient names well known to any
traveled in Geometry, rather than to forge nevve English words which can
neither so breefly nor so aptly express the like effect, least to the common
sort any obscurity might grovve, I think good to adioyne every of their
diffinitions, DIFFINITIONS.
1 A Solid body is that has length, breadth and thickness bounded or
limited with Superficies. 2 Like solides are such as are encompassed with
superficies that are like and of equal number. 3 A Prisma is a solid Figure
comprehended of plain Superficies, whereof two are equal, like, and
Parallele, the rest Parallelogra^mes. 4 A Pyramid is a solid Figure enclosed
with many plain Superficies rising from one, and concurring or meeting in a
point. 5 A Sphere is a gross or solid body comprehended of one conuex
Superficies. In the mids whereof there is a point from whence all right
lines to the same superficies extended, are equal. 6 That poincte is called
his Center, and a straight line by that Center passing thoroughe this solid
bounded on either side with the conuex superficies is called the Diameter of
that Sphere. 7 Also intellectually ye may thus conceive a Sphere to be made.
Suppose a semicircle (his diameter remaining immouably fixed) to be turned
round about til it return to the place whence it first began to move, the
figure so described, is a Sphere. 8 Likewise, if a right angled triangle (one
of the containing sides remaining fixed) be turned circularly about the Figure
so described, it is called a Cone. 9 The right line that remains fixed is the
Axis. 10 The circle described by the other containing side is the Base. 11 The
third line or Hypothenusa, is the side of the Cone. 12 If a right angled
parallelogramme (the one of the sides containing a right angle remaining
immouable) be circularly turned, the Figure so described, is a Cylinder, and
the immouable side is his Axis. 13 The Bases are the Circles by revolution of
the two opposite Parallele sides described. 14 The altitude or height of any
solid body, is a line perpendicularly falling from the top or highest part
of the solid upon the plain whereon the body lies. 15 This perpendicular or
line of altitude in direct solides falls within the body, and upon the
base, but in declyning solides, it falls without the bodies and bases. 16 As
the concourse of lines makes a plain angle, so the concurring or meeting of
many superficies in a point, makes a solid angle. 17 In every solid body a
right line drawn from one solid angle to one other is called a line
Diagonall. But if it pass between opposite angles, it is named the Diameter.


The first Chapter. To measure the contents Superficial and solid of any
Prisma.
FOr the Superficies, ye shall add all the Parallelogrammes and Bases their
Area together, the resulting sum is your desire, but for the crassitude, ye
shall augmente the altitude of the Solid in the Area of the Base, the producte
is the gross capacity.

Example.
Considering of Solides called Prismata, there are two kinds, the one direct
^ upright, whose Paralelogrammes are Perpendiculare to their Base, the other
^^lique or declining, whose Paralelogrammes are obliquely situate on their
bases. ^f either I mind to propound an example, although one rule suffice them
both. ^dmit therefore ABCDEF a direct or upright Triangular Prisma, having
(...) three sides of his base ED 3, DC 4, EC ^, his altitude AD 10, so that by
(...) rules given in Planimetra I find the Area of either Triangle or base 6,
the Paralelogrammes AFED 30, ABCD 40 FBCE 50, all these joined together, make
132, the Superficies of that Prisma. Likewise for the superficies of the
declining solid IKLMNO, by the precepts given in Planimetra I find the Area
of the right angled Paralelogrammes or bases either of them 18, the Area of the
other Paralelogrammes IGNO 39, IGLK 72, KLMP 39, OPNM 72. and these joined
^^gether yeldeth 258, that is the content superficial thereof.

For the Crassitude I search the altitude of either Solid, which in the
upright Prisma is, the ereared side of any of his Paralelogrammes, as AD, BC,
or FE. ^or they are all equal, every one of them being 10, but the altitude of
the declining Quadrangular Prisma is the Perpendicular OR, falling from O the
top of the Prisma perpendicularly on MR a line drawn in the plain whereon the
body re^^eth, 10 therefore multiplied in 6, produces 60, the Solid quantity
of that Pris^a: Also the altitude OC being found by mensuration 12. multiplied
in 18 the ^ase, brings 216, and that is the Solid capacity of the declining
Prisma IKLMNO.

Although these common pieces. K.L. are moten as is tofore taught, yet (...)
may readely thus measure them, multiplye the length with the breadth, and the
Product in the thickness, so have ye the content or Crassitude.

Behold the Figure.
The content of K 216 Cubicall foot, the Crassitude of L 216 square foot.



The.2. Chapter. How the contents Superficial and Solid of a Pyramid may be
measured whether it be direct or declining.
FOr as much as every Pyramid is environed with triangular plains rising fro
the base, and concurring or meeting at the top, ye may by the rules given in
Planimetra measure the Area of every Triangle* whose co^tents joined together,
and the Product to the base, yeldeth the Superficies of that whole Pyramid. But
for the content Solid whether the Pyramid be direct or inclinate, ye shall
first measure the length of the line Perpendicularly falling fro the top to the
plain whereon the base rests, which multiplied in the third part of the bases
Area will produce the Crassitude of that Pyramid.

Example.
Suppose ABCDE an upright Quadrangular Pyramid, whose base being a square, I
measure only the side BC finding it 12, which multiplied in it self, brings
144 the Area of the base, then do I measure the length of the line AG 10, for
so am I taught in Planimetra, that multiplied in 6, half DE brings 60, the
Area of the triangle ADE, but seeing the other triangles are equal to the
same, considering they have equal bases and altitudes, I need make no more
ado, but multiply 60 by 4 so resuiteth 240 the superficies of the four
triangles concurring as A* and this added to 144, the base brings 384 the
whole content superficial of that Pyramid. But for the Crassitude I measure
the Altitude or line AF falling from A Perpendicularly upon the base, this
Perpendiculars length I suppose 8, which multiplied in 144 produces 1152, and
that is the Solid con^^nt of that Quadrangular Pyramid. In like manner to
attain the Crassitude of (...) declining Pentagonal Pyramid IKLMNO, I measure
the altitude or Per^endicular IH 20, likewise the Area of the Pentagonal basis,
whose side is 14, which by the precepts given in Planimetra I find 337, these
multiplied together ^elde 6740, the Solid content of the declining Pyramid.

The.3. Chapter. How Cylinders and Cones are measured.
THe Cylinders altitude multiplied in the Circumference of his base, or the
side of the Cone augmented in half the Peripherie of his base, and the
Productes added to their bases, bring the contents Superficial.

The Solid content of a Cylinder is gotten by augmenting the base in ^is
altitude. Likewise the altitude of the Cone multiplied in the third part ^f his
base yeldeth his Crassitude.

Example.
Admit the Area of the Cylinders ^ase found by the rules in Planime^ra 78 4/7
the circu^ference being 31 3/7, which multiplied in 21 the Cylinders ^ltitude
yeldeth 660, which added unto 157 1/7 brings 817 1/7, the whole superficies
of that Cylinder, but if (...) augment 21 in 78 4/7 the bases A^ea, it
produces 1650, and that is ^he Crassitude or Solid capacity ^f that
Cylinder. Likewise for ^he Superficies of the Cone GHE, I augment 26 the side
HG in 31 ^/^ half the Circumference GFE, thereof resulteth 817 1/7, whereunto if
ye adioyne 314 2/7 that basis Area there amounts 1131 3/7, the Cones content
Superficial, and by multiplying 24 the altitude in 104 16/21, the third part
of the Circle GFE. there arises 2514 2/7, the Solid content of the Cone GHE.

A note to find the altitude of a Solid Cone.
Multiply the side of the Cone in it self, and likewise the Semidiameter of
the Circular base, these deducted the one from the other the quadrat^ root of
the Remainder is the Axis or Altitude of the Cone.

The.4. Chapter. How excauate or holovve timber. etc. is measured.
YOu shall by the Rules before, search the content or Crassitude, as though it
were not holow, then measure the capacity of that hollow, the one subtracted
from the other, the Remain utters the magnitude of that excauate body.

Example.
Admit this round holowe timber logge ABC were to be measured the height being
14 foot, the Diameter of the outward Circle 7 foot, the Dimetient of the
inward Circle 5 foot, the circumfere^ce of the bigger 22 foot, the content
superficial or plain of it 38 the Circu^ference of the less 15 foot and
^/7, his plain 19 ^/14. Now multiply 38, in 14, ^ have ye the crassitude of
the whole round piece of Timber which is 539 foot. ^hen augment 19 ^/14 into
14 ryseth 275 foot, which subtracted from 539, re^ayneth 264, so many foot
is in the crassitude about that hollow piece of tym^er. Or thus ye may bring
it to pass: Pull 19 9/14 from 38, that is the one super^^ciall content from the
other, and the remain multiplye in the height 14, So ^aue ye as before 264
foot. An other example of timber hollowed and somewhat ^ashioned like unto a
troughe: Suppose it to be DEFG, whose outward breadth DE is 10 foot, the length
OF 14 foot, the height FG 8 foot, the inward breadth ^f the hollow HI 5 foot,
the length HK 7 foot, the height as before. Now mul^iplie 10 in 14, so have ye
140. This augmented in 8 ryseth 1120. Then multi^lye 7 in 5, that makes 35,
which augmented in 8, surmounteth 280, that ^umme by subtraction taken from
1120, leaves 840, so many foot is the crassi^ude of this hollow troughe DEFG,
even thus of all other. By that which is ^oken ye may gather how to get the
capacity of all manner regular vessels, and that is performed in multiplying
the plain or content superficial of the inward ^ase or bottom in the
profunditie or height. Example 35 the inward bases plain ^ugmented in 8, the
height produces 280. So many cubicall feet is in the hol^owe vessel. These
280 augmented in 51, brings forth 14280 pints of water, farther divided by 8
shows 1785 gallons. Thus of al other, and that for liquour ^onteyned in any
manner vessel.

The.5. Chapter. How the crassitude and Superficies of a sphere is te be
measured.
FOr the superficies ye shall multiply the diameter in his circumference or get
the plain of that circle, as before in Planimetra I have taught, and increase
it by 4, so have ye the quantity superficial, and that multiplied in the
sixth part of the diameter produces the crassitude. Likewise the diameter
multiplied in his square, and the offcome in 11, this product divided ^y 21
produces in the quotient also the solid content of the sphere. Many ^o rules
could I give you for the like effect. But for better vnderstan^ing of these,
behold the example ensuyng.

Example.
ABCD the globe whose diameter AC is 14, his circumference being 44, the one
multiplied by the other, brings 616, and that is the Superficies of the globe
which increased by 2 brings 1437 and that is the solid content which is
likewise thus produced 14, multiplied in his square yeldeth 2744, this again
in 11, makes 30184, which divided by 21 gives in the Quotiente 1437, the
Crassitude agreeable to the former work.

The.6. Chapter. How fragmentes or parts of a Globe are measured.
YE shall augment the whole superficies of the globe by the altitude or
thickness of the fragment, and the offcome divide by the dimetient, your
quotient is the conuex sphericall superficies of the fragmente, whereunto
addyng his base or circle ye produce the whole superficies.

For the crassitude if it be less than half the globe ye shall first
detracte the altitude of the fragment from the semidiameter of the sphere, the
remain ye shall augmente by the circular base. This producte shall ye
subtracte from a number amountinge by the multiplication of the semidiameter in
the conuex sphericall superficies of the fragment, the third part of the
remain is the crassitude or content solid of that fragment. But if the
fragment be greater than half the sphere, then shall ye deducte the spheres
semidimetiente from the altitude of the fragmente and the remainder multiplied
in the circular base the product must be added to the number produced by
multiplication of the semidiameter, in the conuex sphericall superficies of the
fragment, the third part of this resulting sum is the desired crassitude.

Admit ABCD a fragment of the former globe, whose diameter is 14, and that BD
the altitude thereof be 4, the spheres whole Superficies being 616, mul^^plyed
by 4, brings 2464, and that divided by 14, yeldeth in the quotie^t 176, (...)
conuex Superficies, whereunto if ye adioyn 126, the Area of the base or cir^le,
whose dimetient is AC, there amounts ^02, the whole Superficies of that
portion ABCD, by the like woorking ye shall find the ^uperficies of EFGH 566.
But for their cras^^tude I work thus, In the lesser portion I find (...)
altitude 4, which deducted from 7, the sphe^es semidimetient, leaves 3, which
augmen^ed by 126, the bases Area brings 378, and ^his deducted from 1232 (a
number produ^ed by multiplication of the spheres semidime^^ent in the conuex
Superficies of the segment) ^^aueth 854, whose third part is 284, so ^uche is
the solid content of ABCD. But ^or the crassitude of the other portion, I
augment 440 his conuex superficies in 7, there a^yseth 3080. Likewise I
multiplye 3, the difference between the semidiameter and the fragmentes
altitude in 126, thereof comes 378, these added together, ^ake 3458, which
divided by 3, yeldeth for a quotient 1152, the solid cras^^tude of the other
fragmente EGFH. But for as much as the spheres diameter is here supposed
known, I shall give you a rule readily by supputation to ^earne the quantity
thereof.

The.7. Chapter. Any sphericall segment propouned to atteyne the spheres dia^^
meter vvherof it is the fragment.
First measure the altitude of the fragmente: Secondely, the semidiameter of
the circular base, which ye may also attain by knowledge ^f his
circumference as was taught in Planimetra, then square the semidiameter and
divide the product by the fragments altitude, the quotient ^dded to your
divisor yeldeth the spheres diameter. Or thus, add the square of the altitude
to the square of the semidimetient, and divide that producte by the altitude,
so will your quotient express the diameters quantity.

Example.
ABCD the sphericall segment his altitude BD 4, the semidiameter of his
circular bases AD nigh 6 the square thereof is 40, which divided by 4, yeldeth
in the quotient 10, which added to 4, brings 14 the Diameter of the Sphere.
Likewise the square of 4 is 16, added to 40 the square of AD brings 56,
which divided by 4, gives for the quotient 14, the sphere 5 dimetient
agreeing with the former working.

The.8. Chapter. How a Pyramid cut off, may be measured.
IF the Pyramid be imperfect, yea cut off in the top, continue it by rule
and line wittyly laid to the two contrary sides* and where the joining and
common meetynge is there that Pyramid is whole and perfect, then measure that
whole by the Art before, and also the Pyramid going from the top of the
imperfect to the common meetyng. This done ye shall subtracte the crassitude
of the less from the whole continued Pyramid, so the remain without doubt is
the magnitude of the imperfect Pyramid.

Example.
Let ABCDE represente an Hexagonall imperfecte Pyramid encompassed with two
equiangle Hexagonal Parallele playnes and 6 Isoscheles Trapezia, every of their
Bases being the sides of the ^reater Hexagonum 12, every side of the lesser
Hexagonum 6. Now, applying rules or lines unto the sides BF, GE, I find them
to con^urre at H. Thus have you two Pyramides, ^he greater having his base an
equiangle Hexa^onum, whose side is 12: the other is the Pyramid HFG, whose base
is the Hexagonu^ FG, ^uery of his sides being 6, the altitude of the lesser
Pyramid is 15 the altitude of the greater ^0. Also by the rules given in
Planimetra, ye shall find the area of the lesser Hexagonum ^3, the area of
the greater 294, and so consequently by multiplication of them in the third
^arte of their altitudes as was taught before in ^he mensuration of whole
Pyramides, the solid content of the lesser will be 468, the crassitude of the
greater is 3744, the one deducted for the other, leueth 3276, the magnitude of
that imperfect Pyramid FBCDE.

A note how by supputation to get the perpendiculares or altitudes of those
Pyramides.
FOr that it were tedious and painful in a solid of great quantity, by rule
or line to search out these perpendiculares, ye shall by Arithmetike attain
them thus: multiply the greater Hexagonall side by the side of the imperfect
Pyramid, and the producte divide by the difference or overplus of the sides
Hexagonall, the quotient shows the side of the whole great Pyramid, from
whose square (if ye deduct the square of the circles semidiameter that
encloseth the greater Hexagonum which ye were taught in Planimetra how to
find) the root quadrate of the remainder is the altitude of the greater
Pyramid, which augmented again by the lesser Hexagonall side, and the offcome
divided by the greater, brings in the quotient, the altitude of the lesser
Pyramid.

Example.
The imperfect Pyramid side FB being nighe 16, I multiply by 12 the grea^er
Hexagonall side, there arises 193, and that divided by 6, the lesser side
Hexagonall produces in the Quotiente 32 1/^, the Pyramidall side HB, from the
square thereof, if ye deducte the square of BL, the circles semidiameter that
encludeth the greater Hexagonum being 144, there will remain 900, whose root
is 30, the altitude of the greater Pyramid, which augmented by 6, the lesser
Hexagonall side, and divided by 12, produces in the Quotient 15 the altitude
of the lesser Pyramid. These lines for that they are some of them
incommensurable, can not exactly be expressed, save only in surde numbers: but
so nighe as is requisite for any Mechanical mensuration this operation
declares them: such as are expert in Algebra by the former rules with
irrational numbers may precisely show their quantity. The very like operation
is required in perfect and imperfect Cones, for measuring their Perpendiculars
and crassitude. Whereof to the ingeniouse there need no other Example.

The.9. Chapter. To cut off from any Cone or Pyramid what part or portion
thereof ye will desire, with a plain equedistante to the base, and to find
on what part of the solides side the section shall fall.
THis division of Cones and Pyramides is in two respects to be made, either in
consideration of their contents superficial, or in regard of their solid
qua^tities, for either of them I shall give you several rules. First, it
behooves ye to measure the side of the Cone or Pyramid, that side shall ye
divide by the quadrate root of the number expressing the part assigned, your
quotient is the line or distance from the top of the Cone or Pyramid to the
section or place where the plain parallele to ye base shall pass, which will
divide or cut off from the assigned solides superficies the desired part. The
same line or distance is also found with division of the Cones side squared by
the number expressing the part to be cut off, for the root quadrat of the
quotient shall be your desire. But if ye would from any Cone or Pyramid in like
manner make separation, in such sort that their so^ide contents might retain
like proportion, then shall ye multiply the side of the Cone or Pyramid,
first in himself, and then again in the offcome, and this last producte
shall ye divide by the number expressing the part ye would separate, the root
cubicall of your Quotiente is the side of the lesser Cone or Pyramid to be cut
off from the top of the greater.

Example.
Admit ABC the Cone, from whose summitie or top, I would cut off a portion,
for example, the Cone AEF whose superficies should be the 9 part of the great
Cone ABC, his superficies. I take therefore the root quadrate of 9, that is 3,
wherewith I divide 100 the side of the great Cone there arises in the quotient
33 the line AF or side of the lesser Cone, the same number I produce also by
the second rule thus, I divide 10000 the square of AC, the Cones side by 9, the
quotie^t yeldeth 1111 1/9, whose root is likewise 33, the side AF. But for
operation in solides, I shall give you an other example: Suppose HK the side of
the Pyramid HIK 120, from the which Pyramid I would cut off an other portion,
for example, HLM that might be an eight part of the great Pyramid HIK, the
number of the side 120, I multiply in it self thereof arises 14400, which
augmented again by 120 makes 1728000, and this divided by 8 (for that is the
number wherewith the part is expressed) I find in the quotient 216000, whose
root cubike is 60, and that is the length of HM or side of the Pyramid HLM,
whose solid content is the eight part exactly of the great Pyramid HIK. Even
so shall ye do^ in all other regulare Pyramides, how many equal sides soever
his base have: but if the sides of his base be unequal, and so consequently the
sides of the Pyramid also unequal, then shall ye work with every side
severally as I have by example showed ye in one: or else work by the rule of
three for all the sides are proportionally divided: this to the witty will
suffice.

Here follovveth other fashioned bodies somevvhat strange in figure, but in
effect those that tofore are measured.
THe first ABCD appears to be two round Pyramides joined together, whose
Diameter AC is as the round Pyramid before measured 12 foot, the heigthe or
perpendiculare line 20 foot and 5/40, the side 21, wherefore I conclude the
crassitude of the one part or half of it to be eue^ as the round Pyramid
before measured, that is 759 foot, which doubled, make 1518, the whole
content of this Figure, the other Figure ensuing is like to an egg, and not
very unlike to the Figure above. Wherefore to measure him, ye shall work as ye
did in the other, the crassitude of that so had, and then doubled, brings
the whole content of him. Also this Figure EFGH is like in content to the
other ABCD, according to that form whose crassitude is 1518, this doubled
makes 3036 foot, so much ye may affirm the crassitude or quantity of that
figure like unto an egg. Now to get the quantity superficial of him, ye
shall multiply the arcke FEH in the half circumference of the circle whose
Diameter is EG, or the whole circumference in half the arcke, so have ye the
superficies.

The.10. Chapter. How wine vessels or barrels are measured.
SVppose ABCD were the barell to be moten: first, ye must take the just measure
of both the heads severally, the one head AB, I have imagined 7 foot, the
other CD as many. Now, take the true height of the mids where the barell
swells, which is OF, being here 10 foot. These three diameters keep, the^
note how many foot, or other measure is contained from the mids of either head
to the middle of the swelling G in a straight line moten within the Barel.
Behold from the head H to G the middle swelling, is 6 foot, from G to this
letter I as many: now ye must set the three diameters (tofore reserved) upon
some charde, paper, or other plain, the one differing from other according to
their measures, as ye may see in the figure, then enclose them with an arc on
both sides, cutting the middle line, which line crosses the diameters
squirewise in the middle, the one arc is KBECL, the other is KAFDL, the arkes
drawn as ye see, lo a figure is made like unto an egg: Truly all such
fashioned fygures I have taught you to measure immediately before. In him ye may
find 1047 13/21, now if ye pull away by any art from this whole sum the
number of feet contained in the pieces of the figure superfluouse and more
than the barel at either end, then the magnitude or capacity of that vessel
must needs remain, as by the example is plainly perceived, although it would
seem I had entreated sufficiently, yet I think it worthy of remembrance to
tell you how to search the content of these pieces at the ends of the figure,
I must suppose that ye know the measuring of a round Pyramid which is entreated
before, ymagine the diameter BA which is 7 foot to be the base, KH the height
of the piece here imagined a Pyramid: now if ye (as is before mentioned)
multiplye the plain of the base in the third part of the height, the
content of that figure will come according to that fashioned meeting, which is
51, with this number by the precepts of proportion ye shall work as follows:
first know the length of HL that is 16 foot, ageine GL being 10 foot, both
these added make 26. Now say 16 gives 26, what shall 51 bring, so have ye 53
^/2, so many foot is the piece KBA, and the other CDL as many, which added make
166 * pull this out of the number contained in the whole figure before found,
which is 1047, so have ye left 880 11/14 the capacity of your Barrel. Thus
the learned and famous Archimedes has taught in the 31 proposition of his
book de Sph^roibus and Conoidibus.

An other mensuration of vessels more common.
SOme use when the base plain of the extremes and mids of any vessel are not
one, to subtract the less from the bigger Superficies, the medietie that
remains deducte from the big plain: then whatsoever is left add to the
lesser Superficies, the half of the producte shows the true base to be
multiplied in the height, of the which comes the content.

Example.
THe plain of the bigger Superficies conteyneth 40 foot, the lesser 24, the
difference is 16, the half 8 subtracted from 40, leueth 32, this added to the
less superficies 24 make 56, the half is 28, which multiplied in 24 brings
67^* the whole content. Lo the figure.



Another note of measuring.
IF the Diameter of the vessel be in the mids 10 foot, but at the ends
eight, add them, and take half, so have ye nine, thus nine foot shall be thy
diameter, whose plain or base (as before) multiplied in the longitude or
height, brings a true content. Note well this kind for pillars and other
bodies, when they have diameters or bases not agreeable.

The.11. Chapter. One rule general exactly to measure al kind of wine vessels.
Forasmuch as there are sundry kinds of wine vessels, as the tun, the
pipe, the punshion, hogsheads, buttes, barrels, etc. every of them differing
from other as well in quantity as in fashion, to teach several rules for every
sort it were over tediouse, leuing therefore manyfolde precepts and examples
that I might in this case prescribe, I shall for breui^ie sake set forth one
only rule general, whereby ye shall be able with the aid of a small
proportional vessel, not only to measure the whole ^apacitie of any manner
wine vessel, but also the default and quantity of ^icour therein contained,
when it is partly empty. And first I will begin with this small
proportional vessel, which it behooves you to procure by some skillful
Artificer, so made that their lengthes retain ^he same proportion that their
circumferences or circles, as well at the ^ndes and mids, as also at other
like and proportional distances taken in the length of either vessel: as by
the example following shall more plainly appear.

Example.
Admit S and ^ the two vessels, ^ the greater, S the lesser: now ^o examine
whether these two (...) proportional, (...) search first their lengthes,
^^^nding HD 60 ^^ches, and RQ (...) inches, likewise (...) search the lon^^tude
of every depth or diameter, that is to say, BF and LO the diameters or depths
of the mids, and AG, CE, KP, MN, the circles of the ends, now if BF, AG and
CE retain the same proportion to KP, LO, MN, (every one particularly compared
to his like) that HD the length of the greater does to RQ the longitude of the
lesser, then are those vessels likely proportional: but for greater certentie
(because error may grow upon small difference) it were requisite also to
measure in either of them one other circumference or hoope, as for example in
the greater, the circle passing by TV exactly in the middle between AG and BF,
and in the lesser the circle XY situate in like manner between KP and LO. Now if
ye find the proportion of these two circumferences also agreeable with the
former lengthes and circumferences, ye may assuredly gather these vessels to be
proportional. But if ye find any discrepance or variaunce between them, ye
shall by the aid of some skillful Artificer refourme it in the lesser, till ye
have brought it fully agreing with the proportion of the greater, which is
readily proved by the rule of proportion. Whereof I mind not here to use mo
words, lest in seeking needelesse playnesse, I become over tediouse: your small
vessel thus prepared, ye shall in the next chapter be taught how to use it.

The.12. Chapter. How by this small prepared vessel to measure the quantity
of the greater.
Whenever ye will measure any manner of wine vessels, it behooves you to
consider what sort they are of, and accordingly to prepare your lesser
proportional vessel, then shall ye in either of them measure the profunditie
or greatest diameter, and also the diagonall or cross lines from the bung
holes to the opposite or lowest part of either base, these diagonall lines ye
shall square, and the productes severally multiplye in his correspondent
Diameter, of these surmounting sums ye shall divide the greater by the
lesser, your quotient opens how many times the lesser vessel is contained in
the greater, or if ye augment the greater of those last surmounting sums by
the crassitude of the lesser vessel, and divide by the lesser sum, your
quotient will declare the solid content of the greater vessel.

Example.
Suppose ABCD the wine vessel, whose capacity I would know EFGH my lesser
proportional vessel, first I measure the diameters EG and AC. Admit the first
4, the other 40, again I mete the diagonall lines. Admit I find AB 50 OF 5,
the square of 4 is 16, which augme^ted by 5, brings 80, the square of 40 is
1600, and that augmented by 50, yeldeth 8000, which divided by 80, brings in
the quotient 1000, so many times is the lesser contained in the greater. Now to
learn how many pottles or gallons is contained in that great vessel, I try
first how much liquoure my little prepared vessel will hold: Admit it
conteyne ^/4 of a pint, this augmented by 80000 produces 60000, which
divided by 80, brings 750 so many pintes ye may conclude in that great wine
vessel which reduced to gallons dividing by 8 yeldeth 93 gallons 3 quartes, the
exact quantity of liquour that such a vessel will conteyne, but if it happen
that your vessel be not thoroughly filled, and that ye desire as well to know
how much liquour would suffice to fill it, as also what quantity is therein
contained, ye shall in the next Chapter receive therein perfect instruction.

The.13. Chapter. How both the liquour and default or emptiness in wine
vessels partly filled is to be moten.
FOr greater exactness ye shall provide a fine straight rod of 4 or 5 foot
in length, exactly divided into 1000 equal portions. Then shall ye move the
vessel whose liquour or defaulte ye would measure, till it lie level the
bung hole directely upward, this done take your rod divided as is before
declared, and let it descend perpendicularly down thorough the bung, till it
come to the bottom of the vessel. This done, note what part* the bung or
vpmoste height of the wine vessel will touch of the rod, and likewise how
many parts thereof is wette with the liquour, and last of all how many
parts are contained between the liquour and the bung hole. The first I call
the diameter or profunditie of the vessel, the second the parts of liquour,
and the third shall be named (for distinction) the parts of defaulte or
emptiness. This done ye shall also measure with your divided rod how many
parts the diameter of your lesser vessel conteyneth, these parts augmented
by the parts of liquoure tofore found, and the product divided by the
diameter of the wine vessel, yeldeth in the quotient the parts of liquour, for
your little prepared vessel, which it behooves ye so to situate that it may
also lie level as did the greater vessel, then pour in so much water that by
prouyng with your divided read ye may find the parts of liquour exactly
agreeing with your former quotient: This done augment the diameter of the wine
vessel cubically, that is to say, by his own square, and the producte in the
quantity of liquoure now being in your little prepared vessel, the producte
divided by the cube of your lesser vessels dimetient yeldeth in the quotient
the true quantity of liquor contained in the wine vessel, and that again
deducted from the whole content of the vessel found, as was in the former
Chapters declared, leaves the default or emptiness, that is, how many gallons
or other measures is requisite to fill up the said vessel.

Example.
Admit ABCD the wine vessel partly filled, ADCE the liquour, ABCE the
defaulte or emptynesse, FGHI my smaller proportional vessel prepared as I
have tofore in the last Chapter declared, LM the straight rod divided into
1000 parts, which being let perpendicularly fall from B till it touch the
opposite side at D, I find BD 800 parts, ED that is so much as is w^tte of
the rod 600 parts, likewise placing the rod in my lesser vessel at G,
admit I find the diameter or profunditie GI 200 parts, this number multiplied
by 600, the parts of fullness yeldeth 120000, which divided by 800, brings
in the quotient 150, the parts of fullness for my smaller vessel: fillyng
therefore the proportional small vessel with liquour till it rise unto K,
that is to the 150 part in my divided rod LM, finally by measure I make
trial what quantity of liquour is in my little vessel. Admit it 3 pottles:
Now to learn the quantity of liquour contained in the great, first I multiply
BD the greater diameter being 800 in his square, thereof aryseth 512000000, and
that again by 3, so have I 1536000000, which divided 8000000 (the cube of GI
the less dimetie^t) produces 192, so many pottles is there in that wine
vessel. Now if ye desire to know how many pottles or gallons more will fill
it full, ye may by the last Chapter search how many gallons the whole vessel
will conteyne, and from that withdraw 96 gallons, the quantity of liquour
already therein contained, the remayn is your desire. I think it not
necessary in this case to adioyne any farther example, for that this was in
the former Chapter plainly both by rule and example already declared. This kind
of mensuration serves not only for wine vessels, whereof there are sundry
fourmes, but also for all manner bodies, what kind of fashion soever they be
of, and likewise for their fragments or parts, and it is grounded upon this
Theoreme. All like solides retain among themselves triple proportion of their
like or correspondente sides, that is to say, look what proportion the cube of
one side in the lesser solid, retayneth to the cube of his correspondent side
in the greater solid, the same proportion does the lesser body retain to the
greater: so that with the aid of the golden rule the first three being
known, the fourth is redyly found: And as this rule serves for the whole
bodies, so is it also to be applied to all fragments or parts: so that the
Superficies wherewith the solides are divided be like, and make equal angles
with the sides and Superficies of either solides, for thereupon it must
consequently ensue that those fragme^ts corresponde^tly compared are also
proportional.

Thus much I thought to adioyne touching the reason and demonstration of this
rule, whereby the ingeniouse practizer might the better retain in memory the
operation, and also be able to apply the same to sundry other uses not here
mentioned if occasyon be offered. And for as much as this kind of measurynge
depends wholly upon the small proportional Uesselle, whose quantity is
supposed known, I think it not amiss to give one rule general for all small
vessels how irregular soever they be (their fashion not regarded) exactly to
find their solid quantities.

The.14. Chapter. To measure exactly the solid content of any small body, how
disordred or irregular so ever it be, the form or fashion not regarded.
YE shall prepare a hollow vessel of cubicall form so large that it may
conteyne the small irregular body, which being placed therein, ye shall your
in so much water that it cover altogether the body, then make a mark where
the Superficies or vpmoste part of the water touches. This done take out the
same irregular body, and mark again directly under the former where the brimme
of the water now touches, for the distance of these two marks multiplied by
the square of the Cubes side, produces the crassitude of that irregular body.

Example.
Admit A the cubicall hollow vessel whose inward side I suppose 20 inches,
B is the irregular body, whose crassitude I desire, first therefore I put
the solid into my hollow cube, and pourynge in water till it be thoroughly
covered. Admit the brim of the water reach^ unto C, then taking out that
irr^gular body again: Admytte the Superficies of the water fall to D, I
measure the distaunce between C and D, suppose it 7 inches, which multiplied
in 400, the square of the cubes side produces 2800, so many cubicall inches
are contained in that Irregular body B. Neither is it of great importance
whether your vessel A be an exact Cube. For what kind of Prisma soever it be,
always rising uniformly, and his Paralelogrammes being Perpendicular upon
their base, ye may (changing the form of your Calculatio^) bring the same to
pass, only whereas in the cube ye did multiply his sides square in the distance
between the water marks, ye shall now multiply the same distance or
difference of water marks in the base of the Prisma, the resulting sum is
the Irregulare Solides Crassitude. And thus may you always frame your
containing vessel, according to the form and quantity of the Irregulare body
that ye desire to measure. Meruellous is the appliance of this kinds of
mensurations, and strange conclusions may be performed thereby, wherein
although I mean not in this treatise to reveal any secrets, reserving them
for an other place, yet to give some light to the ingenious to proceed in
applying them farther, I shall not think it tedious to show how it may be
used to discover the weight of such things, as no way possibly by balance may
be found.

The 15. Chapter. How the weight of any part or portion of a Solid body may
be known without separation thereof from the body, vvherby it might be
paised or vvaighed in Balance.
FOr as much as neither by common Balance, neither by that kind of balance
which the Italians use, called Statera, nor any other hitherto invented, the
weight of any fragme^t or part of a Solid body may be known without
seperating or cutting that Fragment of from the whole body, whereby it may by
it self alone be paised in the balance, I thought it not amiss as well for
the rareness of the matter, as for the necessary uses thereof, to set forth
this mean of searching weight by water, with ye aid of Arithmetic: your
vessel therefore being prepared as is tofore declared, whether it be Cube or
Rectangular Prisma it forces not, ye shall first fill it full with water, and
throw the Solid body therinto, then softly lift that body out of the water
till such time as there remain no more in the water than that portion whose
weight ye desire to know, at that instant make a mark on one side of the
vessel where the Superficies of the water then touches, then take out the
body altogether. This done, measure the distance from your mark to the
Superficies of the water as it is now after the body is taken quite out.
Likewise measure the distance of the waters Superficies from the top of the
vessel. This done augment the weight of the whole body by the lesser distance,
and divide by the greater, your Quotient will show the true weight of the
fragment or portion.

Example.
Admit BCD a pillar of an hundred pound in weight, being of Brass, Iron,
Silver, or any other Metal, my desire is to know the weight of the foot or
portion from B to C, first therefore putting the hole pillar into the vessel A,
I fill it full of water, then lifting it softly up til all the pillar be out of
the water, save only the foot or fragment BC, I find the Superficies of the
water fallen to E, then do I lift out the whole pillar, leaving no part
thereof within the vessel, admit now the water fallen unto F, and that by
measuring I find OF 8 inches, and GF 20 inches, 8 multiplied in 100 the whole
Pillars weight yeldeth 800, which divided by 20 (the greter distance) from the
top of the vessel to the lowest water mark, brings in the Quotient 40, so
many pound weight, I c^nclude the Pillars foot or portion BC.

And thus may you by the rising and falling of the water with the aid of
Arithmeticke know how to cut of from this Pillar or any other body what
portion, quantity or weight ye will prescribe, always it is supposed that it
is Corpus Homogeneum, that is to say of matter and kind of substance equally
dispersed through out: otherwise if it be Corpus Heterogeneum, that is to say
of parts unlike in substance, it requires more curious calculation, which I
reserve for an other place, minding here only to make an Introduction for the
witty to proceed farther, and not at large to disclose such secrets as may
be showed herein. By this means did Archimedes find the exact quantity of
every several metal that was in the Kings Crown at Syracusa, without opening
or breaking any part thereof: and many more and no less strange conclusions
may be done thereby.

The end of the third Book called Stereometria.
The Preface.
ALthough the Rules and Precepts already given abundantly may suffice for the
exact mensuration of any manner Solides or vessels that are usually occupied,
or may be proponed to be moten, yet for the satisfaction also of such as
deliting in matters only new, rare and difficile, seek to reach above the
common sort, I have thought good to adioyne this Treatise of the 5 Platonicall
bodies, meaning not to discourse of their secret or mystical appliances to
the Elementall regions and frame of Celestial Spheres, as things remote and
far distant from the Method, nature and certainty of Geometrical
demonstration, only here I intend Mathematically to co^ferre the Superficial
and Solid capacities of these Regulare bodies with their Circumscribing or
inscribed spheres or Solides, and Geometrically by Algebraycall Calculations to
search out the sides, Diameters, Axes, Altitudes, and lines Diagonal, together
with the Semidimetients of their Equiangle Bases, containing or contained
Circles, and as in the Problemes ye shall perceive by Precepts and Examples,
the quantities and proportions of all these lines, Superficies and Crassitudes,
with numbers Rational and Radical expressed, so have I by Theoremes sown the
seed of Rules innumerable, wherein the studious may delight him self with
infinite variety: Finally I shall in the last Chapter by Diffinitions and
Theoremes partly set forth the form, nature and proportion of other five
uniform Geometrical Solides, created by the transformation of the five bodies
Regulare or Platonicall: but not in so ample manner, as the novelty or
difficulty of the matter requires, meaning as I see these the first fruits of
my studies liked and accepted, to bestow time and travail upon an other
peculiare Uolume, which shall conteyne, not only the demonstrations of these
Theorems of spherall solides, but also of Conoydall, Parabollical,
Hyperbollical and Ellepseycal circumscribed and inscribed bodies, and many mo
lines and solides produced by the sections of these, and revolution of their
sectio^s: but to return to this present Treatise, let no man muse ye writing
in the English tongue, I have retained the Latin or Greek names of sundry lines
and figures, as cords Pentagonall, lines Diagonall, Icosaedron, Dodecaedron,
or such like, for as the Romans and other Latin writers, notwithstanding the
copiouse and abundante eloquence of their tongue, have not shamed to borrow of
the Gretians these and many other terms of art: so surely do I think it no
reproach, either to the English tongue, or any English writer, where fit words
fail to borrow of them both, but rather should we seem thereby to do them
great injury, these being in deed certain testimonies and memorials where
such sciences first took their original, and in what languages and countries
they chieflye flourished, which names or words how strange soever they seem at
the first acquayntaunce, by use will grow as familiar as these, a triangle, a
circle, or such like, which by custom and continuance seem mere English,
yet to avoid all obscurity that may grow by the novelty of them, I have
adjoined every of their diffinitions, and so proceeded to Problems and Theoremes
with such method, as how obscure or hard soever they appear at the first,
through the rareness of the matter: I doubt not but by orderly reading, the
ingeniouse Student, having any mean taste of cossicall numbers, shall find
them plain and easy.

Diffynitions.
PRoportion is a mutual or enterchangeable relation of two magnitudes, being
of one kind, compared together in respect of their quantities.

The second dffiinition.
When the proportion of two magnitudes is such as may be expressed with
numbers, then is it certain and apparent and here is called rational: But when
the proportion is such as cannot be expressed with numbers, but with their
roots only, then is that proportion certain also, but not apparante, and
therefore here I name it surde or irrational.

The third diffinition.
When there be three such magnitudes or quantities that the first to the
second retain the same proportion that the second does to the third, those
quantities are said to be proportional, and the first to the third retayneth
double the proportion of the first to the second, and the second is named
mean proportional between the first and the last.

The fourth Diffinition
When four magnitudes are likewise in continual proportion, the first and the
fourth are the extremes, and the second and third the means, and the
extremes are said to have triple the proportion of the means.

The fifth diffinition.
Any line or number is said to be divided by extreme and mean proportion,
when the division or section is such or so placed, that the whole line or
number retain the same proportion to the greater part, that the greater does
to the lesser.

The sixth diffinition.
A line is said to be equal in power with two or more lines, when his square
is equal to all their squares.

The seventh diffinition.
A line is said to match a superficies in power, when the square of that line
is equal to the superficies.

The eight diffinition.
When any equiangle triangle, square, or Pentagonum is in such sort described
within a circle, that every of their angles touch the circumference, their
sides are called the trigonal, tetragonall and pentagonall Cords of that
circle.

The ninth diffinition.
About every equilater triangle, square, or Pentagonum, a circle may be
described, precisely touching every of those figures angles, and that circle
shall be called the circumscribing or containing circle.

The tenth diffinition.
Also within every of these equiangle figures a circle may be drawn, not
cutting but only touching every of their sides, this is called the inscribed
circle.

The eleventh diffinition.
Any right line drawn from angle to angle in those equiangle figures passing
through the superficies, I name the line diagonall.

The twelfth diffinition.
A right line falling from any angle of these superficies perpendicularly to
the opposite side shall be named that playnes penpendiculare.

The.13. Diffinition.
TETRAEDRON is a body Geometrical encompassed with four equal equiangle
triangles.

The fourtenth Diffinition.
HEXAEDRON or CVBVS is a solid figure, enclosed with six equal squares.

The fiftenth Diffinition.
OCTAEDRON is a body comprehended of eight equal equiangle triangles.

The.16. Diffinition.
ICOSAEDRON is a solid Figure, under twentye equal equiangle triangles
conteyne^*

The.17. Diffinition.
DODECAEDRON is a solid comprehended of twelve equal equiangle pentagonall
Superficies.

The.18. Diffinition.
These five bodies are called regular, and about every of them a sphere may be
described, that shall with his concaue peripherie exactly touch every of their
solid angles, and it shall be called their comprehending or circumscribing
sphere or globe, and these solides shall be called the inscribed or contained
bodies of that sphere.

The.19. Diffinition.
Also within every of these regulare bodies a sphere may be described that
shall with his conuex superficies precisely touch all the centres of those
equiangle figures wherewith these bodies are environed, and such a one I term
their inscribed or contained sphere, and those bodies shall be termed the
circumscribing solides of that sphere.

The.20. Diffinition.
The semidiameter of this inscribed sphere, forasmuch as it is the very Axis
or Kathetus of every Pyramid, having his base one of the equiangle playnes, and
concurring in the center, of which Pyramides (intellectually conceived) these
bodies seem to be compounded, it shall be named the Axis or Kathetus of that
body.

The 21 diffinition.
Every of these bodies side, I call any one of those equal right lines
wherewith these equiangle Figures are environed that comprehend and include
these bodies.

The 22 diffinition.
Any one of the Figures wherewith these solides be environed is called the base
of that solid.

The 23 diffinition.
A line falling from any solid angle of these bodies perpendicularlye on the
opposite plain or base, shall be named that solides Perpendiculare.

The 24 diffinition.
The power of any line given is said to be divided into lines retayning
extreme and mean proportion, when two such lines are found as both make
their squares joined together, equal to the square of the line given, and also
hold such proportion one to another as the two parts of a line divided by
extreme and mean proportion.

The 25 diffinition.
One of these regulare solides is said to be described within an other, when
all the angles of the internal or inscribed body at once touch the
superficies of the comprehending or circumscribing regulare solid.

The first Problem. To divide any line or number by extreme and mean
Proportion.
ADmit the line diuisible AB extend him forth sufficiently, then erect upon B
a perpe^dicular to AB as ye were taught in the first book. Now, place the one
foot of your compass in B, and extending the other to A, describe the
semicircle ADC, then divide AB in half at F, and placing the one foot of your
compass immovable in F (making FD a semidiameter) describe the arcke DG. This
done, set the one foot of your compass in B and opening the other too G,
draw the semicircle GEI, so is your line AB parted by extreme and mean
proportion in I, the greater portion BY, the lesser IA. But Arithmetically to
find the same portions ye must multiply the square of your given number in 5,
and divide by 4, from the square root of the producte, deducte the half of
your given number, the remainder is the greater portion, which subtracted from
the whole leueth the lesser part.

Example.
THe number given 12, his square 144, multiplied by 5 and divided by 4 yields
180, the half of the given number 6 deducted from the square root of 180,
leueth {powerof2}180 -- 6, which is the greater portion, and that again
deducted rom 12, leueth this Apotome 18 -- {powerof2}180 the lesser portion.

Ye may also by any of the parts known find the quantity of the whole
thus: Augmente the part given by 12, and divide by his correspondente Portion,
the quotient is your desire.

For example, Suppose the lesser part of a line divided by extreme and mean
Proportion, (whose quantity I desire) 10, which augmented by 12, brings
120: this divided by 18 -- {powerof2}180 brings 15+{powerof2}125, so much is
the whole line whereof 10 is the lesser part. Again, deducting 10 from
15+{powerof2}25, there remains 5+{powerof2}125, and that is the greater
portion. But forasmuch as both this and the former conclusion may sundry
other vvayes be resolved, here shall ensue Theoremes which the Geometer will
apply asvvell to this purpose as diversely to other necessary conclusions,
whereof some shall hereafter ensue.

The first Theoreme.
ANy number parted by extreme and mean proportion, the square of the greater
part is equal to the rectangle or number produced by multiplication of the
leasse portion in the whole.

The 2 Theoreme.
If any line or number be parted by extreme and mean Proportion, and to the
whole ye adioyne the greater portion, that surmounting number or line is also
divided by extreme and mean proportion, his greater portion being the first
given line, and the lesser the line or number adjoined.

The 3 Theoreme
Any line or number parted by extreme and mean proportion, the square of the
whole added to the square of the lesser part, is triple to the square of the
greater portion.

The 4 Theoreme.
A line or number divided by extreme and mean proportion, if ye abate the
lesser portion out of the greater, the square of the remainder adjoined to the
square of the greater portion is triple to the square of the lesser.

The 5 theoreme.
The proportion of a line parted by extreme and mean proportion to his parts
can not be expressed in rational numbers, for if the whole line be rational,
the parts are either of them an irrational called Apotome, but in surde
numbers the proportion may be thus declared, as {powerof2}5 -- to 3 --
{powerof2}5, so is the whole to the greater, and the greater to the less, for
they are Proportional.

The.2. Problem. The dimetiente of any circle given to search out the sides
or Cords Trigonal, Tetragonal, Pentagonal and Decagonal.
SUppose ye Dimetiente AB of the circle ABCD given, divide this Diameter
equally in the poincte E, whereupon erecte the Perpendicular EC and from C to B
draw a right line, then fix the one foot of your Compass in A and opening
the other to E, draw the Arcke OF, making intersection with the circle in F,
from thence extend right lines to AB, This done, divide the Semidiameter BE,
as ye were taught by the first Problem, by extreme and mean Proportion in
the poincte G: Finally, from G to C draw a straight Line, so have ye FB the
Cord Trigonall, CB the Tetragnall, CG Pentagonall, and EG Decagonall. Now,
Arithmetically by the Diameter known to attain these Cords, ye must thus
work: Triple the square of the Semidiameter the root quadrate of the producte
is the side Trigonall, double the Semidiameters square and the root quadrate
thereof is the Tetragonall Cord: Divide the Semidimetient by extreme and
mean Proportion the greater Portion is the side Decagonall, whose square
joined to the Semidimetientes square produces the Square of the Cord
Pentagonall.

Example.
Admit the Diameter AB 12, the half is 6, whose square tripled, yeldeth
108, this surde number therefore {powerof2}108 is the Trigonall Cord. The
square of 6 doubled is 72, whose root is the line Tetragonall. The
Semidiameter EB 6 divided by extreme and mean proportion as was taught in
the first Problem, yeldeth EG, the greater Portion {powerof2}45 -- 3, and that
is the line Decagonall: whose square joined with the square of 6, produces
90 -- {powerof2}1620, whose rote universal is the line CG or Pentagonall Cord.

The Diameter of the circle 12 The cord Trigonall {powerof2}108 The cord
Tetragonall {powerof2}72 The cord Pentagonall {powerof2} vni. 90 --
{powerof2}1620 The cord Decagonall {powerof2}45 -- 3


Now because long vvorking with irrational numbers, may breed confusion in
such as are not perfect in the rules of Algebra, ye may by the rule of
proportion (supposing the Spheres dimetient 1000) reduce surd numbers to
integers, although not so exactly as the subtilitie of geometrical
demonstration requires (considering these cords cannot precisely be expressed
in rational numbers) yet for any Mechanical operation or manual mensuration,
the difference shall not be sensible.

Example.
^

As in these operations by the Diameter ye are brought in knowledge of the
Cords, so by the knowledge of any cord, ye may also find both the Diameter
and all other cords, vvherof to the witty there need no farther Example.

The.3. Problem. The side of any equiangle Triangle given, to find out the
Semidiameters of his containing and contained circles, with the true quantity
of the Area.
FOr the Semidiameter of the containing Circle, it behooves you to square the
side given of the Triangle, and divide the Product by 3 the root Quadrate of
the Quotient is your desire. The half of that root is the Semidiameter of the
certained circle, which multiplied in the Circuit or Perimetry of the Triangle
yeldeth a number, whose medietie is the content Superficial or Area of that
Figure.

Example.
The side given AB 6, the square thereof divided by 3 produces 12, the rote
thereof being {powerof2}12, is the Semidiameter DC, whose half {powerof2}3 is
the Semidimetient DE, which multiplied in 18 the triangles Perimetry produces
{powerof2}972, whose medietie being {powerof2}243 is the quantity
Superficial or Area of the Triangle ABC. The Semidiameter of the contained
circle is also thus found, from the Semiperimetry of the triangle deducte every
side, noting every difference severally, then multiplye these differences
together, the Zenzicubike root of the product is your desire.

The side given AB 6.

The containing circle^ -- {powerof2}12 Semidiameter BD. -- {powerof2}12 The
contained Circles -- {powerof2}3 Semidimetient DE. -- {powerof2}3 The
Superficies or Area of the equilater Triangle. {powerof2}243
Any Equilater triangles Area is also thus gotten, multiply the square of his
side by it self, and the product by 3, the offcome divide by 16, the quotients
root Quadrate is the Area.

Or multiply the square of the side given by 3, and divide the offcome by 4,
that Quotient augment again by the square of half the side, the root
Quadrate of the Product is the Triangles content.

Or divide the Triangles side in three equal parts the square of one third
part multiplye by 3, and divide the offcome by 4, the root Quadrate of your
Quotient increased by the triangles Semiperimetrie, produces his Superficies
also.

The.4. Problem. The side of any square known by supputation to attain the
Semidiamiters of his exterior and interior Circles, with the content of his
plain or Area.
THe half of your given side is the Semidiameter of the internal Circle, and
if ye double the square of this Semidiamiter, and from the Product extract a
Quadrate root, that root is the Semidiameter of the external Circle. Now for
the Area either multiply the side first given in it self, or else your lesser
Semidiameter in half the Perimetry of your square.

Example.
Admit AB the squares side 10, the half being 5 is the Semidimetient of the
inward Circle, the square thereof doubled is 50, whose Quadrate root is EG,
the containing Circles Semidimetient. Now for the Superficies I augment 10 by
it self there arises 100. Likewise 5 the internal Circles Semidiameter
multiplied by 20 the squares Semiperimetry yeldeth also 100, so much is the
Area of the square ABCD.

AB the side of the square 10.

EG the containing circles Semidiameter {powerof2}50 OF the inscribed circles
Semidimetient 5 The Area of the square ABCD 100
The.5. Problem. The side of any equiangle Pentagonum given by Arithmeticke to
learn his circumscribing and inscribed circles Semidimetients with the exact
quantity of his plain Superficies.
IT behooves ye to know that all equiangle Pentagonall figures of what
capacity so ever they be, their sides to the Semidiameters of their co^taining
circles always retain one proportion, so that having already by the second
Problem (the Semidiameter given) found the side, ye may contrariwise by the
rule of proportion in any other, by the side given find the Semidiameter, from
whose square if ye deduct half the sides square, the root Quadrate of the
Remainder is the Semidimetient of your circle interior, the medietie whereof
multiplied by the Perimetrie or circuit of your figure yeldeth the content
Superficial or Area thereof.

Example.
Suppose the side of your Pentagonum ABCDE 14, for the Semidiameter AF, I
work by the rule of proportion thus, {powerof2} universe. 90 -- {powerof2}1620
gives 6, what yeldeth 14, the fourth proportional is {powerof2} universe. ^
which by Reduction is brought to this number {powerof2} universe
98+{powerof2}1920, and that is the containing circles Semidimetient being very
nighe 11 19/21 for exactly nether by integer nor fraction it can be expressed.
Now for FG, I must deducte 49 the square of CG fro 98+{powerof2}1920 the
square of the Semidiameter tofore found, so there remains 49+{powerof2}1920,
whose root universal is the line FG or Semidimetient of the intrinsical
circle, which augmented by 35 the Semiperimetrie, produces {powerof2} universe
60025+{powerof2}2882400500, which surde number rests between 337 and 338
being very ^igh 337, so much is the Area of the Pentagonum.

The side of the Pentagonu^. 14 The containing circles Semidiameter --
{powerof2} v. 98+{powerof2}1920 The internal circles Semidimetient --
{powerof2} v. 49+{powerof2}1920 The line Diagonal -- {powerof2}245+7 The
Pentagonal Area -- {powerof2} vni. 60025+{powerof2}2882400500


Other rules to perform the same.
Divide the side given by extreme and mean proportion as ye were taught in the 2
problem, and to the whole side, add his greater portion, the sum that
thereof resulteth multiplye in it self, and from the product subtracte the
square of half the side given, with the root quadrate of this remainder
divide the square of half the side, the quotiente add to your divisor, the
medietie of this resulting sum is your greater semidiameter, which subducted
from your former divisor, leaves the semidimetient of the intrinsicall
circle, and this augmented by the pentagonall semiperimetrie produces his Area.

Or thus, your given side divided as before by extreme and mean proportion,
to the whole add his greater portion, the product square, and thereto add the
square of the side pentagonall, the offcoome divide by 5* your quotientes
quadrate root is the greater semidiameter, which augmented by the pentagonal
side, and the sum thereof amounting divided by double his greater portion
parted as is before said by extreme and mean proportion, your quotiente will
express the quantity of the lesser semidimetient: for the Area ye may augment
the diameter of the contained circle by 5/4 of the pentagonal side: Or half
that lesser semidimetient in the whole circuit of the figure, the surmountyng
sums declare his superficial quantity.

Many more rules might in this matter be given, but I think it better to
adioyne certain Theoremes, whereby the ingenious shall be able not only to
conceive the ground and reason of these already taught, but also of himself
inuente sundry other no less certaynely and perchance more speedyly performyng
the premises.

Theoremes
The first Theoreme.
THe square of any equiangle triangles side, is triple to the square of his
conteynyng circles semidiameter.

The second Theoreme.
The square of an equilater triangles side to the inscribed circles
semidimetientes square is as 12 to 1.

The third Theoreme.
The semidiameter of a squares containing circle, is mean proportional
between his side and the semidiameter of his contained circle.

The fourth Theoreme.
In any equiangle pentagonum the square of his side is equal to the square of
his containyng circles semidiameter, and the square of the cord decagonal
joined together.

The fifth Theoreme.
The Diameter of the circle described within a Pentagonum is equal to the
sides hexagonall and decagonall of the comprehending circle.

The sixth Theoreme.
The square of the side pentagonall together with the square of the line
subtendyng the pentagonal angle, has proportion to the containing circles
semidiameters square, as 5 to 1.

The seventh Theoreme.
The square of half the side pentagonall being deducted fro the square of the
line diagonall subtending one of the pentagonall angles, the root quadrate of
the remaynder is equal to both semidiameters of the containing and contained
circles joined together.

The eight Theoreme.
In every equiangle pentagonum the containing circles semidimetient retayneth
the same proportion to the contained circles diameter that the pentagonal side
does to his line diagonall.

The ninthe Theoreme.
The Diagonall line in every equiangle pentagonum does divide the perpendicular
(falling from his subtendent angle to the opposite side) by extreme and mean
proportion.

The tenthe Theoreme.
In every equiangle pentagonum the lines diagonall do cut themselves by extreme
and mean proportion.

The eleventh Theoreme.
If within one circle an equilater triangle and a square be described, that
square retains the same proportion to the square of the tria^gles inscribed
circles diameter, that the semidiameter of the triangles conteynyng circle does
to the semidiameter of the contained.

The twelfth Theoreme.
Where as with one circle an equiangle Pentagonum and a equilater triangle are
described, the pentagonall inscribed circles semidiameter parted by extreme and
mean proportion, the greater portion is equal to the triangles contained
circles semidimetient.

The thirtenth Theoreme.
An equilater triangle and an equiangle pentagonum being within one circle
described, if two squares be made, the first equal to the square of the
pentagonall side, and the square of the pentagonall line diagonall added
together, the second equal to the square of the same diagonall and the square
of the line, whereby the diagonal exceeds the side pentagonal, the side of
this first square to the side of the second, reteyneth the same proportion that
the pentagonal diagonall does to the side of the equilater triangle.

The fourteenth Theoreme.
The Tetragonall Cords square exceeds the squares of the cords pentagonall
and decagonall, by the square of a line mean proportional between the cord
decagonal and the excess or difference of the cords hexagonal and decagonal.

The fifteenth Theoreme.
An equiangle triangles side being rational, his perpendicular and
semidiameters as well of the containing as contained circles, are all
irrational, but their squares may be expressed in number.

The sixteenth Theoreme.
The Area of an equilater triangle bears to the square of his side proportion
as his perpendicular to his base doubled.

The seuententh Theoreme.
The Area of an equiangle triangle bears proportion to the square of his
side, as {powerof2} 3 to 4.

The eyghtenth Theoreme.
Double the Area of an equilater triangle is mean proportional between the
square of his side, and the square of the perpendicular falling from one of his
angles to the opposite side.

The nyntenth Theoreme.
The Area of an equilater triangle to the square that is described within his
containing circle reteyneth the proportion of {powerof2} 3 to ^/3.

The 20 Theoreme.
The side of an equiangle triangle being rational, his Area is irrational,
but the square thereof may with number be declared.

The 21 Theoreme.
The Area of an equiangle Pentagonum, to the Triangles area that is described
with in his containing circle, retains such proportion as five times the
line Diagonal of the Pentagonum to the perimetrie of the Triangle.

The 22 Theoreme.
If an equiangle Pentagonum and an equilater Triangle be both described in one
circle, the rectangle contained of the line Diagonal and the Triangles
perpendicular, retains proportion to the pentagonall Area, as 6 to 5.

The 23 Theoreme.
The Pentagonal side being rational, the Area is irrational, proportioned to
the square of the side, as {powerof2} vniu. 25/16+{powerof2}125/64 to an unity.

The 24 Theoreme.
That square whose side is mean proportional between the internal circles
semidiameter, and the pentagonal semiperimetrie, is equal to the pentagonal
Superficies.

The 25 Theoreme.
When an equiangle Pentagonum and an equilater Triangle be both within one
circle described, a mean proportional between of the triangles perpendicular,
and the line diagonall is equal in power to the pentagonall Superficies.

The.6. Problem. The side of any Tetraedron given, to search out the
Semidiameters of the circumscribyng and inscribed spheres.
First as is taught in the third problem ye must get the circles
semidiameter that contains the equiangle triangle whose side ye have:
Multiply the square of this Semidiameter by 9* and divide by 2, the root
quadrate of the quotient is the circumscribing spheres dimetient, the medietie
whereof if ye augment by it self, and from the product subtract the square of
the semidiameter tofore found, the root quadrate of the remain is the
Semidiameter of the contained Sphere.

Or thus more easily and speedily: Multiply the side given in it self, the
ofcome divide by 24 the root quadrate of the quotient is the internal Spheres
semidiameter, which tripled, yeldeth the semidiameter of the co^prehending
Sphere.

Example.
The trigonall side supposed 10, the containing circles semidiameter is
{powerof2}33, whose square augme^ted by 9, and divided by 2, yeldeth in the
quotient 150, whose quadrate root is the dimetient of the sphere, the
medietie hereof squared, is 37, from which if ye withdraw 33, there
remains 4, whose quadrate root is the Axis of this Tetraedron.

Likewise, if by the second rule ye divide 100 with 24, the quotient is 4,
whose square root being the Axis of this tetraedron if ye triple it, the
resulting number vvil be {powerof2}37, and that is the semidiameter of the
circumscribing sphere, ye may also (by deducting 25 half the sides square from
100 the square of the whole side) find the perpendiculare, for the root of
the remainder being {powerof2}75 is the perpendiculare of the base, for the
solides perpendiculare I deducte 33, the containing circles semidimetientes
square, from 100 the square of the side given, there remains 66, whose root
is the solides perpendiculare.

The side of Tetraedron 10.

The containing circles semidiameter -- {powerof2}33. The contained circles
semidimetien^ -- {powerof2}8. The perpendicular of the Base -- {powerof2}75.
The comprehending spheres semidiameter {powerof2}37. The inscribed spheres
semidimetient {powerof2}4. The Solides perpendiculare -- {powerof2}66.
Thus also an other way ye shall most speedily find these spheral
semidiameters, square the side given, that squares medietie ye shall triple, the
root quadrate of the producte is the comprehending spheres dimetiente, which
divided by 3, brings the inscribed spheres diameter, ye medieties of these
are the semidiameters whereof the lesser augmented by 4, produces the solides
perpendiculare.

Theoremes of Tetraedron 1
THe square of Tetraedrons side, is equal to the square of his perpendiculare
and the square of his containing circles semidiameter added together.

The 2 theoreme.
The square of Tetraedrons inscribed circles Semidiameter withdrawn from the
square of his bases perpendiculare, leueth the square of the solides
perpendiculare.

The 3 Theoreme.
This solides perpendiculare is equal to his axis, and containing Spheres
Semidimetiente.

The 4 Theoreme.
The perpendiculare of Tetraedrons base is equal to his containing and
contained circles semidiameter.

The 5 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons containing Spheres dimetiente retayneth the same proportion to his
Axis, that the square of his side does to double the square of his contained
circles semidimetiente.

The 6 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons perpendiculare is of his comprehending Spheres dimetiente.

The 7 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons Axis is a sixte part of his comprehending Spheres Dimetiente.

The 8 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons containing spheres Diameters square retayneth the same proportion
to the square of his side, that the perpendiculare of his base does to the
semidiameter of his containing circle.

The 9 Theoreme.
The square of Tetraedrons comprehending Spheres dimetiente contains the
square of his inscribed circles semidiameter 18 times.

The 10 Theoreme.
The square of Tetraedrons contained circles semidiameter is double to the
semidiameters square of his contained Sphere.

The 11 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons perpendiculare retayneth the same proportion to his basis
containing circles semidiameter, that the contained circles semidimetient does
bear unto his Axis.

The 12 Theoreme.
The square of the comprehending Spheres dimetiente to the containing Circles
semidiameters square, has proportion as 9 unto 2.

The 13 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons side being rational, his containing Spheres diameter is
irrational, and their proportion is as {powerof2} 2 unto {powerof2} 3.

The 14 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons side being rational, the Axis is surde, and it bears proportion
to the side as 1. to {powerof2}24.

The 15 Theoreme.
The Tetraedrons comprehending Spheres dimetiente, is equal in power to these
five, the containing circles semidiameter, the containing Spheres
semidimetiente, the inscribed circles semidiameter, the Axis, and the solides
Perpendiculare.

The 7. Problem. The side of any Hexaedron given, to find the semidimetientes
of the containing and contained Spheres.
INcrease the side by it self, the offcome triple, from the producte extracte
the root quadrate the half thereof is the semidimetie^t of the circumscribing
sphere, from whose square if ye detract the square of that circles
semidimetiente that comprehends one of the Cubes quadrate playnes the root
square of the remainder is ye semidimetiente of the inscribed sphere: the
circles Semidiameter is found by the fourth Problem, admitting the line given
the side of a square.

Example.
The Cubes side 6, the square thereof tripled 108, half the root thereof is
{powerof2}27, and that is the semidiameter of the co^tayning sphere, his
co^tayning Circles semidiameter is {powerof2}18, whose square deducted from
27, leueth 9, his root quadrate being 3 is the Axis or contained spheres
semidimetient.

The Cubes side 6 The line Diagonal^ -- {powerof2}72 The containing Circles
Semid. {powerof2}18 The contained circles Semid. 3 The containing Spheres
Semid. {powerof2}27 The Axis or inscribed 3 Spheres Semidimetient 3


Theoremes of Hexaedron. 1
THE square of the Cubes comprehending Spheres dimetiente is equal to the
square of his side, and the square of his basis line Diagonall.

The 2 Theoreme.
The square of his line Diagonall contains the square of his Axis 8 times.

The 3 Theoreme.
The square of the Cubes comprehending Spheres semidiameter is equal to the
square of half the line Diagonall of his base, and the square of his Axis
added together.

The 4 Theoreme.
The semidimetiente of the Cubes contained circle is equal to his Axis.

The 5 Theoreme.
The Hexaedrons side is mean proportional between his containing Circles
semidiameter and his basis line Diagonall.

The 6 Theoreme.
The Cubes line diagonall to his Axis retayneth triple the proportion of his
side to his containing circles semidiameter.

The 7 Theoreme.
The comprehending spheres dimetiente to the Cubes side, observes the
Proportion of {powerof2} 3 to 1.

The 8 Theoreme.
The Cubes side being a line rational, his Axis is also rational.

The 9 Theoreme.
The Hexaedrons comprehending Spheres Dimetiente being rational, his Axis is
a surde and bears proportion to the Dimetiente, as 1 to {powerof2} 12.

The 10 Theoreme.
The co^prehending spheres diameter has the same proportion to the line
Diagonall of his base that the Cubes side has to the semidimetiente of his
containing Circle.

The 8. Problem. The side of Octaedron given, to search out Arithmetically
the containing spheres Diameter and the Axis thereof.
DOuble the square of the side, and from the offcome extracte the root
Quadrate, so have ye the comprehending Spheres dimetiente the half (being the
semidiameter) if from ye square thereof, you abate ye square of that circles
semidiameter which contains one of the equilater triangles whereof the body
is framed, the root quadrate of the remaynder is the Axis.

Or thus more briefly, square the side given, the producte divide first by 2
then by 3, the root square of the first quotient is the containing spheres
semidimetient, the second quotiente deducted fro the first, leueth a
remaynder, whose root quadrate is the Axis.

Or thus more redily, from the sixte part of the given sides square, extracte
the quadrate root, so have ye the axis, whose square augmented by 12,
produces the square of the comprehending spheres diameter.

Example of the first.
THe side given 10, his square 100, {powerof2}50 being the quadrate root of
half that square, is the comprehending spheres semidimetient, from the square
thereof abating 33 the square of the containing circles semidiameter, the
remaynder is 16, whose quadrate root is the Octaedrons axis.

Example of the second rule.
100 the square of the side divided first by 2 yeldeth 50, then by 3 brings
in the quotient 33, {powerof2}50 is the containing spheres semidiameter, the
one quotient deducted fro the other leueth 16, his root being {powerof2}16 is
the Axis.

Example of the third precepte.
The sides square given 100 divided by 6 produces in the quotient 16, the
root quadrate thereof is the Axis, the same number augmented by 12 makes 200,
wherefore I conclude {powerof2}200 the comprehending spheres diameter.

The side of Octaedron 10.

The containing Circles semidiameter. {powerof2}33. The contained Circles
semidimetient. {powerof2}8. The containing Spheres semidiameter. {powerof2}50.
The Axis. {powerof2}16.
Theoremes of Octaedron. 1.
The Axis of Octaedron is mean proportional between the containing and
contained circles semidiameters.

The second Theoreme.
The Octaedrons side is mean proportional between the diameter and
semidiameter of the circumscribing sphere.

The third Theoreme.
The Axis square increased by 12 yeldeth the compredending spheres diameters
square,

The fourth Theoreme.
The containing spheres diameter has the same proportion to his Axis, that the
Octaedrons side has to the contained circles semidiameter.

The fifth Theoreme.
The side of Octaedron being rational, the comprehending spheres Dimetiente
cannot be expressed with number, but his square to the sides square is double.

The sixth Theoreme.
The side of Octaedron being rational, his Axis is not in number to be
expressed, but the square thereof to the square of the side is as 1 to 6.

The seventh Theoreme.
The Octaedrons containing spheres semidiameter is equal in power with his
Axis and containing circles semidiameter.

The eight theoreme.
The side of Octaedron is equal in power with the axis, the comprehending
spheres semidiametient, and the comprehending circles semidiameter.

The ninth theoreme.
The diameter of Octaedrons comprehending sphere being rational, his side is
a surde, and retayneth such proportion to the diameter as {powerof2} unto 1.

The tenth theoreme.
The diameter of Octaedron being rational, his containing circles
semidiameter is irrational, and has proportion to his diameter, as {powerof2}
unto 1.

The eleventh theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational his axis is surde, and bears proportion to
the side, as {powerof2} unto 1.

The twelfth theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational his contained circles semidiameter is
irrational, having proportion to the side as {powerof2}^/1^ to 1.

The thirteenth Theoreme.
The axis of Octaedron being rational, his comprehending spheres
semidimetient is irrational and their proportion is as an unity unto
{powerof2}3.

The fourtenth Theoreme.
The side of Octaedron being rational, that line which is equal in power to
the semidiameters of his contained sphere, and circle, is also rational, and
the comprehending spheres diameter to that line, has triple the proportion of
the containing circles semidiameter, to the axis.

The fiftenth Theoreme.
Octaedrons contained circles semidimetient his axis, the containing circles
semidiameter, and the inscribed spheres diameter, are 4 lines in continual
geometrical proportion.

The.9. Problem. The side of an Icosaedron measured, by supputation to find
his axis and containing spheres dimetiente.
ADmitting the side measured a Cord pentagonall, you shall by the fourth
problem search out the containing circles semidiameter, and multiplye the
square thereof by 5, the quadrate root of the producte is the dimetiente of
the comprehending sphere, and so consequentlye the half thereof shall be the
semidiameter, from whose square if ye subtracte his containing circles
semidimetientes square, the root quadrate of the remaynder is the axis.

Example.
Admit the side of Icosaedron 12, which supposed a Cord pentagonall, the side
hexagonall or semidiameter found (as was taught in the fifth problem) is
{powerof2} v. ^ the square of this semidiameter increased by 5 makes ^ whose
quadrate root is the containing spheres diameter, his medietie being
{powerof2} v. ^ is the semidiameter. Now to attain the axis I search first
(as was taught in the third problem) the circles semidiameter that contains
the Icosaedrons triangulare base, fynding it {powerof2}48, whose square
deducted from the square of the containing spheres semidiameter leueth ^, whose
quadrate root is the axis of this Icosaedron.

The side of Icosaedron 12 The circles semidiameter, whereon Icosaedron is
framed. {powerof2}.^ The semidiameter of the containing Circle. {powerof2}48.
The semidimetient of the contained circle. {powerof2}12: The comprehending
Spheres semid, {powerof2} ^ The Axis or Cathetus {powerof2} v. ^


Theoremes of Icosaedron and his parts. 1.
The diameter of Icosaedrons comprehending sphere retayneth such proportion to
the diameter of the circle whero^ the Icosaedron is framed, as {powerof2}5 to.2.

The second Theoreme.
The semidiameter of this circle whereon the Icosaedron is framed with two
cords decagonal of the same circle do make the comprehe^ding spheres dimetient.

The third Theoreme.
The comprehending spheres semidiameter, does match in power the Axis and
containing circles semidimetient.

The fourth Theoreme.
If the semidiameter of that circle whereupon the Icosaedron is framed, be
divided by extreme and mean proportion, the square of Icosaedrons side is
equal in power to the foresaid semidiameter, and his greater portion.

The fifth Theoreme.
The diameter of the comprehending sphere being a line rational, the
Icosaedrons side is a line irrational, called of Euclide Minor.

The sixth Theoreme.
If the side of Icosaedron be a line rational, the dimetient of the
comprehending sphere shall be an irrational line called Mayor.

The seventh Theoreme.
The diameter of the comprehending sphere being a rational, the semidiameter
of the circle whereupon the Icosaedron is made, shall be a line irrational, but
his square is rational, and the comprehending spheres diameters square
contains it 5 times.

The eight theoreme.
The Icosaedrons side being a line rational, the semidimetiente of that circle
whereon the body is framed will be an irrational, called of Euclide Mayor, and
it retayneth unto this solids side the proportion of {powerof2} v.
+{powerof2}1/20 unto an unity.

The nynth Theoreme.
The Icosaedrons side being rational, his containing circles semidiameter is
irrational, and bears porportion to that side, as 1 to {powerof2}3.

The tenth Theoreme.
The comprehending spheres diameter being rational, his containing circles
semidiameter is an irrational of that kind which Euclide calls Minor, and it
bears proportion to the diameter as {powerof2} universe -- {powerof2}1/180
unto an unity.

The eleventh Theoreme.
The Icosaedrons side admitted rational, the contained circles semidiameter is
a surde, and reteyneth such proportion to the side, as {powerof2}1/12 unto 1.

The twelfth Theoreme.
Icosaedrons containing spheres dimetient being rational, his contained
circles semidimetient is an irrational called Minor, and the proportion
between them is as 1 unto {powerof2} vniuersalss 1/24 -- {powerof2}1/2880.

The 13 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons side supposed rational, his axis is an irrational called Binomium
and bears proportion to the side, as {powerof2} vni. 7/24+{powerof2}5/64 unto
1.

The 14 theoreme.
The diameter of Icosaedrons containing sphere admitted rational, his axis is
irrational, and reteyneth such proportion to his dimetient as {powerof2}
vni. 1/120+{powerof2}1/180 unto 1.

The 15 theoreme.
The semidiameter of the containing and contained circles, although the
proportion of either to the spheres dimetient be surde, yet the proportion
between themselves is rational, and as 2 to 1.

The 16 theoreme.
Icosaedrons side being parted by extreme and mean proportion, if ye adioyn to
the side his greater portion, the square of that whole line added to the square
of the side, produces the square of the comprehending spheres diameter.

The 17 theoreme.
The diameter of that circle whereon Icosaedron is framed, reteineth such
proportion to the containing circles semidimetient of the body, that the
Icosaedrons side does to the cord pentagonall of the contained circle.

The 18 theoreme.
If from the square of the comprehending spheres dimetient ye abate the
Icosaedrons sides square, that line which matcheth in power the remain,
being divided by extreme and mean proportion, will make his greater segment
the Icosaedrons side.

The 19 Theoreme.
The pentagonall line diagonall of that circle, whereon Icosaedron is framed,
exceeds in power the contained spheres diameter, by a line matching in power
the excess of Icosaedrons basis containing circles diameters square, about the
square of his side.

The 20 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons side is mean proportional between his diameter and the
decacagonall cord of that circle whereon Icosaedron is framed.

The.10. Problem. The side of Dodecaedron given, by calculation to find his
axis and containing spheres diameter.
Using the aid of the fifte problem if you search out the triangular or
trigonal cord of that circle that contains this Dodecaedrons pentagonall
base, admitting the same an Icosaedrons side, ye may by the last chapter
search out the axis and containing spheres dimetient, which are in all
poynctes equal and agreeable in proportion with the axis and sphericall
Diameter of this Dodecaedron.

Or thus more speedily and with less confusion in woorking, by the first
problem divide this dodecaedrons side given by extreme and mean proportion,
adding thereto his greater portion, then triple the square of this whole line,
the root quadrate of the product is the containing spheres Dimetiente. Again
it behoouethe you by the fifth problem to learn the semidiameter of the
circle that contains one of the dodecaedrons pentagonal superficies, and
deduct the square thereof from the square of the comprehendyng spheres
semidimetient, the root quadrate of the remainder is the axis of the body.

Example.
The side of Dodecaedron 10, divided by extreme and mean proportion by the
first problem makes his greater portion {powerof2}125 -- 5, which added to
10, produces {powerof2}125+5, the square hereof tripled is
450+{powerof2}112500 the root square hereof is the comprehending spheres
dimetie^t, whose medietie being {powerof2} v. 112 +{powerof2}112500/16 is that
spheres semidiameter. Again, the semidiameter of this Icosaedrons containing
circle I find by the fifth problem {powerof2} v. 50+{powerof2}500, whose
square taken from the square of the containing ^pheres semidiameter leaves 62
+{powerof2}112500/16 -- {powerof2}500, whose root quadrate is the axis or
inscribed spheres semidimetiente.

The side of Dodecaedro^ 10 The containing circles semid. {powerof2} vni.
50+{powerof2}500. The contained circles semidimetient {powerof2} vni 25+
{powerof2}500. The diameter of the containing sphere {powerof2} v.
450+{powerof2}112500 The axis {powerof2} vni. 62 +{powerof2}1^2500/16 --
{powerof2}500^ The pentagonall diagonall line {powerof2}125+5.


The axis of this body is also thus found, I add the line diagonal being
{powerof2}125+5 to 10 the dodecaedrons side, thereof aryseth {powerof2}125+15,
this medietie squared makes 350/4+{powerof2}28125/4 from whence I deduct
25+{powerof2}500 the square of the contained circles semidimetiente, there
remains 250/^+{powerof2}28125/4 -- {powerof2}500, whose root quadrate is
the dodecaedrons axis exactly agreeyng with the former operation.

Theoremes of Dodecaedron.
THe square of the diameter of Dodecaedrons comprehending sphere is triple to
the square of his basis line diagonall.

The second theoreme.
The Dodecaedrons side being added to the diagonall line of his basis makes a
line, whose square joined to the square of the side* produces the square of
the containing globes dimetient.

The third Theoreme.
The diameter of Dodecaedrons comprehending sphere being rational, the side of
that body shall be an irrational called Apotome, bearing proportion to the
diameter as {powerof2} vni. -- {powerof2}5/36 unto 1.

The fourth Theoreme.
The side of dodecaedron being rational, his comprehending spheres dimetient
is an irrational Binomium, having the squares of his names or compounding lines
in proportion as 5 to 1, and this irrational diameter to the Dodecaedrons side,
reteyneth proportion, as {powerof2} universe. 9/2+{powerof2}45/4 unto an unity.

The fifth theoreme.
If dodecaedro^s side be adjoined to his diagonal line, the medietie thereof
squared is equal to the square of the axis and the square of the contained
circles semidiameter.

The 6 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons side being rational, the containing circles semidimetient is an
irrational called Mayor, and bears such proportion to the side, as
{powerof2} vni. +{powerof2}1/20 unto 1.

The 7 theoreme.
The square of Dodecaedrons side added to the square of his basis diagonall
produces a quantity, whose fifth part is the containing circles semidiameters
square.

The 8 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons side being rational, the diagonall of his basis shall be an
irrational called Binomium, reteining proportion to the side, as
{powerof2}5/4+ unto 1.

The 9 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons axis being divided in extreme and mean proportion, makes his
greater part the less semidimetient of his basis.

The 10 Theoreme.
The side of Dodecaedron being rational, his basis contained circles diameter
is an irrational Mayor, proportioned to the side, as {powerof2} v.
1+{powerof2}frac45; to an unity.

The.11. Problem. The side of Tetraedron known to find his superficial and
solid content.
FOr the superficies ye shall augmente the squared square of the side by 3, the
productes quadrate root is your desire, or multiplye the containing circles
semidimetient in the perimetrie of the triangle, or augmente the contained
circles semidiameter in the perimetrie of the triangle and double the product,
so have you by every of these operations his content superficial. For his
crassitude thus, Multiply the semidimetient of the containing circle in the
axis of the body, and the product in the side, Or the semidimetient of the
contained cir^le in the diameter of the contained sphere, and the offcome in
the side: Or the axis in the perimetrie of the traingle, and the product in the
semidiameter of the containing circle, the offcome divided by 3, yeldeth in the
quotient the solid quantity.

Examples of the Superficial quantity.
The side of Tetraedron 10, his squared square 10000 multiplied in 3, brings
30000, I conclude {powerof2}30000 the Superficial content. Likewise the side
being 10, I find by the third Problem his containing circles Semidiameter
{powerof2}33, which increased by 30 the triangular Perimetrye yealdeth
{powerof2}90000/3, Also the semidiameter of the intrinsecal circle being
{powerof2}8 multiplied in 30 brings {powerof2}90000/12 which doubled
amounts to {powerof2}30000 the whole Superficies of that body agreeing with
both the former operations.

Examples of the Solid capacity.
The side admitted as before 10, by the third Problem the Semidiameter of the
containing circle is {powerof2}33, the Axis ye shall by the sixthe Problem
find {powerof2}4, these multiplied together make {powerof2}2500/18, and this
again in 10, brings {powerof2}250000/18. Likewise the Semidiameter of the
contained Circle found by the third Problem {powerof2}8, augmented by
{powerof2}50/3, the contained Spheres Dimetient, there arises
{powerof2}1250/9, and that again in 10 the side triangular brings
{powerof2}125000/9. Also the Axis {powerof2}4 multiplied by 30 the triangles
Perimetrie, produces {powerof2}22500/6, and this again in {powerof2}33 the
containing Circles Semidiameter, makes {powerof2}2250000/18, whose third part
is {powerof2}250000/18 the Solid capacity of that body exactlye agreeing
with the former workings.

The side of Tetraedron 10 The containing circles Semidiameter {powerof2}33 The
contained circles Semidimetient {powerof2}8 The containing Spheres
Semidimetient {powerof2}37 The Axis or Kathetus {powerof2}4 The content
Superficial {powerof2}30000 The content Solid {powerof2}13888 8/9


Theoremes of Tetraedrons superficial and Solid contents.
THe side of Tetraedron being Rational, the line that matcheth in power his
superficies is an irrational, retaining proportion to the side as
{powerof2}{powerof2} 3 unto 1.

The second theoreme.
The Tetraedrons superficies to the square of his side bears proportion as
{powerof2} 3 unto 1.

The third theoreme.
The triangle whose basis is equal to the Perimetrie of this solides basis,
and his altitude or Perpendicular to the Diameter of the containing circle is
equal to the superficial quantity of this body.

The fourth theoreme.
The right angled Paralelogramme, whose altitude is the contained circles
diameter, and his base the triangular Perimetrie, is equal to the Tetraedrons
superficies.

The fifth theoreme.
That equilater triangle is equal to the Tetraedrons superficies, whose side
bears proportion to the solides side as 2 to 1.

The sixth theoreme.
A Quadrangular Prisma having his base a square, whose side is mean
proportional between the Axis and the containing circles semidimetient, and his
altitude the Tetraedrons side, is equal to the crassitude of Tetraedron.

The seventh theoreme.
The solid of Tetraedron may by imagination be parted into 4 equal Trigonal
Pyramides, having for their bases the triangles of that body, and meeting with
their tops or Vertices in the center of the Sphere.

The eight theoreme.
A triangular Prisma, whose altitude is equal to the third part of the Axis,
and his base one of the equilater triangles wherewith the body is encompassed,
is equal to one of those Pyramides that meet with their tops or Vertices at
the center of the body.

The ninthe theoreme.
A right angled Quadrangular direct Prisma, having for his longitude, latitude
and profunditie these three lines, Tetraedrons side, his Axis, and containing
circles Semidimetient, is equal to the Tetraedron.

The tenth theoreme.
If four right lines be found in continual proportion, so as the first being
equal to the Tetraedrons side, bear proportion to the last, as {powerof2} 72
unto 1, the Cube of the second is equal to the Tetraedron in crassitude.

The.12. Problem. The side of a Cube measured, to find his Superficial and
Solid quantity.
Multiply the side first by 2, then by 3, these Productes multiplied together,
declare the Superficial content. Or double the comprehending Spheres Diameters
square. Or triple the Diagonall lines square. Or multiply the Cubes base by 6,
every of these ways ye have the superficies of this body.

For the Crassitude thus, Augment the side in the base, or the Axis in the
square of the line Diagonall, or the superficies in the sixth part of his
altitude, any of the Productes is your desire.

Example.
Admit Hexaedrons side 10, by the seventh Problem ye shall find the Diameter
of his containing Sphere {powerof2}300, his Axis 5, his line Diagonall
{powerof2}200. The side first increased by 2 makes 20, then by 3 brings 30,
these together multiplied make 600. Likewise the square of the comprehending
spheres Diameter 300 doubled makes 600, and the square of the line Diagonall
being 200 tripled makes also 600, I conclude therefore 600 the content
Superficial.

Example of the Solid content.
10 the side augmented in 100, the base makes 1000. Also 5 the Axis in 200 the
square of the line Diagonall produces 1000. Likewise 600 the superficies in
5/3 the sixth part of the side, yeldeth also 1000, thus I find by all these
rules 1000 the Cubes solid quantity.

The side of the Cube 10 The containing circles Semidiameter -- {powerof2}50
The contained circles Semidiameter -- 5 The containing Spheres Dimetient --
{powerof2}300 The Axis or Kathetus -- 5 The line Diagonal -- {powerof2}200 The
cubes Superficial quantity -- 600 The Solid capacity -- 1000


Theoremes of Hexaedrons superficies and Crassitude. Theoreme first.
THe comprehending spheres Dimetients square doubled is equal to the Cubes
superficial content.

The second theoreme.
A Paralelogramme whose altitude is double to the Cubes side, and his base
triple, is equal to the superficies of that solid.

The third theoreme.
That square is equal to the Cubes superficies, whose side is mean
proportional between the Cubes side and a line 6 times his length.

The fourth theoreme.
Any Prisma whose base is equal to the square of the Cubes basis line
Diagonall, and his altitude the Cubes Axis, is equal to his solid quantity.

The fifth theoreme.
The Cube may intellectually be divided into 6 Quadrate Pyramides, every of
them having to his base one of the Cubes square basis, and concurring or
meeting at the center of the sphere, which is a common Vertex to them al.

The sixth theoreme.
Any Pyramid having his Base equal to the square of the comprehending spheres
Diameter, and his altitude the side of the Cube, is equal to his crassitude.

The seventh theoreme.
A Tetraedron whose side is proportioned to the Cubes side, as
{powerof2}{powerof2} 12 unto an unity, have equal superficial contents.

The eight theoreme.
An Octaedron whose side is equal to a line mean proportional between the
Cubes side and his Diameter, has his superficies equal to the Cubes.

The ninthe theoreme.
If 7 lines be continually proportional, the last retayning proportion to the
first as 72 unto 1, the Tetraedron of the second is equal to the Cube of the
first.

The tenth theoreme.
If 4 lines be continually proportional the last bearing proportion to the
first, as 1 to {powerof2}2/9 the cube of the first is equal to the Octaedron
of the second.

The.13. Problem. Octaedrons side given to search his superficial and solid
content.
MUltiplye the containing circles diameter in the circuit or perimetrie of the
Triangle, or increase the squared square of the side given by 12, the quadrate
root of the producte is the superficies: for the solid content work thus,
multiplye the diameter of the interior circle in the diameter of the internal
sphere, and the producte in the side. Or the dimetiente of the containing
circle in the Axis of the body, and the product in the side. Or the Axis in the
perimetrie of the triangle and the resulting sum in the containing circles
dimetient, the product divided by 3 yeldeth the solid content.

Example.
THe side of Octaedron supposed 10, the contained circles diameter by the
third problem I find {powerof2}400/3, which augmented by 30, the triangles
perimetrie produces {powerof2}360000/3

The squared square of the triangulare side is 10000 which augmented by 12
brings 120000, whose quadrate root is this bodies superficial quantity.

The example of the solid content.
THe side being 10 by the third problem I find the containing circles
semidimetient {powerof2}33, the contained spheres diameter by the eight
problem is {powerof2}66, these multiplied together make 20000/9, which
increased by 10 the triangulare side produces {powerof2}2000000/9

The diameter of the containing circle {powerof2}400/3 augmedted by
{powerof2}50/3 the axis, brings {powerof2}20000/9, and this again in 10
makes as before {powerof2}2000000/9

The axis {powerof2}50/3 multiplied by 30 the triangulare perimetry, brings
{powerof2}45000/3 and this again in {powerof2}400/3 the containing circles
dimetiente, produces {powerof2}18000000/9 whose third part is
{powerof2}222222 2/9 the solid capacity of that Octaedron.

The side of Octaedron 10 The containing Spheres dimetient {powerof2}200. The
containing circles diameter {powerof2}400/3. The Axis or Cathetus {powerof2}16.
The internal circles diameter {powerof2}33. The content superficial
{powerof2}120000. The solid capacity {powerof2}222222 2/9.


Theoremes of Octaedrons content superficial and solid. 1.
THe side of Octaedron admitted rational, his content superficial is
irrational, and the line that matcheth it in power is a surde called of
Euclide a line mediall, retayning such proportion to the side, as
{powerof2}{powerof2}12 to 1.

The 2 theoreme.
The superficial quantity of Octaedron bears proportion to the square of
his side as {powerof2}12 to an unity.

The 3 theoreme.
A rectangulare parallelogramme having the one of his containing sides the
perimetrie of Octaedrons triangulare basis, and the other equal to the
dimetient of his containing circle, is equal to the whole superficies of this
body.

The 4 theoreme.
An equilater triangle, whose side bears proportion to the side of Octaedron,
as {powerof2}8 to 1 is equal to the capacity superficial of that body.

The 5 theoreme.
The square whose side is mean proportional between the containing circles
diameter, and the perimetrie of this bodies basis, is equal to his superficies.

The 6 theoreme.
A quadrangulare Prisma having to his base a square (whose side is mean
proportional between the contained circles diamiter and the contained spheres
diameter, and his altitude the solides side is equal to this Octaedrons
crassitude^

The 7 theoreme.
This body may be divided into 8 equal trigonall Pyramides, whose bases are
the equilater triangles wherewith this solid is environed, every of these
Pyramides meet at the center of the containing and contained sphere, which is
the common vertex to them all.

The 8 theoreme.
To every of these Pyramides that Prisma is equal, whose altitude is the
contained spheres semidiameter, and his base of one of those equilater
triangles, area, wherewith this body is environed.

The 9 Theoreme.
A quadrangulare direct Pyramid having his base equal to the square of a line
in mean proportion between the axis and the perimetrie of the triangle, and
his altitude the containing circles dimetiente, is equal to this regulare
solid.

The 10 Theoreme.
If four lines in continual proportion have the first and greatest equal to
Octaedrons side, retayning proportion to the last, as 1 to {powerof2}2/9 the
Cube of the second is equal to this solid.

The.14. Problem. The side of Icosaedron known, by supputation to learn the
contents superficial and solid of that body.
COnsidering this body is environed with 20 equilater triangles, ye shall by
the third problem get one of those triangles Area, which increased by 20
yeldeth your desire. Or augment the squared square of the given side by 75, and
from the producte extracte the root quadrate. Likewise if you add the
semidiameter of the inscribed circle to the diameter of the circumscribed
circle, the ofcoome multiplied by double the triangles perimetrie, produces
the Icosaedrons content superficial. For the solid capacity add the
containing and contained circles semidimetientes together, the producte
increase by double the side known, the resulting sum augmented by the
Icosaedrons axis (which ye were in the ninth problem taught to find)
yeldeth the gross capacity. Also if ye augment the squared square of the side
by 8 the quadrate root of the producte increased by the axis of this body
brings the desired crassitude. Or if ye augment the sides squared square by 2
1/12 and the resulting sum again in the square of the inscribed spheres
dimetiente, the root quadrate of the producte is likewise the Icosaedrons
solid capacity.

Examples of the former rules.
THe Icosaedrons side supposed 12, by the third problem ye shall find the
area of the equilater triangle {powerof2}3888, which increased by 20 produces
{powerof2}1555200. Likewise the squared square of 12 being 20736 augmented by
75, yeldeth, 1555200, whose quadrate root is your desired superficies. In like
manner if ye add {powerof2}12, the semidimetiente of the inscribed circle, to
{powerof2}192 the dimetiente of the circumscribed circle (for so shall ye find
them by the third problem the triangles side being 12) the product will be
{powerof2}300, which multiplied by 72 double the triangles perimetrie, yeldeth
again {powerof2}1555200 the superficies of that whole Icosaedron.

Now for the solid content if you add {powerof2}192 (for so is the
dimetiente of the containing circle) to {powerof2}12, the semidimetiente of the
contained circle, there will amounte {powerof2}300, which augmented by 24 the
triangles side doubled brings {powerof2}17280, and this by {powerof2} v.
720/10 -- R. 20 -- 48, (for so is the axis as ye may by the ninth problem
perceive) multiplied, produces {powerof2} vni.
7257600+{powerof2}48372940800000, and that is the solid capacity of this
body. The same sum is also produced by multiplication of 20736, the squared
square of 12, in 8 1/^, and the producte thereof in {powerof2} v.
42+{powerof2}1620, the axis. Also if ye multiplye 20736 the sides squared
square by 2 1/12 the ofcoome will be 43200, which augmented again by
168+{powerof2}25920 the square of the inscribed spheres dimetiente produces
7257600+{powerof2}48372940800000, whose universal quadrate root is the solid
capacity of this Icosaedron, and by reduction to numbers rational it falls
out between 3769 and 3770.

The side of Icosaedron. 12.

The containing circles diameter. {powerof2}192. The contained circles semid.
{powerof2}12. The comprehending Spheres semid. {powerof2} v ^ The Axis.
{powerof2} v. ^ The superficial content {powerof2}1555200. The solid capa.
{powerof2} v. 7257^00+{powerof2}48372940800000.
Theoremes of Icosaedrons contents superficial and solid. 1.
THe superficies of Icosaedron to the square of his side, bears the
proportion of {powerof2}75 to 1.

The second Theoreme.
Any parallelogramme whose base is equal to double the perimetrie of the
Icosaedrons triangulare base, and his altitude to the circumscribing Circles
Diameter and the inscribed circles semidiameter added together, is equal to
the Icosaedrons 20 triangles.

The 3 Theoreme.
When Tetraedrons side retayneth such proportion to Icosaedrons side, as
Icosaedrons diameter does to the semidiameter of the circle whereon it is
framed, that Tetraedrons superficies is equal to Icosaedrons.

The 4 Theoreme.
When the square of Octaedrons side contains the square of Icosaedrons sides
medietie 10 times, then is that Octaedrons superfiiciall quantity equal to
Icosaedrons.

The 5 Theoreme.
A direct quadrangulare rightangled Prisma that has for his three dimensions,
these three right lines, double the side, the Axis, and a line componed of the
Diameter of the containing circle, and the semidiameter of the contained
circle, is equal to the solid contents of Icosaedron.

The.15. Problem. The side of Dodecaedron given, to search out by
Arithmeticall calculation the superficial and solid content.
THis body as was before declared among the Diffinitions is encompassed with 12
equal equiangle Pentagonal Superficies, so that, if ye search the Area of any
one (as was taught in the fifth Problem) and increase the same by 12, the
Dodecaedrons superficies resulteth, Or by the forenamed fifth Problem, ye shall
learn the quantity of the containing circles semidiameter, and also of the
line Diagonall, the semidiameter ye shall augmente by 3, the line Diagonall by
5, these productes multiplied together, bring the desired Superficies also.

In like manner for the crassitude if ye multiply the semidiameter of the
containing circle in the line Diagonall and the offcome in the Axis of this
body (which ye were in the tenth Problem taught to find) the producte
augmented by 5, yields your desire. Or the Semidiameter of the contained
circle in the Dimetient of the contained sphere, and the product in the
pentagonall perimetrie brings the solid content also.

Example.
Admit the Dodecaedrons side 1, by the 5 and 10 Problem, I find his
containing spheres semidimetient, {powerof2} vni. 9/8+{powerof2}180/256, the
Axis {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}180/256 -- {powerof2}1/20, the co^taining circles
semidimetient {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/20, the line Diagonall of the base
{powerof2} universe. 3/2+{powerof2}5/4. Now, for the Dodecaedrons superficies,
I search first the area of one Pentagonum, which I find by the fifth
problem {powerof2} vni. 25/16+{powerof2}625/320, this augmented by 12,
produces {powerof2} v. 900/4+{powerof2}810000/20. Likewise the containing
circles semidimetiente tripled, makes {powerof2} vni. 9/2+{powerof2}81/20, and
the line diagonall of the base increased by 5, yeldeth {powerof2} vni.
150/4+{powerof2}12500/16, these multiplied together, produce {powerof2} vni.
{powerof2}253125/16+{powerof2}253125/80+{powerof2}455625/16+{powerof2}455625/80, which contracted, makes {powerof2} v. 225+{powerof2}40500, so much is the Dodecaedrons superficial quantity, and being reduced to rational numbers, it falls out between 20 and 21 very nighe 20 13/20. Now, to attain the solid quantity I augment {powerof2} vni. +{powerof2}1/20 the containing circles semidimetiente, in {powerof2} v. 3/2+{powerof2}5/4 the line Diagonall, there arises {powerof2} vni. 1+{powerof2}5/16+9/80, and this again multiplied in {powerof2} vni. +{powerof2}45/64 -- {powerof2}1/20 the Dodecaedrons Axis, the producte augmented by 5, makes {powerof2} vni. 10 +28125/1024+78125/1024+28125/64+{powerof2}50625/1024+140625/1024 -- 625/20, so much is the Dodecaedrons crassitude. Again, by the other rule I augmente {powerof2} v. +1/20 the semidimetiente of the contained circle, in {powerof2} v. 5/2+45/4 -- the Diameter of the inscribed sphere, thereof resulteth {powerof2} v. 1 7/40+95/64+5/16 -- 1/20, which multiplied again in 5, the Pentagonall perimetrie produces {powerof2} vni. 29 +28125/64+3125/16 -- 625/20 this is also the Dodecaedrons solid capacity exactly agreeing with that former, operation, and by reduction is found to rest between {powerof2}58 and {powerof2}59, being very nighe 7 9/14.

The side of Dodecaedron 1 The containing circles {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/20
Semidimetiente {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/20 The contained circles
semidiameter, {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/^ The line Diagonal, {powerof2} vni.
3/2+{powerof2}5/4 The containing spheres semidimetiente, {powerof2} vni.
9/8+{powerof2}180/256 The Axis or Kathetus, {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}180/256 --
{powerof2}1/20 The content superficial, {powerof2} vni. 225+{powerof2}40500
The crassitude or solid capacity, {powerof2} v. 29 +{powerof2}55125/64


Theoremes of Dodecaedrons Superficial and Solid quantities. 1.
A Pentagonall equiangle superficies (whose side to the side of Dodecaedrons
retayneth the proportion of the comprehending Spheres Diameter to the medietie
of the line Diagonall) is equal to the Dodecadrons content superficial.

The 2 theoreme.
A rightangled Parallelogramme contained of the Pentagonall perimetrie, and
triple the Diameter of the contained Circle, is equal to Dodecaedrons
superficies.

The 3 theoreme.
That Cube whose side is mean proportional between the semidiameter of the
internal Circle, and the perimetrie of the Pentagonall base, has a
superficial content equal to Dodecaedrons.

The 4 theoreme.
When an Icosaedrons side is mean proportional between the Pentagonall bases
Diagonall and his circu^scribing circles Trigonall cord, the Superficies of
that Icosaedron is equal to the superficies of Dodecaedron.

The 5 theoreme.
If two mean proportional lines be found between the Pentagonall Diagonall
and his circumscribing circles cord Trigonall, that Icosaedron whose side is
the mean proportional nighest to the cord Trigonall, is equal to the
Dodecaedron.

The.16. Problem. The diameter of any sphere known, to search out the
sides, Axes and containing or contained circles semidiameters of all such
bodies regulare as are therein to be described, both Arithmetically and
Geometrically.
COnsidering that in any Sphere all the regulare bodies may be described as it
is by Euclide sufficiently demonstrated, and that both the proportion of their
sides Axes and perpendiculars to the spheres dimetient, and also the manner of
working in every of them is different, I thynk it best to adioyn several rules
for every of their operations, and first for ye invention of their sides peruse
the precepts following: square the spheres diameter, and from the producte
deducte, the root quad^^^^ of the remainder is the Tetraedrons side: Double
the square of the Spheres semidiameter, so have ye the square of Octaedrons
side, divide the Diameters square by 3, the root quadrate of your quotient is
the Cubes side, For the Icosaedrons side ye shall divide the Diameters square
by 5, the rote of the quotient note, and supposing the same a circles
semidiameter, by the second Problem search out the circles pentagonall Cord,
for that is the Icosaedrons side. Finally, for the side of Dodecaedron, ye shall
divide the square of the spheres Diameter by 3, and from the producte extracte
the quadrate root, this root divided by extreme and mean proportion, (as ye
were taught in the first Problem) yields for his greater part the
Dodecaedrons side. Now the sides of every regulare body thus found, for their
perpendiculares, Axes, and Semidiameters of their containing and contained
circles, ye shall resort for Tetraedron to the sixte Problem, for Octaedron
to the seventh, for Hexaedro^ to the eight, and so in order for the rest,
where ye are taught by the side to search out all those forenamed lines, and
so shall ye find the exact quantity of all perpendiculares Axes and
semidiameters of any regulare body in that sphere contained.

Example.
It would be over tedious to shevve the calculation for finding of every
particular line, wherefore I shall only give examples of the sides, for that
the practice of their rules has not been yet set forth in any former Problem.
Admit the spheres Diameter that shall comprehend these regulare bodies 10, the
square thereof divided by 3, yeldeth 33 which deducted from 100, leueth 66,
the quadrate rote thereof is the inscribed Tetraedrons side. The square of the
spheres semid. is 25, which doubled makes 50, the Ze^zike rote thereof, is
the Octaedrons side. 100 divided again by 3, yields as before 33, the root
square thereof is the Cubes side, which divided by extreme and mean
proportion (as was taught in the first Problem) makes the greater segment
{powerof2}41 -- {powerof2}8, so much I affirm the contained Dodecaedrons side.
Now, for the side of Icosaedron I divide 100 by 5, thereof arises 20, whose
root quadrate admitted a side Hexagonall, his correspondente Cord Pentagonall
by the second Problem ye shall find {powerof2} v 50 -- {powerof2}500, the
sides thus known for the Axis, Semidiameters, and other lines, (...) use the
same supputation that you did in those 5 Problemes past, where ye were taught
by the sides known to attain all the other lines, and for more plainness I
shall at the end of this chapter adioyne a Table containing the true quantity
of all the rest, which ye may use in stead of an Example to direct you, if
happily you err in your supputations, and for the farther satisfaction of such
as seek to reach beyond the common sort, and will not content them selves
with bare rules and precepts, unless they may also conceive some ground and
reason of their workings, I have thought good to every of these Problemes
ensuing, to adioyne his peculiare figure, with means Geometrical (no regard
had to Irrational numbers without aid of Arithmeticall supputation) to
search out the sides, Diameters, and Axis, of all the regular bodies inscribed
or circumscribed of spheres, by knowledge of their Diameters, or mutually
co^ferred together by knowledge of some side, according to the tenure of the
Chapter vvherin they are placed. And although brevity (which in this
trifeling treatise I have chefely affected) compel me not to stay in making
demonstration of every rule and Theoreme, yet the very construction of the
figures well vvayed and conferred with Euclides 5 last books of Solides,
will give sufficient light to the ingenious both to understand the cause of
these, and to invent many mo vvherof there is no end.

Geometrically without aid of Arithmeticall calculation, to attain the
quantity of all these forenamed lines ye shall thus work.

Admit the Diameter of the comprehending sphere given AB, which ye shall as
was taught in the first book divide in two equal parts at C, and in three
at E, AE being a third part, upon either of those sections errear
Perpendiculars, and (describing a Semicircle upon the Diameter) note their
intersections with FD, dravving lines from either of them to AB, so is AF the
Cubes side, AD Octaedrons side, FB the side of Tatraedron, AF divided by
extreme and mean proportion (as ye were taught in the first Problem at G)
makes AG the Dodecaedrons side, which extended out to H, ye shall make FH
equal to FG, dravving the right line HB, and from F extend a Paralele to HB,
till it cross the Diameter in I, erecting therevppon the Perpendicular IK, so
is the Cord KB the inscribed Icosaedrons side, IL is a third part of IB, ML a
Paralele to IK, MB is the Diameter of Icosaedrons basis containing circle,
whose medietie MN is the Diameter of the contained circle, the half thereof MS
parted by extreme and mean proportion in V, so as SV be the greater segment,
UN vvil be the Semidiameter of Dodecaedrons contained circle, and NB the
Semidimetient of his containing circle, NC the Axis both of Icosaedron and
Dodecaedron, VB is the Perpendicular of Dodecaedrons basis, and MA his Solides
altitude, BS the perpendicular of Icosaedrons basis, and MA likewise his
Solides altitude, AF (the inscribed cubes side) is also Dodecaedrons basis line
Diagonal, OF is the greater Semidiameter of Tetraedrons base, and EP his
medietie the lesser Semidiameter, EC Tetraedrons Axis, EB his Perpendicular or
altitude, FB the cubes line Diagonall, OB his medietie the greater Semidiameter
of the cubes base, OC the less Semidiameter, and Hexaedrons axis Octaedrons
containing circles Semidimetient, OF the Sediameter of his contained circle TO,
his Axis CO, and AF his altitude. Thus have ye Geometrically in one figure the
exact quantities and proportions of all the regular bodies sides, Diameters,
Axes, Perpendiculars, and lines Diagonall, whereby ye may also be able both
to conceive some reason of such rules as are past, or Theoremes that shall
ensue. And also invent diverse means to abreuiate such painful calculation as
by the former rules ye shall be forced to enter into, while ye labor with
irrational number to search out the hidden proportions of these unknown
lines, as by proof the industrious will soon perceive.



The comprehending Spheres Di+metient given AB 10 Tetraedrons Side, BF
{powerof2}66 Basis greater semid, FE, {powerof2}22 2/^ Basis less semid. PE.
{powerof2}5 5/^ Axis, EC, 1 Altitude, EB, 6
Hexaedrons Side, FA, {powerof2}33 Basis greater Semid. OF, {powerof2}16 2/^
Basis less semid. OC, {powerof2}8 Axis CO, {powerof2}8 Altitude AF,
{powerof2}33
Octaedrons Side AD, {powerof2}50 Basis greater semid. OF, {powerof2}16 Basis
less semid. OR {powerof2}4 Axis QF, {powerof2}8 Altitude AF {powerof2}33
Icosaedrons Side KB, {powerof2} v. 50 -- {powerof2}500 Basis greater sem. MN,
{powerof2} v. 16 -- {powerof2}55 5/^ Basis less semid. N.S {powerof2} v. 4 --
{powerof2}3 17/36 Axis, CN, {powerof2} v. 8 +{powerof2}55 5/9 Altitude MA,
{powerof2} v. 33 +{powerof2}888 8/^
dodecaedro^s Side AG, {powerof2}41 +{powerof2}8 Basis greater semi. NB,
{powerof2} v. 16 -- {powerof2}55 5/9 Basis less semid. NV, {powerof2} v. 4
+{powerof2}3 17/36 Axis CN, {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}55 5/9 Altitude MA,
{powerof2} v. 33 +{powerof2}888 8/9



Theoremes of the Regular bodies in one containing sphere described. Theoreme
first.
THe co^taining spheres diameters square to the square of the inscribed
Tetraedrons side is as 3 to 2.

The second theoreme.
The spheres Dimetient is in power double to Octaedrons side.

The third theoreme.
The spheres Diameter is in power triple to the Cubes side.

The fourth theoreme.
The spheres Dimetient being rational, Icosaedrons side is such an
irrarationall as Euclide calls Minor, and bears proportion to the Diameter,
(...) {powerof2} vni. -- {powerof2}1/20 to 1.

The fifth theoreme.
The spheres Dimetient rational, Dodecaedrons side is an irrational Apotome,
retaining proportion to the dimetient, as {powerof2}5/12 -- {powerof2}1/12 unto
1.

The sixth theoreme.
Tetraedrons Axis, is a sixth part of his spheres dimetient.

The seventh theoreme.
Octaedron and the Cubes Axis are equal, and triple in power to the Axis of
Tetraedron.

The eight theoreme.
The Axis of Icosaedron and Dodecaedron are equal, either of them being such
an irrational as Euclide calls Mayor, the spheres dimetient admitted
rational.

The nynth Theoreme.
Tetraedrons side, is the mean proportional between his Perpendicular and
his diameter.

The tenth Theoreme.
Octaedrons containing circles semidimetient is mean in proportion between
his inscribed circles semidiameter and Tetraedrons side.

The eleventh Theoreme.
The Hexaedrons side is a mean proportional between Tetraedrons side, and
Octaedrons basis containing circles semidiameter.

The twelfth theoreme.
The cubes side being rational, the dodecaedrons side is an irrational Apotome,
bearing proportion to the side of the Cube as {powerof2} 1 -- unto 1.

The thirtenth theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational, the side of Icosaedron is such an irrational
as Euclide names Minor, and retains proportion to Octaedrons side as
{powerof2} un. 1 -- {powerof2} to an unity.

The fourtenth theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational, the Dodecaedrons side is an irrational
Apotome, retaining proportion thereunto as {powerof2} v. 1 -- {powerof2}5/9 unto
an unity.

The fiftenth theoreme.
The semidiameter of Dodecaedrons bases containing circle, has the same
proportion to the Cubes side, that Icosaedrons side has to the Diameter of his
containing sphere.

The 16 theoreme.
Hexaedrons side being rational, the contained Dodecaedrons circles
semidiameter is an irrational named by Euclide Mayor, having proportion to the
Cubes side, as {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}^/320 unto 1.

The 17 theoreme.
Tetraedrons side admitted rational, the contained circles semidiameter of
Icosaedron is an irrational Minor, bearing proportion to the Tetraedrons side
as {powerof2} universe. -- {powerof2}1/320 unto {powerof2} 2.

The 18 Theoreme.
Octaedrons contained circles diameter to the dimetient of dodecaedrons
contained circle, has proportion as 1 to {powerof2} v. 1+{powerof2}.

The 19 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons contained circles semidiameter being an irrational Mayor,
Icosaedrons contained circles semidimetient shall be an irrational Minor,
bearing proportion as {powerof2} v. 1+{powerof2} to {powerof2} vni. 1 --
{powerof2}.

The 20 Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons side, to octaedrons axis, retaynethe such proportion, as the
greater part of a line divided by extreme and mean proportion, to the
medietye of the whole.

The 21 Theoreme.
If from the square of dodecaedrons dimetient, ye subtracte the square of his
side, the root of the remaynder (divided by extreme and mean proportion)
makes his greater part the Cubes side, and his less the dodecaedrons side.

The 22 theoreme.
A right line equal in power to the diameter and semidiameter of dodecaedrons
basis containing circle, reteineth the same proportion to their containing
spheres diameter, that dodecaedrons side does to the side of Icosaedron.

The 23 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons side reteineth the same proportion to the side of the cube, that
the semidiameter of dodecaedrons containing circle does to the diameter of his
contained circle.

The 24 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons basis internal circles semidiameter divided by extreme and mean
proportion, makes his greater part the Icosaedrons inscribed circles
semidimetient.

The 25 theoreme.
If two lines equal in power to the spheres diameter retain the proportion of
a line (divided by extreme and mean proportion) to his greater part, the
lesser of those lines is Icosaedrons side: but if their proportion be as the
whole to the lesser part, then is that less part the side of dodecaedron.

The.17. Problem. Arithmetically and geometrically to search out all the
sides, diameters, perpendiculars, and lines Diagonall, with the bases
semidiameters, of all such regular bodies as shall circumscribe or comprehend
any sphere whose dimetient is known.
Seeing these bodies as it is demonstrated by Euclide, ar^ of such uniform
composition that they will both receive an inward sphere touching with his
conuex superficies every of their bases centers, and also an outward sphere
enclosing and with his concaue peripherye touching every of their angles, for
resolution of this Problem it shall be requisite to show how the diameter of
the containing sphere may be found by knowledge of the contained spheres
dimetient: which done, by the proposition last past, the sides, and
semidiameters, may consequently be known. But because these 5 bodies being
described without one sphere, are not also environed of one, but have three
several differente comprehendyng spheres, the largest enuironyng Tetraedron,
the next encompassing the cube and Octaedron, and the last enclosing
Icosaedron and dodecaedron (for this as it is by demonstration approved of
Euclide, so is it also apparent by these former problemes) it seems therefore
requisite to prescribe three several rules for ye inquiring out of their
Dimetientes. And first for Tetraedrons Diameter, ye shall only increase the
diameter given by 3, the producte is your desire. And for the spheres
dimetiente that contains the cube and Octaedron, ye shall divide the diameter
given by {powerof2}^/3 the quotiente or resultyng sum is likewise your
demand. Or divide the same diameter by {powerof2} universe. -- {powerof2}8/90,
So have ye the spheres dimetiente that comprehends Dodecaedron and
Icosaedron.

Example.
Admit the diameter of the sphere whereon these bodies shall be described 10,
this augmented by 3, makes 30, the diameter of tetraedron: Again the square
of 10 augmented by 3, brings 300, so is {powerof2}300, the diameter of
octaedron and the cube: I divide 100 by -- {powerof2}4/45 thereof arises 1500,
-- {powerof2}1800000, I conclude therefore {powerof2} v. 1500 --
{powerof2}1800000, the diameter of the sphere that shall include the dodecaedron
and Icosaedron, whose inscribed spheres diameter is 10, and proceedyng by the
last problem ye shall find the dodecaedrons side {powerof2} v. 1250. --
{powerof2}1512500, Icosaedrons side {powerof2} universe. 1050 --
{powerof2}1012500, and so forth of all the other solides sides, and
semidiameters: for considering their operation is nothing differente from that
was shevved in the 16 problem, it were in vain here again to make thereof a
superfluous recital.

Geometrically to perform the same.
Upon AB the diameter given of the sphere (which al these regular bodies shall
circu^scribe) describe the semicircle, AKB, and upon the same center C,
describe the semicircle DNE, having his diameter DE triple to AB the diameter
given, and from A, errere the perpendicular AF, which divided in two equal
parts at o, makes A o the less semidiameter of Tetraedrons base, and AF the
greater: from F extend cords to ED, OF is the tetraedrons side, and EA his
perpendiculare. Now if ye fix one foot of the compass in C (and openyng
the other to o) describe the semicircle HLI, it will touch the medietie of FE
at G, whereby ye have HI the diameter of Hexaedron and octaedron, HL, the side
of Octaedron, AB the side of the cube, A o the semidimetient of Octaedrons
basis containing circle, AK, the semidiameter of the Cubes conteynyng circle,
AC the semidimetient of the cubes inscribed circle, and AM the medietie of AK
is the octaedrons basis lesser semidimetiente. Thus have you found the
diameters, sides, and circular semidiameters, of these first 3 bodies: for the
other two ye shall thus proceed, from N as ye were taught in the first
book, dravve NO paralele to CE equal to the medietie thereof, and (couplyng
CO together with a straight line) from P where it cutteth the greatest
semicircles circu^ference let fall the perpendicular PQ, and upon S (leaving SQ
equal to 23 part of QE) erect the perpe^dicular SR, the^ from R and P, extend
straight lines to C and E, and to the middle of RE exte^d the right line CT,
cutting the left semicircle in ph, from thence dravv a paralele to RE, cutting
RC, CE in p, x, and (making Cx a semidiameter) describe the semicircle b p x
crossing CP in r, from thence to x dravv the right line x r, for that is the
circumscribing Icosaedrons side, and ph x is the greter semidimetient of his
base, vvx the lesser, b x the diameter of Icosaedro^s comprehe^ding sphere:
This done from R dravv a paralele to the semicircles diameter, c^ossing the
greatest circumfere^ce in Y, fro thence to the end of the gretest dimetient,
dravv the line DIE, from whose medietie th, dravv a straight line to the center
C, then as was taught in the first book, cut D th in half at m, and divide D
m in extreme and mean proportion at l by the first problem, from these points
l, FIE, to the ce^ter C extend right lines, cutting the circumference of the
last described semicircle in the points a z, from the^ to b, dravv lines again,
and divide the cord a b in extreme and mean proportion at g: Likewise b z is
divided in half at d, being both the contact of the least circu^ference, and
also the intersection made with th C, but where l C conreth with b z place
this letter e, so is b g the circu^scribing dodecaedro^s side b x his
dimetient, b d the semidiameter of his containing circle, e d the lesser
semidiameter of the dodecaedrons pentagonall basis, and a b his line diagonall.
Thus have ye in one figure all the sides and diameters both circular and
spherall of all such regulare solides as comprehend or circumscribe the
assigned sphere.



The diameter of the internal given Sphere 10 Tetraedrons Diameter DE, 30 Side
OF, {powerof2}600 Containing circles sedimiameter, AF, {powerof2}200 Inscribed
circles semidimetient A o {powerof2}50 Perpendiculare or Altitude, AE 20
Hexaedrons Diameter HI {powerof2}300 Side AB, 10 Basis greater semidiameter,
AK, {powerof2}50 Basis lesser Semidimetient, AC 5 Basis line Diagonall,
{powerof2}200 Altitude AB 10
Octaedrons Diameter HI {powerof2}300 Side HL, {powerof2}150 Basis greater
semid. AK {powerof2}50 Basis less semidiameter, AM, {powerof2}25/2
Perpendicular AB, 10
Icosaedrons Diameter b x {powerof2} v. 1500 -- {powerof2}1800000 Side r x.
{powerof2} viii. 1050 -- {powerof2}1012500 Basis greter semidiamet. o ph
{powerof2} v. 350 -- {powerof2}112500 Basis less semidiameter ph w, {powerof2}
v. 87, -- {powerof2}7031 Altitude 10
Dodecaedrons Diameter b x {powerof2} v. 1500 -- {powerof2}1800000 Side g b
{powerof2} vni. 1250 -- {powerof2}1512500 Basis greater semid. d b --
{powerof2} v. 350 -- {powerof2}112500 Basis less semidiameter e d {powerof2}
v. 37 -- {powerof2}781 Altitude AB, 10



Theoremes of the internal Spheres circumscribing Solides. 1
TEtraedrons diameter is rational and triple to the contained Spheres
diameter, the internal Spheres diameter supposed rational.

The 2 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons sides square retayneth the same proportion to the square of the
internal spheres Diameter, that his containing spheres Diameter does to his
Axis.

The 3 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons Basis containing circles semidiameter, is double in power to the
contained spheres Diameter.

The 4 Theoreme.
The square of Tetraedrons inscribed circles semidiameter to his Axis, holds
the same proportion in power, that his perpendiculare does to his inscribed
Spheres diameter.

The 5 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons side, is double to Octaedrons side, one Sphere being contained of
them both.

The 6 Theoreme.
The square of Tetraedrons side, to the square of the Cubes side, retayneth the
same proportion, that Tetraedrons comprehending spheres Diameter does to his
Axis.

The 7 Theoreme.
The diameter of Tetraedrons inscribed circle, is equal to the Diameter of
Octaedrons containing circle.

The 8 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons diameter to the diameter of the sphere that comprehends
Octaedron and the Cube, has the proportion of 3 to his quadrate root.

The 9 Theoreme.
Octaedron and the Cubes comprehending spheres diameter being rational, the
diameter of Icosaedron and Dodecaedrons containing sphere is an irrational
Minor, bearing proportion to the forenamed diameter, as {powerof2} v. 5 --
{powerof2} 20 unto 1.

The 10 Theoreme.
Icosaedron and Dodecaedrons axis being rational, their comprehending spheres
dimetiente, shall be an irrational Minor, bearing proportion thereunto, as
{powerof2} vni. 60 -- {powerof2}2880 unto an unity.

The 11 theoreme.
Icosaedrons axis being rational, his side is an irrational Apotome
proportioned thereunto, as {powerof2} v. 42 -- {powerof2}1620 unto an unity.

The 12 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons Axis rational, his side is a surde Minor proportioned to the
Axis, as {powerof2} v. 50 -- {powerof2} 2420 unto an unity.

The 13 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons side being an irrational Apotome of the sixte order, Dodecaedrons
side is an irrational Minor, retayning such Proportion thereto, as {powerof2}
v. 50 -- {powerof2} 2420 unto {powerof2} 27 -- {powerof2}15.

The 14 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons axis being rational, his basis co^tayning circles semidiameter is
an Apotome of the first order bearing proportion to the Axis, as 3 --
{powerof2}5 unto an unity.

The 15 Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons axis being rational, his Pe^tagonall basis greater semidiameter
is an Apotome of the first order proportional to his side, as {powerof2} v 7
-- {powerof2}45 to {powerof2} v. 25 -- {powerof2}605.

The.18. Problem. The side of any Tetraedron given, to find the sides,
Diameters, and Axes, of all such regulare bodies as may therein be described.
Having heretofore at large set forth by Problemes sundry ways (the sides
of these bodies given) to find the semidiameters of their containing and
contained circles, the diameters of their comprehending and comprehended
spheres, with their contents superficial and solid: having also by Theoremes
showed manifold diversity of proportions rational and surde of these bodies,
their Superficies and lines compared with theirs comprehending and contained
spheres, there remains only now to confer these bodies mutually inscribed
or circumscribed one with an other, and to search out by the side of any one
known, the sides and diameters both circulare and spherall, with the
capacities superficial and solid of all such bodies as may within or without
the same body be described, I shall therefore first begin with Tetraedron,
and so proceed with the rest. Tetraedron receives only Octaedron and
Icosaedron, for the Cube and Dodecaedron cannot possibly therein be so placed,
that all their angles at one instante might exactly touch his superficies, the
Tetraedrons side therefore given parted in two equal portions, either medietie
is the inscribed Octaedrons side: Likewise the medietie of Tetraedro^s sides
square, is ye square of Octaedrons diameter which divided by 12, produces a
number, whose quadrate root is ye Octaedrons Axis. For the inscribed
Icosaedro^ ye shall divide the medietie of Tetraedrons side by extreme and
mean proportion, and double the square of the less portion, the quadrate
root of the producte is the side. Or deducte one of these portions from the
other, and add the square of the remaynes medietie to the square of Octaedrons
sides medietie, the rote quadrate of the producte doubled, is the Icosaedrons
Diameter: Or if from the last producte, ye abate the third part of
Icosaedrons sides square, the root quadrate of the remain is the Icosaedrons
Axis.

Example.
Tetraedrons side supposed, Octaedrons side is, {powerof2} his Diameter, whose
square divided by 12 brings 1/24, the root being {powerof2}1/24, is the
Octaedrons Axis. Likewise for Icosaedron the medietie of Tetraedrons side
divided in extreme and mean proportion by the first Problem, makes the
lesser portion ^/4 -- {powerof2}5/16, the square hereof doubled, has for his
root {powerof2} vni. 14/8 -- {powerof2}180/64, so much is the inscribed
Icosaedrons side. Again, the difference of Tetraedrons sides medieties
Portions divided by extreme and mean proportion is {powerof2}20/16 -- 1, the
square of half this difference is 9/16 -- {powerof2}80/256, which added to
the square of Octaedrons sides medietie, produces -- {powerof2}5/16, the root
thereof doubled, is {powerof2} v. 5/2 -- {powerof2}5 the true quantity of
Icosaedro^s dimetie^t. Now by subtracting 7/12 -- {powerof2}45/144 the third
part of Icosaedrons sides square, from -- {powerof2}5/16, the last producte
whose root ye doubled to make the Diameter your remainder vvil be this
number 1/24+{powerof2}45/144 -- {powerof2}5/16, whose root universal is the
inscribed Icosaedrons Axis.

The containing Tetraedrons side 1 Tetraedrons Diameter. {powerof2}3/2 Axis,
{powerof2}1/24
The inscribed Octaedrons Side Diameter {powerof2} Axis, {powerof2}1/24
The contained Icosaedrons Side {powerof2} vni. 7/4 -- {powerof2}45/16 Diameter
{powerof2} vni. 5/2 -- {powerof2} 5 Axis, {powerof2}1/24.



Or thus geometrically without respect of number.
Admit AB the Tetraedrons side given, thereon I describe the semicircle ACB,
erecting the perpendiculare DC, and drawing the line AC, that Cord AC is the
inscribed Octaedrons dimetiente, and AD his side. Now divide DC by extreme and
mean proportion as was taught in the first problem at E, and from E erect
the perpendiculare OF, cutting AC in F, conclude FC the inscribed Icosaedrons
side: again part AC in half at H, and from H to E extend a straight line,
for that shall be the Icosaedrons semidiameter. For the Axis ye shall cut of
from DB his twelfth part, as ye were taught in the first book: suppose it BY,
upon I erecte a perpendiculare, cutting the circumference in K, so is the Cord
KB the inscribed Icosaedron and Octaedrons Axis. As for their bases circulare
semidiameters they are found as was taught in the fifth and sixtenth
problemes, forasmuch as both their sides and dimetientes are known.



Theoremes of Tetraedrons inscribed solides. 1.
Tetraedrons side is double to the side of his contained Octaedron.

The second Theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter is a mean proportional between his side and the side of
his containing Tetraedron.

The third Theoreme.
If any equilater triangle be so described and situate within the Tetraedrons
equiangle triangulare base, that the angles of the inscribed triangle divide
the sides of the base by extreme and mean proportion, the medietie of this
inscribed triangles side, is the side of this Icosaedron.

The fourth Theoreme.
Tetraedrons side divided by extreme and mean proportion, his lesser part is
double in power to this Icosaedrons side.

The fifth Theoreme.
The dimetient of Octaedron divided by extreme and mean proportion makes his
lesser portion the Icosaedrons side.

The sixth Theoreme.
Icosaedrons diameter is equal in power with Octaedrons side, and the excess
or difference of his two parts, the one deducted fro the other.

The seventh Theoreme.
The side of Tetraedron being rational, his inscribed Icosaedrons side is an
Apotome, bearing proportion to the Tetraedrons sides, as {powerof2} v. 1 --
{powerof2}^^/16 unto 1.

The eight theoreme.
The Axes of these inscribed bodies Octaedron and Icosaedron are equal.

The ninth theoreme.
The side of Tetraedron being rational, the contained bodies axes are
rational, in power commensurable, and bear proportion to the side as
{powerof2}24 to 1.

The tenth theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter being rational, Icosaedrons dimetient is an irrational
Minor, proportioned to the dimetiente of Octaedron as {powerof2} v. 5 --
{powerof2}20 unto an unity.

The.19. Problem. The side of a Cube given, to find the sides, diameters and
axes of all such regulare bodies as may therein be described.
THe Cube is capable of three bodies, Tetraedron, Octaedron, and Icosaedron,
for the gretest Dodecaedron that may within a Cube be imagined, will only with
12 of his angles touch the Cubes superficies, his other eighte angles
remaining within the body under every of the Cubes angles, dividing his
semidimetients by extreme and mean proportion: this body therefore omitted
because his inscription is imperfect, I shall give rules for the other three,
and first of Tetraedron, double the square of the Cubes given side, the product
root quadrate is the Tetraedrons side, the same given sides square tripled
brings his comprehending spheres diameters square, which divided by 36
yeldeth in the quotient a number, whose quadrate root is the Tetraedrons axis.
The Cubes sides squares medieties root quadrate, is the inscribed Octaedrons
side.

The Octaedrons diameter is equal to the Cubes side,

The Cubes sides square divided by 12, brings the contained Octaedrons Axis
square. For the contained Icosaedrons side, ye shall part the containing Cubes
side given by extreme and mean proportion, as ye were taught in the first
problem, the greater part is your desire. And if you add the square thereof
to the square of Hexaedrons side, the root quadrate of the resulting sum is
the Icosaedrons dimetient. And if ye square the medietie of this dimetient, and
from it deduct a third part of the square of this inscribed Icosaedrons side,
the root quadrate of the remain is the Icosaedrons Axis.

Example.
HExaedrons side given 1, his square doubled is 2, {powerof2}2 is the contained
Tetraedrons side, the given sides square tripled is 3, his quadrate root is
tetraedro^s diameter, that square divided by 36 yeldeth 1/12, {powerof2}1/12 is
the axis. Likewise {powerof2} being the quadrate root of half the Cubes side
is the inscribed Octaedrons side, the Octaedrons diameter being equal to the
Cubes side is 1 also, and the Cubes sides square divided by 12 yeldeth 1/12, I
conclude {powerof2}1/12 the axis. Again for Icosaedron I divide 1 by extreme
and mean proportion, the greater part is {powerof2}5/4 --, so much is the
Icosaedrons side, the square of this side added to the square of the Cubes
side, makes 2 -- {powerof2}5/4, whose root universal is the diameter: from
the square of this roots medietie being -- {powerof2}1/64, if ye deducte --
{powerof2}5/36 the third part of the sides square, there will remain
+{powerof2}5/36 -- {powerof2}5/64 the root universal thereof is Icosaedrons
axis.

The Cubes side 1. His inscribed.

Tetraedrons Side {powerof2}2. Diameter {powerof2}3 Axis {powerof2}1/12.
Octaedrons Side {powerof2}. Diameter. 1. Axis {powerof2}1/12.
Icosaedrons Side {powerof2}5/4 --. Diameter {powerof2} v. 2 -- {powerof2}^/^.
Axis {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}5/36 -- {powerof2}^/64.

Ye may also with the compass find out all these sides, diameters and axis,
no regard had to any number, so the containing Cubes side be known. Admit
the Cubes side given AB, extend the same line out to D, and upon A as a
center, making AB the semidiameter, describe the semicircle BDC, and upon A
erecte the perpendiculare AC, as ye were taught in the first book: concurring
with the circumference in C, again as ye were taught in the first book
cut of from AB 1/24 part. Admit it FB, upon F erecte an other
perpendiculare crossing the circumference in G, divide also CB in two equal
parts in I, then open your compass to the length of AB, and fixing one foot
in B, with the other cross the circumference in E. Last of all by the first
problem divide AB by extreme and mean proportion in H, so as AH may be his
greater portion, and extend right lines from H to C, from B to C, from E to
BD, and from G to B. Thus have ye the diameters sides and axes of those
inscribed bodies, for CB is the inscribed Tetraedrons side, DE the Tetraedrons
dimetiente, GB the Tetraedrons axis, BY is the inscribed Octaedrons side, AC
the Octaedrons dimetiente, GB also Octaedrons axis, AH is the side of the
inscribed Icosaedron, and CH his diameter, as for the axis ye may geometrically
find it by the sixtenth problem, the comprehending spheres dimetiente being
known, whereof I mind not here to make any new recital, considering it is
sufficient plainly declared before.



Theoremes of Hexaedrons inscirbed regulare Solides.
THe inscribed Tetraedrons side is double in power to the conteynyng cubes side.

The 2 theoreme.
The containing Cube and his contained tetraedron have one comprehending
sphere, but their axes are different, and their proportion in power triple.

The 3 theoreme.
The containing cubes axis is equal to his inscribed Octaedrons semidiameter,
and their axes in power retain triple proportion.

The 4 Theoreme.
Hexaedrons side divided by extreme and mean proportion, makes his greater
part the Icosaedrons side.

The 5 Theoreme.
The inscribed Icosaedrons dimetient is in power equal to his containing cubes
side, and the greater portion thereof, it being divided by extreme and mean
proportion.

The 6 Theoreme.
The Cubes side being rational, his inscribed Icosaedrons side is an apotome
bearing proportion to the cubes side, as {powerof2} 1 -- unto an unity.

The 7 Theoreme.
Hexaedrons side is mean proportional between his inscribed Tetraedron and
Octaedrons side.

The 8 theoreme.
The Cubes side is equal in power to his axis, and the contained tetraedrons
semidiameter.

The 9 theoreme.
Hexaedrons diameter to his inscribed Tetraedrons perpendicular, retayneth the
proportion of 3 to 2.

The 10 Theoreme.
The comprehending cubes side being rational, his contained Icosaedrons side
is an irrational Binomye, bearyng proportion unto the cubes side as {powerof2}
vniuersalis +{powerof2}5/576 to 1.

The.20. Problem. Octaedrons side given, to search out all his contained
bodies, sides, diameters and axes.
DOdecaedron within this body may not aptly be described, for as much as only
eight of his solid angles touch the superficies of this body being situate
in the centers of octaedrons bases, the other 12 falling quite within this
body, not touching his superficies on any part. But Tetraedron may be
inscribed and all his solid angles placed in the centers of octaedrons
triangles. Likewise the cubes solid angles take their place in the centers of
his bases, only Icosaedron has his situation somewhat more strange and
intricate, every of his 12 angles resting in a side of octaedron, and divide
his 12 sides by extreme and mean proportion. Now to attain the diameters axes
etc. Peruse these rules ensuing.

For Tetraedron.
Augment octaedrons side by 2, and divide by 3, the quotient is tetraedrons
side, the square thereof augmented by 3, and parted by 2, yeldeth his diameter,
which divided by 6* declares the axis.

The square of octaedrons side multiplied by 2 and divided by 3 produces this
Cubes diameters square, which again divided by 3, shows his sides square,
half the side is the axis.

For Icosaedron.
Divide the side given by extreme and mean proportion, the square of the
lesser part double, and from the product extract the root quadrate, so have
ye the inscribed Icosaedrons side, deduct one of those former found parts of
the given side from the other, and square the difference, for that added to the
square of Icosaedrons side brings the square of his dimetient. Now for the
axis ye may deduct the third part of Icosaedrons sides square from the square
of his semidimetiente, the root quadrate of the remainder is his ^athetus.

Examples of Tetraedron.
Octaedrons side given 1* increased by 2, and divided by 3, makes, the
Tetraedrons side, the square thereof being augme^ted by 3 and parted by 2,
yeldeth {powerof2} is his diameter, which divided by 6, brings {powerof2}1/54
the axis.

Of the Cube.
The square of Octaedrons side 1, augmented by 2, and divided by 3, produces
the diameters square, that again divided by 3, yeldeth 2/9, {powerof2}2/9 is
the cubes side, whose half being {powerof2}1/18 is the axis.

Of Icosaedron.
Octaedrons side 1 divided by extreme and mean proportion, the greater part ^
{powerof2}5/4 --, the lesser 3/2 -- {powerof2}5/^* this latter parts square
doubled is 7, -- 45, the root quadrate universal thereof is Icosaedrons side.
Again by subtraction of the parts ye shall find the difference {powerof2}5 --
2, the square thereof added to the square of Octaedrons side given, makes 10,
-- {powerof2} 80. I conclude {powerof2} vni. 10, -- {powerof2}80 the
Icosaedrons diameter. Finally for the axis I deduct 7/3 -- {powerof2}5 the
third part of Icosaedrons sides square, from 5/2 -- {powerof2}5, the
semidimetient of Icosaedrons containing sphere, there remains {powerof2} is
the axis.

The comprehending Octaedrons side 1 Tedraedrons Side Diameter {powerof2} Axis,
{powerof2}1/54
Hexaedrons Side {powerof2}2/9. Diameter {powerof2}. Axis {powerof2}1/18.
Icosaedrons Side {powerof2} vni. 7 -- {powerof2}45. Diameter {powerof2} vni.
10 -- {powerof2}80. Axis {powerof2}.



Or thus without aid of numbers, admit AB the Octaedrons side given, thereon
(making C the medietie a center) I describe the semicircle ADB, and from C, I
erect the perpendicular CD, dravving lines from D to AB, the semidiameter CB, I
divide in 3 equal parts at E and I, upon I, I errere the perpendicular IK,
concurring with the circumference in K, from E, I dravv EM paralele to DB,
cutting AD in M, as was taught in the first book of this treatise: again
by the first problem I divide AB by extreme and mean proportion in F, and
thereupon I raise the perpendicular FG, crossing AD in G, and from F to D, I
extend a straight line* finally I dravve the right line KB, cuttyng of a third
part at H, and thus is the figure fully fynyshed, contaynyng all these bodies,
sides, Diameters, and Axes: For AE is Tetraedrons side, KB his Semidiameter, HB
his axis, AM the cubes side, KB his semidiameter, MD his axes, AG Icosaedrons
side, F D his semidiameter, and KB his axes.



Theoremes of Octaedrons inscribed regular bodies. 1.
THe conteynyng Octaedrons side bears proportion to the side of his contained
tetraedron, as 3 to 2.

The second theoreme.
Octaedrons side, to his inscribed cubes side, bears the proportion of
{powerof2}4 unto 1.

The third Theoreme.
The side of tetraedron, to the side of the cube, is as 2 unto {powerof2} 2.

The fourth Theoreme.
Octaedrons containing dimetient, is triple in power to his inscribed
Icosaedrons axis.

The fifth theoreme.
The conteyaing octaedrons diameter is triple to the contained cubes side.

The sixte Theoreme.
The axes of these 3 inscribed bodies are proportional, and the cubes axes it
the mean proportion between the other two.

The seventh Theoreme.
The side of Octaedron divided by extreme and mean proportion, that quantity
which is double in power to the lesser part, is equal to the inscribed
Icosaedrons side.

The eight theoreme.
Icosaedrons diameter is equal in power to the side of the containing
Octaedron, and the d^fference or excess of Octaedrons sides parts being
divided in extreme and mean proportion.

The ninth Theoreme.
Octaedrons dimetient divided by extreme and mean proportion makes his
lesser segment the inscribed Icosaedrons side.

The tenth theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational, Icosaedrons side is an Apotome proportioned
to the Octaedrons side, as {powerof2} universe. 7 -- {powerof2}45 unto an unity.

The.21. Problem. Icosaedrons side given, in line or number to set forth all
the sides, Diameters and Axes of his contained regulare bodies.
ICosaedron is a body of such uniform capacity, that he receives all the
other four regulare bodies, whereof Tetraedron, the Cube, and Dodecaedron,
have their solid angles al resting in the centers of his bases, and Octaedrons
angles are situate in the medieties or middle sections of Icosaedrons opposite
sides, and his three diameters cross them selves at right angles upon the
center of his spheres. Now for the invention of their sides, Diameters, and
Axes, note the rules ensuing.

Of Tetraedron.
Divide the given side by extreme and mean proportion, adjoining thereunto his
greater part the producte square, and from it subtracte the third part of the
square of the given side, the root Quadrate of the remainder is the
Tetraedrons containing spheres Diameter, and the third part of his square
doubled is the square of the Tetraedrons side, whose third part deducted fro
the fourth part of the Diameters square, leaves the square of the Axis, or
divide the Dimetient by six, so have ye the Axis also.

Of Octaedron.
THe side of Icosaedron given, being parted by extreme and mean proportion,
having his greater part to him adjoined, yeldeth the Octaedrons dimetient,
whose squares medieties root is the side, and the third part of his sides
square abated from the square of the Semidimetient, leaves the square of his
Axis.

Of Hexaedron.
THe Cubes Diameter is equal to the Diameter of Tetraedron, which found as
before, ye shall divide the square thereof by 3 the quotientes root Quadrate is
the Cubes side, whose medietie is his Axis.

The inscribed regular Solides lines.

AB The comprehending Icosaedrons side given 1 EB The comprehending Icos.
Diameter {powerof2} v 5/2+{powerof2}5/4 SK The comprehending Icosaedrons Axis,
{powerof2} v. 7/24+{powerof2}5/64 CP Tetraedrons side, {powerof2} v.
7/9+{powerof2}5/9 CK Tetraedrons Diameter, {powerof2} v. 1 +{powerof2} SN
Tetraedrons Axis, {powerof2} v. 7/216+{powerof2}5/5184 CR Hexaedrons side,
{powerof2} v. 7/18+{powerof2}5/36 CK Hexaedrons Dimetient, {powerof2} v. 1
+{powerof2}1 CT Hexaedrons Axis {powerof2} v. 7/72+{powerof2}5/576 CF
Octaedrons side, {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}5/16 CB Octaedrons Dimetient,
{powerof2}5/4+ CT Octaedrons Axis {powerof2} v. -- {powerof2}25/2880 CM
Dodecaedrons side {powerof2}5/36+ CK Dodecaedrons Diameter {powerof2} v.
+{powerof2}5/4 VZ dodecaedro^s axis, {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/320+{powerof2}
V.D. 1/18{powerof2}1/102^
Theoremes of Icosaedrons inscribed bodies. Theoreme first.
THe containing Icosaedrons dimetient is in power equal with his side and the
diameter of his inscribed Octaedron.

The second theoreme.
The inscribed Octaedrons dimetient, is in power equal to the dimetient of the
contained Cube and the diameter of Icosaedrons contained circle.

The third theoreme.
Octaedrons dimetient, (divided by extreme and mean proportion) his greater
segment is the comprehending Icosaedrons side.

The fourth theoreme.
Icosaedrons dimetient in power is equal with the diameter of his containing
circle, and the dimetient of his contained cube.

The fifth theoreme.
Tetraedrons side, is double in power to the side of the contained cube.

The sixth theoreme.
Tetraedrons diameter, is triple in power to the inscribed Cubes side.

The seventh theoreme.
Dodecaedrons inscribed side is the third part of such a line as divided by
extreme and mean proportion makes his greater part the containing
Icosaedrons side.

The eight Theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter retayneth the same proportion to the side of Dodecaedro^
that the diameter of Tetraedron does in power to the side of the Cube.

The ninthe Theoreme.
Icosaedrons diameter retayneth the same proportion to the dimetient of
Octadron, that the side of Icosaedron bears to the semidiameter of that
circle, whereon Icosaedron is framed.

The tenth Theoreme.
Icosaedrons axis is triple in power to the axis of the contained Cube.

The.22. Problem. The side of any Dodecaedron given, both Arithmeticallye and
Geometrically to search out the sides diameters and axis of all the regulare
bodies therein described.
SUch is the resemblance and mutual conformity between Icosaedron and this
body, that the 12 solid angles of Icosaedron will precisely rest in the
centers of Dodecaedrons pentagonall bases, the angles of the inscribed
Octaedron have their place in the medietie of the six opposite sides of
Dodecaedro^, which coopled together with right lines make 12 sides containing
his 8 triangles, and 3 diameters, crossing themselves at right angles on the
center of his spheres. But the solid angles of the internal Cube and
Tetraedron are situate in the angles of the containing Dodecaedron, and one
sphere comprehends them all three. As for the longitude of their axes, sides
and diameters, peruse these precepts following.

Of Tetraedron.
Divide the side given by the first problem into extreme and mean
proportion, and to the whole side adioyne his greater part, the square of the
resulting quantity tripled makes the Tetraedrons dimetientes square, which
augmented by 2 and divided by 3 brings the square of Tetraedrons side, which
divided by 24 yeldeth in the quotient the square of Tetraedrons Axis: extracte
the roots quadrate of these squares, so have ye the desired lines.

Of Hexaedron.
Divide Tetraedrons sides square by 2, so have ye the square of the Cubes side,
which augmented by 3 shows the diameters square, and that divided by 12
produces the axis square, extracte the Zenzike roots of these numbers, so
have ye the lines.

Of Octaedron.
DOdecaedrons side given added to the side of Hexaedron late found, makes the
diameter of Octaedron, the root quadrate of his squares medietie is the side,
and the root quadrate of the dimetientes twelfth part is the axis.

Of Icosaedron.
THe side of Dodecaedron being given, first search the diameter of his
containing circle by the fifth and tenth problemes, and deduct the square
thereof from the square of the Cubes dimetiente found as is before declared,
the root quadrate of the remain is the Icosaedrons dimetient: Now for his
side ye shall add the squares of the Cubes side and Dodecaedrons sides
together, the root universal of the producte ye shall reserve for a divisor,
then multiplye Icosaedrons dimetiente by Dodecaedrons side, and the product
divide by your reserved divisor, the quotient is the Icosaedrons side, the
square of this side deducte from triple the square of Icosaedrons
semidimetiente, and fro the third part of the remaynder extracte the Zenzike
root, for that is the Icosaedrons Axis.

Because these rules of them selves are apparaunt enough, I shall only adioyne
an example for the last, with a table containing the numbers ready calculate of
all the rest, which shall supplye the place of examples for the other.

An example of Icosaedron.
THe Dodecaedrons side given 20 divided by extreme and mean proportion makes
his greater part {powerof2}500 -- 10, which added unto 20, is
{powerof2}500+10, the square thereof tripled is 1800+{powerof2}1800000, so is
the square of the Cubes dimetient, and from it deducting 800+{powerof2}128000
Dodecaedrons basis containing circles diameters square, there will remain
1000+{powerof2}968000, the root quadrate universal thereof is the diameter of
the contained Icosaedron, which multiplied by the Dodecaedrons side creates
{powerof2} v. 400000+{powerof2}154880000000, and that divided by {powerof2} v.
1000+{powerof2}200000 (for so much arises for a divisor by addition of the
Cubes sides square to the square of Dodecaedrons side) there will resulte of
that division {powerof2} v. 280+{powerof2}72000, so much is the contained
Icosaedrons side, whose square deducted fro triple the square of Icosaedrons
semidiameter, 17600/80+{powerof2}70560000/320, whose third parts root is
{powerof2} v. 1880/12+{powerof2}102000/16 so much is the contained Icosaedrons
axis, and that doubled shows the quantity of his contained spheres
dimetiente.

The containing Dodecaedrons side 20.

Dodecaedrons Diameter {powerof2} v. 1800+{powerof2}1800000 Axis {powerof2} v.
250+{powerof2}60500.
The contained Tetraedrons Side {powerof2} v. 1200+{powerof2}800000 Diameter
{powerof2} v. 1800+{powerof2}1800000 Axis {powerof2} v. 50+{powerof2}1388 8/9
The inscribed Hexaedrons Side {powerof2} v. 600+{powerof2}200000 Diameter
{powerof2} v. 1800+{powerof2}1800000 Axis {powerof2} v. ^50+{powerof2}12500
The included Octaedrons Side {powerof2} v. 700+{powerof2}450000 Diameter
{powerof2} v. 1400+{powerof2}1800000 Axis {powerof2} v. 116 +{powerof2}12500
The internal Icosaedrons Side {powerof2} v. 280+{powerof2}72000 Diameter
{powerof2} v. 1000+{powerof2} 968000 Axis {powerof2} v. 156 +{powerof2}24500

For the geometrical searching out of all these lines, behold the figure
following, where AB is the Dodecaedrons side given, BC such a line as being
divided into extreme and mean proportion makes his greater part equal to
BA, and therefore the inscribed Cubes side AC is the inscribed Octaedrons
diameter, and AFC a semicircle described thereon; the center being E, DC is
equal to AB, and perpendiculare to AC, AD is the diameter of Dodecaedron, the
contained Cube, and Tetraedron, AGD a semicircle described upon his medietie
the center N, BG is an arc described upon the center D, GH is a perpendiculare
let fall on AD, HK is the fifth part of HD, KI an other perpendiculare ereared
on that point cutting the semicircle in I, AI is the diameter of the inscribed
Icosaedron, and AVI a semicircle thereon described, BL equal to AI, LM a
parallele to DC, falling perpendicularly upon AC extended to M, AV is equal to
LM, it is the contained Icosaedrons side, VX a perpendiculare from V to AI, XY
is a third part of AX, YZ a perpendiculare to AI, cutting the semicircle at
Z, ZI is the contained Icosaedrons inscribed spheres diameter, WI his medietie
is the Icosaedrons axis, AO is a third part of AD, OP a perpendiculare upon
AD, PD the inscribed Tetraedrons side, PA the Cubes side, OR a parallele to DC,
RC the diameter of the inscribed Octaedrons containing circle, S his middle
point, ES Octaedrons Axis, OF a perpendiculare ereared on the diameter, AC
cutting his semicircles circumference in F, AF Octaedrons side, T W is the
semidiameter of Icosaedrons containing circle, TN the semidiameter of
Dodecaedrons containing circle, OP the semidimetient of Tetraedrons base, and
DQ the circles semidiameter that contains the Cubes square. Thus have ye in
one figure all the sides, diameters, and axes, both of the containing
Dodecaedron, and his inscribed Tetraedron, Octaedron, Hexaedron, and
Icosaedron, with the semidiameters also of the circles inuironing their bases,
but lest the intricate crossing and concurring of lines and arkes might bread
confusion to such as have not ben trained in geometrical demonstration. I
shall adioyne a table containing the sides, axes, and diameters, both circulare
and spherall of every body perticularly by it self, expressed also exactly
with numbers and Algebraicall charecters, the containing Dodecaedrons side
admitted an unity wherein the skillful Arithmetrician shall find matter
abundante to exercise or delight himself.



The comprehending Dodecaedrons Side AB, 1 Basis line diagonall, {powerof2}1
+{powerof2}5/2 BC. Containing spheres diameter, {powerof2} v. 4 +{powerof2}11
^/^ AD. Basis containing circles Semid. {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/20 TN. Axis,
{powerof2} vni. +{powerof2}121/320, AT.


Dodecaedrons inscribed regulare Tetraedrons Side {powerof2} vni. 3+{powerof2}5
DP. Diameter, {powerof2} vni. 4 ^/2+{powerof2}11 ^/4, AD. Basis greater semid.
{powerof2} v. 1+{powerof2}5/9 OP. Axis, {powerof2} vni. +{powerof2}5/^76, ON.
Perpendiculare {powerof2} vni. 2+{powerof2}2 2/9 OD.
Octaedrons Side, {powerof2} v. 1 +{powerof2}^5/16, AF. Diameter {powerof2}
vni. 7/2+{powerof2}45/4, AC. Basis greater semid. {powerof2} v.
7/12+{powerof2}45/144, RS. Axis, {powerof2} v. 7/24+{powerof2}5/64, ES.
Hexaedrons Side {powerof2} vni. 3/2+{powerof2}5/4, AP. Diameter, {powerof2}
vni. 4 +{powerof2}11, AD. Basis diagonall, {powerof2} vni. 3+{powerof2}5. PD.
Containing circles semid {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}5/16, DQ. Axis, {powerof2}
vni. +{powerof2}5/64 NQ.
Icosaedrons Side, {powerof2} vni. 7/10+{powerof2}9/20, LM. Dimetient,
{powerof2} v. 2 +{powerof2}121/20, AI. Basis cont. circles semid. {powerof2} v.
7/30+{powerof2}1/20, Tw. Axis, {powerof2} v. 47/120+{powerof2}49/320, wI. The
Circles Semidiameter whereon Icos. is framed* {powerof2} v. +121/500 VX.



Theoremes of Dodecaedrons inscribed regulare Solides.
TEtraedrons inscribed sides square joined to the Cubes sides square makes the
diameters square of Hexaedron, all being described within one Dodecaedron.

The 2 Theoreme.
Tetraedrons side is double in power to the cubes side, and equal to his line
diagonall.

The 3 Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons Diameter is equal in power to the dimetiente of Octaedron and
Dodecaedrons side.

The 4 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons dimetiente is equal in power to his own side, and such an other
line also (as being by extreme and mean proportion divided) makes his
greater part equal to Icosaedrons side.

The 5 theoreme.
A line equal in power to Dodecaedron and his inscribed Cubes side, has such
proportion to Icosaedrons diameter, as Dodecaedrons side, has to the side of
his contained Icosaedron.

The 6 theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter divided by extreme and mean proportion makes his
greater part the Cubes side, and his lesser the side of Dodecaedron.

The 7 theoreme.
Hexaedrons sides square is equal to the square of Dodecaedrons side, and a
rightangled Parallelogramme contained of the Cubes side and Dodecaedrons side.

The 8 theoreme.
Octaedrons diameters square, is equal to the square of Tetraedrons side, and
a right angled Parallelogramme contained of Dodecaedrons side and his inscribed
Cubes side.

The 9 theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter being by extreme and mean proportion divided, the
excess or difference of these parts squares deducted fro the square of the
diameter, leueth the square of the inscribed Tetraedrons side.

The 10 theoreme.
Hexaedrons diameter is equal in power to Dodecaedrons Basis containing
circles diameter of the inscribed Icosaedron.

The 11 theoreme.
The excess of Dodecaedrons basis containing circles diameters square above
the square of his line Diagonall, added unto his contained Spheres diameter,
creates the square of his inscribed Tetraedrons side.

The 12 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons dimetient is equal in power with these 3 lines, the greater
diameter of his own basis, the diameter of Icosaedrons contained sphere, and
the greater diameter of Icosaedrons basis.

The 13 theoreme.
Octaedrons dimetiente retayneth the same proportion to the diameter of his
basis, that Dodecaedrons diameter does to the side of his inscribed Tetraedron.

The 14 theoreme.
Octaedrons containing circles diameter retayneth the same proportion to his
contained spheres dimetiente, that Tetraedrons side does to the side of the
Cube.

The 15 theoreme.
Dodecaedrons side being rational, the side of his contained Icosaedron is an
irrational Binomie of the 3 order, bearing proportion to the containing
dodecaedrons side, as {powerof2}9/20+{powerof2}5/20 to an unity.

The 16 theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter, to the side of Icosaedron, is proportioned in power, as 5
to 1.

The 17 theoreme.
Octaedrons diameter bears such proportion to the dimetient of Icosaedron. as
a Cord Pentagonall does to a Cord Hexagonall of the same circle.

The 18 theoreme.
Icosaedrons diameter divided by extreme and mean proportion makes his
greater part the diameter of his comprehending dodecaedrons Basis internal
Circle.

The 19 theoreme.
Octaedrons dimetient exceeds in power the dimetiente of Icosaedron by the
diameter of Dodecaedrons basis internal circle.

The 20 theoreme.
A line in power equal to the sides of Dodecaedron and the Cube to the
diameter of Icosaedron, retayneth such proportion as the less segmente of
Dodecaedrons basis perpendiculare (divided in extreme and mean proportion)
does to the less semidiameter of the same basis.

The 21 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons side holds the same proportion to Octaedrons dimetiente, that
the semidiameter of Dodecaedrons contained circle does to the perpendiculare of
his base.

The 22 Theoreme.
If any line be divided in extreme and mean proportion, and from the whole ye
abate the medietie of the greater part, the remain being by extreme and
mean proportion again divided, the lesser segmente of this last divided
line, to the medietie first abated, retayneth such proportion, as Dodecaedrons
side, to the side of his inscribed Icosaedron.

The 23 Theoreme.
If Icosaedrons side doubled be divided in extreme and mean Proportion, and
to the greater part the Icosaedrons side adjoined, the whole line thereof
resulting, is the diameter of the inscribed Octaedron.

The 24 theoreme.
The contained Icosaedrons semidiameter to the less Semidimetiente of the
comprehending Dodecaedrons base, retayneth such proportion as Dodecaedrons
basis line Diagonall to the side.

The 25 theoreme.
Icosaedrons inscribed diameter to the dimetiente of Dodecaedrons containing
circle, bears such proportion, as the medietie of Dodecaedrons basis
diagonall, to the greater portion of his side by extreme and mean Proportion
divided.

The.23. Problem. The side, Diameter or Axis of any regulare body known, to
search out all those forenamed lines in any regulare body that shall include
or circumscribe that proponed solid.
ALthough this question of circumscribing bodies might be divided into 5
Chapters, and in every one as many differente rules, precepts, and Theoremes
taught, as was in the former of bodies inscribed, yet for brevity sake, I
think best to remitte the more ample handeling hereof to the ingeniouse
studente, who comparing the rules, and well waying the Theoremes already
given, shall easily apply them to this purpose, and inuente many m^e perhaps
of greater facility and no less certainty: and in this Chapter I will only
open one way, leaving a large field for others to invent and exercise them
selves in at pleasure. It shall therefore be requisite when the side, Diameter
or Axis of any regulare body is proponed, to consider by the fifte Problemes
last past what bodies may conteyne or circumscribe the same, and resorting to
their peculiar chapters, search out the numbers appropriate to the containing
and contained solides sides, axes and diameters, which found by three
quantities known, using the rule of proportion, ye may readily find the
fourth, as by the example shall more plainly appear.

Example.
Suppose the side of a tetraedron given 10, for the sides, diameters and axes I
repair first to the 19 problem, where I find the containing cubes side,
being 1, the contained tetraedrons side {powerof2}2, saying therefore by the
rule of proportion {powerof2}2, the contained tetraedrons side found heretofore
in the 19 problem, gives 1 for his containing cubes side, what yeldeth 10
the side given your fourth proportional number will be {powerof2}50, the
containing cubes side. Likewise in the 22 problem, I find the containing
dodecaedrons side being 1, the contained tetraedrons side {powerof2} v.
3+{powerof2}5. augmenting therefore 10, the side given by tetraedrons side in
that problem found, and dividing by {powerof2} vni. 3+5, your quotient will
be {powerof2}62 -- {powerof2}12, so mutch conclude the side of a dodecaedron
that shall conteyn or comprehend this tetraedron, whose side is 10. In like
manner may ye search out the other sides, diameters, and axes, of all the
comprehending bodies, whereof I leave to give any farther examples, these two
being sufficient to the ingenious to proceed with like order in the rest.

But for such as not contented with one kind of working will delighte
themselves in the diversity of rules and kinds of calculation, I have thought
good to adioyne these Theoremes ensuing, which well wayed and compared with
such as are already past, shall yield matter abundantly for the invention of
many mo conclusions and strange operations, than hitherto has been used or
published by any.

Theoremes of these bodies mutually circumscribed and conferred with their
inscribed regular bodies. 1.
TEtraedron may be contained or circumscribed of all the other four regular
bodies, and his side being rational, his containing Octaedrons side is also
rational, proportioned thereunto, as 3 to 2.

The 2 theoreme.
Tetraedrons comprehending cubes side is equal to the dimetient of his
inscribed Octaedron.

The 3 theoreme.
Tetraedrons containing Octaedrons side to the side of his inscribed Octaedron
is triple.

The 4 Theoreme.
Tetradrons side being rational, his encompassing Icosaedrons side is an
Apotome, and triple to tetraedrons inscribed Icosaedrons side.

The 5 theoreme.
Tetraedrons side being rational, his circumscribing dodecaedrons side is an
Apotome of the 6 order, proportioned to the side as {powerof2} vni. --
{powerof2}5/16 unto an unity.

The 6 Theoreme.
Hexaedron has only 3 circumscribing regular bodies, for no tetraedron may be
so placed about a cube but that his superficies shall either cut or not touch
some of the Hexaedrons angles.

The 7 Theoreme.
Hexaedrons containing Octaedrons side is triple to his contained Octaedrons
side, and to the Hexaedrons side it bears such proportion, as tetraedrons
diameter to his containyng circles semidimetient.

The 8 theoreme.
Hexaedrons side being rational, his comprehending Icosaedrons side, is an
irrational Minor, proportioned to the cubes side, as {powerof2} v. 31
{powerof2}911 unto 1.

The 9 theoreme.
Hexaedrons side being rational, his comprehending Dodecaedrons side is an
Apotome of the sixth he order proportioned to the side as {powerof2} v. 1 --
{powerof2} to an unity.

The 10 Theoreme.
Hexaedrons Dimetient is mean proportional between his side and the
Dimetiente of his contayninge Octaedron.

The 11 theoreme.
Octaedron may be comprehended of all the other regular bodies, and his side is
the medietie of his encompassing tetraedrons side.

The 12 Theoreme.
Octaedrons external cubes side is equal to his diameter, and double in power
to his side.

The 13 Theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational, his including Icosaedrons side is an Apotome
of the 6 order, having proportion to Octaedrons side, as {powerof2} vniuer. 3
-- 5 unto 1.

The 14 theoreme.
Octaedrons side being rational, his enuironing dodecaedrons side is an
Apotome, proportioned to the Octaedrons side, as {powerof2} vni. 7 --
{powerof2}45 unto 1.

The 15 theoreme.
Octaedrons comprehending Dodecaedrons side is equal to his contained
Icosaedrons side.

The 16 Theoreme.
Icosaedron may be comprehended perfectely of all the other regulare solides,
and his containing tetraedrons side is triple to the side of his contained
tetraedron.

The 17 theoreme.
Icosaedrons side being rational, his comprehendyng cubes side is a Binomy,
and the Icosaedrons Diameter in power equal to them both.

The 18 theoreme.
Icosaedrons side rational his encompassing Octaedrons side is a Binomye and
equal to the medietie of his external Tetraedrons side.

The 19 theoreme.
Icosaedrons side rational, his comprehending dodecaedrons side is an
irrational Apotome, bearing proportion to the side as {powerof2} v 17 --
{powerof2}281 unto 1.

The 20 theoreme.
Icosaedrons comprehendyng cubes side is double in power to his comprehended
Octaedrons side.

The 21 theoreme.
Dodecaedron can perfectly be comprehended of no regulare body save only of
Icosaedron, whose side reteyneth such proportion to the side of Dodecaedron,
as {powerof2} vni. 13 -- 101 unto an unity.

The 22 theoreme.
Dodecaedron and Icosaedron having equal sides, the cubes side that conteyneth
Icosaedron is equal to the cubes side contained of dodecaedron.

The 23 theoreme.
Dodecaedron and octaedron having equal and rational sides, the side of
octadrons comprehending Icosaedron is an Apotome of the same order, that
Dodecaedrons inscribed Tetraedrons side is a Binomye, and their names or
componing quantities equal.

The 24 theoreme.
Dodecaedron and the cube having equal sides, whether they be rational or
surd, the dodecaedrons containing Icosaedrons side is triple to the cubes
comprehending dodecaedrons side.

The 25 theoreme.
Dodecaedron and Tetraedron having equal Sides, whether they be rational or
irrational, the dodecaedrons containing Icosaedrons side to the Tetraedrons
comprehending Dodecaedrons side, reteyneth such proportion, as Tetraedrons
diameter does to the less semidiameter of his basis.

The.24. Problem. The side, diameter, Axis, or altitude, of any regular body,
or any semidiameter, perpendicular or line diagonall of their base given, to
search out the content Superficial and solid, not only of that body, but also
of any other regular solid that shall inscribe or contain that body or any of
his spheres.
FOr resolution of this Problem I might prescribe rules innumerable of most
strange and intricate operation, such is the variety of proportions between
these bodies sides, dimetientes, axes, and other their superficial and solid
lines, that if I should set forth for every peculiar question that might
herin be proponed, but the tenth part of such precepts as offer themselves
upon consideration of these solides forms, proportions and nature, this only
chapter should grow to an huge treatise. But to conclude it in shortest form
and fewest words, the whole variety may be reduced to these principal
points, what manner line is proponed or given, and what content or capacity
is demanded. If the line given be none of the bodies sides, but some diameter,
axis, perpendicular or other line before named, ye have in the 6 problem and
those other four that immediately ensue, the proportion of al such lines to
the solides sides in rational and irrational numbres expressed, so that by
conversion of the proportions there found, using the rule of proportion (as
has been partly before declared, and shall in this Chapter by example be
somewhat more plainly showed) ye may find out the correspondent side of that
solid, whose diameter, axis or other line is given. Then if it be the content
superficial or solid of the same body that is required, ye shall resort to
the 10 problem, and the other four followyng, where ye shall find in the
correspondente Chapter by the side tofore known, the means how to search
his forenamed contents.

But if those contents be not demanded of the same body, they are either of
bodies inscribed or circumscribed, and that either of the proponed regulare
solid, or some of his spheres, for bodies described within his spheres, it
behooves ye first by the side known to learn the Diameter of that Sphere, and
then repair unto the sixtenth Problem, where ye shall be taught to find all
the inscribed Solides sides, but if it be an inscribed body of your proponed
Solid, then have ye precepts for the invention of his side in the eightenth
Problem, or some other of the four immediately ensuing. Likewise if it be the
content of a circumscribing body that is required, that body does either
circumscribe some Sphere, and then have ye Precepts in the seuententh Problem
for the invention of his side, or else it contains the Solid, whose side is
known, and then may ye by the rules given in the last Problem search out his
side, and the side of every Solid so found (resorting to the sixthe, seuenthe,
eigth, ninthe and tenthe Problemes) ye shall there in his answerable Chapter,
receive rules for the invention of his capacity superficial and Solid, or
else work for every several body according to the rules ensuing.

Rules for the content Superficial and Solid of the five Regular bodies.
For Tetraedron.
AVgment the square of the side found by {powerof2}3, and the Cube of the side
by {powerof2}1/^2, the first producte is the Superficies, the second is the
Solid content of Tetraedron.

For Octaedron.
MVltiplie the sides square by {powerof2}12, and the sides cube by
{powerof2}2/9, so have ye two productes equal to the two contents Solid
and Superficial of Octaedron.

For Hexaedron.
THe square of the side augmented by 6, gives his Superficies, which
augmented by of the side, produces the crassitude.

For Icosaedron.
INcrease the sides squared square by 75, the root Zenzike of the producte is
the Superficies, and the Cube of the side augmented by {powerof2}7.2
31/^2+{powerof2}5 245/576 yeldeth the crassitude.

For Dodecaedron.
MVltiplie the sides square by {powerof2} v. 225+40500, so have ye the
superficies, or augment the sides Cube by {powerof2} v. 29 +{powerof2}861
21/64, the product is the crassitude.

For more plainness I shall adioyn v. questions and examples of these principal
varieties, whereunto al other peculiar questions may be referred.

The first question. I have a Dodecaedron, whose comprehending spheres
diameter I know to be five, I demand his capacity superficial and solid.
COnsidering the Dimetient of this solid is known unto me, I repair unto the
tenth Problem, where I find the Dodecaedrons side being 10, the comprehending
spheres diameter {powerof2} v. 450+{powerof2}112500, converting therefore the
limits or bounds of this proportion, I say thus {powerof2} v.
450+{powerof2}112500 gives 10, what yeldeth 5, working by the rule of
proportion, ye shall find the fourth proportional number {powerof2}10 5/12
-- {powerof2}2 1/12, so much is the side of the proponed Dodecaedron, which
known I resort to the fiftenth Problem, there am I willed to search out the
Semidiameter and line Diagonall of his basis, and the Axis or Semidimetient of
his inscribed sphere, his Axis is {powerof2} v. 2 1/12+{powerof2}3 17/36 his
co^taining circles semidimetient {powerof2} v. 4 -- {powerof2}3 17/36, his
basis line Diagonall is {powerof2}8, so that by multiplication and division of
these numbers according to the Precepts there given, I find the Dodecaedrons
superficies {powerof2} v. 7812 -- 1220703^ and his crassitude {powerof2} un
1808 97/216+{powerof2}654097 28403/46656 -- {powerof2}523278 1033/11664. In
like manner if ye augment 12 -- {powerof2}86 29/3^ the square of the
Dodecaedrons found side, in 225+{powerof2}40500. Or {powerof2} v. 3038
7/36+4709502 1033/1296 {powerof2}8477105 5/144 -- {powerof2}5128125 2125/11664
being the Cube of the same side, in {powerof2} v. 29 +{powerof2} v 861 1/64,
for so are ye taught to do by the rule of this Chapter, the first Producte
will be the Dodecaedrons superficies, and the last his crassitude, exactly
agreeing with your former operations.

The second question. A cube is proponed, whose Diameter is the Zenzike root
of 108* I vvoulde know the superficial and solid contents of such a
Tetraedron as this Cubes contained sphere should circumscribe.
Because the diameter of this Cube is given, I resort to the sixtenth Problem,
by the rules there prescribed, I find the Axis 3, which doubled makes 6, the
Diameter of this cubes contained sphere, and considering the Tetraedron, whose
capacity is required, must be circumscribed of this sphere, I search out
again by the same chapter this spheres inscribed Tetraedrons side, finding it
the zenzike root of 24 ye may also thereby learn the Axis and containing
circles semidiameter, and so consequently the capacities of this Tetraedron,
whereof ye have examples in the eleventh Problem: Or by the first rule of this
Problem if ye augment 24 the square of Tetraedrons side by {powerof2}3 there
arises {powerof2}1728 for his superficies, and by multiplication of
{powerof2}13824 the Cube of this inscribed Tetraedrons side by {powerof2}12/72,
there amounts {powerof2}192, so much conclude the Tetraedrons crassitude,

The third question. I demand the superficial and Solid capacity of a
Dodecaedron, circumscribing such an Octaedrons containing sphere, as has for
his side this irrational Mayor {powerof2} v. 20+{powerof2}387.
BY the eigth Problem I find this Octaedrons co^prehending spheres dimetient
{powerof2} v. 46+{powerof2}7744/5 the medietie hereof being {powerof2} vniu.
10+{powerof2}484/5 is the Axis of the Dodecaedron, whose co^tents are required,
which known by the rules of the seuententh Problem, I find the side
{powerof2} v. 500 -- {powerof2}234256, and by extraction of this irrational
numbers root, it appears 4, whose square augme^ted by the root enzike
universal of 2^5+{powerof2}40500 produces {powerof2} v.
57600+{powerof2}2654208000, so much is the Dodecaedrons superficies. Likewise
by multiplication of {powerof2} vniu. 275/8 +{powerof2}^^125/64 in the Cube of
4 there arises {powerof2} v. 962560/8+{powerof2}92484403200^/64 for the
crassitude of this Dodecaedron.

The fourth question. There is a Dodecaedron, whose side is this irrational
Apotome {powerof2} v. 1120 -- {powerof2}1152000, my desire is to know his
inscribed Icosaedrons superficies and crassitude.
FOrasmuch as this Icosaedron whose contents are required, is described within
the Dodecaedren, whose side is known, I search out by the rules given in the
xxij. Chapter, the side of his contained Icosaedron. Or with more speed ye
may thus work, saying a containing Dodecaedrons side being an unity, gives
for the side of his contained Icosaedron {powerof2} v 7/10+{powerof2}9/20, what
shall {powerof2} vniuersalis 11200 -- {powerof2}1152000, by multiplication of
these latter numbers ye shall produce {powerof2} v. 784 -- {powerof2}518400,
which ye shall find (by extraction of the universal ^enzike root) 8, the side
thus found, ye may search out his contents by the fiftenth Problem, or by the
fourth rule tofore prescribed thus, I augment 64 by {powerof2}75 there
amounts {powerof2}307200 the inscribed Icosaedrons superficies. Or increasing
512 the side cubically multiplied by {powerof2} v. 2 21/72+{powerof2}5 245/576
there amounts {powerof2} v. 637155 5/9 +{powerof2}372827022222 2/9 the
desired cassitude.

The fyfth question. An Icosaedron is offered, whose basis containing circles
semidimetient is this surde Binomye {powerof2} vni. 14 14/15 +{powerof2}204 the
superficies and crassitude of his containing Dodecaedron is required.
COnsidering the semidiameter of this Icosaedrons basis is given, I repare to
the 9 Problem, wherein I receive rules for the invention of the comprehending
Dodecaedrons side, or more particularly to set forth the whole operation, I am
referred to the 9 Problem, where I perceive by the 9 Theoreme, that the square
of this known semidiamiter tripled, makes the square of the Icosaedrons side:
I augmente therefore the given Binomyes square by 3, there aryseth 44
+{powerof2}36864/20, the root zenzike universal thereof is the Icosaedrons
side. And for his containing Dodecaedrons side I work by the precepts of the
last Chapter, saying: {powerof2} v. 2^0+{powerof2}72000 gives 20, what
yields {powerof2} vni. 44 +{powerof2}36864/20 your fourth Proportional
number will be 8. Or thus by the fifteenth Theoreme of the 22 Problem: Divide
{powerof2} vni. 44 +{powerof2}36^6^/20 by {powerof2}9/20+{powerof2}5/^^^, so
will the quotiente be 8 also, and that is the comprehending Dodecaedrons side.
Now for his contents solid and superficial, I repair to the fiftenth
Problem, where I am referred to the 10 Problem, and working by the precepts
there given, I find the Dodecaedrons basis line Diagonall {powerof2} v.
96+{powerof2}5120, his basis greater Semidiameter {powerof2} vni.
32+{powerof2}4006/20* his Axis {powerof2} vni 40+{powerof2}495616/320, triple
the Semidiameter is {powerof2} vni. 288+{powerof2}^2^776/20, the line Diagonall
increased by 5, makes {powerof2} vni. 2400+{powerof2}3200000, these multiplied
together, create this surd rote {powerof2} v.
691200+{powerof2}53084160000+{powerof2}265420800000+{powerof2}95552488000,
resting between the enzike roots of 1745904, and 1745905, being very nyghe
1321 ^63/2642 so much is the desired content Superficial. Again by
multiplication of {powerof2} vni. 96+{powerof2}5120 the line Diagonall, in
{powerof2} vni. 3^+{powerof2}4^^6/20, there amounts {powerof2} v.
4096+{powerof2}5242880+{powerof2}1887436, which increased by {powerof2} vni.
40+{powerof2}495616/320, the Axis produces {powerof2} universe.
163840+{powerof2}^0305289240576/320+{powerof2}66520453480448/3200, and this
multiplied by 5, creates {powerof2} vni 7700480+{powerof2}59190018048000 the
contained Dodecaedro^s content Solid. The like is brought to pass by the
last rules, for 64 the Dodecaedrons sides square augmented by {powerof2} vni
^25+ {powerof2}40500, makes {powerof2} v. 92160^+{powerof2}679477248000 the
superficies, and 512 the Cube of 8 multiplied in {powerof2} vni. 29
^/8+{powerof2}^^125/64, creates {powerof2} v. 7700480+59190018048000 the
Solid capacity of a Dodecaedron described within the Icosaedron, whose side
was given exactly agreeing with the former calculations.

Theoremes of the superficial and solid quantities of these regulare bodies
conferred by mutual inscription and circumscription, and first:

Of Tetraedron.
TEtraedrons superficies is double to the superficies of his inscribed
Octaedron.

The 2 theoreme.
Tetraedrons superficies to the superficies of his containing Cube bears
proportion, as 110{powerof2} 3.

The 3 theoreme.
Tetraedrons circumscribing Cubes content superficial, to the content
superficial of his contained Octaedron, retayneth such proportion as the same
Octaedrons superficies does to the square of his side.

The 4 theoreme.
Tetraedrons incompassing Octaedrons superficies contains the superficies of
his inscribed Octaedrons 9 times.

The 5 theoreme.
One base of Tetraedrons containing Icosaedron, is equal unto 9 of his
inscribed Icosaedrons triangulare bases.

The 6 theoreme.
Tetraedron to his contained Octaedron retayneth such proportion as their sides.

The 7 theoreme.
Tetraedrons containing Octaedron to the Cube described without the same
Tetraedron, retayneth such proportion as the perpendiculare of the containing
Octaedrons basis to the less semidiameter of the Tetraedrons base.

The 8 theoreme.
Tetraedrons circumscribing Octaedron contains his inscribed Octaedron 27
times.

The 9 theoreme.
Tetraedrons containing Cube holds the same proportion to Tetraedrons
inscribed Octaedron, that the Cubes diameter does to the Octaedrons Axis.

The 10 theoreme.
Tetraedrons comprehending Icosaedron, contains his inscribed Icosaedron 27
times.

Of Hexaedron.
The 11 theoreme.
HExaedrons superficies to the superficies of his inscribed Tetraedron, holds
such proportion as Tetraedrons dimetiente does to the Cubes side.

The 12 theoreme*
Hexaedrons superficial^ content to the con^ente superficial of his inscribed
Octaedron, retayneth the proportion of the Cubes diameter to Octaedrons
Semidimetiente.

The 13 theoreme.
Hexaedrons containing Octaedrons content superficial has such Proportion
to the superficial quantity of his inscribed Tetraedron, as the Octaedrons
contained spheres dimetientes square to the greater semidiameters square of
Tetraedrons base.

The 14 theoreme.
Hexaedrons comprehending Octaedrons superficies contains his inscribed
Octaedrons superficies ^ times.

The 15 theoreme.
The proportion of Hexaedrons comprehending Dodecaedrons superficies* to the
superficies of his inscribed Icosaedro^, is co^pounded of double, the
proportion between a Cord trigonall and a cord Pentagonall of one ^ircle,
adjoined to the proportion of the Pentagonal, Diagonall to the same Cord
Trigonall.

The 16 theoreme.
Hexaedrons solid capacity to his inscribed Tetraedron, bears such
proportion as the Hexaedrons comprehending spheres semidimetiente does unto
the Tetraedrons Axis.

The 17 theoreme.
Hexaedron to his contained Octaedron, retayneth the Proportion of his Diameter
to the Octaedrons axis.

The 18 theoreme.
Hexaedrons comprehending Octaedron to his contained Tetraedron, bears the
proportion of 27 unto 2.

The 19 theoreme.
Hexaedrons external Octaedron contains his internal Octaedron 27 times.

The 20 theoreme.
Hexaedrons comprehending Dodecaedrons solid capacity to the content solid
of his inscribed Icosaedron, retayneth the same Proportion that the line
Diagonall of the Dodecaedrons Basis does unto that part of his side whereunto
the whole side is proportioned as the square of a Cord Trigonall to the square
of a Cord Pentagonall.

Of Octaedron.
The 21 theoreme.
Octaedrons base doubled, is equal unto 9 of his contained Tetraedrons
triangular bases.

The 22 theoreme.
Octaedrons superficies to the content superficial of his inscribed Cube,
bears such proportion as the Octaedrons axis to the Cubes sides third part.

The 23 theoreme.
Octaedrons circumscribed tetraedrons superficies contains the superficies of
his inscribed tetraedron 9 times.

The 24 theoreme.
Octaedrons comprehending Cubes Diagonal lines square, is triple to the
superficies of his comprehended Cube.

The 25 theoreme.
Octaedrons external tetraedrons superficies to the superficial quantity of
his internal Cube, is proportioned, as {powerof2}27 unto an unity.

The 26 theoreme.
Octaedron is proportioned to his inscribed tetraedron, as 13 unto 1.

The 27 theoreme.
Octaedron to his inscribed Cube retayneth double the Proportion of their
sides.

The 28 theoreme.
Octaedrons external tetraedron to his internal tetraedron, retayneth triple
the proportion of their sides that is 27 unto 1

The 29 theoreme.
Octaedrons circumscribing Cube to his inscribed Cube, retayneth double the
proportion of the comprehending Cubes Diameter to the internal Cubes side.

The 30 theoreme.
Octaedrons comprehending Dodecaedron to his included Icosaedron, bears such
Proportion as the square of a cord Trigonal does to the greater part of a
Pentagonal cords square (of one Circle) divided by extreme and mean
Proportion.

Of Icosaedron.
The 31 Theoreme.
ICosaedrons comprehending Tetraedrons superficies contains the superficies
of his internal Tetraedron 9 times.

The 32 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons containing Hexaedrons superficies to the superficies of his
contained Octaedron is proportioned as the Cubes diameter to his axis.

The.33. Theoreme.
Icosaedrons circumscribing Octaedrons superficies to the superficies of his
internal Cube, bears such proportion as 9 unto {powerof2}12.

The.34. Theoreme.
Icosaedrons comprehending Tetraedrons superficies is double to the superficies
of his comprehending Octaedron.

The.35. Theoreme.
Icosaedrons comprehending Octaedrons superficies has the same proportion to
his inscribed Tetraedrons superficies that Octaedrons lesser spheres
dimetientes square has to the square of the greater semidiameter of
Tetraedrons base.

The.36. Theoreme.
Icosaedrons comprehending Tetraedron contains his enclosed Tetraedron 27
times.

The 37 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons contained tetraedron is a third part of his contained Cube.

The.38. Theoreme.
Icosaedrons incompassing tetraedron to hi^ enclosed Cube, ^oldeth the
proportion of their diameters squares.

The 39 Theoreme.
Icosaedrons external Hexaedron contains his internal Octaedrons 6 times.

The 40 Theoreme.
The proportion of Icosaedrons solid capacity to his comprehended
Dodecaedron, is equal to the proportion of the Icosaedrons semidiameter to the
Dodecaedrons axis, and the difference (of a pentagonall diagonals proportion to
his Cord trigonall of one self same circle deducted from the proportion of
these solides diameters) joined together.

Of Dodecaedron.
The.41. Theoreme.
THe proportion of Dodecaedrons superficies to his inscribed Icosaedrons
superficies, is compounded of the proportion of Dodecaedrons basis pentagonall
diagonall, to the Cord trigonall of his containing circle, and the proportion
of dodecaedrons greater spheres semidiameter to his inscribed Icosaedroms axis.

The.42. Theoreme.
If from the proportion of Dodecaedrons external Icosaedrons greater spheres
semidiameter to Dodecaedrons axis, ye deducte the proportion between the
Dodecaedrons pentagonall basis diagonall and his containing circles cord
Trigonall, there remains the proportion of their contents superficial.

The.43. Theoreme.
The superficies of Dodecaedrons containing Icosaedron to the superficies of
his contained Icosaedron, retayneth quadruple the proportion of Dodecaedrons
comprehending spheres semidiameter to his axis.

The.44. Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons contained Cubes superficies and side, and his contained
Tetraedrons superficies and diameter, are reciprocally proportional, that is
to say, the cubes superficies retayneth the same proportion to the Tetraedrons
superficies that the Tetraedrons diameter does to the Cubes side.

The.45. Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons contained Icosaedron and Octaedron have equal superficial
quantities.

The 46 Theoreme.
The proportion of Dodecaedron to his inscribed Icosaedron is equal to the
proportion of Dodecaedrons greater spheres semidiameter to Icosaedrons axis,
and the proportion of Dodecaedrons basis diagonal line to the inscribed
Icosaedrons side.

The 47 Theoreme.
The proportion between dodecaedron and his comprehending Icosaedron, is
componed of the proportion between Icosaedrons containing spheres dimetient
and dodecaedrons internal spheres diameter, added to the proportion between
Icosaedrons side, and dodecaedrons basis line diagonall.

The 48 Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons inscribed Icosaedron to his inscribed Octaedron, retayneth suc^e
proportion, as Icosaedrons axis doubled to the diameter of Octaedrons contained
sphere.

The 49 Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons comprehended Tetraedron to his internal Hexaedron, bears the
proportion of tetraedrons contained spheres dimetient to the Cubes
comprehending spheres diameter.

The 50 Theoreme.
Dodecaedrons comprehending Icosaedron to his contained Icosaedron holds
sixefolde the proportion of his containing and contained spheres diameters.

The.25. Problem. A Metamorphosis or transformation of the five regulare
bodies.
HItherto have I only entreated of the five regulare bodies, Theorically and
practically opening sundry means to search out the proportion and quantities
of their sides, diameters, axes, perpendiculares, altitudes, and contents both
superficial and solid, and that not only in these solides considered by them
selves, but also conferred with other, as well by inscription as
circumscription, both of themselves and their spheres: so as I suppose hardely
any question may be proponed concerning these bodies, which by the form^^
problemes or theoremes may not be resolved. Yet before I finishe this Treatise
I thought good to adioyne one Chapter of the transformation of these Solides
into such bodies (as though they may not be termed regulare, for that Euclide
has demonstrate only five, and no mo possibly to be found or imagined) yet
have they such uniform composition and conuenience with th^se solides, that
they are not only environed with equilater and equiangle superficies as they
be, but also have all their sides equal, and one comprehending sphere exactly
and at once touching all their solid angles, they are also capable of the
regulare bodies, and only herein different, that whereas the regulare solides
be environed with one kind of playnenes and receive one internal sphere, and
so consequently one a^is. Their Transformed bodies are encompassed with
several kind^ of playnesse, and have several axes and contained spheres, of
which their diversity aryseth manyfolde mo strange, rare, and differente
kinds of proportions, than may in a very large volume (I will not say be
demonstrate, but only by Theoremes) be declared. Transformed regulare solydes
I call them, both to avoid the forging of new names, which I should be
enforced to use for distinction sake, and also because they seem to be created
by the vnifourme section of the regulare bodies, and may by addition of
certain proportional equal Pyramides, be reduced to the regulare solides,
and are in sundry proportions and proprieties so agreeable and resemblante to
those regulare solides, whose names they bear, that they seem only to lose
the form, and yet still to retain the nature of them. I mean not here in so
ample manner as the novelty of the matter requires to entreat of them, but
only by diffinitions and Theoremes open so much as may be sufficient to
explane the composition, form, nature, and proportion of these, and also give
light to the ingeniouse infinitely to proceed for invention of the like, whose
use and appliance may be manyfold to conclusions no less strange than
necessary: but thereof in due place for the nature of these transfourmed
solides peruse their several diffinitions and Theoremes immediately ensuing.

Of Tetraedron transformed. The first Diffinition.
TEtraedron transformed is a solid encompassed with four equal equilater
triangles, and four equal equiangle playnes Hexagonall, having equal sides
with the triangles.



The first Theoreme.
This solid has 18 equal sides, 36 plain angles, and 12 solid angles, and
may be circumscribed of a sphere as exactly as any of the forenamed regulare
bodies: the right line drawn from this spheres center to one of the solid
angles I call the transformed tetraedrons semidiameter.

The 2 theoreme.
This solid also receives two intrinsicall spheres, the lesser touching all
the centers of his hexagonall playnes, the greter touching the centers of the
trigonal playnes, and making circulare sections concentricall with the
hexagonall bases, the semidiameters of these spheres I call the solides Axes.

The 3 theoreme.
Within this solid may Octaedron be described, and his six angles shall rest
in the medieties of those his sides that are peculiare to the hexagonall
playnes and not common both to the hexagonall and trigonall bases.

The 4 theoreme.
Within this solid may two Tetraedrons of differente quantity be described,
the greater having his solid angles resting in the centers of the trigonal
playnes, and the lesser has his angles situate in the hexagonall bases centers.

The 5 theoreme.
Icosaedron may within this transfigured Tetraedron be described, having his
solid angles placed in the hexagonall playnes, and four of his trigonall
bases concentricall, with those hexagonall bases wherein they are situate.

The 6 theoreme.
This solides semidiameter is equal in power to the semidiameter of his
triangulare playnes containing circle, and his greater Axis.

The 7 theoreme.
The square of this solides side deducted from the square of his semidiameter,
leueth the square of his less axis.

The 8 theoreme.
The squares of the axes deducted one from an other, the Zenzike root of the
remain is the semidiameter of the hexagonall basis concentrical circle tofore
mentioned in the second theoreme.

The 9 th^or^me.
The altitude of this transformed solid is equal to his Axes both joined
together, and bears proportion to his side, as four unto the root Zenzike
of six.

The 10 theoreme.
This solid semidiameter bears to his side the proportion of {powerof2}11 to
{powerof2}8.

The 11 theoreme
The greater axis to the lesser is proportioned as 5 unto 3.

The 12 theoreme.
The medietie of this solides altitude is equal to the semidiameter of the
concentricall circle made in the Hexagonall bases by the peripherie of the
solid^s greater internal sphere.

The 13 theoreme.
The less semidiameters of this solides hexagonoll and trigonall bases are
proportioned one to an other, as the squares of their greater semidiameters.

The 14 theoreme.
The greater diameter of this solides hexagonall basis, to the greater
dimetient of his trigonall base, is in power triple.

The 15 theoreme.
The side of this solid is equal to the side of his lesser inscribed
tetraedron, and to his greater internal tetraedrons side it retayneth such
proportion as 3 to 5.

The 16 theoreme.
This solides inscribed Octaedrons side is triple to the medietie of his
containing transfigured Tetraedrons side.

The 17 theoreme.
The side of this solides inscribed Octaedron (being by extreme and mean
proportion divided) the lesser segmentes square is half the square of the
inscribed Icosaedrons side.

The 18 theoreme.
The superficies of this transfourmed Tetraedron is equal to both the
superficies of an Octaedron and Icosaedron, having equal sides with this
solid joined together.

The 19 Theoreme.
This solides crassitude is equal unto two Pyramides, whereof the one has for
his base a triangle whose side is double to the side of this solid, and his
axis equal to the greater axis of this body, the other is an hexagonall
Pyramid, whose base is an equiangle hexagonum, having his side double to the
side of this solid, and his altitude equal to this transformed tetraedrons
lesser axis.

The 20 Theoreme.
This transfigured solid may be resolved into 23 equal tetraedrons, every of
them of equal sides unto this figure, and all joined together make his exact
^rassitude, which is proportioned to the Cube of his side, as 23 to the
quadrate root of 72.

Of the transfigured Cube. The second Diffinition.
A Transfourmed Cube is a figure geometrical environed with 6 equiangle
Octogonall and 8 equilater triangular playnes or bases, whose sides are all
equal.



The 21 Theoreme.
This figure has 36 equal sides, 72 plain angles, and 24 solid angles, it
may be encompassed of a sphere, exactly touching with his concaue peripherie
every of their solid angles, and the semidimetiente of that comprehending
sphere is called also this solides semidimetiente.

The 22 theoreme.
This transfygured body is also capable of two internal spheres, the less
touching only the centers of the Octogonall playnes, the greater both touching
exactly with his conuex circumference the triangulare bases centers, and also
cutting the playnes Octagonall describing therein concentricall circulare
sections, the semidimetientes of these spheres are the axis of the solid.

The 23 theoreme.
Within this solid may a Tetraedron be described, whose angles shall rest in
the centers of the trigonall bases.

The 24 theoreme.
Octaedron may also herein be placed, his angles resting in the centers of the
Octogonall playnes.

The 25 theoreme.
Hexaedron may likewise be inscribed by drawing straight lines conioyning all
the trigonall bases centers.

The 26 theoreme.
This transformed figure receives also Icosaedron, whose 12 solid angles are
placed in his 6 Octagonall bases, every of them receiving two of his angles.

The 27 theorome.
Dodecaedron may not exactly be within this figure described, for 12 of his
angles being situate in the 6 Octagonall bases, dividing their less
semidiameters by extreme and mean proportion, the other 8 angles will not
touch his superficies, but rest precisely in the greater Axes of this solid,
directly under the centers of the 8 trigonall playnes, uniformly and
proportionally cutting every of these forenamed greater Axes.

The 28 theoreme.
The side of this transfigured body is triple in power to the greater
semidiameter of his triangulare base, and to the less semidiametiente of that
base it is proportioned as 1 unto {powerof2}1/12.

The 29 theoreme.
The side of this transfourmed body being rational, the greater semidiameter
of his Octogonall bases is an irrational Mayor, bearing proportion to the
solides side, as {powerof2} vni. 1+{powerof2} unto an unity.

The 30 theoreme.
This solides side being rational, his Octogonall bases less semidimetiente
is an irrational Binomie, retayning such proportion to the side, as {powerof2}
v. +{powerof2}

The 31 theoreme.
This solid side being rational, his greater axis is an irrational Binomie
proportioned to the side, as {powerof2}+{powerof2} unto an unity.

The 32 theoreme.
The less Axis of this Figure is equal to the loss semidimetiente of his
Octogonall basis, and retayneth unto his side the proportion of {powerof2}+^/2
to an unity.

The 33 theoreme.
This transformed Figures side being rational, his comprehending spheres
dimetiente is an irrational Mayor, proportioned to the side, as {powerof2} v.
7+{powerof2} 32 to 1.

The 34 theoreme.
This solides contained Tetraedrons side is proportioned to the greater Axis,
as {powerof2}8/3 to an unity.

The 35 theoreme.
The side of the inscribed tetraedron is double in power to the side of the
inscribed Cube.

The 36 theoreme.
This transfigured Cubes less altitude is double in power to the side of his
inscribed Octaedron.

The 37 theoreme.
The Octogonall bases less Diameter divided by extreme and mean Proportion,
makes his greater segmente, the inscribed Icosaedrons side.

The 38 theoreme.
The side of this transformed Solid, being by extreme and mean Proportion
divided, if to the less portion ye adioyne a line in power double, that whole
line thereof resulting, is the side of the tofore mentioned inscribed
Dodecaedron.

The 39 theoreme.
The Cube of the transfigured Solides Octogonall bases lesser Diameter, has a
superficies exceeding the superficial content of all this Solides Octogonall
bases, by a superficies proportionate to the superficial quantity of his
trigonall bases, as the Cubes dimetiente to his side.

The 40 theoreme.
The Cube whose side is equal to the less altitude of the transfigured
hexaedron, excedeth in solid capacity this transformed figure, by the solid
content of an Octaedron described upon the same side with this transfygured
hexaedron.

Of Octaedron transformed. The 3 Diffinition.
A Transfigured Octaedron is a Geometrical Figure* encompassed with 14 bases,
whereof 8 are equal equiangle Hexagonall playnes, and the other 6 are equal
squares.



The 41 theoreme.
A transformed Octaedron has 36 equal sides, 72 plain angles, and 24 solid
angles, and may be enclosed with a containing sphere exactly touching all his
Angles.

The 42 theoreme.
This solid also receives two internal spheres, the one only touching all
the Hexagonall bases centers, the other both touching all the centers of the
squares* and also with his peripherie cutting the Hexagonall playnes,
delineating in the^ concentricall circles, the semidiameters of these spheres
are called the Axes.

The 43 theoreme.
Within this solid may Tetraedron be described, and his angles situate in the
centers of the Hexagonall bases.

The 44 theoreme.
This Figure also receives the Cube, with his 8 solid angles residente in the
^ ce^^ers of his Hexagonall playnes.

The 45 Theoreme.
The inscribed Octaedrons 6 solid angles rest in the 6 centers of the
Quadrate playnes.

The 46 theoreme.
This solides inscribed Icosaedron has all his Angles situate in those his 12
sides which are peculiare to the Hexagonall bases, not perticipating with the
quadrate playnes.

The 47 theoreme.
This solides side is equal to the greater semidiameter of his Hexagonal
basis, and double in power to the greater semidimetientes of his quadrate
playnes.

The 48 theoreme.
The greater dimetient of the Hexagonal basis, is equal in power to his less
diameter and side.

The 49 theoreme.
The less diameter of the Hexagonal basis, is triple in power to his less
diameter of the quadrate basis.

The 50 theoreme.
The greater Axis of this solid, is double in power to his side.

The 51 theoreme.
This solides semidimetiente, is equal in power to his less Axis, and side.

The 52 Theoreme.
The semidimetiente of the concentrical circle, is equal to the greater
semidiameter of the quadrate playnes, and the square thereof added to the
square of the less Axis produces the square of the greater.

The 53 Theoreme.
The inscribed tetraedrons side is double to the side of this transfigured
Solid.

The 54 theoreme.
The side of the inscribed Cube, is mean proportional between the side of the
inscribed tetraedron, and the side of this solid.

The 55 theoreme.
The diameter of this body is fiuefolde in power greater than the side of his
inscribed Cube.

The 56 theoreme.
This solid^s inscribed Octaedrons side, is equal to the side of his inscribed
tetraedron, and double in power to the inscribed Cubes side, or the greater
Axis, his equal.

The 57 theoreme.
If the greater diameter of this transformed Figures quadrate bases be divided
by ext^eame and mean proportion, triple the less part is the inscribed
Icosaedrons side.

The 58 Theoreme.
The side of an Octaedron transformed being rational, the right line that
matcheth in power his superficies, is an irrational called of Euclide, Potens
rationale and mediale, proportioned to the square of the side, as {powerof2} v.
{powerof2} 432+8 unto an unity.

The 59 Theoreme.
This transfigured Octaedron may intellectually be divided into 41 Pyramides
rising fro the superficies, and concurring with their tops or vertices in the
center of this Solid, whereof 8 are Hexagonall, and 6 Tetragonall, according
to the bas^s from whence they ascend, and the Hexagonall Pyramides joined
together, are triple to the Solid capacity of the tetragonall Pyramides.

The 60 theoreme.
Octaedron transformed to the Cube of his side retayneth the Proportion, of
{powerof2}28 unto an unity, and may be resolved into 24 equal Octaedrons,
having every of their sides equal to this transformed Figure.

Of the transfigured Icosaedron. The fourth Diffinition.
ICosaedron transfigured, is a solid body encompassed with 32 Equiangle and
equilater bases, whereof 20 are Hexagonall, and the other 12 Pentagonall
playnes.



The 61 theoreme.
This transformed figure has 90 equal sides, 180 plain angles, and 60
solides, one comprehending sphere inuironeth all his angles, and the
semidiameter of that sphere, is the semidimetient of this solid.

The 62 theoreme.
This solid also conceiueth two internal spheres, the one only touching all
the Hex^gonal bases centers, the other both touching all the centers of the
Pentagonall bases, and also cutting the plains Hexagonal, deliniating in them
concentrical circles, the spheres semidimetients are this solides Axes.

The 63 theoreme.
Within this body may Tetraedron be described, and his angles situate in 4 of
the Hexagonal bases centers.

The 64 theoreme.
This solides inscribed cube has his solid angles also placed in the centers
of his Hexagonal plains.

The 65 Theoreme.
Icosaedron transfigured, receives an internal Octaedron, whose solid angles
rest in the medieties of 6 such sides of his Hexagonall bases, as communicate
not with his Pentagonal playnes, but are situate Parallel, Perpendicular, and
opposite one to an other.

The 66 Theoreme.
Icosaedron may also herein be inscribed, his 12 solid angles resident in the
centers of his 12 Pentagonall bases.

The 67 theoreme.
Dod^caedron may also perfectly be described within this solid, all his solid
angles being placed in the centers of all the Hexagonall bases.

The 68 theoreme.
The side of this transformed figure being rational, his semidiameter is an
irrational Mayor, proportionate to his side, as {powerof2} universe. 3
+{powerof2}6 2^/6^ to an unity.

The 69 theoreme.
The greater semidimetient of the Hexagonal bases, is equal to the side of this
transfigured body, and to the greater semidiameter of the Pentagonal plains,
it bears proportion as 1 unto {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}1/20.

The 70 theoreme.
The less semidimetients of these Pentagonal and Hexagonal bases, are
proportionate, as {powerof2} v. +{powerof2}4/45 unto an unity.

The 71 Theoreme.
This transfigured solides side being rational, his greater Axis is a Binomye
proportioned to the side, as {powerof2} v. 3 +{powerof2}1681/320 unto an unity.

The 72 theoreme.
The side of this solid being rational, his lesser axis is also a Binomye, and
to the side proportionate as {powerof2} v. 21/8+{powerof2}405/64 unto an unity.

The 73 theoreme.
The greater axis in power exceeds the lesser, by the semidimetient of the
concentrical circle, which retains the same proportion to the side of this
tra^sformed solid, that {powerof2} v. -- {powerof2}1/26 does unto an unity,
and it is the greater part of this solides Pentagonal bases semidiameter,
divided by extreme and mean proportion.

The 74 theoreme.
This transformed figures inscribed Tetraedrons side, is double in power to the
side of the inscribed cube, and to the side of this solid, it bears the
proportion of {powerof2} v. 7+{powerof2}45 unto 1.

The 75 theoreme.
The side of Octaedron described within a transformed Icosaedron, whose side is
rational, shall be a Binomye proportional to the rational side, as {powerof2}
vniu. 6 +{powerof2}405/16 to 1.

The 76 theoreme.
This transformed figures side being rational, his inscribed Icosaedrons side
is an irrational Binomye, retaining such proportion to this transformed solides
side, as triple his greater altitude to the diameter of his comprehending
Icosaedron, that is as {powerof2} v. 4 +{powerof2}3 to an unity.

The 77 theoreme.
The side of a Dodecaedron described within this transfigured Icosaedron, being
divided by extreme and mean proportion, makes his greater part this
transformed solides side, and is proportioned thereunto, as {powerof2} v.
3/2+{powerof2}^/4 unto an unity.

The 78 theoreme.
The superficies of this transformed Icosaedron, is equal to the superficial
capacities of one Dodecaedron, and 6 Icosaedrons, having their sides all equal
to the side of this transformed figure.

The 79 theoreme.
The superficies of a transfigured Icosaedron, is equal to the superficial
capacity of a dodecaedron and an Octraedron of equal sides to this solid, and
the superficies of such a transformed Tetraedron, as has a side equal to
both the sides of those two bodies joined together.

The 80 theoreme.
A transfigured Icosaedron may be resolved into 12 Pentagonal and 20 hexagonal
Pyramides, concurring with their tops or vertices all in the centers of this
transformed body, and their bases the Pentagonal and Hexagonal equiangle
superficies tofore mentioned in the diffinition of this solid. The 12
Pentagonal Pyramides crassitude, to a Dodecaedron created upon this
transfigured solides side, is proportioned, as his greater axis, to that line,
whose greater segment is this Pentagonal basis less semidimetient. And the
crassitude of the other 20 Hexagonal Pyramides, is of this transfigured solides
containing Icosaedron.

Of Dodecaedron transformed. The fifthe Diffinition.
A Transformed Dodecaedren is a massy or solid figure, comprehended of 12
equiangle decagonal, and 20 equilater triangular bases.



The 81 Theoreme.
A transfigured Dodecaedron has 90 equal sides, 180 plain Angles, and ^0
solid Angles, comprehended of one sphere, with his concaue Peripherie touching
all those angles, whose semidimetient is the semidiameter of this transformed
solid.

The 82 Theoreme.
This transformed figure has two internal sphere^, the greater with his
conuex superficies touching all the trigonall bases centers, and cutting the
bases or playnes Decagonall, describing in them concentricall circles, the
less sphere only touches all the Decagonall bases centers resting wholly
within this solid, and the semidimetientes of these spheres are called the
Axes of this transformed figure.

The 83 theoreme.
This transfigurate body receives an internal Tetraedron, whose solid angles
rest in the centers of his trigonall bases.

The 84 theoreme.
Hexaedron may also within this body be described, his angles likewise
remaining in the Trigonall bases centers.

The 85 theoreme.
Within a transfigured Dodecaedron may an Octaedron be framed, and his angles
will be resident in the medieties of those his sides that be peculiar to the
Decagonall, not communicating with the trigonall bases, but opposite, parallel,
and Orthogonal, one to an other.

The 86 theoreme.
Icosaedron within this transfigurate body may be described, and all his 12
angles in the centers of his 12 Decagonal bases situate.

The 87 theoreme.
Dodecaedron may also within this transfigurate body be described, all his 20
solid angles placed in the 20 trigonal bases centers.

The 88 theoreme.
This solides semidiameter is equal in power to his less Axis, and the greater
semidiameter of his Decagonal bases.

The 89 theoreme.
The side of this solid being rational, his Decagonall bases less
semidiameter is an irrational Mayor, proportioned to the greater semidimetient
of the same bases, as {powerof2} v. 5/4+{powerof2}5/4 unto {powerof2} v. 1
+{powerof2}1.

The 90 theoreme.
The side of this transfigurate body, is triple in power to the greater
semidiameter of his trigonall bases, and to the less semidimetient of the same
bases, it is proportioned, as the Diameter of a Cube to his Axis.

The 91 theoreme.
The dimetient of this solid, is equal in power to these three, his side, his
less altitude, and the lesser diameter of his decagonall bases.

The 92 theoreme.
The square of this solides greater axis, added to the third part of his
sides square, makes the square of his semidimetient.

The 93 theoreme.
The square of the less altitude of this solid, deducted from the square of
the greater, leaves the square decagonall basis concentricall circles diameter.

The 94 theoreme.
Twenty direct or upright equ^later triangular Pyramides may upon these
solides 20 triangular bases of s^tch al^^tude be erected, and to this solid in
such sort adjoined, that the wh^^e body thereof resulting, shall be a
dodecaedron: whose side conteyneth in power fiu^fold the side of this
transformed figure.

The 95 theoreme.
Every of these adjoined Pyramides sides, are equal to the greater portion of
this transfigured dodecaedrons side, divided by extreme and mean proportion.

The 96 theoreme.
The square of this transfourmed figures trigonall bases greater semidimetient,
deducted from the square of his sides greater portion divided by extreme and
mean proportion, leaves the square of his adjoined Pyramides altitude.

The 97 theoreme.
The greater altitude of this solid, is equal in power to the sides of his
inscribed cube, and tetraedron, and if the power thereof be divided in two lines
retayning the proportion of a line divided by extreme and mean proportion to
his less part, the lesser of these lines is this transfigured solides
inscribed Dodecaedrons side.

The 98 theoreme.
This transformed Dodecaedrons inscribed Octaedrons dimetient, is equal in
power to the inscribed Icosaedrons diameter, and the less dimetient of his
decagonall bases, and the power of the less altitude of this solid, (being
divided in two right lines retaynyng extreme and mean proportion) the lesser
of those lines is the inscribed Icosaedrons side.

The 99 theoreme.
The superficies of a transfigured Dodecaedron does exceed the superficies of
an Icosaedron made upon this transformed solides side, by the superficies of
^n equiangle Decagonum, whose side retains the same proportion to the side of
this solid, that the side does to his Triangular bases lesser semidiameter,
and the superficies of all this solides Decagonal bases, to the superficies of
all his Trigonal bases, retains the proportion of his decagonal basis lesser
diameter, to the semidimetient of his trigonall bases contained circle.

The 100 Theoreme.
A transformed Dodecaedron may be resolved into 32 Pyramides, rising from his
equilater bases, and concurring with their tops or Vertices at his Center,
whereof 12 are Decagonal, and 20 Trigonal, according to the bases from whence
they rise, and the proportion of all the decagonal Pyramides crassitude, to the
solid content of all the trigonal, is compounded of the proportion between
the Decagonal basis less diameter, and the trigonal basis semidiameter, added
to the proportion of the less altitude to the greater.

Theoremes of these transformed bodies conserred both with their
circumscribing regular bodies, and also betvveene them selves.
The 1 theoreme.
THe square of a tra^sformed tetraedrons diameter, added to 8 times the square
of his side, produces the square of his comprehending tetraedrons diameter.

The 2 theoreme.
The superficies of a transfigured Tetraedron, is proportioned to the
superficies of his comprehending Tetraedron, as 7 to 9.

The 3 Theoreme.
If the side of a transformed Octaedron, to the side of a transfigured
Tetraedron, retain the proportion of {powerof2} 7 unto {powerof2} 12, then is
the superficial capacity of the transformed Octaedrons Hexagonal playnes,
equal to the whole superficies of Tetraedron transformate.

The 4 Theoreme.
The solid capacity of a transformed Tetraedron, to his circumscribing
Tetraedron, holds the proportion of 23 unto 27.

The 5 Theoreme.
The solid quantity of a transfigured Tetraedron, to the content solid of a
transfigurate Octaedron framed on the same side, is proportioned as 23 to 96.

The 6 Theoreme.
Hexaedron transformed, may of a cube be circu^scribed, and his side deducted
from the cubes side, leaves a line double in power to the transformed
Hexaed^o^s side.

The 7 Theoreme.
If ye adioyne {powerof2} of a tra^sfigured Hexaedrons side unto his greater
Axis, the product is the semidimetient of his containing cube.

The 8 Theoreme.
The containing cubes superficies, exceeds the content superficial of his
inscribed transformed Hexaedrons Octogonal bases, by the square of a line
retaining such proportion to the transfigured solides side, as a Cubes
diameter, to the greater semidimetient of his quadrate bases.

The 9 Theoreme.
A transfigured cube, with four Tetraedrons made on his side, are equal to the
crassitude of his comprehending Hexaedron.

The 10 theoreme.
A transformed Tetraedron, and transfigured Hexaedron of equal sides, have the
differenees between their crassitudes and the solid capacities of their
comprehending regular bodies equal.

The 11 theoreme.
A transfigured Octaedron, may within an Octaedron be described, and the
dimetient of that containing Octaedron to the side of the transformed body,
retains the same proportion, that the side of a transfigured cube does to
the default or difference between his greater Axis, and the semidimetient of
his comprehending Hexaedron.

The 12 theoreme.
A transformed Octaedron, and a transformed Tetraedron having equal sides,
their comprehending regular solides sides are equal also, and their superficial
quantities in double proportion.

The 13 theoreme.
Octaedrons superficies, does surmeunt the content superficial of his inscribed
Octaedron transfigured by the difference of an equiangle Hexagonum, (whose side
is double to the transformed solides side) from the square of the same
transfigured solides less altitude.

The 14 theoreme.
If two mean proportional lines be found between the sides of Octaedron
tra^sformed, and his circumscribed regular body the Octaedron having to side
the less of those mean proportional lines, deducted from the crassitude of
the containing Octaedron, leaves the solid quantity of the transfigured
body.

The 15 theoreme.
If two mean proportional lines be found between the side of a comprehe^ding
Octaedron, and the greater Axis of his inscribed transfigured Octaedron, and
likewise two other mean proportionals between the inscri^^d transformed
solides side and his quadrate bases greater diameter: A cube h^^yng for ^his
side the greater of the former two mean proportional lines, is equal to the
circumscribing Octaedron. And if from that cube ye deduct a cube, having his
side the lesser of the latter mean proportionals, the residue or remaining
quantity, is the crassitude of the inscribed transfigured octaedron.

The 16 theoreme.
Icosaedron transformed may be enclosed with an Icosaedron, and all the 180
plain angles of the transfigured body, concurring and resting in the 30 sides
of the containing Icosaedron, whose side is triple to the side of the contained
transfourmed body.

The 17 theoreme.
The semidimetient of the comprehending Icosaedron is equal in power to the
lesser axis, and a mean proportional between the transfigured body, and his
containing Icosaedrons sides.

The 18 theoreme.
The greater diameter of a transfigured Icosaedrons pentagonall basis, divided
by extreme and mean proportion, and the greater part adjoined to his greater
altitude, produces his comprehending Icosaedrons dimetient.

The 19 theoreme.
The superficies of an Icosaedron surmounteth the superficial quantity of all
his inscribed transfigurate Icosaedrons hexagonall playnes, by a superficies
retayning such proportion to the superficial capacity of all his pentagonal
playnes, as the less d^met^ent of the comprehending Icosaedrons basis does to
the less diameter of the transformed solides pentagonall basis.

The 20 theoreme.
Two such lines being found, that the first be to a transfigured Icosaedrons
side double, and the second line equal to the greater segment of this
transfourmed Icosaedrons pentagonall basis greater semidiameter parted by
extreme and mean proportion, a pentilater Prisma, having for his altitude this
second ly^e, and for the side of his pentagonall equiangle basis the first
line, shall be equal to the excess or difference of the containing Icosaedron
above the crassitude of his inscribed transfigured Icosaedron.

The 21 theoreme.
Dodecaedron transfigured, may of a regular Dodecaedron be circumscribed,
whose side being divided in two lines reteyning double extreme and mean
proportion, if from the greater ye deducte the lesser, the remain is the side
of the inscribed transfigured Dodecaedron.

The 22 theoreme.
The side of Dodecaedron transformed, being subtracted from the side of his
comprehending regular Dodecaedron, and from the square of that remaynes
medietie again deducting one third part of the square of the transfigured
Solides side, there remains a superficies, whose quadrate root or line
matching it in power, added to the greater Axis of the transfigured body,
makes the semidimetient of his comprehending regular Dodecaedron.

The 23 theoreme.
The superficial content of all transformed Dodecaedrons Decagonall bases, to
the superficial capacity of all his trigonal plains, retains such
proportion as the less Diameter of the Decagonal bases, to the less
semidimetient of his Triangular bases, and if unto the Perpendicular of the
Triangular bases ye adioyne triple the Decagonall bases lesser dimetient. The
square whose side is mean proportional between that resulting line, and the
circuit or Perimetrie of one Decagonall base, is equal to the universal
superficies of the transfigured Dodecaedron.

The 24 theoreme.
The superficies of a comprehending regular Dodecaedron, surmounteth the
superficial quantity of all his contained transfigurate Dodecaedrons decagonal
bases, by a superficies, retaining the same proportion to the superficial
content of all his trigonall plains, that the lesser of two such right lines
retaining double extreme and mean proportion (as joined together make the
lesser part of the comprehe^ding Dodecaedrons Pentagonal Perpendicular divided
by extreme and mean proportion) does unto the less semidiameter of the
transformate Dodecaedrons trigonall bases.

The 25 Theoreme.
A transformed Dodecaedrons comprehending Dodecaedrons diameter, being into two
right lines retaining quadruple extreme and mean proportion divided, and the
lesser of them again into two lines retaining double extreme and mean
proportion parted: A trigonall Pyramid, having for his equilater triangular
bases side, a line double to the transfigured Dodecaedrons side, and his
altitude fiuefoulde the less line produced by the latter section of the
Dodecaedrons diameters lesser part, shall be equal to the excess or difference,
whereby the containing regular Dodecaedron, surmounteth the solid capacity of
his inscribed transfigurate Dodecaedron.

The end of this Mathematical discourse of the Platonicall regular Solides,
and their Metamorphosis compiled and invented by Thomas Digges Gentleman. ANNO
AET. 25.
DIFFICILIA QVAE PVLCHRA.
HIS DEDIT FVNDAMINA VIRTUES.


Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightriders streat, at
the sign of the Mermaid.

ANNO DOMINI. 1571.


