AN EPITOME OF THE WORLDS WOE, Wherein is perspicuously discovered; the
lamentable miseries of the World, in these tempestuous times, the infidelity
of fained friends, and the fickleness of deceitefull fortune.

Continued by way of Meditation and Resolution.

By GEO. DICHANTE, Gent.

pante n thale kako plomen. All we (poor Mortals) wade against our will,
In waves of woe, and Seas of surging ill.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, and Richard Cotes, 1630

THE VVOE OF THE WORLD.
HEauen's high director, and Olympus King,
Whose power does guide, and govern every thing
Whose blessed bounty does extend to all,
Whose wealth supplies each want in general.
Supply my wants, Great God! thou map of meekness,
And let thy power be perfect in my weakness:
Oh help me to divulge, in these weak times,
The vainness, and vexation of these times.
Inspire my Muse, she truly may explain,
The woes that in this wicked world do reign:
For at the Altar of thy holy Will,
My Muse does offer up her Incense still:
And all the faculties remain in me
I will address and consecrate to thee.
It Is in thy power to rectify each wrong,
Oh guide me then, and go with me along:
Grant what I write, within this tedious story
May to all is good redound, and to thy Glory.
Since that same season wherein I was borne,
(By sin original) a wretch forlorn:
These eyes and ears of mine have known (though young)
Woes; cannot be expressed by pen, nor tongue.
For I protest (yet many think not so)
I have been witness to a world of Woe.
Near in my life as yet that I could tell;
One entire day remaind I perfect well.
But various passions, still were represented,
Sometimes well-pleased, straightway male-contented
Sometimes fresh joy, did over joy my heart;
Anon I was possessed with pangs of smart:
And when some ouerflowe of fickle Fate,
Had filled my bodies banks with bliss or State,
The ebb of that within a little space,
Has left me in a worse, and weaker case:
And seeing thus my joys to ebb and flow,
With lofty Surges first, and then sink low.
Leaving the top-full banks of bliss all dry,
Oh what a wicked world is here (thought I)
Where nothing's firm, but all I here epsy,
Of sublunary Subjects, live to die.
What mortal then, that with the eye of wit?
Descends into the world, but sees that it,
Contains little that is good within,
For it is a nurse of vice, a sink of sin:
A Laborinth of labor, gins, and guiles:
A sack of sorrows, wickedness and wiles.
And In my self though all these woes I see,
(...) s^^ll as me
Each man a little world contains within,
A true compendium of the great worlds sin:
Where Reason as the Princess highest sits,
In the bedchamber of the Bodies wits,
The Senses are Attendants on the Court,
Without whose aid naught passes through the port.
The supreme powers, as Memory and Will,
They are the Peers, retaining good or ill:
The Parts exterior, and interne Affections
Are Commons that rely o'th Peers protection.
Then violent Passions that (there) will not cease
Are base Disturbers of the Common peace.
And as one Passion is another door
Wherein may enter more and more:
So restless Woes continually make room,
Whereby another Woe may likewise come;
Which dumps and dolors do so terrify me,
And sors my senses, that no joy comes nigh me:
For the great griefs, that gaul me every day,
Surpriz^ my comfort, bannish bliss away.
I am no Stoicke that no passions love,
Whose minds at neither mirth nor sorrow move:
These Stock conceits do truly represent,
The overthrow of inward government.
But as a Christian heart my God me gave,
So I'^^ take care to order all I have.
Then tell, what mortal ever yet could say,
His joy was constant st^ll a complete day:
Yet true it is that many men have spent,
(...)
But constantly if it endured a day,
And was not cracked by sorrow near away:
That grief and joy so long has kept a sunder,
I will record it for a worldly wonder.
No, no, the world is merely all but vain,
And her best pleasures turn to bitter pain:
For though joy tarry strangely for an hour,
It Is soon consumed by care, and sorrow sour.
Whence I extract (which every one says plain)
That pleasures period, is a pass to pain;
That joy and gladness take their turns about,
And when the one is in, the others out.
So that in neither, there is a stable station,
But when its sorrows Term, it is joys Vacation.
The Poets feign, there was betwixt those two,
A great dissension, and a deal to do;
Which twix't them selves could not he pacified,
But they must go to Jupiter to tried,
And he all means, and motions too did try,
The variant to reduce to amity.
But when he fee his pains had fruitless proou'd,
And that their malice could not be remoou'd:
To venge himself, and curb these solmne sots,
He bound them in, indissoluble knots;
And chan'd them fast, withal decreed so,
These two inseperate for ere should go.
Then it is no wonder that they do surprise
Men in this manner with their miseries:
For every man has sure his turn of sorrow,
f glad to day, he is sure of grief to morrow.
So thus is mankind with their mischeefes crossed,
One day pays dolor, that another lost:
I never yet with any did remain,
But ever he of something did complain.
If Rich, then to augment his state and store,
He would take care to scrape and gape for more;
If poor and nipt with pinching pennurie,
He then must care to ease his misery.
When Solomon the Mirror of true wit,
Had all experience man could have of it;
And for his pleasure Orchards daily planted,
Made fish ponds, craved naught, but it was granted.
Had men and women-seruants borne and breed,
within his house, and there were nourished:
Had stately buildings, costly gemmes and things,
As presents sent from Emperors and Kings.
Bdellium, Ophir gold, all kind of wood,
Gold, Silver, Frankincense, and all was good:
Nay to be brief, all solace he had sent,
Could please the eye, or give the heart content;
Yet did he deeply (lothing them) complain,
And said, The world and all is vain.
So let men give their hearts to glut in pleasures,
To hoord up Riches, Jewels, Gems, and treasures:
Yet in the end with him they will complain,
And truly say, The world and all is vain.
But discontent and hunting still for more,
Not satisfied with good enough before:
Men fast pursue to be of all possessed,
And till their race be run can never rest.
Which woe indures and the furies fell,
Makes us think earth to be a second hell.
Then cannot this be mended? yes, in store,
God has laid up a Salve for every sore:
And the best Medicine that I find is this
If any in his Baine would look for bless:
When woe and sorrow come, I do not care for it
Because before it come I am prepared for it:
And when it is come (for to digest the smart)
I Will freely welcome woe with all my heart;
But when it goes (it is bitterness to quell
I look for it more and bid but half, Farewell.
So that in Mirth I maladies do fear;
And in my care I know that comfort's near.
Oh that my eyes could shed a sea of Tears
For to lament our unlamented years;
Or could but with my weak and weary strain
Beat all these mischiefs into Mortals buaine:
Then sure some veiwing of its Misery
Would cast all care aside, and learn to dye;
Leave of all worldly love, make preparation,
As here he had but one hours habitation.
I do not care (my Mind was never such)
Whether I be endowed with little or much;
If little, my account shall be but small,
How I Have disposed of this little all:
If much (no Avarice against me has stood,
But I may grant it to the needies good.
And for my part I will confess that I,
Am very young yet old enough to die.
If that the destinies had decreed it so,
I had been well content that gate to go:
Then had I been secure from sinning more,
And past the peril of the pikes before.
But since it stands thus with his holy pleasure,
That to repent, I have the times leisure:
My Times, at all times like a careful man,
I Will make the best use of it that I can.
But as for Fortune and all worldly care,
That daily on this world do make repair,
I Have such an Antidote laid up in store,
As that her horns shall never hurt me more:
For Patience shall arm my body still,
To bear the burden of her good or ill.
My mind shall meditate on that always,
That prudent Pompey used often to say:
My friends (quoth he) we have but little cause,
To trust Fates flatterings, and vain applause:
For by experience I have proved it true,
(My former state I know was known to you)
How the Imperial Rule I once did gain,
Before I looked for or ere wished the same;
And on a sudden every one might see
It Was snarcht away, and taken quite from me.
When I a Mighty Monarch reigned in Rome,
Secure (as then I dreamd) from Care to come;
And climing to attain the top of all,
I was deposed, and cought this feate full fall.
So Senecca (when banished from Rome,
(...)
Unto his mother Altine wrote a letter,
That she might bear his banishment the better.
(Mother said he) I n'ere gave credit to,
Or trusted Fortunes slimme and subtle show
Although 'twixt me and her did often grow,
Great friendlinesse, 'twas filled with fraud I know.
For when she did consent to ought I did,
If any peace or praise in it lay hid:
I knew she did not pity me at all,
But raised me high, to take the greater fall.
So by her liberality what is sent,
Riches, or Honor, I account them lent.
All promises that she does proffer me,
The pleasures, wealth, or what prosperity,
I lay it by within my house by it self,
Looking each hour to lose that lastlesse pelf.
And it does n'ere my mind at all affright,
Whether she take it away by day or night:
I Will n'ere lament nor wander still in woe,
But as it came, I Will freely let it go.
Whence this we see, the prudent and the wise.
Will not presume still on good happ to rise:
Nor all her fickleness esteem a hair,
Because before a change they do prepare.
Yet if I might elect I Would rather buy
Her Amity, then woeful Enmity;
And when I Have lost wherewith she did relieve me,
Then let her take it, it shall never grieve me.
Let her take all I have, burned in the fire,
And give it to some monster, or a man,
Use all extremities she will or can;
Yet shall not this, nay nor a further smart,
Produce a sigh, or ever grieve my heart.
We read that Philip Macedon likewise,
When he heard tell of three great victories:
Straight kneeled down with folded palms to the skies
And unto heaven lifting up his eyes
Vtter'd these words; Oh cruel Fates (quoth he)
And gracious, gods, after prosperity
I humbly pray you you will be content
To moderate my future chastisement:
And let it not be a sad introduction.
Of my great ruin, or my dire destruction:
For I am certain, that such flows are vain,
And after pleasure will ensue my pain.
All which examples, truly should be noted
And in our memories well writ and quoted:
That midditating on them we may know,
How little trust to fortune we do owe:
How much we have to trust the flattering strife,
And fawning happinesses of this life;
For we not taking heed of after claps.
Fall unawares in number of mishaps.
Yea, if it fortune that some time we find,
Pleasures, and great contentments to our mind:
Then pain his penalty, for pleasure doubles,
And us over whelmeth, in a gulf of troubles.
So like right worldlings, thinking for to hold,
Our (...)
In spite of Fortune and her nimble lets,
We Are trapt and toyled in misfortunes Nets:
Such is our folly, when we having got,
Some bauins blaze of bliss, or little lot:
Our Wits by much presuming on that fate,
Are c^ptiuate and drowned in self conceit.
So we become (by running thus astray)
(To froward Fortune, and ill hap) a pray.
O traitorous world, which for a little space,
Do flatter fawn, and smile on us apace;
And quickly in the twinkling of an eye,
Bereaues us of our joys and dignity:
Thou give us occasion to be glad,
And after makes us doleful, heavy, sad.
Now thou aduances, and extols us hie,
Then throws us down, and makes us lowly lie.
But oh base world, how can we escape thy gins?
Or living here extenuate our sins.
For why, the more thou knows a man is glorious
And by's aspiring seeks to be notorious;
To fit his chaps for him thou do provide,
Riches, Honor, and many things beside:
As Beauteous Women, I and dainty fare,
That he may surfeit on them wtthout care.
But after all these wished joys, and pleasures,
Great dignities, and many precious Treasures;
Even as a bate is for the Fishes set,
So are we taken in vain pleasures net.
But as for worldly and these tough Temptations)
(Presented to us for our just probations)
They make us thinkt, impossible ere Fate,
Should Metamorphose such a settled State:
Which hardens us in them to take delight.
And practice naught but pleasures day and night.
Yet I would have one that is affectionate
Unto the worldly pleasures, pomp, and state,
Or loves it most, To tell me by his wit
What recompenses, or what benefit
After the world deceiues them, they can reap;
Naught but Laments, and for their lust to weep,
I Have known great dolors, grief, and lamentations,
In many houses, where is been exultations,
And many joys before, in worldly state,
That have their loss lamented too too late.
But think, the world rewards us still with evil,
And ruins good things like a demy-deuill:
It Is Virtues Tyrant, enemy to peace,
For base commotions never in it will cease:
Errors maintainer, and a friend to wars,
This Soldiers testify, when scourged with skarres:
A grave of ignorance, a field of folly,
That shows us mirth, yet stored with melancholy,
Cursed Cares Charibdes, and a dangerous deep,
Wherein the godly many crosses reap:
A very Scilla wherein our desires,
Do also perish with vain lucres fires.
For the base vulger makes no account of them,
That merit well, or sprung of Noble Stem:
But those that can support and maintain pleasures,
And only wade in wealth and ^^^da^ie treasures
When these bereft of living and of state,
Do curse their birthday, and the faith of fate.
Yet still the base brood, cast a semblance sour,
Upon good qualities, if they be poor:
When they fond clues, his outside only see,
And brave apparel, without honesty:
But care not for all qualities a pin,
Nor the sweet gifts that he retains within.
When the best Clearkes, did often on it vant,
And banished Opulence to line in want:
As Bias carried all his wealth about,
And dogged Diogenes lay in's Tub without;
Poor Irus, Codrus, and a many more,
That sought things firm, and let the fickle go.
For plain experience let these learned see,
Want is the Mistress of Philosophy.
Their skill and learning told them this for sure,
That riches and preferment would not dure;
But virtues luster lasts during breath,
And makes our name Immortal after death.
This should be apprehended of the wise,
Though they seem sordid in the vulgers eyes.
Their judgments fallible, and comes not near,
The true insight, but judge as things appear;
When wisdom always does of things take heed,
Not as they seem, but as they be indeed.
So still the noble strive for to surmount,
The Pedants censure and the vulgers count.
For when the brittle state of things they see,
And wh^^ s^^ll ^old (...)
They cleave to that, which brings perpetual gain,
And makes men without ruin long to reign;
But not of riches, friends, or lands to boast,
That long a gathering are, and soon are lost:
Nor great ones loves, for like the Scithian flower,
Their favors fade, or flourish in an hour.
Did not Egyptian Ptholomie affect,
Ewsenides with honor and respect:
That what he spoke (though he proved but a Daw)
It was reputed for a lasting law:
Instal'd in offices, and finally,
He waxt most opulent, and proud thereby;
Rejoicing greatly in his happy fate,
He boastingly one time said to his mate.
The King no more can attribute to me,
Then the sole rule of all his Monarchy:
Who answered (Sir) be not deceived, think how
The Fate that gau't, can take it again from you;
And that would prove (to your eternal strife)
The saddest day you ere had in your life.
Short after Ptholomie did him epsy,
Talking with women very wantonly
Whom he affected; Ptolomia anon,
Caused all the women poison drink upon:
Ber^ft Ewsenides of all is estate,
And lastly hanged him on the Portall gate.
So by Senerus, Plancina was promoted,
Till in his too much dignity he doted:
For checking of his Princes eldest son,
(...)
Then Commodus his man Cleander loved,
Whose love a long time, could not be remoou'd,
For he was wise, yet auarous and greedy,
(And often times these prove but little speedy.)
For when the Soldiers with a warrant came,
To ask their pay, he did deny the same
Though sealed with the Signet of the King.
And when the Soldiers did relate the thing,
For contradiction of the Kings command,
He hastily was hanged out of hand;
His goods confiscate, and his noble name,
Together with his life, did end in shame.
Constantius to Hortensius had a favor,
And dearly loved him for his good behavior:
As one, on whom relied his chief protection,
All his affairs were done by his direction.
Yet when the King received intelligence,
He was the Auth^r of a foul offense
Did touch his person; straight way for the deed,
He was adjudged for to lose his head.
Nay and a number I could mention here,
Who in great love and estimation were:
Yet for such triuiall faults were done to death,
And all their blessings blasted with their breath.
Great Alexander in his angry mood,
Slew Carterus, and basely shed his blood.
Though Cincinnatus was Bittillons friend,
Yet was Bittilion, Cincinnatus end:
So in men's favors there is no constancy,
For changes come ith ^^i^^ling of an eye
And if from ancient Stories we descend,
To modern acts, and mark the timelesse end
Of Favorites, here I truly might infold,
More presidents, then all this book can hold.
These represent to our meditations,
Lively illustrate, this worlds alterations:
And that there is no minute, hour, nor day,
But Woe and Gladness, alter still their stay:
For which sage Solons speeches I commend,
And say, No man is happy, till his end.
Another grief to make my woe amends,
Does torture me, and that is faithless friends:
Who when they see some poor sinister puff
Of Fate, assault a friend; Oh! that's enough,
And causes good they have, then to reject him,
Leave him to help himself they will not respect him.
Some of this stamp I have, but sure not many,
But of that crew I wish I had not any.
For in a little trial, I have found,
Their bounties backward, and their hearts hide-bound,
When friends affliction, puts them to the touch,
Then little help, or heart is shown from such.
Yet far be it, our consanguinitie,
Should with unnatural affinity,
Be cloyed thus, though some there be that's ill,
Yet I have others, that prove honest still:
And for their parts, thus much I Will boldly say,
For no adversity they will turn away.
But for the first, all goodness does forsake them,
Whom God amend or (...)
For as their hearts are hardened to do ill,
So are their hands to propagate their will;
Their infamy and names I might have noted,
And all their malice in the margent quoted:
But for my present ease, I will forbear,
And press them in another place then here.
They are forwarned now, and I protest,
Though they escape hanging yet they shall be pressed.
For he indeed ought to be termed a friend,
whose love and aid last firm unto the end:
That willingly does offer with his heart,
Of a poor penny to his friend a part;
And willingly supplies what he does lack,
Meat for his mouth, and clothing for his back:
Does succor him before he asks aid,
And's fixed to him when all others fade.
For this is true (none dare I think deny it)
To beg a thing of friendship is to buy it:
And such as in men's miseries forsake them,
They Are monsters made of men, what can you make them.
For while that happy fortune does in sue
Friends grow, then reckon them, you will find enough.
There Is goodman get-all, and my neighbor Jane,
Must needs be sent for unto gracious Lane:
She Is very honest, and I mean to meet
Her (as she promis't me) in Gracious street:
But lauisht out, and you shall see this rag-taile,
Where there no Gold-Finch is, will prove a Wagtaile
Then goodman get-all, and long Jane the Jade,
Will cur^e your poverty like mistrisse Blade.
And they are Jews that have a friend indeed
Endued with virtues, though he be in need,
And do restrain their hands, and then forsake him,
When as their furtherance might mar or make him.
For can a man, that truly is possessed,
Of virtuous ornaments within his breast?
Can he I say long want, or stand in need,
Though for a time his hopes be buried?
No, he will be still releeu'd, each noble heart,
(If friends unwilling prove) will soster Art.
For as the sun when some obscuring cloud,
Does in her bosom all her splendour shroud:
Though thus I say, he shroud it from our sight,
Yet can he not extenuate his light.
So when a Wise man seems to suffer need,
And cloudy want does make his virtues dead
For a small time; that broke and vanished quite,
Then does his splendour shine through's learned light:
And a true friend will never during breath,
Forsake his friend for fear of pain or death.
Nay after death he will lament the end,
Of such a loyal and a loving friend:
And in the world there is not, nor cannot be,
More perfect love (then this) and amity;
That Is, for a friend no perils to forsake,
May for the furtherance of his matters make.
This caused Plato often take his way,
From learned Athens to Sicilia:
And for no other end but look upon,
His true and trusty lover Phocion.
For of a wiseman to enjoy the sight,
The ways (though long) is short, the labor light.
Tianeus (as some Historians say,
Parted from Rome, past through all Asia:
Saild over Nilus with undaunted boldness.
Endured the blasts of Cancasus his coldness:
Waded in cold through her congealed fountains,
Suffered the heates of all the Riphean mountains;
And to no other end. but to confer,
With his Hyarchus the Philosopher.
Agesilans hearing that his friend,
In remote Countries were in the prison pend,
He set's affairs aside, and went his way,
Longing to find where his beloved lay:
Whom when he found, unto the King he went,
And him saluted with this complement.
Redoubted Roy, a friend I have, and he
Is here captiued by your Royalty;
Of his distressed case, some pity take,
And if you please, to free him for my sake;
Or give him honor, dignity, or pelf,
I take the deed as done unto my self:
And I assure you Oh most Royal King,
You cannot chastise, nor do any thing
Unto my friend, but if I hear't or see,
I feel the torment too as well as he.
Thus did the noble man, great love descrie,
Unto his friend, though in adversity;
And of all worldly pomp, riches, and pleasure,
(...)
As a true friend, to whom a man may show,
All secrets, though none but himself does know:
He may recount to him his woes and griefs,
And trustily rely on his reliefes.
In brief, he may repose (without all doubt)
To him his secrets both within and out:
For he is sure to reap this for his gains,
And be releiued in his woe and pains:
Counseld in perils and adversities,
And be reioyc'd with in prosperities.
But such a friend is rare, and hard to find,
Wherefore to choose one of an honest mind
We must be wary, his condition be,
Godly and good, and joined with honesty.
Not covetous, impatient, or unjust,
Thou may then be deceived in the trust:
Seditious factious, nor that moves strife,
Presumptuous, nor faulty in his life.
For if he be infected with those crimes,
As many be now in these latter times;
Reject him, trust him not, nor come not nie him,
And if he proffer love to thee deny him;
For none will buy a horse, or count him trim,
Unless he see him sound of wind and limme;
Nor none will bargain for pure silk or cloth,
But he will first view, that it be free from Moath,
Nor wine, until that he can truly tell;
The colour's pure, and it will relish well.
So none (that is wise) will proffer all his favor,
To any if he know not his behavior:
But with Augustus always careful be,
Whom thou admittest in thy amity.
And when true trial, does inform that he,
Is every way complete for honesty:
Then let thy heart on such a friend take hold,
Reject him not for silver nor for gold.
Fot if we will believe the Antique stories,
Wherein's recorded, many Monarchs glories,
We shall perceive, how friendship they reputed,
And how sincerely for true friends they suited.
As Alexander, Aristotle loved,
King Cyrus, Chylon that so faithful proved:
Great Ptolomie, Pithimon much affected,
And with all reverence he him respected.
Pyrrus, Satirus, August Symonides,
Traiane, Plutarchus, Scipio, Sophocles:
Which men for friendship have been much esteemed
And mirrors of good manners have been deemed:
The worlds true Worthies were they in their days,
Wherein their service meritted true praise.
But oh! this iron age which we live in,
True friends are sown thick but they come up thin.
For in these days it is difficult to know,
Whether a man by's words means well or woe.
Some Parasite, rejected punckes will praise,
And term her the true Damsel of our days;
Extol her to the hight, and tell her how
But she, there is none of any worth lives now:
Insinuating with this base intent,
To let her hear how he can complement*
Or else with her he gladly would make friends,
For's own commodity and proper ends:
But step aside, he will say she is a scab,
And to his neighbor call her scume and drab.
Thus idle heads, that so to sawne devise,
Do circumuent such with a thousand lies:
And make their promise very large and fair,
But their performance is not worth a hair;
But let the wise take heed. not to relieve them,
And when they speak most fair, the les^e believe him
Trust not fair language, many oaths not so,
But hear them for a while, than let him go.
Well now Woes tract, and Fickle faith I Have done,
Wherein a slender course my Muse has ron^e;
Which some may blame me for, when it is well scand,
As too too young to take this task in hand:
To which I answer now that even I,
Though twenty years I hardly have past by,
(Yet Iue observed) sometime that forced tears
Of woe as much as some of forty years.
Therefore grave Seniors, and you froward blood.
That grin at goodmen when they wish you good.
Excuse my weakness, if you be not coy,
To take instruction from a witless boy:
Regard a while and let there grow no grief,
That here I reckon other woes in brief.
It is a woe when men of good deserts,
Should vilipended be with mere vpstarts:
Because they want, and men that little know,
(...)
This is the world, a knave that will not lack,
A precious outside, for his Asses back,
Shall be esteemed, though the fool be mute,
Yet shall he be commended for his suite.
I grieve again when Petti-foggers be,
So au'rous no conscience they will see,
But with long Gowns, they keep their coxcombes warm,
And sell their breath for many a poor man's harm;
For bribes extol them to a high degree,
Which makes them fare so well and fat (we see.)
But let some beggar a petition make,
And pray him double, that for Christ his sake,
With a poor penny he will relieve his want;
He Will tell him straight, that pennies now are skant,
When he is more hoarded up then well he knows
How, or to whom he shall the same dispose.
They make poor Pedants often to trudge in rags,
When they can sit in silk, and fill their bags.
By vain delays, demurres, and needless clauses,
They have a trick to lengthen easy causes.
Their conscience cares not, so they have their share,
That makes them blessed, and many honest bare.
Its a condition incident to all,
That raise their fortunes by another fall:
And as in the Elephant we may discry,
(Being guilty to his own deformity)
Dare not look in the fountains clear and good,
But looks for filthy channels mixed with mudde.
So of their conscience I may moralize,
For bout their souls such base polution lies
They dare not look in them, for fear the elues,
Grow desperate, perhaps and hang themselves.
So have I seen a Patient when his wound,
Has been deep, wide, and rankled all around,
Would not permit the Surgeon to see,
Nor search his wound, so obstinate was he.
I Have likewise seen a wasting prodigal,
Has run ith books so far (by wasting all,
That by no means he could abide to hear,
The sable sum the Merchant made appear;
When it has been a proverb old and true,
Often reckning makes long friends with me and you.
But some near sum their reckonings up with God
Nor fear the ruin of his wrathful rod,
But run oath score so long, with large receipts,
They will not hear nor hearken to their debts.
When we should often sum our sins up all,
And see whereto amounts the principal:
Which while I live with care I will respect,
And then I know, what goodness to expect.
I Will fear no Audit then, nor hatch despair
Of lawful payment, when I thus prepare.
I Have wondered often, and blushed for very shame,
To read of mere Philosphers great aim,
That had no other guide but only Nature,
Yet in their manners were so ripe and mature.
They Amity embraced, and were content,
With fruits and herbs which mother Tellus sent:
Not riotous, nor loved they luxury,
None they oppressed with damned us^^^
And when a heinous crime was ere committed,
'Twas deeply punished, which no Fee remitted.
Now to invent sins we are each day beginning,
And crimes commit by custom of much sinning;
Which to portray does pass my skill and pen,
Since there is as many vices now as men.
But oh the blindness of us Christians now,
That have the Gospel read and preached too;
Yet suffer them by the dim candle light
Of nature, to excel us; though the right
We (fruitless) practice: but their lives so spent
May to us livers be a president.
The great deceites too of mechanicke men,
Which in their callings they use now and then:
Would vex a Saint, when th'honest cannot have
Their work dispatched truly for a knave.
As Tailors that to make their patings large,
Pulls of a share, and puts toth conscience charge;
For'th last apparel that I had to make,
A Tailor (that the task would undertake)
Came to me with fair language and beseeches,
And told me if pleased he would make my breeches:
I willingly assented bid him take them,
And told the manner how I Would have him make them:
These patched up (a Pox light on his nose,
He Would stole at least three quarters from my hose;
Which when I found, I did not as some do,
To fall a scolding, No, he told me how,
His workmanship did most men's works exceed,
(...)
So many of them, chiefly of that crew,
Will not say God be with you, but adieu.
At every oath they hear turns up their eye,
Hates in religion true conformity;
Leave the high street and through the corn make way
To seek new methods both to prate and pray.
This rout (for sooth) they are so holy bent,
In presence they will not swear but complement,
With congies, cringies, nay, they will keep a stir,
With truly yes, and verily (good Sir)
Use ceremonies, make a show to pray,
When'th world has not more hypocrites then they:
And prating thus they can possess an ass,
Their honesty, all honesties surpass;
For if a Nouice work to such men put,
Which he would have trimmed in the newest cut;
He Will tell him he has metaphisicke skill,
And swear to make them neatly, that he will.
He Is tractable enough, and then the clown,
Swears he does make the cheapest in the town;
And says Sir understand this by your favor
I ask but very little for my labor;
Tho others can them larger fees allow,
Nay stretch and steal a great deal more then due,
We hate the humor and these sharking elues,
That neither care for us nor for themselves;
Which is disgrace to us and to them too,
This I admire they do not shame to do:
To use dissembling in an honest trade,
But it is no matter yours shall be well made
This is the fashion of that graceful youth
That lies most, yet must make it (in tirely) truth:
And such a monster well observed of Man,
Who would not take him for a Pewter-can.
He scorns to steal, but for the rips and stitches
(Tho double paid) yet he must pinch the breeches:
For to dissemble, he 'th the exact Art,
Seems holy headed, with a hollow heart;
This they effect with many verilies,
And under truths pretenses cloak most lies.
Now if some Botcher take the same in snuff,
And face my lines out with a counter-buffe.
Say they are weak, and he does much dislike it,
Then throw't aside, or with his purse strings strike it:
Possess the Readers, that it is a toy,
For 'twas composed by a stripling boy.
Yet (Sarrah) contend not now with me to cloak your tricks,
The proverb is, none but a gauld horse kicks.
I can revenge me, but the conquest's base,
That is obtained in so vile a case,
As for the honest workmen of this land,
I gladly would have them to understand;
That I with all obsequiousness respect them,
And (being honest) heartily affect them;
For though my cloth unto my grief was gone,
I will not blame all, for the fault of one;
Nor I divulge it, to eclipse his fame,
That did the deed, for I Will obscure his name.
The Tapsters get unconscionable gain,
And for one penny often pick on twain:
They cosen strangers with half nicke and froth,
(These sookes the City, and the Country both)
Their empty halfe-fildings, and cose^ning pots,
Make poor men pay whole money for their shots;
And yet the rascal, cheates and cosens still,
For he is a trick (observe him when you will)
To fill the judge half full, bring't to the table,
And poures a glass forth as't was commendable:
For why, the villain certainly is loath,
We should perceive the pot half filled with froth.
Well, let them score, and scourge, and brag, and baule
One day will come, will make them pay for all:
And tho they think by smothering to conceal it,
He sees that once will make their carcass feel it.
The cosenning Broker is none of the least,
That most deludes; this fellow in hels-chest
Lays up his linen, cloth, wool, and lawne,
Which he for little purchased at a pawn.
They cosen Nouices, and like base Rookes,
Are happy when the honest's in their books;
For by extorted rates, they are oppressed,
And plagued by exacted interest:
And as they take in others Line or Lawne,
So to the devil they their souls do pawn:
For if the law will but their crimes allow,
They Will freely hazard soul and body too.
But penalty reformes part of their evils,
Which makes men live in peace in spite of devils.
Their grand extortions, and their wounding bills,
Summed up with fabl^ (...)
They Will either live in misery to end it,
Gr leave it to a thriftlesse heir will spend it.
But as Mechannickes use this vile deceit,
And study how to cosen, air, or late;
Leave naught (for lucre) but it is attempted,
Yet few professions are from hence exempted:
For there is no calling under Sun I see,
But it is accrewed with some falsitie.
Our Clergy they whose living should be spent,
Unto the Laymens pious president,
Are most corrupted with damned Symony,
And ignorance is placed by bribery.
This makes Sir John procure a living fat,
That scarce knows what is latin for his hat,
And like an Abbey-lubber gets the gains,
When learnder men lives poor with greater pains.
Such livings perish with their fat and honey,
That are assigned only for See-mony:
But if I were not placed by my Art,
Let then who will show-money (take my part)
For if that coin bear sway and good be gone,
I Will rest me as I am, and near seek none.
Then the loose living of the Temporal man,
Both Papist, Protestant and Puritan,
The Brownist and more I could reckon now,
(Of vpstart Sects) I Am sure near thirty two
Are in as bad, or worse predicament,
Riches, and Riots care, kills their content;
No trust is in them, for their faith I say,
With their small conscience th^^ have chaste away.
Naught now is practiced, but deceit and strife,
A man dare hardly trust his nearest wife;
The Father not the son, nor Son the Father,
Some or they'^ trust their Sire, will hang him rather;
The eldest Son, suites against his younger brother,
And neither of them dare trust one another;
Thus is all truth, good living led astray,
Affections dead, and faith is fled away:
For many now will promise swear and lie,
To do a friend, a favor by and by;
To flatter him in presence, speak him fair,
And bid him make good cheer and take no care,
For they will cure him of that careful case,
And promise mountains too before his face;
But turned aside, their special care grows slack,
And then they will wish him hanged behind his back.
Oh faithless wretches in whose hollow breasts,
No confidence, no truth, no honor rests.
Alas is all your conscience gone and pity too,
That makes it so hard to sinde a parcel now.
But if your lives did any faith afford,
You Would choose to break your neck before your word.
It is a woe when true gentility,
Should croutch to vpstarts crept from beggary:
Suite with submission to the fools for grace,
When such a one invested in a place,
Is far more haughty, and more prompt to scorn,
Then Gentlemen that nobly were borne.
The Ass will grow so curious, coy, and civil,
And set on horseback he will ride lik^ ^ ^^^ill
But let them clime so, yet, beware a fall,
They slip not back, and break their necks for all:
For I have known some full as fortunate,
That have been foiled with the premised fate.
It is a woe when wise are under rules
Of golden calves, and shallow brained fools;
Will be commanded by a rustie slave,
Fawn, flatter him, some kindness for to have;
Do good or evil, that he would have done,
Through wet, and dry, he will either ride or run.
But I admire that men of noble parts,
Indu'd with many Sciences and Arts,
So basely thus can crouch, unto a Knave,
And be officious, tho he money have;
For such observance and obsequiousness,
Make qualities contemned, loare loved the less.
Were I the man, that should be tide unto
One of these mushromes, or I Will choose to do
Such offices, or mark each puppies beck,
I Will first resolve (in faith) to break my neck,
Or to a scoundrell so obsequious be,
As come to kiss her hand, or bend my knee;
To honor her, or humor her conceit,
With vain applauses from an empty pate:
As many falsely do employ their pen,
To make a monster, King of mortal men:
And some loose living Lady to inherit,
A Paragaues true praise and proper merit.
Out on such Asse-made-Epigrammatists,
That fil^ their phrases with such filthy fists*
And make some sordid show, makes foul most fair,
Tells them of Castles (they deserve) in the air.
Indeed if that one knew a nobleman,
But these are rare as is the coale-blacke Swan)
That harbor'd honesty, complete each way,
And that no lies would either sooth or say;
What is it? but for him I would undertake,
Even wade the Sea (if need were) for his sake.
And truly (Mistress) if we list to scan
Upon your spouse, he is each way such a man
As I have mentioned; but what man can tell,
Where such another Mirror now does dwell.
Repleet with honesty, and good, and grace,
That has wits image pictured on his face:
Free from all falsities and horrid crimes,
Abandonning the baseness of these times:
The guide of godliness, the Man of Men,
Whose glories, had I but a golden pen,
I would record, and sing the same in verse,
That our successors might his worth reh^rse.
But while I live, my Muse and I will strive,
To make his honesty his life survive;
In spite of fortune and that fickle fame,
No time, nor ruin shall out raze the same:
And if my lines his true deserts can give,
In spite of death, for ever he shall live.
And so far (Reader) under thy correction,
Have I digrest to show the true affection,
And services I owe unto these two,
Which till I dye (God willing I will do*
Praying their happiness, may never wither,
But they may love, and long time live together.
And now my Muse being weary of this woe,
By ripping ruins up, tossed too and fro;
And seeing that no practice here is free,
But in some part it tastes of misery:
We Will for this time endeavor for to leave,
Such things as mentioned further would but grieve.
For had I iron voices, or brass tongues,
Briarius hands, or large extended lungs,
Or were the Sea all ink, the earth all quils,
'Twere difficult to mention all the ils,
This Microcosme includes: So I intend,
to close my Phamphlet up, and here to end.
Without end.
If I herein have er'd, I pray forgive,
As proper it is for man to err as live.
FINIS.

