a man sitting in a garden, looking to the sky and holding a book I see better.

Contemplations Sighs and Groans of A Christian

I follow worse.



London printed for William Lee and are to be sold at the Turks head in fleet
street 1640.

CONTEMPLATIONS, SIGHS, and GROANS of a Christian.

Written in Latin, By JOHN MICHAEL DILHERRUS.

And Englished by WILLIAM STYLE of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at the
Great Turks Head, next to the Mitre Tavern in Fleet Street. 1640.

The Authors Dedication.
TO THEE O JESUS CHRIST, Son of the living God, and borne of the Virgin Mary,
Lord of the living and of the dead, Do I with Tears and Groans, Give,
Dedicate, and Consecrate These my CONTEMPLATIONS and SIGHS: And do beg and
beseech thee that thou will make them unto me A help in my life, A comfort at
my death, My protection in Judgment.


Thy adorer, redeemed by thy blood, J.M.D.

The Translator to the Reader.
Books, if they be good, need no protection; if bad, (in this our age and
state) they can have none, be not the Surveyors of the Press (a thing not to
be presumed) either corrupt or negligent. Now therefore, to see a book in
print, with an Imprimatur in the front, is a sufficient warrant for all to buy,
and a sure rule for thee to read, without either offense to thy self, or
displeasure of any other. Besides, this is no new Book, though a new
Translation; and therefore, I hope, as it has been publicly vendible for many
years, without restraint, and good applause, in the Latin tongue: so it may
now find as free a passage, and as fair an acceptance in the English; and
shall not need a Protector to keep it off from a public censure, or warrant
it from the fire. And this is all I now wish, either for my Author, or my
self. Yet I have a Patron too, even He that commands, not only the hands, but
(even) the tongues and hearts of men: If he be pleased with these my weak
endeavors, for whose honor I chiefly undertook them; I have my Guerdon, even
all I expect or desire; if not, I am sure I shall vainly implore any other
patronage, how potent soever: as no way sufficient to protect either me or my
Translation from his All-seeing eye, and All-doing hand: of him therefore do I
beg pardon of my errors committed; and to his service, do I (in all humility)
dedicate my self, and this Manual, and do loveingly commend the use thereof
to thee my courteous Reader.

From my chamber in the Inner Temple. August 20. 1639.
THE AUTHOR to the Reader.
THE time is already come, which our Savior foretold, should be, before the
Fabric of this world should be dissolved; take heed (says he) you be not
deceived, for many shall come in my name, and shall say, I am Christ; and that
time draws nigh, but go not after them. And when you shall hear of wars and
tumults, be not afraid; for these things must first be, but the end is not
yet; for Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and
there shall be great earthquaks in diverse places, and famines, and deaths, and
there shall be terrors and oppositions, and great signs shall be seen from
heaven, and there shall be great tempests; but before all these things come to
pass, they shall violently lay hands upon you, they shall persecute you, and
deliver you up to their Synagogues, and into prisons, and shall set you before
Kings and Governors, for my Name sake; your own parents, brethren, kindred and
friends shall betray you, and they shall put some of you to death, and you
shall be hated of everybody. He that makes a doubt of the fulfilling of this
Prophecy, let him cast his eyes upon the actions of the former age, and behold
the tragedy, which is even acted in the sight of all men, which dies in purple
both the body and estates of all men, and yet its Catastrophe does not yet a
pear to us! How many imaginary Christ's forged in hell! has the old Serpent
put upon us; he has suffered (almost) no age to pass, wherein he has not
hammered out new Authors, and Princes of Salvation, and has prepared new ways
for impious devotion; so that we are (even) reserved to that time, than which
none was ever more fierce for Religion, nor more barren in Piety. If any more
sincere, and more unspotted than the rest, be given us from heaven, that may
show us the path to those heavenly mansions, and that faith which is the only
ladder to life eternal, and commands to be clothed with works, and bids those
other personating sectaries of Christianity, to carry more devotion in their
hearts than in their countenances, and to be fiercer in doing than saying, he
shall scarce get from them without hissing, and a clownish jeere; I dare say
that these very things do happen even within the Orchyard of the Church. How
many witnesses of the Gospels truth are delivered by our adversaries to make
themselves pastime, to be destroyed by the cruel sword, to be consumed by the
devouring flames, and to be pined within a dark prison. In our age have we
seen Nation to rise up against Nation, and their great burden pressing the
earth more than ever we read of in our books; we find, by daily experience,
that fathers grow mad and cruel, against their own sons; mothers against
their daughters, and children against their parents, and that either for
Christ's, or Mammons sake. Though we see not innumerable Cities overwhelmed by
earthquaks, yet we know it to be true in other parts of the World. We see
armies of fires in the Firmament, representing unto us and besmeared with the
humane blood, which is after to be shed; netther is the breaking in of seas,
and floods, any new thing; and more I need not say: for as Gregory the Great,
out of whom we have taken something of that we have formerly declared, does
write, when the swelling waves hang over us, and do threaten death, which they
bring with them, we call to mind, no carnal pleasures, yea we cast over board
those very things for which we have made a long voyage; and all things,
compared with our life, are set at naught. So we also, when we perceive the
waves of Gods wrath to swell high, we lay aside the burden of our wordly
possessions, we remove our vain desires, and cast from us the weight of all
our worldly cares; being earnestly and only sollicitous for our hoped for
eternal life. So shall it be that thus lightened, the ship of our devotion may
floate, which laden must sink; for the cares which depresse us in this life, do
draw our souls into the deep, which is borne so much the higher, amidst the
billows of temptation, as we are careful to rid it from the thoughts of this
world; but there is another thing which we should duly consider; in these our
tempestuous times when a storm does first arise, the waves are then but small,
but presently after they swell to bigger volumes, at length they mount so high,
that by their loftiness they overturne all those that sail upon them. Now
also hastens that extreme tempest of souls, that shall overwhelme the whole
World, which sets forth unto us its beginning by wars and slaughters, as it
were by some of his waves: And the nearer we do daily come to the end, so much
the greater are the volumes of troubles, which we behold; but at the last, when
all the Elements are in a hurly burly, the Judge will come amongst us and bring
an end of all things with him; and certainly it is but a moment till he shall
shake, not only the earth, but the heavens themselves. We ought (vigilantly) to
look for this tempest, and to be afraid of the waves that daily swell against
us, and to foresee what must follow upon these troubles, which buffet the
World. God himself warnes us so, saying, take heed least at any time your
hearts be over charged with gluttony and drunkenness, for drunkenness is a
smooth devil, a sweet poison, a delightful sin; he that is possessed with it,
has not himself; and he that acts it, commits not a sin, but is wholly sin it
self; and as the soul which is free from wine, is most wise and of the most
excellent temper; so moystned with the vapors of wine, it is as it were
enveloped in a cloud, it does confound nature, makes us lose grace, destroys
our glory, and makes us incur eternal damnation. He warnes us that we be not
entangled with the cares of this life. For we cannot serve two, God and Mammon;
for the love of riches does far more torture than refresh our souls: to get
them is toylesome, we keep them with fear, and lose them with much sorrow. He
warnes us that we watch at all times, and pray that we may be worthy to
escape the evils to come, and to stand before the son of man. Let us watch, O
let us watch! for that only day of our Lords coming is kept secret, that we
might every day stand in awe. The Lord will come in an hour when we think
not of him, when we shall say peace, and all things are safe. Whether we eat,
or drink, or whatsoever we do else, let that dreadful voice always sound in
our ears. Arise ye dead, and come unto judgment. Let us watch, my companions,
let us watch; he shall be blessed, whosoever he be, that does nothing without
the remembrance of this Judgment: let us pray, O my companions, let us pray,
let us pray without ceasing, and let us cry with a strong voice to the Lord;
and though we cease with our tongue, yet let us cry with good works, and that
without ceasing; for prayer is rather of the heart, than of the lips; rather
of our works, than of our words: the words of him that prays, are not so much
observed by God, as the heart of the suppliant. By how much more we are
oppressed with the tumultuousnesse of carnal things; so much the more
fervently we ought to bend our selves unto prayer. Let us pray continually,
because we are always tempted, and because our sins do labor without
intermission to circumvent us, the world to deceive us, hell to devour us, and
the devil to ensnare us. Let us surround God, making as it were a power
against him by our prayers, that we may bind and overcome our sins, the
world, hell and the devil, and may without blame wait for the fixed hour, and
the day of the universal doom. That hour shall not be unprofitable to us,
which to others has proved most fruitful; for prayer quenched the fiery
furnace for the three Children; stopped the Lions mouths that they could not
hurt Daniel; appeased the seditious Israelites, for Moses; opened Paradise,
locked up heaven, made the barren womb fruitful; loosed Paul's and Peter's
bands; nay, he has enlarged the confidence of prayer, which carried Cornelius
to heaven, and did justify the Publicane. That I might stir up and increase
this desire of prayer of Groans, and of Sighs in my self, not long since I
framed this incitement, when Hanibal (as it were) was even at our gates, and
rash death commanded me to cease from my other labors: and I do willingly
impart it to the youth that love learning and religion, and to others that
please, to whom I wholly enthrall my self. I have willingly and wittingly
passed over those quarrels, and brawles which many make against things of this
nature; for I endeavored not so much to sharpen and embelish the wit, as to
amend and better the soul; nor could I with a soaring wing of wit, compass
heaven and earth. If any desire a smooth style, let him know that I made choice
rather to speak in other men's words, and to recollect the sentences of the
Ancient, than to speak in mine own phrase; and let him consider, not the
style, but the sense of the matter wherein these things are writ; neither
whether it be according to the usual manner of phrase, but whether the matter
be true; for if the sense he true, What skils it, says a learned German, in
so abstruse a business, whether thou cloth it in a fine or a course veil or
garment, so it be not uncomely? Surely my mind is good throughout, and if my
humane tongue, or pen; shall any where falter, let me not be too severely
punished, for there is no malice or obstinacy in it, though there may be
weakness and obscurity: if any shall maintain that these things are neither
beseeming my age or condition, I shall willingly give him leave to abound in
his own sense, and (if he please) to be wise in his own conceit, yet every
man ought to hold piety dear, and to be studious of it, of whatsoever quality
or years they be of. I am young, says one, and now I will take my pleasure,
hereafter will I repent. This is as much as to say, I will wound my self with
my sword, and then I will go to the Surgeon. Alas know thou not that a
wound is received in a minute, that can hardly be cured in a long time? Thou
may sin of thy self, but rise from sin, alone, thou can not: in which most
grave sentence of S. Augustine I end, and seriously rest, I beseech you do so
with me.

Imprimatur:

THO. WYKES.
October. 30. 1639.
CONTEMPLATIONS SIGHS, and GROANS of a Christian.
CONTEMP. etc. 1
Of the greatness of Gods Love.

AWake my soul, out of the sleep of ignorance, awake my heart, out of the
sleep of sloth, struggle out my spirit, out of the depth of darkness, and look
back upon thy God, look upon thy God that cannot be seen with corporeal eyes;
because he dwells in an inaccessible light, that none can behold and live; yet
do I O my god, lift up my spirit unto thee, I raise up my soul unto thee, I
cast up mine eyes unto thee; my understanding desires to meditate, and consider
of thee, but sees not where to begin, how to go on, aad in what manner to end;
the strings of my tongue are ready to move something concerning thee, but can
find neither Prologue, nor Epilogue, neither exordium, nor conclusion of thee.
O my God, guide me, and instruct me, cherish and help me. If I behold thee,
what is it that in the first, second, third, and last place does offer it self
unto me? it is love I observe, it is love that I see, and feel; all the
objects of my eyes are love; the fishes in the Sea are sparks; each pile of
grass in the field is a spark; the trees in the orchards are sparks; the
leaves upon those trees are sparks; the often rising and setting Sun is a
spark; and his beams enlightening all the world are sparks; the Moon's a spark,
and her horns are sparks; the glittering Sarrs and all the host of Heaven are
sparks of it. If all the members which thou have bestowed upon my body, were
tongues, if I had the understanding of an Angel, yet could I not comprehend or
set forth the footsteps of thy love. O violent love, burning love, vehement
love, love that cannot be kept within thee! When I was nothing, thou would
make me something; and thou did not create me after the likeness of the
Sun or Moon, nor yet of the Angels; but after thine own likeness, that I
might serve thee in this life, and after this life, (changed not by death, but
by an easy passage) that I might reign with thee, and praise thee for
evermore. Thou did place me in Paradise, the garden of pleasure, not to
war with beasts, or to terrify me with the Lions roaring, or the grumbling
of Bears, but that all the beasts should be subject to me, and stand in awe at
my beck, and faune upon me in an humble observance. I would O God, find out thy
works, but cannot. Moses writ something, but he did but write, and straight
went hence unto thee; nor have J him now here present, for if he were I would
hold him and beseech him and beg of him for thy sake, that he would freely lay
open to me the wonderful things of the Creation, wherein the fountain of thy
love did flow and bubble up most plentifully, and I would fasten my bodily
ears to the words that should break from his mouth. I would also admit them
within the harbor of my breast; and he should make me sensible, and even
touch my very soul; but he is gone who did but shadow forth unto me thy
wonders, and there is not one left that can unfold the whole; and surely thou
would have me understand thy works but in part only, whilst I am absent
from thee; with thee I shall be most fully instructed. Neither yet do I, O
most Mighty, enough understand that part which thou have granted and permitted
me that I may understand; spare therefore (thou Mercy it self) thy servant
the work of thy hands; thy hands have molded me, thy spirit gave me a soul,
and added life to my life, it gave me what I can neither value nor number; and
such is God, and such are Gods gifts; alas, give me this also, that I may
obtain this near tie of thy love, that as thou art my Creator, thou will be
also my father, and that thou will not refuse or reject, or disinherit of thy
love a son unworthy so great a father.

CONTEMP. etc. 2
Of the Original Nobility of Man, and his falling away from it.

I was in honor O lord and heavenly King, even so great that I cannot now set
it forth; but when I was in honor I understood not what that honor was. In
what an honored place did I inhabit? in a place of delight. My life found
neither trouble nor want; I was compassed with fragrant apples, I was propped
up with honors, crowned with glory and honor, and placed above the works made
of clay. But I was the more excellent in regard of the badge of thy divine
image, and my lot and company was the society of Angels, and the whole Army of
the Host of Heaven; but I did change that glory into the similitude of a calfe
that eats hay. How many virtues was I clothed with? What did I want whom
mercy protected, truth instructed, justice did govern, and peace did cherish?
But alas what shall I say O my God? thou bestowedst that property of reason
upon me, whereby I might excel all living creatures, and did so sublime it
by a peculiar gift, that I wanted but little of attaining to those thy most
pure Ministers; I knew this, but did not acknowledge it, nor did I weigh for
what end thou gavestime this wisdom. I call not that a good ship that is
painted with gaudy colors, nor which has a gilded or silvered head, nor
whose hull is inlayed with ivory, nor which is fraught with Kingly wares and
treasures: but that is strong and firm, and has thick ribs to shut out the
waters, and tough to endure the assaulting Seas, that is pliant to her rudder,
can make good way and fetch all winds. I call that a good sword, not that has
an embroydered belt, or whose scabard is set with precious stones; but that
that has both a keen edge to cut, and a point that can pierce any armor. Men
desire a straight rule and not a fair one; we commend a thing so far only
as it is useful for that end for which it was made: So I, who did then know
these things better than now, ought to have acknowledged that I received all
good from thee; if I would have ordered my self according to the rule of thy
heavenly government, the obedience only which thou requiredst, and which
without thy command was due unto thee, had made me blessed and perfect if I
would, and had not obeyed the detestable suggestions of the old Serpent. From
my original I was good, but that goodness came only from thee; none of it was
from me, yet thou would have some goodness come from me, to the end that
thou might see I did acknowledge that thy goodness; but I obeyed that
traitor Satan, thy enemy, more willingly, and more readily than thee, when I
might with more ease have contemned his slights than I can now those foresaid
poisons which are mixed in my draughts, and that even by my friends; I am
undone, I am undone, I have neglected my perfection, O sad and mournful
change! O man the inhabitant of Paradise, the lord of the earth, Citizen of
Heaven, one of the Lord of Saboths family, and fellow heir of Heavenly
virtues, from whence by a sudden change art thou cast headlong? by reason of
infirmity he lies in a stable, for his likeness to beasts he even needs
hay, for his untamed fierceness he is tied to a manger. I am undone, I am
undone, and nothing can repair me but thou, O most Merciful.

CONTEMP. etc. 3.
Of Man's departing from God; of the subtilties of Satan; the omnipresence and
Clemency of God.

THou art wonderful O God, and very much to be praised, thy power is great,
and there is no summing up of thy greatness and goodness, beneficence, and
clemency. Though but a man, I will confess thee; though I am but one piece of
thy Creation, and but a man that carries his mortality about him, and that
bears within him a testimony of his sins; though such a man, such a portion
of thy Creation; yet will I praise thee. If I were without thee, I should not
be, whatsoever I am, I should become nothing. Thou wast in me to make me have
a being, and to be with thee; but I departed from thee, although I am thus in
thee, and with thee. But how could I depart or be absent from thee? how could I
fly from thy face? if I ascended into Heaven thou wast there; for thence did
thou cast down headlong the spirit of pride and author of disobedience; if I
should make my bed in hell, thou would be there also, for thou have the
keys thereof, and setst open the gates thereof, for them that trust not in
thee; if I should plunge my self in the depth of the Sea, thou would there
find me, for thou did cast disobedient peevish Jonah into the maw of the
whale; thou made him there a prisoner 3 nights and 3 days, and then did
draw him thence, neither torn, hurt, or wounded: if also I should take the
wings of the morning, and make my habitation beyond the farthest Seas, even
there would thy hand lead me, and thy right hand take hold upon me; if I
should say, yet shall the darkness hide me; why, even night shall be turned
into day unto me; darkness it self cannot hide from thee, the night to thee
shines like the day; darkness is light, and light as darkness; not houses,
nor vailes, nor walls, nor enclosures, no caves that are under ground, or dens
that are full of darkness, can shut out thy presence; thou art more nearely
present with us, than we are to our selves. Thou searchest through our life,
our actions and all our thoughts. Can any lurking place hide any from thy
presence? Do not thou fill heaven and earth, and art a God at hand, and also
afarr off? Thou art all eye, for thou see all things; all ear, because thou
hear all things; all hand, for thou framest all things; all foot, for thou
art every where present; thou art near me, thou art with me, thou art in me,
thou sit within me, thou art an observer of all my good and evil, and art
my protector; yet my God I went from thee, I departed, and forsook thee; I
blush when I speak this; yet I speak it willingly; because forthwith, thy mercy
offers it self unto me. Soldiers that keep not their stations, are punished
with death, and he that in the battle first begins to run, loses his life:
yea for a man but to lose his target, is counted a crime, and to cast away his
weapons is counted a most reproachful thing. Ah! how foulely have I left my
station, without thy command O heavenly and eternal commander: there was yet
no ordered or marshalled battle with Satan, I was but only assailed by a light
skirmish, and at the very first onset, I threw away the buckler of my
integrity, and faith, I suffered my weapons to be shaken out of my hands, and
I fled from my allegiance, from before thy face. With what a slight resistance,
and by how childish a valor might I have overcome Satan? it was my sloth, and
not his force that made him strong. As a man greedy of gain, seeing an orphant
have riches, entices him often to his house, makes him a banquet, bestows
something on him, and beguiles him with fair words, till he has gotten his
means: so the devil seeing that I had a precious treasure, heavenly wisdom,
laid up in an earthen chest, presently offered me wealth, pleasures and
honors, that baited with these, he might spoil me of my heavenly riches; he
has stripped me and spoiled me of all my treasure which I ought to have kept
holily, and might without difficulty have done it. But what gave he me in
requital? what riches? what pleasures? what honors? What can he repay whose
inheritance, and riches, is that infernal torment? that gulf that vomits
forth pitch, and flames, whose torments are without end, and his confusion
everlasting. But thou my God for my backsliding have rendered a reacceptance of
me; for my falling from thee, thou have requited me with thy favor. For thy
grace and mercy is precedent and greater than my whole offense and all my
failings. I read it spoken by thy Kingly servant that thy mercy is great; great
he said it was, but how great he could not tell: we have known that it is
great, but how great we have not known nor can perceive. We know not the
quantity of it is greatness, which cannot be expressed in words. We see the
fruit of mercy is great, for were it not extended beyond measure, we had not
after our Fall been received of thee. Ah what is sin to the mercy of God? A
spiders web that a blast of wind makes invisible. Consider a spark of fire if
it should fall into the Sea, could it continue living, or visible? as a spark
to the Sea, so is man's malice to Gods Pity and Clemency; yea not so only, but
far less; for the Ocean though it be vast, yet is not unmeasurable, but of
Gods mercies there is no measure.

CONTEMP. etc. 4.
Of the Council of the Trinity touching the Creation of Man, and of the end
why Man was created.

WHat is man that thou wast mindful of him? what the son of man that thou
did visit him? Thou thoughtest of me before I had a being, I was in thy mind
before I was in the world; thou appointedst a consult, O my God, when thou wast
to make me: after thou had brought forth all things, and had built this
vast stage of the world, had replenished, and adorned it; thou did say, Let
us make man after our Image. Thou God and Father, who art the beginning and
original of the Trinity, with whom consultedst thou? was it with the Angels,
and those holy Inhabitants of heaven? why surely they joined not with thee in
the Creation of man, nor was man made according to their similitude. Did he
consult with the Earth, or with the Sun? because the Sun and man are said to
generate man; who may be suffered to trifle thus? Let us make man said thou,
we our selves will be busy about him, and not an Angel, not the Earth, not
the Sun, not the Water, nor any other thing. But who is with thee? do thou
speak in the Potentates language? Nor was this suitable; thou speak to thy
Coeternall and Coessentiall Son and holy Spirit; thou speak God with God,
one God; as the Father works, so works the Son, and holy Ghost, they work but
one. Thou createdst man the work of the whole Trinity, to live in this world,
better than the whole world, the most exquisite Creature of all creatures, the
most absolute Creature, or little world, the Compendium, and Epitome of the
great world; yet not properly a world, but a man framed by thy hands, by the
Communion of the Son, and the holy Ghost, an image enlivened by the breath of
thy mouth, and a representation of thy self. Heaven, thy habitation, is
resplendant with shining, and sparkling lights; the earth thy footstool does
swell with a thousand sort of fruits, and yet none of them is said to be made
as man was. O God, I am thy Image, I am thy likeness, therefore I will be thy
pleasure, thy delight, thy content; thou will take care of me, and never
forsake me; for who will neglect an image, and a work made after his own
likeness? To what end O my God, have thou done all this? why did thou form
and fashion me in so excellent a manner? Thou made man first of al, that he
might be the stock of us all from which so many branches, so many leafes, and
so many fruits should spring. Thou would that all should have one original,
and a like beginning, that no man should prefer himself before another, as
if he were the seed of a more noble father; that none should despise another,
that one should not hurt another, but that we should every one mutually assist
each other in his labor; that we should be all of one mind, will the same
thing, covet, and desire the same thing; and that there might not be heard any
brawles, contentions, enviousnesse, or deceits amongst us. For concord is that
most fragrant Balsum that breathes thee that excellent odor. Thousand
thousands in heaven do serve thee, and there is found no discord: thousand
thousands should also serve thee on earth, and there should be found no
discord. Thou did make us all that we should be the clear mirror of thy
Majesty, of thy Glory, of thy Dignity, of thy Power, and of thy Wisdom. The
work commends the workman, and the effect shows the cause. O unspeakeable
Artist! O unvaluable causer of all things! Let us take heed that we neither
break nor spot, that we nor fully nor make dusky this glass; let us beware
that we cause not Satan's vizard to be seen in this glass, but let wisdom,
piety, goodness, courtesy, chastity, and whatsoever is most excellent in thee,
in part reflect in us. Thou made us all, that we should be the worlds
perfection, beauty, and ornament. The world was a Cage cunningly and
wonderfully wrought, but it wanted a singing bird, by whose warbling notes al
things might be expressed: let us wordlings beware, that we be not to the world
like a Crow, or dunghill bird, or a Jay, but a Lark, that does night and day,
in the evening, and at morn celebrate and proclaim his Creatours praise: let
us not be a disgrace, an unprofitable, and reproachful burden, that the world
may labor to expel with groans, and be glad, not sorry to be rid of it,
rather than wish for its return. Thou have made us all that we should admire,
and set forth thee, and thy works. Thou have endued me with an understanding
enlightened with heavenly fire, that by thy self I might distinguish thee from
my self, and the world. Thou have given me a will, that knowing thee, I might
love thee above all things, because thou excellest all things, and do
comprehend all good things within thee. Thou gave me a tongue, that knowing,
and loving thee, I should lively express, and redouble thy praises. Be present
my understanding, be present my will, be present my tongue, know him, love him,
praise him: praise the Lord, O my soul, I will praise the Lord all my life
long, I will sing unto my God while I have any being: Praise ye the Lord, for
it is good to sing unto our God, it is a pleasant, and comely thing to be
thankful unto him. Thou have made us all, that we should live with thee, and
that we should be made partakers of thy glory and gladness. The better any
thing is, the more it communicates its goodness to others: but thou my God,
art the best of bests, therefore thy goodness does most plentifully flow to
all, so that they will lay hold, and embrace it; Vouchsafe safe O Lord, that
whilst I walk in the way, I may dwell and remain with thee in life. Thou
ordainest me to life, O suffer me not to fall by death; death is not of thee,
but from my self; life is not from me, but from thee; take that from me which
proceeds from me, and give me that which comes from thee, and I will praise
thee in thine own holiness, I will praise thee in the firmament of thine own
power, I will praise thee in thy virtues, I will praise thee according to the
magnitude of thy greatness, I will praise thee in the sound of the Trumpet, I
will praise thee upon the Psaltery, and Harp, I will praise thee in the
Cymball, and Quire, I will praise thee upon the stringed instruments, and
Organs, I will praise thee in the well sounding Cymballs, I will praise thee on
the loud Cymballs, every thing that has breath shall praise thee, Hallelujah.
My spirit shall leap for joy in God my Savior, for evermore; O most blessed
God, give me a blessed age.

CONTEMP. etc. V.
Of Paradise and of casting forth of Man from thence.

OMnipotent Creator, thou did bestow a threefold grace upon man, the grace
of the soul, original righteousness: and the grace of the body, immortality:
and the grace of a most pleasant place to inhabit: but what is that place my
God, wherein thou did place my first parent, and me in him? I read the
words of thy penman, but what mean those words? what is Paradise? what is
Eden? teach me O my God, for no man (although he think he has gotten much
knowledge) can instruct me sufficiently. I collect that thou plantedst a garden,
and that it looked toward the East; I hear of four rivers, Ganges, Nile,
Tigris, and Euphrates, but yet I am not satisfied: for the doubts of
Disputants, and their wrangling, makes the matter very intricate unto me. But
why do I seek for that which is not, and neglect that which is? give me the
heavenly Paradise, and the earthly Paradise shall never trouble me. I
understand it was a most fruitful Garden, and stuffed with joy, pleasure, and
delight, in which the eyes did want nothing, nor the ears, or any other part of
that body, which it did not enjoy. Within, thou had furnished man with
wisdom, and understanding; without, thou sufferedst him not to want any thing:
All the creatures came about that new king, enthroned by the King of kings, did
tender him homage, and did reverence him with humble subjection. The tall,
fertile, odoriferous, pruned, comely, and pregnant trees, how much did they
refresh him? the Alder tree, Almond tree, Cherry tree, Fig tree, Cidonian
Punick aurea, and what ever else do beautify the fields? But above the rest,
notable are those two, which thy book describes unto me, which did most of all
ennoble the Garden, that Tree of life, and the Tree of the knowledge of good
and evil. When thy faithful servant calls it the Tree of life, does he do it
because it had received this power from thee, that he which should eat of its
fruit, should have his body confirmed in a settled state of health, and a
perpetual strength, that it should not decline to worse, or to death by
sickness, or infirmity of age? Thy very Word does intimate thus much unto me.
Our first Parents were nourished with the fruits of the other trees, that their
living bodies should not suffer hunger or thirst: but therefore they were to
taste of the tree of life, that death might not creep upon them from any side,
nor that they should (in continuance of time) perish by reason of old age; the
other trees were for nourishment; that for a Sacrament. How great was thy care
my God, how great thy providence? thou gave me not a momentany pleasure, nor
a yearly, but an everlasting. Now I am weakened by diseases, I am tormented
with cares, I am tortured with grief, but this is besides thy will, though not
contrary unto it; for what could happen to me against thy Will? could one hair
have fallen from my head if thou had not willed it should be so? what was now
my first habitation? the narrow and dark part of the womb, where I was
environed with the ill sented sides of the belly. I come crying into this life,
I depart out of it with sweat, and I pass through it with labor, nor is there
any one that can boast himself free from this condition: being borne and
brought into this light, I cannot move my self from one place to another; in
my first infancy, I am void of all pleasure, I am a burden both to my self and
unto others, and exposed to innumerable dangers, even till I attain to these
years wherein reason and judgment begin to flourish in me, happier in that one
thing than in the other part of my life, that I understand not my unhappy
condition. What shall I say, O my God, my years are multiplied, and my cares
increase, but I was not even worthy of these things. Thou can not do
otherwise than lead me, and support me with thy hand, although I did not
deserve life, but hell, and destruction, when I had opened my impious mouth and
devoured the forbidden fruit: thou did ordeine the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, for my Altar, and Temple, that I should yield thee due
obedience in abstaining from the fruit thereof; I would be made wiser, and did
become most unwise; before the Fall I had the knowledge and experience of a
present good, I had only the knowledge but not the experience of an absent
evil: but after the Fall there was in me a certain knowledge of a lost good,
but no experience of it, and I had a knowledge an experience of an adherent
evil. Woe is me; when shall I return thither, whence I am expelled? I desire
not a garden, but a house; not a figure, but the thing figured; I desire not to
rule, but to become a servant; I ask not to sit, but to stand and observe thy
Commandments. Look on me, O my Father, look on me, and approve me, and be
pleased in thy mercy, that I may find favor in thy sight, that the doors of
thy palace may be opened unto me when I knock; I beseech thee by my Lord, thy
Son, the man of thy right hand, the Son of man, whom thou have established
for a Mediator between thy self and me, by whom thou soughtest me when I
sought thee not, that I might seek thy Word by which thou have made all
things, and me amongst the rest; thy only Son, by whom thou have called thy
believing people unto thy adoption, and amongst them me also: I beseech thee by
him that sits at thy right hand, and does intercede unto thee for me, in whom
are hidden all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, open quickly unto me,
and grant me passage (O my God) that I may enter into the joy, which cannot
enter into me, because it is far greater than I am.

CONTEMP. etc. 6.
Of the Serpent the Deceiver.

THe devil is wicked, foul, and terrible; he does therefore as much as he is
able, hide his own face, and puts on a strange countenance; yet all his
thoughts, all his endeavors, and all his actions, are to deceive; when he
persuades to good, he deceives, for a greater mischief that is to arise from
that good, in persuading unto evil under the show of goodness; in diswading
from good, as if it were evil: in diswading from evil, that he may bring in a
worse evil. The deceiver invades the Serpent, that we might not discover the
hidden fraud, that he might with more ease, and profit bring to pass that
which he had wickedly, and most cunningly projected: The Serpent was a
beautiful and subtle creature, therefore not unfit to entice, to move, to
persuade, and to seduce. O thou deceiver, O thou turne-coate, O thou ensnarer,
and deceiver: most lying spirit, thou transformest thy self into an Angel of
light, that thy subtilty and slights of darkness should not be discerned; thou
dissemblest the night of thy malice, that we might promise to our selves
goodness from that which is most vile, and wicked; thou mouldest, and
paintest, deckest, and fashionst thy instruments, that they may find some time
for acceptance with us; if thou should rransforme thy self into an enraged
lion, or were so bold to change thy self into a cruel Bear, who would not
tremble, take heed, and fly from thee? thou go amongst us therefore most
comely and most courteously, that thou may, without being perceived, find
admittance of those that are heedlesse; yea, and oftentimes also of those that
are most wary. What are those vile teachers, whose consciences are feared, that
glitter in so many ceremonies, so many forms of worship, and so many
commentaries or expositions of things, but serpents? but broods of vipers, that
cunningly bite us? they put on sheeps clothing, that they may cover their
wolvish claws. Thou old Serpent, thou usest the subtle wits of men, which are
the fittest of all for thy desires; the simple, humble, and abject do seldom
broach Heresies. He that has profited much in knowledge, for the most part,
attributes much to himself; he avoides the beaten way, wherein the credulous
common sort of Christians do walk; and is wise apart, and departs, to fall
headlong into the gulf of errors. Give me, my God, moderate wisdom, but that
I may profit exceedingly in a holy life, and in saving faith: thou will not
ask me hereafter what I have scene, but what I have believed; not what I have
read, but what I have done. Grant that I may receive with an humble heart, what
thou offerest me, and set forth in thy Word; not regarding what either
superstitious reason, or the mischievously obtuse pitch of wit, and foolish
subtilties of Doctors do argue. Thou art the mouth of truth; grant that I may
believe what thou speak; the Devil is the mouth of vanity; grant that what
he lyingly utters may be suspected and avoided by me. Grant I may valiantly
resist and oppose him in fighting with him. He is a serpent, if he but once
gain but a little intermission, he crowdes him self in, and we can hardly
expel him but though we overcome him, as it were, he does recollect
himself, and assayes to get new strength; even as the serpents tail cut off,
does by licking grow again; and if his head get in any where, all his body
will quickly follow. O thou Conqueror of the Serpent, who art not said to
bruise his tail, but break his head, help me that I yield not: if I be
stricken, if I do fight with him, grant me also power, O my God, to trample
under my feet serpents, and scorpions, and all the power of the adversary, that
nothing may do me hurt. Vouchsafe, holy Trinity, but one God, that I may
always be mindful of thee, that I may always have thee with me; and all the
power of Satan shall vanish away. The serpent is afraid of the three leaved
grass, and never lies upon it; Satan abhorres thy name and memory, and to call
upon thee; nor dares approach the adorers of the Trinity, nor those that
inhabit near the Deity. Be present with me, O God, forsake me not my
Redeemer. The serpent flies the Heart, he is driven away by the fume of the fat,
and of the Harts-horne; thou art the morning Heart, thou art that fume, that
odor whereby that infernal spirit is weakened and repelled. Remove far from
me gluttony, and intemperancy. The serpent cannot endure a fasting man's
spittle, but dies being sprinkled with it; make me pour out my prayers with
fasting unto thee, and that I may send forth my sighs, and call forth my
groans, and I shall be preserved in safety. I often think of that (O my God)
which afterward I dislike of; yet I confess those things unto thee, because
thou see them, though I confess them not unto thee; and except I do
confess them, thou do punish them; I often deal thus with my self. Oh that
I had bin so made, that I could not have fallen and been deceived. I think of
good in an ill manner, I therefore think of those things, that thou might
never have been wroth with me, nor that I might have given thee cause to be
angry; this had been good, but I think it in an ill way; for why have thou not
made me so? because thou would not; why would thou not? because thou
would not; I must not be more wise than is sitting for me. But I suppose
that reasonable creature is not of a little goodness, who avoides ill, by
comparing of evils. Thou did not O God, violently hinder man's Fall, because
thou knew how to draw some good from it; yet follows it not from thence,
that thou did will his Fall, but did rather will that good which thou
knew how to derive from his Fall; but the Fall it self thou did hate, and
extremely detest. What shall I think my God? pardon him that has been
deceived thereby: me thinks thy servants are not to be accounted faithful,
and thrifty, if they must be fettered, and shackled, to force them to do thy
pleasure; but when they freely, and of their own accords do manly act that
which belongs unto them. That is not acceptable unto thee, which is forced, and
drawn from us by violence, but that which proceeds from true virtue; for
virtue proceeds from a free deliberation, not from necessity but free
deliberation, and election, require a freedom of will. But why do I dispute O
my God? let it suffice me that thou did not produce a nature not subject to
sin, because it pleased thee not to do it. Pardon me, pardon me, O my God,
and deny not to forgive my curiosity. We should not exercise our selves in an
idle and vain curiosity concerning the creatures, but we should direct our
steps to things immortal, and which endure for ever. Those things which thou
would conceal, are not to be searched into. Those things which thou have
revealed, are not to be neglected, that we be not found unlawfully curious in
the one, and damnably ungrateful in the other; I will seek truth in truth, not
in vanity; I will find it when I have sought it, for truths sake, not for
vanity; nor will I traffic for the gain of death in the words of life.

CONTEMP. etc. 7.
Of Gods Providence, and Preservation.

AS there is not O my soul, O my sense, O my thought, any moment, wherein, my
God, I do not use to enjoy thy goodness and mercy; so ought there not to be
any moment wherein I may neglect to have thee present to my memory; I should
account that I have lost all that time wherein I have not thought upon thee, O
my God. I should account O God, all that time lost, wherein I do no: meditate
upon thee, I therefore come again unto thee; O thou never failing light; O thou
untyred and never extinguished life; O thou ever springing fountain; O thou
seed-plot of life; O thou chief beginning of wisdom; O thou first original
of goodness; thou will not reject me O my God, for I speak not to jeering man,
but to the Lord, that splenitickly laughs not at me, nor flowts me with his
countenance. I behold, my God, this large extended Fabric, and I am struck
dumb; it was made by thee, and thou had an end of thy work, yet did thou
not leave thy work; thou did not like an Architect depart from the piece of
work thou had made; he goes away, and after regards it not; but thou art
still present, and remainest the same. Most powerful and wise God, whatsoever
thou did once make, that thou do always preserve, by thy Omnipotency; and
do order it by thy wisdom. I consider the nature of thy visible creatures,
their place, order, condition, motion; agreements, harmony, comeliness,
beauty, greatness, use, delight, variety, alteration, and indurance; that is
in these corruptible things. I find thy providence manifested in each part of
thy creation; I see it in heaven, and in the lights of heaven, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, in the air and in the Clouds, in the Earth, in the Sea, in
the plants, in the herbs, in the seeds, in living creatures, as well
reasonable, as unreasonable, foure-footed beasts, flying fouls, in swimming and
creeping creatures. Think with thy self my most sweet soul, who it is that
orders heavens axeltree that in so many thousand years it is not grown old, nor
has received any alteration; and although it be made of a passible and
corruptible substance: yet by the word of it is creation, it remains still
upheld in the same state; O Lord our God, there is none like unto thee. There
is none so rude, nor of so brutish a behavior, but if he lift up his eyes
toward heaven, although he may be ignorant, whose providence it is that
governes all this that he sees; yet that does not understand from the very
order, constancy, moderation and profit of these things, that there is a
Providence. Though we should find some living creatures, in regard of their
use, unprofitable, and ordained to no fit use for us; yet might we receive
profit, in beholding them; and they might be more profitable to their hearts
that behold them, than to the eyes of those that use them. And although ir were
apparent that they were hurtful, and pernicious to man's temporary health; yet
would it not follow, but they might mutually serve for his good; though not for
his meat and service: yet to exercise his wit, according to that proceeding of
common instruction, which is ready at hand to every one that will make use of
reason, whereby the invisible things of God are made apparent to the
understanding, by the things that are made. Thou have therefore O God made all
things profitable, and nothing fruitless. Shall I then be only without
profit? shall I be the vilest creature thou have made? let this be far from
me: Let me O God, be profitable to all that ask my help, or that ask it not;
for thou have given me thus many things without asking. Let me be a helper to
all t^^^ need; and having understanding, let me altogether take heed, that I
be not silent; having abundance of all things, let me not grow benumbed in
charity; having skill to govern, let me impart the use of it to my neighbor;
I having opportunity to speak to the rich, let me intercede for the poor; let
me as much as may be, help others in their necessities; and sometime even
beyond my ability; let me account an other man's distress, mine own; and as I
would desire to be helped in my trouble, so that I may not for any respect of
my own, defer to help another. Let the help I give a another, be pleasing to
me; which does indeed redound more to his profit that offers it, than to his
advantage that receives it; it is both profitable to the giver, and does
according to the necessity of the occasion cheer him, that received it: that
so in one bargain made, (which seldom falls out) both parties may seem to
have gotten their wished for gain. O thou mad man, that for to save a
halfepeny, do lose a groat; and to preserve a temporary thing, do lose that
which is immortal. No creature thou, o God, did make was ill, though it
might seem ill, because I did not rightly understand it; thou beholdest all
things thou had made; and behold they were exceeding good. He that says
thy works are ill, deformed, and not beautiful, conceives not all things are
fair to their former, or workman, that uses all things to the government of
this universe, which he rules with a supreme Law. But if an unskillfull man
should go into a workmans shop and should see many tools, but knows not for
what use they are; if he be very simple, he thinks them superfluous. But if
unawares he light into a workhouse, or by ill handling of some sharp iron
instrument, does wound himself, he believes there are in it many pernicious
and hurtful things; but the workman knowing how to use them, laughs at his
folly, and not regarding his foolish words, does constantly make use of his
shop. And yet men that are so simple, dare hardly in the presence of such a
workman find fault with things they know not; but when they see them, judge
them necessary, and ordained for some use. But in this world whose builder and
governor thou art O my God, men dare find fault with many things, whose use
they know not; and would be thought to know that which they are altogether
ignorant of, concerning these instruments of the Almighty Work-master. O the
rashness of frail man! thou my God who art (in thy self) the Alpha, and the
Omega, as thou art in the Angels like sweetness, and comeliness* in thy
Church as a master of a family in his house; in the soul like a bridegroom in
the Bride-chamber; in the reprobate like fear and horror, in the just as a
helper and protecter; in the world as the author, and governor thereof; what
shall I that am so unprofitable, and ugly render unto thee, for so many
benefits and ornaments? I live and prosper in thee, in thee am I moved, and by
thee do I subsist. But thou O Lord, who live for ever, do rest in thy
self, and by thy self have all things in thy self, and do enjoy and find
all things there; thou need nothing, thou seek for nothing without thee,
thou sufficest thy self in stead of all things, and thou thy self art all
things. Thou art both God, and Lord of all things, thou art before the
beginning of ages, and before any thing that may be spoken of, art thou both
God and Lord of all things created; and with thee do remain the causes of all
inconstant things, and the immutable originals of all mutable things do abide
with thee, and with thee do live the everlasting causes of all irrational and
temporary things. O merciful God, tell me thy suppliant and miserable
creature, tell me, what can I repay thee? can I imagine so small a space, or
such a minute, wherein if thou should withdraw thy hand, and would leave
me who am of no account, to my self that am nothing, I could remain any
thing? I can neither move hand, foot, nor finger, except thou grantest me that
motion; withhold, thy beck, and in a beck the frame of the world will be
dissolved. Seeing then I live, and am preserved by thy goodness, all hours,
and every minute of those hours; O that I might ascend to thee every hour,
and every point of time; O that I might conferr with thee, pray unto thee,
glorify thee, and might consecrate my life and motion, my spirit and senses,
and my whole strength unto thee. Thou my God art all things unto me. Let me
being in thee, be all things to thee. In God I will live to God, in God I will
move to God; in God whatsoever I do, I will do it to God. All things my God,
by thy appointment do serve me; all that is in me in like manner shall yield
a ready service to thee. And because thou have tempered whole nature for my
use, profit, and delight; with what face, mouth, or heart, shall I doubt of thy
care, and providence over me? if thou doubtest, my soul, thou doubtest of God
himself, and neither know the Creator, nor the Creature; shake off my soul
thy trembling. Thou have about thee, and in thee thy Savior, whose most
bountiful heart the heavens and earth do witness unto thee.

CONTEMP. etc. 8.
Of the clothing of Adam the first Man.

ALas my God, Adam did sin; though created by thee yet broke he thy
commandment, went back, and became unprofitable; he desired to see that thou
would not have him to see. But what saw he O my God? he saw his own
nakedness. His first nakedness was nothing else, than tokens of chief
happiness, and of the greatest riches; but the nakedness that this man saw
after he had sinned, was mere ruin, a testimony of everlasting woe, and want.
That first man saw his body naked, but his soul was more naked, spoiled and
disrobed of knowledge, wisdom, integrity, and original innocence; he covered
his nakedness, being enwrapped with shame; but this was a wretched garment; he
sowed together figg leaves, and made aprons, to cover himself, and his
seducing wife; O vain mantles, O lamentable coverings! And what are all men's
cloathings that seem so sumptuous, and glittering, but fig leafes that
quickly vanish to nothing, and gald those that wear them? O would to God that
as often as we cloth our selves, we were urged with the sharp and stinging
point of repentance; for they are tokens of our wants, signs of our shame,
arguments of our misery, and comforts for our extreme infirmities. Thou sinful
and fallen man, why art thou proud in setting forth thy impieties? thou thief,
why braggest thou of a halter? why do thou vauntingly boast of another
fleece? what carriest thou under it, but a sack full of dung, the rotten bag of
thy soul? thy skin is not enough to cover thee; nor except thou be most
impudent, do thou let any one see it, but gettest some other thing to supply
the want of thine own. I behold mine own clothes, I see a hell of evils; yet
I consider the depth of thy care, providence, and mercy; for thou helpest me
thus naked, before I can understand mine own want and nakedness; and
command all the creatures to haste unto me, that they might cover my
nakedness, and supply my wants. Thou thy self most merciful God, as I
remember, did clothe sinful man in a Lambs skin, not in Lions, Bears,
Foxes, or Wolves skins, that thou might teach him thy hatred to cruelty,
greediness, deceit, and wrath, and thy love to unspotted simplicity; thou
made his garment of the skins of dead cattle, that thou might show us,
how we were fallen from life to death; how of immortal we were become mortal;
that we were from the earth, and must return to the earth again. Thou tookest
a skin of a Lamb slain, that thou might witness unto us, that our Fall was
only to be healed by a Lamb to be slain. O thou garment of the golden age!
thou unspotted Lamb, slain to the believers before the beginning of the world.
O thou Messiah that wast promised, and food appointed from all eternity; thou
who wast made the seed of the Woman, and have bruised the Serpents head: cloth
me with thy merits, and mine own deserts shall nothing hurt me; cloth me
with thy righteousness, and mine own unrighteousness shall not condemn me;
cloth me with thy holiness, and mine own iniquity shall not accuse me;
cloth me with faith in thee, and I shall one day receive the robe of
happiness. Nothing can cover the filthy nakedness of a sinner; nothing can
hide me from Gods judgment, but thy coat, O heavenly Lamb, but the holes of
thy wounds, but the yawning scarres of thy body; I will put thee on by a
steadfast faith, and with the Church of old I will triumph before thee.

CONTEMP. etc. 9.
Of Noah's Ark, Crow, and Dove.

THou art (my God) very long suffering, and thy wrath grants sinners a very
large time, nor do thou root out sinners on a sudden. Man's malice was
great, and every thought of his heart was continually bent to mischief; they
neglected thy Word, nor did they obey thy Spirit that was to lead them; thou
therefore did repent thee of thy Creation, and did resolve to destroy this
Inn of the World, with all the guests thereof: yet did not thy justice haste
very much to execute judgment, but thy mercy interposed a hundred and twenty
years, that thou might see whether by often preaching, any could be moved to
work repentance. Ah my God, thou go with two feet, one of justice, the
other of mercy; but mercy always makes the first step, and justice the later;
nor do thou delight in the death or destruction of a sinner, but thou will,
and command that he be converted and live. But all thy expectation was in
vain, and thy mercies were entertained with scorn; the wrath therefore of thy
justice was kindled, and the waters of the Flood broke in upon the earth; the
fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the Cataracts of heaven were
opened, and it rained upon the earth for many days, and almost all thy
creatures perished; and among men, none, but thy Noah, and his family, were
preserved in the Ark. Thou forsakest not (my God) thou most just, and most
bountiful God, those that worship and adore thee, but do preserve them in
fire and water, and amidst the storm of growing miseries thou do nor
despise, or reject any; thou do not affright any one, except he who is so mad
as to abhor thee. My God the horn of my salvation, thou that take me up;
thou Father of mercies, God of all Consolation; O Lord my Strength, my
Fortress, my Refuge, my Deliverer; Can thou draw the sword of justice, and
not annoint the point with the oil of mercy? He lies therefore hid in safety,
in that wonderful ship, out of which not life but present death was to be
found. What shall I say that that ship did represent, but thy Church? which is
tossed to and fro with sundry Storms of persecution, and waves of adversity,
and has no fixed station; yet the true, and eternal safety is contained
there, which out of it is offered to none. Noah was the Steere-man hereof: but
thou, O God art the Governor both of Noah and it, and thou wast Noah's true and
heavenly Comforter, who do not suffer it to sink. The waters of the Flood
overwhelmed the palaces of Kings, but did every day better than other bear
aloft the Ark of Noah: so do persecutions destroy earthly kingdoms, but thou
suffer not thine own Kingdom to be overthrown, but do even increase and
enlarge it by storms of temptations. Noah sent a Raven, and a Dove out of the
Ark: the Raven pursued his prey, and did never return to the Arc of Noah; the
Dove did return, and was received in again of this Steeresman: O Christ, let
me abandon the Raven-like gluttony, the loveliness of pleasures; for it is
very rare that any one seated amongst the delights of the age should remain
free from a smatch of vice, in which although he be not forthwith inthralled,
yet is he sometimes drawn away by them; nor can he be long safe, who stands
next to danger; let me remember that I am to play the Soldier in such a kind
of warfare, wherein there is no rest given; I will resolve to overcome
pleasures, which have destroyed many good ingenuities. The Dove finding no seat
to rest upon, returned to the Ark, and was admitted into it. O Christ my
repose, my soul beaten with the flood of sins, finds no refuge in this
world, no comfort, no aid; be thou only my retiring place, and my peaceful
sanctuary; the Dove makes her nest in the holes of the rock, and in the cave of
the flint wall; my soul shall rest in the holes of thy wounds, and shall
therein perpetually delight her self; no creature so well pleased with gemitus
as the Turtle, she mourns both night and day; Oh Christ I will send forth no
other voice, than a mourning, and lamenting voice; that I have not my portion
hereafter with the Ravens, but that thou O Christ may say to me; behold my
love thou art fair, thy eyes are Doves eyes; arise my love, my fair one and
come away; arise, make haste my love, my Dove, my fair one, and come away. O
Christ when shall I come?

CONTEMP. etc. 10.
Of Jacobs Ladder.

STir up now thy self, O my soul, and raise up thy whole understanding, and
consider (as much as thou art able) how great, and what that is that is set
before thee; go into Bethel, enter into the house of God, wherein the Lord
inhabits, which is the Gate of Heaven. Where can thou take better rest than
where thy God does rest? If the heart of man be not fixed in that eternal
place, it can never be firm, but more wavering than motion it self, passing
from one thing to another, seeking rest where there is none to be found; for if
his captive affections be taken up in these transitory, and vain things, he
can find no true rest, because the soul is of so great a value, that nothing
but the chief good can content it: enter therefore (O my soul) into Bethel,
go into the house of thy God, dwell in the high place, accompany thy God.
Ascend, O my soul, ascend; the Ladder is set, by which thou may climb to
the most High. What is that Ladder, O my God, which thy holy Israel did see in
his dream? which stood upon the earth, and reached heaven with his top, by
which also the Angels of heaven did ascend, and descend? is it not thy
righteous Son, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and by whom only we
have access to thee. He stood upon the earth, because he assumed our humane
nature into the unity of his Person, and the branch of Iesse sprang from the
earthly Virgin. Thou my God, willing of old to heal man (the King of all thy
creatures) of his sin, did make as it were thy blessed Son in a sort to
go back from the excellency of the Divinity, and by extreme humility, having
passed over nine degrees, those nine orders of Angels, to descend by the
incarnation, unto the tenth degree, even the humane nature. He was borne unto
us, he lived amongst us, he also rules amidst us; he is with us, nor does he
ever forsake those whom he once determined to love. O blessed Ladder, fix thy
self also upon my heart, and cause my soul to mount up, and remain with
thee. Thou did descend for my sake, let me ascend to thee; as thou have
conformed thy self to my infirmity, so make me partake of that rest and
pleasure, which no care can either interrupt or lessen. The top of this Ladder
did touch the heaven, but thou the Messiah do not only touch heaven, and art
from thence to come unto us, and have from all eternity taken thy pastime
therein, but have also framed it; thou, who have neither beginning nor end of
days, for yesterday, to day, and for ever, art thou the first and the last,
the great, the true, and blessed God, who wast in the beginning, and wast
glorified with the Father before the foundation of the world was laid. But the
Ladder was but one that did reach from earth to heaven; so thou O most sweet
Jesus art Lord of heaven, and a man of the earth, yet but one Person, but one
Man, one God, and one Mediator between a displeased God, and a wretched man,
by the union of the Divine, and humane nature. By this Ladder Angels ascend,
and descend; because Angels desire to look into the mystery of so holy, and
admirable an union, who notwithstanding, do always see, and hear the holy
Spirit instructing them. There do also other Angels ascend, and descend, even
the Teachers, and all believers, who ought to preach nothing else but Christ,
because there is no admittance to life by any other; nor is there any open
familiar, and daily passage to the Father but this. Imitate O my dear soul,
the pure, chaste, and holy Angels in purity, in chastity, in sanctity; except
thou will lie grovelling on the earth, and laden with the dirt of thy sins,
be thrust into hell. O Lord, I cannot lift up my self; be thou my guardian
where ever I go, and bring me out of banishment into thy promised Land; nor
neglect or forsake me till I shall return into my Country. In the mean
time, let me be like Jacob, a supplanter, and by faith let me trample upon
sin, let me prevail, and obtain the blessing: let me rest upon the living
Corner Stone, and I shall not be moved or confounded: let me be also a
spiritual Stone, built upon that Corner Stone, that I may become an
Habitation, and Temple of Divinity. Ah Jesu, my Redemption, my Love, and
Desire, be present with me: I invoke thee, I cry unto thee with a strong
voice, with my whole heart, which voice none but thou can hear. I invite
thee into my soul, enter into it, and fit it for thy self, that thou may
possess it without spot or wrinkle; for a pure habitation is suitable for a
most pure Lord: sanctify me therefore thy vessel, which thou have made;
empty out the malice, and fill it with grace, and keep it still full, that I
may be now, and ever a Temple fitting for thee to dwell in. Most Sweet, most
Benign, most Loving, most Dear, most Mighty, most Desired, most Precious,
most Lovely, most Beautiful. Thou that art sweeter than Honey, whiter than
Milk, or Snow, pleasanter than Nectar, more precious than Gemmes, or Gold, and
deerer unto me than all the riches, and honors of the World.

CONTEMP. etc. 11.
Of the most tender care of God over his people; to be collected from his care
for his people Israel in the wilderness.

MY soul does often languish, and my heart is often full of great cares when I
think what I may be, namely, an example of weakness the ruin of Time, the
scorn of Fortune, the image of Mutability, the beam of Envy, and Calamity,
and the rest nothing but Phlegm, and Choler. Oh, who sees not how many things
may be every where busy upon the circumference of the earth? Oh with how many
tears and sighs, they fill the earth, all which do as it were by a certain
fate accompany man's life? he deplores the sicknesses, which possess this his
body; he deplores the uncertain condition of his health, and the ambiguity of
his life. For what Age or Time is there, wherein he is not thwarted by some
evil? does he not so soon as he is borne, and newly pulled from the moist
receptacles of the womb, abound with slime and filth, and make all things ring
with his bawling cries? after, if he live to the flower of his age, he is
carried violently by his intemperate heat; if he attain to his youth, by
reason of the ardor and violence of his spirit, he cannot be kept within the
bounds of his duty by no counsel, or admonitions; if he live to his old age he
then dies and withers by little and little; yet all this is not enough; for
what Art could man ever yet find out, either to divert a plague, or to stop
the force of violent rayns falling from heaven, or stay an earthquake, or
quench a fire breaking out of the earth? I see a rank and mutual succession
of evils, and I behold a continuation of dangers: But if I come to the soul,
I see even there an army of diseases, by which it is besieged; if I shall wipe
away grief, fear comes in its place; if fear retire, anger arises; if anger
be appeased, envy comes in its room; misery is at hand, and evils are near;
nor does ever any certain rest befall us. Alas, alas, miserable creatures that
we are, how often is man even brought to nothing? I am astonished when I
ruminate on these things, and I pour forth my heart like water; I am not
contented with small drops of tears, but pour forth such plenty, as the
violent and swift running stream is wont to do; I can no where find ease,
nor ever peace, nor can I find any where comfort, but when I fly to thee my
God my Fatherly God; for thou pourest forth thy goodness night and day,
without ceasing. As it is the property of heat to warm, and of cold to cool:
so is it thy property, good God, to do that which is good. I am surely a
wretch, and sufficiently afflicted; yet thy goodness, thy beneficience, thy
care, has overcome all my misery, vanquisheth, and utterly brings to nothing
all my affliction. If I make a just reckoning, there is no man but oftener sees
it clear, than stormy; upon whom thou do often pour forth thy blessings
above his hopes, and thy gifts have overcome his wishes: thy bounties are free,
nay, unexpected monuments of goodness do of their own accord flow from thee:
for thou, King of the world, art thou compassed about by any offerings, or
sacrifices, that thou should confer on Mankind all these things that are so
useful for his life? do thou not administer the engendring heat of the
Sun, the cool refreshings of the Night, the Seasons, the Winds, and Raynes
to good and bad, to just and unjust, to free men and to servants, to poor and
rich, with an equal hand? It is thy property, O powerful and true God, to
afford blessings unsought for, to weary and feeble creatures, and such as are
continually brought low by many sorts of crosses. But I am exceedingly
refreshed, and I am transported with wonderful joy, when I consider that thou
art always an evident assister of good men, and do maintain the better
cause. Although many that belong to thee, do behold the posterity of Israel
often murmuring, and cursing; yet is he a rejoicing victorious rock, amidst
all the greatest dangers he is environed withal: He is oppressed, vexed,
troubled, and almost overwhelmed; but my helping God comes in season to his
aid, to deliver those that mourn. O admirable care of God for his people! O
more than Fatherly protection I am scarce my self, when I behold those great
works of my protecting God. Moses set in the Wilderness to feed his flock,
sees a burning Bush, hears thee out of the Bush, receives thy Commands, is
exalted in Power, is sent to Pharaoh, approaches him, speaks to him, is
contemned, and overcomes him. Egypt is smitten, Pharaohs disobedience is
scourged, and that not after one manner of way, that the sacrilegious King
might be tormented with variety of punishments. And what? after this he
rebels ten times, and is so many times punished. What is it then that I say?
why, I do conceive that during all this, thou tookest knowledge of the estate of
thy children, thou did judge of it, thou tookest care of them, and did most
benignly protect them; as often as thou smotest the rebelling Egyptians, so
often did thou cast back thine eye upon thine own; so often did thou
preserve them, and judge their enemies. But what followed all this I have said?
Israel is let to depart, does celebrate the Passover, does rob the Egyptians,
and goes thence with great riches. Pharaoh repents him, musters an army,
overtakes them in their flight; his army is stopped, he is divided from them
by darkness, the sea is dried up, Israel rejoices he is delivered by the
officious patience of the waves; Pharaoh follows after them, the sea returns
upon him, and he is swept away by the working waves. In order after these
things, the Hebrew Nation, that had conquered without war, enters the
wilderness, and journeyth without travel, and walks without a way: God
ushering them; they honorable in having God a fellow-souldier with them; and
being mighty, by his heavenly guidance following the moving Pillar, cloudy by
day, and fiery in the night; using fit distinctions of colors for the
difference of the times, namely, that he might distinguish the light of the
day, by a muddy darkness, and that he might enlighten the dusky night by a
bright shining flame. Thou addest O wonderful, bountiful and merciful God,
Fountains springing in a moment: thou addest the healed waters, either given,
or altered; keeping their form, but leaving their nature. Thou give them
tops of mountains with streams gushing out; thou make their dusty fields
flow with new streams; thou give them multitudes of quails, brought to
their tents, as they journyed. Thou God, most indulgent in pity, thou give
man things not only fit for his use, but baits to entice him unto thee: my
God, thou love and cherishest thy people, even with pleasure, to thee; Thou
assistedst them forty years long, the stars daily affording them food, and
the dropping poles of heaven in like manner flowing with pleasant sustenance,
not only for livelihood, but even for their delight. Thou preservedst the men,
without addition, or diminution in the parts of their bodies; without growing
of the nails, without wearing of the teeth, the hair always of one length,
their feet not gauled, their garments without tearing, and their shoes without
mending. The honor of thy servants does abound even in the dignity of their
vile Clothing. Here I find God in his office of instructing men, descending
to the earth; the Son of God applying himself to the earthly customs of men,
and a numberless number of commmon people admitted to the fellowship of thy
divine familiarity, to prevail with thee in the honor of thy holy
friendship. I hear God speaking near at hand, preaching the Law with his
divine mouth; I view the letters graven with the finger of God, the learning
people, and teaching God; and that there is as it were but one school of
heaven and earth, mixed of men and Angels. For so it is written, that when
Moses had reported to the Lord the peoples words, the Lord said unto him, Now
will I come to thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear me speak to
thee: And behold, a while after, they began to hear thunders, and lightnings,
and thick clouds began to cover the mountains. And again; He did descend upon
the top of Mount Sinah; And afterward he spoke with Moses, all of them seeing,
that the Pillar of the Cloud did rest at the door of the Tabernacle, and they
stood and worshipped in their Tent doors. Thou did speak, O Lord, to Moses
face to face, as one friend uses to do with another. O what a care have thou
of thy creature man, thou God that affordst and performest these so great
things for him: making vile man partaker of thy Word; and as it were admitting
him to the fellowship of thy holy company, opening thy hands full of immortal
riches, nourishing him with the cup of Nectar, and feeding him with heavenly
food! What greater care, I beseech thee, could thou perform in that thy
government, or what greater affection could thou use, that whereas they were
but in the action of this present life, they did notwithstanding then enjoy a
representation of their future bliss? Nor let any man here murmr, that thou
had this care of mankind heretofore, but that thou now have it not. Whence
shall I believe this repining does proceed? by chance, because we are not daily
fed with Manna, as they were, although we reap from our fields most plentiful
Wheat-harvests? or is it because we catch not Quails flying as it were, into
our hands: whereas we devour all kind of birds, of cattle and beasts? or
because we do not with open mouths receive the waters springing from the
rocks, whereas we drench our Tavernes with the juice of the grapes? Something
I add more, that we our selves who think that God did then take care of them,
and do suppose, that God does now neglect us: if we could exchange our present
blessings for theirs, which are past; we would utterly refuse to wish to be
in their Condition. For we would not lose the things we now have, that we
might possess the things which they then used. Not that we have better things
than that Nation then had, but because even they who were fed by the daily
ministry of heaven, and of God himself; did prefer the old gluttony of
their bellies, before the present good things they received; being sad with
the calling to mind of their carnal meats, and falling sick for the filthy
love of leeks and oyons; not that these things which they formerly used were
better, but because even as we now do, so did they then; they loathed the
things they had, and desired the things they had not. We do rather extol the
things that were then, than the things which now are; not that we had always
rather have them, if we might choose; but because this is an usual fault, that
man's soul is incident to; to desire the things are absent; and for other men's
things to please us better than our own; and for ours to please others more
than the things they do enjoy; so fastidious are we, most miserable men, that
we are not worthy to live, much less, of life with the good things
appertaining to it. But what ere thou give or deniest, thou art always a
Father, and do never forsake a son that trusts and hopes in thee. Give if
thou will, but only five loaves and two fishes; a handful of meal, a little
oil in a pitcher, a few shreds, and branches of trees, and no more; I will
boast of the care thou have of me, O my God, in thee will I boast my heavenly
Father, who take me up, nor can I receive disquietnesse from thee, for ever.
Thou will say to my soul, I am thy salvation; no good thing shall be diminished
to them that seek thee: they shall not be confounded in the evil day, and in
a time of famine they shall have enough. Although I fall, I shall not be
dashed to pieces, because thou set to thine hand. I never saw the just man
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread: I will seek thee, O Lord, and thou
shall hear me, and shall snatch me out of all my troubles: being poor I
will call unto thee, and thou shall save me from all my cares: those that
fear thee cannot truly suffer want: Thou will command that the meal in the
vessel fail not, that the oil in the pitcher decrease not, because I have
need of all these things. I will first seek the Kingdom of God, and other
things shall be added unto me. It is so far from thee, my God and Lord, that
thou should forsake thine, that thou make even dogs to help and give them
ease. I will expect thee, O Lord, I will play the Man, I will suffer thine
hand, O Lord, and my heart shall receive comfort; let my father and mother
forsake me, thou Lord shall take me up. O God thou shall be my help, nor
will thou despise me, O God my salvation. Thou shall set me upon a rock, thou
shall hide me in thy Tabernacle in the time of afflictions; thou shall hide me
in the depth of thy Tabernacle, in the time of affliction, that I may see thy
goodness in the land of the living.

CONTEMP. etc. 12.
Of the Tabernacle of the Children of Israel; Of the Cloud wherein Gods
especial presence was manifested; Of the Mercy-seat; Of the Arc; Of the
Manna; and Of Aarons rod.

I Creep before thy Tabernacle, my God, and I consider how thou did appear
to thy people: I find many terrible things, but yet comfortable also; thou
wrappest thy self in a Cloud, yet is not thy Majesty the less resplendent: it
is so great that thou affrightest, and art feared like a consuming fire; and
how shall I believe that an Intellect severed from all mixtion of mortality,
most excellent, most wife, and most holy, a spirit piercing through all things,
and intent even to each particular part of the Universe; which does as it were
to the strings of a most exquisite Harp, modulate the song of vanishing things
in a most pleasing variety; a Spirit unbegotten, immortal, everlasting; that
is only a place, yea a world able to conteyne it self, and the greatest world
of wisdom, of holiness, of understanding, of reason, of life, of forms; to
whom intelligible nature it self does breath forth, and ceases not to frame
and render praises, can be clothed in a cloud? yet thou cloathest thy self
with a cloud that thou might then exhibit thy self according to the time of
faith, not as thou art a God, but as men might endure to behold thee. Thou
teach us spiritual things, by corporal things; and do demonstrate unto
us invisible things, by things visible; thou art the sun O my God, but my weak
eyes cannot look steadfastly upon thy most resplendant light, except a cloud be
interposed; if I will try the strength of my eyes farther, I may easily be
blind; if I will soar higher, I may be in danger to be burnt to ashes. Let me
always bear in mind that which one of thy Saints was wont seriously to
ruminate upon; I am a man and understand not Gods secrets I dare not search
after them, and therefore I am afraid even to make an essay upon them, because
it is a kind of sacrilegious rashness to desire to know more than is
permitted unto me. In thy Tabernacle I see the Arc of thy Covenant; besides
the Arc, I see the Mercy-seat; I see Manna in the Arc, and those rocky
leafes, and Volume of stone wherein the Law was written, published amiddest
thunders, amiddest lightnings, amiddest the horrid sounds of heavenly trumpets,
amiddest the deadly savor of the ambient air, amiddest the poles of heaven
bellowing with these sacred noises, amiddest those fires, mists and clouds,
replenished with the holy Deity. O my God, how many mysteries do here lie hid,
that I would I might understand? me thinks, I see Christ in all these things;
for he is the true Mercy-seat, who alone has done away the sins of the
whole world, by the only sacrifice of his passion, and has made thee a God
propitious unto us. He was represented by that golden piece of workmanship,
wherein thou did promise that thou would dwell, and hearken unto those
that should call upon thee: for thou lovedst us also in him thy beloved one;
and in him art merciful unto us. He defends his Church, as that golden tent
did cover the Arc: and did hide the Law which was laid up in it from the face
of God, that dwelt above it: that he should not according to the rigor
thereof, take notice of our sins, or enter into judgment with us. Thou thy
self, my God, have promised him unto me, that he might be a sacrifice for me
in his own blood. Thou have made him a propitiation both for mine, and for the
sins of the whole world: O Christ my reconciler, my place of refuge, O my
hope, redeem me and reconcile me, that I lose thee not, and be forced to
bear the wrath of my everlasting Father for ever. He is the true Arc; for as
the Arc was made of pure gold, and the neatest wood; so my Redeemer, God and
Man, is consubstantiall of the most high Godhead, and the most perfect
humanity. The Tables were put in the Arc, because my Redeemer has in him the
perfect fulfilling of the Law, by whose benefits (apprehended by faith) our
disobedience becomes unhurtfull unto us. What more sweet than Manna? And what
more wholesome than Christ the bread of heaven? which whosoever by faith shall
eat, shall never be bitten with hunger, but nourished for ever by an
unspeakable happiness. I also find Aarons rod, sometimes dry, sometimes
flourishing; the rod of Jesse, the tree of life, Christ my Redeemer, with
suffering upon the cross gives up the ghost, and forthwith returns to life, and
flourishes without end. O the riches of the wisdom and understanding, which
thy Book affords them that love and hearken unto thee! O Christ, be thou my
Propitiatory, if the infernal tempter shall accuse me, be thou my Arc where
I may be hid, when sin does tyranously grow cruel against me, be thou my
staff whereon I may lean, when I shall enter the vale of death, be thou my
Manna wherewith I may be continually refreshed after death, in thine
everlasting Kingdom.

CONTEMP. etc. 13.
Of the Conception of Christ.

O What humility, O what a desire to save me had thou, O Christ my Savior:
there was no truth in my mouth, my throat was an open sepulcher, I have dealt
deceitfully with my tongue, and my spirit is not pure; and thou that art the
very mouth of truth, the throat of sweetness, the tongue of virtue, my most
unspotted Savior, and free from all contagion of sin, do kiss me with
the kisses of thy mouth; O blessed kiss and to be wondered at for its
admirable value, in which, one mouth makes not an impression upon another, but
God and Man are united together. With what else shall I compare thy
incarnation, but to a kiss? a kiss, a token of peace and reconciliation; and
by thy incarnation, was peace and reconciliation restored to the world. O what
a blessed day is that, when thwarting thy paths I receive a kiss from thy
offended mouth, in stead of a deserved reproof; as thy Spouse the Church cries
out, burning with impatient love, she cries out, Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth: with a desire kindled from the promises and benefits of
Christ, she beseeches the Messiah might be sent unto her, that she might hear
him speaking, and behold him instructing her: in his flesh, she requires him
to descend, and to be united to the humanity. Consider the Church O my soul,
who having (of a long time) had a promise of her Lords coming, from the mouth
of the Prophets; and having been a great while in suspense, raises her self
from the body; abandoning luxury, and carnal pleasures, and delights, and
disroabing her self of the care of secular vanities, does wish for the
infusion of the divine presence, and grace of the saving Word; and how is she
tortured and afflicted, that he comes so late? wounded as it were with love,
not able longer to endure his delay, turning to the Father, she beseeches
him, that he will send God the Word unto her. I will not have him speak by
Moses, nor by the Prophets; no; let him take my body upon him, let him kiss me
in the flesh: Follow my soul, thou which art a part of that most happy
assembly; follow the example of that groaning Church, and think on nothing
more; love, cherish, vow unto, and expect nothing more, than thy Messiah. See,
I beseech you, and consider, the familiar, and friendly communication of those
souls (sighing in the flesh,) with the heavenly powers; they rejoice in those
kisses, they ask for what they desire, yet they name not him they love,
because they doubt not, but that he knows them, with whom they have been
accustomed (so often) to converse withal; therefore they say not, let this or
that particular kiss me, but only let him kiss us; as Mary Magdalen did not
express his name whom she sought, but only said to him (she thought had been
the Gardner) Sir, if thou have taken him; What him? she utters it not, because
she thought that must needs be manifest to all, which could not (for one
moment) depart out of her heart; neither does that betrothed Virgin, desire one
kiss, burning continually with chaste love, and impatient of delays; but she
asks for many kisses, that her desires may be satiate. For she that loves, is
not content with the parcimony of one kiss, but requires many, chalenges many,
and so uses to commend her self often unto her beloved. Kiss thou also the
Lord, O my soul, lest at any time he be angry, and thou perish in the way. Who
will give thee unto me, O Lord? O let me find thee, and I will kiss, not my
hands, or any thing my hands can touch, but even thee, O Lord. Let the
tumultuous flesh be silent, let the phansies of earth, and water, of air, and
of the vault of heaven hold their peace; let dreams and imaginary revelations
be still; let every tongue, every sign, and whatsoever is acted in a trice,
be quiet; say nothing to thy self, O my soul, pass by thy self, and have no
thought upon thy self, but upon my God. For he is truly all my hope and trust.
For in God and our Lord Jesus Christ most sweet, most bountiful, and most
pitiful, is every of our portions, our blood and flesh: the lover does (as
much as possible) desire to be one with the thing beloved: and therefore they
cling together, and glue, as it were, their bodies in one, and they strive to
make, of both their souls, but one, by the conjunction of kisses. Thou, O
Jesus, my love, thou my desire, thou my thought, thou my hope, thou my wish, I
would I could always cleave unto thee. Would to God that where thou my portion
do reign, there I may at least be a subject, and where thou my blood do
rule, there I may obey, and where thou my flesh art glorified, I may not be
there confounded. I am indeed a sinner, but yet I distrust not of the communion
of grace; and if my sins do forbid it, yet my substance requires it; if
mine own offenses exclude me, the fellowship of my nature drives me not back;
for God is not so great an enemy, that he should not love his own flesh, his
members, and bowels. I might indeed despair, by reason of my too too many
sins and offenses, my infinite faults, and negligences, which I have
committed, and which I daily, and without ceasing do act, in heart, mouth, and
work, and by all ways that humane frailty can offend, except thou had
kissed me, except, O Word, thou had been made flesh, except thou should
dwell in me. Let reason here be silent, and let faith speak; the things are
true which I say, for thy Spirit has revealed them unto me; yet are they so
profound, that I cannot pierce into them; they are so high, that my abjectnesse
will not suffer me to reach them. I will adore them in silence, and admire in
my adoration. And thy miraculous incarnation, shall cleanse my spotted
conception. Let not reason conceive that which thy overshadowing does work, so
that my Salvation may be firm, sure, and unshaken.

CONTEMP. etc. 14.
Of Christ's Nativitie.

THat which none ever saw, now all the world beholds; that which none ever
heard, now all the world does hear; God, the Son of God, undergoes the shame
of our humane nature, and takes upon him the reproachful principles of our
earthly original; he lies in a manger, to whom Angels do yield their service;
he suffers himself to be wrapped in swaddling clothes, who gives clothing to
the heavens; no ambition seen in his house, a bare couch in a stable, and his
Mother lodged in hay; such an Inn does the worlds Creator make choice of;
these were the dainties of the holy Virgins childbed; rags in stead of
purple; for silk, and princely trimming, nothing but plain hemmes; he that
was (before the foundation of the world was laid) borne from the heart of his
Father, who had Alpha and Omega for his surname, the beginning and the close of
all things which were, or are, or shall be hereafter: now in the end of the
determined time, put on the shape of a servant, and is borne of a poor Virgin.
Let the vault of heaven sing, let every Angel sing, let all that belong to
virtue sing, to the praises of God, let no tongue be silent; and let every
voice, for ever and ever sound forth his praises. Old Age and youth, quires of
Infants, troops of matrons and virgins, the simple maidens with tunable
voices; let them with chaste consorts chaunt forth his praises; let every age
acknowledge that the reward of our life is come, after the bondage of our
sharp enemy. Whence is this, that not the Mother of our Lord, but that the
very Lord himself comes unto us? How great is he that is given to me? he is
the Angel of peace, the Lamb of God, the Benefactour of all, the horn of
salvation, the Bruiser of the Serpents head, the Governor of Israel; he is the
desire of the Gentiles, the guide of our life, and the expectation of the
Nations. He is the Son of the most High, the branch of Jesse, the humble Caller
of mankind; he is our Intercessour, he is our Righteousness, he is our
Deliverer; he is our Mediator, he is our Nourisher, he is our Helper. He is
the Prince of Peace, he is the great Prophet, the Restorer of our quiet, he is
our Redeemer. He is our Reconciler, he is King of Sion, a Savior, an
Expiatory Sacrifice; he is the heavenly Bridegroom, the Expeller of sadness,
he is the Word made flesh, the most ample Present, the heavenly Zelote; he is
all things. Let the bright heaven thunder, let the glad earth personate, let
yawning hell mourn, but let mankind keep a Jubily: we groaped in darkness,
and were blinded and covered in a most thick night; he proceeds out of the
darkness and night that expels these mists of ignorance and night of
sins. Our nature is not now strange to God, since that in it, even in Christ
our Mediator the fullness of the Godhead does now dwell; for the Virgins womb
was made choice of for the Lord of heaven and earth to spring in; nor was that
blessed mass, the Son of God incarnate for her only; but that of his
fullness all we might be made pertakers; God did not only make me, but he
made many things for me; seeing that the Word is made flesh for me, and
dwells in us, he is become one flesh with me, that he might make me one
Spirit with him. Christ would become that which man is, that man might become
what God is; it is impossible for me to understand the secret of his Nativity.
My understanding fails, my voice; nay, not mine only, but even the voice of
the Angels is stopped; it is above Powers, above Cherubin and Seraphin, and
above all sense. I therefore lay my hand upon my mouth, I may not search after
these so high mysteries: It may be known that he was borne; It is not to be
disputed how he was borne; it is rashness to enquire after this. This is an
unutterable Birth, who shall declare it? An Angel shows it, the Virtue
overshadowes, the Spirit assists, the Virgin believes, a Virgin brings forth,
and yet continues a Virgin; who does not admire? the Word is born an Infant, 8c
length is acknowledged to be short, and breadth narrowness, height lowness,
and depth shallowness; there light is found that shines not; the Word an
Infant thirsting for water, and hu^gring after bread. O Nativity, honorable to
the world, in its unpolluted holiness, lovely to men by the greatness of the
benefit bestowed, inscrutable also to the Angels, by the depth of the sacred
Mystery, and admirable in all these things, by the special excellency of the
newness thereof; even so, that there has not bin seen the like before it,
nor can there be seen any such to follow it. Ah what was the cause of Christ's
coming and Birth? what, but to save sinners? Take away sickness, take away
wounds, and there will be no use for medicines. Therefore the great Physician
came from heaven, because men lay sick in all places; all the stock of
mankind was lost by the sin of one, in whom all were; and therefore came one
without sin, that might save all that were in their sins; for not our
merits, but our sins, drew him from heaven. It is a thing becoming our
faithful souls, Christian breasts, believing minds, that we celebrate the
coming of our Lord with all devoutnesse, and that we meditate of his Birth,
being delighted wirh so great a consolation, and amassed with so excellent a
Dignity, and enflamed with so great a love. It is a worthy thing my brethren,
that we sing forth glory to the Trinity in unity, and to God the Divine, and
begotten offspring, and also to the Spirit, proceeding from them both. O Jesu,
thou that would be borne an Infant, make me become little in mine own
sight, and that I may not too much desire high things. Thou which did
proceed from the womb of a most chaste Virgin, be thou also borne in my chaste
heart, which is purified by thee. Thou who were born in the town of Bethlehem,
that is, the house of bread, and wast sought and found by the Shepherds; join
me often with thy Shepherds, and furnish me with the heavenly bread, and so
thy Nativity shall for ever satisfy me. The heaven was opened when thou wast
borne; open heaven also unto me, when the days of this my earthly birth and
pilgrimage are ended, that I may see and glorify thee. Angels accompanied the
Shepherds that went to thee; join them also to my company, that I be not cast
headlong into a by-way, or desire any thing besides thee; the brightness of
the Lord did shine upon those that did desire to be near thee; I would that I
might be always present with thee, and be illuminated by thy Light, that I
rush not into darksome fens, or be involved in filth and pernicious darkness.
They granted thee no room in the Inn; O make choice of a place in my heart,
let my heart be thy manger and thy swaddling bands, wherewith thou were swathed,
that I may for ever remain enclosed within thy wounds, and within thy mercy,
and my soul shall magnify thee, O Lord, and my spirit shall rejoice in God my
Savior: I will call out with those loud crying and fiery inhabitants of
heaven, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men: now is
wrought salvation, and power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his
Christ. Thou art worthy O Lord, our God, to receive Glory, and Honor, and
Power; Ah Lord, when shall this come to pass? when will thou bestow this upon
me?

CONTEMP. etc. 15.
Of the name Jesus.

WHat sound is this that flies to mine ears? it is a name that parents gave
not, neither did the circucising Priest bestow it, but an Angel brought it
from heaven; and God, that it should be brought and declared unto us, commanded
saying, His name is Jesus; how pleasant, delightful and forcible a name! O how
this name does comfort my soul! Jesus, is a God of giving men salvation, which
is expounded a Savior, or saving; for this reason of the name was given, when
before he was to be borne, by the Virgin, it was said, Thou shall call his name
Jesus, because he shall save his people from their sins. God has now
manifested his salvation, all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
our God; he has opened himself in the earth, and salvation and
righteousness have been fruitful. My God, thou make us safe in the Lord our
God: thou have given us a light of the Gentiles, which is our salvation even to
the ends of the earth. Let us therefore rejoice in God our Savior, say to the
Daughter of Sion, behold, salvation approaches. The other names of the
Messiah, are taken from the effects of his salvation, and do only signify
either the beginning, or middle, or only the end of salvation; but this name
Jesus, the whole proceeding thereof; for it does sufficiently contain and
express, the beginning, middle, and end thereof; and does include all other
things also within it. The Angels adore, and the devils do tremble at this
name, and men receive it for their salvations. This name is glorious in the
preaching of it; being thought upon, does nourish us, called upon, does
mollify and anoint us; not in the letters of it, but by its spirit and life.
Whence could there have been, in all the world, so great and so sudden a
light of faith, but by the preaching of the name of Jesus? Has not God called
us in the light of this name, into his admirable light to such as are so
enlightened and do see light by his light? Paul speaks deservedly, You were
sometimes darkness, but now are you light in the Lord. And the name of Jesus
is not only a light, but it is also food: art not thou as often refreshed as
thou do think upon it? What does so much fatten the soul, as the thought of
that name? What does so much repair the decayed senses? It strengthens our
virtues, it quickens good and honest manners, it cherishes chaste affections,
all meat is dry that is not moistened with this oil, is unsavory, not seasoned
with this salt. If thou writest to me, I relish it not if thou leave out
Jesus; Jesus is honey in the mouth, harmony in the ear, gladness and physic
for the heart. Is any of us sad? let Jesus come into the heart, and thence let
him flow into our mouths, and behold, at the rising of the light of that name,
every cloud is expelled, and the clear light returns: Does any slip into
sin? does he haste even to the halter of death by his despair? does he not
by invocation of this name of life, forthwith respire to life? Surely there
have been many others who have had the name of Jesus; for the name of Ioshuah
that led the Israelites through Jordan, into the land of Canaan, is the same
name with Jesus. The son of Syrach is called Jesus, and Jesus is mentioned in
Zachary; but these men bear the name without the thing; or if they wrought any
safety, they performed it by the power and help of this my Jesus. There were
likewise many that were called Saviors, as Othniel, Ehud, and others; but
these were only deliverers of the body, and did only for a time deliver the
people from their outward enemies, and did for a while keep them free from the
spoylers of this world: but this my Jesus is the true Savior, for he not only
frees and preserves his people from outward enemies, but from spiritual
subtilties in high places. Sometimes indeed he delivers us to outward enemies,
nor is he presently Jesus or a Savior; he sends amongst us war, plague,
hail, cold, poverty, disgrace, diseases, captivity, bondage, but it is for our
eternal salvation. He is also a faithful Jesus, nor suffers he any one to be
tempted above his strength, but gives our temptations such a measure, that we
may endure them; and although our Jesus does seem too cruelly and too long to
leave us in these external evils, and to lay too heavy a burden upon us, that
we are in fear to be overcharged, to yield, and to fail under it; yet let us
expect the coming of our Jesus, wwhich will be in a fit season. My Jesus best
knows our strength, and how much we can bear; and as the pilot does
diligently take care that the ship be not overfraighted, or fall into any
fearful danger; so my Jesus does weigh and balance our abilities, before he
lays any cross upon us, that it may not exceed them. Think always (O my
soul) upon Jesus, because thou have always need of thy Jesus. If thy sins
do vex thee and Satan does paint them forth, and set them before thee, that he
may persuade thee they are more in number than can be forgiven; that they be
larger than heaven and earth for magnitude; call upon thy Jesus, and make Satan
thy laughing-stocke. Jesus is my Savior, who has delivered me from my sins,
and has taken them upon himself; he is become for me and all the world a
ransom, a sacrifice, a reconciliation. And because it appears that he is not
conquered, but is truly a Savior, they must needs be sinners indeed, and not
feighned sinners that he does save; for this sentence can never be recalled;
Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. If the fear
of death does press thee and if Satan endeavor to dishearten thee with the
expectation thereof, and does portrait the figure of death before thee in a
most bloody and horrible manner and repeats unto thee the threats which God
denounces against sinners, and the vengeance which he reserves for them,
protect thy self with the Name of Jesus, and oppose it to the terrors of
death. Why should I fear death, that I should fear the pains thereof? when
as my Jesus (as himself does teach us) has slain my death; O death I will be
thy death. Does Satan strive to make thee sad, himself being punished and
overwhelmed with everlasting woe, desiring to draw others into his company?
pronounce thou therefore but the Name of Jesus with belief, and he vanishes
away; for he is therefore a Jesus, because he has ransomed thee from the
curse of thy sins, and has reconciled thee to the everlasting Father, that
thou might for ever rejoice with him. Why then art thou sad? What ever
befalls thee, let the Name of Jesus still come into thy heart, and between thy
lips, that the force thereof may assuage all afflictions. Nothing is more
sweetly sung, nothing is heard more pleasingly than Jesus the Son of God. No
kind of sin is so great, but the Name of Jesus is above it; O thou (therefore)
pleasant Name of Jesus, a delightful Name, a comfortable Name; O Lord Jesus,
if I have done that for which thou may damn me, yet have not thou lost that
whereby thou might save me. O most merciful Jesus, O most sweet Jesus, O
most gracious Jesus, O Jesus, Jesus, O Jesus the salvation of those that trust in
thee, O Jesus the salvation of those that believe in thee, O Jesus, the
salvation of those that fly unto thee, O sweet Jesus, the remission of all our
sins, O Jesus, for thy holy Name sake save me, that I perish not; O Jesus have
mercy upon me, while there is a time for mercy, and condemn me not in the time
of thy judgment. Jesus Christ, have mercy upon me; for this thy Names sake,
do unto me according to this thy Name; look on me miserable wretch, invoking
thy Name: it is true, my soul has deserved damnation, and my repentance is no
satisfaction; but it is certain that thy mercy is far exceeding all my
offenses; give me therefore (for thy Names sake) that mercy, O my Jesus; for
thou savest thy people freely by faith alone, without all merit of works, only
for thy Names sake, only by the power of thy Name, only by the blood of thy
body, whereby thou did appease thy Father, and obtainedst redemption: and
therefore do thou save thy people freely, and not for their works, that our
souls might be sure of redemption: it could not be sure if thou should not
save us but for the merit of our works; for either we have no merits by
manifestly sinning against the Law of God, or we have not merits enough,
because our works are imperfect, which can by no means satisfy Gods Law;
therefore that our consciences may be sure of the forgiveness of sins, it is
needful that thou be a Jesus gratis unto me: who seeing thou art true and
constant in thy promises, it cannot be that I can be deceived, if I trust in
thy Name: O most bountiful Jesus, O Jesus my most sweet Lord, keep me in this
faith and confidence, even to the end: let thy last word upon the cross, be my
last word in this life, and when I can speak no more, hear my last desire,
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; thou God of truth, and God of my
salvation; thou, even thou have redeemed me; O little Jesus, I only require
thee, comfort my soul, thou best of Babes, draw me, O draw me after thee, by
thy sweet favor, thou Prince of Glory. Lead me, O thou our true salvation, to
thine own Country; after thine own victory, wherein praise be unto thee for
evermore, Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 16.
Of Christ's, and of our Circumcision.

BEhold, my eyes, your Jesus; my soul, consider thy Christ; the knife is taken
in hand, and the Son of the most High is drawn away to be wounded; stay knife
from touching the Innocent, let the Synagogue spare the innocent, send him away
thou Circumcisor, without touching him; but my Jesus, why would thou be so
circumcised, be so wounded, and spill thy most tender blood? Why do thou so
hasten, O Lord, to the shedding of thy milky blood? it is my salvation which
makes thee thus to hasten: but why did thou submit thy self to be
circumcised, which art the Lord of the Law, nay, the Lawgiver himself? was it,
to confirm the Circumcision that thou had long before ordained to be
rightly observed, even till thy coming, and that the old Religion should not
seem utterly rejected; or that thou might save the Jews by receiving of
Circumcision, as thou did the Gentiles by Baptism, that is, were thou to save
them by the pouring forth of the purified dew, or was it that thou might
keep, fulfill, and establish all the Law? What need I to reckon up many
things? thou wast circumcised for the cause that thou wast borne and for which
thou did suffer: none of all this was for thy self, but all was for thy
Elect, for me, for all that cleave unto thee, that thou might pay for us
those debts, even thou that did owe nothing thy self, and might free us
from our own, and from the offenses of others. O most loving Jesus, I adhere
to thee, do thou everlastingly stick to me; I have run into debt, do thou
pay them. I beseech thee by that precious blood which thou wast willing to shed
for sinners, in thy most holy Circumcision, and afterward most abundantly to
power out for them, in thy most bitter passion, that thou might wash away
all mine iniquities; look upon me, most humbly petitioning, and often calling
upon thy holy Name; cause me, O Lord, readily to submit my self to thy Laws;
I learn from thy self, my Lord, to obey thy Laws, and to obey thee, not by
constraint, but by free consent; for this is the true obedience of the humane
nature, when it subjects its will readily to the will of God, and when by
working it perfecteth the good will it has received, with a willing liberty
without any constraint. Give me, O Lord, the Circumcision of the heart, which
is, that the cloud of error being taken away, to acknowledge the Creator, God
the Father, and his Son Christ, by whom he has created all things, that the
truth of God might be fulfilled; grant that I may cut off, and cast out of my
heart all uncleanness of thoughts, and impuritie of my senses. For the Gospel
has not enjoined cutting away of the Prepuce, but the circumcision of the
heart, and that by the Sword of the Spirit we should cut away all petulancy,
as well of our members, as of our affections: this Circumcision is not in my
power; succor my weakness O Lord, and assist me, that I may do that which
thou have promised by thy faithful servant Moses; the Lord shall circumcise
thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. I am present, O Lord, as thou have
commanded by thy faithful servant Jeremy, Be circumcised to the Lord, and take
away the fore-skinne of your hearts, that my wrath break not forth like fire.
Give me that which Saint Paul speaks concerning me; Thou art circumcised with a
Circumcision which is made without hands, if thou put off the body of sins by
the Circumcision of Christ. The Jews circumcised but one member of the body;
grant, O Lord, that I may circumcise all my members. The heart of man is
wicked, it must therefore be circumcised, and the Sword of the Spirit is to be
unsheathed for it; and this is the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
which if any one receives into his heart by faith, first his sins shall not
be imputed to him, but he shall be accounted just for Christ's sake; then the
holy Ghost shall be given unto him, by whose power it shall come to pass,
that the relics of sin shall not reign in his mortal body, but he shall
fit his members as weapons of righteousness unto God. Stir me up, O Lord,
and strengthen me, that I may circumcise my eyes, that they behold no vanity,
nor defile themselves with privy adulteries. Thou have commanded this, O Lord,
if thy right eye offend thee pluck it out and cast it from thee. Stir me up,
O Lord, and strengthen me, that I may circumcise my hands, that they be not
enraged and shed innocent blood; for thou have commanded this, O Lord, if thy
right hand offend thee cut it off. Stir me up and strengthen me, O Lord, that
I may circumcise my feet, that they go not in the way of sinners, and that
they haste not to do evil; so putting off the old man, and putting on the
new, I shall become a new creature, and shall possess the inheritance of thy
Kingdom, O Christ; I shall enjoy the society of the citizens of heaven, the
quire of Angels singing Hymns unto thee, and the sweet fellowship of all thy
blessed ones. Thus thou shall speak (O Christ) to thy Father, I will that those
thou have given me, may now be with me, that they may behold my glory which I
had with thee before the world was made. O when will thou speak this, O Lord,
O when shall I hear this?

CONTEMP. etc. 17.
Of the passion of Christ.

Do thou ascend for me to Jerusalem, that all things might be accomplished
which are written by the Prophets? that thou might be exposed for a scorn
to the Gentiles, that thou might be scourged, that thou might be spit
upon, that thou might be fastened to the Cross? thou who art the God of
glory, the God of life and safety, the chief, best, and Omnipotent, most
merciful, most just, most secret, most present, most beautiful, most strong,
stable, and incomprehensible God; invisible, yet seeing all things, immutable,
yet changing all things, immortal, illocable, interminable, unbounded, without
ending, inestimable, unutterable, fearful and terrible, to be honored and
reverenced, venerable and renowned, never new, nor ever waxing old, and
innovating all things? For me, who am deep darkness, miserable earth, the
son of wrath, a vessel fitted for reproach, begotten in uncleanness, living
in misery, that must die in extremity; a vessel taken from a dunghill, a shell
of corruption, full of filth and horror, blind, poor, naked, subject to many
wants, and wretched, and mortal as I am, ignorant when I came in, or when I
must go out of the world, whose days pass like a shadow, whose life
vanishes like the shadow of the Moon, a mad man's fancy, as the blossom
upon the tree blows, and forthwith is rotten, now flourishes, and by and by
is dried up, whose life is a frail and fading life, that the more it
continues, the more it decreaseth; the farther we proceed in it, the nearer it
approaches to death. What shall I think? what shall I say? what have thou
committed, O most sweet Savior, that thou should be thus judged? what have
thou done, O my most loving Savior, that thou should be handled so rudely?
what is thy wickedness? what thy offense? what the cause of thy death? what
the occasion of thy condemning? I am the stripe of thy pain, the offense for
which thou art slain; I am the desert of thy death, the wickedness revenged
upon thee; I am the spleen of thy passion, and the labor of thy torments. O
the greatness and foulness of my sins! Out of the consideration of the remedy
I value the measure of my danger; and so is the esteem of the medicine, as is
the heaping up of my grief and fear. O the sweetness and greatness of thy
love! although, O Lord my God, the world was placed in the midst of
mischief, and is full of misery, yet sentest thou thy blessed Son into the
world for us, and for this did thou send him into the world, that he being
sold might ransom us, and being put to death might restore us to life, might
honor us by suffering disgrace, and might adopt us for his sons. If I would
reckon up what he suffered for most miserable man, what voice would suffice me
for it? what ears would not be weary to hear it? for he was no sooner borne,
but his blood was spilt in the circumcision; he was scarcely circumcised, but
forthwith was he designed to the slaughter; he no sooner professed his doctrine
openly, but he was called the impious, blasphemous, and raging stirrer up of
the people, even by them whose God he had always been after a peculiar
manner. I do every where behold misery, calamity, disgraces, reproaches,
griefs, poverty, weariness, sadness, hunger, thirst, that he seems but
only to have finished in his passion what he had continually suffered in the
whole course of his life. After that the Son, coeternall and consubstantiall
with his Father, the Omnipotent Patron of the Church, ordained for a judge of
the quick and the dead, had fervently powered forth those prayers, which he had
conceived for man's salvation, wherein he at the point of death more especially
recomme^ded to his Father, that dear pledge, (his Church) for whose sake he
suffered not only valiantly, but most willingly and freely, not a drop, but
streams of blood to flow from his five wounds. Walking with his disciples
beyond the brook, that took it is name from the shady vale, the traitor meets
him, with an armed troop of servants and officers; his neighbors fly from
him, his Disciples retire, a friend and companion, (saluting the innocent)
betrays him for a malefactor; but it was the same whom before (O cruel
mischief) he had sold for a little money, and for a base price; his hands are
tied, his arms are bound; thus tied and bound is he led away; and the most
dear young man, that a little before leaned upon his most holy bosom,
follows after, and Peter also, but a far off, and with great fear; none of
the rest are present: those whom he had loved, whom he had full fed, whom he
had taken care of, whom he had healed, do not so much as look back upon him;
they all forsake him that never forsook any man; he is made an unhappy
spectacle in the house called Pratorium; his shamefast body is made naked, that
offspring of the most pure Virgin; and was scourged even to death by those
beastly Sergeants, ordained to scourge malefactors; they are instant both with
words and stripes, and drunk no less with blood than wine; they bind him to a
pillar, they load him with stripes they multiply strokes upon strokes, the
place did ring with their smart blows; streams of blood issue from his torn
body, and now there is scarce the resemblance of a body to be seen throughout
him. Behold the man, says Pilate. And here lift up thy eyes, O my soul, and
look steadfastly upon the face of the Lord thy God; leave awhile all thy
vanities, to which thou have all thy life addicted thy self, and if thou
can, collect (for one moment) all thy thoughts, and bestow them (this day)
upon thy Savior. Behold the man, behold a man of sorrow, behold him that is
beautiful above the sons of men, ruddy, chosen out of thousands, whose hair
is as the palm branches, black as the ravens, whose eyes are like the doves
eyes. by the fountains of waters, which are washed with milk, whose lips
distill the choicest myrrh, like the lillies; behold then, it now raines
nothing but blood, his hair cleaves together with blood, his head (pierced
with thorns) does dart forth blood, his nostrils bruised with the strokes of
the fist, have besmeared his face with swart blood, and which is most miserable
of all, being tied and bound, he has not wherewith to wipe of his blood, he
has not, I say, wherewith to wipe away his blood, forcing as it were, from all
parts of his body. Behold the man; This is that face which the heavens cannot
behold, and hell dares not behold; this is he that now keeps silence, whose
voice is heard in the clouds, whose thunder daunteth the courages of men with
his fearful claps. Behold the man; behold the Lord of all things stands in
want, amidst all those things which he does possess; he stands bound, who
frees all; he stands wounded, that heales all. Behold the man; for thy cause, O
man, stands he before the judge, before us all does he stand for us all; he
stands without a garment, he stands robbed, that no wound of his body might be
hid from the beholders. Learn, O man, out of these things which he suffered for
thee, what account Christ made of thee, to the end, by how much the viler thou
art for whom he suffered, by so much the dearer thy Christ may be unto thee:
Learn, O man, to avoid those things which may offend thy God. Behold with how
much sweat, with what labor, with what grief he stood, that he, the Son of
God might reconcile thee to his Father. I have said many things, yet if thou
considerest the rest, they are very few; for the officers add reproach to his
punishments, while they cloth his body with a purple garment, made more purple
with his most innocent blood. They fasten a prickly crown, made of stiff
thorns, upon his reverend head; they salute him for a King, and strike their
King over the face; and they blow upon the glass of Angels with the worst sort
of mixed stincks, even the stench of their breaths corrupted by surfeting, and
mingled with spittle: and by and by when they come to Calvary, the profane
wretches do prepare themselves for the butchery, and lay upon his fainting
body, that most accursed punishment of the Cross: his most innocent hands are
fastened with nails, which never did wrong to any, but had wrought salvation
for all men; his most holy feet are fastened with an iron band; wretch that I
am, they must be joined together, that had been exercised in so frequent
travel, for mine, and for the salvation of all men: His eyes swim in blood,
those two that were wont to be the lights of the good, but lightning to the
wicked: his pure mouth is silent, from which had rained honey combs; his
tongue is tied, which (with its very silence) convinces the cruelty of the
parricides: heaven was afraid of this spectacle, and (in it its mourning weed)
bewailes its Creator the Lord of the Stars; it withdrew it self within a
sudden darkness, as ashamed of so great a wickedness; the Angels groan, the
Citizens of heaven break forth into tears. O face of man, harder than a
flint, that with dry eyes can read this story: O heart of man, harder than an
Adamant, that these things cannot penetrate: O fierce and steely heart of man,
that considers not these things. Thy Savior (being weary and overcharged under
so great a burden) cries and calls out, and in his soul calls upon us, My
people, what have I done unto thee? or how have I been troublesome unto thee?
answer me: I have been no Usurer, nor has any through the earth taken use for
me, yet all do curse me; God has shut me up with the wicked, and has
delivered me to the hands of the wicked. Many calves have compassed me about,
fat bulls have besieged me. They opened their mouths upon me, as it were a
raging and roaring Lion. I am powered out like water, and all my bones are
scattered abroad; my heart, in the midst of my bosom, is like melting wax;
my strength is dried up like a potsheard, and my tongue cleaves to my gums,
and thou have brought me into the dust of death. He cried, he called out, but
there was none that would hear; he is led without the city, to the place made
infamous for the punishing of the wicked therein, as unto a public separate
place, that he might not pollute any man by his contagion, which the adjoining
inhabitants gave a name from the dead men's souls, which lay scattered every
where abroad within it. The Captain of the heavenly hosts, led forth in the
sight of men and Angels, to be fastened between heaven and earth, unto the
accursed Cross, and to be refreshed with vinegar; he is wounded, he is slain,
he is thrust through with a spear; what current of language can sufficiently
unfold this misery? but thls remembrance of such stupendous things, requires
rather the tears of the faithful, than the Orators eloquence. O who shall
give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to mine eyes, that I may weep
night and day? I will weep with strong tears, I will make drunk my cheeks
with my tears; the righteous perish, and there is none that takes it to
heart; the Lord of heaven gives up the ghost, and there is not one that thinks
it concerns him any thing. Raise up thy self, O my soul, and weary thy self
in meditating upon the passion of thy Lord; no time is more happily spent than
that which the devout soul imployeth upon the passion. O wonderful condition
of his censure, and unutterable disposition of a mystery! the unjust does
offend, and the righteous is punished, the guilty transgresses, and God is
chastised; the impious sins, and the righteous is condemned; the good
suffers that which the wicked deserves; that which the servant is indebted,
the Master does pay. Whither, O whither thou Son of God, does thy humility
descend? how far has thy love been inflamed? how far did thy love reach?
and how far did thy pity e^tend? O Lord Jesus Christ, govern and guide me
by thy Spirit, that my soul being pricked by thy visitation, may crucify its
flesh, with the sins and lusts thereof. O Lord Jesus, I only put my trust in
thy passion and death. O Lord Jesus Christ, who have witnessed, that thy
delight is to be with the sons of men: thou who becamest man for man, in the
later age be mindful of all thy premeditations, and inward grief, which from
the beginning of thy conception, thou did endure in thy humane nature; but
chiefly in the instant time of thy most saving passion, foreordained from all
eternity, in thy divine heart. Remember the sadness and bitterness which thy
soul was possessed with, as thou did testify, when thou said, My soul
is heavy, even to death: and when in thy last Supper, thou did deliver thy
Body and Blood to thy Disciples when thou washedst their feet, and when sweetly
comforting them, thou did foretell thy near approaching passion. Remember
the fear, anguish, and grief which thou did endure, through all thy tender
body, before thy suffering upon the Cross; When after thy troubled prayer,
thou did sweat that bloody sweat, when thou wast delivered by thine own
Disciple, taken by thy chosen people, accused by false wi nesses, unjustly
sentenced by three several Judges in the holy City; when at the time of the
Passover, in the flourishing time of thy youth, being innocent, thou wast
condemned, wast delivered, wast spitted on, thine own clothes pulled off, and
others put upon thee; thou wast buffetted, thy face and eyes were covered; when
thou wast bound to the Cross, and crowned with thorns. O most sweet Jesus,
give me, I beseech thee, for the memory of thy pains and passion, true
contrition, and confession, and also remission of all my sins before my death;
and in my death grant me comfort and consolation of spirit, and after death
grant me salvation and glory, Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 18.
Of the first and second word of our Lord spoken upon the Cross.

O My soul, one of thy faithful servants sadly and mournfully cries out,
concerning Job, what a pageant of triumph has God made of the Devil in that
man; what an ensign of his glory has he erected from his enemy, when he did
(with great patience) cleanse away the unclean flowing matter of his sores,
when (sportingly) he did call back the worms that crawled forth from his
sores, to the same holes and feeding places of his worme-eaten flesh! But how
much has thy Savior out-gone him in constancy of mind, and an unshaken
patience? he in the last necessity, in the pangs of death, in the pains of
hell, sorsaken and made exceeding sad, by his angry God, fails not in the
courage of his mind; he showed no sign that his heart departed from the path
of righteousness; but as he began, so continues be to love mankind. Hear the
words that he utters from the chair of his cross; they were few, but great,
profitable, and worthy never to depart out of a Christians heart, as long as he
has his vital breath. Thus he speaks; Father forgive them, they know not what
they do. Oh thy supereminent love, O Lord! thou prayest, not O Lord, that they
might be punished who afflicted and crucified thee; but that they might enjoy
the merit of thy passion, and be saved. Thou so aboundest in thy love, that
forgetful of thy most exquisite sufferings, thou think on nothing but the
reconciling of sinners O incomparable humanity of unspeakable mercy! with what
gentle and friendly eyes do thou lock upon me from the Altar of the Cross!
how can any man despair, seeing we have so diligent, so faithful, so loving,
and so zealous an intercessour? Where are you trembling sinners? where are you
affrighted conseiences? do you delight to see the heart of your Lord to
overflow with grace? Come and behold his Cross: Come, come, see his heart
mounting into his tongue, and begging pardon for your sins. Jesus, my God, I am
also present amongst sinners, amongst those that crucify thee; look on me,
and receive me; my sins, my sins were those sharp nails, which pierced and
fastened thy feet, and hooked them to the Cross. O Jesus, have mercy upon me,
and intercede for me to thy heavenly Father; intercede for me to day, this
hour, this moment, that he may pardon me my sins. In the second place he said,
Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. How mild, O
Lord, how courteous art thou to sinners! thy delight is amongst the sons of
men, even in thy strongest and most unutterable torments. Thou wast hanged
between a most wicked pair of thieves; thou stretchest forth thy hand, that
one of them might take hold of it, and that thou might draw him to thee with
it, and gather him to thee, as a hen gathers her young ones under her wings.
How pleasing is the society to thee, when a sinner joins himself to thee, and
(if they will) with what affection do thou receive and heal them? The Thief
on the left hand thinking reproachfully of thee, does revile and blaspheme thee
most virulently; therefore thy sorrows, sweat, labor, drops of blood, streams
of blood, prayers and intercession, could nothing profit him: the Thief on the
right hand, having a zealous opinion of thee, acknowledges thee; and though he
cannot with his hands, yet does he embrace thee with a contrite and devout
heart; he begges a great thing of thee, and obtaines the greatest; he begges
for a favorable remembrance of him, and he obtains eternal gladness. O
example of true and wonderful repentance! For what is true repentance? what,
but that which is sorrowful for offenses, confesses them, and has recourse
to Christ their Deliverer by a stedfa^^ faith? but it is miraculous, because
then at length Christ is acknowledged the expiation of his sin, when his most
sick soul does meditate the forsaking of the habitation of his body; and the
Redeemer himself is in suffering the last and most horrid punishment. O Christ
my Lord and my God, grant that I also may bewail and confess my sins, and
ask thee pardon for them, and always weigh with my self thy merits; grant
that I may do this with the Thief; but that I may not put off my desire of
thee to the last period of my life, as many do, who naughtily excuse their
most wicked procrastination, by the example of the Thief. Let me not come to
that hardness of heart, that the late gained salvation of the converted Thief
should make me more careless; nor let me say my conscience tortures me not; my
life shall not trouble me, because I see the Thief had all his sins pardoned
in a moment. Consider o my soul, thou guest and companion of my body, not so
much the concise confession and faith of the Thief, but the earnest devotion,
and mournful time wherein the Apostles themselves did wander and forsake their
Master: then imitate the faith and zeal of the Thief, and (at last) promise
to thy self his salvation. Now that unplacable enemy of our souls, tries to
lead thee into this security, that in the fatal hour of death he may thrust
thee (headlong) into infernal destruction. It is impossible to be spoken, how
many are circumvented and damned by the shadow of this deceitful hope; he
deceives himself, and makes a sport of his damnation, whosoever seeks not for
the mercy of God but at the hour of his death; they are abominable to God,
that sin with a hope that it will be time enough to be converted to God in
their old age The Thief that at this time did so miraculously apply Christ's
death to himself, had not formerly put off his repentance, for he had never
(before) heard of the doctrine of Christ; therefore in this minute of an hour,
in this twinkling of an eye, make me pray unto thee, and convert thee unto
me, lest (securely) promising my self salvation, I fall from my salvation.
Grant that being converted, I may be charitable to my neighbor, and take care
for his conversion and salvation, as the penitent Thief did admonish the
impenitent Thief, and did labor to bring him unto thee. Ah my Lord, remember
me also in thy Kingdom, if thou will at least think me worthy to be remembered,
and cast a gracious eye upon me, and I shall have enough, because I am sure of
thy power and wisdom, and I am confident of thy pity and charity. Ah suffer
me to be with thee in Paradise, where is the souls happiness, and the
beautiful vision of God; I cannot be well without thee, nor can any ill be
with thee.

CONTEMP. etc. 19.
Of the third and fourth word of Christ uttered upon the Cross.

WHo are they, O Lord Jesus Christ, who not only followed thee to the Cross,
but do also abide under thy Cross? Who are they not only spectators of thy
most cruel punishment, but exposed also to the cruel torment of their eyes
and souls? It is Christ's Mother, the crown of Virgins; it is Mary thy Mother,
it is John, thy kinsman, it is thy most loving Disciple, who leaned upon his
Masters breast when he was at supper, him whom thy soul loved; a sword does
pierce their souls, thorns and needles do prick their eyes, whilst they see
thee stretched upon the Cross, with all thy sinews torn, all bloody, even
springing forth with blood; thou have taught me, by those thy distressed
beholders made wet with showers of tears, that thy most dear children are
most near to the Cross; those whom thou do most fervently love, they are
most grievously and most often made subject to the Cross. There cannot be a
true Church that cannot be miserable: thou thy self do drink to her in the
cup of affliction, which if she refuse, or loath it, she is a bastard. We ought
to be like thee; let us be contented that we may be as our Master; whosoever
desires to be above his Master, is proud, and not worthy of his Master: we are
a burning bush, which is burnt, but not consumed; we are a city besieged, but
not taken; we are the Moon laboring under an eclipse, but not perpetually
losing her light; we are the Arc of Noah, exposed to the Flood, yet not over
whelmed with it; we are the woman in travel whom the dragon pursues, but yet
kills her not; we are the lilly amongst the thorns; and yet we wither not;
thy most cruel torments O Lord, could not so far afflict and torture thee,
but that thou had a care of thine, but that thou would speak to thy
mother, and to thy disciple; for thy third word upon the cross was uttered to
them, behold thy Son, behold thy Mother, Me thinks O Lord, I see into thy
bowels, into the depth of thy thoughts; thou complainest, the sorrows of
death have compassed me about; but yet that sword does no less break, and
wound my heart, which has with unspeakable torment peirced thy soul, most
sweet mother, I behold also thee most loving young man, the most inimate of my
friends; most sweet desciple, I behold thy groans, and sighs, for the loss
of him, in whom thou have placed all thy hope and trust. I therefore that am
forsaken of all, do bring to both of you, that small aid I am able; thou O
Mother, behold another Son for thee; thou my disciple, behold another help
for thee. O most holy Jesus, O most faithful Savior, O most merciful helper,
how many sad widows do thou even now comfort? how many poor orphans do
thou now relieve? how many afflicted persons do thou now take charge of? I
am also widowed of all comfort, and deprived of all sustenance; robbed of all
protection and aid; the anxieties of my mind are many, my affliction is great,
my griefs are multiplied; comfort me, sustain me, take care of me, O thou
omnipotent Comforter of those that be sad, thou Strength of those that labor;
let my groans come unto thee, what extremity soever I am in, that in my
necessities I may joy in the presence of thy mercy. Hear also, ye that have
ears to hear, the fourth word. Let my soul attend, let my spirit attend, and
let all the devotion that is in me, give her attention; our Priest, (in the
days of his flesh) offered up prayers and supplications, with tears and
strong cries unto him, that was able to save him from death, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? The just God and heavenly Father, who begat thee
from eternity, who by a voice from heaven, testified of thee, This is my
beloved Son, hear him, has forgotten thee; he left thee not for thine own
cause, but for mine; for I by my sins have begotten thee these labors and
griefs; it was I was to be forsaken, but thou stoodest in my stead; thou who
speak righteousness, who art the bulwark of salvation, have trod the
wine press alone, and there was not a man to help thee; thou lookedst about,
and there was no helper; thou soughtest, but foundst none that might save: O
how bitter was this forsaking to thee, but how pleasant, and how happy to me!
Thou God, exceeding long-suffering, thou shall not leave me for ever, because
thy Son was forsaken for me. Thou ardent lover of my soul, thou diligent
Savior of sinners, thou most courteous searcher of men, thy most obedient
Son took on him the punishment which was due for my sins, which are so much
against thee; he has borne the sinners burden, he has endured the horrors
of death, and terrors of hell, and has most largely satisfied for me. Leave
me not then, O my God, depart not from me, O my God, in the day of my death; if
the so copious satisfaction of thy Son, if my so dangerous misery can move
thee to compassion, be present with me most miserable sinner, pitifully hear
my prayers and help me in the hour of death, neither remember my iniquities,
but O thou fountain of mercyes, deal with me according to thy exceeding
great mercy.

CONTEMP. etc. 20.
Of the fifth word of Christ, uttered upon the Cross.

GAther, O gather your selves together, and hear, says the Patriarch Jacob,
when he stretched forth his feet, to enter into the way of all flesh, and stood
even at the threshold of his wished-for eternity; but if the last words of a
man, were to be received with such attention, what attention may be required,
what fervor, and what diligence, to hear his last words, who is both God and
man, who is above all the Patriarchs, in whom all the Patriarchs did trust,
and whom they wished so often to behold? The words were seven. The number of
seven, is a peculiar number, a holy number, and is used in many mysteries; it
is here also peculiar, it is holy, and not barren of mysteries; thou have
already understood this, O my soul, and thou shall know it in part hereafter.
The first word of our Lord was, I thirst; ah Lord, all thy spirits were
dissipated, all thy strength issued forth in the torrent of thy blood; for thou
wast a man of sorrows, and experienced in infirmities, despised, and a man of
the least esteem, although thou had committed no offense, nor was guile
found in thy mouth; therefore wast thou scorched with extreme thirst, and yet
thou Savior and preserver of men, thou could not obtain drink from men. O
most barbarous cruelty! the Lord did travel with extreme thirst, at the
beginning of his passion, and that thirst did increase still more and more, so
that it was one of the greater sort of torments, which the Lord endured upon
the cross: for the letting out of the great plenty of the vital fountain,
does dry and cause thirst; therefore the Lord, who after much weariness and by
his scourging lost much blood, and afterward (being crucified) had four open
fountains, as it were in his body, from which great plenty of blood, had for a
long time issued forth; how could it be, but that he must be tormented with
extreme thirst? They who have received many wounds, from which much blood does
flow, desire nothing so much as drink, as if they suffered nothing but thirst;
but who was there that took pity, and offered so much as cold water, who was
present, who had a fellow-feeling of his sorrows? there was not one, nor any
found to comfort him; O Jesus, thou heavenly Lord, they gave thee gall to eat,
and in thy thirst, they have thee vinegar to drink; thy beloved John says
there was a vessel set full of vinegar, and they fastening a sponge full of
vinegar to an hysop stalk, offered it to his mouth. O cruel wickedness! as
they had at the beginning a little before his crucifying, offered him wine
mixed with gall; so at the departure of his soul they offer him vinegar, a
most pernicious thing for his wounds, that Christ's passion might be a true and
continued passion, from the beginning to the end, without any mixture of
comfort; in stead of refreshing and pleasing liquour, they offer him hurtful
and bitter. O refreshing without any refreshing; O most lamentable consolation!
When Sampson had slain the Philistims, he thirsted exceedingly, and the Lord
opened a great tooth for him, in the jaw bone of an ass, whence waters did
flow; and thou, when thou had overcome the most potent enemies, the world,
satan, and death; did also thirst extremely, but no waters were given
thee, and the Antitype was in a far worse condition than the type, which the
Conqueror of the Philistims did represent; we (alas) had deserved eternal
thirst, to us was due that scorching heat which the glutton had, when he
lifted up his eyes, (being in torments) and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus
in his bosom, and crying said, Father Abraham, take pity of me and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and refresh my tongue,
for I am tormented in these flames; but thou that take pity of us, that most
ardently thirstest for our salvation, have (in thy thirst) suffered that
thirst, and have deserved so much for us, that we shall one day neither hunger,
nor thirst any more, neither shall Sun, or heat fall on us, because thou do
govern us, and leadest us to the fountains of waters, and shall wipe away all
tears from our eyes; thou shall make us drunk with the plenteousnesse of thy
house, and refresh us with the streams of thy pleasure. O Lord, as the heart
desires the fountains of water, so longs my soul after thee O Lord; my
soul has thirsted after God, the living fountain; when shall I come and
appear before the face of God? O Lord, when shall I worthily call to mind thy
mercyes, thy praises which are far above all things, which thou have given
me, and exceeding the multitude of the goods of my house, which thou have
bestowed upon me, according to the multitude of thy mercyes?

CONTEMP. 21. etc.
Of Christ's sixth word uttered upon the Cross.

THou have performed all, and every of those things, which thou knew
necessary to recover our salvation, most willingly, and with all thy heart. And
therefore thy sixth word was not, it shall be finished; as thou did say in
thy journey to Jerusalem; behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall
be fulfilled, which are written by the Prophets concerning the Son of man; for
he shall be delivered up to the Gentiles, shall be mocked, shall be scourged,
and spitt upon, and after they have scourged him, they shall put him to death.
But he says, it is finished: whatsoever the wicked nation could invent, to
exasperate thy torments, is finished; thou truly did foretell the hour,
and power of darkness, and the time of thy crucifying; I have finished say
thou, the work which thou gave me to do; but that was another work; namely
the work of Preaching the Gospel, as thou thy self do intimate unto me,
when thou addest, I have manifested thy name unto men: this work which thou
say is finished, is the work of suffering for mankind; the work of drinking
off the cup of the passion, which thy father has given thee, thou have now
drunk it all off, so that there remains nothing, but that thou give up the
ghost; the power which was given the apostate Angels, and the filthy rabble of
wicked men, is finished; thy pilgrimage wherein thou wentest out from thy
father, and did come into the world, is finished, wherein thou wast upon
the earth like a husbandman, and a travailer; the mortality of thy humanity is
at an end; every prophecy which the prophets had foretold concerning thy life
or death, is finished; the greatest sacrifice of all sacrifices is finished,
that upon which all the sacrifices of the old covenant as types and shaddows
did reflect; for by one oblation, thou have for ever made perfect those that
are sanctified, and art become the end of the Law, to every one that believes.
Now the variety of carnal sacrifices ceasing, thou fulfillest all those
distinctions of beasts by once offering up of thy body, and blood; thou have O
Lord drawn all things unto thy self; for by rending the veil of the temple,
the Sanctum Sanctorum departed from the unworthy high Priests, that the figure
might be turned into a truth, the prophecy into a manifestation, and the Law
into a Gospel: O clean, O unspotted sacrifice, whose Altar was the Cross,
which the viler it was before Christ overcame it, so much the more famous, and
noble did it afterward become; the fire thereof that consumes the burnt
offering, and perfecteth the sacrifice, is this immeasurable charity; which
like a furnace exceedingly heated, did burn in thy heart O Jesus, which the
many waters of thy sufferings could not extinguish. O Jesus, my redeemer, my
mercy, my Savior, I praise thee, I give thanks unto thee, though far
unproportionable to thy benefits, though very void of devotion, though lean in
comparison of that fatness which thy most sweet affection toward us does
require in them; yet my soul does pay unto thee what thanks she is able, not
such as she knows are due unto thee, from me. Thou hope of my heart, thou
virtue of my soul, let thy most powerful worth perfect that which my most
chill weakness does endeavor; my life, thou end of my intention, though I
have not loved thee so much as I ought to love thee, yet do I at least desire
to love thee as much as I ought. O Jesus, let this word always stick in my
memory, It is finished. When sin and damnation shall band themselves against
me wrestling with the pangs of death, and shall present unto me my ugly life,
made deformed by my sins, let me be able then to say, the sacrifice for my
sins is finished: For thou art the Lamb of God that take away the sins
of the world. Thou have not redeemed me with corruptible silver and gold, but
with thy most precious blood, as it were of an unspotted, undefiled lamb. When
the law shall accuse me, and shall exact punishment, let me say each tittle of
it is accomplished: For when the fulness of time was come, God sent his Son,
made under the Law, that he might redeem those which were under the Law, and
that we also might receive the adoption of children. When death shall infest
and terrify me, let me say, thy power is determined, thou art conquered by my
Lord, who has spoiled thee of thy power, has taken out thy sting, and purged
out thy poison, that death may be to me a sweet repose, great gain, a
dismission in peace, a recalling from evils, a momentary hiding me till wrath
is past, and till heaven gates be opned for me. When kindred, friends, and
acquaintance, shall at the time of my departure bewail my going hence, and
compass my bed with groans and tears; let me say my course is finished, the
appointed time is past, the period is fixed which we cannot pass, the glass
is run, the hour of freedom draws near; here my misery makes a stand, and
the haven I make to is near, where all tears shall be wiped away: behold I
leave unto you a Fulfiller of all good, and an asswager and ender of all evil!
he shall comfort you, if you fly unto him; he shall keep and defend you, to
whom I recommend my soul, and to whom I recommend you the beloved of my soul,
for evermore, Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 22.
Of the seventh and last word of Christ, uttered upon the Cross.

ALthough, Lord Jesus Christ, great is thy humility, great thy abasement, and
great is thy affliction, that thou seem scarce a man, but a worm; yet in thy
seventh and last word, before thou gave up the ghost, tho-shewedst thy self
not a man only, but even set above the reach of man's power; for when thou wast
about to breathe out thy most holy Spirit, thou criedst out, Father, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit. Ah what a mournful, lamentable, sad, and miserable
silence is there, when mournful, lamentable, sad, and miserable man is
commanded to breathe forth his soul! how silent, faint, and how dead (as it
were) are all things before death! our deathbed takes possession of us, when
the Suns last shadow flies from us, and enraged death sharpens his Dart, to
strike through our breast. But thou (O Lord) do witness thy power, even in
death it self, not only by crying out, at the last gasp, but also by shaking
the earth, by cleaving the rocks, opening the graves, rending the veil of the
Temple. The Centurion himself (being a man) conversing with the members of the
Church, but believing out of the Church, confessed from hence, and said, This
man was indeed the Son of God. But the last word thou utteredst in thy
mortality, is diligently to be noted, and seriously to be weighed, Father, into
thy hands I commend my Spirit. This was thy last word; Ah would to God it might
be also mine, and I trust, Lord, it shall be so, and God (I hope) will hear
it; for thou have obtained this for me, because thou have both prayed for me
upon the Cross, and have as my chief high Priest, suffered all things; nor
did thou commend thine own Spirit alone unto thy Father, but mine also, and
of all the faithful, who are members of thy body; thou have bound my soul
together with thine own, in the bundle of life, and have delivered it into the
hands of the Almighty: O how do the words pierce my soul and spirit, which
thou utteredst before thou did pass that deadly way, and in which thou did
most devoutly speak unto thy Father, I pray for them, I pray not for the
world, but for those whom thou have given me, for they are thine. Holy Father,
keep them in thy name, whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as we
are one; preserve them from the world, sanctify them in thy truth; I pray not
only for these, but for those also who shall believe in me, through their word,
that they may all be one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee; that
they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me;
and I have given them the glory which thou gave me, that they may be one, as
we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfect in one, and
that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou
have loved me. Father I will that those whom thou have given me, be where I am,
that they may see my glory which thou have given me, because thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world. What father can more earnestly recommend a
son? what mother a daughter, or what brother his brother, to another care;
than thou O Son of the living God, have recommended us to thy Father? Thy
Father does hear us his degenerate and adopted sons: how much rather will he
hear thee, his Son obedient even to the death, and his issue begotten of his
own substance from all eternity? yea, he has already heard him; Can, says
he, (even he thy Father) a woman forget her own child, that she should not
have compassion upon the son of her own womb? Though she should be so
forgetful, yet will not I forget thee; behold I have graven thee upon my
hands: Thou also, O Christ my Savior, say, My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall not perish for ever, and no man shall snatch them out of my hands. My
Father who gave me them, is greater than all, and none can take them out of my
Fathers hands. Resting upon these thine attracting sentences, I may be startled
at the remembrance of death, but I shall not be dismayed, because I shall also
be mindful of thy promises, merits and intercessions. When at length by thy
permission, a sharp sickness shall weaken my sinews, and shall gnaw and feed
upon my bloodlesse and half rotten skin; when my face shall be bedewed with
a cold sweat, and I shall be moistened with the drops of death, when my wan lips
shall be widowed of their redness, and a sad murmr shall be heard from the
horrid noise of the gnashing teeth, when my Sun shall be darkened by my
funeral clouds, and death shall involve my head in everlasting darkness; yet
thou Son of righteousness shall shine clear unto me; thou shall furnish my
soul, wrestling and triumphing by the virtue of thy Spirit with thine own
word, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

CONTEMP. etc. 23.
Of the opening of Christ's side.

COme hither, come hither O my soul, behold him hanging on the Cross; ascend,
ascend O my soul, and pluck out the nails from his hands and feet, wherewith
he is fastened to the Cross. Thou needst no ladder, it is devotion, it is
faith which elevates and lifts thee up thither. O miserable spectacle! O
lamentable carcass! how ill-favourdly, and in what an ugly manner art thou
butchered! They could not glut their malice upon him while he lived; they
insult also upon him being dead, and goare him with a spear, whence blood and
water did flow; most holy Symbols of thy two Sacraments. Who is he, O Lord,
that has overcome the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of
God? This is that Jesus Christ that came by water and blood, not by water
alone, but by water and blood. Thou came unto us in water in Baptism, thou
came to us in blood in the holy Supper: this is that double testimony, that
we are reconciled to the Father by thee, and that we are washed and purged
from our sins: thou wast very much besotted and soiled, yet wast thou lovely
to thy Father, because thou becamest obedient to death, even to the death of
the Cross: thou art also most lovely to me, whilst I dive into thy side, and
into thy wounds, not with the eyes of my body with Thomas, but with the eyes of
faith, which are the instruments of life, the perspective glass of the world
to come; when I see I am freed from death, by the death of my Lord and my God;
When I lock on the immense and love without bounds, love without end, the love
that we want understanding to conceive, and our reason waxes dark to
apprehend: For I have sinned, and thou have suffered; yea, I who have sinned,
have suffered in thee; our flesh was so joined to the Deity, so as that which
was to die everlastingly for sin, became dead in another for us, and we
neither felt grief nor death, yet were we in like manner restored to life: for
as Christ put upon him our flesh in the womb, so he dyed our death upon the
Cross. For whatsoever the God, made man, did suffer, he suffered for man, from
whom he can now no more be severed, than from his other Nature, with which he
united this to the end he might save it. O great clemency! O unspeakable
clemency! O bounty that cannot be expressed with words of man's eloquence! God
who is for ever blessed, is first made man, and at length is made a curse for
man; O blessed day, wherein the head of the Dragon is trampled under the feet
of thy crucified and dead body; Leviathan is bruised, Behemoh that vast and
powerful creature is overthrown, and death is cast out. O most mild
Tribunal, before which I am absolved without punishment, freed without death,
but yet that even by death, where I am dismissed from my bloody deeds, by the
blood of the supreme King; by thy blood now shed, I see most clearly that thou
have transferred my nature upon thy self, that I might receive that innocence
from thee, which I had altogether corrupted in my self; but thou keptest thy
divine Nature, that I might receive glory and dignity; thou joynedst both
together, that the Deity being joined to the humanity, and the humanity
joined to the Deity, he that was sensible of my misery, putting on my
affections, might unite him unto me as a brother, whom I did fear as a Judge.
What shall I say, or how shall I speak? for I am not my self when I think of
thee, when I lift up my eyes unto thee, when I behold thy side launced with the
spear, and behold through that wound thy most loving heart. Thou that art
immense, infinite, not circumscribed, void of passion, and immortal, have put
on for love of us, even this our flesh straight, finite, circumscribed, and
finally liable to passion, and death it self: which by hunger, by thirst, by
miseries, by injuries, by scourgings, by spittings on, by blood, by death, was
handled, beaten, extended, and tortured by pieces in the presence of the
Devil; yet being joined also with thy Divinity, thou have placed it above all
the Angels, above all creatures which are in heaven and earth, even at the
right hand of thy Father, that we who before were even pressed down to hell,
may now (by thee) be taken into the fellowship of the Godhead. I would I might
always rest in this thy so great passion, that I may dwell in thy wounds; for
whosoever flies to thy wounds and precious scars, shall in tribulation find
great comfort, and enjoy that comfort the soul does only desire.

CONTEMP. etc. 24.
Of Christ's burial.

THere is at length an end set to labor, and the work of redemption being
wrought and finished, and that all-sufficient ransom paid, the grave receives
and covers this ill-handled body: for God is faithful, O Christ my God, who
set a convenient end to thy labors, temptations, sorrows, necessities and
persecutions; for my sins thou wast put to death, after death thou art
buried, but it was that thou might rise again out of the grave for my just
fication. Before the day of preparation for the Passover was wholly past; thou
art taken from the Cross, thy Father hastens also our departure from this
preparation day, by a preparation to the heavenly journey, that we may the
sooner be brought to thee, and celebrate Sabbath upon Sabbath unto thee.
Therewas no reproach that thou had not bin laden with in that Cross, nor
any ignominy, that thy body had not been disgraced with in it: yet these
things could not affright Nicodemus, whom thou had instructed by thy nightly
conference, and gained for a secret Disciple; and Joseph of Arimathea a rich,
good, and pious Senator, two of the principal men amongst the Jewish Nation.
Thou did hang upon the Cross between thieves; thy chosen companions fled
from thee, the whole rabble of thy persecutors cried, Crucify, crucify him,
take him away, take him away. Pilate delivered thee over to death, and judged
thee worthy to be tormented; yet these men searing nothing, break through the
midst of the host of these perverse troops, they go to Pilate, and beseech
him, that the infamously handled carkas, yet heavens relic, might be given
unto them, accounting of it as of a most great gift. What courage of mind shall
I believe you had? who quickened your spirits, O Nicodemus and Joseph? what
belief could the small relics of that golden tree raise up in you? did you
not think that ye might be accounted partners with Christ, whom they had
proclaimed for a deceiver, and a disturber of the public peace, and that ye
might be reckoned for troublers of the Senate, and be blamed of Pilate, and
stoned of the people? But the fire of faith was kindled in you, which not being
to be confined within in your hearts, breaks forth on all sides. O strange
power of God, in his faithful servants! O how unsearchable are his works! The
Disciples had above three years been public auditors of Christ now
crucified; they had been plentifully and carefully fed and instructed by him;
but when so great dangers grew thick, they forsake their Master. Nicodemus and
Joseph came in private to Jesus, fearing to bring the peoples hatred upon
themselves; now when they see all things seem desperate, they do not forsake
him whom they had worshipped, whom they had heard, whom they had reverenced,
but do now, still, even now, love and honor not unwillingly. How great is thy
power in those that are weak? how great thy perfection in those that are
imperfect? would to God that nothing also may be able to separate me from the
love of Christ; neither affliction, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor hunger,
nor nakedness, nor danger, nor the sword; but let me be persuaded, that nor
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
whatsoever, shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is Christ
Jesus my Lord. Those diligent worshippers of thee, do wrap thee in clean
linen, do embalme thee with Myrrh and Aloes. O that I may humble my self by
bitter repentance, and purged from my sins, may receive thee with a pure
heart. They embalme thee, and lay thee in a new tomb, in which no other had
ever been laid; O that none but thy self might enter into my heart renewed by
thy blessed Spirit. They spend many things willingly for thy sake, nor dare
spare any cost; let me also spend my life and blood for thee, and for thine,
and what else besides my blood thou have given me in this life. When thou shall
call my soul from this womb of dirt, let me think of nothing but of thy
death, but of thy blood, but of thy wounds, but of thy crown; when I I shall
be affrighted with the grave, let me think I shall be buried in no other
sepulcher, than in that which thou have touched with thine one body, which thou
have sanctified by thy scars, that being to be raised at thy command, I may
live with thee everlastingly. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 25.
Of Christ's resurrection.

SEt forth the praises of the Lord, and call upon his name, declare his works
among the nations; sing unto him, sing praises unto him, declare all his
wonderful works, call to mind his wonders which he has done, his strange
works, and the judgments of his mouth. Who can sufficiently speak of the power
of the Lord, and make all his praises to be heard? O Lord my God, thou art
exceedingly exalted; thou have put on praise and comeliness, and art clothed
with light, as it were with a garment; Joseph was thrust into a most noisome
darkness of a prison, but the third year was he taken thence, and made the
great commander over all Egypt. Christ was put in the bowels of the earth,
but the third day he came out thence alive, and was made governor of heaven
and earth. Moses was cast forth into the river, being shut into an Arc of
bulrushes; but was presently drawn from thence and made the people of Isreal's
Captain and deliverer. Christ Jesus was shut into the tomb; but was in good
time raised thence, and designed for a Savior unto all men. The bush in the
wilderness, did burn, but was not consumed by the fire; Jesus burned upon the
Cross, and was exposed to the flames of Gods wrath, and the assaults of Satan;
but this fire was put out, and now the beams of his fatherly favor shine
forth. Aarons rod was withered, but it flourished again; all Christ's bones
were dried by his passion; but vigor returned to them, from the grave. Josuah
trampled the five Kings that were brought unto him under his feet, and hung
them upon five trees; Jesus Christ trampled upon our five enemies; the world,
satan, sin, death, and the grave; and carried away most great spoils, and
set up glorious trophyes of his victory. Sampson was taken in Gaza; but he
plucked up the gates of the City, and escaped. Christ Jesus was taken of death,
but not kept; and having conquered death, he triumphed. David overthrew Goliath
the Philistims champion, with a sling: Christ with his blood overthrew and
vanquished the devil, the leader and captain of the wicked. We bless thee,
famous Savior, we laud thee, most invincible captain, we reverence thee most
triumphant victour; arise make haste my soul, and come away; now winter's
past, the storm is over and gone, the flowers deck our feilds, the spring is
come, the voice of the turtle is heard in our land; the figgtree is budded, the
flourishing vines send forth a sweet savor; arise make haste my soul, and
come away; it is no time for sloth, but to make speed; it is no time to
sleep,, but to awake; it is no time to weep, but to rejoice; it is no time to
complain, but to be glad; we have been too indulgent to sadness, we have
shed tears enough; let sadness depart, let mirth return, the time of the
passion is past, the time of the resurrection is come; all anxiety must fly
away, when the message sent by the Angel is heard, all grief of heart must
vanish, when the Gospel is received; he is risen, he is risen, whom his
friend betrayed, whom the company of his disciples forsook, whom Peter denied,
whom the Priests delivered up, whom the sergeants smot, whom the high Priests
mocked, whom the Judges condemned, whom the hangmen put to death, whom the
soldiers pierced, whom the accursed burden of our sins did oppress, whom the
wrath due to our sins had tormented; he is risen, the Lord our God is risen,
our brother is risen, who has in his sepulcher buried all our iniquities, and
by his resurrection, has brought forth for us freedom, and salvation.
Confess unto the Lord, and call upon his name, set forth his works amongst the
Gentiles, sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, declare all his wonderful
works. This is the day wherein has fallen what ever lifted up the head against
the Lord; for the Lord, himself after he had drunk of the brock in the way,
exalted his own head, and brake to pieces the heads of his adversaries; this is
the day wherein hell was overthrown, and the abominable Kingdom of Satan
conquered, the devil bound, the old dragon spoiled, death disabled, and the
miserable Christian people freed. Remember the wonderful things of the Lord,
which he has done, his marvailes, and the judgments of his mouth; who shall
set forth the power of the Lord, and make all his praises to be heard? this is
the day wherein did vanish away the snares of the serpent of paradise, which
he laid for the seed of the woman; they vanished away, and the head of the
serpent, was cleft in sunder, and the enmity betwixt mankind and the serpents
brood, brake forth into extremity of deeds. This is the day wherein the second
Adam from heaven awaked out of sleep, and received his only beloved, and
married her to himself; bless the Lord O my soul; O Lord my God thou have
been wonderfully magnified; thou have put on praise, and comeliness, and art
clothed with light, as with a garment; rejoice in the Lord O my soul; this
ought to be the solemnity above all solemnities, wherein Christ the Lord by his
divine power arose from death (...) as before handled like a (...) thief; this
day is better than tha^ wherein the world did first appear: For that was
created for man's labor, this was made for his rest; that deserved death, this
frees him from the fear of death; the light of that day is buried in
darkness, the brightness of this day does even enlighten the graves; to
conclude, the dead see not the light of that day, but the light of this day
has even shown forth to the dead: let us therefore rejoice in this day, which
both shines about the living, and quickneth the dead, and illuminates those who
are to come. Let all the world exult with joy, for it is meet that as every
creature did lament with mournful tears the death of their Creator, and did
follow the hearse of him that was put to death upon the Cross, in the dark
funerals of the night; so they should now joyfully receive him, triumphantly
returning, in his resurrection from the dead. And thou also my soul, rowse thy
self from the sleep of sin, that thou crucify him not again after his
resurrection; awake if thou be asleep, and rise from the dead; when the Lord
arose from the tabernacle, the camp removed, and all the people followed; to
day is the Lord of life and death risen from the grave; thou must not lie
snorting, but follow him by thy fervent devotion; the old leaven must be purged
out, the leaven of malice, and wickedness; we must feed on the unleavened
bread of truth and sincerity. I am willing O God, but not able; thou who have
given me grace to hate the way of the flesh and studies of this age, vouchsafe
that I may never set foot in that way, nor ever be deceived by these
inventions; Lord Jesus, Holy Jesus, Good Jesus, if thou will, I shall be able;
for it is thy will that makes me able; will therefore I may have ability, and
will I may bring this good work to perfection. Thou who did vouchfafe to dye
for our sins, and to rise again for our justification, I beseech thee by thy
glorious resurrection, to raise me from the grave of all my sins and
offenses, and give me daily a part in the first resurrection, that I may truly
deserve to receive a part in thy resurrection. Most sweet, benign, loving,
dear, precious, desired, lovely, beautiful Jesus, thou did ascend into
heaven, in triumph of thy glory, and sit, most mighty King, at the right
hand of thy Father: draw me up to thee, that I may run after thee; for the
odor of thy perfumes I will run, and never be weary, if thou will assist me;
join the mouth of the soul that thirsts after thee, to the heavenly streams
of eternal satiety; yea, draw me to thy self, thou living fountain, that
thence I may drink my fill, whence I may always live, my God and my life.

CONTEMP. etc. 26.
Of Christ's Ascension.

CLap your hands, O all ye Nations, rejoice in the Lord with an exulting voice,
because the Lord is high, terrible, a great King above all the earth; he has
subjected the people unto us, and nations under our feet; he has chosen us out
for an inheritance to himself, the excellency of Jacob which he loved. God
has ascended in a shout, the Lord in the voice of the trumpet. Sing unto our
God, sing ye, sing unto our King; because God is the King of all the earth,
sing unto him with understanding. God has reigned over the nations, God
sits upon his holy seat* the Princes of the people are gathered together
with the people of the God of Abraham, because God is exceedingly exalted by
them that defend the earth. This, O my soul, was the voice and song of the
faithful Jews in the old Testament, wherein they gratulated their Savior,
when in spirit and in faith they saw he was to come, and did exhort one
another, that they should sing unto, and trust in him, that was exalted in his
Majesty. Say thou also O clap your hands, rejoice in the Lord in the voice of
exultation; that which they proclaimed in hope, do thou proclaim in fruition;
for Christ is ascended, the eternal offspring of the eternal God, and the
Son of temporary man borne in time. Sing, O my soul, to thy great God and
Savior, to the true peaceful Prince of peace, Emperor of heaven and earth,
King of kings, Lord of lords. The Angels praise his Majesty, Principalities
adore him, Majesty's tremble at him, the powers of the heaven of heavens, and
the Society of the blessed Seraphins do celebrate his praises with exultation;
do thou also cry out, to thy Messiah be life and victory, blessing and honor,
glory and power for evermore. Those sell souls, not satisfied with his death,
torments, and Cross, did even war against him being dead, and did most
diligently observe all things, lest any should steal his body out of the
grave; yet returns he; the Conqueror returns, clothed with the brightness
of his glory, as it were with most pure garments; he returns, and hastens to
higher things, he flies up to the highest heavens, compassed with quires of
Angels, and heavenly citizens, some of whom (as I guess) sing songs of triumph
to the Conqueror, others dance for joy, others offer him palm and bays,
others strew handfuls of a most pleasing crop of heavenly flowers. Where are
now thy pale lips? where is that filthy besmearing with spittle? where is the
congealed blood? where the pricks of the thorns? where his black and blew
shoulders? where those streams of blood gushing forth? where his torn sinews
by the lashes of whips? In so short a moment is this so thick a mist of
ignominy exhaled, and the brightness of his glory possesses all things. And
now is the forehead clear, the eyes sparkling, the comely cheeks blushing
red; now are the lips died scarlet, now does he shake his golden and glittering
tresses; in brief, he is all over like the Sun breaking out of a cloud.
Where now Lord, is thy abjection, after thou have pierced the skies, and
ascended above all heavens, when thou wast higher than the heavens, and had
entered into thy Fathers house, in which are many mansions? where was thy
contemptible estate, when the glory of the heavens gave place to thee, and thou
ruledst every where, and filledst all places from sea to sea, even to the ends
of the earth, for evermore? Thou fillest all things, O Lord, therefore art thou
most present; and although thou seem sometime to be departed from us, yet if
thou would open our eyes, we should find thee about us, and in us. Thou art
most present; therefore let not my sins defile me, because they offend thee
that wast scourged, crucified, and slain for them, and cause me to be
condemned for offending of thee. Thou art clean, and do dwell with those
that are pure in heart; those that burden their souls with the filth of
sin, do expel thee the guest of their soul. Thou art most present,
therefore whatever betides me, and howsoever the devil batter me, and in what
manner soever the world afflict me, or the flesh do tempt me, yet thou see
it, and art both able and joyful to deliver me. When upon mount Olivet thou
made preparation to depart, to the full enjoying of thy heavenly kingdom,
thou did hold up thy hands to heaven, and did bless thy Disciples; I am
also thy disciple, therefore thou will not withdraw thy blessing from me, but
wilt make thy ascension to become unto me a descention of many sorts of gifts.
Thy graces did descend, as thy body did ascend: so shall I ascend in my heart;
I will run after thee, not with the steps of my feet, but with the desires of
my soul; and flying from worldly desires, I will follow thee thither in heart,
whither I believe thou art in body ascended: let me now take no pleasure in
vile things here below, that am possessed of thee in heaven. I will ascend in
my affections, I will ascend in my progress, and I will ascend in effect. I
shall ascend in my affections, if I relish heavenly things; I shall ascend in
my progress, if I shall daily profit in thy ministry; and I shall ascend in
effect, if I have my conversation where thou art, even in the heavens. And I
trust I shall easily obtain this; for thou art ascended to the Father, to be
my Intercessor. The high Priest, when he entered the Holy of Holyes, made an
atonement for the people; thou art entered into the Sanctuary of blessed
immortality, a Sanctuary not made with hands, but heaven it self: thou will
therefore appear in the presence of God for us. Thou art ascended, not leaving
upon the earth thy humanity, which thou tookest from the earth, and did carry
about thee on the earth, but have so exalted it, that thou have made it a
partaker of heaven. Why therefore, O man, should thou fear? why, O man,
should thou afflict thy self? Be secure flesh and blood, you are possessors
of heaven, and Gods Kingdom in Christ: if any deny you are in Christ, he
denies also that Christ is in heaven; the flesh and blood, and portion of every
of us, is in the man, Christ Jesus. Therefore where my portion reigns, I
believe I reign; where my blood does rule, I perceive my self to rule: where
my flesh is glorified, I know I am glorious. Thou wentest to prepare a place
for me, that I might be with thee in a most pleasant City; thou laydst open the
way, that I might come into thy most loving society; Thou did first break
through, that I might also enter into most ample felicity, in everlasting
health of body, in perfect purity of our souls, in all fulness of glory, and
divine pleasure, into the perpetual familiarity of the Saints, to have
kindred, hope, resting place, grace, and dignity, in the heavens.

CONTEMP. 27. etc.
Of the sending down of the Holy Ghost.

HOw great, and what an unutterable piety of my redeemer is this? he carried
man into heaven, and sent God down upon the earth; behold therefore a new
Redeemer is sent from heaven, behold again divinity and humanity are mixed
together. Thou did foretell, O my God, by thy spirit which thou have given
us, I will power out my waters to the thirsty, and my streams upon those that
are scorched; I will power out my spirit upon thy seed, my blessing upon thy
posterity, I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sonns shall
prophecy. I will sprinckle pure water upon you, and you shall be cleansed from
all your pollutions. I will send my spirit into the midst of you. Now O my God,
is thy prophecy fulfilled, and the showers of thy graces and streams of thy
blessings are powered forth. That common expected time of gladness of all the
righteous is now come, the sweet guest of the soul is come, the comfortable
refreshing, the rest in our labor, the temper in heat, comfort in mourning,
the washing of that which was foul, watering that which was partched with
heat, healing that which is wounded, straightning what was crooked, cherishing
that which was cold, ordering what was gone astray. The inspiter of our faith,
the teacher of knowledge, the fountain of love* the ensign of chastity, and
the cause of all our virtue is come. He came when the twelve ministers, and
dispensors of thy mysteries were unanimously gathered together at Jerusalem, in
the house of prayer, chosen by thine own self, in the holy City, the City of
perfect beauty, and a sudden noise coming from heaven as it were the rushing
of a mighty wind, cloven tongues appeared to them like fire, and sat upon each
of them, so that they were all filled with the Holy ghost, and they began to
speak in diverse languages. They were gathered together with one accord; and
indeed that spirit loves agreement, and does bind faster together men's
peaceful minds; it drives away all brawles and contentions, and is it self
driven away by brawles and contentions. They were gathered together in
Jerusalem; it loves a holy place, and where thy word is preached, there it
graciously abides. This word is not without the spirit; nor thy word without
the spirit; there was a sound like a wind; the holy spirit is not still, but
its voice is heard, he is not dumb, but speaks, and preaches redemption to
sinners, revelations to those in misery; comfort to those that be sad;
exaltation to those that are opressed; deliverance to the captives; liberty to
the bondmen; and rersurrection to the dead. There was a sudden and vehement
sound from heaven; the holy spirit is not the gift of men, but of the Almighty
God; it brings not momentary, but things eternal, not earthly, but heavenly
things. Gods help is also (for the most part) sudden and unlooked for; when
we despair of all men's aid, the power of the most High is sent us, and cures
us in a most fit time. The holy spirit is cheerful, and makes them nimble,
and ready in whom it operates; for the grace of the holy spirit is not
acquainted with sluggish endeavors. The tongues appeared divided like fire; the
tongue is the instrument of the holy ghost, whereby it prepares and enlarges
the spiritual Kingdom; and as the tongue does distinguish tastes, so does the
holy spirit show us good from ill, and to discern between spirits; it also
bestows on us the gift of variety of languages, and gathers together in one
the multitudes of men, dispersed by reason of the difference of their tongues.
The love of God is, lastly, fiery, it enlightens the understandings drowned in
darkness, it warmes the souls by charity, makes them shine in good works,
consumes wicked affections and actions; O most wholesome fire, descend from
heaven into us. We burn with the filthy brands of our lusts, that the earth
seems rather an Aetna of unclean flames, than an habitation of men. For as
the hill Aetna does continually boil with certain inward fiery vapors, so
does that with the abominable flames of fornications; by this means we kindle
the fire of wrath, the fire of destruction, the fire of the Lord, the fire of
indignation, which went out from the Lord and consumed Nadab and Abihu. How
grievously does the prophet cry out, behold, all of you do kindle his fire and
add fuel to the flames; enter ye into the light of your fire and the flames
which ye have kindled. For after this manner, as the scripture mentions,
does all mankind rush into eternal damnation. For first they kindle the fire,
then they put fuel to the flames; and finally, they enter into the flames
which they have kindled. And first do we begin to kindle the eternal fire
for our selves when first we begin to sin, and we add fuel to the flames
when we heap sins upon sins; We enter into the eternal fire, when we fulfill
the remediless sum of all our mischiefs, by the iniquity of our multiplied
offenses: As our Savior spoke to the Rulers of the Jews, Ye serpents ye
generation of vipers, fulfill ye the measure of your fathers. O heavenly
Spirit, let plentiful showers fall from heaven, and quench the accursed flames
of this fire, that I be not delivered into the unsufferable flames, which no
water, no brook, no river, no sea can quench. Filth sticks to me on all sides;
who will wash it off? I am polluted with the dirt of my sins; who shall make
me clean? My soul is wounded, and altogether defiled; who shall heal and
purify it? My bones are dried up; who shall moisten them? Shall not thou wash
me? shall not thou purge me? shall not thou heal me? shall not thou cleanse
me? shall not thou moysten me? Thou did never yet suffer me to receive a
repulse; shall this be the first time that thou will reject my prayer? Surely
thou will not deny that which I pray for, because thou have bid me pray unto
thee, because it tends to my salvation, which thou so much desire, and
belongs unto thine own honor, whereof thou art so jealous. Give me drink
therefore out of the streams of thy pleasure, that I may take no pleasure to
taste of the poisoned sweets of the world. Thou art the light and guide of my
mind; as thou art the Author, so be also the Actor of all the good that is in
me; for I humbly rely upon thee; I believe in thee, the true God, who
pr^ceedest from the Father and the Son from all eternity, and art in time sent
unto me; what ever I am, I am it in thee and by thee; I am righteous by thee,
by thee am I chaste, by thee am I patient, by thee am I strong, by thee humble,
by thee am I courteous, by thee am I long-suffering, by thee am I wise, by thee
liberal, and by thee am I thrifty. O thou Comforter, teach me to do thy will,
because thou art my God. I believe therefore that whomsoever thou possessest,
thou fittest him for a dwelling, both of the Father, and of the Son; happy is
he that shall be thought worthy to lodge thee, because by thee the Father and
the Son shall make his abode with him.

CONTEMP. 28. etc.
Of the mystery of the Trinity.

O Three coequall, and coeternall Persons, one true God, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, who do only inhabit eternity and light inaccessible; who
in thy might did lay the foundation of the earth, and do govern the whole
world by thy wisdom. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbaths, terrible, strong,
just and merciful, wonderful, laudable and lovely. One God, three Persons,
one Essence, one Power, one Wisdom, one Goodness, and one undivided Trinity.
Blessed be always the holy Trinity, one Diety, and coequall Majesty. The
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are three names, all of them one substance, God
the begetter, God the begotten, the Holy Spirit equal God, contained in them
both; yet they are not three Gods, but one true God; so the Father is Lord, the
Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord: there is propriety in the Persons, and unity
in the Essence; an equal Majesty and Power, equal Beauty and Honor, in all
things; comprehending the Stars, the Seas, the Fields, nay the whole
Creation; at whom wicked hell does tremble, and whom the lowest depths do
reverence. Let every voice and tongue now confess him worthy this praise, whom
Sun and Moon do magnify, and the Angelical dignity does adore; and let us
all with strained voice, with musical songs and sweet melody warble forth his
praises. O let us now sing together before the Throne of our God, that is
exalted in the highest. O Trinity to be adored, O Unity to be reverenced! Thou
true Eternity, by thee are we created; thou most perfect charity, by thee are
we redeemed; do thou protect, save, deliver, set free, and cleanse all people;
we worship thee, Almighty, we sing unto thee, to thee be praise and glory for
ever and ever. For it is truly a worthy and a just thing, a right and a saving
thing, that we should at all times, and in all places give thanks unto thee, O
Lord, holy Father, God Almighty, who with thy only begotten Son and the Holy
Ghost are one God, atone Lord, not in the singularity of one Person, but in
the substance of one Trinity: for that which we believe from thy revelation
concerning thy glory, this we understand without difference of distinction,
both of the Son and also of the Holy Ghost, that the propriety of Persons, the
unity of Essence, and equality of Majesty may be adored in the confession of
a true and an eternal Deity. One man is not so much as three men joined
together, and two men are something more than one; but in God it is not so, for
the Father and Son together are not a greater Essence than the Father alone, or
the Son alone, but those three Persons together are equal one to another. The
consideration of the word, One, extends far, to the making evident of this
single Unity. There is an unity which may be called collective, as when many
stones make up one heap of stones; there is also an unity constitutive, when
many members make up one body, or many parts of any thing make up the whole
thing it self. There is also an unity conjugative, whence it comes to pass
that two by marriage are now no more two, but one flesh. And there is a native
unity, whence by the soul and body one man is borne: There is a potestative
unity, whereby a virtuous man is not instable or unlike himself, but does
always endeavor to be found like to himself. It is a consentaneous unity,
when by charity many men have one heart and one soul. There is a votive
unity, when the soul adhering to God in all its desires, becomes one spirit.
There is a dignitative unity, whereby our corrupt flesh is by God the Word,
assumed into one Person. But what are all these things to that most high, and
as I may so say, that only unity where consubstantiality makes the unity? If
thou liken any of the former unities to this unity, it will be after a sort
alike; but if you compare it with it, it will be nothing: therefore amongst
all things which are rightly said to be one, the unity of the Trinity, wherein
three Persons are one substance, does hold the pre-eminence; each particular
Person is in each particular Person; all the Persons conjoined are in each
particular Person, and each distinct Person, in all the Persons conjoined; all
are in all, and all is but one, none of these precedes another in eternity, or
exceeds another in greatness, or excells another in power; that which is there
said to be great, is not otherwise great, than as it is truly so indeed;
because there greatness is truth it self, and truth is Essence; therefore
that is not greater which is not truer, but one Person is not truer than
another of them, or two of them than any one, or all three together than all
three separated each from other; therefore one has no more truth than another,
or two than any one, or all together than each asunder: So then also the
Trinity it self is not any thing greater than every distinct Person in it,
but is equally great with them. These are wonderful things, and set far
above the reach of any creature; therefore man's understanding does very hardly
assent to these mysteries which are set so far from our view, and the mind
easily begins to wander after speculations, if we have not before us a more
sublime doctrine which may recall our phansies into the right bounds and limits
set for us by God himself. That doctrine is divine; No man can take another by
the hand if he want his own; we cannot see the Sun without the Sun, nor
can any conceive divine things without divine assistance, nor can we know God
without God. Be present therefore thou true Light, Almighty God and Father; be
present thou Light of lights, thou Word and Son of God, God Almighty; be
present holy Spirit, thou concord of the Father and the Son, God Almighty; be
present one omnipotent God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we confess in thee,
by thee, and of thee; we confess thou art one in Substance, three in Person,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: O blessed Trinity, God, Lord, Comforter, Charity,
Grace, Fellowship, Begetter, Begotten, Regenerating, true Light, true Light of
light, illumination, invisible visibly, visible invisibly, Fountain and
watering streams; from whom, by whom, and in whom are all things; he that
lives from himself and is Life it self, he that receives life from him that
lives, and he that gives life to those that live; a true Father, the Son of
truth, the Spirit of truth, one Essence, one Virtue, one Goodness, God, above
whom is nothing, and out of whom is nothing, and without whom is nothing. God,
under whom is all, in whom is all, and with whom is all; we call upon thee, we
adore thee, we praise thee; increase our faith, stir up our hope, and infuse
us with charity, Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 29.
Of shunning Curiosity in things not revealed unto us.

WHy art thou afflicted, O my soul, if reason be tormoiled, and does groan
and cry out, being plunged in a bottomless gulf? A thing is not therefore
false because I cannot conceive or understand it: reason is not the measure of
things, but it is bound to fit it self to things: reason is straight, and why
then do thou marvel if it cannot comprehend the vastness of heavenly
things? by how much more simple our faith is, so much is our life more
agreeable to it, although we neither dispute of, neither do understand all
things. By so much more noble and more renowned shall the citizens of the
Church, be (hereafter) esteemed of God, because forsaking all, they showed
themselves willing to become only most dear unto him; it is a short way for
religious and simple minds, both to cast away error and to search out the
truth. For if we return to the fountain and head of divine tradition, the
error of man vanishes away; and the reason of the heavenly Sacraments being
understood, what ever before lay hid under the mist and cloud of obscure
darkness, is made apparent by the light of truth; if the waters of the
channel, which used to flow plentifully, be suddenly dried up, do we not
presently go to the springhead, that there we may discover the reason that it
fails? whether the pipes grow dry from the head, or running full and currantly
from thence, they be not stopped in their middle course? but if we find it is
by reason that the pipes it flows in, be either stopped or broken, that the
water cannot run constantly, and flow as it used to do; when we have stopped
and sodered the pipes, the waters being collected, are brought in the same
plenty and constancy for the use and drinking of the Citizens, as they do
flow from the fountain. We must even do thus according to Gods command, that
is, if truth shall stagger or reele in any thing, let us return to the
original of it, namely, our Savior, his Gospel, and the Apostolical
traditions; and thence let us ground the reason of our actions, whence the
order and original of it first arose. Whilst others make lies of
probabilities, they frustrate the truth by subtilties; and this is done,
because they have no recourse to the original of truth; nor do they seek to
the head, nor observe the doctrine of their heavenly Master; which whosoever
considers and examineth, he has no need of arguments and long discourses. The
trial of our faith is easy by the compendiousnesse of truth; I would have no
man dispute how God the Father begat the Son; nor do thou too curiously
involve thy self within the secret of this depth, lest perhaps, whilst thou
too obstinately searchest after the brightness of this in accessible light,
thou be deprived of that little sight which by Gods gift is afforded unto
mortal creatures: Or if thou think thou ought to wade so far in this
kind as thou art able: First begin thou with things which concern our selves,
which if thou will (consequently) wade through, then prepare thy self to pass
from earthly things to heavenly things, from visible things to invisible
things. First unfold and declare if thou can, how the mind that is in thee,
begets a word; and what is the spirit of memory that is in it; how these things
that are different in things and actions, are notwithstanding but one nature
and substance; and though they proceed from the mind, yet are never separated
from it. But these things, although we have them in us, in the very substance
of our soul, yet they seem to be so much the more hidden unto us, by how much
they are more invisible to the eyes of the body. Let us enquire of things more
open; how does a fountain of it self beget a river? and by what spirit are
the swift streams thereof moved? and though the fountain and streams be but
the same, one inseparable thing, yet cannot the fountain be either understood
to be or be called the river, nor the river the fountain, yet he that sees
the streams, sees the fountain. First exercise thy self, thou superstitious,
and impertinently laborious, and thou soul that toylest after nullities in the
unfolding of these things, and discuss, if thou can, what we hold in our
hands: and then we will proceed to things higher than these: nor think I
persuade thee in an instant to ascend from earth above the heavens, but first
if it please you, I will bring you to that firmament which is apparent to our
view, and there if thou can unfold the nature of this visible light, how that
heavenly fire begets from it self the shining light, how it begets vapors, and
which being three in distinctnesse of things, are yet but one in substance;
although thou could find out all this, know yet, that the mystery of the
heavenly generation, is by so much more different and higher than these things,
by how much the Creator is more powerful than the creatures, and the workman
more excellent than the work he makes; by how much he who is from all
eternity, is more noble than that that took its original from nothing. God is
therefore to be believed to be the Father of his only Son our Lord, and it is
not to be enquired how. For a servant ought not to dispute of his masters
nativity. He wants nothing, O man, who is confirmed by the doctrine of both
Testaments. Both of them are these two swords, of which the eternal Doctor
said, It is enough. I wish again and again, my long-suffering God, that I
might learn and know him; but if I know not the original, nor can measure the
quantity, nor am able sufficiently to consider what manner of thing my soul
is, which rules over my body; if I know not the reason why it should take
pleasure in the body which persecuteth it; if I be ignorant who has graven
this law of my members, that the flesh should oppress the spirit in so violent
a command, and that the better and more worthy part of nature should yield to
the more ignoble: I ought to bear patiently, if I understand not the Creator
of the Universe, who must even in the smallest parcels of his works, profess
mine own blindness. Let me not then proceed farther in other things, than my
small capacity will bear, not curiously pry into those things which are so high
above me. I will say with reason and constancy, I know not his secrets, and I
am ignorant of his divine council; the oracle of the heavenly word is enough
for me to try all causes. God says he sees all things, governes all things,
judges all things. If thou will know what thou art to hold, thou have the holy
Scripture; it is perfect reason to hold what thou have read. But I will not
suffer my self to ask for what cause God does these things in such a manner;
I am a man, I understand not the secrets of God, I dare not search after them,
and therefore I even fear to meddle with them: because even this is a kind of
sacrilegious rashness, to desire to know more than is permitted unto thee. Let
it suffice thee that God does testify, that himself does act, and dispose of
all things: leaving therefore these things, let us rather seek (like good
merchants) to gain the inheritance of heaven, and those things that may profit
our souls: let us learn to get goods which will continue with us; let us
first seek to have Gods seal stamped upon us, because in the day of
judgment, when God shall make that separation, and when all the nations of the
whole earth, the sons of Adam, shall be gathered together, when the shepherd
shall call his flock, whosoever have been sealed, shall know their shepherd,
and the shepherd shall know those he has sealed, and shall gather them
together out of all nations. Every man naturally desires knowledge; but what
does knowledge profit without the fear of God? certainly an humble rudeness
is better, that is employed in Gods service, than a proud Prelate or
Philosopher, who neglects himself, and is always contemplating upon God, or
the motion of the heavens. How many are there, who in this life, by many
curious enquiries, have endeavored to know God, who shall never see his face?
how many in this life do labor to measure the heavens, and to find out all
things belonging to them, that shall never enter into them? He that does well
know himself, thinks meanly of himself, and is not delighted in the praises
of men. If I did know all things in the world, and were not in charity, what
would this knowledge profit me in the presence of God, who then will judge
acccording to my works? I will therefore (at length) rest from the too much
desire of knowledge, because the more I know, the more grievously will the most
high God judge me, except I live the more holily. Give me (most blessed and
most wise God) the highest and most profitable knowledge, that I may know thee,
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with moderation, and may inwardly know my
self to be miserable and of no account; that I may attribute nothing to my
self, and always have a good opinion of others. This is great wisdom and
some sort of perfection; Though I see another sin openly and even to commit
some grievous sins; let me not think my self better, because I know not how
long I may continue in goodness; we are all undoubtedly frail; but let me
judge none frailer than my self, that I may obtain true strength in goodness.

CONTEMP. etc. 30.
Of the Custody of Angels.

Bless the Lord (O my soul) and all my bowels give praise unto his holy Name:
Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not any of his benefits; praise the
Lord, ye Angels of his, ye that excel in strength, fulfilling his Word,
giving ear to the voice of his Word. Praise the Lord, all his Hoasts, ye
servants of his that do his pleasure. Praise the Lord all ye works of the
Lord; praise the Lord, O my soul, in all places of his dominion. My heart is
ready, O God my heart is ready. He has commanded his Angels, says thy
faithful servant David, (speaking of man) to preserve thee in all thy ways,
they shall hold thee up with their hands that thou strike not thy foot against
a stone. God has commanded it, God the true and most excellent Life, in whom
and from whom are all things: the Creator and Governor of the world, the
Sweetness and Beauty of the Angels, the Creator and Preserver of men, that God
who is God of gods; so great a God, that no tongue can rightly express him;
he has commanded, and has commanded his Angels, his holy Angels that are
instructed of God, by the eternal contemplating of which truth they become
blessed; he has commanded them concerning thee O man: What is man that thou
tookest notice of him, or the son of man, that thou did esteem him? Thou
sentest unto him thy only begotten Son, thou sendest into him thy holy Spirit;
and that there should be no want of thy careful working for him, in the
heavens thou do also (for our sakes) send forth those blessed Spirits to
minister unto us: the most merciful God sends forth those Spirits (as it
were) so many bright sparks of his Deity, sparkling from the Torches of his
everlasting light: who are conceived to be divided into so great hoastes, and
into so many orders to prompt us, not only with matter of prayer to God, but of
admiration of his greatness and goodness; when I speak thus (O my soul)
fancy not to thy self little fair Boys, whose countenances are overspread
with an admirable splendor, whose soft dissheveld hair of color like the
finest gold, hangs dangling to their shoulders, and fanned with the gentle
breath of the peaceful western wind, does kiss the smooth pillars of their
milkie necks; if thou fancy such Angels, thou art utterly ignorant of their
power: They have a pure nature, subtle and aerie, not to be represented in the
shape of any body; no spot of matter does cloud it, no mole of corruption does
sprinkle it; and that I may speak briefly, our best part is our soul; an
Angel is nothing but a soul: But what soul? not relishing of that fire
whereby the Stars do twinkle, and the Axeltree of Heaven is moved, but a
vigor of a most quick moved understanding, made (so much the nearer) to
resemble the pattern, the eternal Beauty, by how much it approaches nearer
to, and is the more plentifully sprinkled with that holy Fountain. Hence
truly comes that notable comeliness of all their ornaments, and the immortal
concurrence of goodness, which they with a most acceptable ingenuity of will,
do yield to their Creator; they outstrip in speed the swiftest ship sailing
on the maine, and driven by force of windane oars; they out-fly a bullet in
the air sent from the sulphury mouth of a thundering Cannon; these most
excellent mental Intelligences most wisely foresee all things with no trouble
or interposition of time, and most readily untie any the most intricate knots
of difficulties. If thou consider the grace with which they were ennobled even
from the first beginning of things, when God the Author of all things was in
the Angels framing nature and bestowing grace; thou may call them vessels of
transparent Gum, or Crystal framed by the worlds Creator, into which the
streams of the Divinity did disburthen so great and unusual fragrancie of
graces: if thou weigh the glory and what a large measure of grace this Nature
obtained, thou shall see them all emptied and swallowed up with the similitude
of the love they have toward God. These, these are those whom that great
workman has given us men made of dirt and clay, in this our dwelling place the
earth; to guide nourish and instruct us, to defend us in our way to salvation,
to drive calamity from us, to consult for our happiness, to be fathers in the
care of us brethren, in the love of us, and servants in their obedience to us.
These, these are present for thee, O my soul; they are not only with thee, but
they are for thee, that they may protect thee, that they may profit thee, and
while we are yet but little ones, we are (it is thought) committed to the
charge of Angels, as it were, to Tutors and instructors, to the set time
appointed by our Father. Thou overwhelmest, thou overwhelmest me, O my God,
with thy benefits, that I might delight to abide with thee, and desire to dwell
by thee continually, and never to depart from thee. Thou set a watch round
about me, that I might not escape thee; thou environest me with protectours,
that I be not snatched from thee. O my God, I will sing, I will sing Psalms
unto thee, O my glory, with my heart lifted up: Awake Psaltery and Harp, I my
self will awake very early. I will celebrate thy praises, O Jehovah, amongst
the people, and sing unto thee amongst the Nations; for thy kindness is great
above the heavens, and thy truth reaches above the uppermost clouds; I will
exalt thee, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory is above all the earth: I
can give thee thanks, but I cannot render thee due thanks, O my God; but thou
desire not thy due thanks, because thou know I have not the power to
perform it: it is the custom of people of mean quality to show themselves
munificent amongst themselves; thy benefits as they excel in Majesty, so they
require not that which is lent. O most bountiful God, as thou have freely set
thy Angels over me, so make them freely to abide by, to dwell and remain with
me. Troops of the winged Holyes met Jacob at Mahanaim, as he was on his way to
his Country; I am also upon my way, and am hastening to my Country; give me
therefore in like manner bands of such most valiant soldiers that may direct,
admonish and guide me, and keep me, both behind, and also before, and may on
no side leave me open or unguarded. O my God, send those thy ministers to us
from out thy glorious Tower of heaven to us thy weak creatures staggering
amidst these mournful tents of our cumbersome mortality, that they may
encompasse us in our fears, comfort us in our griefs, and purge us from our
growing and oppressing miseries. Sicknesses do devour and overthrow us, the
plague infests us; send Raphael that may heal and cure us; rumors of wars
do dishearten us, the drawn swords do prey upon us; send Michael to fight
for us; our ill abetting flesh solicites us, devilish suggestions do assault
us; send Gabriel that may reconcile thy will to our will. Woe is me, if
provoked by my sins and negligences thou shall judge me unworthy the presence
and visitation of thy holy Angels, by whose presence thou usest to protect me
and repulse my enemies. Seeing then the familiarity of the Angelical dignity,
is so profitable for me, make me to abstain from evil which does offend them,
and to exercise holiness, in which I know they take delight. But they are
pleased with such things as they delight to find in me, such as is sobriety,
patient bearing of poverty, often sending up sighs to heaven, and above all,
they love truth and peace. Let me be Lot in righteousness, Isaac in obedience,
Eleazer in fidelity; let me be Jacob in piety, let me be Elias in my zeal,
let me be Elizeus in my courage, Ezechias in devotion, Daniel in my constancy,
Judith in my chastity, Tobias in honesty, and let me be Lazarus in my
patience. Grant me these things, O my God, and I shall always have thy Angels
my companions; without separation they will accompany me, they will accompany
both my soul and also my body, and they will accompany my soul after it is
departure out of my body, and shall bring it into Paradise, where is the
society and beholding of Angels and Archangels, and above all, the blessed
beholding of Christ my Savior. Grant me these things, O my God, and I will
praise thee with the Cherubims and Seraphims, and will sing of thy mercies
uncessantly, for evermore. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 31.
Of Baptism.

THey are fearful words, O man, which we read, Ye were at that time without
Christ, and ye were strangers from the conversation of Israel, and were aliens
from the covenants of the promise, and ye were without hope, and without God
in the world. What, O wretch, can be more miserable for thee? and what can
thou hear that can be more terrible unto thee? He that is without Christ, is
without faith; he that is excluded from the congregation of Israel, knows not
what grace is; he that is without hope, has no comfort; he that is without
God, has no helper. O depth of misery, what understanding can rightly conceive
it? or what tongue sufficienly express it? how many myriades of men are
enveloped in more than Egyptian darkness, in superstitions, and abominable
Gentilisme, who are still without Christ, being estranged from the commonwealth
of Israel, strangers to the covenant of the promise, without hope, and without
God in the world? they have (it may be) something which they call by the name
of God; but what ever they paint unto themselves, or what ever they form unto
themselves, they are but apparitions of the night, fearful sights amongst the
graves, terrible noises amidst sepulchers, or tame Statues of silver or gold,
the works of men's hands, which have mouths, but speak not, eyes, but see not,
ears, but hear not, noses, but smell not, hands, but handle not, feet, but
walk not, nor speak they through their throats. O gods without a deity,
without understanding, without life! And I my self was to be reckoned amongst
those many thousands of damned men; for the like sentence of damnation did
attend them who were all guilty of the same offense. But eternal thanks are
due to thee, O eternal God, that thou have freely separated me from them, with
whom I had fellowship, by reason of my sins; it was thy pleasure I should be
begotten and borne of such parents that sat not in darkness, nor had their
habitation in the region of the shadow of death, but were called out of
darkness, into thy admirable light, to an elect stock, a kingly priesthood, a
holy nation, to an honored people. O God my God, thou soughtest me when I knew
not of thee; thou gave unto me, when I asked not of thee; thou openedst unto
me when I did not knock; for when I was yet a bawling infant, in my bepissed
clouts; when I yet savoured ill of my mothers coutch; when I was putrified, as
well with mine own, as with the natural and spiritual uncleanness of my
parents; yet thou, not disheartened with all this, did take me up, cherish and
purge me that was thus conceived, and chafed in my sins. Thou leddest me to the
pure waters, living waters; to the divine oracle, to the lavacre, in the word
of regeneration, and renovation; thou broughtest me, O God my God, to baptism,
the first gate to be entered to the kingdom of heaven; into the arms, and to
the kisses of my Savior, by which he ^ranslates us out of the lap of our
parents, into his heavenly habitation, and enroles us into the number of Gods
elect, and citizens of heaven, and makes us members of his body, which being
one with the head, become partakers of the heavenly treasures. O God my God,
thou have promised this by thy Prophet, Ye shall draw waters with joy out of
the wholesome fountains: And, I will power out my waters upon the thirsty, and
my streams upon the dry ground. I will power out my spirit upon thy seed, and
my blessing upon thy posterity, and they shall grow amongst the grass like
willowes, by the rivers of waters. And again, they shall bring their sons in
their arms, and carry their daughters upon their shoulders. And I, O most
merciful Lord, was brought, carried, sprinkled, and washed amongst them, and
did mount up unto thee, as it were upon the wings of an Eagle. I laid aside the
decrepit age of my sins, and put on the vigorous youth of grace; this did
this heavenly Sacrament work in me. I began to be a true Eagle, who by thy
grace do soar to heaven, and do loath all earthly things. As often as I
behold earthly water, I should remember this divine water, which has wrough so
many and so great things in us. The natural water does wash and take away
spots, does quench fire, cooles and allayes the heat of thirst, incorporates
many and sundry things into one body; it ascends as high in height, as it does
descend below in depth. The heavenly water of Baptism washes away the leprosy
of sin, and wipes away our iniquities, and makes us whiter than snow. Our
sins in themselves are like scarlet, yet are they whitened as white as snow;
they are red like crimson, yet they grow white as wool. The water of Baptism,
by a divine and admirable way and means, does quench the fire of our fleshly
desires. How pleasing is it to us, so soon as the heavenly Spirit slides into
us in this washing, for us to want these trifling sweets? The true and chiefest
sweetness does cast out those other, which else we would fear to lose; it
casts them out, and there enters (in their stead) the hidden and heavenly
pleasure, which is sweeter than all other pleasure, yet not to flesh and blood;
is brighter than any other light, yet more hidden than any secret; higher than
any other honor, but not to men that are high in their own conceits: It
quenches also the flames of hell fire, those devilish brands of hell, which
no help of man can put out. The divine water of Baptism sets an end to the
various and troublesome desires of man's heart, and makes us only rest upon
God. The divine water of Baptism makes one nation of all the nations, of the
Israelites and of the Heathen, that did differ so exceedingly in most things,
that they might become one body, and one soul, one hope of calling, till at
length they may be made perfect in one. The divine water of Baptism is given
us from heaven above, from the Father of lights, and it flowing from the
fountain that springs to eternal life, does not only draw our hearts to
their own originals, but does wholly lead us to that most blessed fountain.
Farewell World, avoid Satan, be gone each worldly thing, for I call to mind
these words that my Godfather holding me in his arms, pronounced for me, I
renounce thee Satan, and thy pomp and worship: with these words am I received
into Gods covenant, and enrolled in the number of Christ's soldiers. What ever
thou shall say, O Serpent, I will presently reply; what ever thou shall speak,
I will not hearken unto thee, Then, that thou catch me not by other means, I
have renounced also thy pomp, and thy worship and thy messengers. I was pressed
for the war of the living God, when I answered to the words in the Sacrament.
Whatsoever earthly things are received in this world, and shall here remain in
this world, are to be despised, as much as the world it self is to be
contemned, the pomps and delights whereof I did then renounce, when in my
better passage I went unto my Lord. In Baptism I was clothed in white, that I
might be taught (most devoutly) to rely upon Christ's innocence, and to be
willing to lead my life sincerely and purely. I confess (indeed) my God, that
I have been sometime forgetful of my covenant made with thee, that I have
forsaken the hoaste of righteousness, and have run away to thy enemy, and
have most grievously offended thee my Captain, by my transgressions and
treasons, that I have been worthy thy most severe punishment: but I return to
thee, I fall before thee, and beseech thee for thine unspeakable goodness,
that thou will receive me, and acknowledge me for thy soldier and servant; and
(at length) of thy grace, grant me the prize of victory, that being freed and
saved, I may (at length) erect a trophee to thy name and praises. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 32.
Of a Christians practice.

IT is an easy thing for one to call himself a Christian, but a hard thing to
perform the part of a Christian. He that desires to fulfill the measure of
that name, let him mark diligently these things that follow. Acknowledge, O
man, thine own baseness; consider how wretched, and of how little account
thou art, thou have nothing from thy self, but all things from God: he gave
thee all things for thy use, to whom thou must repay them, yea, and even thy
life it self, at what moment soever he shall require them; and thou must
depart as naked from hence, as thou came naked into this world and although
all the world, with it: inhabitants, do keep thee companys yet they can
profit thee nothing; for all things are fleeting, brittle, transitory, and
nothing can free thee from death; give not thy self therefore over to
security, but fear God, and examine exactly what may be truly profitable for
thee. Do good to the poor with all thy power, that thou may gather for thy
self a treasure in heaven. Do all that God bids thee, for thou art bound to
do good with thy will and spirit: but he that knows to do well, and does it
not, he is guilty of sin; but he that does good, does it not from himself,
but for that cause that it is bestowed on him of God, and that he belongs
unto God. Love not (O man) the world, or the things of the world, as the lusts
of the flesh, the desires of the eyes, and the pride of life but fear God, and
meditate with thy self of heavenly things: strive to fulfill Gods will in all
vertuousnesse; shun worldly, and minds set upon the earth, that thou be not
defiled with other men's sins; seek Gods kingdom, and so use the mirth is
permitted to thee, that thou may always tremble, stand in awe, and show thy
self thankful, that thou fall into no secret sin, or be delighted with the
tree of good and evil, and with the sight of a momentany pleasure thou remove
(like Eve) the law of God out of thine eyes and heart, which should be,
nevertheless, the sum and highest pitch of all thy delights. It should be
thy delight night and day, that it may be to thee the right way, the truth, and
the life, if thou will lead a a living life, conducting to life eternal, not
to everlasting death. Next, O man, keep these three things, faith, charity,
and steadfastness of hope. What ever thou do, see thou do it in faith, in
simplicity of heart, in confidence of the fatherly will of God, and give God
thanks, to whom they are due, and his blessings shall be always thy handmaid:
let charity spring from the ground of thy heart, nor be careful to give thy
self content, but labor with fear and humility to please God. Be pleasing
unto men in truth, mercy, and justice, without flattery for that is perfect
charity. Charity bids us look to the things that concern God and our
neighbor, not only those things which concern my self. Let thy hope be without
fear and doubting; let him that desires divine, heavenly, and eternal things,
rest upon the will of God, and not upon slippery, frail and brittle things. No
man shall make thee lose thy hold of that hope which thou have placed upon God:
thou may hope upon him, even in the pangs of death, for he is omnipotent.
Never let humility slip out of thy mind; for he preserves thy life by
simplicity, strengthens it by patience, and feeds it by truth. Commit all thy
ways unto God, and he shall bring it to pass; he knows what is for thy
profit, and what not. Think thou that he knows not thy condition? behold
God sees and knows all things, and nothing is hid from his eyes. He regards
also the poor and contrite spirit, and him that trembles at his Word. Search
not therefore after high things; when thou art commended, fear, because thou
art an unprofitable servant, and can do nothing except thou be assisted by
the power, favor, and Spirit of God. Think not better of thy self than of
thy neighbor, for thou art a man of naught; remember God is only to be
honored, and thou shall be the greater, if thou cast down thy self. Be
always ruminating of these things first, let no vain, idle, scurrilous words
break from thy lips, but godly, pleasing, profitable, which tend to life, and
lead not to death; therefore bridle thy tongue, and restrain it, for it can
kill, and give life. Secondly, to keep thy soul and conscience free from
wickedness, exclude thou malice and impious thoughts, and never shun the
light: O thrice happy and more is he whose heart condemns him not. Thou
belongest to God (O man) walk upright with God; remove from thee darkness,
lies, and injustice, for he is a Judge, and a revenger of such things. Try and
prove thy self in all things, that thou may know what vice sticks to thee,
what virtue thou want, that thou may shake off that, and purchase this;
for thou can never be so perfect, that something will not still be wanting.
Whatsoever thou do, thou do it by Gods indulgence and help, if it be
acceptable to him; for of thy self thou art very nothing, and by the
assistance of Gods holy Spirit can thou only proceed in goodness; stay not
therefore or hinder the operations thereof; work out thy salvation with fear
and trembling, in continual repentance, humility, and simplicity of heart,
and think that thou art neither worthy of the blessings of this life, or of
that which is to come. Lastly, pray without ceasing in all thy labors, pray
reverently, devoutly and humbly with faith in all thy ways, with a most
fervent desire of thy neighbors salvation. Thou must pray in thy chamber, in
solitariness, in most humble devotion, in fastings, in tears, in anguish, in
weeping, in contrition upon thy knees night and day, with a full hope, and not
doubting, according to the will of God, for all the true professors of the
Christian faith; study in all things to please God and not men; whosoever
honors God, God will also honor him; whosoever contemnes God, God shall also
contemn him. Grant me thy grace, most merciful God, that it may be with me,
that it may labor with me, and may continue with me even unto the end. Grant I
may (always) will and desire that which is most acceptable unto thee, and most
dearly pleases thee; let thy will be my will, and let my will always follow
thine, and agree best with it; let me will, and will the same thing that thou
do; and grant I may not have power otherwise to will, or not to will them as
thou do. O my God, thou unspeakable sweetness, turn all carnal comforts
into bitterness unto me, which do draw me from the love of things eternal,
and evilly allure me under color of some present delectable good. Let not
flesh and blood, O my God, overcome me; let not the world and its short glory
deceive me; let not the devil and his subtilty supplant me. Give me strength
to resist, patience to endure, constancy to perform; give me in stead of all
the comforts of the world, the most sweet unction of thy Spirit, and infuse
into me the love of thy Name, in stead of carnal love. Confirm me, my God,
by the grace of thy holy Spirit; give me power to be strengthened in the
inward man, and to empty my heart of all unprofitable care and vexation, nor
to be distracted with the various desires of any thing, whether it be vile or
precious, but that I look upon all things as if they passed but by me, and
that I did also pass away, as they do; because nothing under the Sun is of
any continuance, but all things are vanity and vexation of spirit. O how wise
is he that thus considers with himself. Give me, my God, heavenly wisdom,
that I may learn to search after, and to find thee rather than any thing, to
be wise unto thee, and to love thee, and to understand other things, as they
truly are according to the order of thy wisdom. Grant I may wisely shun him
that flatters me, and patiently suffer him that opposes me; because this is
great wisdom not to be moved with every wind of words, nor to listen unto
mischievous flattering pleasure; so shall we with security proceed in the way
we have begun to walk in.

CONTEMP. etc. 33.
Of the true Dignity of a Christian.

LEt others call a man a creature to be adored, and borne for Society, full of
reason and council; let them call him the great Miracle, most like unto God
the, Miracle of miracles; let them call him the Horizon of corporeal and
incorporeall things, the measure of all things, the little World, the Epitome
of the world, and the delight of Nature: let them write that man only exceeds
all wonder, and that nothing is great upon the earth but man; yet so great
dignity, so great excellency, and so great advancement of man can never be so
great, as it will be, if with this a man may be called a Christian, which
denomination took its original from Christ, the very Son of God, and is
imparted unto them that are sprinkled with the saving water of the Sacrament of
Baptism that give their names unto Christ, fighting under his purple Banner,
they defend the honor of their Captain and Author of their Profession, by
their undaunted Profession of the evangelicall and heavenly doctrine, and they
do confirm, defend and propagate that doctrine by their indefatigable study
and practice of good works. O miserable they who are called Pagans, either in
regard that they reverence their Idols in the public streets and ways, being
aliens from the City of God, or because that after the enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom, and the spreading of the Christian Religion, they did not possess
any longer the chief Cities, but were reduced and shut into the strait
Villages. O miserable they, who are called Jews; for although the ancient
people of the Jews had the pre-eminence above other people in privileges and
prerogatives, and was not excluded from the heavenly Kingdom and the City of
God; yet at this day their unclean multitudes dispersed every where through the
world, are far exceeded in sundry and manifold eminencies by the Christian
people; for though the body be already exhibited, they dispute upon shadows,
and obstinately defend their Mosaicall Ceremonies, and despise Christ that is
the only door to eternal life; bewitched with the leven of the Pharisees,
they reject the truth, detract from it and slander it; and thence by Gods just
judgment Jerusalem being destroyed and lost, they have no Temple, have no
form of a Commonwealth, but are most vilely despised in all parts of the
earth. O happy Christians, and freed from all misery! Christ is God blessed
for evermore: therefore are Christians truly divine; Christ being true God in
his Essence, is a Spirit, therefore are Christians spiritual; Christ by nature
is the only Son of God, therefore are Christians by grace the heirs of
heaven; Christ is the virtue and power of God; therefore are Christians
powerful; Christ is Wisdom, therefore are Christians wise; Christ is
Righteousness, therefore are Christians just; Christ is made Sanctification
unto us, therefore are Christians holy; Christ is the Way, therefore Christians
do not err; Christ is Life, therefore Christians, though dead, yet do live;
Christ is the Truth, therefore are Christians led into all truth; Christ is the
Light that enlightens the world, therefore do Christians shine forth in the
midst of darkness; Christ is a Shepherd, therefore are Christians fed in
wholesome pastures; Christ is the healing Physician, therefore do Christians
receive cure in all their infirmities; Christ is the Conqueror of Satan and
the Lord of the world, therefore do Christians bear rule, overcome and
triumph in Christ; Christ does reign in glory, nay is glory it self, and all
in all; therefore Christians, though they be abominable to the world, and are
had in reproach, yet are most glorious in Christ, and though they have nothing,
yet possess they all things; Christ was anointed when his Humanity was taken
into the Person of the Word, the Divinity did anoint, and the Humanity was
anointed; and this anointing is a diffusing of the whole ointment upon every
one that is anointed therewith: he was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows; he is anointed with gifts finite and infinite, conferred by
taking upon him the humane Nature from the holy Virgin, which agree well with
the name of an ointment for the most fragrant scent they breath forth, and the
comforting force they retain in them; they are compared to the Oil of
gladness, because they expel sadness out of Christian hearts, and do
inflame them with true joy and comfort. Think now as often as Christ's Name
comes into thy mind, that God did from all eternity ordain, consecrate and
define him, to consummate the work of the Redemption, and did most plentifully
bestow upon him those unspeakable gifts which he foresaw he should stand in
need of. That he should be a Prophet, our Master, our Priest to offer up
himself an expiatory Sacrifice, that he should be Lord of lords, King of
kings, that might have the possession of an incomparable and everlasting
Kingdom, the first moment of his conception; but the full and most glorious
enjoyment of it in his ascension: even as David was anointed by Samuel king
whilst Saul lived, but did not exercise any regal jurisdiction; but when he
was dead, he obtained the Dominion, and did govern the Kingdom. And we also are
anointed Christians, when we are separate from the ungodliness of worldly men,
and are made holy by the mystery of the Spirit. We were anointed, when, as
Christ did receive the gifts of the Spirit without measure, we received them
with measure. We are anointed, when we are exalted to prophetical, priestly,
and kingly dignity; and this is that which the Prophet speaks, Ye shall know
that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am Jehovah, your God, and that
none else is; nor shall my people be ashamed for ever: And it shall come to
pass afterward, that I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young mensh ll see visions, which he declares by his most dear
disciple. Jesus Christ is that faithful witness, that first borne from the
dead, and that Prince of the kings of the earth, who has loved us, and has
washed us from our sins by his blood; who has made us kings and priests to
God his Father. You are a chosen stock, a royal priesthood, a sanctified
people, a nation whom God challenges for his own. O name, not above every
name, yet a divine, a heavenly, and anhonourable name; here is fulfilled that
which the Prophet said; A new name shall be given thee, which the mouth of the
Lord shall bestow on thee. We have changed our accursed name, because God has
given us a new name. Take heed to your selves, take heed who ever you be, that
you despise none of the faithful, that you disesteeme or reproach them not,
though he seem most miserable, most abject; and most afflicted: for let his
misery or affliction be as great as may be, yet is he the Almighty Gods
Anointed, the Prophet of the most holy, the Priest of the most High; yea, he is
himself a king of most great Majesty. Ye are Prophets, O Christians,
therefore let the Word of God dwell plentifully in you, with all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another, with psalms and hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing unto the Lord with grace in your hearts. Ye are Priests, ye
Christians, therefore I beseech you, my brethren, by the mercies of God, that
you give up your bodies a living and a holy sacrifice, and acceptable to God,
by your reasonable service of him, and be not fashioned like this world, but be
ye changed through the renewing of your minds, that ye may discern what is:
the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Ye are Kings, O Christians,
be not therefore servants of sin, or be subject to the boiling affections of
the flesh, but mortify your sins, tame your lusts, nor prostitute your
dignity to a most base and impure servitude. Extol your Christ, because all
your eminency, all your worth, all your grace, and all your glory proceeds
from him. As the rivers do flow from the sea, and flow back again into the
same; so let your eminency, dignity, grace, and glory, be directed, disposed
of, and referred to the author and giver thereof. Call upon Christ, O ye
Christians, because though you be anointed, yet may that ointment be
overwhelmed, defiled, and wiped off by the filth of your sins, and the dirt
of your corruptions; ye carry heavenly gifts in brittle vessels, pray that they
be not broken, and your graces spilt; pray that no wind may extinguish your
flame, that your oil fail you not, and ye be left in darkness with the
foolish virgins. Love your Christ, ye Christians, because he is anointed, that
you might be anointed; because he is a King that has all the inhabitants of
the earth for his subjects; because he is a Priest, that has expiated all the
sins of the whole world; because he is a Prophet that does instruct all the
ignorant, does inform them, and teaches them the right way to life. Love
Christ, you Christians, because the most apparent manifestation of a thankful
mind consists not in words, but works; not in promises, but in obedience. But
to the end you may more fully consider your dignity, the birth of a Christian
is to be weighed: God is his Father in heaven, the Church is his mother upon
the earth. The Word of God to be heard and seen, is the seed; that is the Word
preached, this is the administration of the Sacraments. Ye are borne again,
not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the Word of God that lives and
abides for evermore. The Father of lights has begotten you by the Word of his
truth. The Churches are the womb where the seed of the heavenly Word is
scattered, and in which the eternal Father, and our mother the Church do meet
together. The heart of man is the matter of this generation; the privation, is
the mortification of the old Adam; the form, is the vivification it self,
whence does arise the assent of the understanding, and confidence of the will,
that the son of wrath may become the son of grace, the blind may see, the
deaf may hear, the dumb may speak, the lame walk, the leaper be cleansed,
and life may be restored to the dead. The time of this formation is when a
Christian does more and more profit in knowledge of the understanding and
holiness in the heart; the carrying in the womb is when in our whole life, by
means of the vessels of the womb, and navell, that is, by the ministers of
the Word, he attracteth to himself the milk of saving knowledge, from the two
breasts of the Church, the Law and the Gospel; and as an Embrion lives in the
womb, so he lives in the Word. He is a brute creature, and more silly than a
beast, that does not admire, that a child in the womb should be preserved
alive in so dark a prison, in so unclean streights, among so many filths,
corruptions, excrements, wrapped in filmes, and crowded by the bowels: but it
is far more to be wondered at, that any Christian should be supported amidst
so many griefs, pains, torments, snares, and calamities. For about the womb
wherein we are carried, the World cries, I will slay him; the Flesh cries, I
will infect him; the Devil cries, I will deceive him. We must there lie hid,
where there is much malice, where is little wisdom, where all things are
viscous and slimie, all things hid in darkness, and beset with snares, where
the souls are in danger, the bodies are afflicted, where all things are vanity
and vexation of Spirit: and yet for all this we live and are preserved; we live
and are not killed; we are nourished, and not in want; we are carried in the
womb, and are not abortive; we are sustained, and are in want of nothing. The
Embrion in the mothers womb lives a hidden life; he lives (indeed) in the
world, but is not seen with the eyes of any; he sends forth his breath, but
scarce draws any in: we also, Embrions of regeneration, lead a hidden life. For
though we live in the kingdom of heaven, yet our glory and desirable life
does not as yet make any great show; we yet behold not the light of eternal
blessedness; we yet draw not the air of the region of Paradise; we yet eat
not the Angelical Manna; we yet drink not of the heavenly liquour, but have
(as it were) but a light taste of al these things; and we have scarce any
sensible breathing of these things. But the hour is at hand, and the time will
come, that it shall be made manifest what we shall be, wherein we shall begin
and never end; this glorious light, this life, not of hope, but of the things
hoped for, even the life of vision. We shall begin this life when we die, for
then begin we to be borne to the true light, when we first put off our
mortality. For the true birth day of Christians, is their day of death. In
death they do begin to live, through death they enter into life: as the infant
lies sighing at the port of the womb, expecting his passage; and though he be
even at deaths threshold, yet is he conveyed into the haven of life. O living
death of Christians! O Christian, son of God, brother of Christ, companion of
the Angels, Lord of the world, partaker of the divine nature! O Christian,
exalted above sin and the law, and placed above death and Satan! O Jesu my
Lord! O Christ my Captain! thy name be glorified, because thou have given me a
blessed name, denominated from thine own name. Let thy praise be daily borne
in my mouth, because thou art daily born in my heart, that I may be born again
in thee, and may live to thee, and with thee. For no man is rightly called a
Christian, that is not conformed (as much as may be) to Christ in his manners;
and he bears this name in vain, that does not at all imitate Christ. For what
does it profit thee to be called what thou art not, and to usurp another man's
name? If any take pleasure to be a Christian, let him carry about him what
belongs to a Christian, and then he may worthily take upon him the name of a
Christian; but he does those things which belong to true Christianity, who
shows mercy to all; that is not moved by any wrong done to him; that is as
sensible of another grief, as of his own; that makes not the poor strangers
at his table; that is not magnified amongst men, that he may be gloried before
God and his Angels: who contemnes earthly things, that he may obtain heavenly
things; that does not suffer the poor to be here oppressed; who helps those
that are in distress; who is moved to weep by other men's tears; as S. Paul
did, for who is weak, says he, and I am not weak? Grant unto me, O Christ,
most mercifully, that am the least and most unworthy of all Christians, that I
may do these things with all my power, and may persevere in the desire
thereof, and that I may not halt, slip, or utterly fall off: for not the
beginning, but the ending well is required in a Christian; let that therefore
be most blessed unto me, O my Savior. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 34.
Of necessary rules to lead a godly life, concerning the thoughts of man.

Man's life is a middle life, between the life of Angels, and the life of
sinners; if a man live after the flesh, he is compared to the beasts; if he
live after the Spirit, he is made a companion for the Angels. Now that thou
may walk in the straitest path, thou must consider of thy thoughts, examine
thy words, and weigh thy actions. As touching thy thoughts, give no time or
place to sins, but as soon as they appear in the blade, before they can
take root, pluck them up. Break (in time) the Basilisks eggs, that none of
them prove a serpent; dash the Babilonish brats against the stones, while they
be young. Fall not often into the same sin, but abridge the custom of sinning,
and sin not without doubt, as if thou neither fear God nor man. Propose not
to thy self those things in thy thoughts, which are either unprofitable, or
impossible. Be not wise too high. Think the world, and worldy things, to be
but vain, that thou do not overvalue them. Be always mindful of death, that
thou fear it not too much when it comes unto thee: call to mind the last
judgment, that thou may appear there with an undaunted courage: remember
hell to avoid it, and blessedness, that thou may enter into it. Learn
(forthwith) therforemore and more to know thine own misery, which arises from
unbeleefe and the transgression of Gods holy Commandments. Renounce therefore
unbeleefe, and strive to keep all his precepts. Knock at the gate of the
mercies of heaven, by the merit of Christ, and so humble thy self, as if thou
were to obtain those mercies, without his merits. What is the most abject
creature in the world? let it not trouble thee to answer thy self, It is I, by
reason of my sins. And again, if it be demanded of thee, what is the most
precious treasure upon the earth? let it not trouble thee to answer with thy
self, the blood and merits of my Lord Jesus Christ, by which I am cleansed
from my sins, and have salvation purchased for me. Above all, abhor to
sin willingly, and with a deliberate resolution; for to have true faith, and
to sin voluntarily, can no more agree together, than fire and water, or the
lamb and the wolf. Be a true, faithful, and sincere servant of Jesus Christ,
not only in the public assemblies, where Gods word is preached, and the
Sacraments administered: but in the rest of thy life, by flying evil, and doing
of good. But if by reason of the infirmity of thy flesh thou have committed any
sin, loath it betimes, and destroy it by speedy and serious repentance. Pray
only unto God; whilst thy conscience rests in prayer to him, sin withers,
and nothing is sweet to thee besides virtue and goodness. Catch not too much
at popular applause, which is very inconstant, and though thou think thy merits
have deserved to be taken notice of by those that pass by thee, and that thou
ought to be respected of the good; yet use it moderately and discreetly,
that it do thee not more hurt, than hatred and contempt. He is truly wise,
that neither too greedily hunts after the peoples favor, nor too much despises
it. Seek, especially, for a quiet mind, and be content with thy present
condition. It is no harmfull thing, that some evil is mixed with the good
things of this life, that God bestows upon us; God deals gently with thee, as
with his Son, therefore despair not; God does also chasten thee, be not thou
impatient, lay hold on the golden mean, search for things necessary, but not
for superfluities, and always have an eye to Gods will, that thine own will
do not oppress thee; he is happy that can lie hid in this life, and is known
to none but God and himself. A certain man was wont to say, As often as I
have been amongst men, I still returned the less man from them. It is an
easier thing to lie hid at home, than to keep himself well abroad; he
therefore that intends to obtain inward and spiritual gifts, he must with
Jesus decline the throng; no man can safely be seen, but he that is willingly
concealed: the better sort of men, in the estimation of others, have often been
in great hazard, by reason of their too much confidence. Thence is it, that it
is more profitable to many, not altogether to be void of temptations, but to be
often assaulted that they be not too secure, that they be not puffed up with
pride, nor that they too licentiously lean to exterior delights. O what a
good conscience would he always possess, that would never seek after
transitory mirth, nor busy himself with the world! O how would he prune off
all vain care, and only meditate of saving and divine things, and place all
his hope in God, and what peace and quiet would he enjoy! Let the want of
nothing, but of Gods grace, much trouble thee; desire Gods grace, and thou
shall obtain it, and let not the scarcity of outward things too much afflict
thee. If Satan reproach thee with thy wants, consider with thy self what Saint
Paul said, We brought nothing into this world, and we know that we can carry
nothing away from thence: and therefore let us be content with our food and
clothing; but those that will be rich, fall into temptations, and snares, and
many foolish lusts, which afflict and drown the sons of men in ruin and
destruction: Pray with Agur, the son of Jakeh, I have desired two things of
thee, O God, deny them not unto me as long as I live; remove far from me
vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches, let me be nourished with
the meat of mine own table, lest being over full, I lie against thee, and say,
who is the Lord? or being poor, I should steal, and so abuse the Name of my
God. Be grieved more for Gods dishonor than thine own; if thou suffer
wrong, bear it patiently, and thou shall overcome it; yet, thou may say, my
reputation is stained, shall I endure it? Why not? suffer, and thy reputation
will be soon repaired: he that shall at length, even in the last day, restore
unto thee thy putrified body, shall restore to thee thy credit; if thou be
angry and enraged, and tear thy self, what shall all these turmoiles profit
thee? Nothing is more pleasing to thy enemy, than to see thee by thy rage to
be in such a confusion. Rather pray for thine enemies, that they be
fellow-heires with thee of eternal life, and fellow-chaunters of thy Fathers
praises in his heavenly Kingdom. The more others extol thee, the more do
thou humble thy self in thine own eyes, nor please thy self with such
vanities. They that esteem lightly of earthly things, are magnified and
extolled by the Angels of heaven: proceed sincerely, rightly, and innocently in
every of thy actions, nor too earnestly take care for the things thou have not.
Think no sin little, for there is none so light, (if any may be said light)
but it may bring upon thee great plagues and everlasting death; therefore,
deplore thy least sins, and pray without ceasing for the bettering of thy
life. Think how short thy life is; if any seriously consider what ever
belongs to us, he shall see they vanish from us like birds in the air, and
we also by our perpetual motion are carried beyond those transitory things;
but that which is worst, no remedy can be found against this, for these things
fall out thus by the law of Nature; for the things of this life are a dream, a
smoke and impostures; this is our life, O men that lead a fleeting life; such
is the Scene upon the earth, that we must be borne ere we could have a being,
and as soon as we are borne, we are again dissolved to nothing. We are a
dream that lasts not, an apparition that cannot be laid hold on, a flight of a
bird that is gone, the passage of a ship in the sea, that leaves behind no
impression, dust, a vapor, morning dew, a flower that has his time to blow,
and time to wither; the days of man are as grass, and shall flourish, but
like the flower of the field. Think therefore always what manner of life thou
have, not how long it may last: make haste to live well, and think every day is
another life; let us extend our life, whose office and argument is action; let
us not place the goodness of our life in the length of it, but in the use of
it: For it may come to pass, yea, it often happens so that he who has lived
long, has lived little; his life is most long, in the whole extent whereof he
has been at leisure for himself, and yet no part thereof has lain waste or
idle. Life is like a Play, it skils not how long it is, but how well it was
acted; not he that has sung much to the Harp, nor he that has made many
prayers, or has steered many ships, is to be commended, but he that has
performed these things; for Beauty is to be placed in Virtue, and a seasonable
moderation, not in length of days. In every thing we see the Priority to be
yielded to maturity and perfection, not to their old age: For amongst the
Plants, those are accounted the best which bear most fruit in the shortest
time; and amongst the living creatures, those from whom we receive most
commodities, for our lives, in the shortest time. We conclude therefore, that a
short time well and innocently spent, is far to be preferred before a sinful
long life.

CONTEMP. etc. 35.
Of necessary rules to lead a holy life concerning our words.

Hear and obey these things, O man, which I shall utter touching thy words;
weigh well continually with thy self, that saying of our Savior, I say unto
you, that of every idle word that the sons of men shall speak, they shall
give an account for in the day of judgment: and that also which the most wise
Solomon also affirms, in the multitude of words there will not cease to be
sin. Fly (therefore) idle and slothful words, which have repentance treading
upon their heels, and ill success at their elbowes. Examine what thou art to
propose, and what to answer: As long as thy word is within the fence of thy
teeth, it is thine own, but as soon as it is escaped, it is his that receives
it. How foul and uncomely a thing is it, if thy unbrideled tongue, breaking
the bounds of modesty, shall cause thee to blush for shame? Let therefore thy
words be few and weighty, and seasoned with salt; and mark in the delivery,
what is worthy, and what in them is unworthy of thee. Chiefly, vaunt of nothing
for truth, which thou know not to be true; nor give thy self over to
receive vain reports. Such a tongue is a monster, more changeable than any
Proteus, that fills the world with fables, and does often in sports cause
tragedies to be acted amongst men: it increases in its progress, and for the
most part relates things to be greater than they are; and cannot abstain from
telling of lies, in relating a truth: and although it does only utter trifles
and toys, yet sometimes is it in the place of a thousand witnesses. As the
hand of a fool does leave a token of his folly deciphered upon every wall it
passes by; so such a tongue fills all men's ears with rumors and stories;
but whether they be true or false, it cares not. A mouse scarce peeps out of
any cranny, but it is presently at hand, and like a midwife receives this
issue, and makes it presently grow big; and that it may show the fairer,
clothes it in most large vestments: so he forces rumors upon every one he
meets, as being fresh and new, yea, as a true story, though for the most part
it has scarce any truth in it. So is falsehood in very short time divulged
through the world. Whosoever hears a report, coins and adds something to that
he has heard, what either credulity, or ornament shall persuade him too. Behold
the stories, which do (at length) put off all show of truth. The wooden
engines were (heretofore) framed with that art, that when they were brought
forth unto the solemnity of the triumphs, they did suddenly grow great, and
raise themselves to a great height: rumors are indeed these Pageants, which
when they begin to spread, are accustomed suddenly to increase, and to extend
into an incredible greatness. But O the rashness of man's mind! we lead a
very short life, we have an end as soon as we begin: the most swift time
returns not in his gate, his course, nor in his flight, and forsakes us even
while we are thinking of vanity, by a flight never to be recalled: And we
amidst these precipices of swit-footed time, are not only slow, but triflers,
wear out our best days in most idle bawbles. Our swift days do pass away,
and we also are carried away in their motion; we are snatched away unawares,
whilst we are toying, and make pastime to our own destruction. Believe not
every thing is told thee, nor report all that thou hear, except thou intend
to lose thy friends, and to kindle the hatred of many against thy self. First
weigh things, before thou judge of them. He that reports things he only
hears, being first deceived himself, does most usually deceive others. Behold
how far the eyes and the ears do stand asunder! If all that the miners did
cast out of the mines, were silver and gold, the world by this time might have
been gilded all over; but whilst the metal that is dug thence, is severed
from the dross, earth, stones, and sand that is mixed with it, it is brought
at length to a small langot: so it is with the recital of things we hear; if
we take away the things which are fained, false, and ill understood, and those
which are added by conjecture; alas what a small scantling of pure truth
remains? for the most part, half that is fained that is related in a
many-worded Oration. Let the words of the tongue agree with the meaning of the
heart, shun falsehood and lies. It is easy to say what a lie is, there needs
no long dispute about it; To speak one thing, and think another, is a lie. To
speak against a man's mind is a lie. Let not thy breast conceal one thing, and
thy tongue utter another thing. Let no man doubt but he lies, that utters any
thing with an intent to deceive. One of the veins ties the tongue and the
heart together, another the tongue and brain; by which disposition of the
veins, nature teaches us, that one member is so to be governed by the
understanding, that the tongue may agree with the heart. For this is a lie, to
carry one thing hidden in the heart, another thing ready at the tongues end: to
believe in heart that a thing is black, but to affirm in words that it is
white. But that you may more fully understand this, you must know there is a
threefold lie, an officious lie, a jesting lie, and a pernicious lie. An
officious lie is said to be that that may be believed, to profit another, but
himself least of all that tells it. They call a jesting lie that that hurts no
body, but is spoken by way of fancy; but though a lie spoken in jest, is not
so ill as that which is spoken to another man's hurt, or for very pleasure we
take in lying, even that also because it is a lie, is sin; for it is vanity
and extravigancie, to take pleasure in that thing which should be far distant
from us; yet it is not called a jesting lie, if any one speak a falsity, not
in earnest, but in such a jesting way, that all may perceive that he means
other ways than he speaks, for in regard there is no signification of
falsehood, it is not a lie; but that is a lie, when any one relates a falsity
for fancies sake, and that he takes pleasure in it, and does does desire to
persuade others that he is serious. Thirdly, and finally, a pernicious lie is
that that is always joined with another harm, and is reckoned amongst sins
of a high nature. An officious lie is not so called, because any man may excuse
it, by taking upon himself the deceit: Although he that sins to profit
another, sins less than he that does it not to this end; yet
notwithstanding he deals not simply, and in a right manner; for ill is not to
be done, that good may come thereon. Therefore fly, with diligence, all manner
of lying, and neither by chance, or of set purpose speak that which is false:
beware of lying in all things. This vice is so to be avoided, that though the
safety of many were to be contrived in one lie, and that but only an officious
or jesting lie, yet it would not be lawful for thee to tell it. Yea if any one
by a slight lie could rid his parents, or any more dear to him than his parents
from devouring flames, yet might he not lawfully tell a lie; it would be better
to forsake them amidst the flames, than by an untruth to offend thy God. But
thou will say, this is a hard saying; it is rigid, yet it is true. Have thou
not read? Let us do evil, that good may come thereon, whose damnation is
just. All doctrine of truth shall in this manner be taken away, if we yield to
most licentious falsehood, if any place be any where left open to a lie, though
it be but an officious one: for whosoever lies, proposes to himself, his
own, or another temporal commodity, than which, what can be done more
perversely? Certainly, an injury offered to God is greater than all the ill we
can do unto man. How many thousand of most holy martyrs, would rather
prodigally power forth their bloods by drops, than consent with one lie to
defend their innocencies. But if our very life be not to be preferred before
the truth, what can be objected to maintain we may lawfully lie, by those that
are of opinion we ought sometimes to lie? Be gone then, let every lie, I say,
be gone, because it has the devil for its author, who himself neither
remained in the truth, nor is there any truth in him. Lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord; but those that deal faithfully, are pleasing unto
him. If thou know any thing that a good man in other things has done, and thou
have long concealed it with the cloak of charity, do not in thy wrath reveal
it, that no man may accuse thee of passion, and to have a malicious mind; and
that others do not that to thee, which thou should not do to others, I
advise thee not to reveal thy self and all thy secrets to any but a true
pious and honest man; thou need not fear such a one, because for Christian
charities sake, which is the foundation of all friendship, he will, perchance,
willingly pardon thy offenses, nor will at all reproach thee. Do nothing also
in any man's presence, which may cause thee to fear that thou may raise up
mischief to thy self, or make a friend become thine enemy. That which thou
would have secret, keep thou it secret, and reveal it to no man; yet
remember God can see through the thickest clouds. Find no fault with others,
but look to thy self. Avoid biting reprovers and obscene jesters; yet if at
any time thou will jest civilly, propose three things to thy self; first,
abuse not the phrase of Scripture to make up thy jest, and so defile thy
religion; what can thou imagine that God thinks, when he sees and hears such
things among Christians that profess his name, that would be thought wiser
than others, and yet account this for no sin? That I may not speak of the
grievous offense that many take hereat, and that they are troubled and made sad
with the worst sort of scandal, who cannot (afterward) read or hear Gods
Word, or pray with the same devotion they were wont (before) to do; very
nature it self also teaches us that we ought not to deal so ridiculously,
negligently and idly, in so grave and holy words. He that consulteth with his
own conscience, finds they be such obscenities, foolish bablings and ribauldry
that are not fitting for Christians. Secondly, let not thy jesting weaken
Christian charity. Thirdly, let them not violate honesty and chastity. Never
speak of God but with fear and reverence, and as it were in his presence, who
is most present every where. For seeing we are not worthy to take his holy Name
in our mouths, much less decent is it for us to profane it with our lips; it
is a sure sign of a wicked mind to use Gods Name upon all light occasions.
Pray therefore with David, Let the words of my mouth, and meditations of my
heart be acceptable before thee. Be finally sparing in commending any man, but
ready to salute any one; gentle in giving respect; courteous in admonishing;
merciful in pardoning; faithful in performing thy promises; ready to requite
good; neither convert thou the reward of virtue into a gift of courtesy.

CONTEMP. etc. 36.
Of rules necessary to lead a godly life, touching our Actions.

HEarken and be obedient, O man, touching thy deeds: do no evil, though thou
may do it; for the least sins, except they be seriously repented of, are
not suffered to go unpunished. Let it not grieve thee to do good; do nothing
against thy vocation; if thou begin any thing, in the first place pray
earnestly unto God for his assistance; then set confidently upon thy work, and
leave the issue thereof to God; if thou undertake any thing, in thy vocation,
trust to Gods providence, though the means thou usest, seem insufficient unto
thee; and if they offer themselves, as it were unto thy hands of their own
accord, resolve that they are offered thee from God; yet place not greater hope
in them than in God, but beseech him mercifully to bless those means: have a
heavenly mind in earthly things, and do what thou art able; commit the rest
to the guidance of the most holy Trinity: never use unlawful means, for that
can bring no gain with it that brings destruction to the soul. For this end
labor constantly that thy conscience be pure before God and man. If at any
time thou be enticed to sin, think Satan lodges near thee, and that it is a
reproachful thing for the sons of men, that are so well beloved of God, and
so gently dealt with by him, to gratify so unclean a spirit, to the dishonor
and reproach of thy God: To the reproach, I say, of thy God, because every
voluntary sin is a reproach offered to God. No Prince will endure this of
thee; and how shall God suffer, who is a God of all Majesty and Glory, that a
reproach offered to his Majesty, so often renewed, and so often with security
committed against him, shall go unpunished? As often as we commit sin by a
deliberate counsel against our conscience, we do (in a sort) consult of it
before (though we oftentimes do not mark and perceive it;) on one scale we
put the profit, pleasure, or delight of sin, in the other our loss, the wrath
of God, and our offenses against him. What madness is it now, what
perverseness, what malice, what reproach to prefer a moment before eternity,
a drop before the Ocean, one grain of sand before a mountain, our own lusts
before the incomparable Omnipotency and Majesty of God? Do thou not, O man,
as often as thou sinnest, strike, as it were, the infinite God with thy
paricidiall hand? Ask continually thy conscience these two things; whether if
any such thing befall thee, thou art to be acquitted? What if thou shall do
any such thing in the very day wherein all the world must receive its doom?
Whether thou can give an answer to the universal Judge, when thou shall be
forced to give a reason for all thy Actions? Remember Joseph, that thought that
God saw what no man could perceive. God is just, he shall draw thy sins to the
light that thou have committed in secret. When David defiled Bathseba by his
unlawful lying with her; Who saw his adultery but God? He brought forth his
secret pleasures to the view of all Israel; and will also at length discover
thy wickedness unto all men. Satan is subtle, even in this one thing, that by
flattering thy self, thou may account thy self but a small sinner, and so
may draw thee into his net; but if thou desire to avoid sin, shun the occasion
of sinning; let that which is good, please thee for Gods sake, and let God
please thee for his own sake; if God favor thee, fear no man's persecution;
God shall make thine enemy thy friend, or shall so temper him, that he shall
do thee but little hurt; no man can be overcome by his enemy, but he who was
first overcome by sin, and so made himself hateful unto God. Deprive no man
of the respect that is due unto him, yet always reckon with thy self that
respect is more due to godliness than to greatness; if God increase thy
substance in this life, think it is a spur of thy thankfulness, and an
incitement to desire those heavenly things, and an exhortation to piety;
neither be proud either of thy external or internal gifts; for outward things
as they seldom happen or come unto thee, so they fall off and speedily depart
from thee: God gave thee indeed thy inward graces, yet he can take them from
thee before thou be aware, if any abuse them, and forget God the giver of them.
It may be thou have many virtues, and it may be thou art disfigured by many
vices that do displease him more than the others do please him. It is not
enough that others commend thee, except thine own conscience do approve thee;
no fame is perpetual, but that which arises from godliness. We read no
where in Gods Book that an hypocrite was ever converted; and what wonder? for
whereas the conversion of sinners is a means to turn from sin; what means of
salvation is left for him that turns repentance it self into sin, which is
the means of salvation? O miserable soul that desires to see holy things, and
lives a heathenish life! Observe in what a manner the wicked end their days,
so that thou may detest their lives. See how the godly end their lives, that
thou may run the same course as they do. Obey thy Superiors, honor those
that are wise; keep company with those that be honest and religiously given.
And seeing man's corrupt nature does much love hypocrisy; touch not, nor use
the Sacrament before thou have founded the depth of thine own heart most
accurately. Rule over those that are subject to thy command, more by courtesy
than severity; courtesy is full of hope, and tyranny of fear: Gods justice
will not suffer a tyrant to continue long, for though subjects, both by Gods
laws and also by man's, ought to yield obedience to Magistrates, yet the
Magistrates themselves are but Gods Ministers; and if we consider them as they
are Christians, they are not only servants, but our brethren also in Christ:
Christians therefore must rule like Christians, in charity and mercy, as
Christ has taught us by his own example. Art thou made a Judge? give right
judgment, remembering that thy self must appear before Gods Judgment Seat:
he is cursed that blesses the wicked; but blessed that blesses the blessed. O
man, how dangerous is man's life, what a great account has he to give, what a
short space is it, but thou must appear at Gods Tribunal? What then must thou
do? What deed have thou committed? How would thou appear, if thou were
this hour to depart? If thou were to appear this moment before thy Examiner?
It would quickly be determined concerning thee: Thou art to day a man, shall
thou appear to morrow? O dullness, and hardness of man's heart, that only
meditates upon things present, and foresees nothing what shall be hereafter!
Thou ought so to behave thy self in every action, as if thou were this day
to dye; in the morning think thou may not live to the evening, and in the
evening dare not promise thy self the next ensuing morning: be always
prepared, and so live, that death may never take thee unprovided. How happy
and wise is he that labors to be such whilst he lives, as he wishes to be
found at his death! O Jesu, give me the perfect contempt of the world; give me
a fervent desire to profit in virtue; give me the love of instruction, the
labor of repentance, the readiness of obedience. O my God, grant that I may
desire thee in my heart, to seek thee in my desires, to find thee in my
search, and love thee being found. Give me, my Lord and God, repentance for my
heart, contrition to my spirit, a flood of tears to my eyes, and a liberal
distribution of alms to my hands. O my King, extinguish in me the desire of
the flesh, and kindle in me the fire of thy love. O my Redeemer, drive out of
me the spirit of pride, and favorably grant me the treasure of thy humility.
O my Savior, remove from me the madness of anger, and indulgently afford me
the shield of patience. O my Creator, pluck out all rancour out of my mind, and
bestow on me the sweetness of a mild spirit: give me, most merciful Father,
a firm faith, a congruous hope, and continual charity: my Governor, do
thou divert all vanity from me, all inconstancy of mind, wandering of the
heart, scurrility of the tongue, pride of the eyes, gluttony of the belly,
reproaching of my neighbors, the sins of detraction, the itch of curiosity,
the desire of riches, the extortion of great men, the desire of vainglory, the
evil of hypocrisy, the poison of flattery, the contempt of the poor, the
oppression of the weak, the thirst of covetousness, the rust of envy, and the
death of blasphemy. O my Maker, cut off from me rashness, iniquity,
lewdness, disquietnesse, idleness, drowsinesse, sloth, dullness of mind,
blindness of heart, obstinacy of sense, bloodinesse of conditions,
disobedience to goodness, resistance of good counsel, unbridlenesse of my
tongue, preying upon the poor, wronging the weak, slandering the innocent,
neglecting my inferiors, cruelty in my family, impiety toward my familiars,
and hardness of heart to my neighbors. O God, my mercy, I beseech thee by thy
beloved Son, give me the works of mercy, the study of godliness, to suffer
with those in affliction, to counsel those that err, to help the miserable,
to succor the needy, to comfort the sad, to releeve the oppressed, to refresh
the poor, to cheer those that weep, to forgive our debtors, to spare them
that sin against me, to love those that hate me, to render good for evil, to
despise no man, but to honor all, to imitate the good, to beware of the
wicked, to embrace virtue, to reject vice, to be patient in adversity, to be
moderate in prosperity, to set a watch over my mouth, and a door before my
lips; give me uprightness in my dealings, and a true testimony of my faith,
to trample upon earthly things, to thirst after heavenly things, that thou
may one day say to me, Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in a little, I will set thee over much, enter into the joy of thy
Master. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 37.
Of the exceeding number of Gods benefits, and of man's contempt of them by the
multitude of his sins.

WHo will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to mine eyes? and I
will weep both night and day. Let my eyes drop tears, and my eyelids flow
with waters. I will convey my self into the place of weeping and of tears, I
will take pains in my groaning, I will every night wash my bed, and water my
couch with my tears. My tears shall be my meat day and night, and I will not
hide my mourning. I will prostrate my self, and let the reins loose to my
tears, and rivers shall gush from mine eyes; I will weep in the bitterness
of my soul. I will continue in weeping, and the tears shall trickle down my
cheeks, wherewith I will deplore my most grievous sins, and will detest my
impious ingratitude, wherewith I have repayed my God and Lord. O that I could
weep out my eyes with tears, that my bowels might be disturbed, and my liver
might be powered forth upon the earth for my great enormities! The causes are
great and many, O God, why my eyes should stream forth wates, yea blood it
self. But I will now contemplate of nothing but the greatness and multitude
of thy blessings that thou have bestowed upon me, when I was yet thine enemy.
That therefore my soul may be astonished, my cheeks blush, my eyes cast down,
and that I may eternally hate my malicious and most polluted life: I will begin
to reckon up thy blessings, and my cursed deeds, that I may see what thou art,
and what I am, what thou have done for me, and how I have requited thee. Send
down from heaven thy holy Spirit, the teacher of truth, and work in my tough
and hard heart, inward and divine repentance, that I may never repent me of.
And now, thou love of that heavenly power, thou holy communication of the
omnipotent Father and the blessed issue, thou Spirit, the Omnipotent Comforter,
slide within the most secret places of my heart by thy powerful operation, and
enlighten every dark lurking place of this my neglected habitation, by the
brightness of thy glorious light. Come, come now thou most courteous Comforter
of the languishing soul, that defendst it in its necessities, and art its
helper in tribulation. Come thou cleanser of my filthiness, thou curer of my
wounds. Come thou Strength of the weak, thou Sustainer of those that slide.
Come thou Instructor of the humble, and Confounder of the haughty. Come thou
holy Father of the orphans, thou mild Judge of the widows. Come thou Hope of
the poor, thou Refresher of those that faint. Come thou sea-mans Star, thou
Haven against shipwreck. Come thou singular Beauty of all that live, thou only
Safety of those that die. Come most holy Spirit, come and take pity upon me.
Fit me for thy self, and mercifully condescend to my weakness, that according
to the multitude of thy mercies, my meannesse may be acceptable to thy
Majesty, and my weakness to thy power. There was a time, my God, when I had
no being, which I cannot remember, and then thou made me to have a being:
thou formedst me of the clay of the earth, and made me according to thine
own image and representation. Thou broughtest me out of my mothers womb, thou
wast my hope when I hung upon my mothers breasts; from the womb was I cast
upon thy providence; for from the very time that I first drew my vital breath,
and entered this tabernacle of the world, and my soul took possession of her
earthly house, thou art my Father, thou art my Redeemer, thou art my Savior,
thou art my Helper. Thou did create my body, and all the members thereof,
thou gave me my soul, and all the faculties thereof, and have most
mercifully preserved my life even to this present hour. Thou have added
another blessing far more precious than the rest, that thou might tie me
the nearer unto thee. Thou descendedst, O God, from heaven, to find me out,
thou soughtest for me being lost of all hands. By thy incarnation did thou
rid my weak and miserable flesh out of the ignominy and baseness, which by
the devils seducing suggestions it was fallen into. Thou sanctifiedst my
sinful nativity by thy most holy birth; by thy bonds and captivity thou have
freed me from the bonds of my enthralling sins. Whilst thou deliveredst thy
self into the hands of sinners, thou have snatched me out of the power of
sin, in the form of sinful flesh; thou have abolished my sinful life,
which is the work of Satan; by this thy great mercy thou have most straightly
tied me unto thy self, thou have enticed me unto thee with those benefits,
thou have confirmed and strengthened my hope with those great merits; thou
would stir up in me a hatred and detestation of my sins, in that thou have
wrought and endured so many and so great things, that thou might reconcile
me to thy heavenly Father, and overthrow the kingdom of sin: so thou have
kindled bright coals over my head, that thou might thereby set my heart on
fire, that overwhelmed (as it were) with the works of thy mercy, which are
included in this thy work of Redemption, I might love him with all my heart,
who has wholly loved me, and imparted himself wholly unto me. Thou have
redeemed me, O Lord my God; but what good had it been unto me, except thou
had permitted me to be baptized? amongst so great a multitude therefore of
Infidels, thou wast pleased I should be borne of faithful parents, and have
blessed me so far above all unbeleeving Ethnicks, Turks and Jews, that I
might be regenerated by the lavacre in thy word, and according to thy Word, and
might put on my Christ, with all his benefits. There thou have adopted me for
thy son, and made me thy heir; there make I that wonderful covenant with
thee, that I should be thine, and that thou should be mine; that thou
should be my Lord, and I should be thy servant; that thou should be my
father, and I should be thy son: there is it so so covenanted betwixt us,
that thou should manifest thy fatherly affection to me, and that I should
with a filial obedience hearken unto thee. What need I rehearse the other use
of this Sacrament, namely, that thou have made it the curing physic of our
sins, that by thine own blood thou might heal my unhappy and festring
wounds, and might thereby more and more add perfection unto me? But though
I have received so many blessings of thee, and have in a readiness so many
antidotes against sin; yet have I not continued in obedience, but have often
broken that covenant, and yet have thou bin so merciful and so mild a God,
that thou did endure my disobedience. O God, my salvation and hope, how can I
recount thy mercy and clemency, without shedding of tears? for how often, O
just judge, might thou kill, and bring me to nothing, and yet none of these
things is befallen me? how many thousands of souls are already thrust into
hell to be punished with eternal plagues and fire, that never came near my
sins either in number or weight; and yet am not I burned? what had become of
me if thou had cut me off, together with them? How ought I to fear thy
terrible and fearful judgment, if thou should punish me in thy immutable
and severe judgment, according to the foulness of my iniquities? O my God,
who tied thy hands? who was my Intercessor, when I most securely slept the
sleep of sin? who held the scourge of thy wrath, when as day by day I provoked
and urged thy vengeance? what was there in me to please thee? what was there in
me so worthy of thy acceptance, that thou should spare me when thou did
root out others, who wallowing in the mud of their sins, thou did summon to
thy most righteous judgment seat in the midst of their days? My sins did cry
to heaven, and thou did stop thine ears; my wickednesses were daily
multiplied, and thy mercy was likewise increased to me; I did sin, and thou
did expect my repentance; I fled from thee, and thou did draw near to me;
I provoked thee so often to wrath, that I might weary thee by my provocations;
yet wast not thou weary of taking pity upon me, as if my transgressions against
thee, being abominable ingratitude in me, were pleasing in thy sight. Thou have
suggested unto me many good thoughts, and given me many profitable admonitions,
to turn me from my transgressions, even in my full speed of sinning. How many
times, standing before the door of my heart, have thou knocked and called,
saying, Return, return thou degenerate son, nor will I set my face against
thee, so that thou will acknowledge the sins, by which thou have offended thy
God? How often have thou called me unto thee by this most pleasing voice? How
often have thou exhorted me by great fear, by most terrible threats, by the
daily expectation of daily danger, of perpetual death and strict judgment?
how many preachers have thou afforded me? how many teachers have thou set over
me, who partly by doctrine, and partly by example, should show me the way I
should walk in? Thou have allured me by most gentle compellations, thou have
chastised me by dangerous sicknesses, and other miseries, and have left out
nothing that might induce me from the old way. What shall I render unto thee, O
Lord, for all thy blessings bestowed upon me? I owe thee my self, and all
things I enjoy, because thou have created me, for thou made me, and what ever
I have. Again, I owe thee my self, and all things I possess, because thou
have preserved me: besides, Lord, thou gave thy self to be my great and
plenteous reward. What can I render unto thee? If I had in my hand all the
lives of all the Angels, and all the souls of all mankind, and I should
resolve to pay them to thee; they could not stand in comparison with one drop
of thy blood shed for me; therefore I most worthily complain, and cry out, who
shall give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, and I will
weep night and day, and deplore mine own abominable ingratitude, wherewith I
thy creature, O my best Creator, have repayed thee, for all thy so many, and so
great, and so incomprehensible benefits bestowed upon me. Help me, O my God,
impart thy grace unto me, that I may with inward contrition confess unto thee
my backsliding from thee. Ah! Lord, I am thy creature, though most unhappy and
unworthy of thee my Creator. Thou did create me according to thine own image
and similitude; look back upon me, O God, take from me what ever I have
brought in, and then thou shall find nothing but good in me, and that which
thou have bestowed upon me, O thou most perfect worker of all goodness. Alas!
I have resisted the powers of thy holy will, and striven much to oppose thee.
Oh, with what security have I given my self over to wrath! my feet made haste
to do evil, my hands prepared themselves to do mischief, to covetousness,
and all manner of impurities; my eyes were turned to behold vanity, my ears
were open to receive lies, filthy talking, slandering and reproaching. My
soul, that was a most noble soul, and near (in nature) to thy heavenly
Ministers, and ought to have contemplated, to beheld, and have reflected upon
thee, turns back from thy unspeakable beauty, and turns it self toward the
flattering deceitful beauty of the world; and labored this with care, that it
might abuse the frail goods of this world to her own lusts, and knew not how
grievous and hurtful this would prove unto her. This (behold) is the
understanding part of my soul! let us see what good may proceed from the will?
Thou have inclined, O Lord, my will to heavenly riches, but it has declined to
earthly things, and has wholly enthralled her self by a vain love unto them:
this, O Lord, is that grace, which I have repayed thee for thy most precious
gifts. What shall I answer thee (ah! Lord,) if thou should call me before
thy judgment seat, and should say, I have planted thee for a noble vine,
and that thou should (wholly) be a faithful seed, how then are you changed
into degenerate branches of a wild vine? But if I stand in so foul a
condition, upon examination of the benefit of my Creation, what will it prove
if I should give an account of the benefits of my Preservation? For thou have
preserved him so many days, so many months, so many years, who has
dedicated all his senses to the contempt and despite of all thy Commandments,
who has persecuted thy servants, who has been a scandal to the communion of
thy Saints, who has strengthened and enlarged the kingdom of sinners. Thou
have preserved the tongue that has blasphemed thee and taken thy Name in
vain; thou have preserved the members that have most vehemently offended thee;
thou have given him meat and drink, that has abused them both to thine own
reproach. I have not been only unthankful, but I armed my self with thine
own blessings against thee. Thou createdst all thy creatures for me, even for
my profit, and to draw me to love thee, and I have used thy creatures to the
inexcusable hatred of thee. Those things which ought to have brought me to thy
most beautiful wisdom, did make me blind, and made me not only not to look
up but did even close mine eyes that I should not behold how much the Creator
did excel those his so many fair and comely creatures: for the most rare
Artist of all beauty and comeliness, was He that that created them. Thou
gave me all things, that I should yield and consecrate my self unto thee:
thou would have all things serve me, that I might serve thee, even I that
have so little thought upon thee. Thy creatures, according to thy command, are
ready at thy beck, but I, alas, have stoutly refused thy commandments. Thou
have given me health of body, and I have granted the use thereof to the devil:
thou have given me strength understanding, and a will, and I have bestowed them
upon the service of iniquity. And what shall I say? as many dangers and losses
of other men as I have beheld, so many of thy blessings toward my self have I
seen, that thou did not overwhelme me in the same dangers and losses. If
thou should send me what I deserve, thou might find me more worthy so
many miseries than others are; but it is thy mercy, O Lord, that I am not
consumed. Beasts are tamed by courtesies, are made gentle and familiar for the
service and obedience of man; and yet thy benefits have not tamed me, have not
moved me, that I might say in my heart, Let us fear the Lord our God, that
gives us rain, the early and the later rain it its season, preserving for us
the fullness of the yearly harvest; that enricheth us with his blessings, that
preserves us from our birth even to our death; Ought not these things to set
before mine eyes and mind, thy favor and mercy toward me? But if I am so
much bound unto thee for these benefits which thou have produced for me by the
bare power of thy Word, what shall I be indebted to thee for redeeming me from
eternal death and damnation, by the precious blood of thine only begotten son?
Oh, how much have I neglected thy most wise counsel? how have I despised thy
incarnation, which I ought to adore? Thou my God, art made man, that thou
might make me partaker of the divine nature; and I a most perverse wretch,
am turned into a beast, and become the devils instrument. Thou did descend
from the most glorious throne of thy heavenly Father, unto me that devil upon
earth, and I have not elevated my self unto thee, nor would I ascend with
thee; but by the works of the flesh I have been faster tied to the more base
things of the earth, and have pressed my self down into the mud, by the
weight of my sins, wherein I have long lien wallowing. Thou have delivered me
out of the power of the devil, and I of mine own accord have ensnared my
self in his devilish toiles. Thou art made one body with me, and I by my
voluntary sins have plucked my self off from thee, and have glued my self
to the body of the wicked. So many thy wondrous works could not force me to
acknowledge thee: So many testimonies of thy love could not soften my stony
heart, to make me love thee again; thy so great merit could not raise me up,
to cause me to place all my hope in thee. That thy most accurate Justice, which
shines most clearly out, and that many ways, out of the work of our
Redemption, could not hold me, so that I might consider the plagues and
punishments which thou heapedst upon thy only beloved Son, for my sake, and
cause me to cry out, If they have done these things in the green tree, what
shall be done in the dry? Thy so many torments and pains could not persuade me
to descend into my self, and to consider with what hatred thou persuest our
sins, for which thou have permitted thy very Son to be most cruelly
afflicted. For these things ought I to have stood in awe, and to reverence thy
great Name. So have thou (my Jesus) humbled thy self, that he that considers
it, may admire, and with trembling behold thee; yet am I grown proud, and at
this very time, alas, do exalt my self above my brethren. Thou did hang
naked upon the Cross, yet I not content with such clothing as was necessary
to cover my nakedness, have sought after excess and superfluity, and have
most tenderly handled my slimy damnable body. Thou did suffer intolerable
thirst in thy extreme plagues and torments, and did taste gall mingled with
vinegar; but I must (as it were) be fatted to the slaughter with lushious
wines; I have been overcharged with gluttony and ravenousnesse, and have
thereby made my self strong in fleshly desires. Thou did bear all things
that thy Father laid upon thee, nor did throw off the the burden, till thou
might truly say it is finished; but I have esteemed it very troublesome and
tedious for me to suffer but a very little for thee. Thou that art the blessed
Son of God, did suffer blows on the face from wicked wretches; but I, if I be
but touched with a finger, or wronged in a word, do presently burn with
wrath, and am most bitterly moved to indignation, that am but a worm, and not
worthy the name of a man, and do deserve, by reason of my filthy sins, not
only most vile reproach, but the punishment and scorn of hell it self. And
what shall I farther say of my most wicked life? Thou did most willingly die,
that I might die to sin, and live to righteousness; but I too much relying on
this thy mercy, do wittingly and willingly rush into sins. What greater
disgrace could I put upon thee? I have made thy mercies the occasion of my
uncleanness, and have used so precious a means of my Redemption, which ought
to make every one to hate sin, to the strengthening and continuation of my sins.
I thought sins were lawful for me, because thou wast so gentle and merciful;
and for giving me so many blessings, I have requited thee with my infamous
deeds, so that I converted the remedy ordained against sin, into the means to
make me sin more freely, and have set the point of that sword against mine own
breast, and well-nigh destroyed my self therewith, that thou gave me to
resist the blows of Satan. Thou art he only, O Lord, that dyed for us all,
that they that live, might not live to themselves, but to him that did both
die, and rose again for us; but I, contrary to this, have lived to my self
and mine own lusts, as if thou had dyed for that end that I should live to
fill my soul with fleshly desires: and abusing thy grace, I should weave the
web of mischief. O Lord, how great is thy patience, that thou would be
buffetted for my sake! but much greater is thy patience, that thou enduredst so
many sinners in the world, that even buffet thee with their sins? But shall
this thy patience last for ever? I call to mind what thou threatnest against
the impenitent; I see that the earth which is watered with rain and brings
forth no fruit, is punished by cursing; I see that the Vineyard well manured,
and yet remaining unfruitful, is wasted and trodden under foot: O hard, and
iron heart! O unprofitable and dry wood! Do thou not tremble if thou hear
the voice of the Omnipotent God, saying; Every branch, not bearing fruit, will
my Father take away; if any remain not in me, he shall be cast out as a
branch, and it withers, and men gather it up, and cast it into the fire to
be burnt. What man can be so careless, that trembles not and shakes not for
fear of so horrible a judgment? How deaf and sluggish is he that hears not
this voice? With what a stupidnesse is he drowned in? in what a lethargy is he
buried, who is not awaked with this thunder? Ah! Lord, this earthly tabernacle
has hitherto delighted me; I have walked amidst thorns and thistles, that
have choked the seed of thy Word sown in me, so that I have had no desire to
know thy will; my lusts have seduced me, my desires have driven me up and
down* my thoughts have disturbed me, the worm of my conscience gnawes me;
and all these have I esteemed as secure delights, and reckoned troubles to be
peace. What shall I do my God? What shall I do? I am forced to confess that
I am not worthy to come before thee; I blush for my unrighteousness sake to
lift up mine eyes unto thee; I dare not lift them up to seek thy favor and
most merciful presence; if thou will punish me as I deserve, nor heaven, nor
earth can hide me from thee; but thou will not, O Lord, my God, that any one
perish, but that all may be converted and live: thou createdst me for thy
praise; but who in hell, where thou art blasphemed, shall praise thy Name? Thou
did pay so great a ransom for me; yet if thou reject me in these my most
great necessities, who shall receive me? if thou shall refuse thy creature,
redeemed by so great a price, who shall help me? Why, even thou my Father,
that Father of mercy, even that mercy which is immeasurable, which is infinite:
And although by my disobedience I have lost the right of mine inheritance: yet,
O my Father, thou have not lost the heart of a Father; though I have fallen
from thee my Father, yet wilt not thou fall from me, or cease to be my Father;
that word never failed, As I live, I will not the death of a sinner, but that
he may be converted and live. And although my sins be innumerable, and my
wounds may seem incurable, yet art not thou ignorant of a way to cure me;
confirm therefore and fulfill thy promises, wash me effectually with the blood
of thy Son, that, as to me, his death prove not in vain: I am (as well) a part
of his flesh, and he a part of mine, as Peter, David, or Paul; he is as well to
me an Emmanuel, as to any other: He bare the sins of the whole world; and
therefore he bore mine also. Look back therefore, look back therefore, O
Lord, upon this lost sheep, regard thy creature, nor contend with him in thy
fury whom thou have made with thy hands: take care, O Lord, of the soul, which
thou have redeemed; I come creeping to thee, wounded with many wounds; but thou
most experienced Physician of souls, and Ma^^er of the diseased, can heal
them all: I come, being blinded, but thou can enlighten me: I come dead unto
thee, but thou can give me life: I come full of leprosy, but thou can
cleanse me: Sprinkle me with Hysop and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall
be whiter than snow. O my God, the God of my life, thy mercy is greater than my
sins, thy clemency exceeds all my iniquities. Thou can forgive more, O Lord,
than I can offend; thy mercies are bottomless and numberless; but as many as
my sins are, and as great as they are, they are neither bottomless nor
numberless. Take me out therefore and deliver me, forgive me my great
injustice, take away my stony and hard heart, and create in me a soft and a
clean heart, that even in this life I may give thee thanks; let me by my faith
and good example bring sinners to thee; and let me glorify thee, and celebrate
thee, for these and other thy innumerable blessings for evermore. Amen, my God,
be it so, even so be it, my Lord Jesus Christ.

CONTEMP. etc. 38.
Of the greatness and foulness of our sins; and of the Confession of them.

I Am afraid of my rashness, when I consider with my self what a Majesty I
have offended with my sins: when I consider how benign and wonderful a Father
I have forsaken, I detest mine own ingratitude: when I consider from how
happy a liberty of spirit, into how miserable servitude I have cast my self;
I condemn mine own madness, and am wholly displeasing to my self, nor have
any other object before my eyes but hell and desperation, namely, that does
terrify my conscience by Gods inevitable Justice. I am to be consumed like
rottenness; sin is rottenness indeed, for it destroys the beauty of the
soul, the sweet savor of a good name, the worth of grace, the relish of
glory; it is truly dirt being wallowed therein: we become abominable to honest
men, the good Angels, and the just God; It is truly smoke that foretells us
that hellfire is not far from it, and does drive away the heavenly Dove: It
is indeed the Devils tavern, in which for the price of souls he sels the
world the wine of pleasure: it is the dart with which our soul is pierced
through, and is deprived of all vigor and life: It is true sickness, because
it leaves us no health in our flesh, nor from the presence of Gods wrath grants
us any quietness in our bones: It is truly a Sea, for it swells over our head,
and easily swalloweth up our whole body: It is truly a burden, because a sinner
is most burdened therewith, and is even pressed down, unto hell it self. But
whither shall I go? where shall I withdraw my self? Ah! be merciful unto me,
O take pity upon me, according to thy great mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy compassions wash away mine iniquities: Against thee, against
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; behold I am
begotten in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. I have gone
astray like a sheep that perishes: seek out thy lost sheep, O Lord, remember
not the faults and transgressions of my youth. O Lord, who understands his own
sins? Cleanse me from my secret offenses. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, because no man living can be justified before thee: Remember O Lord
thy mercies and compassions which have been of old: Remember me according to
thy mercies, even for thy goodness sake, O Lord. O Lord be merciful unto mine
offenses; make thy mercies wonderful, thou who savest those that trust in
thee: Turn not thy face from me, nor cast away thy servant in displeasure, for
in death no man remembers thee, nor shall any praise thee in the grave. What
profit is in my blood when I descend into corruption? Shall dust give praise
unto thee, or set forth thy truth? Regard and hear me, O God, lighten mine
eyes, that I sleep not in death: Set not thy mercies far from me, for thy
mercy and truth do always preserve; in thee O Lord have I trusted, let me
never be confounded. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 39.
Of Gods readiness to forgive sins; and our thankesgiving for the
forgiveness of them.

WHo can despair of pardon from him, who does so often in the writings of the
Prophets, of his own accord invite sinners to repentance, crying out, That he
would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live? How ready is also his pardon to them that repent: he has inculcated unto
us, by his only begotten Son in many of his Parables; as of the groat that was
lost, and found again; the strayed sheep brought back upon the shoulders; but
more plainly, by that of the prodigal son, whose very image I am. No man, O
God, is so ready to sin, but thou art far more ready in thy good time to
pardon our sins. O pitiful, and merciful Lord, slow to anger, and very
pitiful! He strives not with us for ever, neither is he always wrath with us:
Because as the heaven is higher than the earth, so has he made his mercies to
prevail over me. As far as the East is distant from the West; so far has he
set my sins from me. As a father takes pity upon his son, so has the Lord
taken pity upon me; he has washed me from my iniquity; he has cleansed me from
my sins; he knows whereof we be made; he remembers we are but dust. Why art
thou sad, o my soul? and why art thou troubled? return, o my soul, into thy
rest, for the Lord has done thee good: He has delivered my soul from death,
mine eyes from tears; and my feet from falling. Blessed are they whose sins
are forgiven, and whose offenses are covered: Blessed is the man unto whom the
Lord imputes not sin. Rejoice in the Lord, o ye righteous, for praise
becomes the Just; taste, and see; for the Lord is sweet: Blessed is the man,
that hops in him. Bless the Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me,
praise his holy Name, who is merciful to all thy iniquities, and heals all
thy infirmities, who has redeemed thy life from destruction, who crowns thee
with mercy and pity. His goodness and mercy shall follow me, all the days of
my life, and I shall dwell in the House of the Lord, for evermore. I desire,
and beseech thee, o God by the death of thine own son, give me thy Spirit, to
purify my heart, and with his grace to strengthen me, that by mine own
unadvisednesse I fall not thither whence by thy mercy I have been called.
Create in me, o God, a new heart, and renew a firm spirit within me; restore
unto me the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me by thy free spirit. Wash me
daily, by pardoning my daily offenses, translate me from the fennes of this
age, and the mud of this present life, to the excellent kingdom of thy glory,
where is neither scab, nor blindness, nor does any one suffer any unclean
issue of blood, nor is any one unclean; where is no farther need of a lavacre,
thy glorious body being joined unto our body. Thou must needs fulfill thy
promise made, and both finish, and confirm the good work thou have begun in
me; through Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 40.
Of the worthy preparation to the holy Sacrament.

I Will make an entrance unto the Altar of God, even to the God that makes my
youth rejoice. Laying aside the garments of my inveterate iniquity, I will
renew my youth like an Eagle, and hasten to approach that heavenly banquet. A
plentiful and delicate banquet is prepared, which is a medicine to the sick,
a way to those that wander, a banquet that comfort the weak, delights those
that are in health, cures sickness, preserves health; a banquet that makes a
man more pliant to reproof, more patient to labor, more zealous to love, more
wise to wariness, more ready to obedience, more devout to thanksgiving; a
banquet by which our daily sins are forgiven, the powers of Satan expelled,
strength given to undertake even martyrdom it self; finally, a banquet by
which all good things are brought unto thee, because a man partaking of it,
does even become the same thing he receives. This banquet compared with
Ahasuerus his banquet, relisheth far above it; compare it with the table
spread in the Wilderness for the children of Israel, and it refreshes thee
far more. For though that Table contained in it the figure of this our
Eucharist, when God rained down Manna for our Fathers in the Wilderness, and
they were daily fed with food from heaven, and men did eat Angels bread, yet
they that did eat that bread, did die; but this living bread that is set before
thee in this costly banquet, did come from heaven, and has given life to the
world. That Manna came from heaven, this from above the heavens. That being
reserved to the next day was full of worms, this is free from all corruption:
whosoever shall religiously taste thereof, shall not see corruption. That was
given the Fathers after their passage over the red sea, where the Egyptians
were drowned, and the Israelites were delivered; so this heavenly Manna can
profit none but the regenerate: That corporal bread sustained the ancient
people in their passage through the Wilderness to the Land of promise; this
heavenly food sustaines the faithful of these times in their passage to
heaven. Moses was Master of their Table, and here Christ is ready at hand, who
has furnished this Table, and blessed it. For it is not man that makes the
bread and wine, set on this Table, to be the body and blood of Christ, but
Christ himself that is crucified for us; words are uttered by the Priests
mouth, but the things set before thee are consecrated by the power of Christ,
who used these words unto his Disciples, This is my Body, this is the Cup of
the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you. It is Christ in whom does
dwell all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, who is the power of God, unto
whom is given all power in heaven and earth: He, when he was to put an end to
the Ceremonies of the Law, would prepare for himself the Passover; and before
he would be condemned to death, and be nailed to the Cross, he was pleased
according to the solemnity to celebrate the Passover, the roasted lamb,
unleavened bread, and sour herbs. When this Supper was so prepared, amidst
these sacramental dainties, both the old and also the new institutions offered
themselves to him; and having eaten the Lamb that the old tradition did set
before them, This great Master sets before his Disciples a meat not to be
consumed; nor are here the people invited to a banquet made exquisite both by
cost and pains, but the nourishment of immortality is given them, differing
from common food, keeping the form of a corporeal substance, but by the
invisible efficacy of the divine power working in us, and proving Gods
especial presence accompanying it. Come hither ye faithful souls, refresh
and recollect your selves, cheer and fill your selves; join in one by your
faith, your remembrance of Christ, with the application of his merits, with
hearty thanksgiving for your deliverance, made through his blood; receive the
pledge, testimony and assurance of your holy communion and fellowship with
Christ your Head; and (by him) with the Father and the Holy Ghost also:
increase, cherish, comfort and hold fast the faith of the remission of your
sins: your faith is imperfect; perfect it, not only by the hearing of the Word
preached, but by using this holy Supper; the Word offers, but this Supper
applies Christ unto us. Encourage your selves to the study of good works. How
too often are we hindered, stopped, and grow stupid in performing this work? Here
Christ keeps us company, in exhibiting unto us his body and blood: he does
daily more and more mortify in us the body of sin, and begin in us the
newness of a spiritual life: perform each to other the offices of concord,
peace and love, for we eat the same flesh, we drink the same blood, we are
nourished with the same food; we are refreshed with the same drink: we are made
one body under the same head; but who has ever seen the members of one and
the same body to disagree, to strive, jarre or contend? Cast out rancour, pluck
up hatred, purge out the old leaven. The faithful under the Gospel must not
be made of leaven: The holy Banquet requires pure and sincere minds: The sweet
savor that comes from Christ's scorching upon the Cross, does concoct all
crudities of our carnal senses, and does harden and settle the affections of
the mind; nor let there be any spot in the Sacrament of the holy Church, but
pure simplicity and innocence of life in one house, the holy Catholic
Church. Christ is offered to the faithful departing out of Egypt, being
cleansed in their affections by his blood, in their passage in the red Sea. O
Jesu Christ, our omnipotent Lord God, thou Fountain of life and immortality,
thou Creator of every visible and invisible thing, that art the eternal Son of
the everlasting Father, who of thy abundant goodness in the last times did
take our flesh upon thee, and wast delivered and crucified for us sinful and
unthankful creatures; thou by thine own blood have restored our nature
corrupted by sin, and give me thy flesh for my food: But thou art a fire, and
consumest those that be unworthy; destroy me not, my Maker; rather come into
the union of my members, into all my sinews, into my reins, into my heart:
burn up the sting of my sins, cleanse my soul, sanctify my mind,
enlighten my five senses, glue me firmly to thy self in love, always protect
and defend me; preserve me from every word and work that may hurt my soul;
purge, cleanse, and direct me, adorn, instruct and make me famous; make me
the temple of thy Spirit only, and not the habitation of sin; that being made
thy house by the entrance of thy holy Communion, all impiety and all evil may
fly from me. Let thy holy body be made everlasting Bread unto me: Merciful
Lord, let thy precious blood become a remedy of sundry diseases unto me;
fearful and wicked wretch that I am, defiled with absurd works, I am unworthy
of thy pure body, and heavenly blood: O Christ, do thou make me worthy to be
partaker of thee; give me, O Christ, the drops of tears, to wash my filthy
heart, that having a pure conscience, I may come in faith and fear to receive
thy heavenly gifts. O most merciful Savior, let thy unspotted body and divine
blood be made unto me the participation of thy holy Spirit, eternal life, and
a change of my sufferings and miseries. Heal the wounds of my soul, O Lord,
and sanctify me through-out, and make me unworthy wretch, worthy to be
partaker of thy mystical divine Supper; be it unto thy most vile servant as
thou have promised, and remain in me as thou have said. For behold I eat thy
divine body, and do drink thy blood. Thou Word of God, and God him self, let
the flame of thy body enlighten me, that am all obscurity, and let thy blood be
also a purgation to my corrupted soul: Sanctify my understanding, soul,
heart and body, O my Savior, and make it worthy, O Lord, to come to these
fearful mysteries without being condemned. I shall obtain new effects, and
will receive the increase of thy grace, and preservation of my life, by the
participation of thy mysteries, O Christ. O holy Word of God, God himself;
sanctify me thoroughly, that am coming to thy divine mysteries. Despise me
not, O Christ, when I receive the bread, which is thy body, and whilst (wretch
that I am) I am made partaker of thy most pure and fearful mysteries, that
they prove not condemnation unto me. But let them be unto me, O Christ,
eternal and everlasting life. O Christ, thou Fountain of goodness, let the
receiving of thy immortal mysteries, become light and life unto me, and cause
the avoiding of vicious affections, and the increase of heavenly virtues in me,
O thou only Goodness, that I may glorify thee. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 41.
Of those things which are to be meditated upon after the receiving of the
Sacrament of the Supper.

LEt thy servant speak thine own Word in thy ears, that thou be not angry
with thy servant, O Lord my King: Thou have slain thy Sacrifices, thou have
mingled thy wine, and prepared thy Table; thou have sent forth thy maidens,
that they might invite to thy tower of defense, that if there were any little
one, he might come unto thee. Thou have said, Go forth ye daughters of Sion,
and behold your King crowned with the Crown wherewith his mother begirt his
head in the day of his betrothing, in the day of the gladness of his heart.
Thou have said, O Lord, unto thy servant, Go out quickly into the ways and
streets of the city, and bring in hither both the poor and the weak, both the
lame and the blind, and compel them to come in, that my house may be full. I
being called, came and saw, was led in and tasted; thou turnedst not thy self
away from thy servant, nor said thou, Thou shall not see my face. Thou have
showed thy self unto me, my Comforter; I beheld thee, thou Light of mine eyes;
I felt the joy of spirit, and was touched with gladness of heart: Thou did
prepare great things for me, O my Delight and sweet content. O Lord my God, my
Life, and sole Glory of my soul, I have found thee out; O thou Desire of my
heart, I have held thee fast, O thou Love of my soul. O let me retain thee,
thou Life of my soul; I will love thee, O Lord, my Strength, my Castle, my
Refuge, and my Deliverer. Let me love thee, my God, the Tower of my might, and
my pleasing hope in all my tribulations. I will enbrace thee, who art that
Good, without which nothing can be good: I will enjoy thee the Best, without
whom nothing is best; I will exalt thee my God and King, and will bless thy
Name for ever and ever: every day will I praise thee, and bless thy Name for
ever and ever. The Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised, and of his
greatness there is no end: Generation from generation shall praise thy works,
and shall declare thy power, shall speak of the magnificence of the glory of
thy holiness, and shall tell of thy wonderful works. They shall break forth in
remembrance of thy abundant sweetness, and shall exult in thy righteousness.
O merciful and pitiful Lord, patient and full of compassion! the Lord is
sweet to all, and his mercies are over all his works. All thy works O Lord, do
praise thee, and thy Saints do bless thee, they speak of the glory of thy
Kingdom, and tell of thy power; for thou art my true and living God, my great
King, my guide to my Country, my true light, my holy sweetness, my true life,
my excellent wisdom, my pure simplicity, my peaceful concord, my safe
protection, my good portion, my everlasting safety, my great mercy, my
strongest patience, my unspotted Sacrifice, my holy Redemption, my firm hope,
my perfect Charity, my true Resurrection, my life eternal, my most happy ever
enduring exultation, and most blessed vision. Thou my God, wast pleased, for no
merits of mine, but only by vouchsafing me thy mercies to satisfy thy
unworthy servant with the precious body and blood of thy Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ. What manner of food? What drink was this? O the memorial of the Lords
death. What shall I repay unto the Lord for all that he has bestowed upon me?
O know, O Lord my King, in that thou have created me, I owe my self unto thee;
and in that thou have redeemed me, yea, and wast made man for me, I should owe
thee more than my self, if I had it; by how much more thou art greater than he
is for whom thou have given thy self; behold, though I have more, yet cannot I
give thee that I have without thee: But do thou receive me, and draw me unto
thee, that I may become thine by love and imitation, as I am thine by creation
and redemption: Let my life it self be thine, O Lord; I freely offer up my
whole self unto thee; let my whole spirit, my whole heart, my whole body, and
my whole life, even my sweet life it self live unto thee; for thou have wholly
delivered me, that thou might wholly possess me; thou have wholly
refreshed me, that I might be wholly thine own. But how can thou have me,
except this holy Communion may not prove a guilt to draw down punishment upon
me, but an wholesome intercession to obtain pardon, the armor of faith, and
shield of good will, except it may be an emptying of my sins, a banishing of
lust and concupiscence, an increase of charity and patience, humility and
obedience, a firm defense against the slights of all our enemies, as well
visible as invisible, a perfect appeasing as well of my carnal as spiritual
perturbations, a fast cleaving to thee, the true and only God? Ah let me
obtain these things of thee, who art most merciful, and have commanded me
therefore to pray for them, that I might obtain them, and might come to that
unspeakable Banquet; wherein thou with thy Son, and the holy Spirit, art to
thy holy Ones a true Light, full Content, everlasting Joy, perfect Delight, and
absolute Felicity Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 42.
Of beginning the day holily.

I Am awaked out of sleep, O my soul, I shall also one day awake out of the
grave; which perpetually consider of with thy self. The Sun breaks forth of
the clouds, and day succeeds in the place of night: one day also shall break
forth the eternal day, after the long lasting nights are past, and the Sun
of righteousness, Christ Jesus, shall return with his glorious light, whom
many thousands of Saints shall accompany, shining most beautifully, and far
above the brightness of our Sun. So prepare thy self, O my soul, in this
entry, that in that day thou may have admittance into the house it self; nor
that the Sun may hide his face from thee, and thou be involved in thick
darkness. Let no flattering of gain, no invitation of honor, nor delight of
pleasure so seduce thee, that thou lose the gladness of that day. Let the
brute beasts be they that do only behold the light of this our Sun, do thou
with the eyes of faith behold the light of that day. Remember, O man, that the
devil like a roaring lion, walks about night and day, seeking whom he may
devour. Do thou doubt whether he be about thy bed when thou art buried in
sleep, and that he then labors to devour thee? but who resists him? why
thou weak wretch, art laid prostrate before him: It is the only keeper of
Israel that neither slumbers not sleeps, that preserves thee. Do thou hear
the cock crowing? think upon Peter, who though he was eminent in the dignity
of being an Apostle, and did hear the great Doctor, the Son of God, yet did he
greatly err. What shall become of thee, think thou? except by thy fervent
prayers thou daily stick close unto God. Think thou hear that heavenly
trumpet which the Angel, the Judges companion, shall blow, and consider how
thou could stand before that Judge if he were now come, and did presently
exact thee to appear before him. Remember God is about and in thy bed, and by
his omnipresence does look into all thy thoughts, and sees all thy behavior
and actions. Call to mind the holy troops of Angels, which by night defend
thee, stand about thee, observe thy sleeping and waking, and that rejoice at
thy holiness, and grieve at thy ungodliness. Live therefore so as if thou
did live in the sight of God and his Angels, and thus, if thou be wise,
believe thou do. When thou put on thy clothes, remember they are the
coverings of sin, nor is there any cause thou should be proud of them.
What I pray is most of our clothes? are they not the rejected things, the
excrements and spoils of beasts? it is madness therefore for a man that is
endued with reason, to be proud, and to brag of the relics, the excrements
and spoils of brute beasts. Thou cloathest thy body with a covering; but think
this more necessary far that thou defend thy soul with the most pure robe of
Christ's righteousness, and that thou put it on, not by a lukewarm faith. He
that cloatheth not himself in this manner, shall be tormented with everlasting
cold. Ah! with how many precious clothes have many covered their bodies, whose
souls remain cold and naked! Consider, that Gods mercy and goodness are
daily renewed, and that he does daily, as it were, bestow a new life upon us,
whilst he repaires the power of our senses, and restores thee the enlivening
heat of the Sun. Let therefore no creature divert thy prayers, let no
thoughts arise in thee, before thou have given God his praises. O Omnipotent
Lord God, that art the Trinity in Unity, that art always in all things, and
had thy being from all eternity, and shall be always in all things; O thou
my God, take pity upon me, that I may speak. The house of my soul is
straight, but do thou enlarge it, that thou may come into it: it is
ruinous, but do thou repair it. There are in it those things which may offend
both thine ear and eye. I know and acknowledge it, but who shall make it
clean? or to whom else shall I call but to thy self? Cleanse me, O Lord, from
my hidden offenses, and pardon me my open sins. I believe, and therefore I
speak, thou know it. My sins do plead against me before thee; pardon me
therefore the impiety of my heart, and cast my sins into the depth of the
sea, that they confound me not in this world, nor condemn me in the world to
come. O God that art for ever blessed, I do this day, and at all times;
commend unto thee, and into thy powerful hand, my soul, my body, all my
thoughts, all my affections, my words, my actions, all my outward and inward
things, my senses and understanding, my memory, faith and belief, that thou
might keep them day and night, hours and minutes. Hear me, holy Trinity,
and preserve me from all evil, and from all scandal, and from all deadly sin,
and from all the snares and assaults of the devil, and from my visible and
invisible enemies. Expel out of me all boasting of mind, and increase in me
contrition of heart: lessen my pride, and perfect in me true humility: give me
tenderness to weep, and soften my hard and stony heart. Teach me, O Lord, to
do thy will, because thou art my God. Give me, O Lord, a heart, that may stand
in awe of thee, a mind to love thee, an understanding to know thee, ears to
hearken to thee, eyes to see thee. Take pity upon me, O God, take pity upon me,
and look down upon me from the holy throne of thy Majesty. Lord Jesus, give
concord to thy Ministers, peace and quietness to Princes that judge
righteously, repentance unto those that live unjustly. I beseech thee, O Lord,
for the holy universal Church, for the Clergy and Layety, for all Christian
Governors, and all that believe in thy Name, that labor in thy holy Word,
that they may obtain perseverance in good works. Grant O Lord, eternal King,
unto young men chastity, to those of riper years holiness, and unto all
innocence; pardon to the repentant, succor to the Orphans and Widows, to the
poor protection, to the travelers a happy return, comfort to them that
mourn; eternal rest to the faithful, a safe haven to those that rove upon
the sea, to the better sort of Christians that they may persevere in goodness,
to the weaker sort that they may grow better, to them that commit wickedness
and still offend thee, that they speedily correct their ways, with me a
miserable sinner. O most sweet and most merciful Lord, Jesus Christ, thou Son
of the living God, thou Redeemer of the world, that art amongst us all, and in
all things, be merciful to me a sinner. Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 43.
Of ending the day religiously.

AS nights and days have their returns, so let the thought and celebration of
Gods mercy have their returns in thy heart. For therefore are the vicissitudes
of light and darkness granted us, that there might be an interchangeable
restoring of labor and rest, and that each of them might have its fit and
appointed time. If God would have made the Sun to stand still, there must
have been a perpetual day. Also if the stars had had no motion, who can
doubt but their must have been an everlasting night? but he gave them motion
that there might be changes of nights and days, and such various motions, that
there might be mutual vicissitudes of light and darkness, in which, alternate
spaces of labor and of rest might appear unto us. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, that has appointed the Moon for its determinate seasons, and the Sun
to know her going down that it may be night, wherein all beasts of the forest
steal abroad; the young Lions roaring after their prey, do seek their food,
and when the Sun arises, they retire themselves, and lay themselves down in
their dens: but man goes forth to his work and his tillage until the
evening. How ample, O God, are thy works! how wisely have thou made them all!
how full is the earth of thy possessions! Consider well, O man, what thy work
and labor has been this day. If thy endeavors have been honest, ascribe
them to God; if thou have learned any good, impute it to God; but if thou have
done any evil, and have offended either God or thy neighbor, humbly crave
pardon for it, nor sleep the sleep of oblivion or security with thy sins
upon thee. That is an accursed and darksome night, in which thou go to bed
without reconciling thy self unto God. Cast up thy reckoning, and wipe out thy
scores, being to account with thy God: and if thou find thy account fair
(which, alas, seldom or never falls out) give praises to the Lord; but if it
appear soul, cast thy self grovelling at the feet of thy Lord, and implore
his unspeakable mercy, that if thou were even this night to be called to his
judgment seat, thou might by it be excused. If thou have moved any man to
anger and indignation, desire his pardon, nor let the Sun set under this
troubled cloud: If he forgive thee, beware afterward; but if he refuse thee
pardon, fail not earnestly to beg of God forgiveness of thy offense. And
thou, do that willingly to another, that thou would have another do to
thee. Revenge not thine own quarrel; for God has reserved vengeance to
himself. Surely he must needs be accounted very bold, that dares wrest Gods
sword out of his hand. The Heathens were wont to do this when the day was
ended, and they retired themselves to their rest, they asked their soul, what
wound of it was that day healed? what vice it had resisted? in what part it was
grown better? Let anger cease, and it will be more temperate; let thy soul
know that she must daily come before her Judge. What should thou that art a
Christian think of? is not thy soul also a secret searcher and censurer of
thee? she knows thy manner, she retires into the closet of her thoughts, and
sees what she has secretly wished for. O heavenly Lord, to whose bottomless
goodness and infinite kindness we owe all things, that have given the most
clear light of the day as well to the bad as to the good, to undertake the
works of their calling, and have lovingly afforded us the friendly silence of
the night to refresh the strength of our bodies, and to wipe out the cares of
the mind, I beseech thee that those things which I have this day committed,
either through humane negligence, or inbred malice, may for thy unspeakable
mercies sake be forgiven me; and vouchsafe unto me also, that this night (by
thy blessing) may be happy unto me; and thou being my pure keeper and
protector, I may be free in it from the nightly illusions of the devil, that
my sleep make both my body and soul more cheerful the next day to serve
thee. And because in this life there is not an hour wherein we can assure our
selves from the coming of that evening when thou shall come, and the dead be
raised at the sounding of thy holy Angels trumpet, I beseech thee that thou will enlighten the eyes of my soul, that my faith may not be extinguished,
and I sleep in everlasting death, but that I may rest in thee, in whom even
the dead do live, who live, and raignest, for ever more, Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 44.
Of Death, the last Judgment, Hell, and Happiness.

IN all thy words remember thy last things, and thou shall never sin; no
artificial medicine, nor any doctrine does so overcome pride, so conquer
malice, so quench lust, or so trample upon the vanities of this world, as the
remembrance of our last things. What are those our last things? let others here
dispute what they be, but let the godly weigh the matter diligently with
themselves; thy Death, the last Judgment, the glory of Heaven, the pains of
Hell; these are the things thou must meditate of. What comes more suddenly and
when we less think of it than Death? We die daily, for part of our life is
daily diminished, and even while we increase, does our life grow less; the
time that passes away, is lost; we even divide this very day we now enjoy,
between death and our selves. Wretched man, why disposest thou not of thy
self every hour? Think thou may now die, because thou know thou must
die: call to mind that the time is coming upon the wings, wherein thy eyes
must sink into thy head, the veins of thy body shall be cracked in pieces, and
thy heart shall be cleft with sorrow; remember thine own frailty, remember
the miserable estate of thy pilgrimage; call to mind in the bitterness of thy
soul thy years past, and the dangers of man's life. Amidst the most uncertain
things of man, yet is death most certain; yet what is found more uncertain
than the hour of death? it takes no pity upon want, it reverenceth not
riches; and to conclude, it spares neither wisdom, manners, nor age; this
only is the difference, that death stands at the old man's door, and for the
young man he lies in ambush; every one therefore ought well to fear this last
day, because every one in the day of Judgment shall be judged for such as he
shall be found at his day of death. Upon this only moment of our life depends
eternity that has no end! What is more terrible than judgment? and what can
be imagined more intolerable than hell? What will a man fear, if he fear
not these things, if horror seize not on him, and if dread do not cause him
to tremble! O man, if thou have lost the shame which belongs to so noble a
creature, if thou be not sensible of the sorrows of affliction, which is also
a property that belongs to mortal creatures, yet lose not at least thy fear.
Fear therefore, O man, because in death thou must be parted from all the good
things of this thy body, and the sweet marriage knot of thy united soul and
body must be cut in sunder by this most bitter divorce. Fear, because in that
terrible Judgment thou must stand before him into whose hands it is a most
fearful thing to fall, even before such an Examiner from whom nothing can be
hid; if iniquity be found in thee, thou must be banished the society of bliss
and glory, and be severed from the number of the blessed. Fear, because in
hell thou must be exposed to insufferable and everlasting torments, and receive
thy portion with the devil and his angels, even in the everlasting fire
prepared for them. Do thou not yet fear the face of the Judge, which is even
terrible to the angelical Powers? Do not thou tremble at the wrath of that
powerful One, at his angry countenance and his sharp words? Art thou not
afraid of the teeth of the infernal beast, of the belly of hell, of those
yellings, forerunners of our devourings? Are we not yet afraid of the gnawing
worm, scorching flames, smoke and vapor, brimstone and stormy tempests? O!
who shall give water to my head, and a fountain of tears unto mine eyes, that
by my weeping I may prevent that weeping and gnashing of teeth, and those hard
bands of hands and feet, and that weight of oppressing, fettering, burning and
yet not consuming chains; and that I may come to thee, my Lord, and my God?
Yet if any be so cursedly obdurate, so fierce and steely, that he cannot be
troubled with the fear of ill; yet who can be so mad and senseless that he
will not be touched with the desire of good things? There are laid up endless
good things for them that make a godly end; even things which the eye has not
seen, nor the ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive,
which God has prepared for those that love him; those things the preparer and
worker whereof is God. What things must they be, think thou? The eye has
not seen them, because they are not color; the ear has not heard them, for
they are not a sound; nor has it entered into man's heart to conceive them,
because the heart of man must ascend unto them. Why labor I then to make my
tongue to utter that, which my heart cannot conceive; which is to be believed,
and not to be beheld? nay, it is not only invisible, but also unspeakable. O
Lord Jesus Christ, when that most perilous moment approaches, wherein I shall
enter into the way of immortality, then give me a quiet and pleasing repose,
that in the true acknowledgement and confession of thy grace, I may yield up my
spirit, and my poor soul with peace and gladness, and may deliver it into
thy hands; Neither let me be long tormented, as I have a thousand times
deserved; and that I may enjoy peace on the earth in my body, and may watch,
and be made coheire of the resurrection to life of all the believers, that I
may praise and glorify thee with gladness, and may give thee thanks for
evermore, for all the innumerable blessings which thou have bestowed upon me,
through the whole space of my pilgrimage. Call me not to an account for my old
scores, and remember not the sins of my youth, but be merciful unto me,
according to thy great mercies, and sustain me in a firm faith and comfort,
even to my last gasp, that neither sin, death, or the devil do me any
hurt, nor that my own flesh make me impatient, but that I may enter in unto
thee, that I may dwell with thee, and may remain with thee for evermore, Amen.

CONTEMP. etc. 45.
Of Eternity.

IS it this, that divides the entrails, parts the bowels, wounds the
heart, ties the tongue, shuts the lips, distracteth the senses, and
overwhelmes all our members with fear? Rivers slow from our eyes, our cheeks
are watered with tears, and all this torrent has its original from this one
word, a terrible word, by the force and threats whereof fear and anguish are
bred in us; a word that no day, no voice shall determine, no starre-light shall
shadow, no constellation shall darken; a word that melts the marrow, and
softens, breaks, and even minces the heart and bones, though harder than the
Adamant or Marble. This word is Eternity, a word of longer continuance than the
Heavens, more terrible than thunder and lightning, or any tempest whatsoever.
It is Eternity, that has neither pause, measure, nor end, and drives on the
minds of men (as it were) with goades, and spurs, and pricks; so that they
search not after mutable or transitory things. This word has moved many to
pluck of their glittering crowns from their ayery heads, and to despise the
lofty bays, and made them let fall their towering plumes; and putting on a
courser habit, to contemplate higher and more divine things. This word does
wholely possess me, nor suffers me to enjoy any increase of content; it
infuses into my most disquieted soul care, fear, and grief. O end, most
remote from any end! o time without time! O year and no year! O number not to
be summed up of any! Descend, descend my soul to hell, not to mix thy self
with flames, but to avoid those consuming fires. The wicked might bear it, if
it could be so gently dealt with him, that Aetna might be his place of torment,
that the Vultures might continually gnaw his liver, that the Spiders might
weave Cobwebs in this throat that he might be nourished with aconit, that he
might be tormented with boiling pitch, that he might drink naught but dragons
blood, that he might be fed with glowing coals, that his body might be
clothed with a perpetual scurfe, that he might be broiled on a gridiron, that
he might be peirced with spears, be bound to a stake to be burnt, that he
might be plucked in pieces by wild horses, that he might be choked with
brimstone, that he might be stretched on the wrack, that he might be
continually pining to death for want of meat and drink; that he might be
butchered with pugniards: that wicked wretch might suffer this end for a
thousand years continuance, yea for thousand of thousands added to that
thousand, if there might be hope at length of an end of tormenting. How great
soever a torment or torture be, or how great a vexation, yet a hoped for end
does make them easier to be borne of us; it is the eternity of them that does
truly wrack and torture us. It is that that makes the pains of hell, it is
that that makes plagues to be plagues indeed, that gathers all punishments into
one, and does not only double, but infinitely multiply the flames thereof.
Alas! alas! what is Eternity? What Geometry can measure it? It is not days or
months, or years, that can set a period to it, not hundreds of thousand
revolutions of times, not millions of millions of Olympiades. Yet the passage
to this never ending eternity, is wrought by the flying unstablenesse of a few
days. The sun rises and sets; but they that come to this, do never
return; here the beginning is the end, and the end the beginning. O life worse
than any death! O perpetual dying, without a death! thou shall be hurried
thither, who ever thou art, that do here glut thy soul with pleasures, that
do follow after the corruptions of thy flesh, that give unto a harlot thy
members which Christ has redeemed with his blood, that stretchest thy throat
with quaffing, and stuffest thy paunch with gluttonous eating. For what shall
that fire devour, but thy sins? The more thou sinnest, the more fuel thou
storest to be consumed of that fire: there are many descents thither, but never
an ascent from thence; he that once falls thither, must always abide there,
and is lost without any hope of succor. He that is once numbered amongst the
inhabitants of heaven, shall always rejoice; and he that is once joined in
company with the furies of hell, shall always be affrighted. The joys of the
blessed souls shall be without number or measure; the torments of the accursed
souls shall be without metes and bounds, without mean or remedy. After
years infinite and without number are passed, they are still compelled to
think that these are but only the beginnings of punishments: One hour of
punishment there shall be more grievous to us than a hundred years spent here
in repentance; the coals shall not there be dead, but glowing; no abatement,
but increase of heat. The punishments shall increase, the punishers shall be
exasperated, the place of torment shall be enlarged, and the number of the
tormentors increased. Let the citizens of Heaven rejoice, and let those above
for ever live; let the damned for ever mourn, and those in hell for ever be
dying. Tread the path to heaven while it is open, run in that way while it lies
fair before thee: the path shall be shut up, and the way destroyed, if thou
once go out of it: dogs shall tear the Goats, but God shall refresh the
Lambs; the Hawke shall prey upon the Crows; but God shall preserve his Doves.
Whilst the guest of Heaven is filled with delight and gladness, what can be
set before those that lament in filth and corruption? let those that are there
famished, beg for crumbs, and for fragments, to stop their querulous throats,
they shall not receive their miserable complaints; They shall be commanded for
ever to drink their own tears, and to cool their throats with the
continual waters flowing from their eyes; their drink shall be a torrent of
grief, that shall never grow dry, a fire in which they are consumed; a pitcher
of gall shall be mixed with their tears, which shall neither be drawn dry,
or broken insunder; the gall shall flow continually, and the guest shall
continually be urged to drink. Ah! how much better would it be to thirst for
ever, than continually to be destroyed with this drink, and perpetually to
groan and tremble. If thou once enter in, thou shall never get out; if the
enemy of the blessed do once get possession of thee, he will be for ever
thine host; first thou shall be presented with dainties; afterward, expect as
long as thou will, thou shall ne-never see any; this table, shall be always
furnished, and never empty of ill meats; to morrow, to morrow thou shall
suppose it may be better, but every moment shall be as to day. To day as thou
read, or hear these things, ruminate diligently thereon, and repent
fervently, nor expect or think thou will call to morrow for mercy. O eternity!
he is lost for ever that is not always mindful of eternity! O man, O soul of
man, who has both reason and meditation granted her, if the love of God cannot
lay hold of thee, yet let at least the fear of the judge, the horror of the
grave, the snares of death, the pains hell, the burning fire, the gnawing
worm, the stinking brimstone, the scortching flames, and all other evils, and
the eternity of them restrain and keep thee in awe; for the space of eternity
is so great, that if any damned wretch should drop but one tear every thousand
years from his eyes, yet would those tears come to be more water before that
space should have an end than the whole world could contein. O Eternity!

FINIS.
A Table of the Contemplations, Sighs and Groans of a Christian.
1 OF the greatness of Gods love. page 1 2 Of the original nobility of man,
and his falling away from it. page 4 3 Of man's departure from God; the deceits
of the devil; of Gods omnipresence and clemency. page 8 4 Of the council of
the Trinity concerning man's Creation, and of the end of his Creation. page 13 5
Of Paradise, and of casting forth of man from thence. page 19 6 Of the Serpent
the deceiver page 24 7 Of Gods Providence and Preservation. page 30 8 Of the
clothing of Adam, the first man. page 38 9 Of Noah's Arc, Crow and Dove. page
42 10 Of Jacobs Ladder. page 46 11 Of the most tender care of God over his
people, to be collected from his care for his people Israel in the Wilderness.
page 50 12 Of the Tabernacle of the children of Israrel; of the Cloud wherein
Gods especial presence was manifested; of the Mercy Seat; Of the Arc; of the
Manna; and of Aarons Rod. page 62 13 Of the Conception of Christ. page 66 14 Of
Christ's Nativity. page 72 15 Of the Name Jesus. page 79 16 Of Christ, and of
our Circumcision. page 87 17 Of the Passion of Christ. page 92 18 Of the first
and second Word of our Lord spoken upon the Cross. page 104 19 Of the third
and fourth Word of Christ uttered upon the Cross. page 110 20 Of the fifth
Word of Christ uttered upon the Cross. page 115 21 Of Christ's sixth Word
uttered upon the Cross. page 119 22 Of the seventh and last Word of Christ
uttered upon the Cross. page 124 23 Of the opening of Christ's side. page 129
24 Of Christ's burial. page 133 25 Of Christ's Resurrection. page 137 26 Of
Christ's Ascension. page 144 27 Of the sending down of the holy Ghost. page 150
28 Of the mystery of the Trinity. page 157 29 Of shunning curiosity in t ings
not revealed unto us. page 163 30 Of the custody of Angels. page 171 31 Of
Baptism. page 179 32 Of a Christians practice. page 186 33 Of the true dignity
of a Christian. page 193 34 Of necessary Rules to lead a godly life concerning
our thoughts. page 207 35 Of necessary Rules to lead a holy life concerning our
words. page 115 36 Of Rules necessary to lead a godly life touching our
Actions. page 225 37 Of the exceeding number of Gods benefits, and of man's
contempt of them by the multitude of his sins. page 234 38 Of the greatness
and foulness of our sins; and of the Confession of them. page 355 39 Of Gods
readiness to forgive sins; and our thankesgiving for the forgiveness of
them. page 258 40 Of the worthy preparation te the holy Sacrament. page 261 41
Of those things which are to be meditated upon after the receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. page 269 42 Of beginning the day holily. page
274 43 Of ending the day religiously. page 280 44 Of Death, the last Judgment,
Hell, and Happiness. page 284 45 Of Eternity. page 289
FINIS.

