A DISCOVERSE OF THE MARRIED AND SINGLE LIFE.

WHEREIN, BY DISCOVERING THE MISERY OF THE one, is plainly declared the
felicity of the other.

Bona pudicitia coniugalis, sed melior continentia virginalis.

LONDON, Imprinted for Jonas Man.

1621.

The Preface to the Masculine Reader.
Never was there any thing so perfectly good, that by traducing tongues has
not been made to seem evil, neither has there any thing been so absolutely
evil, that either by colorable speeches, or fair pretenses may not be made
to seem good.

Some men apply themselves to reading only, to procure matter of
contradiction, that what others defend, they would disprove, and what by others
is disallowed, shall by them be highly commended. But such as are wise, have
learned to suspend their judgments in, concerning that which either pleases
or displeases them, until they have laid such infallible grounds, as may
justly clear them from al suspicion, either of folly for approving that which
in it self is known to be ill, or of maliciousness, for disprouing that, the
goodness whereof. (it is likely) they never understood. The Authors intent in
this ensuing discourse, is not to breed in men's minds a dislike of that which
in it self is good, both in respect of him that ordained it, as also the ends
wherefore it was ordained, which are most good. But since his discourse is of
Marriage, he is to be conceived either as a detector of the miseries thereof,
proceeding rather from the persons, then the thing it self, or as a director
to the comforts thereof; which chiefly consist in such qualities and
dispositions, as are directly contrary to such as here be mentioned. As
therefore we have just occasion to love them that show us a good way, and
direct us in it: so are we not to despise them that by detecting unto us the
evil way, teach us to avoid it.

The differences that are betwixt the married and the single life, as there was
never any man so wise as to know them all, so never as yet has any man
discovered them all, which makes it a point of great difficulty for a man to
know which is the better, until he have tasted both; and then shall he only
learn, that the inferiors of the one do only exceed the inconveniences of
the other.

If we should take this Authors opinion, who will perhaps be judged partial,
having never tried both, he does certainly prefer the single before the double,
and in so doing, will also give us some reason why he may be believed, because
the actions of many of the best men have witnessed the truth of that which he
maintains; and so much the rather also, because there are many reasons why
that should be preferred before this, and but one only, why this should be
preferred before that.

The temptations of the single life, are subject to persuade a man to marry;
the encumbrances of the married life, to dissuade a man therefrom. Let us
consider of that happiness wherein man lived before be inioyed the company of
a woman, and so behold that misery wherein he is inwrapped since the time he
partaked therein; and it will be an argument sufficient to induce a man to
approve that, which in it self was good, rather than of that which in it
self was the only cause of the deprauation of that only good. Let but a man
consider the many qualities, wherewith he that will be married must be
burdened, and those few that will serve for the single life, and he shall be
rather induced to choose that whereunto nature of her self has fitted him, one
only being wanting, than desire that whereunto there is so much requisite, as
it is not almost possible for a man to attain in the whole course of his life.
He that would live without a wife, needs strive for no other quality, but
Chastity, all other will offer themselves; he need only entertain her. But he
that will be married, must measure both his words and his actions according to
the disposition of his wife; he must both be diligent in looking to her, that
her steps go not awry, and he must be also careful to look to himself, lest
he incur the suspicion of Jealousy.

The subiections, that he must yield both to her and her kindred, if he be any
thing imperious (and so he will if he be not a natural) are most intolerable:
the censures that he must undergo, and the hard taxations that will be
imposed upon him, even for his priuatest speeches, will, if he come to know
them, make him wish he had never felt them.

Let a man also consider the qualities, wherewith women are endued, which for
the most part are opposite to those of men: as, her wantonness, to his
sobriety; her frowardness, to his meekness; her stubbornness, to his
patience; her pride, to his humility; her lightness, to his gravity; her
disliking, to that which he approves; her coveting of which he denies:
wherein they justly resemble the shadow of a man's body, which if a man pursue,
it will run from him; if he go away, it will follow him: this is all the
comfort that a man in his choice can have, that perhaps it may be his fortune,
inter malos, non habere pessima: amongst many that are evil, not to light of
that which is worst of all: but as this Proverb is, that amongst blind men,
he is counted happy that has but one eye; so in a world of miseries and
inconveniences, he is not the worst, whose fortune it is, either to light of
the fairest, or to bear the easiest. Many have thought it impossible to know
which is the worst quality of a woman; some have made it a great question,
whether it were better for a man to marry a shrew, or a sheep, but hardly can
it be resolved. If the former, then is she Tyrannical; and the greatest
cruelty, is the cruelty of a woman; if the latter, then can she not be
endured: for there is no burden more grievous than the folly of a woman. Let a
man but weight the infidelity of women, and that in matters of greatest
importance, and then let him judge what secure trust can be reposed in them, by
whom he shall under stand, not only Towns and Cities, but also Kingdoms and
Dominions have been utterly ruinated, either by their treacherous practices, or
for the satisfying of their ambitious humors; so that when there shall be
nothing to restrain them, but the fear of the Husbands displeasure, which,
when occasion is offered, is as likely to change the mischiefs of their
intent, as the breath of a man to refell the fury of the wind; or the shaking
of a straw to daunt the heart of a Lion; I cannot see by what means he can
avoid or escape destruction, that violently casts himself upon the edge of
her ouer-sharpe patience.

Let a man but further consider the great dissiculty that consists in the
bringing up of Children, if he have them; the infinite discomfort, if he have
them not. For their bringing up, we see by daily experience, that in their
tender years, they are either by too much lenity made to become dissolute, and
effeminately prone to all manner of vice, seeing that indulgence is the only
bellows to Kindle the spark of a corrupt nature; or else by overmuch
severity they are made unapt and incapable of any thing that is good; and so
the expectation of the chiefest happiness, is turned into the fruition of the
greatest evil: and he that will diligently observe, shall find, that children
have by the badnesse of their mothers disposition, bin made the only instrument
of their fathers coffeehouse: yea, and sometime the author of their
destruction.

The husband is, by the very institution of marridge, ordained to be the head;
and the head was made to rule and govern the body. Now, the difficulty that is
incident to this regiment, is such, and so great, that few men take pleasure in
possessing it, none at all perform it in that manner they should; the greatest
wisdom that herein is required, consists in the counselling and discovery,
as occasion serves, of his passions, and in the right applying of his
affections, according to the condition of his wives humor. If he love her too
much, then will she condemn him: for plenty always breeds lothsomnes. If he
do not manifest his love in that sort that she desires or expects, then she
presently imagines, that he bestows it some-where else; and so being possessed
of that Jealousy, there is no misery that will not follow of it. If he let her
have her will, souerainety is straight turned into Tyranny: If he abridge her,
she then falls into a thousand inconveniences. If he be ready to obey her
commandments, then will she be most importunate. If he deny her request,
though it be never so unreasonable, then is he presently judged unkind and
hard-hearted.

Many men ouer-venturous, will put their hands into the Hiues for honey; but at
the last they are stung with Waspes; and no marvel is it, where there are
more Wasps tha^ Bees. Yet the stings of a thousand Waspes do not so wound, as
the tongue of one woman: for of the one there be many remedies; the other
remains always incurable: for diseases that be mortal, men should be
careful to prevent, because there remains no hope to cure them: and such are
they that are herein mentioned, namely, the diseases of marriage, the which
when men study to cure, the remedy does oft-times prove worse, and procure them
more danger, then the evil it self was likely to have done; which as it is not
unknown to any that have observed the usual proceedings of the world, so have
they felt the smart thereof, whose fortune it has been to partake therein. He
therefore that would know the difference betwixt the married, and the single
life, shall neither find the one to be absolute good, nor the other to be
altogether evil: but herein he shall see the difference chiefly to consist,
that the inconveniences of the one may be remedied when a man will, the miseries
of the other remain incurable; which as they are many, so it is not possible
to reckon them up: some of them in this discourse are touched, the most remain
discovered, he that plungeth not into all, shall be sure to leap into some;
the benefit he shall get by reading of this, is, that though perhaps he cannot
be forewarned by wisdom to prevent them, yet he may be forewarned with
patience to endure them; which is the only drift which herein is aimed at.

A DISCOVERSE OF THE MARRIED AND SINGLE LIFE.
CHAP. I.
A Letter of Lindorach the Philosopher, to Cultibert King of the Indians,
concerning the inconvenience and discommodities of the married Life.
I Understand that of the cooking, which I thought I never should have
understood, for which cause I am enforced to write that unto thee, which I
never thought to have written.

I hear, thou art about to purchase unto thy self a wife, and the price that
thou must give, is thy liberty; that of a King, thou will make thy self a
Vassal; of a Lord, a servant; and of a man of wit and understanding, wilt show
thy self to be void of both.

I understand, thou bear on thy head the crown of India: but look unto thy
self, thou do not bear another of patience, or to speak more properly, of
folly, and perhaps one worse then both, that thou do cause other men to frame
and publish: the proceeding against malefactors, will now bring to thy house
for thy daily expense, a Notary and Examiner, a daily informer and publisher of
the whole proceedings of thy life.

And to be brief, that thou will bring a Queen over the Indians; a mischief
over thy mother, a Lady over thy servants, a Tyrant over thy riches, and a
madness over thine own head.

The Indians rejoice at it, hoping, that thou with thy Mistress, shall make a
cruel station of them.

The wife which thou shall take with her imperiousness, shall make a most
cruel example of thee.

The people of Antia are sorrow full, fearing that whereas they are now
governed of one that has reason, they shall be then ruled by a man that is
governed of a woman without reason; thy mother lamenteth, for that in the day
wherein the insolency of a daughter in law shall interre the duty of a natural
some.

Thy servants are grieved, that whereas now their estate is miserable, in being
servants unto a mistress, they shall be then most miserable, in being servants to
a servant.

Thy riches seem to complain: for that thy treasury and thy store, which
ought to be employed in the honorable reward of servants, and especially of
soldiers, is turned into wantonness, into Jewels, into Chains, into Rings,
into Bracelets, into Girdles, into Frontlets, and other such like things that
tend to the adorning of the Wife, and undoing of the Husband.

Thou only in so great misery, glad and merry, go laughing to the place of
Justice, and singing, when thou art at the Tribunal of that sentence that
touches thy self.

The servants always go with a slow pace to the Inchantor.

The Colt is carried unwillingly to the bridle. The Bullock is brought by force
to the yoke. The thief is drawn by violence to the stocks, and so to the
halter.

Yet thou runnest violently, and joyfully to thy Inchanter, to thy bridle, to
thy yoke, to thy stocks, and to thy halter.

O man, thou deseruest double pity and compassion. First, because thou art
miserable: secondly, because thou art blind, and do not see thy misery. Thou
and I do both of us offend, through folly thou, because by marrying, thou
perswadest thy self to find contentation in thy mind by thy wife: And I, in
thinking by writing unto thee, to find fidelity, and present change in thee.

As for my folly, it is much less then thine, for that I attempt a thing,
howsoever not easy, yet at the least possible; and thou hopest for that which
both is hard, and also impossible ever to be done.

The letter which I write unto thee, I know thou will read it laughing: but
whenever thou read it, know that I have writ it sorrowing.

And know further, that thou will not laugh so much at my letter, as others
here after will laugh at thy harm.

Now if thou shall despise my counsel, yet grant at the least my request, that
though perhaps thou may cast away my words, yet keep this my letter by thee,
and after a little time that thou have been with thy Spouse, turn her to
read it; and if in reading of it, she do not lift her face up to heaven; if
she do not turn up the white of her eye; if she do not strike her nails upon
her teeth; if she do not beat thee upon thy cheeks; if she do not ruffle
and disorder thy beard; if she do not smite thee upon thy breast: Then am I no
Philosopher, then am I no man, then is thy wife no woman.

For that believe me, if thou will believe the truth, that to marry, and to
repent, are as near alike one to the other, as to day and to morrow; so that
if thou meanest to marry to day, thou shall be sure to repent to morrow.

CHAP. II.
A Letter of Lindorach, wherein is declared the conditions of many married
folks, chiefly of the manners and conditions of Wives.
HArd and opposite, even as Scilla and Charibais, are the show of diverse
conditions, the which it is necessary that from time to time I do propound
them unto thee, that thereby thou may see, whereunto wives of necessity do
often slide, and with them draw their husbands unto danger.

The wife which thou have to take, but I mistake my self, and will return,
the wife of whom thou art to be taken, she must for her being, either be fair
or foul.

If she be fair, she will then be adorned, if foul, she will deserve to be
rejected: if she be fair, she shall be loved of many; if foul, she shall be
abhorred of all.

For a man to keep that to himself, which is beloved of many, is hard to
possess (...) that which is abhorred of all, is noisome.

If she be fair, many will envy thee.

If foul, all men will pity thee: and whosoever is envied or pitied, is alike
unfortunate.

If she be fair, she will be proud: for pride accompanies beauty, even as the
shadow does the body.

If she be foul, then will she be jealous: for if she have any wit, she may
in her glass espy her want of beauty, and knowing thee not to be blind, she
will soon imagine that thou seek other company, and by this persuasion will
perhaps procure some also for her self.

If she be fair, then will she never consent that the law is fulfilled, which
says, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife.

If she be foul, she will not desire to have that precept fulfiled which says,
Thou shall leave father and mother, and follow thy wife.

If she be fair, she can never go abroad, but she shall be like the mark in
a But, where at the minds and eyes of all men do shoot and aim; or as an
Owl set upon a Perch, about whom all other birds do fly and wonder.

If she be foul, she is like the Snake or Adder that a man no sooner sees, but
presently turns away his eyes from beholding it.

If she be fair, and be at meetings and gossippings, she can never be named,
but as the prayer which is made unto the Sun, which being long, and
convenient that it should be pronounced with one breath, sighed, as it is said.

If she be foul, then is she like the drawling disease, at the very naming
whereof, cuery man by nature is moved in Spirit.

If she be fair, all thy busmesse abroad is sure to go to wrack: for her
bewitching and attracting beauty will enforce thee to stay within doors.

If she be foul, thy business at home will go worse: for that by reason of her
noy somnesse, thou will have but little list to be at home.

What then shall I say more concerning those love qualities?

If she be fair, it will give cause to the world to think her dishonest; for
that beauty and chastity seldom dwell under one and the same roof.

If she be foul, the world shall have occasion to judge thee blind, and a
religious obseruer of the Feast of Venus, the fair will make thee doubt of
keeping thine own, with loss of labor and infamy.

The foul will cause thee to seek other men's, with danger of life, honor and
foul.

If she be fair, thy house shall then be a Stage, the people Spectators, and
thy wile the Actor of a Comedy.

If she be foul thy house will be hell, thy wife the devil, and thy self the
miserable foul tormented.

If thy wife which thou will take, be young, she will always be importunate for
her better attyring.

If old, her neuer-leauing to counsel thee, will be intolerable.

If she be young, thy heart will be always pricked with fear of infamy.

If old, thy thoughts will be always troubled with her inequality of years.

If young, she knows not how to govern thy house.

If she be old, she will never be able, the one will not have wit to govern,
nor the other strength to bear children.

If she be poor, then look to have with her unhappiness.

If rich, then expect pride.

If she be poor, prepare then to consume thy patrimony, perhaps before thy
matrimony.

If rich, be ready to be her slave, not her companion, and think thy self
to be made of her feet, not that she was made of thy rib.

But let not any thing that I tell thee of marriage, seem strange; for I write
it not so much as a matter belonging to thee and thy equals, but rather to men
of another degree and condition. And to return to what I said.

If that thy wife be mean, then shall she be despised.

If she be noble, then will she be disdainefull.

If thou take one that wants friends, then shall thou not be esteemed: if
she has many friends, it is not possible for thee to tame her.

If thou take her of a better degree then thy self, her brethren will not be
thy kinsmen, but thy masters; her father will not be thy father in law, but thy
Lord.

If thou take her of a lower degree, then must thou be protector over her
friends, so that whereas the one sort will always be imperiously commanding
of thee, the other sort will never leave needy entreating of thee.

If perhaps honest, she will expect, that for having that virtue, thou
should bear with her in all other vicos.

If dishonest, I omit what to say: then come all miseries. Doors and windows
must be shut, eyes and cares must be open. Then every thing is diligently
looked into, every thing is harkned carefully after and observed, all her
doings being feared: then would there be putting chains to her hands, making
laws for her feet, and restraint for her eyes: then is there strict account
kept of her paces, of motions, of her gestures, of the signs she makes, of
her writings, of her speeches, yea even of the turning of her eyes. If thou
make the suspicion known, how art thou pointed at, as an infamous man? if
thou keep it secret, thou art condemned as an ignorant person. And if she be
dishonest and shameless, she will publish her own shame: If thou suffer
her to live so, by that means she becomes worse: for she who once loses her
honor, there is as much hope of amendment, as there is of wool that once was
died black, ever to become white again.

If thy wife be a widow, she will always be either praising or praying for
her first husband.

If a maid, she is then unacquainted with thy conditions, and inexpert in
wives duty and business.

If simple, then must thou be beholding to thy neighbors to govern thy house.

If witty, then her husband must even commend himself to God, the simplicity
of the one suffers household matters to go up and down. The wittines of the
other, will almost make the husband distract of his little wit.

If barren, the husband lives then in great discontent, esteeming himself to
be in hatred with God and nature, in being denied that comfort, for which
chiefly he married: And not giving him the fruit of that blessing, the want
whereof makes him reproachful, whereby he shameth to accompany with men, as
seeming himself to be less then a man. And seeing other men's children, he
grecueth, and wishes, that the worst of them were his, and so seeks
carefully to adopt some other man's child.

If thy wife he fruitful, so that she has many children that increase much,
both the charge in bringing of them up, and thy trouble in looking to them,
should make busmes for thy self; thou must then provide dainty meats, rich
apparel, and other strange delights, diligent Nurses, worshipful Gossips, and
learned Schoolemasters: thou must satisfy her fantastical desires, in her
time of being with child, and her troublesome frowardness, night-cries of
children, and the importunate demands of Nurses, and oftentimes the negligence
of Servants, losing more then the diligence of the master can gain.

If thy children be good, and it fortune that they die, that greeueth thee much.

If they prove ill, and live, that greeueth thee more.

If they be good and die, the father must comfort himself and the mother, from
the fatherly sorrow of such mishaps as are befalne to them, then shall the
father know that all his passed joys give place to those piercing sorrows.

If the children being good, do live, then the father greeueth he cannot bring
them up according to his desire, or their desert, also he greeueth that he
has not so many possessions as sons.

If they live and prove evil, the father lamenteth that ever he had begot
them, and sighs that ever he married.

If he chance to have daughters, he can neither choose, nor so govern them,
but that they will be beloved, sued unto, and followed.

If they be fair, it is hard to keep them; if they be foul, it is hard to
bestow them.

If they be noble, it behooves the father to seek husbands of like degree.

If they want their dowry or honor, the father has then all the care, to him
only remains trouble and travail.

If the daughters marry against the will of their fathers, the father is
dishonored.

If they stay and marry with their fathers consent, he then rests in bonds;
and when he hops to be quit of trouble, he then falls into great troubles
by them or their children, etc. he must supply all their wants: the daughters
are always complaining, and sometimes return to the father. The sons bring
their wives to the father, and which is more intolerable, the grandchild
hops to be made heir.

If the wife be sharp and hasty, thou imaginest she loves others besides
thee.

If she fawn upon thee, then thou may well persuade thy self, that either
formerly she has deceived thee, or now intends to deceive thee.

If she be merry, thou think it is, because she has received some good
news from her Lovers.

If she be sad, thou think, some new love tormenteth her.

If she be good, thou fear she will die before thee.

If she be ill, thou desire her death every day.

If she be bravely apparelled, then art thou jealous.

If she be carelessly apparelled, then art thou offended.

If thou apparellest her gallantly, thou make her to be the more gazed at.

If thou keep her meanly, she disdaineth it: for the one, thy neighbors and
friends will accuse thee of too much softness, and for the other, they will
condemn thee for very covetousness.

If she converse with men, thou fear they be adulterers.

If with women, thou imaginest they be Bawdes.

If she converse with her kindred, thou suspectest thy goods.

If with strangers, then art thou jealous of thine honor.

If thou leauest her without a watch, thou art persuaded that she seeks by
means of opportunity, which makes thecues whthilde; it is offered them.

If thou be watchful over her thy self, she shall be constrained to err,
for want of necessaries, which thou (perhaps) deniest her. For it is the nature
of women, to be quieted with abundance, whereas they are discontented with
scarcity.

If thou set others to watch her, then they themselves do that which they
prohibit others, for which, there must be others to watch also over them; but
howsoever, thy wife is either honest, or else she is dishonest.

If honest, she ought not to be guided: if dishonest, she cannot be guided
enough.

If thou give her the government of thy whole house, thou must then serve her
at command.

If thou reseruest any part thereof to thy self, she then complains of the
little trust thou reposest in her.

If thou make her governor of all, thou may not do any thing, thou can
not be in any place, thou can not inuit any friend, thou can not give any
thing, but she knows of it, and must first give thee leave: nay, oftentimes
therein she breaks with thee, and so causes that thou can not be so good
as thy word, constraining to have saw, for that wherein thou art not faulty.

If thou give her a limited government, either she will not accept it, or
else she will not execute it, finding her self discontent, seeing that there
is no difference made betwixt her and thy servants.

If she praise any, thou fear that she loves him whom she praises.

If she blames any, thou think she dissembles; for that it often happens
that wit in women blames most those whom they best love.

If she can write and read, she then writes unto her Lovers, and receives
lettets from them also.

If she can neither read nor write, she causes others to read and write for
her; and when thou art from home, and do but write to her, others must see
what thou writest.

If she can read printed Books, in reading, she mingleth that of the
Serpent, with that of the Scorpion.

If she cannot read, then being idle, she has many evil thoughts, which
produce and grow to evil actions.

If she be slow of speech, then thou remembrest, that where the stream is
slowest, the water is deepest.

If she commands one servant more than another, then thou fear that she
loves him whose business best contenteth her, and whom also she commands
not, thou perswadest thy self that she loves him also, for that, in not
commanding him some labor.

If she over live thee, thou dyest with doubt of honor.

If thou ouer-liuest her, thou remaynest with the troubles of thy house; then
must thou bethink thy self, in burying of thy old wife, how to get thee a new.

If thou have Children, thou carest how to govern them.

If thou have none, thou must restore half of thy wives dowry.

If thou marriest a new wife that has children, then thine own will go to
wrack, and perhaps neither of them both will thrive.

If she be a widow, and has no children, thou shall be in doubt also not to
have the benefit of marriage.

If thou give her too much liberty, then thou spoylest her.

If thou give her too little, then will she be angry.

If thou suffer her to beautify her self, the world will say thou art too
holy, meaning too horney.

If she would do it, and thou do contradict it, then will thou seem too
rigorous.

If thou dwell in the town, thy children are brought up without manners or
virtue.

If in the City, thy wives lovers will always be soliciting her either by
letters or messengers, and when thou art at home, she will always be
quarrelling, and when thou art abroad, thou shall never be free of suspicion.

If thou let her be seen, either abroad or within doors, then beware the
horn.

If thou keep her close up, then never look to be at rest.

If thou leauest her alone when thou go abroad, thou do very ill; for
though perhaps she may not offend, yet young women's fame is for the most part
slippery.

If for company sake thou do couple her with a young woman, they two will be
sure to agree in committing evil, to pardon one the other.

If thou leauest an old woman with her, then thou feedest a Bawd.

If a man of low condition love her, thou can not perceive it.

If a Noble man love her, then must thou be content to hear and see, but in
any case be silent.

If she be beloved, and do not manifest it unto thee, thou have reason to be
jealous.

If she do make it known to thee, it is either because she fears that thou
have knowledge of it already, or else she tells thee, to endanger thee some
way, or else she does but draw the hook with the one hand, to put it to again
with the other; or at least she does it, thinking thereby to obtain thy
greater trust, that so with more security she may after deceive thee.

If she love thee not, thou eatest and sleep with an enemy.

If she seem to love thee, thou eatest and drinkest, and sleep with a spy.

If she love thee not, art thou not always sorrowful?

If she breeds child, then have thou travel.

If she bear it, thou have more:

If she be sick, thou art amazed.

If she so dies, thou art much perplexed.

If thou marriest a wife aghast her parents will, then is it likely thou shall
lose her dowry, and therewith gettest many enemies.

If thou take he against the will of thine own friends, thou art in danger
to lose thine own inheritance, and gettest hatred for her.

If she be forced to take thee then is there no peace.

If thou be forced to take her, there is always strife.

If thou marriest her for love only, then after the first affection is
extinguished, and her prime of beauty past, her love changes to hatred, and
love was made only for marriages, but it is like flowers which the Sun
quickly withers.

If thou take one of another man's choosing, it behooves thee to look that
her dowry be qualified, whereby thou may afterward live so, that thou be
not jealous of her, nor discern that others be jealous of thee.

If thy parents compel thee to marry her, then have thou no joy, and reuengest
anger upon thy wife.

If her friends force her to take thee, she lives always sorrowful, and
reuengeth her self upon thee: and what joy or peace can be expected in that
house, where one of the Principalls is always discontented: there never
happens one earthquake, but it makes the buildings beat together. Where the
Ocean is troubled, all less springs must needs partake; when the Sun is
eclipsed, all the seven Elements suffer; and when the head aches, all the other
members languish.

If the mother and kindred of thy wife which thou will take, were chaste, thou
then fear, remembering that nothing under the Sun continues stable, as Seeds
and Vines alter with time, and all things grow worse with age, and how Virtue
is altered with Vice, and Vice with Virtue.

If they were dishonest, thou know that a Heifer brings not forth a Fawn;
and when thou see an alteration, thou know that every one is more prone to
evil then good.

If her father were a fool, thou think she must be like her father.

If wise, thou know that wise fathers have oftentimes foolish children. And
the reason is, that when they beget them, their wise minds are oftentimes
besotted of foolish matters.

If before she was married to thee, she had other Loves, thou have cause to
fear, left they they continue so to her still.

If she knew not how to love before she was married, thou fear that she
does it neither now effectually.

If in her maydenhead she had thee only a suter, and was then unkind unto
thee, that will often cause hatred between you even till death.

If she then granted thy request being unmarried, thou may justly fear, she
will do as much for others when as she is married.

If thou fulfillest all her desires, thou make her unbridled and licentious.

If thou do not fulfill them, she will then be always melancholy and
wrathful.

If thou do then reprove her, she sins of custom.

If thou threatnest her, she calls her friends to witness.

If thou entreatest her, she laughes thee to scorn among thy neighbors.

If thou correctest her, she will never be pleased.

If thou forgiuest her she will be intolerable.

If thou do not clothe her honorably, thou leauest her honor in great hazard.

If when thou go to bed, thou find her cold, thou fear lest she has
bin far from her own bed.

If thou feel her hot, thou imaginest she has been about some other man's
business.

If she have been thy fellow Citizen, then will she be much familiar with
you. If she was a stranger, ththilde; have thou not known her life.

If thou have loved her, know, that after fair weather, comes rain, and after
love, hatred.

If thou have not loved her, then have thou no pleasure with her.

If thou do reveal any secrets unto her, she discloseth them.

If thou keep them from her, then she complains that thou trustest her
not.

If thou do not adorn and deck her up, she will never care for thee.

If thou do adorn her, then will she please others as well as thee; and if
she desire to please thee only, she would not then beautify her self in that
morning when she is to go abroad: but rather in the evening when she is to
come unto thy bed.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is discoursed of other conditions of many folks.
COncerning the estate and conditions of the married life, what shall I say
more?

If thou art poor, having a wife, and beholding thy children, thou art
consumed even with care of enriching thy self.

If thou art rich, then art thou troubled with care of keeping of them, as also
tormented with fear of losing them, for that as before I said, I do not so
much speak unto thee that art a King, as to other men that are not of the
honor, but of that humor that thou art in again.

If thou be poor, thou learnest least.

If either poverty, or the provocation of all evil, or riches, the corrupters
of chaste minds, do oppugn, and in time cleave, wish away the honesty of thy
wife.

If thou be rich, thouart much afraid, lest wanton ease and delicate
lasciviousness afford too many imaginations to the hurt of thy Spouse.

If thou live alone, then thou live contrary to the custom of all humanity.

If thou have much acquaintance, thou art then suspected of much deceit.

If thou have no friends, thou want then the chiefest good that is in the
world.

If thou have many friends, thou please not thy wife, for that she couets
always to have all thy love bestowed on her.

If thou be married to a young woman, she is ouerquicke and hasty.

If to an old wife, she is ouer-slow: and herein a young wife vnsinnewes the
body of his chief strength, wastes and consumes thy pleasant age, brings for
thee children of little value and account, and an old wife becomes jealous,
thou art called fool, having wealth, and wanting posterity to inherit it.

If thou be studious, thou can not intend thy book and thy wife too.

If the study of hunting, and of Arms do delight thee, either the one, or the
other displeases thy wife, and breeds contrariety in thy matrimony.

If thou be a Tradesman, and intending thy business and affairs, thou
can have but little care of thy wife.

If thou be a Gentleman, a City set on a hill cannot be hid. What then will thou do in such a necessity? Hence the Hammer, thence the Anuill; here the
door, there the wall; whatsoever thou willest, vexation and trouble is on all
sides; to one of those extremities thou art forced. That which the husband
oftentimes desires, that, for the most part, the wife contemns.

But if thou shall say unto me, that I carry things too much one way, and too
little another way, and that thou will be advised to find the golden way,
betwixt so great excess; I answer thee, that if thou can possibly find a
wife, that is neither fair, nor foul; neither rich, nor poor; neither base,
nor noble; neither foolish, nor witty; neither, honest, nor dishonest; neither
barren nor fruitful; and as I have discoursed, through all the proposed
conditions: and on the contrary, if there can a husband be found, that is
neither rich, nor poor, neither old, nor young; neither base, nor noble;
neither foolish, nor witty; neither honest, nor dishonest, nor in any of those
extremes which I have before touched; then will I content my self that thou
be married.

But where are they, that we may seek them? when shall they come, that we may
behold them?

CHAP. IIII.
Concerning some other miseries incident to the married life.
OWretched man, if thou did but know how dear it did cost thee to be married,
that in the very day in which thou art to be betrothed unto a wife, thou
make thy self more ready to be intombed in thy grave.

A wife, ah a wife! alas, there is not one member, that will not cost the
weight in gold. Her hair is valued at as much as the Pearls, the
Imbroderings, the Aglets and Roses, with which she adorneth her self.

Her forehead, as the Frontlets which she wears thereupon.

Her Ears, as the Pendants that hang thereat.

Her eyelids and her breath, as the odours and sweet perfumes which she
imployeth therein.

Her Cheeks, as the painting both of white and red which she consumes.

Her lips, as with the soft furs wherewith she ouershadoweth them.

Her mouth, as the dainty meats which she ministers unto it.

Her Neck, as the Currals and Amber, the chains and other wanton toys that
she hangs about it.

Her breasts, as the precious stones wherewith she inuironeth them.

Her shoulders, as the vayles and Cypres wherewith she is covered.

Her arms, as the bracelets which she wears.

Her hands, as the sweet waters, precious ointments, perfumed Gloves, and
gallant Fannes wherewith she adorneth her self.

Her fingers, as the Jewels and Rings, wherewith she covers them.

Her sides, as the Girdle wherewith she imbraceth her self.

Her feet, as the shoes which she spends upon them.

Finally her whole body, as the Garments wherewith she is clothed, which every
day she changes and rechangeth, yet being insatiable, is never pleased nor
contented.

Her eyes being such, as no sooner seeing such hangings, such ornaments, but
straight she coueteth them.

Her tongue so impudent, that she no sooner sees them, but presently
demands them.

She will be always demanding of apparel, and must always have Chests full.

She cares little though her children go as naked as the Trees in December,
though her house be as much noted as that of the Fencers: So that for getting
her apparel, her husband becomes a beggar, and they are feign in the end to
betake themselves to an Hospital.

In the day, the husband must labor abroad, and in the night at home, strife
and contention is in his bed; trouble and sorrow at his Table; when he
thinks to eat, then is he compelled to brawle; and when he thinks to
sleep, he must hearken to her reuilings.

O wretched man that intendest to marry a woman! thou must go unto the eyes of
Argus, to keep her; the ears of Faues, to hearken after her; the nosethrils of
a Wolf, that thou may smell out her defects: The tongue of a Fish, that thou
be silent at her brawlings: The stomach of an Estridge, to digest her
reproaches: The neck of a Bull, to support the heavy yoke: The Crown of Pan
wouen with thorns, to cover thy horn: The feet of a Heart to run from her
snares: The riches of Crassus, or rather of Croesus, to satisfy her: The lust
of a Spaniard to content her: The strength of a horse to endure her: The
drowsinesse of a Slowworme, to sleep amidst her chidings: The hunger of
Eriseton, to devour her clamours.

We mortal men commit all things to the trust of other men; but it is well, so
long as we commit them to the trust of men: As our fields to the Husbandmen:
our Herds to the Pastors: our Gardens to the Gardiners: our house to our
menseruants: our chambers to our Maid-seruants: our secrets to our friends: our
writings to the Notaries: out Robes to the Advocates: our Merchandises to the
Mariners: our sons to their Tutors: our daughters to their friends: our heads
to the Barbers: our lives to the Phisicians: But our honor, which is more
precious then all these, we commit into the hands of a silly woman, in such
sort, as we must never again demand it, never can release it, nor never can be
sure of it.

Thou can not be called a Blasphemer, if thou did never curse; nor a
perjured companion, if thou did not swear, in that which is false, nor a
despiser, if thou did not contemn the gods; nor an homicide, if thou never
committedst murder; nor a thief, if thou did never steal; nor a coozener,
if thou did never deceive; nor a treacherous person, if thou did never deal
falsely with thy friends; nor an adulterer, if by no means thou did never
attempt another man's wife; neither can any of these faults be imputed unto
thee, if thou did never offend, nor desire to commit them. But thou may be
iniuried by a greater matter then all these, if (though without thy will, or
without thy fault) another man goes with desire to thy wife.

O wretched man, it is a wonder to see, what danger thou art come in: All other
things are seen and considered on, before they are bought: A house, if it be
to be bought, is marked and observed: the Instruments are heard; the Melons are
smelled unto; the wine is tasted of; the cloth is felt; the timber is fitted;
the glasses are touched, to see if they be found on all fides; the Lute is
chosen; the strings are stretched; the wood is measured; the shoes are pulled
on; the Horse is backed; the Cow is chosen out: and to be brief, all things
are proved, when we buy them to gain by them. But if in our marriage the
bargain be once concluded, then art thou married to the Sun, thou
canstineuer refuse, whilst thou live, but must remain with thy wife even
vutill death: she is taken blindfold, as men use to play at blind; as the
Cat, or rather the Cat in the sack, she is not proved, lest she should be
refused upon the trial: neither is she seen, for that if she were, she
would sooner be refused then accepted.

Whosoever will buy flesh, they may go to the Shambles, and pay for it: and if
they will have fish, they may have it in the Fishmarket.

And she that will be married, let her pay her husband first for taking of her.

It is marvel if she should stand, and be fresh and new.

It is strange that her friends should have such desire to hunt her out of the
house, and that she is so willing oftentimes, to return again. Look how much
the greater thy bargain seems to be, so much the worse is the flesh, and
look by how much the richer thy wife is in dowry, so much the poorer is she
in virtue.

If thy Garments do not fit thee well, thou may cause them to be made again.

If thou have a Ring, that is either too great or too little for thee, thou
may cause it to be new cast.

If the money thou have, like thee not, thou may change it.

If one house like thee not, thou may remove to another.

If thy field please thee not, thou can sell it away.

If a servant be not for thy purpose, thou may dismiss him.

If thou have a sister that is offensive unto thee, thou may marry her to a
husband.

But thy wife, howsoever she come unto thee, thou must of necessity keep her
until her death.

If her friends would bid thee marry her for a touch, as when we buy Capons: O,
for a taste, as we use to buy Millions: Or for a proof, as we use to buy
Shoes: Or for a time, as we use to buy our Cattle: Or for so long as she
shall remain good, as we use to buy horses: Or until we might change her as
we do our money.

Then would I counsel thee to take her, and to prove her: if she like thee, to
hold her: if not, refuse her, and all she brought, even as thou were married to
her.

But the law is ouer-strict, and for this cause is it ouer-strict, for that if
the second day thou should refuse her, and all thou had with her, then no
woman will ever care for thee again.

Thy friends will never more speak for thee: thy enemies will begin to rejoice
at thee: thy parents will be sorry for thee: thy daughters will diminish thy
substance: thy house will increase thy travel: the honor of thy family will
begin to die: thy wife will begin to shorten thy life: thy sons will begin to
desire thy death: thy dowry will not serve to begin another contract.

Thy wife can be no more assured to thee, for that she belongs to another man.

Thy Children may be taken from thee, because they are not thine own.

What a fool shall he be accounted, that buyeth a house, to the door whereof
every man has a key?

Is not he such a fool, that takes a wife?

Is there not any man in the world, that keeps a key for the honesty of any
woman?

There are four things that deceive a man out of his own house, smoke, fire,
a rotten roof, and a churlish wife.

The smoke is remedied, by putting out the fire.

The fire is quenched, by casting on water.

The roof is amended, by laying on new Tyles.

But for the frowardnes of a wife, there is no remedy can be found; that is
intolerable for ever.

But I end, lest that thou think I make a history.

CHAP. V.
Wherein is recollected diverse examples of Women, that have murdered their
husbands.
FOr the proof, and example, and confirmations of this, there shall be brought
the examples of things not only past, but also to come; for that the Stars, in
contemplating upon which, I am wont to spend many a fair night, do
prognosticate unto me a thousand grievous events to happen, and amongst others,
great plenty of such as these to happen, which makes so infinite a number of
husbands to go to their wives sorrowing.

Agamemnon was slain by his wife Clitemnestra; the sons of Aegistus, of the
daughters of Danaus: and so it happened to the husbands of the sisters of Albina:
Alexander Fereus, of his own wife; Albinus of Rosamond; Antioch of Laodicea:
so it happened in like manner to Antonius, being murdered of Lucilla, Gandulph
also of his own wife, Saleotus of his spouse, Ninus Fabius of Fabia, Tybertus
Caesar of Agrippina, and a thousand more, which to collect would be too long:
The greater of those either had been, or after should have been kings.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein is shown how hard and difficult a thing it is, to keep the honesty
of a woman.
Do thou not imagine, that with thy gates shut, thy windows locked, thy
ears open, thy eyes watching, a thousand keys, never so many chains,
vigilant friends, infinite guards do keep the modesty of thy wife, when she is
in her conceit? choose thee the contrary, shut her in the highest and
strongest Tower, that she cannot get out to talk with her lovers, by which
means the wife of old Fuldericus kept her faith, being in amored of fair
Ordancus.

Commit her to thy Parents, and she is not safe in their custody, which is made
plain in A. B. that was inamored of her own Brother.

Commit her to her own friends either, she is as ill, as the example of
Francis, Queen of Armenia.

Neither is there any safety in committing her to thy Nephews; for so
Tractanus fell in love with Hilippia.

Neither is she in safety in being committed to thy sons in law: for we know,
Phoedra did not spare to sport with Hyppolita.

Neither is she secure in being committed unto thy friends: for so Gabrina
could not content her self to make one kill her husband, but afterward fell
in love with the murderer.

If she be not chaste, why did she not at the first accord with thee, to place
another in her stead, as Elippo did to Marisso?

If she once tells thee all her love, then know, she goes about to betray
thee, and so to gain opportunity of gayning him.

So did Edatrice, the wife of Eganus: and if she with him deceive thee, she
will yet persuade thee, that it is some other woman, as Izabel did to her
husband Agnutius.

Count her thy Godren: and if any man tell thee that her love is within thy
house she will make thee believe that it is but a false report; for so did the
wife of John Latharinus.

If thou set a watch for her at thy gates, she will make shift to bring in
her Lover at the roof of the house, as did the wife of Galosus. Nay though she
has sometimes two lovers in the house, yet will she make thee believe, that
which she knows, shall be sure to make most for her purpose. At one time she
will have Leanettus, at another time, Lambertius.

If thou be minded to shut her out of doors, she will prevent thee, and
shut thee out first: for so did the wife of Latonus.

Thought thou dwell with her in the house, and do listen after her, and
talk with her, yet at the very same time, also will she sport with her lovers,
as did Poronella, who having placed her husband in the Bark, whiles she sailed
along the shore, made the horns to show on his head.

Yea though thou should see it, and behold it with thine eyes, yet will she
make thee conceal it with thine own eyes, and compel thee to say, thou
saw not that which thou did see.

Such is the wonderful audaciousnesse of women, as we see Lidia dealt with
Nichostratus. To be brief, when thou sleep'st, though she lie on the
selfsame Bed with thee, though thou should take another man with thee, to
watch her, yet she, in the midst of you both, will admit a hired company,
and so deceive and defraud you both; for so was Faustus and Fecundus betrayed
of the harlot Fiometta.

What then will thou do? in what brazen Tower will thou shut her? with what
chains will thou bind her? under what locks and keys will thou keep her?
what Champions will thou have to guard her? into whose custody will thou commit
her? for though her husband had as many eyes, as hairs, yet will his wife
deceive him. When it shall therefore happen that thou art minded to marry, thou
must pray to God to send thee a good wife, and to take from her all
opportunities of offending.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein are touched diverse customs used at Marriages.
AT the First touching with the hand, it is a custom with many, to buy their
wives with a Ring, that by compassing her finger with a Ring with a precious
stone, or with gold, she thereby circumuents her heart with a desire of gold,
of Iemmes and Jewels.

When the Marriage is solemnized, there are none admitted to be present, except
the parents, to prevent that the wife may not in one day become both a wife and
a Lover.

The husband and the wife are both covered with one veil, to give her to
understand, that she must conceal her affections from all, except her husband.

At the solemnity of the Marriage, is brought in fire and water, and presented
to the husband, to show therein, that to what end soever he turns himself,
he is in danger either in being burned or drowned.

Before the Bride, is used to be carried Torches burning, and behind her, a
hook hanging down; which is done, to signify, that the house into which she
goes, she will set fire to it, and that she draws out of the house, from
which she comes, as much as she can.

The Nuptials are commonly solemnized at night, as if the Sun scorned to
behold them.

The Spouse is not permitted to tread upon the threshold of the door, because
the very gate through which the husband must pass, rejects the evil, which
it should receive from the feet of the wife, which uses also to be anointed
and sprinkled with oil, that it may the less smell of that hard cruelty and
sharp severity that the wife brings with her, who at her first entrance into
the house, always sets her right foot forward, to signify, that the last
thing, which she puts under her husbands roof, is her heart.

Moreover, in some places for those customs, which I reckon up, are not all
used in our Countries; but in others the wife never uses to cook any thing
that the husband eats, to signify that all her works be raw.

The day in which the wife is espoused unto her husband, she banqueteth
amongst her friends, and inuiteth company with her, which is done to the end,
that that day she might be satisfied.

Her body is girt in a girdle of diverse colors, to give us to understand, that
her heart is compassed with diverse and strange imaginations.

The husband presents to her the Spindle and the Rock; and for that, she
restores to him the Spindle vntwisting or winding backward: to represent her
own ingratitude, that in recompense makes him as an vntwisting Spindle.

The Husband settes the Rock to his Wives sides, because she will set a
Helmet on his head, and sometimes give him one cuffe to begin withal, and so
he may correct her faults, which he may do justly without fault.

Sometimes at marriages Walnuts are scattered up and down; which shows, that
a woman is like unto a Walnut, that has a great shell, but a little kernel,
fair without, but rotten within: to pull off the first bark, we use to bruise
them in our hands, and to break the second, we endanger our teeth.

What fruit makes more noise then a Walnut when it is broken?

And what creature has more prattling ththilde; a woman?

Under the bark of a Walnut is a fair juice, that he that keeps it in his
hands, is defiled therewith: so a woman with her beauty hurts whomsoever
beholds her.

He that is unmarried, is called Callibas, as it were Coelestis, and remains
free from bands.

But marriage is called Ligam, because it binds a knot, because it knitteth a
string, and because it tyeth: and a yoke, because it burdeneth: yet is it far
better to carry a yoke, then to marry a wife, for that a yoke is borne in the
day, but laid down at night; but a woman must be endured even to the death.

In the Italian tongue, marriage is called Maritarice, as Tarse il marie, to
commit to the Sea: and Spousuer, in which language the letter S undoes the
signification of the very posure, with which it is compounded, into a contrary
meaning, as the one signifies to depose; being compounded with S, is to be
without repose: so he that will marry, must be sure to forsake all pleasure
and delight.

And very well is marriage in the same language called Rote, as Dotansa,
doubting, that those that are enticed to marry, do always live in fear,
doubting a woman's Dowry is given in Cuffes, in Garments, in Chains, and such
like.

But if it be called for gain, it must be restored in Vineyards, in Lands,
and in Houses, it is received slowly, but restored quickly.

A wife with her children quickly consumes the apparel she brought, and the
goods she found in the house: and if it chance she dye, her Dowry must be
restored, which is sure never to be lost.

But let the Patrimony of her husband be consumed, there is none to restore
that again.

Yet a man should think it better with reason, that children should rather
consume the goods of the mother, then those of the father, for that they are
always more surely her children then his.

He therefore that will be married to a wife, let him first think with himself
for what cause he marries her.

If thou marriest her to govern thy house, why, thereby thy servants which
thou may leave behind thee or take, thou may change them at thy
disposition, reprehend them after thine own will, look unto them at thine
own pleasure, and without controlement, give or take from them thy keys.

If thou marriest her for desire of children, thou may adopt sons to thy
self, and discharge them after thine own pleasure and heart.

But if thou couetest to have them legitimate, and thine own, neither can this
desire of thine be fulfilled by having a wife, and it is better for thee, that
more reprehend the folly of thy servants then of thy wife:

If thou desire to have children of thine own, I will tell thee what thou
shall do: Cause the mother that bears them, to bestow them as a gift upon
thee, whereupon thou may then, without lying, say they are thine own.

If thou marriest, thinking with thy wives Dowry to pay thy debts, thou had
then better take up money at interest, though thou should pay a hundred for a
hundred.

If yet thou think with these Dowries to match thy daughters, it is better
for thee to keep them thy self, then to commit them to other solkes custody.

And to be brief, If thou would marry for love, remember that thy wife has
eyes blinded, that her years are childish, and indiscreet, her hands stinging,
her father (perhaps) an old limping man, and her mother a wanton and lascivious
woman, her shoulders are winged, her hands polluted, and her body unclean.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is showed diverse examples of witty men, that have reprehended Marriage.
NOw that I have bound up all in so small a Faggot, these my speeches would
seem too long, if I should by example endeavor to prove all that I have
before spoken; I will therefore for breuity sake content my self with a few.

A certain young man lived, reprehended for taking a wife of a very small
stature, excused himself, by saying, Of many evils he had made choice of one
of the least.

A certain man being counseled to marry, by a Philosopher, who himself had
never been married, desired him to bestow of him one of his daughters.

Some have been of opinion, that the gods would descend and dwell with us, if
it were not that women lived amongst us.

There is no man but remembered that Phoromis, the King and Lawmakers of the
Argiues, used to say, that if he had not a wife, he should have all felicity.

Socrates, one of the chiefest Philosophers, had nothing that so much annoyed
him, as his wife Xantippa.

A certain Philosopher, who whiles he was young, was often demanded why he
married not? always answered, that it was too soon: of whom the same being
asked when he was old, then replied, that it was too late.

A wise man that was poor, being requested of an exceeding rich woman to marry
her, he refused, saying, that she being rich, would think to be a husband and
mistress of him that was poor.

One being reprehended for giving his daughter in marriage to his enemy, said,
that he knew not how to be better revenged of him.

There is nothing in the world more proud then a woman.

Socrates, of who^ we spoke before, was requested of one, that he would give him
leave to marry: He said, that whether he married or not, he would after repent
him. Only this difference there was, If, says he, thou repentest of not
taking a wife, thou may mend thy self, when thou will: but if thou repentest
when thou have taken her, thou can not any way find redress.

Arri^s, being himself a married man, and seeing one lamenting and making
great moan, that three of his wives, one after another, had all hanged
themselves in one tree in his Garden; he with great desire requested a branch
thereof, maruailing that the man should sorrow for so good success, bade him
proyne and dress that tree well, which brought him forth so good fruit, as to
rid him of that which so much annoyed him.

I remember, that before I compared the wife to an Owl, that is the gazing
stock and wonder of all that pass by her.

I will now compare her husband to a Cuckoo, who is wont to cover and hide the
eggs of other birds, for that some woman will rather be content with one eye
and one hand, then with one man.

Merchants being at Sea, and seeing their Ship in danger to miscarry,
resolved to cast forth some of their heauiest wares. Whereupon one cast forth
his wife, saying, It was hard for the Ship to sustain such a weight.

A wise man repented him of three things; of a day lost, a voyage made by sea,
when he might have gone by land, and a secret revealed to his wife.

The conclusion of the Letter.
I Should have a long web to weaue, if I should produce examples out of all
those sayings, which confirm these my speeches: If I should only repeat the
examples of children, that most cruelly have tortured and murdered their
parents; I will therefore conclude, telling thee only one thing.

That the first night that thy wife shall enter into thy marriage bed, she will
begin to hope for thy death, which thou shall better believe, if thou do
but observe one suspicious custom that women have, That the first night she
lies with thee, will withal diligence observe, whether they or their husbands
fall first asleep, prognosticating thereby, that their death is nearest.

If I should repeat unto thee all the secrets and vanities of women, what
strange things should thou then hear of me? But I refuse to relate them,
because indeed it is a shame to know them.

Some (I know) will condemn me, for that I have spoken, which will be such as
then are newly married, or do intend to marry.

But let them go on, and in the end they shall blame themselves, for believing
me no better.

The first month that a man is married, I know, he will think me a fool.

The second month he will call my name in question.

The third month, he will contend with me.

The fourth month he will withdraw the sentence.

The fifth month he will pay the charges, accounting me a wise man, and
himself a fool.

But thou will say, I am no competent Judge, having never had experience, what
a woman is.

I answer thee, that when two men wrestle together, he that looks on,
beholds the game better then themselves.

But let me say what I will, I know, thy resolution is wholly bent upon
marriage, and to a man deliberate we seldom use to give counsel.

Yet let me advise thee, that with thine eyes shut, thy nose stopped, thy fist
closed, and thy stomach armed, thou will take thy wife as a medicine of
Rubarbe. And so I desire the gods to give thee grace to believe this my letter,
and to keep thee from evil: which thou shall best do, if thou keep thee from a
wife.

FINIS.

