A Short introduction for to learn to Swim.

Gathered out of Master Digbies Book of the Art of Swimming.

And translated into English for the better instruction of those who understand
not the Latin tongue.

By Christofer Middleton.



AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts for Edward White, and are to be sold at
the little North door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1595.

To the Worshipful and well accomplished Gentleman, Master Simon Smith.
SIR, the report of your perfection in this faculty, has imboldened me to
presume upon your courtesy, the rather for that as experience in other things
has taught me, how Birds of one kind, with mutual consent help to support
the younger and weaker sort, till nature has sufficiently enabled them, so
does hope in this thing persuade me, that men of one disposition, will as
willingly accord in their commendable exercises, tending to profitable ends, as
the senseless Fowls of the air naturally agree, mutually to maintain their
own estate. Thus under your thrice worthy protection, as a sufficient shelter
from all the ayerie Buzzards shroude I my self, Dum virum me fecerit etas,
which if you vouchsafe, it shall embolden me so to employ my next vacant time,
as may in some better sort requite your Worshipful favor.

Yours in all dutiful obedience. C. M.

To the Reader.
I Writ not this (gentle Reader) to derogate from his worth, whose labor first
brought this work within the rules of Art, and has thereby, as Virgill for
the tillage of the earth, Vigetius for Millitary profession, Hipocrates and
Gallen for Physic, Justinian for the Law, Aristotle, Tullie, Euclides, Boethius
Ptolomeus, for the liberal Sciences, Pomponius Mela, for Cosmography, or
Marcator for the Globes of the world, (thought his matter may be of some
accounted as the least) yet for his form deserved commendations with the best:
but for his learned style, exceeds the capacity of the greater part of men,
and the matter it self being so necessary for all, I have, (as I could)
gathered his work into a brief compendium, for their better understanding
that are ignorant in the Latin tongue. Thus not to gain the reward of other
men's labors, nor to attribute to my self other men's virtues, but to
vncurtaine that to the view of all, which was only appropriated to a few,
have I vnder-gone this task* which I doubt not will prove as profitable as
pleasant.

Uale.

Of the Art of Swimming.
ALthough from the beginning, amongst all the Authors of Arts and Sciences,
there are few or none which have bestowed any pains in the explayning or
publishing this Art of Swimming, it being so profitable a thing as it is,
toward the preserving of man's life, when as he is at any time distressed in
the greedy jaws of the swelling Sea, destitute of other help, ( Et si tamen
a nullo laudetur laudabile tamen est natura,) although it be by none praised,
yet does nature it self prefer it sufficiently, especially in man, which
above all Fowls of the air, Fishes of the Sea, Beasts of the earth, or other
creatures whatsoever, excels in this faculty as hereafter shall more at
large be expressed. If Physic be worthy of commendations, in respect of the
nature in purging poisoned humors, dryuing away contagious diseases, and by
this means adding longer date unto the life of man, well then may this Art of
Swimming come within the number of other Sciences, which preserves the
precious life of man, amidst the furious billows of the lawles waters, where
neither riches nor friends, neither birth nor kindred, neither liberal
Sciences nor other Arts, only it self excepted, can rid him from the danger
of death. Nor is it only to be respected for this great help in extreamitie
of death, but it is also a thing necessary for every man to use, even in the
pleasantest and securest time of his life especially: as the fittest thing to
purge the skin from all external pollutions or uncleanness whatsoever, as
sweat and such like, as also it helps to temperate the extreme heat of the
body in the burning time of the year. And if we respect thoroughly the nature
of this Art, we may easily perceive and see, that it does not much differ from
the rest of the liberal Sciences, A libera mente procedentes.

Whether all thi^^^ swim by nature (...)
NAture our provident mother, has carefully provided for every several
creature, several means for their preservation in their several kinds: as
unto those creatures which have their living in the inmost bowels of the earth,
or other such places far remote from the danger of water, to those has she
not imparted this knowledge, for that is a thing to them altogether
impertinent, but to other her creatures, either those whose continual aboade
is in the deepes, as Fishes, Fowls, and some Beasts that live in the water,
or to other which in the actions of their lives, do any ways tend toward the
waters, on them, for their better preservation has she bestowed this great
gift, yet not to every creatur^ alike, but what Element does most abound in the
composition of their bodies, according to the quality thereof is their kind of
Swimming. As for example, a Toade has a broader body then a Frog, and to man's
judgment more fit to swim, and yet because her complexion is more earthly
and therefore heavier by nature, and feeds upon the sollid poison of the
earth, either presently after she comes into the water, sinketh right down,
or if the do remain any time upon the superficies of the water, it is with
great labor, whereas a frog feeding on the aierie dew that lies upon the
grass, pleasantly plays upon the water, lively representing the true
Swimming of a man.

The like reasons is of the Fowls of the air, as the Swallows that feed
upon the slender buzzing Flies of the air, they nimblier fly to and fro, and
lightlier drink on the top of the water, then other Fowls, that either
feed on the worms of the earth, or the Fishes of the Sea. And even as the
liuelesse truncks which in their constitution, have a greater temperature of
air or fire, then of water or earth, are of their own accord carried above
the water, as wood and such like, and on the contrary, heavy constitutions of
water or earth, as lead, iron, stone, and such, directly settle down to the
bottom, so is it with all creatures that have life, as the Lion the beast of
the sun, and king of the Forest, because he is of a sanguine complexion, a
hot constitution, nimble of his joints, and of a noble courage, swims lightly,
and strongly, and so of the dog, and other creatures, whose constitution is a
lower degree of heat. But some kinds of Fowls, although they be of a good
constitution of body, yet for some impediment in their form, are hindered and
do not swim so well as other, whose bodies are more gross, as the Cock
which is the bird of the sun, for that he wants (as we call them) the webs
of his feet, swimmeth not so easily as a Duck which is more melancholy and
heavy by nature, according to the disposition of Saturn.

Man swimmeth by nature.
THe Fishes in the Sea, whose continual life is spent in the water, in them
does no man deny swimming to be the only gift which Nature has bestowed
upon them, and shall we think it then artificial in a man, which in it does
by many degrees excel them, as dyuing down to the bottoms of the deepest
waters, and fetching from thence whatsoever is there sunck down, transporting
things to and fro at his pleasure, sitting, tumbling, leaping, walking, and at
his ease perfourmeth many fine feats in the water, which far exceeds the
natural gifts bestowed on Fishes? nay so fit is the constitution of man's body,
that who so does but with himself thoroughly consider of it, cannot but accord
with me in this, that a man of all creatures under the circumference of
heaven, naturally excels in swimming.

As for example, a shaft shot in the water, when it rises again, hangs
perpendicularly downward with the head, and the upper parts and feathers swim
above the water, even so is it with a man, who although the lower parts of his
body be earthly, and heavy, yet above is the life of lives, the vital spyrits,
the external and internal scences, to be short, the life spirits of every
man, exceeds the lives of all Beasts, for that they only retain the
vigitable and sensual powers, the one whereby they grow and increase, and the
other whereby they hear, feel, see, smell, and taste. But in man is all
these, whose least part exceeds the greatest quantity of the other in the
highest degree, a reasonable soul: so yt he has not only in great measure
the other helps, which Nature has provided for this purpose, but he has
wisdom, by Art to perfect that in himself, which by nature is left
imperfect: and having plain rules of Art, how by motion to keep up the
heavy parts of his body, which by reason of their heaviness are naturally
carried down, it cannot otherwise be, but that swimming must naturally come to
a man: and in swimming he must excel all creatures whatsoever.

But for some will object, that if swimming were so natural a thing to a man,
then should not so many perish in the water, to these in a word I thus answer:
that men who have not had some practice in it before, when by any sinister
occasion they fall into the water, the discreet use of their senses is taken
away by a sudden fear, and so unorderly laboring in the water, they by the
indirect moving of their bodies pull down themselves under the water, and so
are drowned, which to avoid I leave it to every several man's consideration,
how necessary a thing this Art of Swimming is.

Of the place and time to swim.
OF all the circumstances which the Author of this our Art has in his first
book learnedly set down, as necessary antecedents before he enter into the
practice it self, I hold these two sufficient for the unlearned sort to know,
(time and place,) and leave the rest to their wise considerations which are
able thoroughly to understand the Latin tongue. The time which the temperature
of this our clymate affords as good to swim in, is comprehended in four
months, May, June, July, and August, for that in these months the Sun
drawing nearer unto our Zenith, his beams falling more directly down upon the
superficies of this earth, make a greater reflection, and thence comes a more
vehement heat, which does temperate the water, and make wholesome the air.
The wind and weather ought also in these months to be regarded, especially of
those whose weak constitution, is not so able to endure the cold, as others of
a stronger composition of body. The winds that are most unwholesome and
dangerous to swim in, is the East and North, for that blowing from cold and
dry places, they bring diverse and sundry discommodities. The weather that is
to be eschewed is rain, for these considerations, the drops do trouble the
superficies of the water hurts the body, disturbeth the eyes, and lastly,
drayning from the bancks into the River, brings also with it, whatsoever
dunge, straw, leaves, and what filth or unwholesome things else, do lie near
adjoining unto the place.

In the place is two things especially to be respected, first, that the bancks
be not ouergrowen with rank thick grass, where oft-times, do lie and lurk
many stinging Serpents, and poisoned Toades: not full of thorns, briars,
stubbes, or thistles, which may offend the bare feet, but that the grass be
short, thin, and green, the bancke beset with shadie trees, which may be a
shelter from the wind, and a shadow from the parching heat of the Sun.
Next that the water it self be clear, not troubled with any kind of slymie
filth, which is very infectious to the skin, that the breadth, depth, and
length thereof be sufficiently known, that it be not muddie at the bottom,
least by much treading the filth rising up from the bottom, thicken the water,
and so make it unfit for that purpose. Also that there be not in the bottom
of the River any old stakes or sharp stones, which may greatly indaunger the
Swimmer, but that it be a clear running water, not a standing corrupted poole,
the bottom fair sand, where from the bancks may easily be perceived,
whatsoever does lie in the deepest place of the River. Which time and place,
according to these rules and directions when he has fitly selected, let him
asociate himself with some one that is taller and stronger then himself,
which may both comfort him, and help to sustain him, for that at the first
entrance, the chilnes of the water will greatly discomfort him: as also he may
thereby be better directed where the water is deep, and where it is shallowe.
But if so be that he for any extraordinary occasion, or other reason
whatsoever, rather delight to be alone then thus, let him take a long rod like
unto an angle, and upon the end thereof, hang in a long small cord a plummet
of lead, wherewith he may standing upon the bancke, sound every place of the
water, and if he cannot reach the further side with his pole, boldly venturing
so far into the water, as by this direction he has experienced, he may reach
further and further, until he has tried it all, which if he find
correspondent in every point to the rules before rehearsed, and that there be
not any sudden or plum falling down into any great holes, which exceed his
own height, nor any whirlpooles, as we call them, or kind of swift or violent
streams, that may forcely carry him away, let him there practice, according to
these rules following: and venture not into any other unknown place, until he
be a perfect practisioner in this Art. Thus much for the time and place. For
the manner of his going into the River, it must not be sweating, (a thing
whereunto in the heat of So^mer men are greatly subject,) for that coming
into the cold water it makes a sudden change in body, which is very
dangerous, but rather by walking easily in some cool shade, or some such
other moderate means, let him before he enter into the water bring his body
into a reasonable temperature of heat and cold, and then, not as some which
are more bold then wise, rudely leap into the water with their feet
downwarde, as this picture next following shows.



Or when he comes at the side, fall in upon his right or left side, after
this fashion.



Or else leaping from the banck, and casting forth his legs (but yet keeping
of them close together) he may light upon his hippes, and the hinder parts of
his legs, as you see in this picture.



To swim on the back.
But for that with long swimming on his belly, he will be wearied, Nature that
provident nurse, which carefully provides for every creature things fitting
their kind, has as in all things, so in this thing made man excel every
thing: for him has the taught in this to ease his weary arms, by lying in
the water upon his back, which we call Swimming upon the back. A gift which
she has denied even to the watrie inhabitants of the Sea, no Fish, no Foul,
nor other creature whatsoever, that has any living or being, either in the
depth of the Sea, or superficies of the water, swimmeth upon his back, man
only excepted: and therefore, when he has perfectly learned to swim to and
fro on his belly as he lifts, let him learn thus to turn upon his back,
by thrusting out his right hand as far as he can before him, and withal, turn
over his left side* and still keep out his right hand, until he be turned
upon his back, for that it does in turning so, support him from sincking, as
in this example following.



And when he is thus laid upon his back, he must lie very straight, not bending
or bowing with his body any way, save only his legs, which he must easily
pull out and in, as when he was on his belly, to put him forwards in the water,
as thus.



To turn in the water like a Roach.
There is an other kind of turning when a man is swimming upon his belly, with
his head one way, suddenly to turn himself, still being upon his belly, and
bring about his head and all his body the other way: and for that it is to be
done quickly (as often times you may see the fishes within the water, when in the
pleasant heat of Summer they wantonly friske to and fro,) it is commonly
called the Koach turn, and that is done thus, if he will turn toward the
right hand, he must suddenly put the water from him with his left hand, and
pull that water behind toward him with his right hand, turning back his head
and his body as you see in this next figure.



To turn the Bell turn in the water.
There is also a turning which is called the bell turn, as when one swimming
one his belly shall suddenly pull in his feet, and in stead of striking
with them as is before said, he shall heauing backward with his foreparts,
strike forward with his feet, which motion will turn him upon his back: and
because he may at his pleasure turn so upon his back and belly as he will,
it is called the bell turn, resembling also a bell when it is ringing, as for
example.



To tumble in the water.
There is also a kind of tumbling in the water, as a man would roll and
tumble in the grass, and that is done thus, swimming on his belly or back,
which way he means to roll himself, as toward the right hand or the left,
he must thrust that hand broad-wayes down into the water, with the palm
downward, and he must carry the other close beside him, as ready to use so
upon the other side: and with the uppermost leg still as he turns, strike
the superficies of the water, so that the motion with the hand helps to
turn over the body, and the striking with the feet, keeps better up the
hindmost parts, which are most heavy of themselves, as in this picture
following.



To strike the superficies of the water.
To strike the superficies of the water with four parts of the body at twice,
is thus done, by lying upon your back, and something declining your body
toward the left side, which hand must be in the water, laboring to and fro
like the finne of a Fish, to keep him from sinking: and so may he lift his
right hand and right leg out of the water, and beat them down again, and
so of the left side, as the picture following shows.



To swim with hands and feet upward.
To swim with hands and feet upward, is nothing else but the swimming upon the
back, as we taught before, saving that he uses his hands as a boat does
her Dares, casting the^ out on both sides, and drawing them in again, which
makes his motion swifter, as in this example.



To swim backward.
That is, when one lying upon his back with his body stretched forth, and
holding up his breast as much as he can, that his back may lie hollow, which
will keep him from sincking, and lifting easily one foot after another above
the water, and so drawing them forceably toward him under the water, they will
pull his body backward, as in this example is showed.



To roll upon ones back.
This is done only by lying straight upon his back, and pressing down the
water with his hands, so may he roll from side to side, like a ship in the
Sea, as thus.



To make a circle in the water with his feet.
This is done as we said before, by lying straight upon his back, without
bending any part of his body, and if he will turn from the right hand, then
must he lie somewhat over upon his left side, and first of all pull his right
leg out of the water, and afterward his left as fast as he can, and strike
with them toward the left hand, one after another, and about one foot, one
before another, which will turn his body round, and make his head lie in the
midst, like the center of a circle, as thus.



To stand upright, and turn about in the water.
He must by stirring of his feet up and down in the water keep up his body,
and keeping his hands underneath the water, pull the water toward him, that
way which he would turn, and so also incline the motion of his feet, as thus.



To swim with his hands together.
This must be done in all respects, as is said before for the first kind of
swimming upon the belly, saving the motion of the hands, which must be joined
with their palms together, the thombs standing right upward, which he must
pull in to his breast, and thrust them forth again, without parting of them, as
for example.



To swim upon his side.
This kind of swimming, though it be more laborious, yet is it swifter then
any of the rest, for that lying upon one side, striking with your feet as when
you swim on your belly, but that the pulling in and thrusting out of his
hand, which then did only keep him up, do now help to put him forward: for
only the lower hand supporteth his body, and the upper hand roweth like an
Dare, as in this example.



To swim upon his belly with his hands still.
This is only to lay his hands behind him, and strain himself to bear his
head somewhat higher, and strike somewhat lower with his feet, as in the
picture following is showed.



To swim with one hand, and one foot upon his belly.
He must take his right foot backwards in his left hand, and strike with his
right hand and left foot, which for that one is upon the one side, and the
other on the other, they will easily bear him up, as thus.



The use of these two last kinds of swimming, is to ease his hands that is
subject to the Crampe, or any other infirmity.

To swim like a dog.
Into this kind of swimming many do at the first fall, before they perfectly
learn the right stroke, and there is this difference betwixt them, that
whereas in the right kind, he strettheth out his hands and his feet, in this
he rudely beats the water with his hands and feet: first lifting his right
hand out of the water, and then his right foot, and forceably striking them
into the water again, as in this example following.



To beat the water.
This is done swimming upon his back, and lying straight out with his body,
the palms of his hands being downward, and moving up and down in the water
to keep him up: so may he lift out either one or other of his legs, and
beat with it upon the superficies of the water at his pleasure, as thus.



To play above the water with one foot.
This is all one with the next precedent, saving that in stead of striking his
leg right down into the water, he must turning it about three or four
times, only but touch the very superficies of the water with his toe, as in
this example.



To show his toes above the water.
This is also done by lying straight upon his back, stretching out his feet
together at length, and moving with his hands in the water, as in the former
example: and so lifting up his seete, ti^l he has brought all his toes above
the water, as thus.



To hang by the chinne in the water.
When he is swimming upon his back, let his feet sincke easily down toward
the bottom, and with all, let him strive as much as in him lies, to bend in
his back, bowing backwards his head, until his face be the uppermost part of
his body, and then draw his feet somewhat upwards, his hands holden behind
his back, and his body bending also that ways like unto a bow: so that the
water working up and down in the concauitie of his back, will so easily hold
up his body, that he shall not need to stir either with hand or foot, as
thus.



To tread the water.
This is only standing bolt up, as it were in the water, and pulling up your
feet, and thrusting them down again, after the same manner as he does
swimming upon his belly, which have the same force to keep him that way, which
they have to thrust him forwards the other way, as you may see in this picture
next following.



To swim with one hand and one foot upon his back.
This is the same upon the back, which the other was upon the belly, to lie
upon your back, and behind you take your left leg in your right hand, and
forceably move your other leg, as when you swim upon your back, thus.



To swim with his hands and feet bound.
This kind of swimming is easiliest done, by lying very straight upon his
back, drawing in his legs, and thrusting them forth again, after this manner.



To slide forwards upon his belly in the water.
This must be thus done, he must keep his hands together with their palms
downwards, by which he must draw the water toward him, and his feet also and
legs kept close together, he must easily thrust out and keep in as well as
he can, keeping them together in this wise.



This is best to be used in those Riners where are many high weeds, for that
swimming upon his belly thus, he shall safelier slide over them.

To sit in the water.
He that will exercise this kind of swimming, must be such a one as is not
troubled with the Crampe, for that the forceable bending backward with his
body, is otherwise very dangerous, which must be thus done. Lying upon his
bark, he must draw in his feet toward his hippes, and use some motion with
his hands under the water, to sustain him till he has gotten his legs in
his hands, thus.



And then using some small motion to put him forwards, keeping only his breast
and head above the water, the stream will easily keep him up, by reason of
the concauitie in the back.

To pare his toes in the water.
Swimming upon his back, let him draw up his left foot, and lay it over his
right knee, still keeping his body very straight and then having a knife ready
in his right hand, he may easily keep up his leg until he has pared one
of his toes, as thus.



To show four parts of his body above the water at once.
He must lie straight upon his back, and lay one leg over the other knee, so
that the uppermost knee may easily be seen above the water, then he must,
setting his hands on his breast, hold up his elbowes above the water, and so he
shall at once show his head, his elbowes, and one knee, as thus.



To swim with one leg right up.
That must as the rest, he done by lying straight upon his back, and lifting
one leg as high above the water as he can, and stryking under the water with
his other leg* to drive him forwards, his hand easily moving by his side, the
better to keep him up, as in this example.



To carry any thing dry over the water in his hands.
This is only done by swimming upon his back, and strayning himself to lie
straight with his body, so that he hold his arms straight up, which will else
force him to bend his body, and so he shall sincke, and holding his arms
upward as before, he may easily carry, or recarry, any thing over the water
without wetting, as for example.



To stroke his leg as if he were pulling on a boot.
This is nothing else but lying straight upon his back, as are all the other
extraordinary feats, and suddenly lifting one leg above the water, stroke
with both his hands in this manner.



To caper with both his legs at once above the water.
Lying upon his back straight as before, his hands with their palms downwards,
pressing the water the better to keep him up, he must cast both his legs out
of the water at once, and caper with them upward as men use to do downward in
dancing, as thus.



To diue underneath the water.
He must if he be in a place where he way stand upon the ground, with as much
force as he can, leap up, and bending his head toward his breast, fall
forwards down into the water, as thus.



His hands he must hold before his head, with their backs together, that
they may be ready to pull him as it were forcing him down under the water, and
he must pulling them out and in, now use them to help him down, which wear
before a means to hold him up, his feet also must strike upward, moueing them
after the same manner, as he does swimming above the water upon his belly,
after this example



To swim under the water.
When he has thus buried himself in the water, he must thrust his hands
sorth before his head, and as it were draw the waters which are before, and
beat them behind him, stryke with his feet as swimming upon his belly, but
somewhat upward, that they may the easilyer keep him down, as in this example.



To rise from the bottom.
That is done by the spedie turning upward of his body, and with one hand the
palm being downwards, press down the water beneath him, and with the other
hand draw down the water which is above him, and then striking downwards with
his feet, it will easily bring him up, as thus.



To seek any thing that is lost in the water.
He must swim under the water as before, but as near the bottom as he can,
so that he touch it not, least he raise any mud to thicken the water, his eyes
open, that he may see where it lies, and if so be that he have any occasion to
turn him self, or to seek round about, as thinking himself near the thing
he seeks, if he will turn toward the left hand, he must with his right
hand, pull toward him the water which is on his left side, which will easilye
turn him about, as this picture next following shows by example.

But thus much to him which learneth to diue, let him never swim further then
he can see the bottom, for it is either very deep, or else he is under some
baucke, or in some such danger.



To swim like a Dolphin.
This is nothing else, but in diuing to lift his head above the water, and when
he has breathed, presently diue down again, as before.



FINIS.

