EVERARD DIGBIE his Dissuasiue.

From taking away the lyuings and goods of the Church.

Wherein all men may plainly behold the great blessings which the Lord has
powered on all those who liberally have bestowed on his holy Temple: And the
strange punishments that have befallen them which have done the contrary.

Hereunto is annexed Celsus of Verona, his Dissuasiue translated into English.

Beatius est dare qua^ accipere. Act. 20.

Printed by Robert Robinson, and Thomas Nevvman.



blazon or coat of arms TANDEM SI.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



To the right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton: Lord high Chauncellor of
England, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Counsel. Euerard Digbie wishes true felicity.
Sundry times weying with my self (Right honorable) what small account is made
of poor Scholars at this day, and how fruitless their greatest labors be:
I resolved with my self, never to publish any thing in print hereafter. Yet
notwithstanding after many storms, all mixed with unnatural showers,
descending from the idle brain of sundry fruitless wits: I seeing many
stinging Nettles amongst the sweet Roses, erecting their heads higher then
all the wholesome herbs in the Garden: And that a ridiculous generation newly
come ashore into the world, are not ashamed to affirm, that these stinking
weeds, are those sweet lillies named by our Savior Christ: that they will
dig up the garden a new: that they will reform the supperstitious branches,
of the sweet ancient welblowne Rose of England. That they will pull down the
winepresse, and level the ground a new, by a new line: that they will build a
new wine press, of a new fashion, yelding new wine never seen or tasted by
any Christian heretofore. After these great puffes of this fruitles wind, had
e^tonce resounded in mine ears, beating it self with such out ragious blastes
against the walls of the Church that it makes the strongest pillars thereof
to quake and tremble: Though I be the meanest of many thousands (...) this
cause concerns, yet knowing that it directly belongs to the maintaining of
true religion, and the holy worship of Almighty God, I could not with bold my
pen any longer, from refuting so dangerous and damnable an opinion. It is a
grievous thing by sins of infirmity to offend Almighty God: but openly and
obstinately to affirm, that palpable darkness is clear light: that evil is
good, and good is evil: that sacrilegious deadly sin, is godly zeal, and
that openly before the face of his aeternall Majesty: Is the true inheritance
of that treble woe often denounced in the Scriptures. This moved me (Right
honorable) in regard of mine humble duty to your Honor, and the public
commodity of many Christian souls (which once tasting this sweet bait,
might easily be entised to eat up sin as it were bread) to forewarne all
those, which shall read this plain simple treatise, that they wash their
secret thoughts, from this most heinous sin: which who so practices, with
bloody heart he offers violent hands even unto the bosom of the sacred
spouse of Jesus Christ. Amongst all the creatures of this world, God has given
man only an under standing soul adorned with sundry heavenly virtues, of
which there is none greater, none more excellent and divine, more acceptable to
God, more honorable in the sight of men, than is his holy worship,
religiously celebrated in his holy Temple. Over the which place, his care has
been always such, his eye so vigilant, his providence so continual: that
neither the sweet intising cups of worldly pleasure could at any time bewitch
it, nor the devouring sword of fiery persecution consume it. But as the little
ship, whilom welneere perished with the outrageous tempest, at the voice of our
Savior, was presently safe in quiet calm; even so when subtle worldlings seek
either by force or policy to overthrow the little Church of Christ: The^ the
Lord stirs up some valiant Gedeon, some mighty Constantine, some true
Christian knight, whose Name and Nature do yield a sweet consent to support his
savior and therewith to withstand the fury of his enemies. Who daily seek by
new devises, thrice fined in the fire of subtle policy, so to darken the
clear son of true Christianity, that the house of God may no more be seen,
and that all the fountains belonging to the same, in one day may be clean
dried up.

Since then the glistering cloud of sacrilegious zeal has spread it self so
larglie over our horizon, and so eclipsed the true radiant sun, that in
stead of the day spring, which from an high has visited us with true light
unto salvation: the wiser sort do plainly perceive that the hour of darkness
now hangs over our heads, and that the day of iniquity has already
dawned, in which Satan by the secret mystery of iniquity, begins to
work those ruthful stratagemes against the Church of Christ, which he has
bin many years in devising: I cannot but write truly, that which the Clergy
with the whole realm confess plainly: That we render immortal thanks unto
Almighty God, for preserving her most Royal Majesty so miraculouslie unto
this day, giving her a most religious heart (the mirror of all Christian
princes) once and ever wholly consecrated to the maintaining of his divine
worship in his holy Temple.

From this clear Crystal fountain of heavenly virtue, many silver
streams derive there sunarie passages so happily into the vineyarde of the
Lord, that neither the flaming fury of outward enemies, nor the scorching
sacrilegious zeal of domestical dissimulation, can dry up any one root
planted in the same, since the peaceable reign of her most Roial Majesty. Of
these clear Crystal currents, I have vewed the most, and doubt not but that
I have tasted of one of the best, since in the greatest heat in summer, it is
never dry, in the hardest winter, not once congeled, in the greatest tempest,
always calm, in the greatest distress, it yields juice of sweetest
comfort. Herewith oftentimes being well refreshed: when I look back, and in
my self behold the great comfort which both our universities daily receive
from your honor: I account it one of the most special blessings of the Lord,
that in his great wisdom he has reserved your Honor unto these days,
wherein Satan streacheth all the strings of his wit, reuiueth all his
policies, practices all his treacheries, against the poor distressed Church
of Jesus Christ. He uses force by foreign enemies abroad, and secret
undermining, by smoth dissemblers at home. Herewith he has displaied his
banner before the gates, and given a special su^mons to the temple it self.
(...) malis, Sed contra audentior ito. Let the Lords knights now arm
themselves, with true Christian courage. Let them gird there sword upon their
thigh, let the^ awake with the worthy Samson, and adventure the battle with
Julius Caesar, who where the greatest danger was, there in person he would give
the first charge: Non est nisi in summis victoria, In greatest dangers, true
virtue atchieueth the greatest victory. And surely if we behold the poor
innocent Church all naked in the midst of her armed enemies, daily wounded by
some, betraed by others, contemned of the most. If we look into the world and
see the small comfort which poor scholars have commonly when they come abroad,
the counterfeit courtesy, the seeming friendship, the smiling looks, the double
words the single deeds, the smoth promises, the doubtful denials: We cannot
but confess, that he which in this uncertainty continues a certain and
asure Patron, Arduam virtutis calcauit viam, sed tamen gloriosam: He has
entered the hard way of perfect virtue, but yet that which leads, unto true
honor. He which with the light of heavenly wisdom, and the true integrite of
a right noble heart, has entered this way, at no time diuerting out of the same
either by flattery of fauning friends, or fear of privy nipping enemies, or
by double danger proceeding from the^ both: He it is whom God loves, whom the
better sort do strive to imitate, whose memory the posterity shall celebrate,
for whom we daily pray, and whom I honor with my heart. In this perfect
resolution, I have presumed to dedicate this my Dissuasiue unto your Honor, at
this day a most assured friend to the church of Christ, a special benefactor to
our University, and my most honorable and singular good Patron, who^ I desire
to gratify in the best manner I can devise. Which I have done the rather, to
show my duty to the common weal, and the sincere affection which I bear to
your most rare virtue: assuring my self, that you will take it in good part,
as from him which without all flattery and with entire affection, does beseech
your creator to bestow that upon you, which your most honorable heart does
desire.

Your Honors in all dutiful observance for ever, Eu^rard Digbye.

The Preface to the Reader.
IF my pen (Gentle Reader) had erst bin dipped in the silver streams flowing
from Parnassus hill, or that Apollo with his sweet sounding harp would
vouchsafe to direct the passage thereof unto the top of that high Olympus:
after so general a view of great variety f^r and near, I might bouldly begin
with that most excellent Poet Cicelides Muse paulo maiora canamus. But since I
find it true in this my simple state of life, now well nere spent, which the
father said unto his son, affecting his goulden tressed chariot drawn with
breathing horses through the crystal skies: Magna petis Phaeton and quae non
viribus istis, munera conueniunt: I fear to fly so high a pitch, and leave
the lofty discourse of higher argument to those, which with the Eagles eyes of
perfect wit are able to behold the bright radiant Sun of true invention. And
since sometimes in giving attentive ear to the sweetstrains of melodious
music, I have most affected the pleasant mean: since in the life of man the
goulden mean is that sure rule, by which the wise do pass they sie seas of
worldly calamities. In a mean style I mind to record to you a true Christian
argument, which though in these days it be but meanly regarded of the most:
yet it is and always has bin had in great honor with the highest, the
greatest and mightiest Princes in the world. And what is that mean that
sounds so high? If you will listen, the note is sweet, and the dittie
resoundeth the little Church of Jesus Christ. Though my music be very simple,
and I not practiced in the art, though the song be plain truth, and the Echoe
thereof most usually odium parit: yet since naked truth by her own mere
strength prevails against all the armies, and armed men of the world, since
her simplicity is not able to be refuted by the finest wits and most
eloquent tongues, I am bold to sound my slender oten pipe amongst Mineruaes
muses, and therewith to gratify you with Celsus of Verona his dissuasiue,
plainly translated into our English tongue. The truth whereof incited me in
simple style, no less effectually to record the good blessings of the Lord
powered on those which love his church, than Celsus has done to the contrary.

Considering that these be those evil days foreshewed by the Apostle, of which
it was said, charity, shall wax cold, and that the general flow of iniquity
over the face of the whole earth does argue unto us the dauning of the latter
day: For our souls health I thought it expedient to show unto those which
shall read this rudely written treatise, how dangerous a thing it is in the
sight of God, and how loath some in the eyes of all true christians to detract
any thing from the true worship of God, his holy temple, and the reverend
fathers the true disposers of the sacred mysteries in the same. In which
discourse though in the ears of some, I may seem to sing the treble rather
than the mean, to nisse the mood, and to mistake the figure, and therewith to
sound some sharps instead of flattes: yet in that my purpose is to profit the
good, and so little as I may to offend the evil, I hope (God willing) to show
the truth so plainly, so briefly, and so truly, as that the well disposed may
vouchsafe to read, and the evil may desire to learn. To the end that this
little fountain might flow more abundantly, and therewith derive it self
into diverse passages: I meant before this to have published the same,
indifferently to all. But afterward considering the simple plainnes of the
same scarce worthy the reading of the learned: (on good cause having half
vowed never to publish any thing hereafter) I thought it good rather to present
my friend with it, as a private token of my goodwill, then by publishing it, to
make my self a mark for such boults, as in this case usually fly abroad.
Having sometimes walked this way heretofore, I find that Poetical proverb
most true, pronounced by that anncient Alceus: (...): under every stone there
lies a Serpent. If the envious tongue were but as the wind which changes
often, or as the sting of the little Be whose greatest swellings are easily
assuaged with the anointing of sweet honey. Then might I adventure my little
boat into the wide Ocean seas: and cry alowd with old Anchises: Vela date
ventis. But since the venomous tongue more mortal then the Cockatrice, empoisoneth
farther then ^the eye can see, infesting the absent with deadly disgrace:
hereafter, Spes and fortuna valete, shall be my song, and (...) my full
conclusion.

Euerard Digbie his Dissuasiue.
The first part.
THE exiled Poet in the sorrowful distress of his banishment (gentle Reader,
having penned the record of the same, and now ready to send it into the city,
Parue nec inuidio, sine me liber ibis in vrbem: My little book (says he) I do
not envy thee, that thou shall freely pass thither, whither I cannot come.
Since the Poets shadowed style, resembles perfect truth often richly clothed in
their golden verse, since they had wit at will, and the Muses sounded at their
call; their pen did flow with drops distilled from the fountain of most
pleasant invention: their style was high, their words were sweet; their
sentence true, their number perfect, their works admired. So that naught but
envy, durst once devise the least disgrace against the same. If my skill would
yield me but a bare resemblance of their perfect style, whereby I might reveal
the truth unto the world, with like delight, as did those Poets fine: or if
this age were but half so much delighted, with the substance of truth it
self, as they were with the portraiture of the shadow. I would hope for that
good acceptance of this small simple work, (which now I doubt) and write with
him: I am sorry for my self since thou shall be accepted. But since that day of
darkness has already dawned, in which if we write the truth plainly, we
are hated, if we write obscurelie, we are suspected, if we write simply, we
are contemned, if we write not to please the itching ears of flesh and blood,
we are rejected. Since men are so much bent to their own self will, and so
besotted with the love of themselves, of their own house, their own goods,
their own lands, their own wife, their own children, their own posterity,
and lastly with the love of this present world, of dignities, honors, scepters
and kingdoms, that the kingdom of heaven to them is but a dream, bred in a
little corner of their secret cogitation: and he which shall tell them, that the
kingdom of this world passes away, John. 19
like a flower, a cloud, a smoke, a shadow, that the kingdom of Christ is
not of this world, that the further we enter into worldly possessions, and
the higher we climb unto honor, the further we go back from the kingdom
of heaven, and the greater is our fall into the grave, since he which shall
write this plainly, and more than that, that the whole regiment of a Christian
common wealth, ought principally, above all things to serve for the setting
forth of true religion, the true worship, the true honor of the name of God:
since the disgrace of worldly pride now commonly received, and on the
contrary, the extolling and magnifying of the beauty of the temple of God, is
an odious thing amongst worldlinges at this day, and my skill very simple,
mine invention slender, my treatise, rude, my words plain, mine eloquence
nothing at all: I begin with him though to another end, Parue nec inuideo: My
little book I do not envy thee, nay, rather I pity thine estate, since thou
art now to pass into the world, whose ysie ways are opposite to God, and
crauest attentive ear of those, whose foul deformities thou openly
displaiest. Nether would I think thy destiny so hard, or so much to be
lamented, if they were simple at whose hearts thou knockest (willing them to
reverence the worship of God, more than the laws of earthly princes) or
easily to be recovered from the bewitched ways of this present world. But of
them many are high and honorable, many wife and learned, many politic,
strong, and wealthy, hardly bowing down their eye to behold the low estate
of the humble, and seldom opening their ear to the cry of poor fatherless
lying in the street, or to so plain, so simple, so unsavory a speech, as
thou seem willing to utter in their ears at this time.

In this despair of thy good success, I hear an other trumpet sownd, whose
loud alarm bids thee either retire, or else to change thine habit, thy
countenance, thy simple style and cote, wherewith thou art now clothed. The
solemn courts of princes have their Porters, to keep such base coats out:
who if they once presume to speak, being controlled, then the staff, the
rod, the whippe, the stocks, do make the period of their style.

These be the storms, and will thou shrink for showers of rain? God it is
which fashioned the globe of the golden tressed sun, he raises clouds and
discusseth them again, he thundreth loud, and sends quiet calm, he sends
grievous stinges of the body, often times to his beloved, that he may rejoice
his soul, with the beauty of his countenance. Ille meas errare boues vt
cernes and ipsum: Ludere quae vellem, calamo permisit agresti: he first sent
forth the piersing beam of clear light, he opened mine eye, he bowed the
fingers of mine hand, and bid me write, that in this age we seem and are not,
holy, learned, wise, charitable, loving and kind one to an other. If this be
the general course of the world, foreshewed long sithence by revealed
Prophecy: let no man think that truth proceeds from any evil humor: or
that this heavenly darte (which spares none) does aim at him, or her, or
any one: but humbly requesting all in the bowels and mercies of Jesus Christ,
specially to look to the salvation of their own soul, it touches all, that
all thereby leaving the love of this present world, by his gracious cross and
passion, may be made the true children of eternal bliss. That ancient Poet
Hesiod Hesiod.
writ many hundredth years ago, that which our lives do porfectly fulfill
(...). When the Gods and mortal men began to multiply upon earth, the first
age was a goulden age, for they were simple, plain wise, honest, religious,
long lived, deuoide of injury, craft, and and subtilty. The second like to
silver, not so good as was the first: The third, brass, more corrupt in mind,
manners, and nature: O sineque ego quinto interessem hominum generi: O (says
the Poet) that I had not come in the fifth age of the world, but either had
been dead long before, or else not yet borne, since this is an iron age,
replenished with malicious crimes and mischief. This was a deformed shadow
and the body of our age is like unto the same, according to the exposition of
Daniell Daniel. 2.
unto Nabuchodonozer, wherein he foreshewed that the images head of gold, and
the breast silver, the belly of brass, the legs and feet halse iron, half
earth, signified the nature and inclination of the whole world. Three of them
be past, and seldom comes the better. Since this in which we live is the end
of the fourth Monarch, whose evil works and sinful inclination is resembled to
the iron mixed with earth, in steed of long life yielding short, sinful,
wretched days: in steed of sweet peace, yielding wars and rumors of wars in
all places: in steed of simplicity, yielding double dissembling: in steed of
true devotion to the church of Jesus Christ, yielding pilling, and polling on
every side: in steed of love to the common wealth and our posterity, with the
insatiable greedy worm of covetousness, providing oncly for our own mouths,
our own bellies, our own time: in all our dooinges fully expressing the sense
and sentence of that ancient Poet Pindarus Pindarus*
(...) the present commodity is ever most accepted, for the subtle age to come
will alter all. Together with this iron earthly age, the seed of corruption is
daily sown, whose blossoms now already put forth, though they shine clear
and bright, as does the cockle amiddest the wheat: yet if they once begin
to reap, to threshe, to grind, to grind, to bake, to eat, they shall soon
perceive, that there is cockle amongst the corn, and often times under the
painted viserd of great knowledge, you shall se blind bayard wax so bold, that
through many words and often speaking amongst the ignorant (whose eyes dazell
in beholding such painted sepulchers) he is reputed for wise and learned.
According to that true saying of that learned Dorne. Dorne.
In hoc ferreo postremoque saeculo, non nisi faeces artium superesse videmus,
etsi non nulli putent eas maxim vigere, propter sermonis ornatum. In this last
iron age, we have but the d^egges of arts and sciences, although many think,
that learning florisheth more now, then in times past, because we talk more
then they did, and that more cunningly, more smoothly, more courtly. Which
great absurdity of this our age, thoroughly mixed with earth and iron, to the
great peril and danger of many thousand souls, moved me first, to pen
this rudely written treatise, in the behalf of the Church of Jesus Christ, and
the souls health of all true Christians, unto whose hands it shall come. Which
secret cogitation taking effect by outward sense, and showing to my bodily
eyes in sundry places, and many solemn foundations now made desolate
(whereby many thousands of learned pastors might have been maintained for
the preaching of the Gospel of Christ and the daily praising of his name,
Psalm. 115.
credidi and propterea loquutus sum, with the holy Prophet and Apostle, I
believed and therefore I writ that which the holy scriptures, the holy
counselles, the holy fathers have plainly affirmed. When I looked back and
considered, what we are, and what we ought to be: what we have done: and
what we ought to have done: the truth piersed my spirit, my heart rent, and
my joints did cleave in sunder: the passion of that sight began to work,
the fire was kindled within, the sayings of the holy fathers ministered oil,
wherewith the flame brake forth at my mouth, crying alowde: for Sions sake I
will not hold my peace. Here with returning to the mirror of truth, Esai, 62.
the holy word of God, whereby all our thoughts, words, and works are to
be tried: and furthermore perusing the holy fathers (by the assistaunce of
the holy Ghost openers of the true understanding thereof;) I meant to gather
some store of testimonies out of them, to witness with me, that this my
affirmation in this matter, is a certain and undoubted truth. Having beheld
this radiant sun of light the word of God, and the little stars the holy
fathers illuminated with the clear beams thereof, though the truth appeared
plainly in them both, yet their testimonies concerning things once dedicated
to holy use, seemed to me neither so many as I expected, nor so plain.
Herein having made some spence of time in seeking that which was not so
plainly figured in the fathers as I hoped, and as it was truly meant: at
length the truth of that conclusion offered it self, most plainly to my
cogitation, which was: that as that ancient Solon, Solon,
having made many excellent laws amongst the Athenians, he made no law
neither set he down any punishment, for him which should kill his own father,
supposing that the earth would never nourishe so wicked a creature. Even so it
is truly supposed, that those holy fathers living in the silver age of old
antiquity, did never imagine that out of this earthly iron age of ours, there
should spring any so barbarous, so cruel, so wicked, that would attempt to
take away any thing from the true worship of almighty God. Which
suppositio^ least in some men's sight, it should seem to want true position and
sure ground, let us turn our minds a little from carnal cogitations of worldly
minded men: which think of necessity the course of the world must be
maintained, howsoever the service of God be neglected, and his holy temple,
your minds thus turned clean away from wordlie vanities (which in one minute
shall all vanish and consume, like the paper cast into the fire) turn your
eyes and behold the book of life, therewith confer the expositions of holy
councels and ancient fathers, expounding the true sense of the same, and you
shall see most plainly, that things once dedicated to holy use, Exception.
are not in any wise to be altered, vnleast it be in extreme necessity, the
branches whereof are plainly laid open by that holy father Saint Ambrose S.
Ambros lib. 2. offic. cap. 28.
in these words: Vasa ecclesiae initiata, in his tribus confringere, conflare
and vendere etiam licet, primum, vt extremae pauperum egestati succurratur etc.
In these three cases it is lawful to break, to melt, to sell the vessels of
the Church; first for the relieuing of the poor; secondly, for the redeeming
of the Christians being captives to infidels. Thirdly, for the preserving of
the Church, and christian burial of the dead, these extremities make that
irreligious fact sometimes lawful, as appears, (though very seldom) in the
practice of the primative Church: according to that which Sozomene Sozomine
writes in the fourth book of his ecclesiastical story, the 24. Chapter.
Says he, when the people of Jerusalem wanted meat, and were all ready to
perish through the great famine, which was amongst them, Cyrillus the Bishop
of the city, sold the treasure of the Church with all the costly clothes
belonging to the same, distributing to the poor, according to their
necessity. First of all the goods of the Church, being duly and dutifullie
bestowed on the worship of God, and divine function, the true proper and
principal use and end of the same. Secondly in extreme necessity: this is a
good lawful, and also a holy use of them, and scarcely to be called
al^enating of the Church goods, since the poor are belonging to the same:
according to that general sentence of all the councels and fathers, S. Gregory
Bona ecclesiae sunt bona pauperum: the goods of the church are the goods of
the poor. But to take away the lands and goods of the Church, whereby the
beautiful feet of those, which bring the glad tidings of the Gospel are shed,
their sides clothed, their bodies fed, and numbers of those which daily pray
in his holy temple, are or ought to be maintained, lifting up pure hands with
hearty prayers for the sins of the people: and those also which daily sing
praises to his holy name, for his wonderful mercies showed to mankind: no
scripture, no council, no father, no writer, no religion whatsoever does allow
it.

If we look into the law of nature, or the rules of humanity, not much
dissonant from the conclusions, of moral philosophy, we shall see plainly,
that those creatures which receive the greatest portion of blessing, they
render the most again, not once retracting the former yeilde. The fields for
one pore grain received, send forth many scores again. The fishes multiply
in all the coasts of the wide Ocean seas: Hessiod.
the beasts their young, the Bees their honey, the sheep their lamb, their
wool, their skin: the little poor lark, she mounteth up into the clouds with
a sweet song* which solaceth thee, either riding by the way, or plowing in the
field, or sitting in thine house at home. All creatures by kind yield gifts
of thankful grace unto the Lord, not once retracting any thing again. And
shall only sinful man be found unthankful unto his maker?

The Lord of his mere mercy, without al merit has given him all the beasts
of the field, the fowls of the aier, Psalm. 8.
the fishes of the sea under his dominion, he has given him an understanding
soul, and made him steward of his household. Nay when through disobedience to
his maker, he had cast himself clean out of doors: our savior Christ he
came down from heaven for his sake, he appeared in the habit of a man, he
was counted vile, dispited, and hated, threatened, betrayed, martired, even to
the sheading of his most precious blood on the cross for sinful man. Neither
did his loving kindness cease with the time, Act. 1.
for he left his household behind him even his catholic Church and his holy
spirit to govern and guide it, to comfort man, to instruct him, to support
him against all his enemies; daily and hourelie holding the strings of his
heart in his hand, and preserving the breath in his nostrelles, least he should
vanish from the face of the earth. These be the manifold mercies of the Lord
toward man, more than to all other creatures: and shall sinful man be more
unthankful to his maker than the rest? shall man only of al other creatures
take away from the Lord that which is once given? shall the heart of man wax
hard against bis creator, that he should once think there may be too much
given to God? Math. 19.
or forbid any man against the commandment of Christ to give all that he has
to the poor distressed members of his church? Naie shall not sinful man
rather invent in his heart, write with his pen, pronounce with his vocie,
statutes, laws, and commissions, to the end that the whole frame of the
common wealth, especially and before all other matters whatsoever be directed
and wholly bent to the glory of God, and the worship of his holy name, the
highest point whereof consists in mainteining of his holy Temple, the house
and place of his true worship here on earth? Reg. 4.
Naie, shall the beastly heart of that proud Nabuchodonozer be placed in the
body of any Christian, that he should lay wast the Temples of the Lord? or
that dronken mind of king Balthazar, that he should take to his own use the
goods of the Church? that he should dissolve the Quire of sweet voices
praising the Lord in the City, and bestow the foundation thereof on a kennell
of hounds crying in the woods.

If the king call shall we not all run? and if the kingly prophet David bid
us bring unto the Lord, Psalm. 22.
shall we wax hardharted in taking away that which we never gave? If the
heathen people through the instinct of heavenly light, secretly written by
the finger of God in the center of their heart, trembled at the entrance of the
temples of the Christians, and were afraid to touch any thing therein (as we
read in sundry histories) shall not the true Christian utterly abhor from
the same, if not for love (in regard of the tender mercies of Jesus Christ
bestowed on him) yet for fear of those extreme and extraordinary
punishments, that he speedily powers upon all those which spoil his
temples? Psalm. 2.
O ye kings and rulers of the earth, be wise; count not of this crown of
molten metal, which weieth heavy on your head, and presses you down to the
earth: but cast down your crowns before the lamb of God, S. John 1.
which takes away the sins of the world: despise your kingdoms and glorious
roialties, learn to serve him with a perfect love of eternal blisle, and
perfect loathing of these tedious earthly kingdoms: strive to find the narrow
gate, cast away your jewels and heavy ornaments, run, run: run on a
pace, run swiftly, that ye may attain that crown, which will lift you up both
body and soul above all the kingdoms of the world, nay far above all
heavens, even unto eternal life. That you may more readily enter, this race
of a true Christian, and more happily attain the true perfection of the same,
first forsake the world and all the love thereof, cast away your worldly
delights, and secret inclination, deny your selves, count not of that
flattering constancy, whose end is doleful misery. Having rejected this
worldly habit, Luke 9.
together with thy fleshly delights, let the troubled way of fickle fancy
go, and there with entering further, the first degree of heavenly meditation,
weigh wisely with thy self and consider, what God is, and what thou art, and
thou shall see plainly, that who so is without him, or out of his favor, he
is nothing, or at the most a very vile and an evil thing. The great desire of
the kings of the earth is long and prosperous reign. Which who so has
enioied long in the court, let him but walk out a little into the pleasant
woods, and he shall hear the ancient Poet Symonides, Simonides
sounding that truth in his sweet song: (...) etc. a thousand and ten
thousand years in respect of eternity are but a minute, or rather the least
portion of a minute. Since all is nothing unto him, and he is one in one
eternity, from which unity all creatures have their integrity, let us learn
as little children do by 1. 2. 3. the eternal, the incomprehensible, the
first and simple unity in trinity, from which all things have their rising
by proportion of number: knowing that, as he is the ^ and ^: Apocalypse
so the first and the last love of our heart, the first and the last honor
which we can devise, the first and the last fruits of the labors of our
body, must be given unto him: and in such manner, that being once given unto
him, it is the first and the last, never to be revoked again, no not to be
desired in mind and secret cogitation, but there to rest and remain as in
the first and last conclusion, for which it was ordained. If any worldly
minded man seem to doubt the truth hereof, I will not produce this course
begun, from the mystical principles of secret philosophy, least with the
clouds of reason, I should obscure the clear light of heavenly truth, and
hide it from the simple, whose good success in the school of Christ I most of
all desire. The express rule of Justice, right and equity, is the will of
God; by which, what is right or wrong is to be examined. Who then is of the
council of the Lord, or to whom is his will known? Aristotle Aristotle.
that excellent philosopher says, that the cogitations of the heart be plainly
known by the words of the mouth, since the voice is the interpretour of the
mind, and (as our savior Christ says) out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks: Math. 12.
by which inferior rule of reasonable philosophy, we may climb up to that
true conclusion in divinity, that the Lords will is revealed in his word.
And is there any mention thereof in holy scriptures? Come and see; turn the
book and read the twenty seventh chapter of Leuiticus, Leuiticus.
where it is thus written, plainly, shortly, and truly; Omne quod domino
consecratur etc. what thing soever is consecrated unto the Lord, be it man,
beast, or field, it cannot be sold or revoked again, because whatsoever is
once dedicato God, is holy of holiest unto the Lord. Man is not like unto the
mere vegitable creatures, the flowers of the garden, or the lillies of the
field, that he should grow and go forward, until he come to such a
degree of ripeness, and then to wither and decaie: neither is the Lords
temple, or his holy worship, as the earthly field, whose seed does grow
and straight decaieth again: but to man it is appointed, that from the
beginning of his days unto the end thereof, he should first and last seek
the kingdom of heaven, Math. 6.
and the righteoufnesse thereof.

In which course, who so has begun, let him know, that not to go forward,
is to go backewarde, and what is that? He which is the way, the truth, and
the life, he has showed it us, saying: Peter 1. 1.
Estote sancti, quoniam ego sanctus sum, be ye holy, because I am holy. In
what manner? not in hearing, but in doing the will of God; not in talking, but
in walking; as it is written: not the speakers but the dooers of the law shall
be justified: as also another scripture: Regnum Dei, non est in sermon, sed
in virtute: the kingdom of God is not in words, but in virtuous and holy
life: not in criyng Lord, Corinth. 1.
Lord, but in doing the will of God which is in heaven: not in looking for a
mansion place, or building pompous palaces here on earth (whose greatest
joys be a shining misery) but in hastening forwards toward the kingdom of
heaven, in giving our goods, our lands, our bodies and souls unto the Lord.
Our goods to feed the poor, to cloth the naked, to comfort the sick, etc.
Our lands to the maintaining of his temple, Math. 25.
wherein his word is daily preached, his name praised, the poor commonly
harbored. Our bodies to the prison, the lion, the sword, the fire, for his
names sake: all which is the true christian, and acceptable yielding our souls
into the hands of our almighty creator, our merciful redeemer, our heavenly
comforter. This is the old christian way to the kingdom of heaven through the
armies of pleasures, of temptations, of dangers of punishments, of the
spiritual powers of this world: which who so refuses, hoping to save his life,
he shall loose it, and who so loses it, shall find that place, vbi vere
vi^itur, the true life of eternal bliss for ever. Who so grudgeth to give a
piece of vile pelting, earthly land, to the Church of God, or takes ought
therefro, or esteems more of goods, lands, friends, rumors, fame, credit,
kindred, brethren, sisters, father or mother, or his own life, than of the
glory of God, and of the welfare of his beloved spowse the holy Church, he
is not worthy of the kingdom of heaven, neither has his foot trodden the
first step of the way of life.

If this be thus, then what manner of men ought we to be in holiness of life,
and in studying daily by all means possible, how to gratify the Lord of life:
If he reward the charitable bestowing of a cup of could water on his
disciples, when they thirst: how highly is he displeased with those, who either
diminish or take away the maintenance of his holy Temples, where his name
dwells? In this respect (gentle Reader) consider that as David said
concerning his son now dead: Reg. 2.
I shall go to him, but he shall not come again to me; so we must think of
goods once given to the holy worship of the Lord, for so it is: we must go
to them, and that often, even to the holy Temple, but they must not be
brought back again to us.

This is one true plain christian way, leading to one perfect end, according
to that saying of Bachilides Bachilides
(...), etc. there is but one way for mortal men to attain happiness, and
one end thereof: to this agrees our due and dutiful consideration of the
Lords worship and his holy will, which is that his glory should be only,
and wholly to himself, as it is written: gloriam meam alteri non dabo, I will
not give my glory to an other. The truth of this conclusion tells us, that
we must serve him only, Esaie, 42.
not only first, but him only. Which if we did ponder wisely with our
selves, and thereunto frame our lives and daily dooinges, we would not take
the squared stones of the temple, to build our pompous palaces withal, but
we would rather remember that old saying: accursed is that house, which has
any stone in it, belonging to the church. We would not chang the names of
church lands, and call them by our own names, our lordships, our lands our
mannours. We would not eat the bread of the poor, nor drink the tears which
trickle down the cheeks of the widow, nor contemn the simple estate of the
ministers, Ecclesi. 35.
by whose lands and liuinges we are now fatted like the bulls of Basan. If we
would but once enter into our own conscience, plainly and truly remembering,
whose goods they are that we possess, and lift up our eye to the heavens, to
the which both we and they are dedicated, we would soon loath that which we
have looued, our heart would quake through the bitter sting of conscience, and
sin would clean cover our faces with the mantle of dark and deadly
despair, since we have spoiled, robbed, contemned him, whose loouing
countenance is our eternal Salvation. S. Bernard


Herewith remembering the bitter sequel, and deadly sting of sins committed
against God himself, loss of goods and lands, contrary to all expectation,
sudden fires in one hour, destroying house, goods, and all the treasure which
thou have wickedlie heaped together many years: barrenness of womb, since
thou have traveled all thy life long for goodly lands, and have no children to
enjoy them, or if thou have, their sudden death before thine eyes: and
lastly, the restless pain, and eternal misery of hell fire, purchased with
so many cares and troubles, with so much wealth of this world: we ought to
wash our hands with Pylate, and not only to say as he said, I am free from
this innocent blood: Math, 27.
but both in word and deed, to keep our profane hands, from the violating
of holy things. That holy father Saint Augustine he affirms, that God is
a clear eye, and sees every where, much more he beholds all the corners
of his own house, and the footsteppes of those which spoil his temple before
his face. Which who so, rudely, rashly, and irreligiously presumes at any
time to attempt, let him consider, that he does it against the Lord openly
before his own face, and therewith let him know, that he is a ielous God,
visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth
generation of all which hate him, since he is God, yesterday, to day, and for
ever: as also all things are which are once consecrated to his holy worship.
I understand that by the course of law, inheritance descends to the next of
the blood, Heb, 15.
and for want of heirs in the second, third, or fourth generation of the
eldest, it comes back to the younger brothers issue and posterity: of which
if all fail, and at length by intailement or otherwise by law, if it comes
into the possession of the King, it never goes back. If this be the
prerogative of goods, given to earthly Princes, which are here to day and to
morrow lie rotting in the grave, Common Law.
let us not deny the same to the Lord of Lords, the King of Kings, the
creator of heaven and earth, into whose house whatsoever is incorporated,
though conscience and religion dare not speak therein, yet let the heathen
Poet open his mouth and make the period (...), that which is once done, cannot
be undone again. If this constancy was always kept betwixt man and man:
how much more betwixt God and man? betwixt his Church, his Prests, his
spiritual Pastors, and the men of this world, whose parents and instructurs
they are, according to that saying of Micha unto the Leuit: remain with me and
be my father and my Priest, and the tribe of Dan also to the same Leuit: houlde
thy peace and come with us, for thou shall be our father and our Priest.
Judges. 17
Sith then by the secreet instinct of nature, and also by the express
commandment of God, we are commanded to honor our father and mother, to
obey and cherishe them in all we can: by the same law we are utterly
forbidden, to to detract or take any thing away from them. And if any hard
hearted christian under the color of dissembled zeal, seem to open away
herein, to his sacrilegious covetous mind, saying that these commandments of
our Lord, are meant concerning our natural father and mother: let him and all
men know, that the holy fathers expounding this commandment, affirm first
that it concerns our honor to our spiritual father, and the Church our
spiritual mother: Patres.
secondly it commands us to nourish and obey al superiors, magistrates, and
ministers, amongst whom are contained our natural parents. But suppose that
were obscure and doubtful, which is as plain and clear as the noone day,
yet can thou doubt what the will of God and the rule of right is in this
case, wherein the Lord has spoken plainly as it is showed before in these
words, Leuilic, (...).
whatsoever is once dedicated to God shall never be sold or redeemed? As is
the fountain, so are all the little brooks running from the same. This is the
law of the Lord concerning things dedicated to his holy worship: and the
lives of the holy Patriaches, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Ma^tirs, the
fathers, do clearly express the same. Joseph the true figure, of our Lord
and savior Jesus Christ, Joseph.
in that great famine of Aegipt, when he had bought almost the whole land, and
brought it into the Kings hand, he would not once offer any money for the
priests lands, but in that their great want, gave them nourishment of the
Kings store, Math, 6.
according to that rule of the Lord: the suburbs of the Priests shall not be
sold, for the possession of them is eternal without redemption.

God is our heavenly father he has sowed the eternal seed of his exceeding
love in our hearts to the end he might receive from us the same, Gala^, 4.
even love for love, because such as he sows, such will he reap. Can we
say that we love our spiritual father, and therewith spoil his loving spouse
our spiritual mother the holy Church? castinge down her walls, banishing
her eldest children? possessing her lands, goods, and treasure, which is an
odious crime in the sight of God and man? according to that saying of Saint
Ambrose: si quis in sua: if any man presume to take the treasures of the Church
to his private use, it is a great crime. Wherein, Ambrose.
least he should seem to abridge the spiritual pastors of the Church, for
whose sustenaunce they were first given, he expounds himself in these
words: Templum domini laicis tradi non debet: the temple of the Lord ought not
to be given into lay men's hands: sign^fying that we must give unto Caesar,
those things which be Caesar's, and unto God those things that be Gods.
Amongst the heathen Philosophers it was counted the first point of justice,
Math, 22.
to give to every man his own: and least amongst christians any in time
should prove so barbarous, and utterly void of grace, that he should lay
violent hands, on the goods of poor innocents which cannot speak, even the
temples of the Lord, dedicated to the worship of his holy name, besides the
express commandment of the Lord in holy scriptures, the holy fathers and
councels have pronounced it a cursed thing, as the clear bage of him, which
has renounced heaven, and taken himself wholly to serve this wicked world and
the vanities thereof. The council of Gangrene Consil. Grangren
celebrated the year of our Lord 324. or there about, according to the Cannons
of the Apostles, decreed in this manner: If any man shall presume to take any
thing once offered to God, vnleast it be the Bishop or his deputy appointed
for the distributing of the Church goods to the poor, let him be accursed. In
like manner also the third council of Rome: If any man covet or take away any
reuenews belonging to the Church, or if any of the Priests consent there to:
Consil. Romans
let them be accursed. The reason follows in the fifth council alleged in
this manner: for it is a great injury and an intolerable sacrilege, that
what so ever any man bestows on the church of Christ, should be altered or
translated to any other use, especially by those men, who of all other ought to
maintain the Church, as be christian Kings, Princes, and Prelates.
Furthermore, that it might be manifest to all those, which dutifully embrace
and reverence the spouse of Jesus Christ, how wicked an enterprise it is, and
what manifest danger to the souls of all them, which shall presume herein,
the same Council has foreseen the danger and set down the sentence of
eternal truth in these words. He which shall not wisely foresee this
evident danger of eternal damnarion to his own soul, and contrary to this
sentence, take away the goods and possessions once given to the Church, or
unjustly deteyne the same, unless he make present restitution to the church
so soon as he can, let him be stricken with the curse, which the wrathful
judge of all the world, shall inflict on all the souls of the wicked at the
day of doom, and let these goods be a curse to him which gave them from the
Church, which received them, and which possessed them.

Neither let him find any protection for his crime, before the tribunal
seat of Jesus Christ, because without all fear of God, and regard of his holy
worship, against law and right, he has taken away the goods of the Church
given to maintain the holy worship of the Lord, and to feed the hungry
bodies and souls of the poor innocent people. Generally says the same
Council, whosoever, shall presume to confiscate, to spoil, or to take any
thing consecrated, to holy use, or belonging to the Church, unless he
truly repenting correct and amend his wicked fact, so soon as he can, and
that by restitution to the same Church, let him be subject to the grievous
curse and censure of the Church. Likewise those which enter on the goods of the
Church, and detain them through the gift, the authority, the commission of
Kings, and Princes, obtaining them by tirannicall force from the Church,
leaving them to their heirs and posterity as though they were their own
inheritance, unless with speedy repentance they restore the Lords
possession unto his Church being first admonished by the holy Bishop, let him
be accursed for ever, and accounted as an infidel, according to that
commandment of our savior Christ: if he will not hear the Church, Math, 18
let him be to thee as an heathen, or as an infidel, therefore (says the
council) it is not lawful for the Emperor or any true christian, to attempt
any thing contrary to the commandments of God, neither to do any thing
repugnant to the rules of the holy Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists.
John, 10.


Those which be my sheep, says our Savior Christ they hear my voice, and
those which be natural children of the Church, their heart will melte when they
hear the voice of their mother, crying in the streets. Our heavenly father he
has begotten us in the spirit, and our spiritual mother, she nourishes us,
with the sweet milk of the word of life. She utters her voice often, and
cries alowde in many places of the world, but never so manifestly as when she
shows her countenance openly to all the world, in open general council,
gathered together in the holy Ghost. You have heard her voice whileare, and
the sound thereof has gone into all lands saying: touch not mine anointed,
neither any thing once dedicated to my holy worship. Sponsus sponsam amat:
the bridegroom does love his spouse entirely. He shows her his breast, and
reuealeth to her the secrets of his heart, his will is apparent unto her, and she
has revealed it at sundry times unto her children. Which times though they
were diverse yet veritatis simplex est oration: her voice was and is always the
same, as appears by the council of Aurialens, Consit. Aurial.
whose words though they differ from the former, yet the sense and sentence
is the same: first forewarning her eldest children of this grievous sin, and
then the other in their order, after this manner: Let no Clarke or spiritual
pastor, alienate any goods belonging to the Church: and least it should seem
true which some object, that those which give to the Church, may also take
away: the same council does meet with that objection in the 19. chapter in
these words: It is not lawful for him which gives any thing to the Church,
or for his heirs, once for to require it back again. In like manner the second
council of Spale: Consil. Spalens,
Those Churches which by tumultes and wars have been disturbed, shall
altogether retain the self same liberties, which they had before, with all
the possessions, whether they be possessed by any other Church, or any others
whatsoever. The first council of Paris has given this resolute judgment
concerning Bishops goods, and therein the goods of the Church, because the
goods and possessions of Bishops, are known to be the goods and possessions of
the Church. Consil. Paris.
If any man shall violently intrude himself into them, or by violence pervert
them, let him be stricken with the curse of the holy Canon, that he which
would not follow the motion of his own conscience, at the least may be
reclaimed by the holy constitutions of the Church. Which offense least it
should seem a small sin in the eyes of worldly men, or that the gain gotten
thereby, might seem to counteruaile the loss; no man is so simple which sees
not plainly, that this is a pleasant sinful thought, leading to a bitter
end, as appears by the sentence of the same council following. Let no man be
so far from the seeking of his own souls health, or so willing to seek
eternal death, that he should once desire, enter, or possess any goods,
lands or commodities belonging to the church. Though the council of Magnutium
Consil. Magunt.
seem in the beginning by gentle words to mittigate the haynousnesse of the
fact, yet indeed the meaning is the same, and in conclusion of the same
weight, as appears by their style in this manner: If any man do presume to
retain, diminish or take any goods, lands, or profits, belonging to any
Church, College, or any holy place, let him be excommunicated as a spoyler
of the Church, not once allowed to come near the Church door.

These mild words, least they should animate the wicked, they draw a more
fearful judgment after them, as appears afterward in the same council,
concluding thus; If any man diminish any thing belonging to the Church: as a
cruel murderer of the poor, let him be accursed for ever. This was the
voice of the mother, and her children have learned to pronounce the same. Saint
Ambrose S. Ambros.
(as it is written before) affirms it unlawful, for temporal men to
possess ecclesiastical goods.

Saint Augustine S. August.
writing on the Psalms says, that when the last dedication of the house of
God shall come, then shall that safety also be given unto it: which was
spoken in the seventeenth chapter of the second book of the Kings, after this
manner: I will appoint my place of worship with my people Israel, and they
shall dwell alone separated from others: and the son of iniquity shall not
presume to destroy it. The scripture calls the spoilers of the church the
sons of iniquity, Reg. 2.
because the son of heaven has not beheld a more ungodly fact, then the
injury of the son done to the mother; of the infantes to the nurse, of
Christians to the Church, which is the spiritual mother of all Christians, as
well rich, as poor, the mighty, as the simple, the king, as the beggar,
according unto the saying of Saint Chrysostom, S. Chrisost
writing on the Gospel of Saint Matthew: Ecclesia, primorum regum est matter,
The Church is the mother of the highest Princes. Not many pages after, giving
his judgment concerning the goods of the Church in this sort, those which
build tombs for the Martyrs of Christ, and adorn his temples, they do a good
work. Thereby signifiyng, that they which deface the temples of God, and pull
them down, they commit a great and grievous sin in the sight of the
almighty.

Paulus Diaconus, Paulus Diac.
in the fourth book de gestis longo Bardorum, records, that Theodelinda that
virtuous Queen built a fair Cathedral Church, dedicating it to the name of
Saint John Baptist, adorning it with many precious jewels, ornaments and
goodly lands, which the aforesaid Author says, ought not to be alienated.
According unto the sentence of Justinian Justinian.
in his book Authent. Columna secunda, of constitutions, entitled, of not
alienating or changing ecclesiastical goods whatsoever. All good Emperors in
their laws and constitutions, had a special care of preserving, increasing,
and safekeeping the goods of the Church: And since Justinians laws were their
direction, he not only made General statutes for the preservation thereof,
but also in his law, he affirms that the holy vessels and garments of the
temples, ought not to be pawned, except it be for the redeeming of captives
out of the servitude and tirannie of infidels, nay in another place he
charge the Bishops, that they take not to themselves the treasure of the
Church: which wholesome laws so moved the hearts of all Christian Emperors,
that they bestowed very devoutly and bountifully on the church commanding
straightly, that all me^ should restore unto the same whatsoever had bid taken
therefrom by wicked tyrants, robbers of the Church, and spoilers of the dead,
which Saint Chrysostom in his book Defato, counts little less than
manslaughter.

Hereupon Theodoricus Theodoricus.
commanded Duke Ibba, that he should restore unto the Church of Marb^na, the
possessions thereof, taken away and detained from the Church by Alaricus. And
in an other epistle to Gelericus, he commands him to restore a field,
which was alienated from the Church of Constance, and to punish the possessor
thereof, in that he presumed to take to his own private use, the possessions
of the Church.

This censure was given without exception of any person according to that
which Turonensis Turoneus.
writes in the fourth book of his History: certain kings (says he) have
presumed most irreligiouslie to take the goods of the church into their
treasure: as did Clotharius, which made an edict, that all the Churches of his
realm, should pay the third part of their fruits into his treasury: but
being rebuked by that holy Bishop Iniuriosus, he retracted his irreligious
opinion, and that wicked fact. Let no man bear so irreligious a mind, or so
hard a heart within his breast, to think otherwise, than that it is a most
grievous sin to take any thing from the holy Church, since first it is given
to maintain the holy worship of God there. Secondly to feed the poor, and
to be bestowed on such like holy and urgent necessity, according to the
which our ancient Beda S. Beda.
writes in the first book of his history, concerning this Island, Bonorum
ecclesiasticorum (says he) of church goods, the first part is due to the
Bishop for the maintenance of hospitality: the second to the inferior clergy,
the third to the poor, the fourth to the repairing of the church: but to
other, or to those which have sufficient of themselves, the goods of the church
are not to be employed; as that learned Prosper Prosper
in his treaty De vita contemplatiua witnesses in these words: ecclesia
nihil eis erogare debet, etc. The church ought not to bestow any thing on those
which have sufficient of their own.

Otherwise, though some of the Church give it, yet it is plain sacrilege for
them which take it, as saint Ierom S. Ierom.
in his epistle to Damasus shows in these words: qui autem parentum bonis
etc. Those which have sufficient left them by their parents to maintain them,
if they take any of those goods which are given to maintain the poor, it is
sacrilege. Calvin Calvin.
writing on the seventh of Amos, calls the diminishing of the immunities or
commodities of the church, sacrilege: sounding the same with good Saint
Barnard S. Barnard
writing on the Canticles, according to this tenor: Proditores dei and
ecclesiae, etc. They which take from the temples, they are betraiers of God and
his church.

These learned fathers, they express the true sentence of their mother, the
holy church, pronouncing the true favor of God and his loving countenance,
turned clearly unto them, which favor and nourish his holy church, with his
poor belonging to the same: and the severe wrath of the Lord God, kindled
against all those, which spoil his loving spouse here on earth, bereauing her
of her beautiful children, her costly garments made of needle work, all
glorious within, concerning whom the Lord has said, he which harmeth you, he
touches the apple of mine eye. Bullinger Bullinger.
on the fifth of the first epistle of saint Paul to Tymothie, concerning the
reformation of Church goods, writes thus: the goods of the Church are the gold
of Tolossan, which breeds his destruction that possesses it.

Therefore though the churches, their goods and lands, were abused by Monks
and Friars: yet there is no cause why Christian Princes should think that
reformation good and religious, which pulls down the churches, and turns
the church goods to the use and possessions of lay men, for they were not
first given to this end, kings, and princes, and magistrates have their
revenues, their tributes, their fines, their customs, their public
treasures appointed for their uses: but as for the goods of the church, they
were first given for the maintenance of students in humanity, and divinity,
for the maintaining of Bishops and hospitality, for the relieuing of the poor
widows, stangers and captives, and those which are in necessity: and a
certain portion was appointed for the repairing of Churches.

Let them restore such sufficiency of goods to the Church, as will fully
suffice for the maintaining of all the premises, before they take one half
penny from the Church, or else let them surely look for the grievous
vengeance of God on them and their house.

That learned Peter Martyr P. Martyr.
concerning the goods of the church unjustly required by Magistrates writes
thus: in eo quaesto difficilis est and in qua dissoluenda etc.

In that case it is a doubtful question, in answering, the which I had rather
incline to that point, that if the prince or magistrate should take away the
goods of the church, no man ought violently to resist them. But if the
magistrate would counsel me to give up the goods of the Church into his
hands, I would not willingly do it.

Concluding, that unless it be in cases set down before by the holy Father
saint Ambrose. It is not lawful any way to alienate the goods of the church.

To this general consent of scriptures, counsels, and Fathers (as the
conclusion of the rest) succeeds the great and dangerous punishments which
the Lord sends on all them, that take any thing from his holy temple, of
which who so minds but to sippe, and take a bare taste, let him mark these
examples, plainly propounded in these few lines following: but if he will
have more store, and is minded to wade further, let him enter the dissuasiue it
self, consisting more of example then rule, and Celsus Celsus.
of Verona his dissuasiue thereunto adjoined. There he shall find it true by
record of sundry histories, which is written in holy scriptures, concerning
those which either take or deteine any thing once vowed and given to the holy
Church. And what is that? we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that Ananias
and Saphira his wife consented to keep back some of the money which they had
once given to the Lord. Act. 5.
Which how heinous a crime it was, let all men note. Since for the same Saint
Peter opened his mouth and struck them both with present death, reasoning with
them and saying on this manner: was it not your own to have done with what you
list? why then do you tempt the holy Ghost, since the offense is not against
man but against God? signifiyng that after it is once given or appointed to
holy use, no man ought to retract any part thereof back again. The like
punishment succeeded to all those which spoiled the Church at any time.

Euagrius Euagrius.
in the fourth book of his history shows, that the Duke Gabaones, hearing
tell that the Vandalls came against him with a puissant army, called some of
his Captains to him, willing them to put on poor simple apparel, and so to
pass over to the host of the Vandalls, marking diligently whether the
Vandalls, honored the temples of the christians, or spoiled and violated them.
If they spoil or violat them (says he) then see, that in what you can, you
reedifie and adorn them: for the God which the Christians worship I know not,
but if he be so mighty as they say he is, he will spoil the^ which spoil his
house. Gabaones
The Vandals went forward as they had begun, they spoiled the christian
temples, as they passed with their army, they did eat, they drank, they
sported and triumphed, enriched with the spoils and goods of the church, they
marched forward. And at length joined battle with Gabaones: but most of them
were slain, many grievously wounded in the battle, some taken and put to
diverse torments. Quanto rectius ille, how much more wisely did that heathen
Emperor Alaricus Alaricus.
the captain of the Gotes, which besieging that famous City of Rome, at last
conquered it, and gave the spoil thereof to his soldiers, only excepting the
fair and solemn temple built over the tomb of S. Peter, for the reverence
which they bare to him, commanding and charging most straightly, that no man
should once touch it or violate any person, any goods, or any thing whatsoever
belonging to the same, which was the cause, why the whole City of Rome, was
not then clean defaced and destroyed. Let no man in this place object on the
contrary, saying, Moses took the calfe and burnt it to ashes, casting the^
into the running brook; the Israelits destroyed the temples of the heathen.
Josias pulled down the temples of the groves: Elias the temple of Baall: David
eat the shewbread being lawful only for the Priests, and Phinehas slew the
adulterers, being a private man: of which some were moved by special zeal,
proceeding from the holy Ghost, whereby they were warranted: and some were
commanded (as the Israelits) to slay man, woman and children, which things at
this day we must not only not do, but if we do the^ (as Bullinger Bullinger.
and many learned writers affirm) it is sin in the sight of God. Since the son
of man (as says our savior) came not to destroy, but to save. He has broken
down the wall of separation, and has made one shepherd, one sheepefold both
of Jews and Gentles, Acts 10.
even the holy Catholic Church, the walls whereof who so diminishes or
casts down, the Lord shall inflict the torments of this world on him and
his posterity, unless with hearty repentance, he restore that which he has
taken away, and in the world to come, he shall cast him out into utter
darkness, where the worm of wicked conscience stingeth day and night, where
the fire is never quenched, Math. 25.
the cry never ceased, the pain never mittigated, the misery never ended.
But to those which love the Lord, and beautify his holy temple, with the
finest of their gold, the first of their fruits, the most hearty goodwill that
they can, the Lord of his mercy shall redouble their gracious charity many
thousand time, into their bosom, granting them their hearts desire here in
this world, and in the world to come, the eternal salvation of their souls,
even the life everlasting: which God grant us all thorough Jesus Christ our
only Lord and savior.

Amen.
Euerard Digbie his Dissuasiue. The second part.
Having perused the excellent disswasiue of that worthy man Celsus of Verona,
though the pages be few in number, and the pains of translating the same not
worthy the account: yet considering the deadlye sleep into the which we are
fallen in these most dangerous times, and that (as Hermes Trismegist in his
Pymander writes) the usual and careful feeding of our fleshly bodies, is
the consumption of our souls: In regard of my humble duty toward the most
honorable espouse of Jesus Christ, our loving mother the holy church, and to my
dear country a member of the same: Hermes.
I seeing now the same doubt and danger of the enemy which was in his days,
the same supplia^ce collected from the church, the same wound, the same
swelling: the same grief conceived: doubting least if this unnatural wound be
long unhealed, it will draw to an issue (which is commonly incurable without
the danger of the whole body:) I thought good to pen this simple short
treatise, with Celsus of Verona his dissuasiue thereunto annexed: that thereby
not the common people only, but also those of higher place and degree might
cleerlie understand; that he which eats the bread of the innocent shall
never be satisfied: he which takes away the clothes of the poor, shall never
bewarme: he which spoileth his nurse, shall never be well lyking: he which
powleth the church, shall never be rich: and he which weakeneth his mothers
back, shall never stand upright against his enemies in the day of battle.

Therefore my dear brethren, bought with the same price: you which love the
Lord more than earthly kingdoms, and which count all worldy honor, riches,
pleasure, and dignity vile earth, springing out of the earth, and destinate
with your bodies to the earth again: Genesis 3.
be ye not so enchaunted with the humming swarm of worldly pleasures, and
delights, that ye loose the joy eternal.

And now a little seclude those painted shows of worldly vanities, besmeared
with glistering vernish, which dimmeth your eyes; and look upon your selves,
your souls and bodies. Neither is it sufficient to consider with that holy
Father: vnde, vbi, quo, S. Ierom.
from whence we came, where we are now, and whither we shall return: the
true answer whereof is that treble anxesis of the prophet: earth, earth,
earth. But in this journey according to the counsel of saint Paul, we must
shake of all which hangs heavy on, and presses us down; we must learn to
weane our selves from our infirmities, Hebr. 12.
and to know our disease: with fixed eyes we must behold our wounds, how many,
how dangerous, how deep, they be? how they are to be cured, and how the
stroke of the enemy here after is to be avoided.

Though al our battle and strife is not directed against flesh and blood
only, Ephesians. 6.
but also against spiritual powers, and enemies of our souls: yet the enemy
of flesh and blood often times so daunteth our hearts with his proud defiance, and
in such sort, that through the too much caring and carking for our selves, he
makes a plain and ready entrance to the wounding of our bodies, and so much
the rather because the shield and brestplate, with which we choose to defend
our selves, though at the first sight it sit fit upon our breast, and outwardly
seem well steeled to the eye? yet inwardly it is most dangerously
impoisoned, infesting the body with strange contagion, sinking into the veins
and synewes so deep, that it weakneth our iointes, it dulleth the spirits,
and daunteth the courage of the heart.

This is the contagion wherewith (as Celsus wri^eth) the Venetians seeking to
overcome their enemies, were made a pray unto them.

This is that two edged sword, with which whilst we rashly fight against our
enemy, and strive to reach him a sore blow, with lifting our hand up too
hastily, too rashly, too high; with the other side we cut our own faces.
This is the rule which teaches us, that when we are provoked to battle by
outward foes, we must not make flesh our strength, or put any confidence in
riches: but if we hope to overcome our bodily enemies, we must first
conquer the spiritual adversaries of our souls, now ruling in our mortal
members: Ephesians. 6.
and that is by flyflying to our most loving captain, and victorious
conqueror Jesus Christ, who having conquered our great enemies, death, hell, and
damnation, is ascended up on high, Ephesians. 4.
leading captivity captive, and giving great spoils and gifts unto men. His
loving voice does sound from heaven, and bids all men come. Math. 11.
Come unto him all ye that are laden and he will refresh you. The spirit and
the spouse say come: and he which hears let him say come, and he which
thirsts let him come, Apoc. 22.
and those which hope to see their desire upon their enemies let them come, and
all which love Jesus Christ and his loving spouse come and see, touch, and taste
how sweet the Lord Jesus is.

But how shall we come? and which is the way? he which bids come, he
calls them which thirst, opening to them the fountain of eternal life.

And though I am unworthy to advise any, yet my purpose is to admonish those
which err, that they come into the true way. And how shall we come? Math. 7.
by true repentance of our former wickedness, and sins committed against God.
And how shall we repent? not in only saying Lord, Lord, or only God forgive
me: and so going on in our sinful life? but if thou have offended thy Lord and
loving father, thou must be heartelie sorry for thy misdoings, with fasting,
with praying, with showing thy penitent mind, and sorrow for thy sins, in
thought, in word, in deed. If thou have taken thy neighbors goods restore
double: and with that good Zacheus in sign of true repentance, Luke. 19.
give half thy goods to the poor.

In this habit of a true Israeli^e, forsaking all that ^hou have, follow our
Lord and savior, who has walked the same way before us. If thou have sinned
in fleshly lusts and desires: fast and pray instantly, strew ashes on thy
head, put on sackcloth in stead of silks, return from the view of courtly
troops, entering into thy secret Chamber, cast down thy self before the Lord,
even upon the could ground.

Mourn and lament before the Lord: cry out alowd, Virgill.
Adsum qui ^eci in me conuertito ferrum. It is I O Lord, it is I wretched man,
which have sinned against heaven and against thee, have mercy upon me O Lord
according to thy great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies
do away mine offenses.

This is the beginning of repentance: for these sins of infirmity, and the end
is like unto the same. These were the words and deeds of David: and was there
nothing else? yes verily, after due consideration of his sins, and sorrow
for the same, he sought to please the Lord: he fully purposed to take the arch
out of the simple tent, and to build a fair temple unto the Lord God of
Israel, this was his holy life, wherewith he sought to win the Lords favor,
and his sins were the sins of his body, even the sins of infirmiti^: but
if thou once lift up thine hand against the Lord, and his holy temple, if thou
take away the goods of his church, and the maintenance of his holy ministers
and preachers of his word who first took thee up in their hands and brought
thee into the Church, who have washed thee with the baptism of repentance
unto eternal life, who have taught thee the true Christian faith, and clothed
thee with the stole of righteousness, and lead thee by the right hand unto
eternal life, who pray daily for thy sins, and the sins of the whole
people: then know thou assuredly, that though thy army of soldiers be huge
and monstrous. Though they be very many, and their courage great. Though thy
chariots be nine hundred all of iron (as were the chariots of Sisera) Sisera.
though thy barred horses be raunged forth by thousands, and thy Iennets by
ten thousands. Though thy riches be incomparable, and thy strength above al
estimation: yet if thou have taken any jot of maintenance from the service
of the high God: if thou weaken the walls of his Church, and by unlawful
exactions impouerish his ministers. I speak a truth, and I call heaven and
earth to witness the same: that which you account your strength, shall breed
your destruction: The Eagles feather once thrust in, shall eat to dust all the
feathers in the bed; the lions hair shall consume the mixture of other
peltes adioined thereto: Joshua 7.
and Achanes forbidden spoil, shall cause the Israelites with loss of life to
fly the field.

Though thy number be three to one, and thou assure thy self to have the
day: yet if the forbidden Babilonish garment be hidden in the tent, rather
then thou should prosper therewith, Judges 5.
the stars in heaven, even the stars shall fight in order from heaven
against thee, as they did against Sisera: the Rivers shall swell against thy
coming: which if thou enter, they shall strike of the whe^es, and carry thine
iron charrets clean away. The stones in the walls shall fight against thee at
home, and the fowls of the air abroad, thine enemy shall stand upon the
shore with his banner displaied, whilst thou lie drowning in the deep. He
shall march unto the tops of the highest hills, without loss of men, or
shedding of his blood, he shall display his banner with triumph, he shall
descend in peace, and refound his trumpet in his tente most courragiouslie.

Therefore let all true christians, muse and meditate more wisely on the will
of the Lord, Psalm, 118.
let them know that it is better to trust in the Lord alone, then in any power
of man: that it is better to depend upon the service of the Lord, and the love
of his holy name, then to put any confidence in Princes, in power, in
authority, in riches. Let the truth of the Lord be their light, and let his
love be the way, and his holy Prophets their guiders in the same. Let the^
fight cheefely for the glory of the Lord, and not their own glory: for his
church, and not their own possessions: for their sovereign, and not their own
primacie: for the realm, and not for revenge of private quarrels or hope of
higher rule. Let their departurebe in peace and unfeigned love unto the spouse
of Jesus Christ: at their going forth, let them not say that their garments,
their furniture, their money and their coin, came from the church: but let
them look back into the land, and behold the church from whence they
sprang. Let them pity their mother in their heart, and let them say with the
sons of God: peace be with thee, and sweet prosperity O thou house and City
of the Lord, Psalm, 121.
let their watch word be Domus dei: and their great allarum, Vincat veritas.

But let them not be christians only in word, let not all their religion
dwell in their mouth, ^sdras. 3.
and nothing in their hearts and deeds: let them not go forth laughing, and
leave many weeping eyes behind them: let them not brag that they fight for
the Church abroad, whilst they are full of deadly sin within, and weaken
the foundation of the Church at home. Can we love our father, and yet spoil
our elder brethren? Can we tender our mother, and yet press her teates so
sore: that in steed of sweet milk, they drop blood? Can we cherishe the
sucking child and yet empoision the teate of the Nur^e, which gives it suck?
Does he love his freende, who while he is gone into a far country,
takes his little childrens bread out of their hands? their clothes from
their backs? their houses over their heads? If this question knock at the
door, by which we would feign enter into the Church of Jesus Christ, and the
answer to the same, be the key, which opens the way, and shows us the
light of truth, whose beams shine clearly from the son of God: why shut
we up the fleshly windows of our heart, with custom of this great sin
above the rest? So that that the clear beams of the son of God, the bounty
of his mercy, the brightness of his glory, cannot once open our earthly
intralles: or move our sinful bowels, to have compassion on our tender nurse,
and most loouing mother: if this be far from your persuasion and you doubt of
the same, then open your ears and incline your hearts to the voice of health
and salvation, John, 1.
lift, Psalm, 23.
up your eye liddes O ye worthies of the earth, and comprehend the light which
shines in darkness. O ye Princes open your gates, and ye the elect of the
Lord open your eternal doors and the true light of the God of glory shall
enter in.

Which when thou have once beheld with thy mortal eye having therewith read
this small treatise, rudely written in have, with a posting pen, ask no more
the question is this true? or shall I answer for goods thus taken, or is it a
blessed thing to give unto the Church, and a cursed thing, to take there fro?
In this conceit be not high minded, but fear and tremble before the Lord,
look how high the lord sits above all heavens, and how low thou art here
on the earth. Psalm, 21.
Way that thou art in the earth a worm and no man, that thy days are but a
spanne long, and that one spanne is a continual warefare: hereunto apply this
process, that when thou came first into this world, and werte very young,
thy spiritual enemies were old and subtle, that they have rather won then
lost ever sithence, and hold the same vantage of thee at this day: that they
have wounded thee sore, and so sore, that thou art not able to stand upright in
the way of life. Therefore though thou be mighty and puissant, yet in that
thou art sore wounded refuse not the wholesome oil of the simple Samaritane,
which he powers in thy wounds: Luke, 10.
deny not his suppliant pains, in binding them up, in setting thee on his
horse, which will bring thee to thy Inn and place of rest, where thou would
be. If he do the best he can, and lay out the finest coin in his purse for
thee, though it be but two pence, yet since all this is done for the bringing
thee into the way, from the which thou were wandered, the delivering thee from
evil, and the saving of thy life: confess the truth which thou can not
deny, the oil is wholesome: the binding comfortable: the man devout: his
doing good: Esdras, 3.
his sayings true, blessed be the God of truth. Which because thy doings
show thou yet doubtest, lesten but a little, whilst I open before thine eyes
the high fountain from whence the truth of sure persuasion most gently
flows, together with the plain examples of ancient times, which show most
clearly in a glass, the true countenance of the well disposed mind, the good
life, and happy death of all those, which heretofore have looued, founded,
enriched, nourished, freede, privileged, adorned the church: and contrary the
ugly shape, the tirannous life, and miserable death of those, which persecuted
the Christians, pulling down their temples, pilling and powling the liuinges
and freedoms of the Church of Jesus Christ here on earth.

Concerning this kind of catterpillers, Celsus Celsus.
of Verona had written plainly unto the Duke and Senate of Venece. In which
short treatise since we may evidently behold the great deformity of our age:
Since his leaves be few, his examples many, his appliaunce plain, his
conclusion true; sith it is now translated and set open before our eyes,
showing us this foul spot in our face most apparently. I will not long
discourse on that part, pardon me the glass is clear, what should I write?
That proverb was used of ancient time, and we prove it true: Suis quisque
malis blanditur, every man flattereth himself in his own humor, and though
the glass do show thee plainly, that thy face is foulie spotted in diverse
places, with uncleanness of thine own hands, and full of puffed pimples, by
reason thou drinkest lyquor not ordained for thy stomach: yet to the end that
those small scabbes without, may breed great sores within, and that thine end
may be the lue of thy desert: flattering thy self with thine own deformrtie,
and loath to be corrected by an other, thou castest away the glass: which
once abandoned, (qui semel verecundiae limities transilient) without all
blushing, thou affirmest boldly, a mould, a wart, a wrinckle, a ^reckle, a
spotte, a wheale, is but a toye in a man's face. I count but little of the
foolish glass. And show me reason why not? why not, if it be not seen, it is
no blot, but if it be no more hid, then the nose on your face, or the sight in
your eye, if all men loath the sight thereof, Tim, 2.
and count you careless of your health for neglecting the same: then know
that the time is now come of which it was foreshewed, that men should be
loouers of themselves more then of the Lord, and you are a child of the same,
now therefore since the glass is gone, and reason is the rule by the which you
leauell: know ye that your deformities are great, and since you love to feed
on meat forbidden two men of your complexion, know this for a truth, that
all meats are not for all me^. It were a strange unnatural kindness, if the
little child sucking on his mothers breast, should pull the meat out of her
mouth as she is feeding: and yet much more unwholesome to be eaten of the child,
then strange to the beholders. If this unnatural unkindness do seem so
intolerable in the flesh, how much more in the children of the spirit? we
must know that man (as Hermes writes) consists of two natures: of heaven
and earth: of body and of soul, of the flesh and of the spirit.

The flesh is of earth earthly: 1. Corin, 2.
the spirit is from heaven heavenly: first is that which is spiritual and
then that which is bodily. The body is quickened last and dies first: but the
spirit is that which is first and last. As the spiritual is first, so we
ought first of all to walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh: to
become like our spiritual father, and to nourish our spiritual mother, and
brethren redeemed with the same spiritual sacrifice: renewed with the same
spiritual grace: confirmed by the same spiritual pastors, unto sanctimony and
holiness of life, reading first, and above al other knowledge, science
contemplacions and revelations, the true heavenly doctrine of the spirit.
Seking with our bodies, lives and goods, to preserve and keep the volumes, the
pastors, the temples of the spiritual worship of the Lord, where the bread
of life is broken to those which hunger and thirst after righteousness, and the
spiritual food of the soul. After the body follows the shadow, and next
to this spiritual food of the soul, the food of the corruptible body is to
be provided. Both are necessary, but the former first. Therefore let us not
seek after the food which perishes, but seek the food which preserves
both body and soul unto eternal life, knowing that (as our sauiout Christ
says) man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out
of the mouth of God. Math, 3.
This word is the conduit of the spirit, whose substance is perfect truth:
this word was in the beginning, and by it all things were made. It created all
things of nothing: in weakness, strength, in vileness, honor, in the dust, it
placed a living, a heavenly and an understanding soul: erecting the bodily
chariot (where in he placed it) right up to heaven, that he might above al
things continually have his face, Psalm, 48,
his eye, his heart and cogitacion fixed on heaven and heavenly conversation.
But man would not abide in honor, the spiriual grace of the heavenly fountain
infused into him, was corrupted with the uncleanness of the vessel. From the
beginning his enemies provoked him to offend his maker, to leave ye heavenly
spirit, and to incline to her handmaid, this sinful, filthy coruptible flesh.
Therewith he lusted after his sensual appetite he rolled his eye to and fro:
according to ye wavering of fleshly sensuallity, leaving the mistress, in most
degenerate sort, he bound himself to serve the pleasurs of the body. with the
los of life, he brought in death in affecting the losenes of the flesh, he lost
the freedom of the spitit: in seeking lands and honor on the earth, he left
the spiritual Canaan, the heavenly Jerusalem perfect law of the liberty. Since
therefore the essence of man is his spirit, according as it is written Men's
vniuscuiusque is est quisque, Tullie.
as the mind is, so is the man, either good or bad, and that our first and
chiefest constitution is spiritual.

Let us understand thus much of our selves, that it is most consonant to our
creation, to our constitution, to our salvation: that above all other things,
we frame all our thoughts and meditations: our calling, and conversation: our
goods, and lands: our lives and liuinges, our bodies and our souls: to the
nourishing of the doctrine of truth, and the maintaining of the nurses, the
true teachers and preachers of the same.

This is the key of knowledge, whereby we must open the door of heaven: the
tree of life, which feeds the soul, the clear light which lighteneth every
man which comes into the world. John, 1.
Now the window begins to open, the day spring from an high now visits
us, teaching us truly, that as we consist of two natures, so we are of two
beginnings, spiritual, and earthly, of a spiritual father, the creator of
heaven and earth, Act, 2.
a spiritual mother, the holy catholic Church, on whom he has sent his
holy spirit visibly descending.

So we must first and principally apply our selves to the maintaining of the
health, peace and safety, the reverence renown and glory of this spiritual
father and mother, leaving our earthly father and our earthly mother in regard
of them, because he created, redeemed and sanctified us unto himself, and our
holy mother. She nourishes us with the spiritual milk of the holy ghost,
that we should be an holy religious generation unto the Lord.

Therefore after we have truly confessed, that we believe in the most
holy, blessed, and glorious trinity, three persons and one God, next unto our
heavenly Father, we acknowledge our spiritual mother, the holy catholic
Church: in whose custody at his departing out of this world, he left his will
and testament plainly written and subscribed with his own hand, and the
hands of many faithful witnesses, surely sealed with his most precious
blood. He fixed it so surely, and with such virtue, that therewith the speres
did shrink in the heavens, the Moon against nature retired from the East,
Dionys. Areop.
into the Meridian, the Sun lost his light, the air was dark, the earth did
shake, the graves opened, the spirits arose, the hell below all tre^bled: so
that the powers thereof were loosed. After this athentical signifying of his
most precious death and bitter passion, in heaven, in earth, and in hell: he
gave it as his own deed, his last will and testament unto his beloved spouse
the holy church, a sure seal and pledge of eternal salvation to her and all
her faithful children for ever. As is the love of her husband, so is hirs: for
she has it given her of him, even breathed from his own mouth: he is one and
his love is one for ever: the heavens shall wax old like a garment, Pet. 2.
the Sun shall shrink from his Excentrich, the earth shall pass away like a
tempest, but the love of our spiritual mother, is as the love of our heavenly
father, once and ever: whom she once loves, she loves them to the end, and
that most entirely, according to the saying of the prophet; when father and
mother forsakes me, then the Lord takes me up. Therefore if we be his true
children, we must frame our selves, that we be like our spiritual parents,
not in countenance only, and outward look, but in sincerity and holy
devotion. Math. 19
We must forsake both father and mother, concerning the flesh, honoring our
spiritual father and our spiritual mother above all other things both in
heaven and in earth. He has begotten us sons of the spirit, even by the
spirit of life, and she through his great grace does nurse us up with the same
food: she takes us up out of the mirie ways of this sinful flesh, she
unfolds the sinful clothes of the body, wherewith we are almost smothered,
she opens our mouth, applying thereto her tender teats, from whence she
distilleth the drops of spiritual life into our hearts, whereby our souls be
fed, our bodies preserved, our understanding increased, our eyes cleared, our
faith perfected; so that we see most plainly how we should loath the world, and
learn to love our holy mother the church, knowing that it is not meet to
leave the clear Sun, and to wait on shadows: or possible to serve God and
Mammon, this world and heaven, the flesh and the spirit: according (as Hermes
Hemes.
writes) Nisio fili corpus tuum oderis, teipsum amare non poteris: impossible
est vtrisque simul intendere: O Son unless thou hate thy body, thou can
not love thy soul: for it is impossible to apply thy self at once to them
both. Therefore be ye not so blinded with the stinking mist of Satan's deadly
smoke, or the painted vale of this wicked world, or the sinful web of fleshly
corruptions, ouerspredding the sight of your eye, that you should not look into
the clear glass now set before your face, wherein you may plainly behold the
reflection of your deformities, and this unnatural spot wherewith you greatly
disgrace your selves before the face of God and man at this day. If your eyes
be so dim through the cares of this present world, that ye cannot look into
the times of old, and if you cannot see so far before you, by reason of the
cloudy temptations, which the world, the flesh and the devil beat in your
faces: yet in regard of your safety, look down unto your own feet, least you
depart from the way of life. If you be so entangled with the briers of this
wicked world, that you cannot go forward: nay that you cannot once turn your
self to look toward the Church: Yet fix thy feet that thou go not backward
from evil to worse, and let thy countenance affect the sight of the heavenly
Jerusalem.

Though thine eyes be dim, yet open thine ears, harken to the sweet
admonitio^s of thy mother, foreshewing thee the sweet and the sower of this
thy dangerous iourneie, wherein since thou art to walk through the wilderness of
this wicked world, before thou assaie the isie ground thereof, know that which
elsewhere is wisely written: Terra imbrobitatis est prouincia, the earth is a
province full of naughtines, through which who so minds to walk safely, he
must be very circumspect, taking heed to his beginninges, knowing that he
which begins well, has half finished the work. Aristotle.
The first entrance of this way unto eternal life, is to love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, thy mind, and thy soul; the next step is like unto it:
love thy neighbor as thy self, according to the rule of nature. Quod tibi
fieri non vis alterine feceris. Lex. Not.
Do unto others as ye would that they should do unto you again.

This rule is general the meaning large, the observance thereof hard and
tedious: therefore before I post forward too fast unto the end, I will make
some little small spence of time in opening the first beginning thereof: and
which is that? as it is said in the rule of christian faith, next to the
blessed trinity is joined the holy catholic church: as also in the table of
the ten commandments, next to those which wholly concern the worship of God:
in the first place and before all the rest, is placed. Honor thy father and thy
mother, and that with a blessing: which who so minds to be partaker of, he
must not only honor his natural father and mother, but he must understand
truly, that as the spiritual part soul of man, is before the flesh: so first
and principally we must honor our heavenly father, which has begotten us of
the true spiritual immortal seed, whereby as says S. Paul, Romans 8.
the faithful daily crieabba father, and next to this our spiritual father,
above all fleshly parents, we must honor our spiritual mother, the holy
catholic church, whose children we are before we have our perfect being in
the flesh* according to the saying of Euaristus Euaristus.
in his decrees. Scimus Christum esse caput, cuius nos membra sumus, ipse est
sponsus, and ecclesia est sponsa cuius filii nos sumus, we truly know that
Christ is the head of his Church, whose members we are: for he is the husband
and the church is his spowse, and we the children of the^ both.

Therefore before we look at our natural parents, we must most christianly
apply our selves unto the honor and reverence of our spiritual father and our
spiritual mother. Nay we must forsake both goods and lands, honor and
dignity, friends, kindred, brethren, yea our natural father and mother, and
cleave unto our spiritual mother the holy Church, according to that most
christian answer of that learned Tritemius Tritemius
to his natural mother. To who^ after she had signified by diverse loving
letters, that she most earnestly desired to see him face to face, he returned
this answer: Non licet mihi deinceps parentum solatio delectari: Omnia pro
Christi amore contempsi: and coepiiam esse vt Melchisedech, sine patre, sine
matre, sine genealogia: Solum Deum patrem agnosco: and matrem non habeo nisi
Ecclesiam: It is not convenient that I should hereafter take comfort in any
natural parents: I loath all other things in regard of the love of Christ:
and now I am become like unto Melchisedech, without father, without mother,
without kindred: I have no father but God, neither any mother besides the holy
Church. In these words he signifies thus much: that who has created us first
and loved us most, we ought to seek him first, and most to love him, and
therefore since our heavenly father is a living spirit, and our mother truly
spiritual, since there is no love comparable to his, which leaving all creatures
in heaven and in earth, Eusebius.
gave his life for us; or to hers, which though she were ten times persecuted,
even unto death for our sake, yet she lovingly embraced us; In loving our
spiritual parents before all other things, let us render like for like.

Let us willingly reject the sensual entisements of the flesh, disarming our
selves of riches, goods, lands honor, office, authority, yea our own father
and mother, according to the flesh, that we may serve our spiritual father
and mother in the unity of the spirit.

This is a clear glass, in which a christian may behold the degrees, by
which we must pass through this vale of misery, unto the kingdom of heaven,
and the rule is like unto it, for the first rule or direction of a christian
soul unto heaven, is, above all things to meditate with himself whether he
be in the true way of eternal life or no. And therewith to consider with
himself, what he has done, what he has not done, and what he ought to
do: which who so wisely weighs, he shall find it true, that before all
care and provision of our sinful bodies, we ought most painefully to provide
for the health of our souls, knowing assuredly that we must pass this earthly
pilgrimage, with such religious care of our spiritual father and mother, that
therewith we must restrain our affections, from the woonted wishes of the
world, and weane them so from fleshly corruptions, with the true discipline
of our spiritual nurse, that neither riches, nor goods, nor dominion, Romans 8.
nor power, nor friends, nor enemies, nor life, nor death, can once separate us
from the true worship of his holy name, and the daily maintenance of the same.

This is the way easy to be found out of all those which heed the same. The
ground is even, the path is plain, the degrees not many, the passage easy. O
that the foot could be content to follow the direction of the eye, that the
handmayd would be obedient to her mistrisse, or that the flesh would but cease
a little to resist the good motions of the spirit.

If we could but a little, yea I say but a little sequester our selves from
this worldly security, which with her manifold charming pleasures, has lulled
us so long in the cradle of the flesh, that we are almost all fallen into a
dangerous dead sleep. If we could but once behold the Lord as he is, in
himself, Zachar 13
truth and equity: or but once think of him aright, of his wonderful
majesty, supported with eternal sanctimonie, Cor. 2.
holiness, and righteousness: If the Lord of his great mercy would but once
open our eyes, and let us see this heavenly object, we should be so far from
offending his majesty, and decaying his church, that for ever after we would
loath this earthly dungeon of our body, full of deadly destructions and
pleasant miseries, we should then more truly know God and Jesus Christ, whom
he has sent: we should be able to discern the honorable, the blessed, the
singular prerogative, which he has given to his spowse. And therewith we
should strive to yield her the first fruits of our best and greatest
endeavors, we should look about us, and see more clearly how far the
heathen have gone before us in their kind, concerning religion: how far we
are fallen in these days from the rules of nature and true philosophy, from
the examples of the holy fathers, the old patriarchs, the true prophets, the
blessed apostles, the christian emperors the reverend Bishops, whilst we
embrace this present world, and make desolate his holy Church, with the
ministry thereof. Let us know that we are here placed in a strife of
obtaining double pleasure, and double pain, the pleasure of the sense works
sin, Jacob 1.
and sin is the parent of death, but the mind flies higher unto the
heavenly hills, even to the top of that high Olimpus, from whence comes our
health.

These two contrary desires be the cause of man's disquietnes in this life,
Gal. 5.
showing plainly that the flesh evermore strives against the spirit with such
perfect discord, that whatsoever maintains the one, destroieth the other:
that which delights the one displeases the other: that which exalts the
one, depresseth the other. So that though the spirit be willing, yet the
flesh is very weak, and unable to walk this strait and narrow way of
eternal life, yea so weak, Romans 7.
that Saint Paul in the midst of this battle cries out: that which I would
do, that I do not, and that which I would not, that I do. O wretch that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of sin, even the grace and mercy of
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let us therefore cast of this coat of sin, with the works of darkness, and
put upon us the armor of light now in this most dangerous day, wherein
charity is waxen so cold, and iniquity so hot, that we scarce count it any
sin, to take away the maintenance of the Church of Jesus Christ. The natural
Philosopher teaches truly, that every compound body consists of two
parts, of matter, and form: affirming that the form is the more excellent
part of nature. The Logitian considering with Plato, that matter is a note of
corruption, affirms that the form is worthy to rule. The moral Philosopher
writes thus: Animal autem primum constat ^x animo and corpore, quorum illud
quidem imperat natura, Aristot.
hoc quidem paret: animus imper at corpori, herili imperio, men's antem
appetitui civilly and regio: a man consists chiefly of mind of body: the
mind by nature does rule, the body by nature does obaie, concluding thus:
Imperet sapiens, let the strong in body take pains, but let learned wisdom
rule. In Aegipt the best Astrologers were had in greatest honor, and as it
appears by Hermes (the first law giver of the Aegiptians) such were commonly
chosen Kings.

So likewise with the Chaldeans, with the Assirianes, with the Romans, and
Indianes, the heavenly virtues and gifts of the mind were in highest honor:
so that as (Plato Plato.
writes) they counted that common wealth happy, in which either Kings were
Philosophers, or Philosophers reigned. Herein we learn that even by the mere
motion and instincte of nature, the very heathen honored wisdom and virtue
in what person soever, above all the gifts of the body, naie they so highly
esteemed of knowledge and virtue, that they not only gave them the highest
honor, and dominion whilst they lived, but after their death, they built
temples unto them, and celebrated their memory after their heathenish
superstition perpetually. Their doings showed plainly that they had some
hidden spark in them by nature of the fire, which ought not only to be
kindled in the hearts and minds of all true christians, but also it ought to
flame forth and give light in their lives and conuersations much like a candle,
which stands on high, gives light to the whole house. Rome, 13.
This candle shows us plainly, that man by nature (following the better
part of his constitution) is appointed to worship God, and to emploie himself,
his goods, his gifts, and all his power, for the maintaining of the true
worship of God, in his holy temple above all other things in heaven and in
earth. Neither let any man think, that this is the duty of the clergy only,
whose office is in the first place of holy function, to be ministers of his
divine worship: or that it belongs only to the poor fatherless inferior
people (although of such commonly the kingdom of God does most consist, as it
is written: not many mighty, not many rich, not many of the most accounted of
in this world, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven) but unto the
worshipful, the honorable, the Duke, the Prince, Corint, 1.
the King, the Emperor, who though he be accounted the greatest among
christians, yet he that is least in the kingdom of God, is greater then he.
Since this little spark of heathen fire, has lightened the candle even of
christian princes, let not our hearts be so over grown with the choking weeds of
this mortality. Neither let the God of this world either so blind our eyes,
or dim our sight, that we professing the name of Christians, with our mouth,
should be like the heathen people in our life. Herein let us learn to
distinguish the clear light of a christian candle, from the smoking snuff of
the heathen. He which is the king of kings, and only ruler over all, he
said plainly, my kingdom is not of this world. Neither those which only
bend themselves to the fleshly course of this world, to attain high style,
dominion and rule: the fat of the field, or riches of the City, are the truest
christians. For what is a christian? or what difference do we make betwixt
the worthy dignity of christian princes, and the tirannicall empire of the
heathen? Their strength is the cursed confidence of flesh and blood. Psalm, 31.
Though an horse be but a vain thing to save a man, though all flesh is
grass, and the glory thereof is as the flower of the field, which florisheth
to day and to morrow is cast into the furnace, though every man living, Esaias,
40.
and all the living of man, is but mere vanity, yea lighter then vanity it
self: yet the heathen and worldly man will disquiet himself in vain, he
will make flesh his arm and the compass of the earth his dominion: he will
plant his foot in the sea, and his army in the highest hills, he will
displaie his banner before the clouds, and compare his glory to the golden
tressed sun. The swelling of sinful flesh is above measure and desire of
rule sees not God. Christian kings they set the glory of God before their
eyes, and not their own glory, they first of all acknowledge their spiritual
father, and their spiritual mother, before their natural parents, according
to that sense, and sentence of Hermes: Hermes.
Diuina officia praecedere, humana sequi debent, we must first seek heavenly
things, and the^ those which concern this world But the Kings and rulers of
the heathen, they are filii terrae, the sons of the earth. Their desire,
their life their love, their greatest glory and rule, is in the earth alone,
and came from the earth, they know not their heavenly father, and therefore
often times they spoil their spiritual mother. Such as they be, such is their
rule, not for the glory of God, or the safety of his church, for they defy
her, they profane her, they pill and poll her, but they rule for their own
glory, their own peace and safety, according to their own humor, Daniel, 5.
as it is plainly described by the mouth of Daniell speaking unto Balthazar in
this manner. O King, the most high God has bestowed dominion, magnificence,
glory, and great honor, upon Nabuchodonozar thy father, and in regard of that
highness, which God gave him, all people, kindreds, Kings and nations, trembled
before him and feared him greatly. Whom he would, he killed, whom he would he
did strike, whom he would he advanced, and whom he would he threw down. This
is the tyrannical rule of the Kings of the nations, concerning which our
savior Christ has said principes gentium dominantur eis, etc.

This is the way of flesh and blood, into the which that younger son, even
the carnal man, is already entered, but to the elder children begotten in the
spirit, borne of our true spiritual mother and nursed in the school of
Christianity, and by her instructed out of the book of life, in the faith,
fear, and love of God, our spiritual father has said: Vos autem non sic.
Luke. 22.
The Kings of the heathen and rulers of the earth, they are called good
master, and good grarious lord, most high, most renowned, most mighty, most
glorious, most excellent majesty, without exception of heaven and earth.

They think themselves to be Gods, making the end of their power and rule, to
be the extolling of their own honor and dignity. They regard not justice,
that they should do no injury: nor the poor, that they might be called
merciful: nor their brethren, that they might seem natural: nor their
inferiors, that they might appear humble: nor the goods, the lands, the
peace, the privilege, the honor, the glory of God, or man, that there might
appear some spark of Godly life in them. But without regard of God, of piety
or pity, they say to this man, cast thy self headlong from yonder rock
before my face: break his legs: pearce the other to the heart: reach me
the head of that brave knight: let that Lord be pulled in pieces with wild
horses: cast that Earl into the dungeon with the Lions: destorie that nation:
Dan. 6.
burn those temples, sley man, woman, and child: only preserve my kingdom,
my crown, my majesty, and let your prayers be made only unto me. But
christian Princes must not do so. Though the Lord, has given the highest honor
to the King, and put the scepter into his hand, in which respect they are said
to be gods, sitting in the place of God, pronouncing the sentence in his name
and person, yet let the^ know that they must die like men: that their bodies
are made of a loathsome matter, that they are but worms meat, dun and ashes,
earth, earth, earth, most vile and corruptible earth, as all other men be,
though their descent be princely, often times from the house of many mighty
Kings and Emperors, though the knee of flesh and blood, Augusti.
do bow and kneel at their presence, though their honor be great in the
eyes of the people, their scepter mighty, their crown gorgious: yet one clod
of earth must cover their heads in the grave, and all their glory shall be
shut up in a few lines: according to the saying of saint Augustine in his
book De vera innocentia: Qui splendes in mundo, etc. Thou which shinest in the
world above the rest, thou accountest of thy nobility, of thine ancestors,
thou reioycest in thy large dominions, in thy parentage, in the great honor
and homage, which all men do unto thee: know thy self that thou art earth,
and thou shall be consumed into earth again: look up but a little, and
behold those which were placed in the same throne of majesty, before thy
time. What is become of those excellent Orators, those mighty princes, those
puissant conquerous, those renowned Emperors?

Look unto the grave, whether thou art passing, behold and see, are they not
all now rotten dust? are they not like a spark of fire, which is vanished? is
not all there glory and fame contained in a few lines written of them by some
poor contemned scholar? shall not the greatest Prince in this world, rise up
naked at the day of judgment all amazed, Paul.
trembling and quaking? Naie not his body only but his heart and his mind,
Rome.
his soul and his conscience, shall be laid open before the Lord, his Angels,
his saints, and all his elect. If he have played the tyraunte beating his
fellow feruantes, ruling for his own gain and not for the benefitte of his
Church, shall not the remembrance of his honor be a stinging serpent to him
in his conscience, and his Princely dominion a most deadly corasiue to his
heart? Therefore be wise ye kings and princes of the world, Psalm, 2.
and ye which judge the earth, hearken to the words of understanding. Know
ye that the wisdom of this world, is not as is the wisdom of God. Many men
in their wisdom, forecast by all means possible, to come into possession of
riches, honor, authority, power and majesty, which when they have attained,
let them but look back a little, and consider, with what wicked, sinful
grievous pains, they were gotten, with what fear and danger they are
possessed: with what grief they are lost: let them enter into their own
hearts, and behold what a hell of corruptions, and what an army of tempting
serpents accompany the mind that is set upon riches: let them mark how
many wise men of this world, Psalm. 26.
have come up of nothing, to great abundance of wealthy authority: and yet
after they have well practiced, and wisely waied many years, which way they
might come to enjoy the height of their desire, (which is to rule whilst they
live here on earth, and to leave the like to their posterity) it has pleased
the Lord in one hour, to cut of the sequel, and issue of all their hope.
Either the^^elues together with their posterity are cut off, or else the
Lord does take away that their joy before their face, or after all sends
a worse mischief to their soul, then any pen can write, any tongue can
tell, or any heart can understand. Which though we cannot sound to the
bottom, yet let us learn by the shadow, Matheteci
to guess the pourtraiture of the body: by the effect, to search the cause, by
the conclusion to know the truth of that axiom: Who so ever makes his God
of any thing here on earth, it shall never prosper with him. And who so makes
his quiet heaven here. He shall never possess the eternal heaven in the world
to come. Who so presumes of his own wisdom, before the justice of God, or
on his might that he may tread down, the poor, he shall not be able to
stand upright in the day of his danger, and to his utter confusion he shall
hear that voice at length. Prouer. 21.
Non est sapientia, non est prudentia, non est consilium aduersus dominum:
there is no wisdom, there is no policy, there is no counsel against the
Lord.

If we will not hearken to the poor contemned ministers of Jesus Christ which
forewarne us daily, of that great danger of our soul, which we rashly
adventure by more esteeming of man then of God, of the service of man then of
the service of God, of the commandment of man, then of the commandment of
God, of the house of man, then of the Church of God, of the servant of man,
then of the minister of God, the stones in the wall shall cry out aloud, and
our own conscience shall tell us plainly, that in loouing the honor, the
maintenance, the issue of our body, we have utterly lost the salvation of
our own souls, O that our eyes were so clean washed with the water of life,
that we might but once steadfastly behold the bright beauty of the radiant
son of God; no doubt we would leave this great politic wisdom of this
world (wherein every one strives to frame his children) and learn the true
wisdom, Cor. 1.
which is folly in the eyes of flesh: we would humble our selves before the
Lord, and kiss the son least he be angry. We would not count of that
sweetness which is tasted with tongue, nor of the fading beauty, which shines
in the face of sinful flesh: we would cast our worldly honor in the dust,
and put our scepter under the foote-stoole of Jesus Christ; We would not so much
seek the honor of earthly kingdoms, nor triumph so often in the flesh, but we
would first above all other things, Psalm. 1.
read the will of our God, and meditare in the same both day and night; we
would seek to differ from the heathen in extolling our scepters, after the
manner of flesh and blood: we would leave the delight, and careful seeking of
the world, which is the first entrance unto Christ.

We would knock at the door of his mercy by a true faith, and enter further
by perfect obedience. We would draw near to the father, and kiss the son
most lovingly, because he loved us first so entirely, Pet.
that when we were his enemies, and being a most vile and sinful creature,
he left thousands of bright shining holy angels, Heb. 2.
his daily ministers, the spheres of heaven, the stars of the firmament, with
all the rest of his beautiful creatures, coming down in great humility, and
was made man. He being the high God of heaven and earth, for our sake was made
man, he suffered hunger and thirst, reprochies, and reuilings, agonies and
pains, he sighed in his heart, he groned in the spirit, and that which is
able to make any christian heart to melt, when it is hard, he suffered that
cruel soldier to pierce his tender side with a spear, John 19.
where with came out both blood and water, even his most precious heart blood,
the eternal food of our souls. O what mercy is this, and who is able to
comprehend it? shall I pass it with silence? or shall my pen presume to touch
the same? shall my heart stand amazed at this wonder, and my mouth keep
silence? When I behold the heavens, the angels, the height of these creatures
above man. And consider the depth of his mercy toward man: shall I not begin
with the Prophet: O what is man that thou art so mindful of him? S. Barnard
or the son of man that thou visitest him? And proceed with the voice of good
Saint Barnard: O hone Jesus. Quid tibi and merito? nos debuimus, and tu soluis:
nos peccauimus, and tu luis: opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito: Charitas
sine modo. O sweet Jesus how belongs this to thee, or thy desert? we are
indebted, and thou paiest it: we have sinned, and thou art punished: a work
above all comparison, mercy without all merit: charity above all measure: O
my soul open thine inward spirits, and let my tongue sound forth his praise.
O praise the Lord in his holiness, praise him in the bounty of his great
mercy, and all that is within me praise his his holy name. O ye princes open
your gates, and let the king of glory enter in. O bow down your princely
eyes, Psalm. 23.
and behold this great humility of the first and the last, the king of kings,
the Lord of Lords, the high sovereign king of heaven and earth.

Take heed ye rulers of the earth, that ye go not far from this fountain
of life, least ye thirst and so perish by the way. O come near and taste how
sweet the Lord our maker is, and let not the comfortable voice of his
loving spowse (whom he has made ouerseer of his will) once depart out of your
ears, Take heed now your father is gone, that you disquiet not your loving
mother.

Do not your selves that mortal disgrace, or the Lord of light that
unkindness, that you should forget his bloody stripes wherewith ye were
healed, or his wounds which gave you life, or his exceeding love which passes
all understanding, but render love for love to the uttermost of your power.

Since he has loved us first, let us love him first of all. Since he refused
all creatures in heaven and in earth that he might show mercy upon us, let us
refuse all other things, and love him alone; not in word only, nor in show,
but in heart, in word, in our outward life and conversation. Can we taste of
the clear fountain, and not kneel down? or drink of the liquor, and not
touch the cup with our lips? can we taste of the sweet drops of his most
precious blood, and not kiss the son of our salvation, the spring of
eternal life, the glory of heaven and earth?

Then leaving heathnish glory, and the rule of flesh and blood, christian
princes must come to the fountain of true christianity, Apoc. 7.
which is clear and bright, and shows plainly, that they must fall down
before the throne of the lamb; that their regiment, and commonwelth ought not
to be disposed, and for the establishing of their own kingdom, or for the
advancement of their own honor, or for the safety of their own life: but
especially and above all things, they must bend themselves to set forth the
honor and glory of God, their high honors and offices must be appointed for
the service and kingdom of Christ: their power, their men, their armor, their
goods, their lands, their dominions, their nobles, their court, and courtiers,
are to be employed in the service and obedience of the church of Jesus Christ.

Thus proceeding in the way of life, let them not barely imagine, that God is
above all the rulers in the world; but that he is carefully and dutifullie to
be served every day, and that the hour of his divine service is not to be
appointed at our will, but at his will, and when it shall be thought most meet,
by them which are truly religious.

Herein we ought to be so resolutelie bent to serve the Lord our God with all
our heart, Deutro. 6.
our mind and our soul; so truly and so heartily, that no ambassador, no
triumph, no pleasure or worldly affairs whatsoever, should alter the hour of
common prayer, which we have once given to the Lords service: unto the which
if we cannot resort sometime, at the appointed hour, which we have once
granted unto the Lord, yet let the rest of our life be so holy and reverent
before the Lord and his people, that our Christian absence may show most
plainly, there is urgent occasion why we cannot come. If they count it a more
holy, a more necessary, a more honorable thing to serve the Lord, and to
humble themselves on their knees before him in his holy temple then to feed
their eyes with worldly pleasures (which in time and season are good and
commendable) if the count more of divine service, than of humane, of the
eternal joy of heaven, than of this perfect misery; of the everlasting
kingdom, than of this earthly tabernacle: they will not only leave all
these, and come to the temple of the Lord, there falling down before their
good Lord and maker, their maker, and redeemer, their redeemer, and present
helper, Romans 12.
their helper and comforter in all woe, and distress: but in fact, in truth, in
good earnest, after the yielding themselves, their souls and bodies a holy
and acceptable sacrifice before God (which is their reasonable service don to
him) they will open the bowels of their compassion unto their holy mother the
church and their poor brethren, they will wisely bestow their best lands,
goods, honors, privileges, counsels, courts, auctorities, even the most
perfect meditation of their understanding hearts, upon the spouse of Jesus Christ.

O ye mighty men, whose throne is exalted in the midst of flesh and blood,
do you doubt of this? Have you not heard of old how the gentiles ruled, which
knew not God? or what our Savior Christ said concerning them? and what was it?
you shall not do so, and how then? The Apostle writes that which the prophet
said: Psalm. 115.
Credidi, and propterea loquutus sum: Corinth. 2.
I have believed this truth, and therefore I have written: neither is it bare
belief, since plain truth holds the stern: whilst my little pen passes
over the high surges of this worldly sea: and that those worldly minds thus
tossed and tumbled with the uncertain flawes of worldie tempests, might find
the true calm discried by the rule and compass of Christian doctrine: let
them but look up a little, directing their eyes unto the climat, where the
son shines clear and bright, and they shall see the land and haven of
quietness where they would faines^ be.

And where is that? Psalm 106
or what sure direction have we to the same? whilst we sail in these
tempestuous and troublesome seas of uncertainty, considering that the bottom
is so britle, that we can have no ancre hold, the seas so wide that we are
far from kenning of any coast, the wind so uncertain, that we know not
whither we are driven: let us surely believe that which our parents told us
at our entering into this fleeting vessel, that there be many gone before us,
even the same way, through the same seas, to the same haven that we desire.

And if you will look up with me a little, I assure you I have descried one,
which though it be far off, and scarcely within kenning, yet by the view
the pilot thereof seems cunning, the course direct, the ship fair and
good, taking the very way of our direction: and now lying at ancre before the
mouth of the haven, which we so long have wished? And where is that? The
examples which I mind to propound unto you is, these three wise men.

The first fruits of the Gentiles, which by the appearing of a star were
directed unto Christ, and since in these days the style of learning, Math* 2.
and the learned is low, yea so low, that it lies written in the dust; trodden
down with the feet of ignorant men, and the kingdom of this world is the
golden mirror on which most men's eyes, are continually fixed with desire and
admiration.

Let no man doubt, but these learned men were also kings, according as it is
written in sundry learned fathers: Vira.
Dicts sunt etiam reges, quia illo tempore, philosophi sapientes regnabant,
they were also called kings, because in those days wise philosophers reigned.

Then these being the first fruits of the gentiles, and the first Christian
kings that ever were.

All those which mind to come to Jesus Christ to be washed with his blood, to
be saved by his perfect merit and great mercy, let them fix their eyes on
these first christian kings, let them learn truly, and mark diligently what
they did. They left their own natural country, with all things therein,
following the star which led them to Jesus Christ. They came to the Inn where
the child was porelie laid in a Ma^nger: there heart was still fixed with the
light which did shine to them from Heaven: Luke. 2.
though they were mighty Kings, yet they regarded not the baseness of the
house, nor the vnseemlinesse of the stable, where this holy Child was: but
acknowledging great majesty, to lie here covered in low humility, they cast
down the glory of their kingdoms at his feet, they opened their golden
vessels, and offered to him, gould, mirre, and frankensence, the first fruits
of true christianity. Wherein we have a plain example propounded to all
christian princes and people, in that they followed the light of the star:
showing that the wisest though they be exceedingly learned, Corinth^ 1.
as they were, yet since this is the Lord of wisdom, even the wisdom of the
God of heaven and earth (leaving our own natural wisdom and denying our
selves) we ought to follow this clear light, which shines through Christ
from heaven. Though they be noble Princes as these were, yet they ought to
acknowledge him to be king of kings, and Lord of Lords, of whom it was
forshewed, Esaias 9.
that he should walk upon the lion and the dragon: that all nations should do
him service, that his kingdom shall have none end. And who shall declare his
generation? though the mighty of this world be of high honor and dignity as
they were, yet their humble kneeling and obedience, shows that christian
Princes are not to rule over their subjects, like the heathen, for their own
pomp, their own honor, their own magnificent glory, for the safety of
their own life, regiment and kingdom: but that with the princely majesty of
the anointed of the Lord, they should leave the care of their earthly
kingdom, and follow the clear star of Jesus Christ, which lightneth the
grossest darkness. They should bow their bodies, and bend their whole
strength before Jesus Christ and his holy Church. Though worldly men,
Potentates and Princes, live in great plenty of honor, freedom, and all
abundance, yet knowing that without God, is without all: let them leave the
love of their own houses, the delight and glory of their pompous palaces,
let them forsake their own fathers house, their goods, and lands, and cimery
with the faithful Abraham, Genesis 20.
and bestow their whole substance, honor, and riches, on the Lord Jesus, and
his loving spowse the holy Church. Remembering that he created them poor
wretches when they were nothing, and that of nothing: (as it is said) he has
loved them without their desert, and that with a most entire surpassing love.
He feeds them in their mothers womb, and opens their mouths, that they
should breath. He preserves them from all the dangers of their infancy, and
every minute maintains them in their kingdoms, holding up the scepter in
their hands, as it is written: Per me reges regnant, Prou. 8.
by my permission kings do rule upon earth. They rule by him, and him alone,
for if he do but alienate the minds of the subjects, the princes seat
does shrink under him. If he do but a while restrain the dew of heaven,
Reg 3.
as he did at the prayer of Elias the prophet of the Lord, both prince and
people famish together.

Though he give store of food, though it be well prepared, and by the
counsel of good physicians dressed finely for the kings own mouth; yet if the
Lord do not bless it in his mouth, as he cheweth it, in the throat as it
descends, in the stomach as it concocteth, in the passage from thence as it
digesteth, his meat is his bane, or at the least he falls sick after the
taste thereof, and lies miserably groaning upon his pillowe: If the Lord
does withold but the least of his benefits a little, the fire from roasting,
the sun from shining, the corn from riping, the tongue from tasting, the lungs
from breathing but one minute of an hour, though he be the mightiest king in
the world, forthwith he perishes from the face of the earth.

Therefore let all kings and princes, Psalm. 67.
all people and nations, acknowledge the great power of the Lord, even in the
least of his benefits. Let them leave off the delight of worldly vanities,
wherewith they are puffed up, their honors, lands, and goods. Let them
affect the true honor and majesty, the glorious triumph and perfect pleasure,
which well beseems a christian prince, even the anointed of the Lord.

Neither are we carried with the fruitless wind of scisme, that we should
condemn those pleasures which be lawful: knowing that as the Lord has
given man a body together with his soul, so it is as necessary that he look
for the sustenaunce, the defense, the delight, or recreation of his body, as of
his soul, and that in most honorable, pleasant, triumphant manner, if time
and place permit. But yet first and principally we must seek to feed our
soul with the food that never perishes, and then the body.

Those which do bless the Lord of heaven, and love him above all the fading
joys of the earth: they shall receive from above blessing for blessing, grace
for grace, love for love, to their endless comfort in the great day of his
visitation, Cor. 1.
they shall flourish like the fruitful vine, their children shall stand like
olive branches round about their table, and they shall never want one to sit
upon their seat after them for ever. They shall see their childrens children,
together with the temples and good works of their own hands. They shall
rejoice therein, because their memory shall never perish from the face of the
earth: but especially because this oil which they have in their lamps, shall
give a light to their eyes: a direction to their feet: a comfort to their
heart and conscience, in the day of judgment.

This is the sentence of holy scripture, and the example is like unto the same.
Psalm. 36.
Look over the book of God: peruse it diligently, and tell me, if ever you
did see the righteous forsaken, or his seed begging their bread. But always
those which first above all worldly affairs, did seek the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, which built temples to his holy name,
maintaining his praise and glory in the same, they had all good blessings
powered on them.

Abraham left his own country, willing to have sacrificed his only son, at
the voice of the Lord: and therefore he had this assurance by the voice of an
Angel from heaven: Genesis 26.
By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) that in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed.

Which blessing continued in Isaac, the fruits thereof began to budde in Jacob,
whose willing mind well known unto the Lord concerning his house: in his
sleep there appeared unto him a ladder, the foot whereof stood on the earth,
but the top did reach unto the heavens, by which the angels did ascend and
descend, and the Lord leaning on the top of this ladder, said unto him. I am
the Lord the God of thy father Abraham and thy father Isaac, the land in which
thou art now will I give thee, and to thy seed, and thy seed shall be as the
dust of the earth. Thou shall increase from the East to the West, from the
North to the South, and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. When Jacob awaked out of his sleep, he said, of a truth the Lord is
in this place, and I knew not: and trembling he said further. Genesis 28.
O how terrible is this place? this is none other place, but even the house of
God, and the gate of heaven.

Forthwith rising in the morning, he took the stone which lay under his head
all night, and rearing it an end, he powered oil upon it: making a vow and
saying: if the Lord will be with me etc. the Lord shall be my God, and this
stone which I have here set an end, shall be called the house of God. and I will
give him the tenth of all the increase which he shall give me. After the
sparks of heavenly fire new kindled in the breast of the holy patriarch: the
flame brake forth at his mouth, and so fructified together with his true
piety, that afterward he was wonderful rich in servants, goods, and cattle,
in being a joyful father of many goodlie-children, living to a good old
age, seeing his childrens children, laying his hand on them, and that which
passes all, though his graundfather Abraham did make an alter in the same
place, proceeding to offer the blood of his only son unto the Lord (which
was a perfect figure of Christ) yet the latter light did shine the clearer, and
the Lord did so multiply the blessings promised to Abraham in his sons Isaac
and Jacob, Genesis 28.
that long before the time of the revelation of that holy one, to him and in
him, he uncovered the vale so much, that he showed his loving regard to his
elect here upon earth, in looking down on Jacob, and leaning on the ladder,
in sending his Angels up and down to his patriarch, full of grace. Who when
his eyes were open, and he did see as it is said: Gratia gratiam peperit. Grace
brought forth grace.

For to the end that he and his posterity might more easily clime this
ladder, and for our example he trembled when he perceived that the Lord was
there, he gave the title, and joined the reverence thereunto: saying, out of
all doubt, this is the house of God, and the gate of heaven: concluding, it
shall be called the house of God.

Which his zealous speech and doings, condemn the fruitelesse zeal of our
age, for when he perceived that he was once in the house of God, with a
reverent fear he trembled. Not dispairing, but believing in heart, he looked
up: confessing with the mouth, he promised and perfourming in deed, he
reared up the corner stone, on which even in the same place, the holy temple
of the Lord, even in the Temple of Jerusalem, was afterward built: Act. 4.
which though it was refused of the cunning builders, in latter times, yet
being once anointed with holy oil, it became the head stone of the corner.

If the Lord did so woonderfullie bless the patriarch Jacob in his true faith
and perfect zeal, that of one sma^^ s^one he raised the most holy, the most
honorable, the most sumptuous, the most rich and costly Temple in the whole
world. Let no good Christian doubt, to lay though it be but one stone in the
College, the Church, the Temple of the Lord, acknowledging with Saint Paul,
that, Romans 9.
Non est volentis, non est currentis sed miserentis Dei.

It is not he which wills, or he which runs, but God which shows
mercy.

It is not we which do it, but the grace of God which is in us.

Which if it once begin to spring, and show it self in the work, lay
weight enough on it, for it will rise mauger the might of all the world.

He which has laid the greatest foundation in the lowest element, the
highest glory in the lowest places: which confounds the strength of this
world with his weakness, which puts down the mighty from their seat, Luke 1.
and exalts the humble and meek: of his abundant mercy he will magnify the
charity of the poor Widow, though it be but a mite: he will make the
building strong though it be founded on a cup of could water. Those which
love his spouse, he will bless their seed here upon earth, with plenty of
peace, and glorify them in his heavenly lerusalem.

This blessing is seldom obscure or unseen amongst the sons of GOD:
neither does it cease from generation to generation. For if we look back
unto this little spark, we shall see and say with the prophet David, that the
fire was kindled in Jacob, and the flame broke forth in Israel, not for weeks
or years, or hundred years only (though it was suppressed in that watrish
Aegipt) but it shined so clear out of the dark Cloud in the wilderness,
Exodus 36.
that the arc was there built by the hand of his great messengers Moses and
Aaron. Neither could the desartes of Synaie or sin, or the exceeding high
hills of all the mountain country, restrain the course thereof, but it
passed over the tops of the highest mountains, and it divided the deepest
waters of that Country, passing on dry land, throw the bottom thereof into
that promised land, the land of Canaan.

When the Arc (the true figure of the Temple) was by the providence of
almighty GOD, thus brought, and placed near the propper home.

And David also the servant of the Lord, taken from the sheepefowlde,
preserved from the tyranny of Saul, and placed in his kingdom.

Now for our example let us mark how this holy place, and godly King accord
together, and what effect there is betwixt them.

The Arc having been long before neglected by Saul (which appeared by his
end) David he had a special eye and regard unto it: before all other
things, with great strength, power and glory, 2 Kings. 6.
bringing it from the house of Abinadab nearer him.

'First placing it in the house Obededom, and afterward, seeing the great
blessings which the Lord showed to that place where his Arc stood, he
brought it home into the City of David, placing it in the tabernacle which he
had built for it. Afterward when he had conquered all his enemies round
about, and he sat quietly in his palace, he followed not the swelling humor
of flesh and blood, which rules most in those that are the lowest born, and
the basest minded, according to that ancient saying: Asperius nihil est humili
cum surgit in altum: but that which is the duty of a godly prince, he called
the prophet Nathan unto him and said. Do you not mark how I dwell in my
sumptuous house of Cedar, and the Ark of the Lord is simply covered with
skins? showing that it was not meet that the house of the king, or of any
man, should be more fair, more sumptuous, more honorable and maiesticall,
than the house of God.

And therefore he purposed fully with himself, to build a temple unto the
Lord, which he has performed with dutiful endeavor in good time, but that
the Lord by the mouth of his holy prophet signified, that his good intent was
accepted, and therefore the Lord would bless him on all sides, 2. Kings. 7.
promising that he would give him peace and rest, from his enemies, that he
would place him quietly in his own palace, and when his years were come to
an end, and that he should after the manner of the godly sleep with his
fathers, the Lord promised that he would raise up a son unto him, in whom
he would establish the kingdom of David for ever, and which should build an
holy temple unto the Lord God of Israel.

Here upon the kingly Prophet did magnify the Lord in his soul, and his
spirit did so hartelie rejoice in the wonderful mercies of his creator, that
he lift up his voice before the Lord, and penned many Godly himnes, to be
musicallie and melodiouslie sunge, by the chaunter and the quire, before the
Lord. He yielded his whole heart unto the Lord, and gave unto him the first
fruits of his lips.

Therefore the Lord blessed him with a virtuous son, even the wise Solomon,
whose works were like unto the wisdom of his heart: 3. Kings. 5.
shewinge plainly unto us, the work and fruit of true and perfect
wisdom, and what is that? As he was the wisest man that ever was created so
he brought forth the best and happiest fruit that ever was: building an holy
temple unto the honor and service of the Lord, and that such a one, as far
surpassed, all the superstitious temples of the heathen. He set many
thousands of men a work at once, he provided the goodliest timber that could
be seen or heard off, the fairest squared stones that might be, and of
greatest price. His ships went to Tharsis for gold, and he spared not to
spend the jewels of Arabie, on the same.

He erected therein great pi^llers of beaten gold and silver, gilding it on
every side, and garnishing it most ^oyallie. He endowed it with lands and
possessions most liberally. He finished it most perfectly, he frequented the
same with his devout prayers daily to the glory of God, the profitre of his
nation, the public practice of the ^olie law and sacrifice of the Lord. All
the days of his life, he enjoyed it most happily, though by infirmity he
fell, yet ye Lord remembering his mercy, let him depart in peace, so that he
slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Roboam his
son reigned in his steed.

Likewise also the high and mighty Monarch Cirus. Diemon.
King of the Persians, Paralip. 2.
though he were an heathen man, yet he yielded so much unto the true God, that
he released his chosen people out of captivity, saying: the Lord of heaven
who has made me Lord over the whole earth, he has commanded me, to build
him an house in Jerusalem. Though he was an heathen, and chief ruler over all
the world: yet he disobayed not the heavenly voice, sending Zorobabell the
chief of the Jews, proclaming, that it might be lawful for any of those,
which were in captivity, to go home and to help up the buildinge of the
house of the Lord: bringing out the golden vessels, which Nabuchodonozer
brought from the temple of Jerusalem, and yielding them all into the hands of
Zorobabell, and the rest whom he sent unto Jerusalem to build up the wasted
temple, giving them great freedom, authority and store of gold, of filuer,
of work men, and all kind of suppliance what so ever.

After this his religious bounty toward the temple of the Lord, he had
great battles against the King of Babylon, and many other mighty Princes:
against whom the Lord gave him so great and so good success, that after he
had overcome the rich and strong king Craesus king of Babylon, and that most
mighty magnificent famous City, Cirus.
which many other most puissant Princes, he alone was chief ruler of the
Assirians, the Medes, the Persians: being the first erector, of the second
Monarch, of the world. Seldan.
Wherein we see most plainly the great care and dilligent eye, which the
Lord has unto his temple, in that he commanded Cyrus to reedifie it: and
the good success which follows those, which help to build the same:
Especially if they persevere in their good devotion unto the end.

But if after they have begun to work in the spirit, they incline
themselves to fulfill the desire of their fleshly eye: Let them know though
they obtain most excellent victories and high renown in the battle, though
they be placed over many kingdoms, Plutarch.
and have obtained the height of their desire, in what they can wish in this
world: yet after all this, shall succeed the infamous death of Cyrus, who
with his exceeding great army was overcome in the feelde. And good cause why,
since (as Plato Plato.
writes) he sinned much in bringing up his children wantonlie, commanding
his own brother to be slain very treacherously.

Let no man presume so much as to doubt that there is a God the rewarder of
the just and punisher of the wicked: and that so merciful on the one part, and
so perfectlye just on the other, that of his exceeding mercy, he rewards
the least good deed of us sinful wretches, and punishes every sin
whatsoever, (vnleast we do hartelie repent and turn our selves truly unto
his mercy) which we commit against his divine majesty.

How comes it to pass, that we are become like horse and mule, Esai, 1.
which have no understanding? If the carter do but wagge his whippe, the
horses, hie on apace: if the shepheardes dog do but bark, the sheep do
whirrie all on heaps: if the lion roar, the beasts of the forest tremble.
And yet the Lord calls daily and hourelie by signs from heaven, by fires in
the air, by strange courses in the waters, by unnatural monsters in the earth,
Amos, 3.
by loss in the field, and by scarefire in the house, by sickness in the
body, by the denouncing of death to our souls: and no man trembles, no man
runs, no man looks up, no man once regards it. O ^sencelesse sensuality.

Do you marvel why your grief lasts day and night, and your disseases
be incurable, since you have such great store of honor and wealth, to ease
your mind which poor men want? they want them both in deed, and fith they
seldom taste the meat, the Lord of his mercy seldom offers them the
sower sauce, belonging to such dainty dishes. Therefore let al men leave their
wandering thoughts of fancy, of chance, ill luck, wicked men, evil minds,
deceitful hearts: Non est malum in ciuitate, quod non fecit dominus, there is
no chance or fortune in regard of God, neither has the wicked any power to
hurt, but where the Lord shall permit, and he permits not without deserte.
Amos, 3.
There is no deserte without sin, no sin without punishment: no punishment
without deserved pain, vnleast we repent, no repentance without sufficient
restitution, as much as lies in us.

Therefore thou which art strong, marvel not that thou art wounded of the
weak, whose heart perhaps is greater then thine. Thou which art rich and
farest daintelie, August.
marvel not that thou lie sick, pininge, consuming, groaning, with the
palsy in thy head, the burning in thine heart, the Ciatica in thy hippes, the
stone in the rei^es, the gout in the thy toe, thine arm, or thy leg, the
burning ague through thy whole body. Thou which art mighty wise and
honorable, merueile not if thou be brought under: if thy foolish doings
breed the repentance with discredit. Thou which have honor and riches,
dominions, and power, health and Physicians, credit and success, at thy will,
marvel not though thou want children, or having one only child, which is all
thy joy: when he is taken away by untimely death. Say not to thy self, O what
ill fortune is this, that having one only child in whom I ioyed, he should
be thus taken from me, neither weep so bitterly for thy natural child.

O ye sons of the earth weep not for your children but weep for your
selves, Luke, 23.
and your own sins against God. Know ye right well, that who so ever
makes his joy of any thing, provides for any thing, honors any thing,
more or in comparison of the Lord: either he shall not enjoy it, or it shall
not enjoy him. This is the Mayor, and the Minor is like unto it, which is this.

There is no adversity, what so ever comes to us, but it is for our sins,
though not the thousand part which we deserve, but as it were a philip, in
respect of the cutting off of the head.

If we will but turn our eyes from the vain cloud of worldly folly and
confusion, we shall see most plainly, that there is no sickness, no
untimely death, Reg. 4.
no loss of Parents or children, no imprisonmentes, no aduersitye what so
ever, but it is sent of the Lord for our sin, and on the contrary, that the
Lord is so full of goodness and loouing mercy, that he continually
blesses every good deed of ours what so ever, and that by his continual
mercies, showed unto them which love him, and his holy temple, where his name
is to be praised to the worlds end.

We may see it plainly amongst the heathen, that the Lord is just in
remembering his promised mercies, Psalm, 57.
to all them which fear him, and say also with that holy Prophet: Verily
there is a reward for the just? not for the Jew only, or the Christian
only, or for this nation, this degree, this sort or kind of men only: but
as saint Peter affirms, there is no acception of persons with God: but in
every nation who so ever fears the Lord a right, and works
righteousness, he is accepted in the sight of God.

Let all men therefore learn to fear the Lord aright, let them open the
fountain of their charitable compassion toward their brethren, especially
toward his holy temple. At the least let not us be more unkind unto the
spouse of Christ then were the heathen. Look back again, to that high
mountain, from whence we are newly descended.

Cyrus began to build the temple of the Lord, and he prospered wonderfully:
he forgatte the Lord, and he came to an evil end. Darius Darius.
also succeeded him, who finished the building of the temple, begun by Cirus,
willing his lords and captains beyond the floude, that in any wise they
should not hinder the Jews in their building. But that if they wanted stone,
or timber, or silver, or gold, calves, goats, kiddes, salt, oil, or wine,
they should let them have all things at their will, showing therein his good
mind, and the cheifest use of these worldly goods in these words:

Vt offerant deo coeli oblationes, orentque pro vita regis and filiorum eius.
Esdras, 3.
That they may offer up oblations to the God of heaven, and pray for the life
of the King and his children. It is very strange and worthy to be let up as a
mirour before the eyes of all Christian princes, that these heathen Emperors,
should attribute so much to the glory of God hearing but a far off, and seeing
his mighty majesty but in a cloud. What may be compared to that which
follows in the style and words of Artaxerxes written after this manner?
Artaxerxes rex regum, etc. Artaxerxes Artaxerxes.
King of Kings, etc. Unto E^dras the most learned scribe of the law of the God
of heaven. I have decreede that of Israel in my kingdoms and dominions, who
so will go with thee unto Jerusalem, that he have free liberty to go: and
what gold or money thou desire in the whole province of Babylon, take it to
buy Sacrifice to be offered in the house of your God in Jerusalem, take also
the vessels which are given thee to serve in the house of your God: in fine
what so ever is thought meet or necessary for the furnishing of the house of
God, let it be allowed you out of the Kings treasure.

I Artaxerxes the King, have commanded all mine officers beyond the floude,
that they give Esdras what he will demand, etc. Furthermore I charge you
straightly, that you exact no tribute or payment, or exaction, or any other
tax, or incumbraunce what so ever, of the Priests, Leuits, Singers, Officers,
or servants of this temple. Neither that you vpbraide them, or object any
kind of disgrace against them.

O that the Christian Princes of our time, would but look a little unto the
unfeigned love, which those heathen Monarchs showed to the God of heaven, and
his holy temple. I would they did not only possess the name of Christ and
love of his church, but that in every particular law, in every action, in every
deed of liberalitye, it might plainly appear before ye face of God and man
their first and chiefest love is the prosperity of the church of Jesus Christ:
and not only the general name of profession, but that after the example of
those heathen kings, they would love it indeed, and the ministers thereof,
Paralip. 2.
that they would give wood and stone, iron and lead, gold, and silver, to the
building of the Lords house, to the celebrating of his divine service, to the
good and honorable maintaining of his ministers. And not only in making
general laws, which may seem to acknowledge this calling to be good, nor in
taking, but in giving to the Lord, and the maintenance of his holy worship,
the first fruits of their hearts and minds, which is more than I can briefly
comprehend.

Neither should this charity be shut up only in the heart, but the
fountains thereof (if it be right) are oftentimes so pierced with the finger
of God, that the rivers of this charitable and heavenly oil, runs down not
only into the church it self, but into the bosoms and bones of the officers,
the singers, the porters, and the lowest minister of the church, in such sort,
that no unjust law, commission, payment, punishment or encumbrance whatsoever,
shall hinder them from their, good, lawful, and daily administration in the
Church of God. And if they should: yet if the cry of the poor disciple of
Jesus Christ once come to the princes ear: no doubt he sitting in the place of
God, will also break out and say in the person of God: touch not mine
anointed: but let them be free, Paralip. 1.
for the Lord which placed me in my throne, he has put the word in my
mouth. Have not I said it? it is written in the volume of his book, that I
should do his will, and shall I not come? he has commanded, and shall I not
obey? he has always blessed those which loved his temple, and shall not I be
partaker of the same? This blessing above all others of the Lord, is so
manifest, that every nation, every kindred, yea even the heathen if they have
but a little spark of the reverence of his holy name, they have greatly
prospered therewith.

It was the manner of the ancient Graecians, Grecians.
to build temples, and amongst all other they solemnized the temple of Apollo,
endowing it with great honors, freedom, lands and possessions, after which
customable benevolence, showed unto their God, they prospered so greatly, more
than they were wont, that they woonne many great battles against the
Persians, with such exceeding glory, that they did rise to the third Monarcke
of the whole world: Alexander.
most highly esteeming of the ^temple of their God, and that in such reverence,
that in no wise they would take the least iotte from the same, though it were
for saving of a kingdom.

This appears plainly by Alexander the great, who was wisely instructed of
Aristotle, after the manner of the Philosophers, that he should first fear
God, and above all things keep his hands from the spoil of temples dedicated
to the Gods. Therefore when he wanted frankensence to sacrifice, he would not
take it out of the temple at home, or exact it of Apolloes Priests (who had
great store) but after great wars and many honorable exploites, he
brought it out of far countries: and then bestowed it in sacrificing most
plentifully, saying; that to the Gods he would not be a niggard. With this
good mind he prospered both by sea and by land, his power was mighty, his
conquests many, his name great, even Alexander the great and mighty Monarcke
of the Grecians. Shall I go forwards as I have begun, discussing the course
of times, the succession of kingdoms, and the good success of those which
indeed have loved the Church? or is there any which doubts of the great
blessings which follow them and their seed, who build and bestow liberally
on the house of God: and the grievous curses which fall on them which do the
contrari^? The (...) always observed this rule, that above all other things,
they begun with the reverence of their Gods, their temples, their sacrifices,
and both in peace and war, their chiefest end was the maintaining of the same.

Ianus Ianus,
was the first that made temples to the Gods in Italy, appointing sacrifices
and other rites thereunto belonging. And therefore as Tullie Tully.
says, in sacrifices, he is always remembered in the beginning of their
prayers. Such as he sowed, such did he reap, for the posterity much
celebrated his memory for this fact, and built a most solemn temple in his
name. By which religious mind, they thought that they flourished more in peace,
and had greater victories in the wars, than any other people. In which their
exceeding great victories, according to the rites and religion of their nation,
they imitated that well disposed Alexander the great, who having won the city
of Thebes, and sacked it to the ground, destroying, captyuating, and banishing
of the inhabitants thereof above 4000. He spared none save only the
priests of that city, those which were strangers there of Macedonia, and all
the kindred of that learned poet Pyndarus.

Much like to this was that of the Romans, who when they had conquered that
fair ancient City Alba: T. Liuius.
they destroyed all the buildinges thereof, save only the temples and
churches: being afraid least if they should take any thing from the temples
of the gods, they should thereby make them their enemies, and so not only they
should come to some (...), but also their whole common wealth should be
brought to utter ruin and destruction. That this was their resolute religious
opinion, it appears in sundry places of their histories. For when Tullus
Hostillius T. Hostilius.
had conquered the Sabynes, destroyed all the fair buildings of that city,
and carried the people thereof unto Rome) as it is plainly showed in that
history) only the churches remained untouched, and unviolated, as holy houses
on which they durst not presume to lay their hands: which reverence done to
the religious houses of the gentiles, since it was done by the aforenamed king it
seemed that it rather proceeded of the wise policy, and rule of regiment,
left to him by that worthy ruler Numa Pompilius N. Pom.
his predecessor, then of any great devotion which he had toward the gods
or their holy temples, in that it is written of him, that he accounted
nothing less honorable or princely, then to apply himself to the honor of
religion.

Therefore his fierce, wild, desperate mind: was so daunted and thoroughly
pierced with deadly agony, and shaking fare, that of a neglector of religion,
and religious houses, suddenly he left all other matters whatsoever, most
earnestly and superstitiouslie fulfilling even the least ceremonies of their
religion. But because he became religious rather for fear than for love
(through the wrath of God) he and his house together were burned, and clean
consumed with lightning from heaven. So far were the people of that age from
spoiling the temples of their own gods, that when they conquered any nation,
they feared to lay hands on the temples or any other thing. Nay it seemed to
them great sacrilege and a thing always punished by God to alter or translate
the holy rites, or any thing thereunto belonging, as appears in the same
history.

After Tullus had conquered the Sabynes, and sacked their city, being now in
his majesty, replenished with honor and all kind of kingly abundance: of a
sudden, news came to the court that it rained stones in the mount Albaine.
Albani.
Whither when they had sent messengers and found it so, there was also a voice
heard in the mount crying aloud, and saying, that Albines should use their own
Country Religion which they had left, when they left their temples behind
them desolate, and lost their country.

With this the Romans were also much moved, so that for memory of this they
appointed certain solemn feast days.

Nether was this religious mind only proper to the Romans, who in this point
of all people were most religious. But common also to other people, even by the
law and instinct of nature, as appears by the legates of Locris sent to the
Senate of Rome who (as it is partly recorded of Celsus of Verona, after many
great injuries and violences offered to them and their Country, they repeated
this as the chiefest, saying.

There is one thing (O worthy senate) of which even that Religion, which
nature has infixed in every man's mind does will us to complain: we know
right well how devoutly and ceremoniouslie you embrace, not only your own
gods, but how favorably you entreat and use the gods of other nations. We
have a temple dedicated unto Proserpina. Proserp.
Amongst other his abominable facts, your Legate Pleminius did take away the
treasure of this Temple, Temp.
he shipped it and hoisted up sail, but the wind blew, the tempests did
arise, the waves tossed, the surges fomed, the sea roared in such sort, that
the ships were violently reuersed to the shore from which they went, and
spletted on the sands, where the treasure was found, and restored to the temple
again. Nether did any thing ever prosper which he took in hand after that
deed, so that being driven from Italy, he entering Greece, in the night, he
died a shameful, and an unlucky death.

After this, your legate and the tribunes of soldiers, presumed so far also as
to lay violent hands on the treasure belonging to the same temple, therewith
defiling themselves and their houses. Which fact (o worthy Senate) unless you
will by your religious mind reform, without doubt ye shall have no good
succesie in your affairs either in Italy or in Afric: but their blood shall
be spilt, and your common wealth hazarded also in lue of that fact. And to
say the truth even at this instant, the wrathful reuengement of the goddess
does light upon your captains and soldiers: we our selves hane lately seen how
they run violently together with banners displayed one part against another:
the captain of one part is Pleminius, Pleminius
of the other the two tribunes. Thus they daily fight together most cruelly,
most barbarously, most deadly. Many of the soldiers be often in a phrensy: and
think you that the gods has let the captains go scotfree? no she punishes
them surely. The Tribunes were, taken by the Legate, and whipped with rods. Also
the Legate at length apprehended by the policy of the Tribunes, his body all
rent, and torn with sundry torments, his nose and his ears cut off: he was
left bleeding almost to the death. Afterward the Legate recovering cast the
Tribunes into prison, whipping and scourging them stocking and tormenting them,
with most vile punishments fit for roges and rascals, he put them to death,
forbidding any man to bury them. These be the punishments which the Gods
has sent on the spoilers of her temple. Nether will she cease to torment them
all and every of them with innumerable plagues and punishments, til the
treasure taken from her temple be restored to it again. This was the speech of
the Legates of Locris unto the senate of Rome: which shows plainly, that as well
the Gretians as the Romans counted it a wicked thing to diminish or take ought
from the temple of the gods of the nations.

Nay they themselves not only took this wise and sure way in the establishing
of their commonwealth, but also in every particular action whatsoever: they
had a special eye and regard unto the Gods, their religion, their reverence,
their worship, their temples.

And surely if we look into the Roman histories we may see most plainly, that
they observed the rule of their own Poet, A Jove principium musae, Maro.
they first of all regarded the temples of their Gods, and then their
commonwealth. By which safe rule they conquered east by Pompey, and far west
by Julius Caesar: Caesar.
who at the first was most of all men in that age, addicted to the maintaining
of temples and their Gods. Whereby he did gather such strength, and rose so
high, that neither Prince nor king could retire the force of his army, or
subdue him in the battle. Till at the length, through daily practice of
shedding blood, by force of arms, his heart was so hardened, that unnaturally
he drew out his sword, and lift up his arms against his own country, from
whence he had his chief beginning. But afterward when he had held forth
his swoorde against his mother (which gave him it first into his hands) and
had dissolved the most famous and renowned state of the Roman Senate, and by
force made himself Emperor or Rome. That which is the desteny of all worldly
felicity, the Lord yielded him up to a most famous death, being stabbed by
the hands of those wise and ancient Senators.

Why do you reason thus within your selves against a plain truth, joined most
narrowly with your own souls health, saying these be examples of Jews and
Gentiles? If the matter be doubtful and ambiguous, why do you not rather help
to confirm this true conclusion, since the open display thereof is the great
glory of God, and the benefit of his church? will you that I prove the true
leuel of mine aim, and that I draw forth this line, from Persia in the east,
unto England in the west, seioyned from the continent of the whole world? Luke.
7.
The Jews they requested our savior Christ, most instantly, that he would
revive the Centurions servant, saying that he was worthy of that good turn,
for he had loved their nation, and had built them a synagogue. Which good works
because they proceeded from a perfect faith (as appeared afterward by the
approbation of our savior Christ^ the Lord did not forget him in the day of
his sorrow, and most bountifully remembered his faithful devout deeds.
Afterward though many years, the sun of the Gospel, was darkened with the
manifold storms, and clowdy tempests of persecution: yet when it began to
reflect the clear beams on the top of the highest mountains of the earth,
and to illuminat the heart of that holy and renowned Emperor Constantine
Constantine.
the great, the sun waxed warm, the fields were pleasant, the soil was
fruitful, and the seed of the Gospel of Christ sprung up apace in sundry
sorts: so that this godly Emperor, though he could not come to the beholding
of the sun himself, yet he received the brightness of his shining beams, so
clearly in at his eye, and shut them so secretly in his heart, that in perfect
zeal he showed his loving heart unto the Christians: he stretched forth his
hands, and most heartily embraced the poor orphane Christians, dispersed,
persecuted, weakened, discomfited. He nursed and nourished them, he called
them together into one place, knowing that united virtue is the stronger. He
gave them the milk of good and wholesome council, willing them in the name of
God to foresee what was the truth, to seek that, to discuss that, and with
one consent to conclude that, and he with all his will and power would ratify
the same. After that the iointes of this little infant began to knit, and
council waxed riper in the head, he supplied stronger meats, he gave the^
liberty of calling a general council, he supplied with yearly commodities
the wants of those which had illuminated his heart, with the glad tidings of the
God of heaven: and after innumerable great charges, gifts, and endowments,
bestowed on the church (that which is an example for all Christian princes) he
spent all his time in meditating upon the law of the Lord, in studiyng and
devising how he might promote the religion and true faith of Jesus Christ.
Herein considering that we cannot possess our souls in this life, without
bodies, nor bodies without meat, nor meat without money, nor money unless it
be given: with great joy and love he laid the fou^dations of many fair
temples, raising the^ an exceeding great height, Eusebius.
in the honor of Christ; endowing them with great store of lands and
possessions, therewith giving great freedom unto those places, and all the
ministers of Christ, to whom they belonged. He built a very solemn and
sumptuous temple, in the place where our savior did rise again, commanding
that it should far pass all other temples of the world in exceeding fair
walls and marble pillars, adorning it within most richly, with princely
ornaments, more sumptuous than can be expressed in a few words: adding
thereto solemn monuments of gold, silver, and almost infinite numbers of
precious stones.

Neither was his love as is the love of man, soon hot and soon cold: or as
is the love of these latter days, in which we surely look for the great day
of doom: but he proceeded in building and founding of temples, and religious
places, for the maintaining of the poor disciples of Jesus Christ. At Bethlem
also where our savior was borne, he builded a temple, and that at the motion
of that devout woman the Lady Helina Helina.
the Empress his mother: who being endued with special graces from heaven,
ascended high after the steps of Christ on the top of Mount Olyuet (from
whence he ascended up into heaven) even in the very top thereof, founding a
sanctuary for the Church of Christ, and at the bottom of the same mount,
Eusebius vit.
in that place where our savior was wont to resort with his Disciples,
Constant.
she erected a very fair Church, showing unto her son the way wherein he
should walk: not only in founding temples for the woorship of the Lord, but
in giving unto the poor, in redeeming captives, in clothing the naked with her
own hands, in visiting the poor sick Christians.

The clear candle which this virtuous woman held in her hand, gave such light
unto the most worthy Emperor her son, that imediatly after his mothers
death he builded temples in all provinces, making them much more fair than
they were before.

Also he built many fair and sumptuous temples in Constantinople, he retired
back again into Asia even to Nicomedia, the first and chiefest city in
Bithinia, where he built an exceeding large temple, and no less beautiful;
adjoining to it on all sides very high and fair Cloisters, within he erected
a sanctuary of an infinite height, being in form eight-angled, with very huge
pillars, sumptuous arches, bossinges and monumentes, all adorned with great
plenty of gold, brass and other precious mettell.

Though the church of Christ and his profession was now but young amongst the
gentiles: yet he had a special regard to the faithful patriarchs of old. He
looked far back, and since his sight was good he beheld his forefather
Abraham, and remembering that heavenly apparation of the holy, blessed and
glorious Trinity under the oak of the valley of Mambrie: unto the patriarch
(for a monument) he commanded a fair Church to be built in the same place,
reedified all the decayed Temples and monumentes, building them very high, and
fair, destroying the Idols of the gentiles, pulling down their altars,
utterly defacing their superstitious religion, and all other worldly states
whatsoever were a hindrance or disgrace to the church of Christ.

It is plainle showed by the ecclesiastical writers, that so soon as he had
ouercomed the enemies of the Church, he employed himself and all which he
could do, by word, by work, by letter and example to reedifie the churches of
the christians, or else to build them new, leaving a most perfect pattern
behind him, which all true christians ought to behold.

When he had vanquished his enemies, all the world over, and was placed in the
throne of the empire, with great honor, triumph, glory, majesty, abundance of
health, of wealth, of liberty to command what he list: he did not swell in
his heart, with pride, but in all humility fell down before the cross of
Christ Jesus yielding himself Christ his soldier, under whose banner this most
renowned Emperor marched forward. He was not so base minded, as to look
about him how he might raise great sums from the poor people, or how he
might under some good pretense, exact some payment from the church, though his
enemies were many and mighty, his war great, his troubles innumerable, his
charges infinite: yet he did not molest any one person belonging to the
church, nether would he suffer the mightiest of his princes, once to meddle
with them.

He could not possibly be persuaded to increase his treasure with any penny
which came from the Church, or his honor, with their prerogative, or his
security with their trouble, or his credit with their disgrace.

But this foster father of the poor dispersed lambs of Jesus Christ: he
bestowed, he founded, he erected, on high, he reedified those temples which the
heretics had pulled down: he restored the lands which they had taken
away: when he took it into his hands, he did not give one half to God, and
kept the other half to himself, saying: I have two eyes, the one to look to
my kingdom, and the other to the church: But being a good true christian
philosopher, he knew, that though we have two eyes, yet we must look but one
way, nor see but one mark at once. Math. 6.
We cannot at once love both God and Mammon, sin and righteousness, the
kingdom of this world, and heaven. But he knew it truly, and wayed it
wisely in his heart, that the high God of heaven did create him, that he
blessed him, preserved him, exalted him, and gave him all that he had.

And therefore he rendered unto him and his beloved spouse, all honor,
freedom, peace, and abundance. He was taught by the holy fathers out of the
book of life, that the Lord is a ielous God, he will not part stakes with any,
nor give his honor to any other: but of him it is said, and of him only:
Thine is thy kingdom, thy power, and thy glory for ever and ever, Math. 6.
Amen.

When the good Emperor beheld this perfect style of Jesus Christ, and did see
the ensign, on which it was described, together with the church of Christ cast
down to the bare earth: he drawing near as S. Paul did to the altar, Act.
17. John. 19.
wherein was written ignoto deo: beholding but four bare letters I. N. R. I.
which signified that this was the ensign of the unknown God, not acknowledged
amongst men: forthwith he humbled himself in the flesh, and reioiced in the
spirit, that the unknown God, the God of heaven and of earth, had vouchsafed
him that special grace to reveal himself unto him. He cast down his banner
and took up the cross of Jesus Christ crucified: he cast all dignities,
courts, commissions and kingdoms aside, and laid his honor in the dust, in
regard of the true honor of Jesus Christ, (as we have mentioned) he employed
all the gifts which he had given him, even of mind, body and goods,
especially in founding, erecting, beautifying, perfecting, adorning,
priuiledging, and freeing the church of Christ: as Eusebius Eusebius.
testifyeth most plainly in these words: Ecclesias vero Dei, incredibile est
and supra omnem opinionem, etc. It is incredible, and far beyond all men's
opinions to recount what gifts and ornaments he bestowed on the church of
God, what freedom, what plenty of maintenance, what honors he gave to them
which had wholly bent themselves to serve the Lord in his holy temple, daily to
pray for the safety of the land, for the honor of the King, and the sins of
the people.

This was the expressed piety of that first and most Christian Emperor, and
the Lord of his great mercy redoubled his kindness even into his bosom: for
he not only showed him the scale which Jacob saw, and the gate of heaven
opened at the top therereof: but he gave him that great and rare gift of
perseverance in his devout deeds, even unto the end.

Therefore the Lord blessed him in his palace, Deuteronomy. 16.
and in the field, Psalm. 90.
from the arow which flies in the wars abroad and from false friends at home,
and in such plentiful manner, that all things which he took in hand did
prosper wonderfully. His victories are compared with the conquests of Cyrus,
but his end was much more happy, for when he had most honorably passed the
full course of the life of man, and enjoyed all the blessings of the earth,
above the space of sixty years, not once troubled with any sickness of body
or vexation of mind, but in wisdom and true christian love, flourished
continuallye like the green bay tree, whose fruit does comfort the heart of
man: Psalm. 103.
like the spreading vine, and like the fat Olive branch, which makes him to
have a joyful countenance: since he distilled these sweet drops of his
sincere love, into the bosoms of the poor distressed christians of his days:
the Lord he kindled the spark of true christian love in his heart, and made
him glad with the joy of his countenance. He had always victory against his
enemies, conquering from Scythia in the east, to this I Will of Britain in the
west.

Neither was the love of the Lord extended unto this good Emperor in his life
only, but to the end all men may know that the love of the Lord is not
fained, that his justice never changes, that his mercy endures for ever;
Genesis 17.
he departed out of this life, being full of years in his ripe old age, even
about the feast of the ascension of our savior Christ; and the descension of
the holy Ghost, at high noone. At which instant (his soul leaving the mortal
body here on earth) he was no doubt received up into heaven, by the hands of
immortal angels, there enjoying the crown of eternal bliss. Which the Lord
has provided for all those assuredly which love his coming, and maintain
his holy militant Church here on earth. Neither was the reward of the Lord
only proportioned by the merit of man: neither did his munificent mercy,
only exceed the merit of this true christian Emperor, so much as the
compass of the heavens, (whose least stars are much bigger then the land
and sea) exceeds the earth, Gen, 1. 7.
in giving him his hearts desire, (which is eternal bliss and felicity) but
that which the Lord recounteth to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for a sure
blessing here on earth: he gave this Godly Emperor, three good and godly
sons, to ^it upon his seat after him, neither for one or two lives only,
but as it is written of his posterity, Vt imperii seeds, etc. That as the
Empire descended from his father, Eusebius.
unto him, so by the course and law of nature, it was continued unto his
childrens children and their posterity. Neither is it all only to be
marked, what fruit the branch bears in the top, but if we be good
simplicians, we will have recourse unto the root, from whence the first life
and natural virtue proceeds. Herein if we consider well and look more
narrowly into it, we shall plainly perceive that these former examples, more
nerely concern our native couutri-men, then at the first sight appears: since
this is the tree which we so highly commend, and we be all branches of the
same. Neither does this more narrowly concern us in respect of the clear
fountain of christianity, which he opened to us with his finger, directing
the course thereof more plentifully into this worthy Island: but because by
blood, we be descended from the same line and kindred from whence Constantine
the great did first spring, (in that the virtuous lady Helina his mother, was
the daughter of king Coell, sometimes king of this noble Island) let us contend,
not only to retain, Gua L. red
the true virtue of her noble blood, but also that we be like minded unto her,
in fasting, in praying, in the giving to the poor, in redeeming captives, in
setting the bound at liberty, in founding of temples, and maintaining them
honorably, which with their bewtiful feet, bring to us the glad tidings of
the Gospel. Amongst whose excellent virtues that one does shine most clear,
and represents unto us, the express image of her virtuous mind: that in all
her iournies, being either near or far of, when so ever she came to a nie
city or town, so soon as she was once alighted, before she would admit
any suit or person to her speech, or that she minded any worldly affairs:
first of all she would have recourse unto the temple of the Lord, there
pouring out her prayers and petitions before him, bestowing rich jewels, and
costly ornaments on the Church, and distributing her alms very liberally
amongst the poor, where so ever she came.

Wherefore the Lord of his exceeding mercy, blessed her with a long, a
prosperous, and blessed life, giving her a willing desire, to leave this
wretched world, after she had passed eighty years in this tedious vale of
vanitye. In which old age she called that pearelesse Emperor of the world
her son, unto her, holding his hand in hers, she willed him to bestow all
her treasure, and earthly goods what so ever on good, and godly uses. Which
divine behest, once passed from out her gracious lips: she committed her
self into the hands of God, her body died away, Jesus Christ receiving her
blessed soul into his hands. O wonderful depth of the mercy of God,
toward those which love him. O ye true christians what so ever, and ye which
descend from the blood and line of that most virtuous Empress: paral, 2.
though now in the old crooked age of this world, charity be almost frozen to
death, yet let not hardness of heart, prevail so much against nature, that
being branches of so worthy a tree, ye should give no shaddowe, no leaves,
no blossoms, no fruit at all to your posterity.

This honorable nurse of the Church, she sprang out of the natural soil,
wherein we now dwell, her virtuous seed did spread it self, both far and
near, it took deep root in Thrasia, in Greece, in Jury, in Italy, in
France, in Germany, in Spain, and could the narrow seas restrain the course
thereof, from her first native soil, Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae, that
which is bredde in the bone will never leave the flesh, and the bountiful
sowing of this virtuous Ladies seed, brought forth a plentiful harvest, in
England some taste whereof does sweeten the mouths of some, and comfort
the hearts of others at this day. If ye be not moved, with the discovery
of so fruitful a vine, which first did spring forth of English soil, and
has spread it self over all christian nations, yelding pleasant juice and
comfortable to the hearts of all true christians.

If you count not of these examples, which at this day present themselves,
before your eyes, through the glass of other men's rising and falling: If your
own evils will not move you, because they be familiar: then once again do
but look back unto this mother vine, let the root alone, now mark the
passage of her bows, and the goodly spreading of her branches: and you shall
see many fair, well plumped clusters of grapes, which though thou can not
reach, yet disdain not to behold the fruitfulnes of the vine. Though it
grow beyond the seas, yet give it the due commendation: though the root
thereof be founded in simplicity, yet it bears wholesome beries in the
top: though the Lord thereof was derided with a crown of simple thorns: Yet
the kings and princes of the earth, did reign by his permission. All knees
shall bow to him, who was the planter of this vine. All christian princes shall
honor him: and though the wild Bore have broke down the hedge, though he
have spoiled the garden, and rooted up the vine, so that no one branch thereof
does now appear: yet the mightiest Emperors will not pass by, no they count
more of this wasted piece, then of all the kingdoms in the world. Exodus, 3.
They will put of their shoes when they enter it, because it is holy ground:
they will cast down their crowns of gold, from their heads, because in that
place it was said before the face of many witnesses, to him whose kingdom
endures for ever. Hail King of the Jews. Therefore Godfrie that worthy
Bulliner, the king of France, John, 19. Godfrie Bullin.
after he had won the holy land, being offered a crown of gold to be set upon
his head, he utterly refused it, saying: it does not become me to wear a
crown of gold, where my Lord and savior, the Lord of lords, the king of kings,
the God of heaven and earth, did were a crown of thorns. Herein we may behold
the true image of a right noble heart, Mic, Ritius
for if we look about us, and behold the common sort of base minded men, all
their desire is, not so much by virtue and prowes to attain the victory
(which this noble Godfrie did, first entering the wall himself) as to have the
abundant wealth of the place, the majesty of the crown, the glory of the
triumph. Of these men it is not so, commonly said, as truly verified: he
which has the most show without, often times has least within, and truly many
puppies in the world, if they were but a little sequestered, from the pomp and
pride which they show without in glorious manner, themselves were lighter then
a feather, which is carried away with every blast of wind, and when it
falls down, is trodden under foot. Therefore because they have it not within,
they are very careful to magnify themselves, with the outward appearaunce of
that majesty, which in deed they have not. These base sort of men if they had
ouerpassed the walls with such good luck, and once been set on horse back,
they would have galloped over the bodies, of their poor yelding adversaries,
they would have been most fierce and cruel: they would have bathed their
swords in their blood, they would have sought great glory by barbarous cruelty,
and their chief desire would have been, with the golden cote on their back,
the scepter in their hand, the crown on their head, the applause of the
people, to sit in the throne of majesty. This did not the noble Godfrie of
Bulle^, he did not so, but possessing the true treasure of right valor,
Adricom.
and perfect virtue in his heart, he counted not his saftie to stand in the
death of his enemies, nor his chief possession in worldly riches, nor his
honor in glistering show, nor his triumph in magnificent troops of noble men,
nor his majesty in a crown of molten metal. This he might have had, but he
would not, si quidem posse and nolle nobile, the noble mind often may, but will
not. The virtue of the mind was his possession, and wisdom was his guide, in
this famous victory. He was studied in books of art and wisdom, he red
the Poet and liked his heroical verse full well: Virgilius.
Sicelides musae, paulo mayor a canemus: non omnes arbusta iuuant humilesque
myricae. His mind was great indeed, he could not glory in fleshly pleasures.
He saw this famous City, was but a heap of lime and sand, built with the
hands of many poor slauishe workmen, the riches, like glistering poison,
infused with the wine into ye cup of gold, the whole kingdom of Judea, he saw
was earthly, and easy to be won at al times, with a sword of iron and
steel. Therefore he counted the glory of the crown and scepter but a toye.
And what was that then which he counted off? even that for which he came, by
which he conquered, in which he meant to dwell. Jerusalem. Not that Jerusalem
whose, desolata est, did raise a most sweet pleasant note, from the musitions
pen: not the figured, but the perfigured, even the Church of Christ, and also
that which is figured by it, the heavenly Jerusalem, the true holy city, the
place of eternal rest, of the true glory of perfect triumph, where he might
safely and ever say unto his own soul: Judge, 4.
O my soul thou have marched valiantly. He counted not of glory, which
rises out of the earth, and therefore most wisely, he fixed his heart and
mind, on true eternity, which dwells only in the heavens. Having
conquered, he did not ascend the chair of majesty, that he might show
himself unto the people, with great glory: but as that holy and victorious
conqueror Henry the fifte, king of England, when with a few thousands of men
he had vanquished Charles the Dolphin of France strengthened with a royal
army (wherein was most of his nobility) he with all his army kneled down in
the feeld, psalm, 114.
holding up his hands to heaven, singing and saying, Non nobis Dominenon nobis:
sed nomini tuo da gloriam, not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but give the glory
to thy holy name. Even so, this worthy conqueror of Jerusalem, though not with
the same words, yet with the like devotion he humbled himself before the
Lord: for the space of seven days, walking on foot in Jerusalem, beholding
the places, where our savior Christ was co^uersant, when he lived here on
earth, where he was taken, where he was examined, where he was whipped and
scourged, and despitefully spit on, derided with a reed in his hand and a crown
of thorns on his head. The mighty conqueror did behold all these with his
eyes, and his heart melted within him. He often kneeled down and kissed the
places where our savior Christ had been. With weeping eyes, he looked up
into the heavens, and his soul desired to see the Lord of light. That the Lord
of his mercy would regard him he daily prayed with great humility, liberallye
bestowing on the poor* In the place where the temple was, founding a most
solemn college for religious men, giving them great and large liuinges:
calling them Prebends, building them many fair houses near unto the Church,
for them to dwell in. These and innumerable such like, where the fruits of
this noble mind, which being clear in the sight of God, of Angels, and of
men, the Lord blessed and prospered him wonderfully, in so much that in regard
of his high prowess and victorious conquests, to his eternal fame, with all
posterity, he is reputed one of the nine worthies of the world. The fountain
of this perfect glory did first break forth in France, flying over the
highest Alps, even to Jerusalem, where by the way, if we will but divert a
little, into Spain, amongst some good, some bad, we shall see one most
excellent famous noble woman, a great friend, and true lover of the church. The
best and truest chronicles, give her this style. Serenissima, ac catholica
domina, Ludouic. Brunus.
Elizabetha, Hispaniaru^, ac vtriusque Siciliae, ac Jerusalem Regina, etc. The
most virtuous, catholic lady, Elizabeth Queen of Sapine, Sicily, and
Jerusalem, etc. This virtuous woman much like the godly Helina, mother of
Constantinus, was so greatly esprised with the love of Jesus Christ and his
church so yt she bent all her muse and cogitation, seeking daily and
diligently, how she might beat down the heathenish power of the Turks, and
infidels, therewith to enlarge the kingdom of Christ, and the dominions of the
Christians, to the end that her virtuous intent might the better prosper, she
began this work with fasting, and often praying, with almes-deedes, and
founding of many godly temples, not leaving any work undone, which she
thought was acceptable in the sight of God, nor any means untried, which might
procure the favor of Jesus Christ, her loving savior. She turned her every
way, and looked diligently on all sides, how and where she might best bestow
the fruitful seed of her charitable devotion: her heart was so enflamed with
this heavenly desire, that she could not contain her self any longer in her
palace. In great desire she found no rest. And what followed? with the
consent of her princely Ferdinando, she mustered her men of war, and
gathered together the power of a mighty prince, like the ancient Debora, she
marched forwards into the kingdom of Granata, the greatest part whereof had
been inhabited by the Ismaelites above seven hundred years, and defended by
them a warlike people continually against the Christians: which kingdom paid
tribute to the crown of Spain 800000 crowns by year: she counted not of the
force of so huge and strong a people, neither once regarded the great reuenewe
which came into her treasury that way. The winters diverse times were so
extreme cold, that her captains and soldiers requested her most instantly to
break up her camp, till a more seasonable time of the year: yet she
answering that this was the subtlety of Satan, to hinder the work of the
Lord, warred continually for the space of three years, till the enemies of
Christ clean overcome, she made that whole realm christian, bestowing very
liberally on the poor, M. Ritius.
the maimed, the captives, the strangers, that were in any distress. In the
same realm founding and erecting many goodly churches, colleges, and
hospitals, for the poor maimed comfortles people. We may see by the large
spreading and plentiful yield, that this fruitful branch, did spring from
Helynaes root. For she not only adue^tured her own person in mighty wars
against the Infidels, farther than that sex does commonly afford: but she
sent into the wide west Ocean sea, to the 7 fortunate Islands, and to the
Atlantich Ila^ds, bearing far north and by west, gaining them all and their
people to the christian religion, which never heard of Christ before. In which
Islands, to the end that after they had tasted the sweet milk of the Gospel
of Christ, they might be fed with stronger meat: having built and erected many
parish churches, besides diverse goodly colleges, she founded and erected in
Granata, four Cathedral churches; in the fortunate Islands, two: in the
Indian Islands, three: in Affrike she won Mellam, L. Brunus.
a most strong defenced town: she won from the Turk the Island Cephalena,
sometimes Ulysses inheritance, amongst the Grecians: and most lovingly she
restored it to the Venetians, whose sometimes it was. She won the City and
tower of Ostia, violently detained from the Romans by a tyrant: restoring it
unto the Bishop of Rome: she enacted that there should be but one religion in
her dominions, one faith, one form of divine worship, and thereupon,
notwithstanding the great tribute, which came yearly into her treasury from
the Jews, she expelled from her dominions all the Jews which dwelt there,
even to the number of six hundred thousands, also she offered to all Sarasins
and Mahometists, either freely to depart out of her dominions, or to become
Christians. Whereby after some time and diligent preaching, within one year, of
the Sarasins, there were converted and baptized above twenty hundred thousand.
Lastly, she gave to the adorning of the temple, built over the sepulcher of
our savior Christ, four costly syndones, which whilst she was with child,
she did spin and weaued afterward with her own hands, in token of her dutiful
obedience toward him. O most fruitful and virtuous Lady, which shunned neither
cold nor heat, nor wars, nor weapons, nor wearying of her self, nor spending
her treasure, her time, her life, so that she might increase the church of
Christ, and make his name known amongst the Gentiles. Therefore the Lord looked
down from heaven upon her, with his loving countenance, giving her all that her
heart desired here upon earth, with most happy success: till at the length
after her long, prosperous, and victorious reign, she which had lead her
life most virtuously, yielded her soul into the hands of Jesus Christ, most
willingly. After whose most happy death, her childrens children were raised by
the Lord, unto the seat and title of Earls, Dukes, Kings and Emperors.

This right renowned Lady, was born in the year of our Lord 1448, and departed
this life 1504, at which time also flourished in England, that most virtuous
Princess, the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond and Darbie, mother to king
Henry the seventh.

This devout Princess being replenished with heavenly graces, well knowing
that the high honor of flesh and blood is but a glistering cloud of vanity,
leaving the transitory delights of the world, she betook her self wholly to
the service and worship of God. She fell down often on her knees secretly in
her closet, and bowed her self most humbly before him in his holy Temple,
pouring out her complaints together with the penetentiall Psalms of David,
humbly requesting the Lord in her prayers, that he would look down with his
loving compassion on his holy Church, mercifully forgiving the sins of his
people. This she did daily, ordinarily, faithfully, and sincerely. To her
divine meditations, she adjoined often fastings, with many thousands of
merciful deeds to the poor, hearing their cry: willing that they might have
access unto her, helping them to their right against the mightiest of their
Country, of what calling, place, honor, or office soever they were. Her house
most princely and solemnly ordered, her virtuous statutes set down by her
godly Counsel, and signed with her own hand (as it is to be seen at this day)
the Chapel was most reverently regarded, of all other places, and not of her
alone, but of all her honorable retinue: her hour appointed for prayer, no
pleasure, no business, no embassage, no King nor Keisar could once interrupt.
No oath within her doors, nor any word or deed which might offend the King of
heaven.

And yet those usual recreations which might very well beseem the better
sort of Christians.

Her house thus well reformed, according to the disposion of her heavenly mind,
though she waxed in years, yet she walked forth of her doors into the harvest
of the Lord, whereby the way looking up, she viewed the height and fairnes of
the temples: well thinking in her wise and Godly meditation, that there were
many goodly places, deuoid of worthy persons and many fair walls, Marh. 9.
but not so many well learned as they should be. Her thought was good, her
intent godly, her success was happy. And what was that? she seeing the
harvest great, and the laborers few, forthwith she thought to send more
laborers into the field of the Lord. And how? She pulled not down many little
Celles to build up one great College (as did the Cardinal, who lived not to
see the end of his work once begone) but wisely waying the great inconvenience
of walls without men, men without religion, religion without knowledge,
knowledge without spiritual pastors: she founded an excellent college in our
vniuersit of Ca^bridge, after the name and number of Christ and his xii.
Apostles, endowing it with goodly lands and possessions, with statutes and
rules of virtuous life, to the end, that by her means many good and skilf^ll
workmen might go forth into the harvest of the Lord. This branch of true
christian charity increased so much, and was so acceptable in the sight of
God, that by the view thereof she framed a more solemn portraiture in her
breast: for not long after she still meditating how she might best gratify the
Lord of light, who had put down her foes, and replenished her heart with joy
and gladness, according to the true rule of profiting in the schole of Christ,
she went from virtue to virtue, and from strength to strength, even a little
before her death, raising up a most solmne and sumptuous college, by her will
founding therein seauenty fellows according to the number of the seauentie
Disciples sent out by our Savior Christ into the world to preach the Gospel,
for the good weal and prosperous maintenance whereof she gave very rich,
ancient, fair, and good lands. She left them wholesome and worthy statutes,
whereby a virtuous life might be practiced, and all knowledge, as well of
tongues as of sciences, might by her godly devotion, be more happily attained.
Lastly having bestowed great lands and possessions for the maintenance of
lectures in Hebrewe, in Greek, in Latin, in Arethmetike, Rhetorike, Logic,
Philosophy, Geometry, Mathematick, Physic, Astronomy, Divinity, and such
disputations, with other profitable exercises belonging to the same. She
cleaped this latter college by the name of that Disciple whom the Lord so
loved, that he let him lean upon his breast. (...). Aristot.
For whose sake we love another him we love much more. And surely this most
vertuons princes loved our Lord Jesus with a perfect love, which so honored the
name of that disciple whom the Lord loved so much: neither did her worthy
devotion contain it self within these walls, but proceeded like the pleasant
flowing river, which gives moisture to the pastures round about it: In that
she founded a divinity lecture to be read publicly in Cambridge, and an
other in Oxford, with many other gracious deeds elsewhere. To these good
fruits, which this worthy tree of the Lords vineyard, did send forth
plentifully, (under whose shadow many of us pore souls, are shrouded from the
nipping cold in Winter, and the scorching heat of Summer at this day) the Lord
distilled the heavenly deaw of his blessing unto her heart, giui^g her a most
devout and heavenly mind here upon earth: to which all the treasure in the
world is nothing comparable, with pefect honor, and true hearty love of al
good Christians.

To which he added a faithful and loving promise, made unto the just, setting
her most princely son upon the seat of the kingdom, whilst she lived. And
after her death, his childrens children, which we see with our eyes at this
day to our great joy, peace and comfort, most heartily praying God to grant
her a long and prosperous reign, Elizab. Regina.
in this world, and in the world to come everlasting felicity, Amen.

Amen is already said, and my prayer to God shall be amen. But thend and period
is not yet: since in the field of the Lord there is good seed and tares,
wholesome herbs and weeds: sweet roses and stingingnettles

We have now showed plainly the fruitful seed of this garden, and the sweet
fragrant flowers growing in the same, which daily send up a most sweet smell
into the nostrils of the Lord, much like the odoriferous smell of Jacobs
garments, Genesis 27.
which greatly delighted the senses of his old father Isaac, or like the
precious ointment powered on the head of Aaron, running down his beard even to
the hemme of his garment.

Amongst the which good trees now named, as there are many passing pleasant
flowers, springing out of many and sundry soiles, so the peareles pearl the
flower of flowers, Tue rose of England.
the rose of England, being joined with the rest, does make the nosegay full
fair, and sweet, whose pleasant smell, because it is so wholesome to the head,
and comfortable to the heart: because the oil thereof does comfort the
bruised sinews, lowseth the dried iointes, and mittigateth swelling pains,
through the whole body: The Lord hold his holy hand over this flower, and
preserve it to his glory, according to the tenor of that old verse: Haecrosa
virtutis de coelo missa sereno,
Eternum florens, regia sceptra tenet.
This rose of true virtue, even sent from heaven, holding the kingly scepter of
this land, shall flourish for ever.

And good cause why. Since the root thereof is firmly fixed on the south-east
side of this orchyard. Over which the sun of heaven has spread his blessed
beams so plentifully, that the ground thereof is fresh and green, the flowers
fair, the smell sweet, the fruit most plentiful and very wholesome. Which
because it yields the first and sweetest taste, unto the spowse of Jesus
Christ, he has blessed it as ye have heard, and it shall be blessed. And
though I be the unworthiest of many thousands, to walk through this orchard
of the Lord: Yet if it shall please you of your courtesy to accompany me unto
the of there side, Psalm. 36.
ye shall see by the way, that we must decline from evil, and do good: that
on this side of the orchyard be many fair and large trees, whose bows be
fair, the leaves be green, the fruit is well seeming, but yet it hangs so
high, that it will not come down, the bows are so stiff, and the trees so
intractable, that they will not once bend themselves unto the hand of the most
loving spowse of Jesus Christ.

And therefore as the Lord of his mercy has blessed those abundantly, which
love his spouse, and nourish his children: so on the contrary, he makes those
trees barren, Toby 13.
which yield him no fruit. He takes the juice from them, so that their bows
wither, their leaves fall from them: the body dies: the tree is cut down
with his sharp axe, or else with great force pulled up by the root, and cast
into consuming fire. Math. 3.
But if the rank root of the evil tree, be so full of natural corruption,
and venomous posion, that it suck out the juice from the good trees near
adioining thereto, which yield wholesome fruits unto all his saints, then the
Lord he sends forth his spirit of mighty force and tempest, which breaks
the bows, Psalm. 25.
and rendeth the tree in sunder. He prepares most exquisite torments, and
intolerable dolours, for all those which impouerish his Church, which disgrace
the shepheardes of his flock, which tread down the sides of his simple
fold, Psalm. 126.
and devour his poor lambs, through the gredie and heathenish desire, which
they have to the the goods of this world. From this corrupt fountain springs,
the uncertain and the wretched cares of man's life: in that every one is set on
fire, with the sparks of infinite desires. Being once tottered in the chariot
of this uncertainty: man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself
in vain. His heart is set on vanity, and all his purchase is the sorrowful
fruits of the flesh. Though honor and riches have no stabilitie. S. Bernard
though the strength of man is like a bruised reed, which we bteake in sunder
with our fingers: though the whole world be a sea of troubles, and all the
prosperities thereof waves of perpetual disquietnes: yet man, sinful man,
presumptuous, disobedient, insatiable man: though his eyes be weak and dim,
yet will he adventure to look against the radiant sun: though he be blind,
yet will he walk: though he be weak, yet will he strive against the strongest
stream: though he be naked, yet will he offer himself, to the stroke of death:
though the drink be deadly poison: yet because the color is good, the cup
pleasant, the first taste thereof sweet: he will drink a large draught, till the
taste of his tongue empoyson his own heart, till his pleasure break out with
roaring pain: till his body be dried up, and til his soul all consumed with
sin, Job. 10.
cry out with Job: Tedet animam meam vit ae meae: it irketh me of this wicked
life.

Though this be thus: and daily example of those which descend before our eyes
into the grave, does tell us all this plainly: yet we daily carke and care,
for this carcass of ours, knowing well it is but dust, Genesis 2.
we desire sweet meats, which empoison the soul: we reverence, we fear:
most seruilely we admire worldly honor, which is lighter than vanity it
self. The wise, high, mighty, honorable, politic rulers of this world,
trouble themselves all the days of their life, in fetching, in casting, in
compassing, goods, lands, honor, dominion and power.

They rise up early, and go to bed late (as says the prophet) they eat the
bread of carefulnes, they search and seek many new ways. They inuente many
strange policies: they adventure many great dangers: they loose many friends:
they undo many poor scholars, widows, and fatherles children, even to the
loss of their own souls, and yet they say, they love the Lord and his holy
temple. O sinful hearts besotted with sensuality.

Can that ship be safe which is tossed with every surge of the sea, and
overwhelmed with every blast of wind? can that mind be quiet, which boyleth
with sundry flames of fire? Is there any surety in lightness it self? any
certainetie in outward fortune? any safety in perpetual war? any security
in present danger? any frendshippe in open defiaunce? any felicite in outward
riches? any religion in spoiling the Church?

Be there two heavens that we should make our paradise here on earth? or is
the Lords arm shortened, that he can not execute his will? or his justice
decayed, that the sinners should escape vengeance? Is he asleep, that he
is not stirred up with the outrage which the heathen and hard hearted worldlings
commit against his church? or is he deaf, that he hears not the cry of
the poor? or blind that he sees not the pride of the world openly
disclaiming the brightness of the heavens? Per. 2.
No the Lord is not slack as some count slacknes. He which made the heavens so
high, most carefully he beholds the lowest, the poorest the simplest
creatures here below. Psalm. 112
He which made the ear, he will hear the cry of the poor, and he which
made the eye, he will behold the scarres, which be inflicted on the face of
his beloved spowse In his compassion, he shall pity her, and in his
judgment he shall draw forth the two edged sword of his wrathful indignation.
He shall rise up like the Giant to the battle, Psalm. 18.
and shall pass forth as the Lion to devour his pray. He shall redouble the
wickedness of his enemies into their bosoms.

He shall cast down the house on their heads. He shall bring the curse of
their desert upon them, and who is able to withstand the surie of his wrathful
indignation? to endure his anger? or to suffer his heavy displeasure? though
some men prosper for a while with that which is not their own, being reserved
to a greater destiny: yet let those which hope for the salvation of Israel,
learn to fear the Lord aright. Let us not abuse the long patience and loving
kindness which the Lord has showed in sparing us so long. Sapien. 15.
I grant the Lord is merciful, and long suffering, full of patience and mercy,
sore grieved with the death of a sinner. But yet he is just in revenging the
injuries of his spowse.

If any offer injury to the king, or to a noble man, or to a mean man before
his face, he will revenge it presently: but if we offer violence to the spowse
of Christ, or the dead, or the fatherless, or the innocent, which cannot
speak for themselves, nor plead their own cause: then know that the Lord
has taken the defense of these to himself.

He which dwells in the heavens, he sees it. Though his blow be long in
coming, it pearceth deep even into the Marrow and the bottom of the soul,
and that to the third and fourth generation of them that hate him. Exodus 20.
He bears long with them: but when he comes he pays home.

He suffers the wicked to devise many unlawful means, whereby they wax
rich in this world. He lets them pass on their course often times, with great
prosperity, even many years, and diverse lives, till at the length, when the
fruit of sin is ripe, and the first sower thereof is ready to reap a
plentiful harvest of his ungodliness, then besides the danger of the soul,
the sowthwinde arises, the heavens ouercast, the outrageous tempest breaks
out of the clouds above, it passes, it pearceth, it overthrows, so that the
harvest which has been so many years in growing, of a sudden is clean
distroyed, and vanishes out of sight.

Though thou have thonsandes of lands, and ten thousands more than the
ancient inheritance of the fathers: Though thy money be heaped in bags, and
thou wallow in thy wealth, having all things at thine own will: yet if thou
have robbed thine own mother, to enrich thy treasure, thou shall be a
fatherless child, and childlesse father thy self, so that thou shallt have
no parents, in whose presence thou may joy, nor leave any child behind
thee, to weep for thee at thy graves side.

Nay that which is a visible curs: thy goods for which thou have drudged so
sore, when thou art dead shall be translated, into the hands of thine enemies
to the end they may strongly be avenged of thy dearest friends.

O let not your eyes be blinded with carnal delight, Reg. 4, 10.
and too much carfulness of this earthly body, let not the delights of the
flesh, blot out the well meaning motions of the spirit.

Be wise betimes and understand this true rule of the spirit, least the
terriblenesse of the example cause you to tremble at the first sight, and after
further view breed great amasement in your heart and conscience.

If thou have children, and childrens children, and great store of earthie
offices, honors, and dignities for them all: yet if thou spend more time and
care in providing for them, and herein count more of thine own honor, now
begun and budding in thy posterity, then of the prosperity of the Church of
Christ, of his divine worship of of his holy ministers: Thy wife shall prove
a stinging serpent in thy bosom, thy children shall be wastfull distroyers of
that which thou so carefully have built up: thy body agonished with sundry
malladies, altogether incurable, thy groaning day and night will mar thy
melody conceived of thine abundance of riches: thy heart shall quake with
doubtful fear of thine enemies: death will double the discord of thy
disquietnesse: and if thou were the mightiest and most puissant prince in the
world, yet if thou count of any earthly thing, before or in comparison of God
and his holy Church, (unless thou repent) thy desire shall never prosper.

Concerning this conclusion, I mind only to give you a taste, of which (if it
please you to pervse Celsus of Verona hereunto annexed, Celsus of Vetona.
ye shall find the whole service represented in sundry deynty dishes, which
many wicked worldlings take from the ministers of the Chuch, setting them on
their own tables.

He has described the whole course, and named sundry costly meats, whereon
the Venetians used to feed, adjoining thereto their sower sawces: which once
received in at the mouth, but hardly afterward digested: did breed great
heart burninges, in their breasts. And good cause why: for if the Lord promise
long life and happy days to them which dutifullie honor their father and
their mother: Exodus 20.
shall he not pull out his flaming sword of indignation, and cut of the
line of their posterity, which dishonor their spiritual mother the holy
church? pilling and powling her of her jewels, ornaments, ancient liberties
and large possessions, making her loathsome even in in the sight of the heathen?

If thy loving mother took thee up out of the wilderness, from the mouths of
many wild beasts: if she brought thee in her loving arms into her house,
and lapped thee warm in her own clothes, if she suckled thee with her tender
breasts, if she sustained many great losses, Honorius Solitarius,
and hard adventures in bringing thee up: if she suffered many troubles and
dangers in defending thee: nay if she have been most grievously persecuted,
once, twice, thrice, nay more than ten times for thy sake: is it not
barbarous cruelty for thee when thy mother is old, to take her jewels from
her neck, her clothes from her back, her house over her head, her meat out
of her hand? Will thou scratch the teate that gave thee suck? or diminish the
living of the Church, which gives the spiritual food for the soul? though
the holy scripture had not once mentioned it, yet the law of nature does
threaten a dreadful doom, to all those which destroy their own parents: and
God the Creator of nature it self, does never leave it unpunished.

Let us propound unto our selves, the life, the honor, the dignity, the
blessed memory, and immortal glory, of those worthy princes already
mentioned. And on the contrary the sinister beginnings, the evil success, the
miserable ends of all those, which neglected the glory of God, and the
prosperous estate of his Church, Reg. 4.
which of all Christians, especially of all true nobility, ought most to be
abhorred. Do but lift up your eye, and look at tbose which have shaked their
head at Sion, and by shaking of Sion her self, have meant to strengthen
themselves on all sides. Fix your eyes steadfastly, yea but a little,
Athanasius.
on those graceless ympes, and after many great plagues and destructions sent
on them, ye shall see the cloud clean vanished, and in the house of the
wicked no man left. His habitation shall be void, and there shall no man
remain to say, with the old Prophet, alas my brother, alas my uncle, alas
my loouing father. Now having bent our eyes unto the view of sundry
examples, let us look into the ages past, and see if ever the Godly were
utterly destitute, or that the enemies of the Church of God, ever continued
long in honor, or if those which any way impared the Church, prospered
afterward in their generations. Come and see: nay I pray you reed and
understand, that the Lord has always been most ielous, over his beloved
spouse. Tell me if you be so old, or your memory so good, can you name any
what so ever, which at any time in any nation, diminished the state, the
living, the honor, the safety of the church of Christ, and escaped the hands
of the almighty? David's eating of the show bread, in the days of Abiather
the high Priest, is answered by the Lord of truth, extreme necessity drove
him thereunto: and yet (as the learned write) he might more safely do it,
because he was both a Prophet and a king, herein prefiguring the person of a
savior Christ, who was a king, a priest, and a Prophet. But let us proceed,
plainly saying the sooth of our conclusion. The Lord in executing his
judgments, has no respect of persons neither pardons he this grievous
voluntary sin, of detracting from the Church, so easily, as he does other
sins of infirmity.

But rather he shows his most severe judgment, against those which take the
living of the leuit from the Church, and impropriate the same unto themselves,
their wives and their children. Ely was a goodly old Priest and very learned.
Ely.
He was so beloved of the Lord, that by the mouth of God, he and his seed,
were appointed to minister in the house of God, he had the freedom and
prerogative of the Priests: and he only had the disposing of the Arc, the
house, the sacrifice of God in his days. Till at the length together with the
use of holy rites, thorough the hope of small gain, he suffered great abuse
to enter into the house of God: in that the sons of Ely forgetting God, and
the due reverence which they ought unto his holy sacrifice: applied the use
thereof more to the feeding of their own selves, then to the solemn and
reverend pacifying of the Lord, for the sins of the people. They seldom
offered themselves, and when any of the people came to offer up unto the Lord,
whilst the meat was boiling the Priests boy came, and having a fleshhook in
his hand, he thrust it deep into the caudron, and what piece soever came up,
that the Priest took to himself. This did they unto all the people of Israel,
which came to sacrifice in the house of God at Silo. Yea, and before they burnt
the fat, the priests boy came to him which offered, saying: give me a portion,
that I may roast for the priest, I will not stay to take boiled flesh at thine
hands: but I must have it raw. To whom when he which offered unto the Lord,
answered not so, but (according to the custom) let the fat be burnt first, and
take then at your pleasure. To whom the boy replied, nay but if thou will not
give it me presently, I will take it whether thou will or no. Hereupon the
sins of the sons of Elie, was grievous in the sight of God, because they
being sinful flesh, took to their own use, that which was bestowed on the
sacrifice of the God of heaven. Elie heard all those things of his sons, and
more then that: and he said unto them very mildly: how is it my sons that
I hear of such wickedness committed by you against the Lord? do so no more my
sons, do so no more. Consuetudo peccandi, tollit sensum peccati. They sinned
still by daily custom without regard: they offended the Lord without remorse:
the old father spoke to his sons sometimes, but so loving lie, that he hated
his children: that he fed their humor, and nourished them in their wanton
wickedness, forgetting that truth which he spoke with his lips: If one man sin
against another, God may be pacified for them both, but if man sin against God,
who shall entreat for him, or make sufficient satisfaction? This mild old man
waxed toward his end. As is the use of natural fathers, he loved his sons too
much, too vehemently, and too childishlie, in that he was loather to loose
their fauning looks, then the favor of the Lord. Alas (say some) you must bear
with nature, he was very old, and his greatest joy was his sons. Was his joy
here upon earth? And did he rejoice more in his fleshly children, then in the
true service of the Lord? because he loved the issu of his flesh more the^ the
glory of God; and maintained his children with y^ which was bestowed on the
worship of god, therefore the Lord sent a doble embassage unto him. First ye man
of God told him plainly after this manner: Thus says the lord: did not I
plainly appear unto y^ house of thy father, when he was in Egypt in Pharaos
house, and chose him out of all the tribes^ of Israel, to be my Priest, to
offer upon mine alter, and to burn incense, Exodus 4.
and to wear an Ephod before me? and I gave unto the house of thy father, all
the burnt offeringes, made to me by fire, of the children of Israel.
Wherefore have you kicked against my sacrifice, and mine offeringe which I
commanded in my tabernacle: and honor thy children above me, to make your
selves fat of the first fruits of all the offeringes of my people Israel?
Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says: I said that thine house, and the
house of thy father should walk before me for ever. But now the Lord says:
it shall not be so, for them which honor me, them I will honor. And they
which despise me, shall be despised. Behold the day shall come that I will
cut of thine arm, and the arm of thy fathers house, and there shall not be
an old man in thine house, and thou shall see thine enemy, in the habitation
of the Lord etc. And this shall be a sign unto thee: thy two sons Ophney
and Phinees, shall both die in one day. This was the first Embassage, and the
second was like unto it, denounced by the child Samuel in this manner: Behold
I will do a thing in Israel, that the ears of all which hear it, shall
tingle. In that day, I will bring all the plagues against Elie, and against his
house, which I have already determined: and I will judge his house for eu^r and
the iniquity of his house shall not be done away, with offeringes and oblations
for ever. Which when Elie heard, he being stricken with greese of heart, he
said: it is the Lord, let him do as it seems best in his eyes. Immediately
after these offenses of the so^s of Ely, against the Lord and his holy worship,
and the profaning of the tabernale, which was a figure of the church: the
Philistnes moved battle against Israel, they won the field, they took the
ark of the Lord: and in the same day Oppney and Phines the sons of Elye were
slain in the battle. At which time, Ely sitting upon a cell, trembling for
fear of the arc, then gone forth into the battle, he being blind, in the
evening he hard a sorrowful noise, through out the whole city, weeping and
mourning and great lamentation: even in such sort, that he sent presently to
know the cause thereof. In the same instant a messenger came running from the
feelde in have, telling him that all Israel was that day discomfited in the
battle: great effusion of blood in the midst of Israel, with the death of
his two sons Ophney and Phinees, and also the ark of God, was taken by the
Philistines. But when Elie heard the ark of God named, Reg. 1.
he fell down backward from his feate and brake his neck. O the dreadful
judgment of the Lord against those, which take away the living given to
maintain his holy worship. Here we see the truth of Elies speech: if man sin
against man, there may be an atonement made betwixt the^ But if man sin against
God, if he diminish the glory of the Lords temple, to increase his own honor,
or feed himself, his wife, his children, with the goods given to the worship
of the Iord, and his holy temple: who shall entreat for him? those which by
weakness of the flesh sin of infirmity, to the^ the Lord will more easily grant
pardon. But if thou lift thine hand, against the mighty God of heaven and
earth: and willingly diminish the worship of his holy name, the^ tremble and
fear and repent indeed, for not the malefactor only: but his father, Exodus: 20.
his brethren, his city, his country, where his wickedness is suffered, shall
be grieuouslie punished by the hand of God in peace, and vanquished by the
enemy in the day of battle. Herein both Clergy and Temporaltie are to take
example of the punishments which light on those, that diminish or alter the
oblations, and godly devotions which true christian Princes, and other well
disposed people, has freely bestowed on the Church. Though their hearts be so
hardened that they do not fear, and their conscience so brauned that they cry
to those, which show forth the dreadful judgments of the Lord, in this case:
Talk on, give me the goods: and therein take the fat of the Church livings,
and leave the lean for those which minister at the Altar of the Lord: Yet let
them assure themselves, S. Pet: 2.
that the Lord will come, and will not defer, and till he come he has laid up a
heavy judgment for them, against the day of distress. In the battle they
shall be discomforted, their sons shall perish with the sword, themselves
shall die the same night, and they shall know that it is the Lord. He will be
served first, and none but he. He will have the best of our lands goods and
children, and none but he. He will have the Kingdom, the power, and the
glory, and none but he. There shall no iniquity remain in his house. Neither
is he like to sinful man, that he will grant childish dispensations, contrary
to his own laws. He has granted no privilege of evil life, to any person
whatsoever. If the King offend, he spares not his goods, his lands, his
children, his life, his honor. If the people sin, he raises a strong and
strange people against them in war, or sends a secret pestilence to destroy
them at home in peace. If the priest convert the offerings of the Lords
worship, unto the maintenance of his wife and children, though it be that good
old man Elie, yet the people for whom he prays shall fly before their
enemies, his sons shall die on the edge of the sword, he shall break his neck
down backward, the ark of the Lord shall be taken by the uncircumcised
Philistines, and (that which is the core of this most grievous plague sore) the
glory of the Lord shall depart from the land. Tunc tuares agitur paries, Reg: 1.
cum proximus ardet, if judgment begin at the house of God what shall be
amongst the estranged sinners, if the fire be already so kindled in the green
tree, what shall become of the dry? If the Lord thus severely punished his
priest (whom he chose unto himself) for diminishing the sacrifice and the
solemnity thereof: with what sword will he revenge the disgraces of his holy
Temple, amongst the heathen, or the greedy Atheists, which spoil her of her
daily maintenance, of her precious clothing, of her solemn foundations, of her
well bestowed lands? You know that Salomo^ was the wisest man that ever was
being only man, and ye have heard of the fruit of his heavenly wisdom, even
the building of a holy temple unto the Lord. If heavenly wisdom built it up,
then sinful folly pulled it down, and down it came. But will you see with what
countenance, the Lord beheld that fact? That mighty Monarch Nabuchodonozer
amongst his general wars and famous victories, he conquered Jerusalem and
rased the walls, Nabuchodonoser.
he spoiled the Temple, and took away some of the golden vessels of the house
of God, Ierem. 39.
placing them in his emple before his Idols, wherein the learned observe that
he had some conscience, in taking some of the vessels and not all, and in using
them only in the temple of his gods, not in his own house. He was a mighty
Emperor, and as his dominions were greater then those of other princes, so was
his heart lift up in pride, above all other men: therefore the Lord he put the
mighty man from his seat, Daniel 4.
he disarmed him of all his power, he made him naked of al his glory, he
removed the crown of gold from his head, and that which argues what manner
of men they be, which lay violent hands on the temple of God, he took from
out his breast, the understanding heart of man, and placed therein a brutishe
beastly heart together with the shape of an Ox, which has horns and hoofs,
and eats haie. After this he took him from the princely palace, and turned
him lose into the wild soil, even amongst the beasts of the wood. His body
was wet with the dew of heaven, his drink was the water of the puddle: and
his solace was the company of brute bests. He led this dull and deadly life, for
seven years: yt he might learn to know the God of heaven: to regard his
truth, to give him al honor and glory: which after the Lord of his mercy and
wisdom, had restored him to his kingdom he did most willingly and plainly
acknowledge, even in these words: I Nabuchodonozer, Daniel. 4.
do lawd, magnify, and extol above al things, y^ king of heau^e and earth,
etc. Though after this strange chastisement, he was wonderfully humbled in the
sight of God and man: yet the corruption of the fathers blood did sink so deep
into the bones of his son king Balthazar, that when he was at a solemn feast,
amongst his princes and the nobilite of his court: being dronken he commanded
y^ the golden vessels, which his father Nabuchodonozer ^ad brought from the
temple of Jerusalem should be brought into him: that he and his princes, his
nobles, wives and concubines, in a bravery might drink in them. It was so don.
They did eat and drink in the vessels, belonging to the temple of the Lord:
they praised their idol Gods: but by the way, the wine which tasted sweet to
his lips, came cold to his heart. For in the same moment as he was drinking:
right over against the candle standing on the table: there appeared the fingers
of a man's hand, writing on the wall: which once discried, by the king himself:
he beheld it with a ghastly look, and fearfully esprised with the letters,
which appeared in his sight, his color changed, his heart panted, his spirit
was troubled, his raines were loosed, and his legs shrunk under him.
Straightway in great have he sent for Daniel, Daniel. 5.
who read the writing, which was this: Mane, Techel, Phares: expounding these
three words in this manner: Mane, that is, God has numbered thy kingdom, and
brought it to an end: Techel, thou art weighed in the ballaunce, and thou art
found too light: Phares, thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and
Persians. This was the sentence of the Lord against that mighty king, for
translating his vessels appointed for his holy sacrifice, unto profane use:
and the execution was not long deferred: for the self same night in which he
presumed to drink in those holy vessels, he was slain in his own house.
Though the Lord do not always send such manifest and speedy revenge on all
those, which take the goods of the holy church unto their private uses: yet let
them which are guilty thereof beware, that they abuse not too much, the
merciful and loving patience of the Lord, for his sword is sharp, and passes
swiftly, betwixt the soul and the spirit, like the lightning breaking out of
the clowd. Think not that he is forgetful, because the fact is now past: or
unjust, because vengeance yet lies hid: or partial, that without repentance he
should suffer any sin to escape unpunished, in any person whatsoever, from the
beginning of the world unto this day. David was a holy and a kingly prophet, a
man even according to Gods own heart: his eyes beheld the vain beauty of a
woman, wherewith his heart was straight inflamed, and set on fire within his
breast: he took his poor subjects wife, and sent her husband to wars, where
he was slain: he loved, he killed, and after that he possessed the woman, and
had by her a goodly boy. What follows in the text of holy scripture? the
prophet Nathan brought him a heavy message from the Lord, saying: it is even
thou; thou have sinned against the Lord and thy poor subject: thou have slain
Vrias the Hethite, and married his wife: wherefore the sword shall not depart
from thine house for ever. This was the defiance of the Lord sounded against
king David, by the mouth of Nathan the prophet, to which the great alarm was
not unlike. For the Lord did visit the little child, which he had by Vrias
wife with sickness. For whom David prayed unto the Lord most instauntly, that
he would spare the child. He prayed long, he fasted religiously, he
mourned, he remained in the dark; he put on sackecloth and ashes; he lay
upon the cold ground; his noble counselors could not entreat him to take
any meat for seven days, in the end whereof, the Lord took away the fruit
of his sinful delight, even the child unlawfully begotten, which he so
entirely loved.

Afterward, though the Lord blessed him with Solomon, yet to show that the
fight of the rereward, should be no less mortal than the sudden alarm,
given before to the maine battle: the Lord stirred up his own son in
arms against him, and armed the people so stoutly with rebellious hearts, in
desire of his destruction: that it was said plainly, before the king: that
all Israel were up in arms against him, and sought to destroy him.

This tumult of the people was so sudden, so violent, and so outrageous, for
the time, that the king for fear, fled out of his own palace, and durst
not stay therein, though he had showed great signs of hearty repentance:
and the Lord had said, that he would remember his mercies, promised unto
him: the retreat was not fully sounded, but the Lord punished the sins of
the king together with the death of seventy thousand of his subjects,
destroyed with the plague which he sent amongst them. Whereby all men may
learn to fear the Lord, knowing that he is just and holy, immutable, and
not as man is, to be pleased with a fair word: but even amongst his chosen
children, he sends his devouring sword to cut of the root of their sins:
and not to them only, but to their children and childrens children.

Concerning this we have a clear example in Achab king of Israel, who when
he could not entreat poor Naboth to depart unto him his vineyard and the
inheritance of his forefathers: he lay down on his bed, all sick with grief
turning his face from the company toward the wall, he sighed sorrowfully, but
the physician was at his elbow. For there was a commission presently sent
forth, a court called, witnesses examined, Naboth condemned, brought forth,
executed.

When Achab heard of this, he rose from his bed, he descended and took
possession. But the Lord he sounded forth his trompet of defiance against him
by the mouth of Helias saying, Regum 3.
have thou killed and taken possession? behold, in the same place where the
dogs licked the blood of Naboth, they shall also lick thy blood, and I will
cut of the line of thy posterity, so that I will destroy from Achab every one
that makes water against the wall, Achab hearing this, was wonderfully sorry
and vexed in his heart, so that he rent his garment, fasting and praying in
sackcloth and ashes. Therefore the Lord had an eye to his penitent sorrow, and
recomforted him by the mouth of Helias, saying. Because thou have humbled thy
self at my voice, this evil shall not come in thy days, but in thy sons
days; and yet not one jot of the word of the Lord failed, concerning his
death. For after three years, there arose great wars betwixt Israel and the
Ass^^ians, in which king Achab being sore wounded under the side with an arrow,
the blood ran down into the chariot, and he died: and they washed the Chariot
in the poole of Samaria, and the dogs licked his blood, in the self same
place, where he spilt the blood of the innocent Naboth. His eldest son Ioram
was partaker of this punishment sent from God, Reg. 4.
for he was shot betwixt the shoulders by the hands of Iehu, being cast out
of his chariot into the field of Naboth. Also his wife Iesabel the deviser of
this sin she was cast out of her window down upon the pauement, Iesabel.
where (her brains dashed out against the stones, her blood sprent upon the
walls, her body bruised against the ground)

When she should have bin taken up, there was nothing found remaining save
only her hands, her feet and her scawpe, as it was spoken by the mouth of
Helias. Dogs shall eat the flesh of Iesabel in the fields of Iesraell.

Lastly (that we may behold the severe judgment of the Lord against those
which take away other men's possessions) though Achab left great store of
Children behind him, even 70. sons in Samaria: so that it seemed very likely
in the eye of man, that he should never want issue to sit upon his seat,
yet the Lord in one day by the hand of Iehu destroyed them all: Reg. 4.
their heads were cut of at his commandment, and laid on heaps by the city
gate, to the end that all posterity might learn hereby: not to trust in the
multitude of their lands, authority and riches, or to hope too much in the
succession of their carnal body: but to way the severe judgments of the Lord
against all those which neglect his honor, and which through a greedy desire
of earthly possession, with the hasard of their own souls, willingly undo
their poor neighbors and brethren, for whom the Lord Jesus the God of heaven
and earth, has shed his most precious blood. O that carnal men would consider
wisely, and way this conclusion truly in their heart, that if the Lord did so
severely punish Achab (and yet not the thousand part which he deserved) for
the taking away of one of his subjects vineyardes, which lay very
commodiouslie for him: that he died unfortunately in the battle, his Queen
was eaten with dogs, his children even 70. be headed all in one day: what
grievous punishment has he prepared for those which take the house and
vineyards of his beloved spouse? which impouerish his children of whom he has
said, he which hurts you, he touches the apple of mine eye? which eat her
bread from her, and make her barren of her best beloved children? Which place
all their study and delight in hording up corruptible riches, not remembering
how little it avails a man, Math. 46.
if he win the whole world, and loose his own soul? Nay not considering the
exceeding great blessings which the Lord continually powers on them that
maintain his holy temple, and the extraordinary curses, wherewith he
cutteth of the desire and posterity of all those, which either decay his holy
church, or diminish the divine worship of his holy name.

Me thinks our eyes should not be so dim in this clear light, that we should
not see: nor our hearts so fleshly that we should not understand and the will
of the Lord, and his great judgments against those which maintain themselves
by the goods of the church, being none of those which do service, or have any
special function in the same. Though we will not understand the fearful
examples which the Lord has showed heretofore: Yet let us so incline our own
hearts and ways, Acts 20.
that of our selves we may be ready rather to give with the blessed, than to
take away with the cursed. Let us consider with reason, that man is created for
the glory of God, not for his own glory: for the service of God, not for his
own service: for the salvation of the whole man, even body and soul, and not
for a little vain delight, whilst he lives herein y^ flesh. Herein let him
know by the rules of nature, of reason, of civil laws, and holy institution,
that the goods of the church, came to us by the right of succession: and by the
same right they are entailed to our posterity, and succession of our place and
calling for ever. If this be so the^ the sequel is most plain and true, the
goods of the church they are none of ours to give, but whilst we possess
the^, nor theirs to take: we offend in giving, and they offend in taking away
that, Reg. 3.
which is neither theirs nor ours. But (as Naboths vineyard) the inheritance
given by our forefathers, to us and our succession. We gave you them say some,
and we may take them away. Not so, though the antecedent halt, yet suppose it
were true: the co^sequent is altogether maimed. Though you had given that which
you would feign take away, and though those good devout souls, your
ancestors, which so charitably provided both for you and us, lived at this day
(whose life would be to them a double death, if their eyes did see that which
we see) yet that which thou have once given into mine hand, willingly wittingly
lawfully, thou can not take to thee again. Who presents a noble man with a
saire horse, or a goodly dog, and after the acceptance of the same with
hearty thanks, challenges his gift again for his own? If his manners fail
thus far, yet is it right or reason so to do? But if we give unto the Lord
and that freely, as we ought to do, if we confirm the same with word and
deed, with witness, hand and seal, Reg. 1.
and willing delivery, shall we be so shameless, that before the Lords face,
and in the sight of all his saints, we will say: give me my goods; or these be
my lands: or as the Priests boy said: if you will not give me, I will take
it? this is thus, or at the least, I so suppose, since thou which lately did
walk below in order with thy brethren, art now well fatted, and they still
lean: thou have taken a higher flight, and aymest at a richer pray: thou have
seen great wars, and with the strange devise of foreign sleights thou
breakest that, which will not bend: leaving the good country simplicity;
entering the usual course of this flattering world, forgetting the plain
honest dealing of a true Englishman: thou art thereby well instructed to live,
and so full soon thou becommest very well learned: thou can the rule to
catch on all sides, and to hold fast till death does loose the knot. In
practice of this general, thou reapest where thou sowest not: thou find
that which erst was never lost: thou receiuest from the church, that which
when thy con^cience sees it within thy gates, it blusheth red as a rose, and
burns within thy heart, like the flame of fire. That this flame may not only
appear without, but also consume within, even the heart, the life, and the
soul: thou powrest oil into it, ioining house to house, and land to land:
turning poor men's commons into thine own private pasture. With these two
wings of violence, of a sudden thou risest from the earth, and with the help
of the puffing wind, thou mountest swiftly so high, that the highest temples
and mightiest mountains, to which before thou durst scarce lift up thine eyes,
least thy head should dazell, now are far below thy slight, and through
great despoile almost out of view. In this thy height remember that thou were
low before, and that thou must descend down into the earth from whence thou
came.

The arrowe shot upright out of the bow, Genesis 3.
when it is at the highest, it turns back, and swiftly falls down to the
place from whence it came. The soaring foul which flies most swifte and high,
when mowlting time by kind and course comes in, ofttimes does cast her
fairest feathers. Those on whom this world does laugh most pleasauntly,
which have the fawning of outward fortune at their own pleasure, pleasing
themselves in the high throne of honor and rule; let them consider that the
higher they climb, the lower will be their fall: and that which is the corsey
of their pomp: the highest boughs be most weak and brittle. This is the
vain hope of sinful man.

What avails it to attain the highest boughs since on the same does hang
the fruit of our perdition? Psalm. 48.
Can thou sit surer and faster on the highest boughs above; than old Ely
did on his Cell below, from which he fell down backward and brake his
neck? Flatter your selves still (if you will) O ye which distraine your
mothers teate so hard, that it droppeth blood withal, and feed your selves
with the doubtful pleasure of this sin, and when you have satisfied your
thirst, with the taste of that which ye drink too much: then assure your
selves if God be God, even the God of Gods: if he be just, even justice it
self: if he be the same he was (as says the Apostle) the same yesterday,
Heb. 13.
to day, and for ever: if he be true, which is the way, the the life, and
the truth: most true, most holy, most eternal: that way which you seek to
save your life, ye shall loose it: that means by which ye desire to raise
your selves, shall cast you down: those goods, which you lay up in store,
for the maintaining of your children; shall cut off the line of their life,
and clean blot out all thy name and memory from off the earth: and that which
you studied to make your honor, shall be your utter confusion.

If the glass now set before your face be true, and if your sight be good,
why do you not behold this spotte of earth, wherewith your face is so
besprented? But if your blindness be the same, with his which will not see:
behold yet I will set the glass nearer to your face: and if I can, I will so
rub it, that the spotte of your disgrace, may more easily appear loathsome
unto your eyes. He which receives you, Math. 10.
receives me (says our savior Christ) and which honors you, he honors
me. Now do ye but behold a little, what reward, what countenance, what
place, or credit, a poor learned man has amongst us in this world, and then
mark if the spot be not foul and great. If he be in the Court, away good
peake goose, hence John Cheese. If in the country, he is of no wealth, what
call you for his witness? wheresoever he comes, Pauper vbique iacet; every
wans verdict is this general pity; Genesis 40.
alas poor scholar* And thus he lives. The Lord has decked the barren
earth, with store of goodly flowers, the trees he has laden with leaves, and
the waters he has replenished with fishes. The cuntriman has his house, his
cattle, his plough, his ground, whereby he lives: the lawyer his pen and
tongue, with which in few years, he purchases hundreds: the merchant his
returning gain: the courrier more than I can tell: the secretary his secret
co^mings in, which make him glitter in his gold abroad. And is the learned man
without house or home, without money in his purse, or good apparel to his
back, without a cogging face and shi^ting looks? has the Lord provided no
such thing for him? alas poor scholar. Had he never cretaine living of his
own? has he none, or can he have none? Habui filium, says the old man:
Terence.
Nos quondam floruimus, says the Troiane.

And so do we; it may be we had some certainty: and now it may well be: but
the conduit pipe by which the water flowed from the spring into our bosoms, is
waxen so full of riftes, that the sweet spring water runs out on every
side, into strange grounds adjoining to the same. There be liuinges good
store, says one, and if the learned will seek, let the^ assure themselves they
shall find. Seeking is a ready way, if it were so plain as it seems short.
But what if the best hownd in the whole kennell, be not the best seeker, who
shall go away with the Hare? yet let him follow, and at the length he shall
come to the view of the wished gain. It is true even as Tullie says. Tullie.
Fluctibus saepe obruitur, antequam portum conspicere valet. After he have bin
long tired and scratched in the bushie woods, peradventure he shall come to the
death of the Hare. And yet in our moral, the course is not so hard, nor half
so uncertain. For when the wished preferment which you mean is once to be
achieved, who so hard hearted that will not bestow it on the best. Is it detur
meliori, or detur pulchriori? I know not, but I am sure, he that seeks shall
find. Gladly would I learn that kind of seeking. If his wished preferment lie
in the court, he must provide a friend in the court, who is always better than
the penny in purse. What if it be in the country? these things have all one
certain rule. But as the giver is, so is the way of obtaining. Then the
learned are in worse case than they were before, because the way is more
uncertain: for he must sometimes sue to the good, honest Farmer in the
Country, who knows a golden angel better than a Latin word, sometimes to
the gentleman in the City, sometimes to his wife, his son, his daughter, his
cousin, his steward, his factor: sometimes to the Noble man: and all his
circumstances, before he can come to the matter. And when he has done, if he
be not so well seen in secret Philosophy, that he can talk learnedlie with
the secretary: his studying at the University so many years, his riding into
the country, the city, the court, his expenses, his pains, his hope is all
lost.

Is this the seeking which you mean? and must the poor learned man, after he
has read so many volumes, and studied so many years in so many sciences and
tongues, run and ride post, and have from place to place, from country man
to gentleman, from him to his wife, from both to the court, to the noble man,
to his son, his clerk his secretary? alas poor scholar. Whilst we have
been seeking after your manner, we have almost lost the game which we begun
to hunt, and yet I hope we are not run so far counter, but that we may
easily undertake it again.

Since it follows conveniently, if they be good minded men, which pity the
poor distressed case of the learned, then they be euilly minded, which are the
cause thereof, Psalm 40.
diminishing the liuinges of the Church, wherewith the learned ought to be
maintained. Without such contingent seekinges, the last despair of most
learned men's desire.

From this river conduit pipe flows a channel of foul troubled water,
wherewith whilst these worldly minded men do use to wash their faces, they
appear much more deformed than before, since the tasting often of the
sweetness of this troubled earthly channel in heart and mind, are so
bewitched with the love of this present life, that the honor of God, the
reverence of his name, the due hearing of his word, the daily celebrating of
his divine Service, together with the immunitie and perfect freedom of his
ministry is much decayed. I pass over all the examples, and plain speeches
of contempt used against the ministers of Christ at this day.

Those which be thus euilly minded toward the Church of Christ, nay toward
Christ himself: are the Christians? are they comparable to the heathen in
their kind? or worthy to be numbered amongst men? though their titles be
many, their honor great, their lands inestimable, yet think ye that these
men shall prosper here on earth? as for heaven, turn back good sir, this is
not the way. The gate by which ye must enter in thither is very low, the way
narrow, the journey long, your body is idle, Math. 7.
your doings dissolute, your chariti cold, your heart to high, ye cannot come
in.

Our Lord and Savior Christ when he lived here on earth, he willed that the
little Children should come to him saying: that of such consists the kingdom
of God. And yet if the children treading in the steps of their fathers, Mark.
10.
contemn the minister of God or in their childishness dishonor him: If the
children of Bethell scorn the good prophet Elizeus, like graceles boys,
crying out on him, go up you bald pate, go up: though they be small and young,
Regum 4.
yet their cry pearceth to the heavens. The Lord shall listen very
attentively when ought does sound against the honor of his prophets: he shall
open the window of his wrath, and in his displeasure two she Bears shall come
out of the wood, and shall devour two and forty of them, that thereby both
old and young may learn to reverence the prophets of the Lord sent unto them.

Even as the countenance of the mother beholds the sucking child in her arms
most lovingly: and as the eye of the Hawke minting at her pray, does most
fixedlie and fiercely behold the same: even so the Lord does continually
behold his ambassadors, his prophets, his pastors, his ministers, and not
their life only and their safety: but their good maintain, and regard: so
that the son shall not burn them by day, Psalm. 120.
nor the moon by night. The pride of sinful flesh shall not repress them
long, nor the greatest tyrant in the world shall disgrace them in any word, or
sprinckle any spot in their face, but it shall be washed off again, even with
his own precious blood.

Well and wisely did the Poe^s feign, that the contemners of the gods always
came to evil end. Amongst a number of examples, this appears plain in Ajax,
Ajax.
who counted more of bodilye valor, than of Mineruaes wisdom: and with
hawtie speech disdained that it should have the due reward: and therefore he was
berest of common wit, and understanding: being stricken with a most furious
fit, in which he slew himself upon his own sword. What should I rehearse the
manifold plagues and punishments which the Lord sent upon the conte^ners of his
holy worship, even from Noe unto the birth of our S. Christ? whose life,
because that tirant Herod sought by his bloody sword to cut off from the earth,
and that with the shedding of much innocent blood: therefore the Lord on a
solemn feast day, when he showed himself unto the people in his highest glory,
and the multitude to flatter him cried most blasphemosly it is the voice of a
God, and not of a man) then, even then the Lord from heaven stroke him by the
hand of his angel; so that presently his flesh rotted, crawling full of
quick worms and lice, which devoured him most miserably before the face of all
the people. Acts 12.
If carnal sensuality did not too much dim our eyes, I should not need to
hold out this my obscure light unto you now at the noon day, when the light
of the Gospel shines most clear and bright round about us. If we had cunned
the rules of true christianity by heart, or understood the truth of them; or
had received the virtue of well woorking into our consciences, therewith renewed
in the spirit. I should not need at this day, so often and so plainly to have
opened the glass before your face, or to the end that you should acknowledge
your deformity, wherewith your fleshly hands have fowlie bespotted the
beautiful countenance of your souls. I should not have needed to have
travailed into strange countries amongst the Jews, and heathen people, to
show you by the true consent of sundry glasses, that as it appears without,
so it is that you have fowlie stained your christian consciences inwardly with
this foul sin of taking from the Church.

Neither should I need now after the proposing of those two fair well steeled
glasses, of the heathen and the Jews: to add the third, which is the true
mirror of christianity, showing most plainly, that the Lord Jesus has an
especial eye unto his beloved spowse the holy Church, and most severely
punishes the detracters of the same. Herein as we have begun; if we go
forward and pierce the fountain, we shall soon perceive great rivers
flowing from the same. For first of all in the days of our Savior Christ; let
us mark what was concerning the Church: what ought to have been, and what
followed. The Lord of light was made a man; he walked amongst us in the habit
of man; he was used very hardly; Phil. 2*
he lived in very mean estate; he was reviled, persecuted, whipped, despited,
with mockings and mowings, with spittings, with a reed in his hand, and a
crown of thorns on his head, And lastly with a most bitter and cursed death
for our sakes, and for our salvation. Likewise also the Disciples; though they
preached the glad tidinges of the Gospel, with the great power, virtue, and
Majesty of the holy Ghost; yet concerning the world, they were poor,
simple, contemptible, persecuted men. In so low a valley, it pleased the Lord,
to sow the first seed of his Gospel, and to the end that the Roof of the
Church might afterward rise far and high above, first of all, he laid the
foundation in great humility far below. Thus it was then, and worldly
minded men regarding more the prosperity of their bodies, then the health of
their souls, and the safety of the holy church: misconstruing that voice of
truth, Vos autem non sic: say, that as the simplicity of the Church was then;
Luke 22.
even so it ought to be now in the flourishing state of the Gospel. Wherein I
wish them to beware that they look not on this Crystal mirror too much, or
that they hold it not too near, for fear lest their fleshly breath do dim
the same. Remove the sight of the glass a little, and let us see what was
then, and what ought to have been; they contemned the Gospel of grace: they
crucified the Lord of light, and cruelly persecuted his disciples: what were
these? Acts. 2.
according to the prophecy, the Kings and Rulers of the earth, even Pontius
Pilat, high deputy of Jury: Herod the Tetrarch, of Galilee: with the high
priests, the Judges, the scribes and the pharisees, and the whole multitude of
the Jews: so that in these days, the Church was trodden down, the poor
Ministers contemned, afflicted, persecuted, by that faithless generation. But
now you which so much allude, to those dark days of persecution in the
Church. Do but alter the case a little, and suppose that the Emperor, and
Pontius Pilate his deputy; Annas and Caiphas, with the rest of the Rulers in
those days, had believed in Christ, and confessed plainly that he was the
Savior of the world: that he created them, that he came to redeem them, that
he nourished them in their mothers womb: that he perserued the breath in
their nostrels, John 1.
and that it was he, by whom they should be either exalted or put down,
either accepted or rejected, either saved or condemned in the day of
judgment. If this had bin so: let us think what a strange metamorphosis, had
followed in their doings: how would they have fallen down before the Lord?
with what humility would they have cast down their crowns, and scepters at
his feet? with what joy would they have exalted the Lord of light? what
honor and magnificence would they have yielded to that heavenly bridegroom,
and the children of the marriage? what great freedoms and foundations, would
they have bestowed on his Church and little flock for ever? No say some, though
Jupiters priests, with the whole City (when they did see the mighty woorking of
the holy Ghost, by the hands of Paul and Barnabas) would have sacrificed to
them, and given them the honor and title of gods. Yet they refused it, knowing
that the true worshippers would worship him in truth an spirit: outwardly
yelding him but mean reverence, belonging to simpler state. Neither would he
or his disciples, have accepted of any worldly honor, John. 18.
since he said plainly, my kingdom is not of this world. As was the root of
humility, so were the branches, springing from the same. As the Lord though
he would not openly be proclaimed a king, yet he had ordained in his secret
counsel, that the Church should have her time of infancy, of childhoode, of
strong age, of flourishing, and decaying: Even so it pleased him, that this
seed, should not be both sown and reaped in one day: that it should not
first spring and bring forth seed in one hour: and that the Church should
not be founded and perfected, both in one minute. Though by divine providence
the Church was in the infancy, that time of our Saviors being here on earth
and his Apostles, and though the space of three hundredth years after, it was
trodden down very low by persecution, Ebion.
under the heathen, under Ebion, Cherinthus, and Arrius, heretics of the
first head: whereby the account and calling of the Ministry waxed very poor
and mean, Cherinthus.
contemned of some misliked of many* Eusebius. 3.
little reverenced of the most: yet if these Kings and Rulers, had had the
grace to have acknowledged Christ, to be the GOD of of heaven and earth: out
of doubt they would have applied themselves in all loiall manner, to ^he
enlarging and amplifying of the true profession of his name, they would have
left their princely palaces, and founded solemn temples for the service of
the Lord; they would have founded largely for the maintenance of his holy
worship, and given perfect freedom to his Ministers. Which (if any now
blinded with this beggarly conceited error, concerning the poor simple estate
of the primative Church; whereunto in hope of our liuinges they desire to
reduce us) doubt what these Kings and Rulers if they had believed, would, or
ought to have done: Let them but mark a little, what the first Christian
Emperor did; who being guided by the spirit of God, his doings showed
plainly, what the Lord would have done. Behold a while the gracious feature
of this most Christian Emperors mind: Math. 27.
read the histories of his life, and mark diligently, what great account he
made of the holy fathers of his time, above all other men, Magistrates,
Rulers, and Princes of his dominions. How he opened his heart unto the^, and
made them of his secret counsel* what special care he had of their good
estate, and prosperity: not that they should go up and down in his
dominions on foot in thread bare coats: But he gave them freedom, title and
honor, and to the end that it might endure when he was dead and rotten (an
example for all christian Princes, which should succeed him) he founded many
goodly temples, endowing them with large and ample possessions: with a
christian care he reedified the temples which were wasted by the heretics and
Infidels: building and raising them an exceeding great height. He established
all things concerning Christian religion, and the professors of the same,
Constable. M.
in most honorable and religious manner. Therefore the Lord blessed him most
abundantly, with perfect health, with exceeding wealth, with true Christian
liberty, of obtaining al which he did desire in this world, and in the world to
come, with everlasting felicity. If the life of this right virtuous Emperor,
cannot dissuade you from the contrary, but still you will proceed in this
erroneous opinion, that the Church of Christ amongst Christians ought to be
poor, simple and naked, as it was in the time of persecution under heretics
and Infidels: If you be so constant in this error, that you will not regard
that Constantine: then go forward in the way which you like so well; and
passing on mark by the way how it fares with those, which though they
profess the name of Christ, yet in life and conversation they deny him,
Sozom. ^
in that no less cruel then the Jews, they take from him, his clothes, they
afflict his spiritual body, they disgrace him, and keep him down, to the
end they may have no riches in price, but the mucke of the world: no
profession in account, but worldly authority: no glory, but the childish
decking of the body: no honor, but outward pomp and vanity: no King but
Caesar. As the hardharted Jews cried out, his blood be upon us and our
children: Romans 6.
Even so the fleshly worldlings answer at this day: What tell you us of had
I wist; of times to come; of doomes day? If we shall not answer till then;
then care away: grant us so long a day to answer in, and we will have the
rest. O that men would learn by earthly similitudes, to understand heavenly
wisdom. If a cloud do but rise South, or Southwest, we say it is like to
rain, and can we not see the Sun of our salvation, even now setting in a
dark deadly cloud before our faces? Consider that the destruction of
Jerusalem, was a plain resembla^ce of the end of the world. As it was in those
days, even so it shall be immediately before the ending of the world: they
cried away with him, they took away his coat, and parted his raiment: they
crucified him, and all those which professed his name: Acts 7.
they stoned Saint Steeuen the Archdeacon, and James the Cousin of our Lord:
who after he had been placed Bishop of Jerusalem, many years, most
rebelliouslie they pulled him out of his chair, casting him down from a
pinnacle of the City wall, and when he lay gasping on the earth, most
barbarously they dashed out his brains with a Fullers clubbe.

These were the first which sought the decaie of the Church of Christ. Eusebius. 2,
And what destenie followed this evil adventure? The Lord brought a huge
Army into their City, with a destroying plague, and consuming famine, with
civil sedition, slayings and wastings, domestical murders, inward anguish
bred by civil discord, so that through fear without, and deadly anguish
within, there died many thousands, nay hundredth thousands, within the walls
of that City. Many thousands lay gasping in the street for breath of life:
many lay groaning ruthfully in their houses: many as they were putting up their
hands to their mouth to feed themselves, were slain with the devouring sword
of the seditious, which destroyed so on al sides of the City, that the blood of
those which were slain within by themselves, came running out at the gutters
of the gates, and out at the sinkes underneath the walls. The noble men were
fain to eat their own flesh from off their arms: and that good ancient
gentlewoman which when the wars began fled to that City for succor, with her
little infant sucking on her breast, after her house had been often ransacked and
spoiled by the seditious, Iosep. Bell. Iu.
her men and maids slain in her house, her victuals clean consumed, her
color wan, her milk and blood dried up, her body fainting with hunger: she
was compelled to think an unnatural thought in her heart, and to execute a
deadly devise with her hands: she took her little boy now sucking on her
breast: she held it a part from her with both her hands, beholding the sweet
countenance of her pretty child: the boy smiled: but alas the mothers tears
did show her heavy cheer, it were too much grief to rehearse the mothers
sorrowful voice, in this woeful distress, uttered to her son. She laid the
little infant on the table before her face: her trickling tears redoubled their
course enterchangeably: after many distillations sent down from her weeping
eyes, she says unto her little infant: my little boy, the child of me a most
unfortunate mother: I nourished thee within my womb, and have fed thee a
long time with the milk of my breasts: and now thou must be meat for me
thy wretched and most distressed mother. With these words, her knife infixed
into the breast and bowels of her little infant, the blood springing up into
her face, she dismembered, she roasted, she eat of him: the smell whereof
being once entered the nostrels of those seditious soldiers; they brake open
the door, they came rushing in: running into her, they pulled the meat
violently out of her hand, eating it most greedily. Daniel. 9.
Of which because she had no more store ready, they cruelly murdered that
poor old gentlewoman. To this and a hundred thousand like miseries seldom
heard of, succeeded the destruction of the whole nation, with the utter
destruction of the City, the walls, the Temple, and all the ancient
Monumentes of the most famous Kings of Israel. Though no Christian heart can
take pleasure in walking this way, yet since we are entered into it, let us
pass on a little further, and we shall easily see that this sin of defacing
of the profession of Jesus Christ and his holy Temples here on earth, is so
heinous, so contumelious, so heathenish in the sight of God; that he never
suffers it to lie long unpunished. Neither be the plagues and punishments sent
upon the earth, for this sin of spoiling the Temples of the Lord due to
ordinary or common infirmities, incident by the course of nature unto man: but
as it is a much more heinous and grievous offense, for the child, unnaturally
to despoile his own father which begot him into this light, and cruelly with
bloody hands to take his life from him: even so, since the taking from the
Church, is the despoiling of God our Creator: The punishment sent on such
offenders must needs be much more grievous then that which usually is sent to
man, for his usual and natural infirmity. Cells. Seio^.
We have beheld the good blessings of the Lord, bestowed on those his loving
servants, who in their lives and doings expressed their tender love unto his
temple: and let us not now loath to behold the evil desteny of those, who from
time to time have striuen against the Lord and his holy church. After, the open
enemies, which sought with force of arms, and authority, to suppress the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, had showed their force against the church: stoning some,
and imprisoning others, whipping, scourging, Acts 5.
banishing, cruelly persecuting the rest: Then Satan striking sail, and
drawing in his ensign of open war, and defiance, sought by policy to keep
down the church of Christ, now springing in the east. He raised sundry damnable
heresies, which increased so long, and entangled so many poor Christians: that
the church of Christ which whilom did shine most clear and bright, by the
mistie clouds of heresy, begun to be eclipsed. Sed exitus act a probat: the
harvest does show the goodness of the seed: the life does prove the virtue of
the mind: the death ofttimes does show the course of naughty life. Let us
leave the force of Herod in the field, and a while consider what became of
them, which colourably weakened the church in the town. Arrius.
Arrius that notable heretic, he most blasphemously sought the disgrace of the
holy, blessed, glorious Trinity: affirming inequality of the three persons,
and detracting from the eternity of Jesus Christ.

This opinion entered the Christian flock, infecting far and near in most
nations. So that the heretic had many seeming Christians on his part, and that
with great glory, till at the length when he should come to be restored to
the church, as he went in the street with great pride, and countenance of many
friends: of a sudden he went aside to the privy, where his belly violently
burst in sunder, his guts came out, and he fell down dead most miserably, as
it was presently seen of all the people.

What should I here rehear^e the wicked lives of those arch-heretikes, who
though they flourished in the world for a while, yet in that they did strive
against the son of God, and sought to diminish his majesty: their reign was
not so glorious, as their end was miserable.

Nestorius flourished greatly, Nestorius.
and his heresy spread it self mightily amongst the people: but when this
shining cloud was once well shaken with the tempest sent from God: he was sent
into banishment: in the which he being often taken captive by the barbarous
people, Euagrius hist. 1.
the city burnt over his head, and his life every hou^e in the heathens hand:
he fell into a most deadly contagion; insomuch that his tongue was eaten out of
his head with worms, with which he ended his miserable life. Let not worldly
minded men flatter themselves, and feed their humor with the contag on of this
disease; saying these were heret^call men, scholars of no great account; but
rulers, and those that be of authority, they are wiser. Surely those men were
worldly wise men, and in their profession very learned, in great authority and
account amongst many nations: and though they had been higher in degree, yet
let al men know, that the Lord counts not of earthly honor, neither spares
any man for his great authority.

This appears plainly in Maximinius that cruel persecuter of the
Christians. Maximinius.
Who after he had cruelly persecuted the Church, therewith pulling down the
temples of the Christians: the Lord laid his heavy hand upon him, so that of
a sudden there brake out of his body a mortal ulcer, with a corrupt humor
rotting his bowels, besides an incredible number of crawling worms, gnawing
him within, and corrupting him in such sort, that his body and breath sent from
them a mortal stinch, his body was so loathsome to be seen, that few
physicians could abide to look on him. Those which ventured to come near, they
dyed with the contagious smell of his filthy corrupt body.

This misery at length caused him to remember his wicked cruelty, committed
against Jesus Christ, and his holy church. Therefore feeling some remo^se in his
conscience, first he confessed his sins unto almighty God. Secondly, he
commanded that the persecution of the Christians should cease, and that of
their obedience to the imperial authority, they should reedifie the Churches
of the Christians, in which he requested them to pray to the Lord for him.
Eusebius. 9.


Though the Lord inflicted this horrible sickness on him, with his
ignominious flight in the battle, he casting away the imperial habit, and
deniyng it to be his: yet in that he had some remorse of his sin, though
distreyned on all sides with grievous horrors, his end was not so fearful,
as was the event of that wicked Emperor Julian, Julian.
the Apostara, who after many wicked cruelties, and deadly policies
practiced against the church of Christ, proceeding with his puissant army of
valiant soldiers, toward Persia, having passed the River before he wist,
he was in a wilderness, where he wanting guides for his army: Sozom. 6.
after a few days, his whole company was so distressed, for want of
victualles, that many of them died with hunger and thirst: diverse fell down
languished as they went, by the way. The most fled, and he was found in a
solitary place, sore wounded, crying out with grief, and rauing furiously,
blaspheming God his Creator, railing on the god Mars, and saying that Apollo
was a lying god. At length feeling the extreme pains of death come upon him,
Ruffing. 1.
his guts issuing out of his wound (which most men think was inflicted on
him by the angel of God) he took his handful of his own blood, and did cast
it up into the air, crying out Vicisti Galilee, vicisti. Though I have
conquered thy Christians, Platina.
and pulled down many of thy Temples, yet now at length O Galilean, at length
thou have ouercomed me.

This may well be true (say some) and yet the sequel not so sure, since this
irreligious Emperor, most Atheisticallie opposed himself against Christ, and
in defiance of him spoiled his pore flock, and the holy church, which they
took for a sanctuary. But to destroy the temples of the heathen, and to fire
the churches of heretics, and those which are not of a good Religion, that is
no such offense before God. But rather I think we ought to pull them down.

You think, yea, and I do constantly affirm the contrary. In this difference
of opinions, let the art of Logic be the framer of our arguments, and the
rules of eternal truth, our direction to the same. Let self will bath her
self in her own blood. Let arrogancy drowned her self in the deep: let
ignorant zeal fly far from hence into the wilderness: let sophistry betake
her to a dead sleep, and let the truth appear plainly, speak briefly,
therewith repeating your chiefest arguments most truly.

And what be they? In great mislike of many good things now used in our church,
you commonly begin after this manner.

In mine opinion Bishops, Deanes, cathedral churches, etc. are not to be
allowed, since they savor of the constitutions of men, and are not commanded
by the word. If you will join reason with true judgment, and let judgment
guide the uncertainty of opinion, you shall easily perceive, that in mine
opinion is no great good argument. Look into true art, and you shall soon
see, that as vnderstanstanding is the internal beginning of the demonstratiue
syllogism (whose conclusion is aeternae veritatis, impossible to be refuted)
and as fancy is the internal beginning of Sophistical arguments (which fly at
the presence of the former, even as the shadow of the earth shrinketh
successively from the rising of the sun: Even so, opinion is the internal
beginning of probable reasoning, whose conclusion is indifferently, either true
or false: as the Philosopher in his Morralles concludes most plainly, Aristot.
and as it clearly appears by this example. In your opinion, they are not to
be retained: in mine opinion they are.

Now let the Reader judge which of these two arguments is the stronger.

The absurdity of this conclusion flowing from the fountain of ignorant
arrogancy, teaches us, that these men's opinions is more than the truth: There
zeal far beyond all knowledge, their arguments without all compass of art.

Herein we must understand that opinion is their proper prerogative, and Art
is not worthy to knock at the door of their blind arrogant zeal.

What then remains to raise this scaled Dragon out of his dungeon? Exurgat
Dominus and dissipentur inimici etus. Psalm. 67.
Let the Lord arise, and let his enemies be scattered abroad. Let the truth
break forth like the morning beams descending from the cristall skies. Let the
holy scriptures confute this reason founded on the ysie ground of false
opinion: and that by the example of Ietro: (who though he were an Ethnicke, and
a stranger to the Common wealth of Israel: yet his advise (proceeding from
man's invention) was both accepted of by Moses, and directly followed in all
good Common wealths unto this day.

Therefore the constitutions of Bishops, Doctors, Deanes, Cathedral
Churches, etc. and all other Discipline, orders, constitutions, and laws
whatsoever in the Church of England or else where: though they proceed from
man's invention (as they term it:) yet if it be Secundum, non contrae
scripturas, according to the word of God, not contrary to it. They are all
lawful, good, and godly.

This is a plain undoubted truth, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. And though the piercing flood strive to issue through the chinkes
of those infernal doors: Though the pitchie smoke ascending from that deadly
pit, contend to cover the eyes of the simple. Though this hellish Cloud of
darkness could put on the cleerenesse of the radiant Sun, and those foul
deuilles appear in the habit of the brightest angels: Though they open their
mouths wide, and (to the end they may deceive many) cry alowde, dispersing
the doctrine of sedition, under the color of the word of God opposed to man's
inventions: yet shall the Lord of light quell this hideous dragon with one
small sentence of truth proceeding from his mouth. And though the truth is best
known, and most evidently seen when she is most naked: yet is she not so
tender that she can be pierced with the sharpest arming sword of her enemies,
nor so feeble that she will yield to blastes of wind, nor so ill appointed,
that she has but one pore dart, nor so unlearned that she should yield to
the vanishing smoke of false opinion, nor so simple but that she can soon
discern deceauing spirits from the spirit of truth. Wisdom cries in the
streates, (says Solomon) and the truth of this conclusion though it was first
pronounced in Jerusalem: Prouer. 20
yet at this day the sound thereof has passed through al our streets, entered al
our eares^ knocked at the door of al our hearts. And what is the sound thereof?
even the voice of the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. He
has said it plainly: Whosoever is not against us is with us. By which short
sentence, he which has but half an eye may plainly see, that whatsoever is
not contrary to the word of God, is according to his word. Sententia
scripturae est scriptura, S. Angust.
says Saint Augustine: Not the words, but the meaning of the scripture, is the
scripture. The letter is a dead element, but the spiritual understanding
thereof, founded in truth and verity, gives life to all which apprehend it.

Therefore these subtle deceivers which cry out for a new reformation in the
church (framed in their own fancy) according to the word, and under that color
disclaim the regiment set down by our most gracious Princess: they do
therein most presumptuously abuse her majesty, and all her subjects. This
facing error is not content with bare saying, but it also proceeds to
defending and proving, after this manner: Things once abused by superstition
and idolatry, ought not to be used in the woorship of Christ: therefore
Churches etc. ought to be pulled down, and utterly abolished. When I hear
this principle so often repeated by them, I think on that proverb: Facile quae
cupimus, credimus: and when I confer therewith the manner of their reasoning, I
remember Tindarus his short salutation to his master Salve, Plautus.
atque vale.

So when I behold their false propositions, which they take as granted, and
their vntagged arguments thereunto annexed: I cannot imagine, that they ever
entered further into the Logic schools, than the threshould: or being
there; that ever they did once behold that mistress of Arts and Sciences: or
if they did once see her grace and countenance, yet they never saluted her: or
if they did salute her, it was but Salve atque vale. Ex vnguibus leonem: the
first view of this dangerous error, does discover the vglines of the monster.

Suppose these seeming saints were so indeed, and their opinion true: yet do
but view a while, the venim tail which she draws after her, and you shall
soon epsy a thousand Hidraes heads arising out of her footings.

If you be so hard hearted, that you will not believe unless you see; then cast
away the blinking eyes of fond opinion, and with the clear sight of true
understanding, behold that mirror of heavenly truth, which by the beautiful
show of sundry portraitures, teaches us plainly, that things abused by
superstition, may be well, wisely, and religiously used in the church of God.
The Gentiles they had their gods, to whom they built solemn temples, offered
daily sacrifices, many prayers, and petitions. Therefore should not Solomon
build a most solemn temple unto the God of heaven and earth? The example
confirms that rule: Quarum rerum est vsus, earum etiam est abusus, and
contra. Things well used, may be abused: and things abused, may be well used.

The truth of this general is evident by sundry rules and histories of the
holy scriptures.

We read in the book of Numbers, Number. 6.
that Eleasar the son of Aaron, took the sensors (wherewith the rebellious
Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, had sinned so grievously, that the ground opened,
and swallowed them up quick into hell) and put them into the ark of God Joshua
reserved the gold, Joshua 6.
silver, and brass of Ierico, he put it into the treasury, and consecrated it
unto the Lord. Nay (that which is most plain) Gedeon did offer a bullock unto
the Lord, which his father had fatted for an offering to Baall.

Our savior Christ preached in the Jewish synagogues, which by shedding the
blood of the prophets, and by diverse other enormities, was grossly abused. Saint
John preached in the temple of Diana, which had been many years
superstitiously abused. The rest of the Apostles, in most parts of the world
preached in the temples of the Gentiles, which were built for their Idol gods,
and many ages most sinfully abused.

Saint Paul alleges the sentences of sundry Poets, whose Gods were the
stars of heaven, worshipped of them for many years, and by them most
idolatrously abused. Therefore the right use of things is not to be taken away,
because they have been superstitiously abused.

What then is the rule of right Christian reformation? and wherein does it
consist? Even in taking away the abuse, and not the use.

Hereunto agrees Saint Augustine, S. August. ^pist. 154.
who wills us to deal with the goods and temples, as we do with the men
whom we convert from sacrilegious wicked men, to good Christians.

Saint Gregory (as Beda notes) concerning the reforming of the idol temples
in this land, S. Greg.
then built, and dedicated to the Pagan gods, writes thus: Fama idolorum in
gente Anglica, etc. Let not the idol churches in England be destroyed, but
utterly subvert and destroy the idols in the same.

If this little taste of these pleasant running brooks will not quench the
outrageous heat of thine intemperate stomach, then return with me again unto
the fountain it self, which since it is able to wash thee clean both body and
soul, come boldly thereunto: and if thou doubt of the true way, leave off
thine own erroneous humor, and harken to the voice of that good old man S.
Augustine, S. August.
teaching thee the way most truly in these words: Omnis Christi actio est
nostra instructio, that which our savior Christ did in this case, that ought
to be our example. And what did he? when the fulness of time was come, that the
veil should be removed, and that the sacrifice of the Jews should cease:
because the light, the body, the thing it self, by that prefigured, was now
come; and that it was impiety now any longer to be circumcised: the Lord of
light did not destroy the temple, pulling off the lead, breaking down the
walls, the glass, the timber, thrusting out the Scribes and Pharisees, taking
their lands and livings into his own hands, Math. 21.
but he reformed the abuses thereof, he whipped the money changers, and cast
out them which sold doves therein, he taught the gospel in the temple, and on
the sabbath day expounded the scripture in their synagogues. Afterward, that
holy Apostle and martyr of Jesus Christ S. James, called James the just, he
taught the Gospel therein, and in those countries, being Bishop there thirty
years. Likewise also the rest of the holy Apostles, S. James, Platina.
they frequented the temple, and the synagogues very often, and that for 10. or
12. years after the ascension of our Savior Christ. Peter and John went up
into the temple to pray. Paul was conversant in the sinagogue at Athens
allowing the inscription on the alter ignot^ Deo. The Apostles were dispersed
into all quarters of the earth. S. Peter.
And yet we never hear that they willed any Temple to be destroyed: Eusebius. 2.
but with all piety and humblenes of spirit, they ingrafted the gentiles into
the true christian faith, together cutting up the branches of heresy, and
heathenish superstition.

Peter and Paul planted the faith of Christ in Rome, S. Paul.
they taught long in their temples. But yet we read not where they willed to
pull down the old temples, or to take any whit of maintenance away from the
same.

The holy Apostle and Evangelist saint John, S. John.
living sixty odd years after the passion of our Savior Christ: Eusebius. 3.
and being in his latter days in Ephesus: we do not read that ever he once
persuaded them to pull down the great huge temple of Diana. And yet that the
Gospel was therein preached, it is manifest by sundry histories: as also in
that it is recorded, that this Apostle even when he was so old that he could
scarce go, being taken upon men's shoulders, least the throng of people should
oppress him, and to the end his voice might be heard the better, as he passed
from I Will to I Will, he held out his hand, and said: Fratres diligite inuicem,
diligite inuicem. Hoc est preceptum Domini, Hier. lin Galat.
diligite inuicem. Brethren love ye one an other. Love ye one an other, this
is the last commandment of the Lord, that ye should love one another.

This brotherly exhortation of the holy Apostle saint John was pronounced by
him in the self same temple, in which the Idol of Diana was worshipped.
Nether is this thing strange, or any whit to be doubted, since it has been the
manner of all Christians, even from the Apostles time to this day, to save and
not to destroy, to convert, and not to subvert, to reduce those temples to the
service of the true God, and not to subduce them into our own purses. If the
matter were doubtful, I might easily allege diverse testimonies out of the
ancient fathers, and latter writers for the same. But in that I study rather
to edify the well disposed, than to satisfy the cavil of the froward: I had
rather use that plain way of example, wherewith already I have now begun.
Requesting those which love the true reverent worship due to our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Acts 13.
to understand, that as is said, the glad tidings of the Gospel was preached
by Christ in the Temples and sinagogues of by the Jews: Luke 4.
his Apostles also and their Disciples. And not only the Jewish synagogues,
but in the temples of the heathen, at Corinth, at Ephesus, at Rome, and also at
Jerusalem: which after it was woonne and inhabited by the Sarasins above sixty
years, and the church thereof polluted, A drico
with their Mahometicall idolatry all that time:

Afterward it was converted to the use of true Christian religion, and so
detained for the space of four score years and odd. So that we see most
plainly the truth of this conclusion, which teaches us not to take away the
use of holy temples, for the abuse which has bin committed in them.

Who sees the poor waifaring man, whose earnest desire and full purpose is,
to pass the right way unto eternal life, wandering out of the way, and
because he is out of the way, despoileth him of his money and raiment, and
also his life: but rather with charitable pity, does not take him by the
hand, and bring him into the right path again, and laying out that coin
which he meant to bestow upon seducers, on the true guides and leaders of the
way? This seems much better, and is much more to be wished, though not to
be hoped. In mean time, now in the end of this world let us count that true,
which the Lord has always showed, that the spoilers of his Temple, as they
were always toward, and not brave minded men: so not amongst the Christians
only, but also amongst the heathen, most commonly they have come to evil
and wretched ends.

Paris following the pursuit of his venerious dream, Dares Ph^y.
spoiled the temple of Venus and Diana, in the Greek Island Citherea: whereupon
followed the lamentable destruction of that heroical kingdom of Troy.

Cyrus and Alexander the great, declining from the virtue of their younger age,
and that love which they then showed toward the holy temples, according to
their latter inclination: they which had lived honorably, died ignominiously:
the one with all his army being overcome by a woman Queen of Persia, the
other through pride and insolency, contemning his people (by whose help he
obtained the high dignity of 3. Monarchs) neglecting the temples, and the
sacrifice of the Gods, which before he so much honored, he became odious
unto his subjects, Q. Curtius.
so that he was poisoned in that fair city Babylon, being at supper amongst
his minions, even in his greatest glory and delight. In these two mighty
monarchs, is not the conclusion which I intend, concerning the lovers and the
neglecters of holy temples most plainly? nay in both of them, or else in which
you will? Cirus in the beginning of his age was desirous to build up the temple
of Jerusalem, and he prospered wonderfully, conquering in all his wars: he
forgot the Lord and his holy Temple, and forthwith he was vanquished of his
enemies. So likewise Alexander, whilst he loved his gods and their temples, he
prospered wonderfully: but when he fell from that his first love, he left his
chiefest safety, and in that cup wherein he took much pleasure, Eccles. 16.
he lost his life. So that those which love the Lord, and so long as they
strive to lead a holy, virtuous, and godly life, he mercifully rewards them
according to their faithful christian deeds: but if the righteous turn from
his good life, Ezec, 33.
and leave the christian rule of sanctimony, whereby he has once bin guided,
then the Lord turns his face from such an one, and sets open the gate of
evil end and destruction before him. Let no man flatter himself with the
deceitful appearance of this uncertain world, of this pelting honor and
authority, for which we so much contend with these tempting, insatiable,
unquiet, unlucky, cancred riches, after which the heart of sinful man by nature
thirsts and languisheth with earnest desire thereof: or with the vain
pleasures of the flesh, and all the foolish pomp and pride belonging to the
same: of which if we have but once our sacietie, it is most sinful, most
deceitful, most loathsome and detestable, ever unto those which erst lusted
longly after the same. Neither account less of those most ancient kings and
princes named before, because some of them were long sithence, and others
heathen.

But let us know for a truth, that they on whom the tower of Siloe fell, were
no greater sinners than we: Luke 13.
and unless we repent, we shall likewise perish. Let us behold the rising
and decay of the Monarch of the Babilonians, of the Persians, of the Graecians,
of the Romans; the increase and decrease of the good estate of the christians.
Look the lives of their princes, so long as they honored the God of heaven
and earth, accounting more of his holy worship, than of their own, so long
they prospered and flourished in all kind of wished blessings and glorious
prosperity. But after they regarded their own honor, more than the temple and
service of the Lord, then within few years they came to miserable ends.

The example is plain in Nabuchodonoser, in Cyrus, in Alexander the great, in
Julius Caesar. Though these were mighty Monarchs of the world, yet the same
judgment is due unto all men, even from the highest to the lowest, which any
way decay the woorship of God, Romulus, Numa Pompil.^
and the true reverence of his holy temple. Romulus and Numa Pompilius, the
first rulers of the Romans, erected temples to their Gods, with great
observance and reverence thereunto, and they prospered wonderfully by this good
means.

Contrary observation may be had of that mighty Ruler amongst the Romans
Antonius, who requesting all the young men of Alexandria, Antonius.
that on a solemn feast day they would present the best and comliest of the
city before him in the field, to the end he might choose of them the best, and
prefer them to honor: after they were all gathered togeiher friendly, and with
good cheer before him and his Army: he most cruelly caused his horsemen to
run on them, killing, slaying, destroying, and cruelly treading in pieces, many
comely young gentlemen and others, with their wives and children, which were
nere to the place. This cruel impious mind not contented with this wicked
dasterdly murder in the field, he came into the town, despoiling the temples of
al their rich ornaments. But as the shadow follows the body, eue^ so his
desteny succeeded his steps, for not long after as he was marching bravely
forward with his army, having occasion to step aside for his easeme^t,
conueying himself a little from his army, into a secret corner, only with his
secret servant: when his points were untrust, and his hose let down, he turned
him aside to ease himself: with which, Martialis (privy to his wicked facts,
and lothing his impious mind toward God and man) pulling out his dagger
quickly, stepped to him presently, wounded him deadly, left him there lying
miserably. Herodian.
If this had bin in our time, we would say it was an evil chance, and he a
wicked fellow. I grant, but why do we not remember that there is no hair
falls from our head without the permission of God? why do we not wisely way
with our selves, that there is no hindrance, or disgrace, or danger whatsoever,
which we suffer but it is sent of the Lord for our sin. When he calls thus:
why do we not rise out of our earthly bed, Kings 4.
with little Samuel? why do we not run to the priest, and ask the question
what shall I do? or why do we not enter into our own hearts, and ask within
our selves, even in our conscience what have I done? this comes for my sin
which I have committed for my notorious pride, wherewith I would seem to be
loftier then others of my calling: for my secret murders, secret adulteries,
secret polling and undermining the Church of Jesus Christ. And if it be a great
punishment sent from God, upon thee, thy wife, thy children, thy house or
family, thy country or people, though thou have not sinned lately
notoriously: yet remember what thou have done long since, think that long
since thou inclosedst such a field from thy poor neighbors, that that thou
tookest the goods, lands, and privileges from such a Church, there given to
maintain the worship of the Lord: therewith remember that though it were
long since, yet with the Lord a thousand years is but as one day, S. Pet.
and therefore now he punishes thee even with as perfect justice, as if the
deed were now in doing, before his face. Would to God that men would hereby
learn to fear the Lord, and to tremble at his secret judgment: that they
would cast off the love of this wicked world, which corrupts their
consciences, and poisoneth their own souls: that they would leave this
fained kind of repenting in word only, and repent in deed, which is
restoring with Zacheus four fold, and undoing that which they have done, S.
John.
to the uttermost of their power. If the love of the Lords blessings will not
incite them to good life: yet let the fcare of his heavy judgments, deter
them from sin. Let us not look on those great and grievous examples, which I
have now rehearsed, thinking those were long since in times past, and that in
foreign nations beyond the seas: for if we look well, we shall see, that as
many plagues, pestilences, and other contagious diseases of the body, have
been brought over sea into this fortunate Island: so also this most contagious
and deadly malady of body and soul, came over and rooted it self in this
land long since. We have store of examples at home, and one shall serve for
the perfecting of this period. William Rufus, Will. R^f.
the third son of the Conqueror, after he had overcome his enemies, and
their resistance diverse times, being returned out of France, and quietly
enjoying the Scepter of this land: afterward he lived in joy and triumph, and
for the more suppliance of his pleasure and pastime, he to enlarge his Forest,
pulled down four Abbeies, seauenteene parish Churches, and all the Towns
belonging to the same. Romans ^.
Quo quisque peccat, eodem saepe plectitur modo: Often times a man is punished
the same way, by which he offends; and so was he, for in the same Forest
where these Churches stood which he pulled down: and in the same disport or
pastime, for which he dissolved them: he was slain by the glauncing of an
arrow shot at a Dear, by a Knight: so that he fell down therewith on the
ground, giving only one groan. Some write that in the same place where he
fell down and died, in old time there had been a fair Church, which with
others in his Fathers time were dissolved for the enlarging of the said
Forest, in which Forest also a little before, the Kings Nephew was slain by
the like chance. This Kings Father and he both minded to have made this a
f^ire goodly Forest, fit for the disport and hunting of a king: but the
Church of Christ, and the houses of his poor Subjects stood in his way. His
officers and sycophants, considering what would come rouling into their purses
that way, said it was very meet it should be so, and so it was. But alas it
proved a small pleasure of the father, which ended with the deadly groaning of
his son, a simple pastime for the king to have his body wounded with the
piercing arrow to the death. Pleasure bought with grief, is seldom kindly;
and gain procured with the displeasure of the Almighty, does never profit.
The hearts of the wicked lust after their own bane, Ovid.
and wanton pleasure poisoneth her own Nurse. The flower of flesh florisheth
not an hour, and the fall thereof is grief to the eye. The wisdom of this
world compoundeth cares: and the height of their devises want success. Most
men's fancy wearieth the spirit; and their welthiest wish, is perfect
disquietnes. He which magnifieth himself, seeks his own decaie, because the
chair of pride is placed on slipperie ice. He which gathers unrighteous
goods for his children, pierces the heart of his own flesh: and who so
takes away his neigbours possession, he diggeth up the root of his own
posterity. Proverb. 8.
He which neglects his maker, choketh his soul: and he which takes from
the Church, shall not prosper upon earth: his body shall deca^e without, his
blood shall dry up within: his marowe shall consume within his bones: his
music shall be groaning day and night: his feeding, shall be loathsomnes of
meat: his wish shall be, O that I were as yonder poor man: his comfort, that
his good days be past: his recreation one pang upon an other: his glad
tidings the death of his children: his consolation, the loathing of his
friends: his hope, the fear of death: and unless he repent, his end shall
be despairre of eternal life. Who so minds to live with Jesus Christ
eternally in heaven above, and in this life minds to see good days, let him
walk the way of the righteous, and mark the fruitless paths of the wicked.
Frst of all let him keep his hands, from violating holy things, and behold
the miserable end of those, which do the contrary. Math. 23.
Let him read the holy Gospel of Saint Mathewe, and in reading let him mark
diligently, in marking diligently, let him understand truly, what our
Savior Christ means, when he says: ye fools, whether is the gold holy
or the Temple, which sanctifies the gold? and whether is the gift holy, or
the Altar which sanctifies the gift? If the Temple make the ornaments holy,
then the walls, the wood, the stone, of the which the Temple does consist, is
holy: if the Altar do sanctify the gift, then that which belongs to the
maintaining of the Altar, is sanctified, and they which minister there at, are
to be reputed holy. If by our savior Christ his speech, those things be true:
then they be holy men, which build up the Lords house, and they be wicked
which pull down the same, according to that old verse.

Ecclesias Christi, quas fundauer^ parents:
Heu male diripiunt gnati, pietate carentes.
The godly Fathers builded up the Churches of Christ, and the ungodly
children have pulled them down. But mark the end of all those, which walked
this way, and learn to keep thy conscience clear from this graceless fact.
The Lord inflicted many plagues on them, whilst they lived here: and when
they were once dead, their honor vanished like smoke, and was buried with
them in the grave. As their bodies consumed in the earth, even so their infamy
did spring up out of the ground: their goods wasted like wax in the fire, and
like snow before the Sun: their posterity became like the grass growing on
the house top, Pal. 129.
which withers before it ^ee ripe. Nether was this only the reward of those
which defaced the Temple of the Lord, and decayed his holy Ministry* but it
is most plain and evident, by sundry ancient histories, that in all ages,
when wisdom, learning, and religion, once gave place to worldly policy: when
the virtues of the mind were subdued to the force of flesh: when virtuous life
waxed out of use, Corinth. 1.
and sensuality increased: when the body robbed the soul, and the natural
man imprisoned the freedom of the spirit: when the pride of the world
maintained it self, with the goods of the Church: then shortly after followed
the utter subversion of the whole common wealth. Therefore let sinful man
look down upon himself, with great humility, let the pride of corruptible
flesh, strike sail in time, le^t with the sudden puffes and pirreies of
unnatural winds, which commonly rise from such men's hearts, it be violently
driven into the swift currents of perdition, whose end is the gulf of eternal
sorrow. Let not worldly men go on day by day, minding nothing else but
earth and earthly ioies, like brutish beasts, which have no understanding, but
let them look up unto heaven, from whence comes our joy and true felicity:
let them consider that which the Philosopher gathered, Psalm. 120.
by plain reason, that man consists not of body only, neither that his
beginning is mere natural as is the stone, the flower, the tree, the ox, the
ass: but that he is endued with a soul of heavenly and angelical substance,
made unto eternity, that his stature was framed upright, and his countenance
erected to the heavens, to the end that above all things, he should have a
diligent eye unto God, his Creator, who dwells in the heaven above, and a
special regard unto his divine worship, which he has appointed here
below. That this duty is inioined him from the day of his birth, to the day
of his death: that in observing the same is life, Deuteronomy. 33.
and in neglecting it is death: not the death only of the body, but the
eternal death both of body and soul. If this be so, how diligently ought we
to look about us, how ready to walk the steps of our Savior Christ, S.
John. 4.
whose meat and drink was to do the will of God here an earth? how willing
should we be and desirous to imitate those godly Christians of the primative
Church, who sold their goods, and their lands, laying them down at the
Apostles feet? or their successors, which employed themselves, their goods
and their lands, on the divine service, and reverent Temple of Jesus Christ?
Act. 4.
Let no man presume so far in his blind zeal* altogether deuoid of
knowledge: and sauering rather the doctrine of men, then of God: to say that
God dwells not in temples, made with hands, neither is he worshipped, with
outward worship, but in truth and spirit, thereby most profanely concluding,
that we ought to put no religion in outward things, or to ascribe any holiness
to the same. We have heard that the Temple sanctifies the gold thereof: and
if any man doubt of the same: let him add profane hands, unto the arc,
though under color to hold it up, Oza.
and try with Oza whether he shall presently be stricken from the Lord with
sudden death. Reg. 2.
Or let him but hold out his hand against the Prophet, and try with Roboam,
whether it will be presently dried up or no. Though the Lord strike thee not
presently with Oza, or at thy return change thee into a Leaper as white as
^nowe with Gehesey: Reg. 4.
though he does not accurse thee as he did the figtree: yet assure thy self
that with the burning sins of thy body, the wings of thy soul (wherewith
thou should fly up into heaven) shall be scorched, thy heart shall melt,
thy conscience shall burn, and thou shall be consumed in the great day of the
Lord.

Let all men know this for a truth, that those which diminish the worship of
God here upon earth, the Lord will cut of the line of their posterity in
this life, and blot out their portion in the land of the living.

If this be fearful (O ye sons of men) then let the daily remembrance
thereof enter into your breasts, let it sink down into your hearts, and
ransacke your inward spirits, that ye may thereby learn to kiss the loving son
of your salvation, to embrace his manifold mercies, and to tremble at his
judgments.

Say not God is merciful, and therein abuse him; he is far off, and
therefore deny him: a thousand years with him is but a day, and therewith
forget him: but remember with your selves, and consider wisely, that all his
words are truth, and he has said long since, I come, and I will not stay:
behold I come quickly. Apoc. 22.
He has girt up his loins, he has taken his two edged sword into his hand,
his trumpet is now ready to sound that great alarm of the day of judgment.
Iud. 6.
His thousand thousands of angels are ready to divide the heavens, to inflame
the air, to dry up the waters, and to shake the earth with all the kingdoms
therein, and now he is coming even at the door.

Though some may think that my pen declyneth to this fading conclusion,
rather by course of style, than for the evidence of truth therein contained,
for the glory of Jesus Christ, or for our dutiful readiness against the day of
our salvation: yet in so great danger remain not doubtful through the
flattering show of sinful delusions. But rather, since it greatly concerns
our souls health, let us harken to that plain voice of truth: when you see
these things, then think that your redemption is at hand, and be ye
persuaded fully of the same by evident reason; by that which you see with your
eyes, which you hear with your ears, which you have felt with your sensual
bodies, not many years since. And now after the meditation thereof, more truly
understand with your hearts. Whereby you are forewarned hereof even by secret
thoughts, when you lie in your beds, considering that the bridegroom of our
eternal salvation is at hand. Cast off the love of this present world, scarce
go back into thine own house, to thy wife, Math. 24.
and thy little children; if thou be at home within thy doors, go not out
into the field, to see thy cattle, or into the streets to bid thy friends
farewell, or look once aside from this present comfort, the redemption of all
the godly. Resolve thy self to give account, to come to judgment, for now
the course of this world by all computation, is run out, all flesh is come to
an end. And would you have it set more plainly before your face?

Lift up your eyes, and you shall see, that long since the fig tree is
budded, the fields are all white unto harvest, the heavens are shrunk in their
seat, and waxen old like a garment. If you yet doubt, that the world is not at
the point to be dissolved, or that there is no such present appearance, why
we should look for a new heaven, and a new earth: do but look back a
little into the old world, and you shall see plainly, that the time is now
expiring.

There be but twelve hours in the day, and if ye will calculate exactly,
there be eleven of them and fifty nine minutes past. He which stands on
the hill top, he sees the enemy a far off, and the vigilant watchman, he
says, that every minute he persuades himself, that he hears the trumpet
sounding: Surgite mortui, and venite ad iudicium, S. Jerome.
arise ye dead, and come to judgment. The world was created in six days, and
perfected in the seventh, whereby the ancient, writers learned by conjecture,
out of the prophecy of Elias; Elias.
and also by proportion, that the world should remain six thousand years, and
after that, should succeed the eternal sabbath of our souls. Five ages by
all men's computation are past, and now we live in the sixth, whose 1589 years
now already past, argue, that the sequel of the sixth is also at an end. Of
those six thousand, which long since the learned aimed at, already be expired
5562, and he which with his word did create the world, and at his will shall
destroy it clean, even in the twinkling of an eye: he has promised that the
days shall be shortened for his elect and chosen childrens sake, which seems
likely that the day is even now appearing in the heavens. If we look a little
into the deep visions and revelations of Daniel, Daniel.
in which the course of times and seasons to come in the latter end of all, was
plainly revealed unto him, we may easily guess by that which is past, the
course which is yet to come. He which has seen the rising of the sun, and
marked the course thereof, five days together from the rising to the setting;
and the sixth day, he marking how it did rise in the morning, how it was
elevated at noone, how it begins to decline, when it draws into the west:
he will have a shroud guess, when it is toward night. So likewise let us but
a little turn over the two and twenty books of hidden conference, which
according to the six days of creation divided the world into three tooes.

The infancy, which is two thousand before the law: Liberati.
the strong age which is two thousand under the law: the old age, which is two
thousand under grace.

Let us rise by proportion from two to four, which be the four astrologicall
trigones in the heavens, executing the influence of the seven planets, and
that by the ministry of the four elements: Leouitius.
in order proportionating the four great Monarchs of the world. Hereunto if
we shall adioyne the regiment of the seven mouers or spirits, which the Lord
has placed under him, by the course of nature, according to his secret decree,
to dispose the elementall creatures here below: we may guess to our great
comfort by that which is past, that the end is at hand.

The trigonicall course of constellations have always begun, proceeded,
declined, and ended, after the same manner in the heavens: beginning the first
da^e of creation, at the first degree of Aries, the head of the fiery trigone,
so passing through the earthie, the airie, the watrie, till it ended in the
last minute of Pisces, the full and perfect period of the watrie trigone.

These trigones as they always passed after the same fort in the heavens, so
commonly the same or very like success fell out in the earth, and the same
spirit of planet entering the rule of the world, the same or like events
followed here on earth.

The world (as Plato diuinelie writes) was created in fire, Plato.
even in the sign Aries, the head of the fiery trygone. At which time
Orifiel, the first planeticall angel, or spirit of Saturn, began (according to
the disposition of the Almighty) to rule the world. After whom according to
the process of the four trigones followed Araell the spirit of Venus
Zachariell the spirit of Jupiter, Raphael the spirit of Mercury: Samael the
spirit of Mars: Gabriell the spirit of the Moon: Michaell the spirit of the
Sun. Each of them ruling the world three hundred ^iftie and four years till
the end of that great watrie trigone, Tritemius
in the tail of Pisces. At which time according to the computation of the
seauenty interpreters, Septuaginta. Beda.
and that learned Beda, the watrie trigone ending under the reign of Gabriel
the spirit of the Moon, within few years, after issued that great universal
flood. Unto this day the trigones with the regiment of the seven angels or
planeticall spirits according to the appointment of God, successively took
the disposition and regiment of the world, beginning in the fiery trigon under
the spirit Orifiell passing on to the other trigons, whose particular
proceedings if I should declare with the whole course of the success and
effect of that which followed here upon earth: showing, that as the
constellations changed in the heavens, so commonly there followed alterations
of kingdoms, of states, of prosperity, and adversity, of famine and plenty, of
alteration of laws, rules, people and nations, the rising continuing and
ending of Monarchs, and mighty Empyres: it were a more demonstratiue, and
forcible way. But because it is tedious to show this course perticularly from
the beginning of the world unto this day. As for example. When Orifiell began
his dominion over the world first, then men were naked, rude, living abroad. To
whom when Arael the spirit of Venus succeeded, then began they to be more
handsome, and to love one another. After him Zachariell the spirit of Jupiter
succeeded, under whom men began to build and to rule one over another. To this
Raphael succeeded the spirit of Mercury, under whom caracters, and writing,
and musical instrumen^s were first invented. To this succeeded Samal the
spirit of Mars: under whom though the Hebrews account that the flood was,
Hebraei
yet according to the account of the septuaginta, Isiodore, Isodorus.
Beda, and Tritemius (who proves this assertion by the same rule of
multiplicatio^) the flood was afterward under the dominion of Gabriel, the
spirit of the Moon. Because it were both obscure and tedious, to show from the
beginning of the world unto this day, every course of these trigones in the
zodiach, and every dominion of these planetical spirits, with the effects
which followed here on earth, to the end that we may understand a secret truth
sufficient to warn every one which loves the Lord, to be ready, since his day
and coming seems near at hand: I will only show some effects of the watery
trigone: especially what followed when it ended, as it did lately in the tail
of Pisces, with the appliance of the effects of Gabriell the spirit of the
Moon, who last of all begun his dominion over the world, the year of our
Savior his incarnation 1525. and shall rule (unless the Lord shall cut off
those evil effects) til the year one thousand eight hundred seaue^ty nine, and
eleven months. For the more inciting of us unto the consideration of our state,
and this present age in which we live: let us call to mind the words of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: who when he forewarned his Disciples of the last
day of doom, (which now hangs over our heads:) then (says he) look up,
for your redemption is at hand. He which bids us look up, he first created
man upright, to behold the heavens, not minding to make us gase at nothing,
but he has set some clear object for us to behold above. And because heaven
is above, and earth below, look up unto the heavens, Genesis 1.
and behold the stars which (as the Scripture faith) are fixed therein for
signs, and times, for years and days: since the Lord himself in the creation
of the stars appointed them for signs and seasons: and since the Son of God
has bid us look up to them. Let us not regard the colored speeches of the
ignorant: (who being a ridiculous generation, would feign seem that which
they are not.)

But let us look up, and we shall see strange signs in the heavens, such
signs as has not been since the beginning of the world unto this day, and
were not, nor could not well have been found out of us, if we had not had
cunning, and expert Astrologers amongst us.

The appearance of these prodigious sights in the heavens: do bid us consider,
that the six thousand years are almost ended, that the sixth age of the world
is inclining it self into the grave: that the fourth Monarch (though Liberatie
very learnedly adds a short defensive for the same) is now languishing.

The stars were appointed for signs and seasons: and this is a great sign
of the decaying of the fourth monarch, in that the watrie Trigone is now
expired under the which the fourth monarch had the beginning. The same two
great planets Saturn and Jupiter, being conioined in Scorpio, Julius Caesar
being then in the height of his imperial pride, Iul. C^sar.
which was forty seven years before Christ. That learned Liberatie argues
strongly on the contrary, and to an other conclusion than I will name;
affirming that no constellation decaieth his own proper effect. Ciprianus
Leouitius coniectureth a shorter conclusion from heaven. It is lawful for all
men to believe what seems most likely, and when all is done, the conclusion
is mere coniecturall, but yet by many probabilities.

This for our instruction let us mark, after the passing of these six thousand
years, six ages, four momarches, and now the fourth Trigone newly ended; that
the world also is drawing toward and end. With this let us consider, how
often this constellation has had issue from the beginning of the world,
together with the dominion of Gabriell the spirit of the Moon, who rules now.
And therewith let us consider the effects which followed them. Anno mundi,
2242, the watrie Trigone drawing to an end, Gabriel the angel of the moon,
began his dominion over the world, and what followed? men being then given to
pride and lechery, to feeding their bodies and not their souls; to regard the
kingdoms of the earth, and not the kingdom of heaven: not regarding that
learned Noe, the servant of the Lord: the clouds were dissolved above; Genesis
6.
the fountains of the earth were opened below; the seas were let loose
abroad; the waters flowed outragiously over the whole earth, and drowned all
worms and beasts, all fowls, all men, women, and children, all living
creatures of the earth, except Noe, and those which he took with him into the
Arc.

After this general destruction of the whole world in the end of Pisces, the
spirits of the planets together with the Trigones, proceeded successively,
till at the length, in the end of the dominion of Samaell the spirit of Mars
(under whom the destruction of Troy was complete) Gabriel the angel of the
moon began the second time to rule, Troy.
in the end of the watrie Trigone. And what followed? that mighty Monarchy
of the Assirians was destroyed, and came to utter ruin under that ^leshly
Sardanapalus. Also the kingdom of the Macedonians, Tit. Liu^.
the kingdom of the Syluians ended, and the Romans began, together with the
captivity of Babylon amongst the Jews.

Thirdly, the Trigones and planeticall spirits proceeded successively, till the
same watery trigone ended again, the fiery entering six years before the birth
of Christ, and what followed? There was great change throughout the whole
world. Josephus.
The sacrifice of Moses did cease; the oracles and idolatry of the heathen
came to an end; the Gentiles were called to be partakers of the true faith; the
empire of Rome was subdued and brought under the law of the Gospel, Romans 1.
which began under the fiery triplicitie. After which the succession of the
trigones proceeded to the end of the watery trigone, which was about the year
of our Lord 600. And what followed?

Mahomet the Arabian, brought in the sect of the Saracens, by which the Roman
Empire, and the profession of christianity decayed together in Asia, besides
many wastings and destructio^s in the church, recovered again by Charles the
great.

From that time to this, Lonicerus
the trigones have passed their course successively in such sort, P. Iouius.
that now the watrie trigone is once again expired in Pisces, and the fiery
newly entered in Aries, together under the dominion of Gabriell, which ruled in
the time of the flood, and in the destruction of the first Monarch. And what
shall follow? God knows, and no man, no not the angels in heaven.

And yet let us not be so blinded with the cloudie fancies of the flesh, that
we should loo^e our spiritual understanding. But let us look up to heaven,
and behold the great signs, which the Lord shows in the heavens; especially
let us fix our cogitation on that strange star, An. Dom. 1573.
which he showed unto us fifteen years since. Which though it appeared
amongst the stars of heaven, and that in the place of a star (so that none
but Astrologers could perceive the same) yet it was a strange sight to all the
learned which beheld it. I. Dee.
And so much the rather, because it was found to be placed very high in the
aethereall region above the sphere of the moon, a fair, clear bright, calm
star, round and even, but brighter than the stars of heaven, T. Digges.
it was exceeding strange to the wise and learned, because there was never any
such like seen, since the first creation of the world unto this day, but at the
coming of Christ. Though some old Chaldeans note, that the like appeared to
Noe, fifteen years before the flood, and therefore seems to be a sign unto
the world of such an effect, as never was in the world before, unless it were
the coming of that holy one, the Lord and savior of the world.

It appeared in the heavens, and not in the elements; whereby we gather, that
it signifies an event from heaven. In a sign which never sets, and that a
whole year together, which forsheweth an eternity. The sign wherein it
appeared, is Cassiopeia, Cassiopeia.
which by the Egyptians, and old Astronomers, is figured a virgin sitting in
a chair with a branch in her hand, Aratus.
which likely resembles the state of judgment. G^ariau.
Since therefore after so many general courses, Mercator.
of the Trigones, of the monarchs, of the dominion of the planeticall spirits,
the Lord has showed wonderful signs of his coming in the air, in the water,
in the earth: and lastly above all, has held out his hand in the heavens,
showing us that he is now opening the doors of heaven, and coming to
judgment: and that the doom of all creatures is now dawning. Let us wisely
weigh and consider, the exceeding great power and majesty, wherewith the Lord
of hosts shall come to judge the earth. Though he was made man for our sakes,
and for our salvation: yet be ye not so carnal in your cogitation, or so
bewitched with the delaying fancy of sensuality, that you should imagine his
power to be compact after the manner of men: Enoch.
that when he is mustering his thousands of angels (as Enoch prophesied long
since) that we should hear of it before, and that after we hear of it, he
should be long in coming.

No, the Lord will bow the heavens at his pleasure, Esai. 64.
and come down even in the twinkling of an eye, according as it is written:
even as the lightning breaks out of the East, Math. 24.
passing forthwith into the West: even so shall the coming of the Son of man
be. He is not like to the earthly princes, that he should send his
harbinger before. But I am is he: most monderful, most holy, most mighty, in
whose presence the angels are not pure, and the heavens corruptible. He spoke
the word, and they were all made: and at the sownd thereof they shall all be
consumed. He shall kindle the fire of his heavy displeasure against the sinners
of the earth. He shall cleave the heavens asunder, and the flame shall break
forth like a furnesse. As were the days of Noe, a general destruction, Genesis 7.
with the voice of mourning and weeping, and deadly lamentation: as was Sodom
that sink of sin, Genesis 19.
and Gomorrha that evil nurse of iniquity: as the fire and brimstone rained
down from heaven most ruthfully, firing, wasting, burning, destroying, and
sincking those wicked cities: so shall be the coming of the son of man.

He shall shake the heavens above, and make the hell below to tremble, the
trompet shall sownd, even the trompet of the God of heaven and earth, the sownd
thereof shall rend the clouds of the air, it shall make the fowls to shrink
with fear and to fall down dead on the earth. Pet. 2.
Therewith the sea shall flee from the woonted course, and the floods shall
roar, the earth shall swell, the creatures thereof shall be amassed, the air
shall thunder and lighten, the elements shall melt with heat, the stars shall
fall from their spheres, and the light shall vanish from before the face of all
men then living on the earth: Joel. 2.
as it was foreshewed by the prophet long since. This is like to be a black
day, a glowming day, a day of fire and smoke from the heavens, a day of anger
and wrath, of bitterness and tears, of lamenting and utter destruction on the
earth. Then shall fear come on all men living, and the inhabitants of the
world shall be agasht, when they shall see that with their eyes, which makes
our hearts quake when we remember it. The prophet long since has given us
warning thererof, and many hundre^h years ago he cried alowd, blow up the
trumpet in Syon, and showt in my holy mount. Let all the inhabitants of the
land tremble, for the day of the Lord is come, for it is now at hand: a fire
deuoureth before him, and behind him the flame burns up, the earth shall
vanish at his presence, like a tempest: the heavens shall melt, the clouds
shall drop, the Sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the stars shall
withdraw their shining.

There shall appear fearful wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood,
and fire, and pillars of smoke, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the Moon into blood. Then shall we see the powers of heaven to move above in
the firmament, and the inhabitants of the earth shall stand gasing, all
amazed, Esai 13.
and who is able to behold it? then shall the dead arise out of their graves,
according to the sownd of the trompet, then shall all arise and come to
judgment. The poor together with the rich, the old the young, the mighty,
the simple the King, the beggar. The^ shall the poor of this world rejoice,
when they shall behold the heavenly countenance of the bridegroom, their loving
savior and merciful redeemer. Then and in that day the Lord shall look upon
his poor militant church, with a cheerful eye and loving countinance. He
shall send down his angels, who shall embrace his loving children, and take
them up into everlasting joy. But as for the wicked and many of those which
have inioyed the great honor, authority, pleasure, plenty and joy in this
world: he shall behold them a far off. Even as the clowdy pillar which was
placed betwixt Israel and the Egyptians, was light to Israel, and darkness
to the Egyptians: Exodus 14.
even so the chosen of the Lord in that day shall stand in the light, and shine
in the kingdom of heaven, as the stars in the firmament: but the children of
this world, and those which made their heaven of this worldly treasure, Sapien.
3.
shall stand still all amazed in heart: the Cloud of confusion shall compass
them about, and their faces shall be covered with the mantle of shame: griping
shall pinch their hearts within, and their voice shall sownde out nothing else,
but woe and alas.

When they shall behold all their gould melted, their houses burnt, and their
hope clean vanished, their lands suncke, and their friends gone, they shall
run stark mad unto the waters, and all amazed unto the mountains,
kneeling down before them, and crying: cover us and our iniquities. O cover us
from the face of him that sits on the throne* their consciences accusing
them, they shall hate the goods which they have gotten euilly, and shall fly
from those lands which they have violently taken from the poor, or from the
holy church, fearing least it should open and swallow them up into hell.

They shall fly from their houses, built with ill gotten money, least they be
consumed together with the flame thereof: great fear and vexation of spirit
shall be to the mighty men of this world, according as it is written: potentes
potenter pat^entur, Sapien 6.
the mighty shall be punished mightily, when the puissant princes of these
earthly regions, shall stand all naked before all the world both good and bad,
before the angels of heaven, and Jesus Christ now sitting on his throne, and all
their deeds, yea all their secret doings therewith laid open: when they shall
remember how negligently they have looked to the woorship of the Lord, and how
careful they have been of their own estimation: how little they have bestowed
on the house of God, and how many thousands on their own painted palaces:
how little they have bestowed on the poor of Jesus Christ, and have exceeding
much on their carnal friends in whom they delighted. When those things shall
come clearly to their remembrance: then shall be fulfilled that saying of the
Apostle. James 5.
Go too ye rich men, howl and weep for the misery which shall come on you.
Many and mighty shall be their wailings: it shall grieve them that they have
bin rich, when they shall see the blessings of the poor: their honor shall
breed thought of despair and confusion in their hearts, and their fair lands
which they made their paradise here on earth, shall be a burning consumption in
their consciences.

When the wicked shall see heaven open above, hell gaping below, and the earth
melting away betwixt them both: when they shall hear that voice of joy; Math.
25.
Come ye blessed: and that voice of sorrow; Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire: when they shall see the mighty put down from their seat, and the
humble lowly hearted exalted: it shall grieve them, so that they shall utterly
loath all those pleasures which they have so loved, and they shall gnash
thereat with their teeth. But to the godly, to the penitent sinners, to those
which love his holy worship, and study to maintain his poor members here
upon earth: the Lord of his great mercy will bestow his loving kindness and
peace, with the fruition of everlasting life. Which he grant us, that has
bought it so dearly for us, even Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost, one most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, be
all glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS. Deo gratias.
Celsus of Verona his Dissuasiue to the renoumed Senate of Venece: showing that
since they enriched themselves with the goods of the Church, they are become
unable to resist their enemies.
IT has been the manner of many men (most entire Prince, and worthy Senate)
often times when they were to entreat of any matter, truly to speak, to reveal,
and to comprehend, that in their speech which might please the ears of the
hearers, or obtain grace and general good liking of all. And on the
contrary, that which is right, which is profitable, which seems good and
honest unto them, that they openly refuse, and utterly reject, as a thing less
pleasant, and less delightful to the hearers. But I am far of an other
opinion, since (as me thinks) those men are greatly deceived, and fail often
times of their purposed conclusion. For whilst they seek the glory and
commendation of men, by a servile kind of merchandise they fall into the pit
of ignomie and discredit. For what is more dishonest, then with the color of
virtue and goodness, deceitfullie to blind the eyes of our friends. What more
unseemly thing, then in the steed of truth, to place fained and forged errors?
what is more filthy or further from all honest dealing; then by pestilent
fauning and flattering, to induce mortal men into many great and dangerous
errors? these kind of men are not to be accounted friends or welwillers, or
yet good men, but rather to be esteemed as cruel enemies, utterly to be
detested of all men.

For who is able to recount what mischiefs, what losses, what pestilent
destructio^s they bring with the^? I say who is able to number all the great
detriments, the charges, the discommodities, the dangers which thorough the
wicked counsel of these parasiticall flatterers, and their deceitful
glosinges, not only private men, but all Commonwealths, and the Dominions of
all Princes have sustained. And it is no hard matter for them to attain
hereunto: since they masking under the smooth visure of good will and amity,
with glosing words and fained flatteringes, they blind the eyes of those
which behold them, they entangle them, and they intrappe every one not yet
acquainted with their sleights, and in such manner, that they cannot possibly
discern what is good and wholesome for them: nor on the contrary, what is ill
and hurtful.

They think themselves to be such kind of men, that of right and reason they
should be commended: from which opinion innumerable offenses do proceed,
since hereby they remain in most gross errors. Therefore at this present I
am not minded to tread in their steps, but rather I mind to prosecute* and
to declare those things boldly, which though they seem less plausible, or
less pleasant, yet they are not forged or fained: but are such indeed, as
become a true friend, and faithful instructor, and therefore peradventure,
they will prove not altogether unprofitable, nor unfruitful: for the potions
of Physicians, often times are bitter, but yet the same minister help and health
unto the diseased: the which thing also it behooves me to do, even to execute
the same duly, and to resemble the same person: whereby I may more easily
and directly recover, the good health of those, which now lie still and
languish. In this respect if I shall seem to have uttered any thing more
licentiously then I might: do not think that it proceeds of stomach or
malice, but rather that your mind (most excellent Prince) and theirs also,
which are destitute of such admonitions, may be stirred up effectually, and
in good earnest to take wiser and more wholesome counsel.

In fine I request you to accept this small treatise of mine, written rudely
and in a mean style, which for that great love and hearty good will which I
bear unto your Honor, and that most famous Senate, I have determined with my
self to dedicate unto you. If perad^enture not only by my daily and devout
prayers, but also by exhortations I may profit you and your afflicted state,
either with counsel or otherwise, with my profitable endeavor.

And now lest my speech should rome and range too far (most mighty Prince) I
will begin to declare that which I mind to entreat of at this time. If by the
way I may but note and name this one thing, that therefore of mine own accord
I took this labor upon me, that in no respect (so far as my faculty will
extend) I would restrain my self, but I would supply those things, I would
persuade those things, I would admonish you of those things, which I am sure
nerely concern the safety and preservation of that your most honorable and
famous Senate, and (in these so great calamities and dangers) your perpetual
name and glory.

NOt many days since (most Noble Prince) travailing through many Countries and
Cities: I spoke with many rare and excellent men, many famous and mighty
Princes. In the midst of our talk often times we fell into the self same
speeches, which are now common in every man's mouth: that is concerning the
prosperous success of the wars of the great Turk, a most wicked and
professed enemy even to the name of a Christian. With which wars he
persecuteth, vexes, and cruelly tormenteth the Christians, with which he
strives day and night, to root out the ancient Catholic faith. In which
thing we see plainly, that he has prevailed, so long and so strongly, that
he has levied such strength of soldiers, both by sea and by land, that he
has so furnished himself, with warlike power, and to conclude that he has
prepared as great an army against the Christians (nay Italy it self) as ever
Zerxes that great Potentate brought against the Grecians, whose army (as it is
recorded) almost covered the Seas with ships, and the land with footmen,
wherefore the hugenes of such great preparation and incredible power, must
needs be great terror to us all. Many such like matters, passed and
ouerpassed, whilst we were talking. At length our speech drew to that
conclusion, how great, how lamentable, and how sorrowful was the loss of your
Island Euboea, and not to be named without tears: then the which, there could
not have chanced a greater, a more sorrowful, a more lamentable loss, either
to you or to the state of all Christendom. For thereby most cruel war, and
extreme danger is threatened, not only to you and to your dominions bordering
on the seas: but likewise to Italy it self, and to our Catholic faith, a
most grievous euersion and utter destruction is attempted. Wherefore we have
great cause to fear, lest the name of Christendom be now in danger to be
utterly extinguished, together with the Catholic faith, confirmed with so
many labors, with so much blood, with such and so many agonies of Jesus
Christ. For now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, our cruel enemies
are before the door: now the shores resound again with the great force of
wars which approach them by Seas. Now (unless it please God to help us from
heaven) death and destruction do come upon us. Who is able to repress the
cruel force of this devouring beast? who shall disanull his deadly attempt?
who is able to terrify him from his purpose, already puffed up with the hope
of victory. Through the multitude of his people, and the greatness of his
victories, he counts his dominions to little* for desire of rule and Empire
has no mean. But how much the larger the dominion is, so much more the
desire of rule increases. Wherefore he will easily be persuaded that in time,
he may also obtain the whole dominion of Italy. In truth this is the full
height of his wish: he even gapeth after this most greedily; to this purpose he
frames all his study, all his cogitations, all his counsel, all his devise
and policy. The same occasion which moved Alexander of Macedonie or Julius
Caesar (whom he propounds to follow before all others in higher sort then is
the lot of mortal man) to seek the conquest of the whole world, moves this
man also most earnestly, thus to seek the enlarging of his dominions, and
through his victorious acts, to become famous with all posterity: which has
been no small prouokement, to the most ingenuous and excellent minds, to
attempt the greatest and hardest adventures. Now the^ by emulatio^ of their
glory, he indeuoureth to show himself like unto the^, and through the example
of their renoume, and desire of praise, he seems daily more and more to be
inflamed; which he so much the more earnestly desires, how much the way is
broader, and the entrance easier, through this his last victory. In which
respect (as it seems to many) this death and calamity of your Euripus, is the
greatest and most to be lamented of all others: the which many think and
affirm that God of his righteous and just judgment, has brought upon you:
for your insolent taxing and pouling of holy things, belonging to the Church,
and your injurious troubling of the state of religion. It likewise happened not
long since, to that most famous city Constantinople, renoumed through the
whole world, which in time past was the sea of the Romain ^mpire, but (as I
remember) for a greater crime. For although without great grief we cannot well
remember that unfortunate slaughter: yet all men can well witness, that their
lamentable calamity, and miserable destruction came upon them by the just
judgment of almighty God, for the long and obstinate discord, and departing of
the Grecians, from the true faith. What signifies the destruction of the
Pisans which in times past gloried that they were of so great power and
dominion? did not all things prosper well with the^? was not their kingdom
safe, and sure both by sea and land, so long as they embraced religion with
great reverence? but afterward when they laid wicked and violent hands on the
Church, and the Ministers of the high God, then they were brought into many
adversities, many great losses, many miserable calamities, so that they did not
only lose their dominion and rule, but they became bondslaues to their enemies.
Where, let no man marvel if of late it has happened in like miserable sort, to
your Ila^d Eubo^a, for it is the saying of all people and nations that your
expeditio^ of Achaia, had so lamentable and so unhappy a conclusion for your
diminishing and taxing of the liuinges belonging to the Church. And in like
sort all men account that the death of your Euripus was the just judgment of
God for your injuries and polling of the Church. Wherefore if we will way this
matter wisely, if with judgment we will look into our own doings, we have
great cause, I say we have great cause to fear (that if you remain in this
mind and disposition still) the rest of your Islands and Cities shall be
subject to the same calamities and destruction. Neither can we hope that our
afflicted state shall be repaired, so long as the just cause of our ruin,
still remains amongst us. These things, and such like, are often heard in
every place, which were too long to repeat, at this present. Now this one thing
is sufficient to be here mentioned, that many things are reported abroad,
not uncertainly, nor obscurely, to the great discredit and disgrace of your
most famous Senate, by reason of your great compilation and pilling of holy
things. Wherefore to say the truth in regard of that singular good will, and
observance, which I bear unto your honorable Senate: I do not a little lament
your estate, in that I am desirous to hear those things of you and your happy
estate, which belong to high praise, to great glory and renoume. I cannot but
be greatly grieved, when I consider how low that great honor and worthy fame
of you is fallen, which (and that worthily) thorough out the whole world, and
amongst the furthest nations, was thought incredible. For even as in times
past, this most famous City excelled all others, in abundance of wealth, in
plenty of all things, in high glory, in great dignity: so also in honesty of
manners, in holiness of life, in justice, faith, piety, religion, and other
virtues it far past them all. Which good and virtuous practices, after they
begin to be forgotten, even so likewise that ancient glory and dignity of
your name, by little and little began to diminish: by little and little it began to
be obscured and therewith also distinguished. And although I am greatly
grieved, when I see so many slaughters, so many calamities, so many and such
ill proceedings, so many and so great disgracings of of your ancient dignity,
which are well known throughout all Italy: yet I am of this opinion (under
your correction be it said) which think that this new and unusual tasking and
tolling of the Church, is the chief cause of your ill and unhappy success in
those things which ye took in hand. For when I weigh with my self, and
consider the course of times past, I am easily induced to be of their opinion:
and to speak plainly, that which I have good cause to think, It seems that
all your great loss and adversities, proceed from hence as from a most corrupt
and poisoned fountain. And that it is so indeed, it appears plainly to all
men, which will record the most excellent and famous factes of ancient time,
and now to repeat the beginnings of your ancient exploits. Who is so
unskillful? who so simple and so ignorant in all matters whatsoever, which
knows not the beginning of this your commonwealth? how wonderful, how
famous, how divine it was, how greatly and in most ample manner it increased
above the customable manner and course of all other Cities. For all things fell
out so luckily, and had so good success; that all things therein seemed to
increase, and therein also to flourish.

For in short space it became famous throughout the whole world, not only in
abundance of most precious jewels, in sumptuous and magnificent buildings, in
great strength and store of ships, but also ye enlarged your dominions far
and near, both by sea and by land.

And through your excellent wisdom, and the wise forsight of your ancestors,
ye have entirely preserved the same. So that the force and power of Italy
(sometimes the Queen and mistress of the whole world) could not at any time
vanquish the same. What then was the true cause of such great prosperity and
happy success, unless it were because there was never any City, in which
either religion was more embraced, or true justice longer or more religiously
preserved? I hope it may be spoken without suspicion of flattery, for I seek
to speak little in comparison of the thing, and the weight of the matter does
pass beyond the bounds of my speech.

Who will not greatly commend the sincere and singular love which your
ancestors bare unto religion? the great and inviolable observance of justice
and holiness? their exceeding great charity and liberality toward the poor
members of Jesus Christ? their inestimable bounty toward the adorning and
beautifiyng of holy temples, even unto this present day?

This thing is manifest, both by the fresh memory of devout me^, and also by
our temples richly adorned; and by our ample churches full of holy monuments,
which (as it is apparent) were built in times of old, only by the oblations
and charitable devotions of your ancestors. For although they were always
accounted liberal and devout, concerning those things which appertain to the
worship of God, and their service toward religion: Yet notwithstanding when
they began to be oppressed with these calamities, and were so sore distressed:
then especially by their good works they earnestly required help from
heaven: then even with great distribution of alms, with great faith, with
great devotion, they did strive to please and pacify God the giver of all good
things. What diverse seasons, and how unlike or rather plain contrary
observance of religion and holy worship have succeeded, I had rather other me^
should judge than I: for the thing is so plain and manifest, that he which
has but half an eye may easily see it. But concerning this hereafter. Now I
return unto the ages of your ancestors, who, as we have showed, being so well
strengthened, waged batraile against their enemies, in defense of their
dominions. They went forth into the field, and valiantly joined battle:
neither did they return home again, till their enemies were discomfited and
overcome. They obtained the victory, and divided the spoil. Wherefore Camillus
deserved immortal fame, which (as Liuie writes) oftentimes and earnestly
exhorted the people hereunto. Behold (says he) O ye worthy Romans, either the
prosperous or the afflicteed state of Rome in these years, and ye shall find
most surely, that whilst we were religious, all things went well with us: but
when we once neglected our duty to religion, all things went against us. And
now (O worthy prince) how much better were it with your whole commonwelth, if
you would propound unto your selves the most excellent discipline of your
ancestors, and their worthy laws concerning religion? how much more wisely and
excellently were the co^monwelth ruled, if by the example of their high wisdom
and noble acts you would wax more wary; Out of question you should not be
molested, with so many discommodities, so many wars, so many dangers: but as
in times of old with the vanquishing of your enemies, you should obtain
victory with great triumph.

But if you have worse success in these days, than you look for, or would
desire, no marvel when as the godly laws of your ancestors by little and
little are clean forgotten, when religion it self, and the reverence of holy
priests is less practiced than it was wont, and less than reason would it
should be.

Pardon me I pray you, if I speak plainly: for most men, nay, almost all
which are ruled by reason, are of the same opinion. I speak all this to do
you good, and therefore you may more easily pardon me.

And now let us return to that from whence we have digressed. Those things
were unwisely neglected of you, which we spoke of before, and that truly: for
those were the only things which in times past advanced you and your common
wealth to such dignities, such glory, such happy fame. Wherefore not without
good cause, your happy success, your famous spoils, your victorious triumphs,
are come to an end: and now your great fame and glory, the great auctority and
majesty of your name, which has resownded most famously through the whole
world: which seemed wonderful to all people, princes, kindreds, and nations, is
in hazard now to be extinguished. Count ye nothing of this (O ye most famous
Venetians? do you not think of these things? do you not magnify all these?
Mark I pray you this one thing wisely: way and consider this one thing even in
your own conscience, way this one thing truly. How many victories, how many
conquestes, how many spoils have you achieved, against your enemies? how many
happy events have you had in these so long wars, since you invented this
strange and pestilent council? in that you fear nothing at all to lay violent
hands on church goods, and holy things dedicated to God almighty: which
impiety (believe me) will not help you one whit in these your great dangers,
and extreme necessity. And although peradventure it seem not so to many: yet
without all doubt as a most fierce and piercing poison, which with the deadly
contagion thereof, is wont to infect and poison all things, which come near
it. Even so your great strength and preparation to war by your former
impiety toward the Church, is like (which God forbid) to be clean
vanquished and destroyed.

Julius Caesar would never have admitted such wicked council, Julius Caesar.
though he were an heathen: who (as it is apparent in his life) when he entered
by chance into Aruernia, the me^ of that country pointed to the sword of
Caesar hanging in their Church, as it were a spoil got from the Emperor by
force of arms. Caesar entering the Church seeing the sword, he smiled to him
self, saying nothing: and when his friends willed that it should be pulled
down: Caesar in any wise would not suffer it. Out of question he did both
wisely and religiously, for he accounted the sword and all things else
dedicated to holy use to be sacred things, therefore he thought it unlawful
to touch them any more with carnal hands, or to have them in any wise employed
in human affairs.

Also your ancestors would never have done so, they would never have imagined
any such thing. Those ancient rulers much renowned for their great wisdom:
which being free from all danger, from adversity, from all extremity, they
would never have hearkened to such counsel, nor have accepted of any such
subsidy. And that most wisely, for they knew full well, that the best kind of
government by which a common wealth is preserved, augmented, and increased be
two, especially: Religion, and Justice. Which when they are maintained, the
common wealth is safe and sure: but if they fail, it must needs also decay.
With these kind of arts and orders rather then by force of arms, they
obtained this ample dominion, which is enlarged by sea and land.

But so soon as these excellent arts began to wax out of use, forthwith the
Empire it self began to decay and come to ruin. Which things if you will
consider aright, ought to forewarne and stir you up into a greater devotion,
and more dutiful observation of Religion and holy things.

Neither ought these examples of your own country affairs (which have fallen
out unluckily) only be a warning unto you, but also that great care and
dutiful devotion, which your ancestors continually, and plentif^lly yielded
unto divine things, and unto them whose function was to attend upon the same.
Religio Aegyptiorum.
Amongst the Egyptians (as Diodorus affirms) all the yearly revenues of the
land, were divided equally into three parts.

The first part the Priests did challenge to themselves, who were of such
authority amongst them, that al things were governed by their council and
wise foresight, and being free from al burdens and taxes, they had the second
place of the rule and dignity next the king. Indians.
Also the Indians dividing the whole common wealth into seven tribes,
constituted the tribe of the priests in the first place, free from all burden
and service, yielding them great honor and reverence. But yet in mine opinion
concerning worship and duty toward God, Aethiopians.
the Aethiopians did far excel all others. For with them the priests and
keepers of their temples were in such great honor, that they only were the
men, whom they thought eligible to be their kings: and that which seems
incredible, they were of such authority and credit amongst them: that when
they thought good, they gave notice to the kings, that they should die,
affirming that it was the sentence of their gods: which was the cause that al
their Kings til the time of Ptolomy the second, obeyed the edict of the
priests, and willingly took their death at their appointment, not constrained
but even by old custom, being loath to alter the superstition.

Wherefore they boast, that they have reaped this fruit and reward for that
their great piety toward their gods, that the invasions of all their
enemies, and that cruelty could never do them any harm, and that they were
never conquered or subject to any foreign nation.

For Cambyses that most mighty king of the Persians, Cambises.
when he once assaulted them with a most dreadful army; most of his soldiers
being destroyed, with great ignominy he lost almost his whole army.

Hercules and Dionisius having travailed through the whole world, Hercules.
Dionysius
would not once trouble the Aethiopians, in respect that they were so
religious. The same thing also appears in the holy Bible. For in the book of
Genesis we read, that in the days of old there was so great and so strange a
famine through the whole world, that corn and victuals were scarcely to be had
in any place. The fiercenes of this famine was especially in Egypt, and
pinched them sorer than other nations: insomuch that the inhabitants of the
land were compelled to sell their farms, their possessions, and their houses,
nay their household stuff for victuals. Which when they began to fail them,
through the long and hard famine; at length, least through hunger they should
die straungely, and most miserably, they gave themselves also into the kings
hands.

Wherefore that religious steward of the king, Joseph the patr^arch.
having laid up exceeding great store of provision even of purpose. He bought
the whole land of Egypt (the possessions of the Priests excepted) and their
countries into the hands of king Pharao. From which time until Moses (as the
scripture witnesses) the fifth part of the increase of Egypt was paid unto the
king. But those things which appertained to the priests, and the keepers of
the temples, they were safe from this law; for Pharao did not only give them
fair and large possessions, but also he appointed that they should be duly
fed and nourished all the time of the famine, by the common store and
provision, which was the cause that they sold not their possessions and goods
as the other people did. What should I here make mention of the Romans? did
not they appoint a most solemn priesthood to the ministers of holy things?
The Roman Priests.
did they not always imploie their greatest studies and pains in preserving
and increasing religion. For (as Valerius Maximus says) that city preserved
religion above all other things whatsoever, so that the highest and chiefest
magistrates did willingly yield themselves and their service unto holy rites,
hoping assuredly, that they should attain the chief rule and magistracy of
the world, if they humbled themselves devoutly unto the heavenly power.

But to what end do I show these things, since all books that ever was
written, either divine or profane* are full of these examples and clear
monuments, and therefore read you those books, and peruse them diligently.
Neither think you that the priests and ministers of God (as some talk) should
now be poor and physicians, as they were sometimes. But on the contrary you
shall easily see, that in no age, in no time past, they were used so
beggarly, and so unworthily. But if in ancient time men were so religious in
their error: how devout think you they would have been in the sincere
worship of the true ever living God? Such manner of men ought we to be, which
do not worship fained idols or devils (as they did) but that great creator,
the maker of heaven and earth, and all things therein. Wherefore I desire (O
most noble prince) I desire most earnestly, even for that great goodwill which
I bear to you and your commonwelth, that you and those which be of your
opinion, would alter your minds, and take better council, concerning the
church, the clergy, the lands and goods once dedicated to the same. Although
you are not moved with those examples of your ancestors, yet at the least, let
your late losses, and present calamites joined with ill success, be a
sufficient warning unto you. For I doubt, and of my truth am sore afraid; least
if you go on with the same mind and purpose as you have begun, you shall suffer
greater adversities, even as those which are of a far better disposition,
have plainly foreshewed unto you.

In like manner (as it is recorded) it has fallen out very daungerously to
others in times past: for S. Augustine writes in his book entitled De
ciuitate Dei, Augustiue
there was a great plague in Rome, both of women and of beasts, so that
through the huge number of those which died, they doubted that all living
creatures would finally perish: and further also that winter was so exceeding
cold, that the snow (which was extraordinary) lay of a great deapth even in
the market place, for the space of forty days, and Tyber was frozen over
very hard and thick: Then (they say) it was answered, that the cause of
the plague was, in that many private men possessed, and dwelt in many
religious houses: which being shortly after restored to their true use,
forthwith that great and wonderful plague ceased.

Qu. Fuluius Flaccus, Q. Fuluius Flaccus.
as Valerius writes, left a notable example behind him, even an example to all
posterity, concerning the contempt of religion. For this man, though he were
the controler of the city, yet he escaped not unpunished, in that (while he was
in office) he took the marble pillars of Iunoes temple in the city Locrine,
and wickedly placed them in that house which he built at Rome. For immediately
after this fact, he fell into a frenzy, and was stark mad ever after, with
fierce mad passions still consuming: till at the length he hearing that of his
two sons, which were soldiers in Ilirium, the one was dead, the other most
grievously sick, he died most miserably. By which great danger the Senate and
people of Rome not a little moved, decreed presently, that the marble pillars
should be carried to Iunoes temple, from whence they came, that thereby the
impious fact of the Censour might be corrected, and by that excellent example
they might note unto their posterity, that whatsoever is once dedicated to the
immortal God, cannot without great impiety be altered in any wise; though it
be employed to some other honest and very good uses.

And if any should be so wicked and irreligious, that they should attempt to
violate and profane holy things; yet they should understand that the Senate
would take it grievously, and that they would be fully revenged of the^ for the
same, even unto death. On the contrary Xenophon writes finely and
excellently, Xenopho^. Agesilaus.
concerning Agesilaus that famous Emperor, that he always with great
diligence and study did seek to reverence the temples of his enemies,
thinking it reason that the immortal God ought to be truly worshipped,
as well amongst his enemies as amongst his friends. And likewise the religious
and devout persons, even amongst his enemies, he would not suffer them in any
wise to be molested: for he said it was unreasonable and a most barbarous
cruelty, to take any one thing from the Temples, and holy Churches, or that
the priests should be at any charges, or loss in any respect. Wherefore he
hated such wicked church-robbers even unto the death, hoping thereby to
vanquish his enemies, and to strengthen his own power, the which conclusion
proved true, as appears by that which is excellently written of Mithridates
in the life of Lucullus translated out of Greek into Latin by Leonard
Justinian that noble conncellor and father of your common wealth: Mithridates.
for whilst he assaulted the city of the Cizice^anes being tributorie to the
people of Rome, and that with an exceeding great power, both by sea and land,
by and by a sudden tempest rising, and his victualles failing, he was
utterly vanquished by Lucullus: the greatest part of his army being spoiled
and destroyed in the fight.

Afterward, when he thought to save his life only by flying, again he was so
afflicted with a strange sudden tempest, that leaving the ship in which he
was, which through the outragiousnesse of the tempest, was almost ready to
sincke: he was constrained to yield himself into the hands of pirates.

They report that Diana worthily afflicted him with that great overthrow and
calamity (which they accounted a goddess) because most injuriously and
irreligiouslie, even with wicked hands, he spoiled her temple, and presumed
to take her image from thence.

No less horrible chance there was amongst the Roman army even on the like
occasion. For when Carthage a professed enemy to the Romans at length was
won of them by force of arms, a certain Roman Soldier (contemning
Religion) in the spoiling of the City was not afraid to commit sacrilege,
taking away the goulden vesture from Apollo, who was woorshipped as a GOD, of
all men: but he escaped not long unpunished, for that wicked fact, in that the
most righteous God of his just judgment, brought it so to pass that the
hands of this church-robber, were found cut off amongst the pieces of the
vesture: whereby other afterward might be taught, how carefully we ought to
keep our hands from violating holy things.

We may allege many such like examples out of holy Scriptures, especially
as it is written in the book of the Machabees, Antiochus.
Antiochus that wicked king yields us a plain example: which vaunted
himself so prowdlie, and so arrogantlie above all measure, that he seemed to
himself as though he could command the flowing of the seas, and reach the
heavens with his finger. This man contemning the holy religion of the true and
eternal God, was not afraid with wicked and profane hands to spoil that
fair and famous Temple of the Jews. Though he hoped to escape the vengeance
of God, yet he escaped not long: for of a sudden he was stricken with so
dangerous and horrible plague, that out of his body there issued abundance of
woormes, and with most horrible torment to him, they issued out of his flesh,
he yet living. He being woonderfully moved with this plain and manifest
punishment sent from God, at the length he remembered himself: and at the
last, when he could not abide his own stink, it is meet (says he) to be
obedient unto the Lord, and for a mortal man not to seem a God unto himself.

Furthermore he promised, that he would adorn the Temple (whose ornaments
and precious plate he had taken away a little before most wickedlie) with many
and wonderful gifts: and that he would abundantly, supply all the charges
belonging to the sacrifice with his own revenues: and to conclude, that he
would be circumcised.

But when after so many barbarous mischiefs and outrageous spoilings of the
Church, he seemed unworthy of mercy, he ended his wicked life as he was
worthy.

The like also happened to Heli^dorus Legate to the King (as we read in the
same Book, Heliodorus.
in the like matter) for being sent of the King to take the treasure of the
Church: whilst he executed his commission committed to him, very stoutly,
as many as obeyed his sacrilegious commission, presentle (even by the power of
God) rushing down, they were amazed, and clean confounded.

Heliodorus (a sudden sight appearing unto him from heaven) forthwith was
stricken to the ground very sore wounded in sundry places of his body: then
without all hope of life, a great number of soldiers thronging about him with
a few he was drawn out of the place half dead, which imediatly before he
entered with great pride and haughtiness: by and by through the prayers of the
priests, he recovering having vowed many things, his commission not
executed, he returned with his army unto the king, where when he had
priuatlie and publicly signified the apparition which he had from heaven,
and which he had felt in himself through the handy work of God, the king
asked him what messenger he thought meetest to go again to Jerusalem on this
business. Says he, if you have any enemy or traitor to your person, send
him thither: for though he escape alive, yet he shall return well whipped,
since in that place there is some divine power and Godheade: for the most
mighty Creator of heaven and earth, which rules and disposes all things by
his great providence and wisdom, is the sure keeper and safe defendor of that
place. Whosoever therefore without respect of religion shall offer force unto
him, or violent hands, let them not think to s^ape unpunished: for he pursues
them in such sort, and afflicts them with so great calamities and
intolerable torments, until they suffer just punishment for their deserts. Of
this matter you need none other witness than my self, which made trial not
not long since in mine own person. I am afraid (O most noble Prince) least
that which (as I said) did lately chance unto Heliodorus may also be the
sorrowful lot of those which exact tribute from religious me^ and houses, both
because they attempt that, from which if they were wise they should kede
themselves free. but especially, because some men rush upon it outragiously,
without al respect of religion, or their poor estate.

I am persuaded it is far enough from the intent and purpose of your noble
and most wise Senate; that through these exactions the priests and ministers of
God, which are continually busied in divine functions for the souls health of
all men, should suffer any injury. But yet in private conferences, I have
rather observed it, that by this means and dishonest endeavor, they seek to
gratify your noble Senate. Wherefore their actions seem too austere, too
cruel, and unreasonable. For unless their money be ready even at the appointed
day; presently there comes in the unmerciful receivers of such exactors,
they offer force and violence to the poor priests, they rail on them, they
miscall them, they wound them with contumelious and opprobrious speeches, they
violently take away their goods and household stuff, they prise it, they sell
it, their gain is almost more than the value of the payment. O wonderful
impiety, before this age never once heard of. O great cruelty worthy to be
revenged with great punishment.

Those which do these things, are they to be called Christians? can we
persuade our selves that God will forget such heinous offenses? other sins,
although they be grievous; yet the Lords wrath being once pacified, by true
repentance they are put away. But if thou have once lifted up thine hands to
spoil holy things, then, then it is high time for thee to tremble before the
face of the wrathful God, the revenger of all impiety, will come suddenly, he
will take full punishment on the^, even in his straight and fearful
judgment: and now for the better and more certain knowledge of this thing, we
may well remember that most unhappy death and destruction of Cn* Pompeius, Cn.
Pompeius.
on whom fortune at the first blush did laugh so favorably that (as Tullie
says) there is no man to be thought so fond, which within himself would wish
such and so many high honors as God himself bestowed most plentifully on
Pompey, and yet because (as Liuie writes and Josephus the most clear and
excellent historiographer of the Hebrews) he went about to take away the riches
and costly jewels out of the temple: he purchased a miserable death unto
himself. For how sore a battle, and how unhappy success, had he ever after
against Julius Caesar in Thesalia, and other places, and also how miserably his
head was struck off, by Ptolomie, being but a boy (in whom he reposed great
hope) it is very plain and manifest. The like evils or (as I may say)
sisters unto these; M. Crassus*
were those which happened to M. Crassus, going to war against the Parthians:
who were professed enemies to the Romans. He going to war when by the way he
had spoiled the foresaid temple of the Jews, and (as Josephus writes) amongst
other things had taken the golden pillar out of the temple, which waied an
hundred and fifty pound weight in massy gold: and had broke it in pieces, and
most wickedlie paid his soldiers therewith: afterward he fought against the
Parthians with so hard and evil success, that amongst all the great losses and
ill adventures of the Romans, his is also numbered and recorded. For first of
all, his dear son, whom he loved tenderly, was slain in the battle before
his face, and many legions of the Roman Soldiers even the flower of their
chivalry were then also most pitifully slain, many of their ensigns were
taken by the enemy, the rest of that army which escaped the slaughter of the
battle by flight, were scattered into Armenia, Silicea, Syria. At the length
Crassus himself by the just judgment of almighty God being taken of his
enemies, chose rather to kill himself then to be captive to the barbarous
people. For he thrusting the riding wand (wherewith he did beat his horse) deep
in at his eye, with that strange kind of death, ended his wicked life.
Afterward his wretched head and his right hand once cut off by the barbarous
people, and brought to the king Aristonicus, his enemies made an open scoff of
it, and they poured liquid gold into his mouth, as a man concerning religion
of all others most unworthy: signifying thereby that he whose mind was
inflamed with the fervent desire of gold, should have his dead body even burnt
and scorched therewith, being poured red hot into him. These be the rewaids,
these be the presents, these be the gains and fruits of them which presume to
take religious things unto themselves, or under any color whatsoever, to
convert them to other uses. And as we read that the Lord punished these men
most grieuouslie for their contempt of religion: so also we find it plainly
written, that to the devout, and religious, God of his justice has given great
benefits and prosperous success in all things which they took in hand. For
it is written of Alexander the great (a most invincible king) that concerning
divine worship and orders of the Church, he was always most liberal. For
when he was yet but a young man, and in the midst of his sacrifice, he took
both his hands full of frankensence and sweet odors for offerings: Leonides said
unto him, O Alexander, when you shall once have conquered those lands, which
bear those odours and frankensence, then you may sacrifice largely, but now
more wisely and sparingly. Alexander answered, O Leonides I pray thee, when
thou desire prosperous success, deal not niggardlie with the gods. Of who^
we read in Josephus, as also in other ancient histories, that he bestowed
many excellent great gifts upon that holy temple of Jerusalem, and that with
his own hands he sacrificed unto our God. He so reverenced Iadde the high
priest of the temple, that lying prostrate on the earth, he adored him: he
also commanded that the priests and ministers of the temple, should boldly and
freely require what they would: and among other magnificent gifts, he
granted them this one thing, that it should be lawful for that nation, to
live by their own laws for ever, and also that seven years, all the
Countries of the Jews, should be free from all kind of tribute. Lastly he
decreed, that what Jew soever would go to war with him, should be very
gently and honorably entreated. He having done all this in so good order, as a
man strengthened by God, with a good courage he passed forward with his army
toward the Indians, very strongly, and with great expedition most
victoriously he conquered Porrus, that mighty and almost invincible king of
the Indians.

I cannot but wonderfully commend that worthy man Themistocles, who
notwithstandig the rest of his noble and excellent virtues, yet he excelled
especially in giving due reverence unto religion: of whom it is recorded, that
(public affairs laid aside) if he had any leisure, Themistocles.
he would bestow that in beholding the beautiful furniture of the Church,
and in viewing the gifts and offeringes which were in the holy houses.
Wherefore he was very careful lest any man should pull down or deface any
thing there, or lest any thing should be wanting, which he knew did appertain
to religion. And if these men now mentioned were so devout, and
superstitiously religious in serving their false gods, how much more ought we
Christians so to do, which retain the knowledge of the true and eternal God?
with what care, with what diligence, with what study, with what endeavor, with
what piety and reverence, ought we to embrace the true and unfeigned religion,
with which the true Creator of heaven and earth is truly worshipped, which
not only gives us these earthly and temporal goods, and prosperous success
in our offaires, without the help of any other, but also after this life,
gives eternal bliss, and happiness unto the soul, if so be we have lived
here well: which benefits the gods of the gentiles could not only, not give to
them, which worshipped them, but they could neither profit nor hinder them in
any thing, without the assistance of God. If we read that any time they have
either profited or disprofited men, we must think that it came by the
permission of God, and that so much more righteous, as it were more secret.
Neither can there be any thing done iu the world without his commandment,
who is the fountain, the spring, the root, and beginning of all things, and
who only rules, moves, and preserves the world. Wherefore if you desire to
inioie the favor of God, the giver of all good things, you must endeavor your
selves with great care study and diligence, that in any wise the integrity
of holy worship and religion, be more seriously regarded and kept. That
there be no impiety committed against the holy Temple, and goods dedicated to
God. That there be no unworthy fact committed on your parts, against the
priests and ministers of God. Into which kind of impiety if at any time we
shall fall, let us assure our selves that God will bring upon us the same
plagues and punishments, which those false gods, or rather the true God sent by
them unto those which despised them: and so much more grieuoulie and seuerelly
as the offense and sin committed against the true and high God, is greater and
more heinous then that which is committed against false gods and devils.
Wherefore now mark diligently* O ye noble Venetians. I beseech you mark and
see most clearelie how prosperously all things succeeded with them, which
reverenced God truly and the holy things dedicated to his worship: what
miserable ends they had, which contemned or profaned them. Neither is it
marvel if your affairs scarce prosper, if you sustain many discommodities,
dangers, calamities, and overthrows, for your exactions and pollings of the
Church are not such, that they do deserve any help from God, they are not
such, that they can turn away his vengeance and displeasure, which now
hangs over your heads, out of doubt they are not such that they can promise
you good success or victory in your wars. Your opinion does greatly
deceive you, if you think so. If you be so persuaded, believe me, you kill
your self with your own sword. Neither do these exactions help you one
whit, but rather (much like to the poison of Ietalie) man^e detriments,
dangers, and losses ensue thereof. To conclude those do not mittigate the wrath
of God now kindled against you, but rather they provoke and call for it
daily. We read in Trogus Pompeius (a most eloquent man, and of great
authority) that one of the kings of France called Brennus, when he had
conquered the Macedonians by force of arms (as though earthly spoils were of
no account with him (he turned his force to the spoilings of the temples of the
gods. In scoffing manner answering that the rich gods, ought to bestow on
mortal men. And therefore when he made expedition toward Delphos, minding
there to spoil Apolloes temple (where there was great store of gold and
silver) of a sudden there arose an Earthquake, with which a great part of the
mountain rushed down, which destroyed almost the whole army of the
Frenchmen. And Brennus himself being sore wounded in many places, and not
able to endure the pains and exceeding anguish of his wounds, he killed
himself with his own dagger: and so for his bold attempts, he had his deserts
by deserved death. When ^yrr^us had compelled the Citizens of Locris to give
him a great portion of the treasure of the goddess Prosorpina, and when he was
sailing away laden with his wicked pray: he and his whole navy by force of a
sudden tempest, was beaten against the shores of the goddess: on which the
money being found again, it was restored to the old custody of the
treasury. But what should I speak any more of these things? for I fear me
that if I should comprehend all the examples of ancient times, appliable to
this purpose, in this treaty, that I should keep no mean in writing of the
same, for they be so many that they can scarce be numbered, I omit the
example of Qu Cipio who being Consul, when he had sacked the Town Tholosam,
and that there was found much gold and silver in the Temples of the same
Town: whosoever presumed to touch any of that gold in that spoil, in lue of
his deserts, he died therefore in most horrible grief and anguish. I omit
Xerxes the king of the Persians, which sent four thousand soldiers to Delphos
to destroy Apollos Temple, which company was clean destroyed with lightning
and tempest: that Xerxes might understand thereby, the greater injury he
offered to God, so much the less his force should be to resist. Which
revenge truly may be applied to these our days, for we have seen it
oftentimes chance in like sort unto you, even in these days, since you
began to take the goods of the Church into your own hands, and to pay
Soldiers wages therewith.

For (as you your selves can witness very well) not only your Ships full
fraughted with munition for war, were destroyed with diverse tempests, with
thundering and lightning from heaven: but also many thousands of soldiers
afflicted with diverse calamities died most miserably: so that none or very
few which you sent unto the war, came safe home again. Tell me (O most
renoumed Venetians) how should these strange overthrows, these strange
slaughters and destructions of men, these many calamities and miseries come?
but that this your war is not only against man, but also against God, and
his true worship? a word in this matter is enough. Now I mind to apply my
speech unto these our times, and to couclude with domestical examexamples, for
we must not content our selves, with the examples of ancient times, if our
own be appliable also hereunto. Especially since many will say unto me, why
do you propound unto us, the examples of the Pagans temples, and their wicked
gods? why do you rehearse their reuengementes against their enemies? since by
the hand of God at length they were all taken away? To whom I may well answer
and in good time: that I make mention of those heathen gods, to the end we
might thereby understand, how severe a reue^ger our God (eue^ the God of all
Gods) of his justice ought to be unto those, which presume wickedly to take
away the goods of the church and transport them unto other uses: since that
those which were falselie called gods, and which indeed were no gods, (or
rather God himself by them) sent such cruel plagues and punishments for the
contempt of their religion. The cause why the most righteous God permitted,
that they which were rather devils then gods, should so grieuouslie punish men,
was, because forasmuch as they knew they contemned the true religion, and the
true God. Since those idols were most wickedly contemned of them, which (though
falselie) yet the whole people took them to be true gods, and they seemed to
these men, which spoiled them so wickedlie, to be true gods indeed. Wherefore
God himself brought just punishment upon them for this contempt of that which
they faithfully believed to be God. And now in these days that cloud of
ignorance being clean removed: since he is more barbarously contemned of us,
surely he will punish us more severely and grievously. But now (from whence
we digressed) let us return unto these of our time, to tell what great death
and slaughter chanced to that wicked Frederick the second, for violating the
liberty of the church. I shall not need many words, for that is plain enough
to those which read the histories. For when he was made Emperor by Innocentius
the third, and had taken the cross in his hand against the enemies of the
Christians: then (even unto his own undoing) devising most unhappily with
himself, how he might take away the goods of the church now dedicated to holy
use: he was not afraid to take them wickedly, and to employ them profanely:
hereupon he became so blind in his own opinion, that he made a sacrilegious
pact with the mighty king of Egypt the Sultan, concerning the suppressing of
religion and religious houses, and concluded that, from which a christian man
ought especially to abhor. But he did not long escape the just vengeance of
God. For after that he had spoiled many cities, after many dissentions had with
the church of Rome: after that he had devoured many temples, after many most
cruel and barbarous sacrileges: having his own son in a jealousy, that he
affected his Empire, he shut him up in most filthy dungeons til he died. And
he feeling the great and grievous censure of the church (as the righteous God
had appointed) he was strangled of his own son Manfredus most cursedly. Here
I will not omit the like calamities of the princes of Carraria in the like
impiety: for when they began once wickedly to challenge to themselves the
ordering of those things, which belong only to holy function, by reason of the
pestilent council which they had taken: very soon after they lost that famous
city Patauium, most strong both by situation and force, which was thought
almost to be invincible. Neither fained he which wrote that saying; Unless the
Lord keep the city, the watchmen watch but in vain. And unless the Lord of
hosts do help, truly he labors but in vain, which leads the army
forth, trusting only to his own wit and policy. So also did that holy woman
Judith sing before the Lord, when she cut off the head of the insolent
Holifernes with his own sword, she did sing most excellently in this manner:
O Lord thy power consists not in the multitude of an host, neither in the
strength of an horse; but the prayer of the humble and meek, was always
acceptable before thee. Wherefore if you put your confidence in your strong and
mighty navy of goodly ships, and do not seek to please God with good works,
and more diligent devotion in your religion: ye have good cause to fear least
(whilst ye have offended him) hoping for victory, ye strive in vain; when
according to the heavenly saying of David, we must rather put our whole trust
and confidence in the Lord: these be his words: Some trust in chariots, and
some in horses, but in the name of the Lord our God we shall obtain the
victory. With this force your ancestors did overcome their enemies both by sea
and land most victoriously: with this kind of fight they obtained many
victories and glorious conquests. But yet they never took council once to
touch holy things, and the goods of religious men, that they might employ the^
on warlike affairs. Read your histories of ancient time, and reuise your old
momuments, you shall never find that they sought any ways to strengthen
themselves with the goods of the church. Lastly propound unto your selves the
late example of Philip. Maria: Philippus Maria.
who when he had good success in all his affairs, and al things fell out with
him as well as he would wish: at length he gave over himself unto such madness,
that al fear laid apart, he challenged church goods unto himself. But mark
how duly he suffered worthy punishment: for being wearied with continual
wars, he not only lost a great part of his dominions, his enemies besieging
him eue^ hard unto his walls; but also he suffered dangerous and grievous
diseases in his body, so that he being blind, lead a most sorrowful life a
long time after: but what became of his Empire, and by what means his noble
family is now clean extinguished, and no succession left at all, it may easily
appear to every man, the thing being yet so fresh in memory. To what end
(say some) have you set down so many examples, of Gentiles, of Pagans, and of
Christians? I have briefly gathered al these together (O most noble prince, and
you most renowned Venetians) for that goodwil and duty which I owe unto you,
and to your commonwelth, to the end that they which are addicted to this
opinion of spoiling holy things, might both by ancient examples, and also by
their ill success, he moved to take better counsel, and also that every man
may know right well, that there was never any (not only in our time, but in
the times of old) found, which stretched out wicked hands unto holy things,
who prospered any long time after, and suffered not the present punishment
thereof: the which I pray God to turn from you and your dominion, by which
examples (least I should be too long) be ye afraid (O most worthy Venetians) if
ye persist any longer in this your purpose, fear and tremble, least so many
dangers hanging over your heads, ye be compelled to suffer greater and
greeuouser. Think not that God will leave it unpunished in you rather than in
others. The wrath of God proceeds gently unto revenge, but he recompenseth
the slownes of his wrath, with the greeuousnes of his punishment.

Never was there any excellent ruler in the common wealth commended for
dwelling too long in the self same opinion, but as in sailing if you cannot
attain the haven, it is the point of art to yield to the course of the
tempest: But when you can attain the haven, having turned sail, it is a
folly and mere madness, to follow that dangerous course, in which ye were
before; so ought we to do in the government of the commonwelth; neither ought
we always to follow the same council and advise, but that which we are
sure brings honest and profitable, good and happy success to the
commonwelth, that is to be followed, to be embraced, to be retained most
constantly. But if it be discerned to be hurtful to the commonwealth, all men
know that it is folly and rashness to follow that with danger, which we may
easily leave with safety and glory. Now (O worthy Venetians) harken unto me
a man most desirous of your prosperous estate, take better council for the
safety of your selves and your affairs, retain ye the name of Venece (most
famous thoroughout the whole world) in more religious manner than ye do: Remove
these diverse and tempestuous calamities (which are ready to fall upon you) with
more wholesome means, that with such council and wisdom^ ye may foresee, what
most belongs to your own (...) faires, and the commonwelth, whose safety
cannot stand without yours.

FINIS.

