THE COPPIE OF the Anti-Spaniard made at Paris by a French man, a Catholic.

Wherein is directly proved how the Spanish King is the only cause of all the
troubles in France.

Translated out of French into English,

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

The Coppie of the Anti-Spaniard, made at Paris, by a French Gentleman a
Catholic.
THe Spaniard now after some time having by treasons, and sundry sleightes and
practices enueigled away no less of our dominions, then at this day remain
under our jurisdiction, and presuming on his success therein, has of late
dared to advance himself above us, to whom it was accostumably: an honor to
follow us, even in the second place. And now at this present feeling his aged
years to hasten in, winding up his latest days, knowing well ye insufficiency
of his offspring, the ambition of his servants, and iminent ruin of his
estate, and foreseeing that the weakened kingdom of France will and may in
time recover her former health and liberty, (which as it were newly revived,
and enflamed with desire of war, will in the end encounter her fiercest
enemies) he labors before his death to chain fast that Lion, which
otherwise may in short time devour both him and his children, and endeuoreth to
make him self absolute Lord of all France, not regarding any rightful claim,
title or pretense whatsoever. Whose desire notwithstanding I do not much
marvel at, this being the most excellent pray that ever Prince obtained, but
rather wish that we would here fore-thinke us, before we be bound, for it will
be too late with after thoughts to recover our liberty being once lost. For
the effecting whereof his Ambassador here amongst us, (a man as it were borne
to the managing of such affairs) has proceeded so far by his extraordinary
liberalities, and by means of his preaching Friars, and meetings of his
Jesuits (his disguised spies, whom we have freely entertained amongst us to
our great cost and charges) that in the end a contract is agreed on, which in
effect is the very sale of the Crown of France: for the ratifying whereof, it
is even now a concluding to put the Spaniarde in full possession of the same.
And that it may not be gainesayd, some labor to persuade us that it is the
only and most necessary thing, as without which we must of necessity in the end
become al Heretics. O most miserable wretches then that we be. Can not our
Catholic religion continue without the safety of an aged Spaniard? has it no
other holdfast, then upon so sclender a thread? Are we now come to this
pass, that if either the King of Spain (whose aged years breed continual
danger) should chance ere long to die, or the Turk should again assail him,
or the Flemmings renew their wars, or if the Portingales (which can no
longer brook his insupportable tyranny) should happen to rebel, whereby his
leisure might not serve him, to restore France to her desired peace. And if
either the one or the other should befall him (all which ere long are most
likely to happen) are we then utterly to loose our Religion? why good God, who
to deliver thy people from bondage, did restrain the course of the waters,
and made a wall of the sea against the sea it self, can thou not at this
present in the secrets of thy great providence, find some means to continue
the glory of thy holy name, but that of necessity we must be made the
bondslaues of a most cruel master, being the most insolent tirant that ever
lived, or now does live on earth? Must it needs he (Lord) that thy Religion,
which at the beginning prevailed in France against the Roman slavery, being an
assurance of our free liberty, and a pledge of thy great favor, must it now
produce most contraryeffects in constrainyng us to yield our selves to the
Spanish tyranny? Oh happy then, yea thrice happy those our forefathers, who
fighting, died, rather then they would become Spaniards, must we now their
successiue children so much degenerat from them? and must we needs become
Spaniards? Alas if your spent blood has profited so little, yet at least, why
have you not left us some spark of your Honor, or some praiseworthy motions
to die in fight against those, who seek to dispoile us of our liberty? Shall it
remain chronicled in the histories of our time, that a few Hugunots (albeit
with extremity of danger) have maintained them selves true French, not becoming
either English or Germains, in such sort as that albeit we sought to enforce
them with the cruelty of fire, and other torments. To alter their religion, yet
spared they not to aid us them selves, in the recovery of Newhauen: and that
we, whom none have dared so much as to think to constrain in our religion,
and who more then doubly exceed the army of our enemy, do so slenderly
regard the honor of our country, and our own proper liberty, that at the
first we are contented to yield our selves professed Spaniards? Here some will
say, it is not the name of King, that he will so soon take upon him, but only
of Protector. Oh learned Lawiers, and such as understand the sense and meaning
of words: is not every King necessarily either a tyrant, or else a Protector.
The King of Spain would make us believe that he will be our Protector. But in
what sort? Did not the Romans content them selves with the bare name of
friends, and allies with those, whom by conquest they had made their subjects?
And does not he at the first usurp the name of master over us? But make your
meaning a little more plain unto us: Either we shall have no King at all (and
yet Philip shall be our King) or we will have another, which if we have, he
must needs be under the protection of the Spanish King. What? shall the King
of France (who never had any other Protector but God, and the sword which he
has given him, and who never had other superior to direct and command him)
acknowledge him self to be at the disposition of the Spaniard, and leave God,
to be under the Spanish protection? At the beginning we were made believe, that
he would take no other title upon him, then Protector of the Catholic
religion. But now we find the contrary: for the very first word of the
agreement which some have passed unto him, imports him to be Protector of the
Kingdom and crown of France. But imagine this (whereto we are persuaded) to
bevery true, and that we had a Protector of our Catholic faith, and a King who
for the preservation of the Catholic religion (as one unable to subsist of him
self) should stand in need of a Protector, I would demand but this question,
whether of the two should have absolute authority to command in time of war?
who the direction of armies? whether the placing of governors, officers, and
benifices? and if any matter of strife or controversy should happen between
them, either for matters of religion or otherwise, or if the one would usurp
over the other, who should procure an agreement between them? Oh rare
imaginations. Is it possible the world should have two Suns? or one Estate
two Soueraines? And if it be needful (as in deed it is most necessary) that
the one should be under the other, whether in reasonable sense is likely to be
the greater commander? the Preseruour or Protector: or he who shadowed and
protected under a greater power then his own? Alas, does he not already by
these articles, take upon him the name of his Majesty without any addition
thereunto? What difference is there between the name of Majesty and King, but
that the first is a name of greater pride and more arrogancy. Let us say (if
so much liberty be left unto us, and that we be not already become his slaves,
let us boldly say that which every man does know. That the King of Spain will
be our master for a time under the name of Majesty, and of Protector
enterchaungeably: but in the end, for ever under the name of King. He will have
his Lieutenant, or Uiceroy of France, as he has of Naples: and for a while he
will use them that presently aid and assist him to serve his own turn, but
at last destroy or at least banish them: fearing least they will not humbly
enough obey him in France: and then shall we have a Don Ferdinando amongst us,
as well as his other subjects: it is expedient that we speak thus boldly. Have
we not been long enough deluded with these fantasies, have we not often been
told, that in sooth there is some intelligence and intercourse of dealing with
ye Spaniard, but not of such consequence as some imagine, and peradventure he
expects, and that is necessary to retain him in expectation of some great
good, but that in the end he is undoubtedly to be deceived: forasmuch as he
knows not how to make his own bargain, and take good assurance of us? Is it
not a good while, since the state of France is secretly bought and sold:
especially at this present time, when with all manner of open hostility it is
suriously assaulted? Must we still dissemble and hide the cause of our
misery? or rather must we needs please our own humors therein, seduced with
a vain hope of coin and silver? As though any thing could happen more
miserable to a mind of any courage and valor, then to be enforced even to
sell himself for mere want and penury. Are we so poor and needy? Here let
me ask a question or two, what is become of those great and infinte sums of
money which not long since were found in many houses of this City? Where are
those huge sums that were levied of so many ransomes, lones, beneuolences,
and imprests? where was that money employed which was made of the sale of all
our plate, of all our chains, and of all our jewels? Is the greatest part
thereof transported out of the Realm? Have not certain, as it were hunger
staruen pesants, and greedy varlets, so enriched themselves with the
remainder, that they are now as demie Princes? Have not some of them so
sumptuously adorned themselves therewith, that they iet it up and down rather
like new married bridegromes, then soldiers sit for the field? Have not many
of our best and richest widows of Roane and Paris, been seduced and beguiled
with some part of it? In conclusion, have our treasuries been so well managed,
and our revenues so well husbanded, that for need and poverty we should in
the end be enforced to seek us new Masters? Was this the reason that Roland
our Treasurer could never be brought to any account, for fear we should see
the infinite (yea bottomless) depth of our revenues? and therewithal perceive
that it is not in the power of the Spaniard to furnish us with the twenteeth
part of such and so great sums. Alas good man, where should he leauie so
great store of silver? Are we ignorant how before he lost his great fleet
(foolishly by him baptized the Invincible, of which long before we saw so many
arrogant Catologues both written and printed, whose miserable slaves we
afterward received into our ports, permitted them in pity to be relieved by
begging from door to door) he brake and was banquerout with his creditours of
Genoua? But shall we better discover and make his penury more manifest? Let us
sell our selves to him (seeing we desire it so much) always provided, that
without fail he make us ready payment, not posting us over with bonds,
promises, delays, and Spanish bragges (for if we be once his servants, what
action may we have against our master? What plea may we commence against him?
Shall our purse be at his commandment, or his at our disposition? Let us
resign all these fertile fields unto him, these beautiful rivers, let us
deliver al these strong and mighty towns unto him, these goodly and stately
buildings. To conclude, let us surrender all France unto him, (which is the
very eye and beauty of the world) and that for nothing. Let us freely and
frankly give him all the riches and treasures that are contained therein. Let
us give him our wives, our childen, and whatsoever else we have, and all for
nothing (oh grief and intolerable misery to think upon) let him buy nothing
but our selves, and that at the lowest price. And the chepest rate that may be,
so that he make ready payment. Let him disburse but twenty millions of gold
for all us, all which will not amount to ten crowns a man. But what speak I
of twenty millions of gold? it being so far from his meaning, who never
intended to give us one hundredth thousand crowns. Oh how long is it since we
are bought and sold, but no payment made yet, only two and thirty thousand
crowns excepted, which lately he delivered to those sixteen thieves, and that
only to solicit and hasten our delivery? But where (I beseech you) shall he
leauie so many millions of gold? where shall he have so much money? are they as
easy to be found as promised? As though we know not that the rebellions of
the low Countries have cost him as much gold, as ever he received from the
mines of Peru, when he drew them driest? Or when he ransacked the whole
country, murdering above two millions of those poor, naked, and innocent
Indians, on whom he committed all the execrable cruelties, that either
antiquity could invent, or the time present devise. The history whereof
(printed in the year 1584.) was wholly smothered by means of the Jesuits, who
buying up all the copies yt were extant, caused yt it should be forbidden to be
printed any more. Oh brave butchers, whose fingers ends itch, to try whether
the French that does not sufficiently humble himself before you, will prove so
abject and so base as those poor and naked savage Indians. But ravenous tigers
that you are, you are not yet come to that pass: know you not that you must
confront so many millions of true French men, as will (if need require)
encounter you with an hundredth and an hundredth battles, before they will
become Spaniards? What? shall those Marranos, yea, those impious Atheiests
reign over us as Kings and Princes? Shall the Country of France become
servile to the commandment of the Spaniard? shall France be added to the titles
of this King of Maiorica? Of this demie Moore, demie Jew, yea demie Saracine?
Shall it be made known to the world, that France is no more a kingdom? that
France is become Spain? and that all to the river Rhene contains nothing
else but provinces of Spain? and that the three flowers de Luce are as an
honor annexed to the py-balde and barrie-armes of this universal King? Oh that
the earth would rather open, and the Sea break out his limits, then we do
die and never remedy these outrages: Oh let us die rather then prove such
traitors to our native Country, and that we subject our selves to the yoke of
the Spaniards. Let us die rather, yea let us die with our swords in our hands,
thick and three fold one upon another, like the natural and true children
of our forefathers, who for the honor of France, and for the preservation of
their own liberty, have covered the plains of Saint Quintines, those of
Rantie, and so many others with the slaughtered bodies of these accursed
Spaniards. What, are we brought to that exigent, that we must needs be subject
to these Castillians? Have we not yet an hundredth Lords in France, who will
choose to die a thousand times rather then yield the right they have, or
hereafter may have to the crown of France, after the blood Royal, unto any
stranger whatsoever? An hundredth Lords (I say) who cannot read any one
Chapter of our histories, but they shall find sundry notable exploites and
deeds of arms of their ancestors, who valiantly have dyed in fight against the
Spaniards, and others their enemies, who always have been the very props and
stays, whereon the state and Crown of France have depended, who with the
loss of their blood, and by their means and valor have gotten, preserved and
conquered the greatest part of this most goodly and famous Realm, and who have
left unto their children all the right, interest, and possibility they had
(after the blood royal) in those things which with such pains and travail
they have helped both to get and preserve. There is no question but that their
title will be most available against all strangers whatsoever, who under
pretext and color of aid, have a long time labored and sworn our utter
ruin and subversion. This is the reason for which we see the Spaniards
treacherous proceedings against the Princes and whole nobility of France,
against whom he laboreth by all means possible, to inflame the people daily
more and more, knowing well that he cannot lay any sure foundation for to
establish the state which he goes about to usurp from us, but by their utter
ruin, whoby no means can never brook him, or his tyranny. For he knows
full well that our Gentlemen of France will never be brought every New years
day to purchase a license from a Castillian, whereby they may be authorized,
(if so they please) to wear a weapon by their side, as it is notoriously
known, that those few which remain of the Nobility of Naples, are enforced
to do at this day: the use being, that if any man be noted throughout the
whole year not to have sufficiently humbled himself to the basest pesant that
is a Spaniarde borne, they may do him this disgrace and dishonor, as at the
years end to deprive him of his Rapier, without yielding any reason
wherefore. Well wots he that our Nobility can never endure to see the Castles,
Towns and fortresses of France to be in the hands, and at the disposition of
the Castillians. As it is most manifest that they must all be, by the Maxims
of Estate which hitherto he has most diligently practiced: who can never be
induced to reverence and worship such his Uize-roies, as it shall please him
to send us one after another. Who in conclusion will rather have their throats
cut, then that their bodies should contain Spanish souls. And here may we
note the reason why our Preachers (dazeled with the brightness of his gold,
and bewitched with the hope they have that the Abbeis and Bishoprics shall by
the spoil of those which presently possess them, be bestowed on them,
grounding this doctrine of theyrs upon the Council of Trent) proclayme and
pronounce naught else to us, nor trouble us with any other thing but this,
that the whole nobility is utterly to be defaced and rooted out, as serving to
no other use nor purpose, but to brave and ouer-crow us at their pleasure, and
that we shall never be at rest till it be clean consumed. What? shall we
then destroy the race and offspring of those, who have made the French standard
to flourish even in the farthest parts of the Estate? and have placed the name
and honor of the French in the heavens? Shall we so unnaturally massacre those
in whom nature has seemed to frame the very perfection of true valor and
prowess? And shall we be-die our native soil with the proper blood of her
own children? only to please their humors who have practiced the like in
Flanders? Beginning with the two Earls Eigmont and Horn, whom an hundredth
thousand men know well, and can witness to have died good Catholics,
bearing the cross in their hands, and confessing themselves to a Priest, even
in the view of the whole world. The cause of whose death was naught else, but
their hearty affection, and natural love to their Country, and kind good
will to their Countrie-men: as those which could not tolerate the execution of
a most execrable Spanish tyranny, and that a base Spanish swain should so
outragiously ravish (even before their eyes) a young damzell left worth in
substance above an hundredth thousand Crowns. Which extremest cruelty was no
whit alayd by the death of those two noble Gentlemen, but has rather been
increased more and more even to the extirpation of the whole Nobility. For in
truth what is now become of them throughout all the Provinces of Flanders, that
are under the Spanishe government? Where are now so many great and famous
houses, wherewith all histories of former ages are teplenished? Oh poor
nobility of France, must it needs be that the time shall come, when thine utter
ruin and overthrow shall serve as an example to other nations, to beware of
the Spanish tyranny? And will not the success of these thy next neighbors at
this day any whit move or warn thee? Here some will say, what need we be so
careful for the good estate of our nobility, seeing that if it be once
destroyed, we shall peradventure remain free from being any more taxed, and
pouled? no without doubt we shall be taxed, no more then those of Naples and of
Milane are at this day, from whence all manner of inventions and devises
serving to this purpose are brought amongst us. Do we not already see how they
begin to ease us of such our superfluous and never well brooked charges? we
are constrained to make war under the color of the common wealths benefit
and commodity, hoping thereby to remedy such extreme taxings as we are daily
troubled withal, yet have these wars brought forth nothing else as yet but
destruction with fire and sword? have we not seen our wives and children
ravished before our eyes? have not our goods, our houses and our selves bin
robbed, spoiled and massacred? and have not our taxings bin doubled? and
accompa^ed with a number of new kinds of borowinges, lones, and imprests?
being fed only with this bare comfort (which some do secretly seek to
persuade us) that if any thing be left us to pay toll, and taxes unto the
Spaniarde, we shall not pay alone, for all towns and cities, shall pay as
well as we, and we shall have no Nobility to trouble and vex us any more.
Alas, and shall we have no Noble men left amongst us? Who shall then defend
us, if we be assaulted? Shall so great a charge be committed to a few fresh
water soldiers? I mean to those sixteen new hatched Caualieros: who know
better how to cut our throats then how to defend themselves? Alas most
miserable that we be, we stand in fear of our Nobility, who have lived thus
long in peace among us, and yet we do not so much as dream on the couetize,
cruelty, and extreme insolency of the Spaniards, who as yet being but silly
adopted swains amongst us, durst upon the one and twentieth of October last
past, violently take away from the Parliament a Sergeant and companion of their
own, condemned by law to die for wilful murder, making him to pass through
the chief chamber of that high and honorable Court. What Lord of France did
ever enterprise so outrageous a fact? But in these flattering persuasions
whereby we imagine that at our pleasure we may even at one blow ruinate and
destroy the whole Nobility, it seems that we may without controllment both
check and mate the same. But oh good Lord, how much are we deceived, and how
far are we from that, for that only will remain as a due scorge to chastise us
most unkind traitors to our Country, and as the very patterns of monstrous
ingratitude, the like whereof the world did never yielde, as those that rather
deserve to be borne slaves, and bredde as vassals to the Castillian tyranny,
then in this most fair, and free Country of France. Do we not forsee that
the three parts of our Nobility, are and have been of long time armed against
us, and that the rest seeing these unnatural contractes with the Spaniards,
for as much as they detest to have so foul and so reproachful a blotte of
infamy and treason engraven on the foreheads of their posterity (either
manifest, for arming them selves against the Flower de Luse, or secret, for
lurking in their houses like dastards, so long as this public flame does
burn in their natural Country) they prepare with all possible speed to show
them selves like courageous children in the great and bloody battles, which
France their natural mother, yea fair and Noble France, will present and give
to Spain, if it shall perceue the same to have so much courage or so much
valor, that it dare encounter us and accept of fight. Oh how hard a matter will
it be to vanquaish this Nobility? being once joined together: which though it
be divided, and fighting against necessity, has notwithstanding already
obtained sundry notable victories, and has brought us to so miserable a
famine: this Nobility maintained by so many, so strong and so well munited
cities: This Nobility on whom all the good soldiers do always attend and
wait: which are the stocks on whom by reason of her great prowes she is
engraffed: this Nobility which has heretofore been assisted with the goodly
and strong armies of those populous and mighty nations, that at all times have
been in perfect league and amity with the name of France, and enemies unto
the tyranny of Spain, all which will no doubt with might and maine jointly
hinder the increase thereof: this Nobility led and commanded by so many
excellent Captains, who maugre all these stormy winds of sedition, and to
the intolerable grief of the Spaniard, do yet survive the fury of these
miserable tempests. This Nobility animated, and enflamed unto war by the
aspect of those bright shining stars, the children of Saint Lewis, proceeding
from that warlike race, which can not, nor will not dye but in the midst of
bloody battles: and to conclude, this Nobility so undaunted and so terrible
in arms, that knows not yet what it is to recoile and give ground, much less
to be daunted with fear: which always heweth, and with the dint of sword
cutteth out her way, and makes him self passage. What? and shall it be
vanquished, and shall it thus be overthrown by these Castillians and renegd
Frenchmen? Is it upon them we must rely our hopes? Is it from them we must
expect that peace, that quiet, and that happy time, which so long, and so often
has been promised us? But shall we yet more clearly consider and view into
what gulf of wretchedness (besides the loss of our liberty) we headlong
cast our selves? Let us grant and suppose that the Spaniards and all their
followers and subjects do gain six notable battles of us (howbeit they
shall sooner lose an hundredth then get one only) how many years shall we
trouble them with war (that is in regard of us, with all sorts of miseries
and afflictions) ere they shall force and get an hundredth strong cities, and
conquer three whole parts of the kingdom, which rather then they will yield
to acknowledge any King, under what title and name soever, except their own
right and lawful King, whom God and Nature, and all the laws of the Kingdom
has given and appointed them, are resolved to endure all the extremities of
the world. But what do we speak of forcing and conquering of cities, when we
have so lately been most shamefully chaced from Senlis, and from Diepe? We
whom Sauense, Senlis, the Gautiers, Argues, and our own Suburbs have brought
into so good forwardnes and possession, to be always beaten? we who through
false and deceyuing promises of succor have suffered those of Gergeau, of
Pluuiers, Estampes, Ponthoise, Meulan, Eu, Geinuille, Uandosme, Man's, Sable,
Chasteau-gontier, Touuoy Laual, Alenzon, Dampfront, Argentan, Fallaize, Bayeux,
Lisieux, Honflew, Bridge audemer, and of Eureux, to be so vily lost and
overcome? Let us rather consider and think upon our own necessities which
still do press and follow us, let us (I beseech you) remember the commodities
that we have lost, and those which we daily feel the want of, and not go
about to force and surprise cities which are defended and maintained by so many
of the Nobility, a thing which all the strength of the world conjoined
together may not, nor can not atchiue and bring to pass. Here some will say,
that we shall now be troubled with Spaniards those great warriors, those great
bug-beares: what? those three thousand Wallons led and commanded by a reneagd
Frenchman? what? and are they not the mates of those cowardly runawayes of
Senlis, and Argues, who being ten to one durst never attempt to charge one
small number of the Nobility of France? Are these all the great and
invincible Spanish forces (as for the natural, they will never be drawn to
leave the Cittadels?) Are these they, who without any other help will one of
these days in triumphant sort bring us, al our enemies prisoners into the
Bastille? who if they be so mighty, how comes it to pass that they can not
defend them selves better from the open enemies of all Christendom? why have
they so ignominiously suffered them selves to be chased and driven from Algiers,
Thunis, and Goletta? and through their own default caused so many poor
Christians to be so miserably oppressed by the Infidels? what is the reason
they will not revenge the death of King Sebastian, whose kingdom and
inheritance they have so wrongfully usurped? Has this universal Protector of
the Catholic faith so suffered it to fall where he should most have maintained
and vpheld the same? who though he care not for the increase of Mahomet, and
that he seeks to suppress none but Luther, wherefore does he not make have
to subdue the English whom so long sithence he has so much threatened, and yet
could never hurt, who though they never threatened, have notwithstanding so
greatly hurt and endamaged him? But I perceive how the case stands with him:
it is easier for him to terrify the fearful with his Bug-beares, then to
hurt others: it is more easy for him to promise and feed men with hopes, then
helps. Shall not we think, that he will abuse us hereafter with his false
promises (then which nothing is evermore uncertain) since that in all our
troubles past, he would feign persuade us, that we are beholding to him, and
that the honor of the battles which heretofore we have gained on the
Hugonots, is only due to him. Good God: what invincible Caualieros are these
Spaniards? they are the cause of all our victories, and yet we could never see
any of them among us: They will peradventure speak of those fifteen hundredth
Harguebuziers, who at the battle of Dreux made such notable barricades with
all the Carts of the army, out of which they could never be drawn to bestow
one shote on the enemy, till all the danger was past, and then they began to
cry aloud Viue Espagne, viue Espagne, as if they alone had put the enemy to
flight, when (God wot) they durst never look him in the face, till we had
clean subdued him, and yet were these fifteen hundredth right Castillians, and
natural Marranos, whom they would now make us believe to be Giants, and
soldiers of the other world, that they might the better hide their small
number, and the want of men in their waste and desert countries. Now if this
Spanish army be so terrible, and the Spaniards such jolly fellows, I pray
you, what did they, and wherein were they occupied when (not long since) their
greatest enemy was so long in so destitute, so poor, and so weak a town,
which never saw a Camp, nor ever defended it self from any army? they were
but three days journey from him, at the most. How comes it to pass that
these great Poliocetes came not altogether, where in three days they might
have taken Diepe, and so many Noble men and Captains in it? Good God, what do
I speak of three days? The Spaniard can not yet tell what it is to take a
city, unless it be at three years end. He will stoop, he will linger, he
will suffer, (which is the chiefest of his praise) and finding no other way (a
notorious Atheist as he is) he will never attempt to win any by assault.
Moreover, it were necessary that the Duke of Parma were not poisoned with a
lingering poison, which (as he him self causes publicly to be reported) his
good master has sent him. But let us suppose him to be so strong and valiant,
and so well affected toward us, and let us grant him the victory of twelve
battles, and that our enemies have withdrawn them selves into their holds:
yet shall we be troubled five and twenty years more with him (that is the
least) is it not so long, and more, that the Spaniard is about to conquer and
tame his country of Flanders? and yet could never get one half of it: which
to effect, we must make this old King young again, and cure him of so many
diseases, that he may live fourscore and ten years more, or else shall we be
left friendles and succourles, even in the midst of those wars, which we
have undertaken, when most we shall need both: else in the midst of the
storm and in our greatest danger shall our great Pilot be drowned, and then
will a lamentable shipwreck follow our ship, that erst with full spread sails
did with top and top gallant sail so stately: then will every man shift for
him self and take hold on what splint soever he can get. Who doubts that the
governors of these so divided estates and dismembered Provinces will not
embrace every opportunity, and show their desire of liberty (a thing that
never cease to set the minds of all the Spanish Slaves on fire) who doubts
(I say) but that every one will with might and maine go about to appropriate
that country, or place which he houldeth unto him self. Good God, what new
counsels, what new deliberatiues, what new drifts, and new aliances will then
follow. Then will those whom now we think to be our Kings greatest enemies,
become his servants, only to be maintained and defended by him. And whilst the
Spanish Empire shall thus be tossed and shaken, what shall become of all the
goodly forces on which (as the Jesuits will force us to believe on pain to be
proclaimed heretics) all our Catholic religion does depend. Let us suppose
(all which notwithstanding is as it were impossible) that so many nations,
which expect nothing so much as that day, wherein with what price and how soever
they may deliver them selves from their miserable bondage and slavery, do so
far forget their duty, and fall a sleep when it shall come. Let us imagine
that the Portingales and Flemmings which never enquire for any other news, so
much as of the Catholic Kings health, remain as giddie and irresolute, when
they shall hear this happy and so long desired news. Let us suppose moreover,
that all the good hap which a man in such an alteration may wish for, do
happen: yet taking al things at the best, shall we be but in the hands of an
infant, of an Idiotte, and of a sickely person: who if he dye (which is the
desire and vow of all the Spaniards) then are we in the hands of a young woman,
a Wench. What? shall France be subject unto a Distaffe, as a member and
dependence of Spain? And shall these Alexanders and Cesars of France, whose
ancestors the Merouees, the Clodions, the Charlemaines, the Phillippes
worthily surnamed Augusti, and Valloys. Shall Charles the eight, Francis the
first, and Henry the second, who were never able to extinguish their thirst of
fighting, shall all these Marciall minds be subject unto such, and so silly a
woman as a daughter of Spain, and unto him whom she pleases to choose and
adopt for her husband? No, no, France is not so easily gotten. France is not
giuien as a dowry, he that will be King of France, must be borne King of
France. Vitam tibi contulit idem imperiumque dies: the Country of France is
the Minion and Darline of Nature, it is the portion which she has reserved
for her self alone to dispose as best she pleases, with whom no contract or
condition of any man shall be admitted to deal withal. France can not be
gotten with one nights lying with a Wench. If the Daughter of Spain will not
marry unless she make her husband King of France, she may vow virginity for
ever. As far as I see then, the King of Spain is not so much moved by a
godly zeal, and due regard of our religion, as by a desire he has to have a
son in law to be Uiceroy of France, to swaie and tyrannize over us under the
name of his Majesty, until he have gotten all our Fortresses and holds into
the hands of his Castillians, and then shall he be removed and change place
with the Uiceroy of Naples. That is the zeal, that is the desire, those be the
burning thoughts of Phillip King of Spain, who never waxes old, who fails
not (though in respect of his age he seem not to aim at France, and at the
crown thereof, but to content him self with the Kingdoms, Dukedomes, and
Counties which hitherto he has so wrongfully alienated and dismembered from it)
to go about by all possible means to cosm and deceive us, as whilome he did
the Portingals: for we know that Covetousness and Ambition have this peculiar
condition, to increase proportionablye as other passions diminish. And that
Youth by reason of other pleasures and vanities is drawn and distraughted from
them, but as riper age does by little and little weaken and enfeeble them,
ambition (especially in those that are high borne) enters in their place, and
daily increasing does in time take greater holdfast. Suppose we did not
apparently perceive the insatiable desire that this Spaniard has to grow
great, and advance himself under what color and pretense soever, suppose we
knew not the care which of necessity he must have of his children, and the
fear and apprehension he feels, if he leave them so great and mighty an
enemy standing, and therewithal so noble and so puissant a king as ours is: do
we think in conscience that it does not touch and prick him as near the
heart, as any other particular consideration? Shall we yet a little more enter
into the view and consideration of his holy and sacred zeal? would he for any
thing in the world (I beseech you) that there were no difference nor
controversy of Religion throughout all Christendom, and that all men were at
peace? And that we lived quietly under the obedience of so great a King as ours
is, and that he were in quiet possession of France, no I warrant you, for were
not this controversy of Religion, and our troubles of France, he would not
think him self safe in the midst of all his kingdoms of Spain? would he
not fear, yea tremble (if our King should once reobtayne that which the
Spaniard has heretofore so fraudulently usurped from him in his kingdom of
Navarre) least he should one day (provoked thereunto by a just revenge, and
lawful right of war) victoriously undertake the recovery of his right, and
ioin Scepter to Scepter, and Crown to Crown. For is not he that great and
polliticke commander and leader of armies? he who in counsel is a grave;
Nestor, and in the midst of larums and battles a stout Achilles, who has
sooner surprised Cities, then other men can take the view of them? Who in the
space of two months, in the very heart of winter, has with the dint of sword
conquered one hundredth leagues of Country in length, and fifty in breadth? Is
not he that al-daring French Alexander, whom the twinne-headed imperial Eagle
seeing already adorned and beautified with two Royal Crowns, begins to
cherish and embrace, desiring to conioine these two invincible nations in one,
and brotherly forces together? To conclude, is not he that glorions King of the
Flower de Luse, with the long visage, with the great nose, who by ancient
prophesies is called to be the Monarch of the world? And is not this that great
King who has so often bin promised unto us? Yes verily it is even he.

The Monarch whose undaunted looks,
and never conquered arm,
Shall force the fury of his foe,
to fly the threatened harm:
Fore-runne, shall victory his steps.
About his azurd shield,
(Of terror and of wasting war,
which represents the field)
Shall laurel boughs, and palm,
the trophes of his triumph spring,
When through the world his tried fame,
and high renown shall ring.
Then shall he make the knights of France,
each where to understand:
The greatness of that honor which
is got by armed hand.
No wight this King shall overcome,
in courtesy and grace:
Yet when he takes in hand,
his neuer-yelding cortelace:
No Prince or wordly Emperor,
how mighty that he be,
The angry fury shall of this
most christian Hector fly.
It is therefore (as far as I perceive) to hinder the succesfull victories of
so worthy a King, and to empeach the conquests that else he should have on the
Spaniard, that these French Castillians, or Castillian Frenchmen do so
trouble the state of France: it is therefore that so many do daily seek to
persuade us, that he which never failed his word, will never keep that which
he has promised us in his late declaration, wherein as a good father, he has
with tears of pity, and meare compassion of our miseries, clean washed, and
wholly blotted out of his remembrance all our forepassed faults and trespasses,
only five or six treacherous Spanyolised villeins excepted, who have engored
the name of France in blood with the most proditorious and traitorous
parricide, that ever the Sun saw yet, a parricide committed and perpetrated
in the person of him, for the preservation of whom all true French men should
never refuse to die a thousand deaths. Is it not for this occasion that the
Spaniard does daily cause so many to whisper in our ears, that our King is
fallen into the relaps, he that never professed any other Religion, but that
which his mother held, and who was never in any of our Churches but once, and
that in danger to have his throat cut? Is it not for denying the omnipotency
of God, that he is called impenitent, as if that God could never touch his
heart? Is not that the cause that all those which go about to instruct or
convert him, are called Heretics? least that in showing him the truth, he
should be brought unto the mother Church again, not to assure him self of his
two rightful earthly Crowns, but also of the third and glorious Crown of
Heaven? Thus must we say, and thus it be houeth us to cry, if we will
faithfully serve the King of Spain our good Lord and master, otherwise his
Majesty's affairs will prosper but sclenderly, if the French should once agree
and come to an unity together. Oh poor and silly miserable French men that we
are, shall we suffer our selves to be deceived and enueagled by these false
traitors, who are duly paid their pensions every month, for the pains which
they take to flesh and provoke us one against another, and to make us abhor
the means given us by God from above, to cut off al heresies, with his
bright-shining sword (that is his word) which our forefathers have used three
or four times to cut off, and root out one self same error, and which all
Europ deemeth necessary and expedient for to bring Christendom, and the states
thereof unto an agreement and conformity, thereby to shun the utter ruin of
it, which otherwise is iminent and near at hand, and to avoid the Turks
invasion which cannot by means of so many divisions be deferred or withstood?
These be the same pencioners that would feign make us believe that al France
will be of the Hugonots Religion, never remembering that there are not so many
ministers in all the world as may suffice to allow for every forty miles of
ground one only. Do you think that those of the Nobility which are
Catholics? all the strong towns that profess no other Religion but the
Catholic, all our Princes, al our Croune officers, all the French Cardinals
that follow our King, as the true and lawful heir of France, and of the
Flowers de Luse, and al Catholics else will ever set their helping hand to
the overthrow of our ancient true Catholic Religion? and that he who never
detested any thing so much as to win and compel souls with the sword, will
in any sort compel and constrain our consciences? Even he who in the midst
of the most violent wars that we have waged against him, had more then the one
half of his own household servants, followers and officers Catholics, yea
true Catholics, who no doubt might (if they had pleased) have been otherwise.

It is therefore most manifest and apparent, that Phillip king of Spain has
caused these tidings to be preached unto us, rather to make his slaves to
engage us in a perpetual war against our natural liege King (which may well
be termed an inevitable perdition) then for any motion of Christian charity
that remains in him. And to say truth, when did we ever perceive any spark
of charity to appear in the Spaniard? Is not this that Catholic charity,
which with so notorious and treacherous treasons has wrongfully deprived us of
Cicilie, the fertilest and fairest Island of the world, and matchless price and
mark. At which those two undaunted nations did in all their noble wars shoot
at? Is not this the same charity that has in like manner deprived us of the
flourishing kingdom of Naples, and of the rich Dukedom of Millaine? both
ancient and lawful Patrimonies of the house of Angiou and Orleans, which
erst cost France the price of so much gold, and loss of so much blood: Is
not this that charity, which so unlawfully detayneth the principality of
Flanders, and of the County of Burgondie from us? that has usurped new France
from us, yea fair France, which the fair rivers of Loyre, Beine, and So^me
do wash and run along? Is not this the very same Catholic charity, that
with large promises and a little silver, suborned the confessor of one of our
Kings, by whose fond persuasions the County of Roussillion was so subtillie
dismembered from the Crown and Demaines of France? Is not this also that
charity, that Catholic humility with which he has presumed to dispossess
us of our right of precedence, and to take place before us? Alas, what an
indignity is this? Is it not a shame for France, that this new vpstart, this
new come Christian, whom not yet long since we have drawn from the Alcoran,
and from Paganism (who had not we been, should yet be a Saracen, a Barbarian,
a Jew) should so much as dare to think, much less to attempt to march and take
place before our most Christian Kings, who successively are the successors of
the mightiest and most ancient Kings of the world? But miserable and silly
wretches as we are, what do we dispute and call our place and standing in
question? It is not that we must stand upon now, they are other matters and
of greater consequence, that this Saracin Castillian, or Castillian Saracin
does so busily go about. He would fain be our master, and make us all his
subjects, his subjects said I? What? shall France that has heretofore ever
been so mighty in arms, France that has ever been a terour to all nations,
fair France that yet was never subdued, but through a necessity of the
providence of God (who thought it expedient that his Son our Lord should be
borne under one great Monarchy) at what time it was divided into twenty
petty Kingdoms: Noble France which Caesar deemed invincible, and never to be
conquered, if ever it might be reduced to one sole Monarchy, and under one
absolute King. And to be briese, France which acknowledges and holds nothing
but from God, and by the sword, which ever was her tenor: shall it now be
brought into subjection and bondage? Shall it now be compeld to live in
servile slavery? Shall it be made to receive and admit Uizeroies, Lieutenants,
Generalles and Governors, and Dons of Spain? that has of yore been one of
her Provinces, and ever been ready to stand to the mercy of every
conqueror and inuadour: and is and ever has been the finke, the puddle, and
filthy heap of the most loathsome, infected, and slavish people that ever yet
lived on earth. O Clouis, O our good King Clouis, this wicked race of those
falls Wisigots, with the cation of whose carcases (after thou had with thine
own hand slain their King) thou did sprinkle and fatten the fertile plains
of Poictou, who never thought themselves safe from the fury of thy sword,
until they had past the Pirency hills again, that very same treacherous race
dare at this day go about to sway and dominer over thy fair Country of
France: that wicked race would make all thy people their slaves. But why do we
call on good Clouis dead so long ago? This goodly King Phillip, this jolly King
Protector, is not he the son of Charles the fifth, that sworn and mortal
enemy of our fathers, which against all right and Christianity, did kindle
those two bronds in Picardie and in Prouence (a thing the Turk nor the
Scithian would never have attempted) that set a ranseme of three millions of
gold upon us? Which huge sum we have ever since felt, and yet to our common
grief do feel. Who framed all his driftes, and contrived all his desseines
upon the ruin and overthrow of our poor France? Which purposes and intents
he has by his latter Testament bequeathed unto his son Phillip? O you noble
Maeedonians that wept for joy when you saw your Alexander sitting in Darius
chair, and felt no other discontent, but yt your forefathers might not
participat your great Coment. O most miserable as we are, we go about to place
Darius in Alexanders chair, to enstal the Spaniard in the royal Throne of
France, and lodge King Phillip in the Louure. Francis the first, O Henry the
second, our good Kings, rise up and leave your graves for a while. Do you not
see your mortal and professed enemy prepare himself to occupy and usurp your
Estate, your Crown, your City of Paris, your Palace, your Louure? Who by his
Ambassador already takes the possession thereof? Do not you perceive how he
goes about to insult and triumph over your graves, and to violate and break
the same, as he has already done that of your Constable? Be ye well assured,
that he who has so villainously brought your two last children (the very and
lively images of your selves) to their longest home, will never parden your
Statues of Marble. O worthy and noble minded Phillip Prince of Spain, although
fortune has not advanced thee to be Emperor, as thy Father was, yet have thou
gone beyond him far in his valiant exploits, to consume and extinguish our
noble Princes of France. He never durst employ any other poison, but that of
his de monte Cucullo, that was executed at Lions. And yet not withstanding left
us one of our great king Frances his three children: But thou have with thy
valor utterly rooted out all the race of them, for the performance whereof, thou
have unto the secret poison of thy Salcedes (by means of thine Ambassador)
added and employed the poisoned knife of a damned Iacobine. But why should he
spare them under the color of mere alliance? Has not he most unnaturally
caused his own wife their proper sister to be poisoned? and his natural
eldest son to be strangled? Courage then O noble Frenchmen, add valor to
your strength, and valyantly take arms in hand for to follow the just, lawful
and ever victorious arms of our great Henry, whom God has even from above
chosen for to revenge the blood of the Valois, so traitorously spilt, and which
continually craves justice at his hands? Why do you follow so bravely the
Standarde ofithat but cherlie homicide of your Princes? Why do you follow the
colors of that empoysoner and hereditarie murderer of the house of France?
Will you put your selves even in the mouth of the Cannon of your King? Will you
besprinkle France with your blood, that in the end it may become all Spanish?
Or will you but keep some portion of it for the Infant of Spain? And good
reason, because she is the eldest, and that her youngest sister has already
the Marguisate of Saluzzo, strong Salluzzo, that footing and holde-fast which
we had left in Italy, and that has been given her for the increase of her
dowry: which was the Arsenall and Storehouse of munition that our Kings had
beyond the mountains, wherein were more then four hundredth pieces of ordinance:
which Arsenall made al things tremble under the name of France, which made the
strongest walls to stoop and fall before it, that Arsenall which had already
danted the chiefest rampard or hold which the Spaniard had in Italy, against
the strength of France, and which we held as a mean and gage forto recover
ere long both Naples and Millane again. Alas poor France, what potion has so
deprived thee of thy senses, that thou do not feel how by little and little
thou art disabled, and disarmed? that thy weapones are taken from thee, that
thou art tied in chains, with purpose to be cast into a galey, there miserably
to perish and die under the stripes and cruelty of thine enemies? and if thou
have any feeling, sense, or sight, oh my poor France, what charms have so
besotted thy spirits, or what illusions have so dazeled thee, that thou dare
seek thy welfare and protection among those which gape and seek for nothing
else so much as thine overthrow and utter ruin? who like false traitors, that
they may the better and with more ease yoke and at their pleasure bind thee
hand and foot, do daily whisper thee in the ear, that when thou please thou
shall be free again, and whenever thou will, thou shall be able to expel and
chase the Spaniard out of France: as if a man could by any examples prove that
ever they would or could be removed from any place, where once they have had
footing: as if they could not erect Citadels, great and stately Citadels,
cimented with the blood, and built with the goods and wealth of the poor
people, and Citizens: as though they were to learn how to tirannise in all
Cittyes with their blood-thirsty garrisons, and to affright poor men with the
erecting of so many gibbets, wheels and scaffoldes, with which they keep men
in such awe, that none dare so much as frown upon them: those of Portingall,
of Naples, of Millane, and of Flanders, can with grief and experience witness
what I say: but to come nearer home, what is he amongst us, that dares be so
bold, as to say aloude in the Grieve of Paris, that he is no Spaniard, but a
true French man, and escape present hanging ipso facto for an Heretic, and
heinous offendour against the laws of God and man? all these robbers, all
these spoilers, all these bloud-suckers, and destroyers of christians, these
sixteen Caualieros and their adherents, which live but by the spoil of us,
which glutte themselves with our blood, even our heart blood, are they not the
ministers and officers of the Spanish tyranny? Ministers as yet but weak,
officers as yet but easy to be withstood, and punished for their faults, if
there were any spark of yt ancient courage of France remaining in us: but alas
if we so fondly suffer our selves to be enueagled and luld a sleep with their
superficial fair words (which we have paid full dear and ready money for)
what grief and harts-sorrowe shall we feel when we shall wake and rise out of
our slomber again when we shall find our selves fast chained, and hembd in
round about, so that we shall not be able to stir, no not so much as complain,
when we shall feel the proud Castillians proudly to tread and keep us under,
holding their daggers in their hands ready to stab us at the heart, if we do
but offer to wail and sighe our miserable condition. Alas it will be too late to
offer vows after the shipwreck, or to repent when the fact is done. And if we
will consider how dangerous every delay is on our side, I beseech you do but
behold and vewe how forward he is already in the establishing of the
foundation of his future Emperie. Do you think that that great Caualiero, or
turret of offense lately erected so alofte in the Bastile against our own
City, has bin built at the cost and charges of Bussi the Clerk? Oh poor and
miserable French men, are we so void of judgment that we cannot perceive how
he will not employ his larcenies and stolen goods so nigh home, but that he
sends and embanks them further? is there any man that knows not, or at least
that will not know, how Bernardin Mendoza has weekly paid the work men of it?
and that Bussi is but a substitute of that Barbarian and squynteied great
Commaundadour? who in effect is the chief Captain of the Bastille? Does not
the Spaniard also promise us that his poison shall not cease upon the utmost
borders, but that it shall spread it self to the noblest and chiefest parts,
even unto the heart it self? that he will not stay in Frontiere tounes, but ere
long enter, take, and surprise all other parts of the kingdom? and will some
say that for conscience sake he will refuse Cambray, Amiens, or Aubeuille?
would he do it think you, if they would receive him? or is it because he
knows that the Picards (as they that have of long time known his conditions)
have flatly refused to accept of him? what? have those of the Frontiere tounes
bin eccepted, because they have stoutly resolud not to receive the Spaniard,
and yet all we, with all the parts of the kingdom of France are contained in
this honorable covenant, or agreement, not so much as our Bastille is
comprised in the same, by virtue whereof these Castillians will one of these
days (as well they may) at their pleasure mount and level all our own canons
upon the huge Caualiero, and first batter, and then sack and spoil our poor
City of Paris, as whilome they did Antwerpe. And it is not good reason, since
that this Mauritanian race has so well begone, it should continue, and so
pluck out and deface the two fair eyes of Europe, and that it should make an
end, and utterly overthrow those two stately and rich Cities, those two
great miracles of nature, Paris and Antwerpe. Oh Antwerp, whilome fair
Antwerp, who of the fairest, ritchest, and most flourishing cittyes of Europe,
art by the hands of these villeinous and blood-sucking Spaniards, brought to
be the most delolate, spoiled, and desert city of Christendom. Is it possible
that the very name of thy fall, and report of thy monstrous and horrible
sack, should not make all men (especially thy neyghbors) to be warnd and to
take heed of Spaniards? since that it does so manifestly declare unto us,
their insatiate avarice, their more then Tigrish cruelty, their filthy,
monstrous and abominable luxury, their wast full burning of thy houses, their
detestable ransacking and pillage of those great treasures, which from all
parts of Europe, were laid up in store in thy sumptuous palaces, their
lustful and inhumaine deflouring of thy matrones, wives, and daughters, their
matchless and sodomiticall rauishinge of young boys, which these
demi-barbarian Spaniardes committed in the presence of aged Burgeoses that were
fathers, brethren, husbands or parents of those tormented pacientes, who to
grieve them the more whilst they committed al these execrable villenies and
outrageous cruelties, did tie and chain them at there beds feet, or in other
places, and last of all the general and continual cruel tormentinge and
masscring of thy poor and wretched Citizens? has not the report thereof made
all them that ever heard it to tremble at the same, and feel a kind of horror
in them selves? and now to take away the apprehension of so many evils from
us, they go about to bleare and blind us with their holy Inquisition. Good
Lord, is that the first mess that the Spaniard will present us with? is that
the Ring that he will wedde France withal? will he endowe us with that severe
and barbarous Inquisition, which has the virtue to make men rotte in prison,
before they know any cause, and who is their accuser? that Inquisition, which
under a false pretense of Religion, does miserably bring all them that derest
the Spanish tirannny to death and confusion? Are we ignorant how they have
used the same at Naples, and at Millane, and how only that has bin the mean
and efficient cause to destroy and subvert all the noble houses which before
times had in any sort followed or favored the French faenction: Is this then
that holy Inquisition, of which good Catholics need not stand in any fear?
no in good sooth they need not fear it, always provided that they have their
souls died in Spanyolisme, always conditioned that they forget they were
borne free men, that they were bone French men, always granted that they
become as abiecte slaves, prepared to endure all cruelties, and to pocket up
every Castillian brauado, that none of the^ have any houses, offices,
benefices, or any thing else whatsoever, that a Spaniard may desire or like,
that no French man have a young wife, or fair daughter, which any gallant
Inquisitour may have a fancy or mind unto, and to be brief, that they become
so miserable, and so submisse, that neither envy or hatred, or any other such
passion may move any motion in them, otherwise (I pray you do but tell me) what
is he that is so pure and unspotted in his conscience, that can think
himself secure and safe amongst these butcherly murderers, that subvert all
orders, confound all justice, and pervert all law and equity, to bring a man to
his grave, whom they hate or mislike. The Rectour of our University of Paris,
a man for the purpose, chosen by the Spaniard, and denoted to them, not long
since suing and laboring that this Inquisition might be embraced amongst us,
told us that if it brought some innocent to his death, it would in recompense
thereof ere long clear all the kingdom of France of Huguenots. There is no
doubt of that, for when the least word that shall escape a man shall be
construed to be an irremissible crime, when we shall be enforced as soon as we
see a Jesuit to fall down and worship him, although he be a mile off, or
else we shall be in danger to be cast into a deep dungeon, not being allowed any
man to speak for us, and to conclude the Inquisition shall no sooner be
established among us, but they of Rochell will send us their keyse. Here let me
ask a question, why is it not used in the low Countries? how comes it to pass
that he who has such excellent and sovereign remedies against this disease
can not cure himself? How can he promise health unto us, when he him self is
full of sores and ulcers? Wherefore should we rather think him a skillful
Phisiition, then a prattling Ciarlatan? But I see what it is, he goes about to
prefer the infirmity before death, and yet would feign persuade us the
contrary. For if it be not so, how comes it to pass, that he who would feign
be reputed an Angel of heaven (without whose help we should all be Hugonots)
has granted the inhabitants of Antwerpe to enjoy the free liberty of their
consciences for the space of four whole years? Where is that earnest, pure
and Catholic zeal which he would make the world believe to be in him? And yet
all this is nothing in regard of the Edict which was made at Gant in the year
of our Lord 1576. For by that he yielded and promised, that none dwelling in
any of the Provinces, which had submitted themselves to his laws and
obedience, should in any sort be troubled or molested concerning matters of
religion. And as touching the provinces of Holand and Zeland, nothing
appertaining to the exercise of their religion, should be removed or altered
from that it was at that present: which yet stands in full virtue and effect.
Is not that a testimony of his yelding and stretching conscience, which (on
condition that he may bring his intent to good and wished effect) he will
turn, bend and apply to what bias a man please? He will allow of two
Religions in the low Conntries, so that he might thereby recover them again,
and yet can he abide but one in France, that thereby he may subvert the state
thereof.

His own subjects will not believe him touching those things which depend
only of his own authority, as they that know well, and to their cost have
experienced, that he never promises, but to deceive them: and shall French men
believe and give any credit to their ancient enemy, touching those things
that only depend on his life, which were he but thirty years of age, and
sure to live one hundredth years more, he shall never be able to bring to pass?
But let us consider (I pray you) and waighe the occasions that do so animate
and move the people of the low Countries so opiniatiuely, or rather obstinatly
to endure the discommoditie of such long and loathsome wars (for so I may
well term them) as we see they have hitherto, and yet do maintain against
him. These people (I say) who are both trusty and tractable (if the world may
yield a people of such quality) is it for any pleasure they take in so
unpleasant an exercise? no man will believe it. Is it because they will not be
as good subjects to their Prince, as he will be gracious Sovereign to his
people? Nay, so far are they from the merit of so unjust a censure, that
contrariwise they mayntaine themselves in all duty and loyalty toward him:
he has attempted to tyrannize them with no less barbarous cruelty, then he
spared not to entreat the Indians with all unchristian immanitie, contrary to
his sundry oaths and solemn vows made unto them. And when as by humble
supplications they have besought him, sending for sollicitours of their suit,
of the most noble and honorable personages of the Country, to seek to
mittigate his merciless malice, and to procure a remedy for so great a
mischief. Even then has he most of all (like the vyper her venom) spit forth
his spite, and redoubled his rage against this innocent people, most miserably
and without mercy, putting them to the sword, as sheep to the slaughter, his
impious Excellency being impatient of the petitions of his faithful, and (but
too affectionate) subjects, as in deed to our cost we may say, they have but
to much showed themselves to be. For in witness of their good wills, they have
at several times (besides the revenues of his Dema^^s and receipt of tallages,
subsidies, and other ordinary impostes) assented to supply the Emperor with
the sum of nine millions of gold extraordinary, and in deed have not
failed to furnish him therewith, though to the great damage of the Realm of
France. But will you know what it is that so much moves the patience of this
barbarous King, or rather incestuous tyrant. It is forsooth, that his Father
the Emperor had these contributorie sums by gayning (with his Grace) their
good wills, and in deed by holding a general assembly of the Estates, got
them granted by a common consent of voices, but Phillip his son, only by
his authorities power, will wreast from the people what him pleases, as
exacting it from a Country but newly conquered. Are we ignorant (think you)
how as well by the Duke of Alua his endeavor, and by the labor of other the
ministers and executioners of his mischiefs, he went about to obtain this
exaction amongst them, viz. that every man should yield him yearly the tenth
of his revenue, and pay him the tenth penny of every thing that should be
sold, yea, and for every time it should be uttered, though it were bought and
sold an hundredth times to and fro, which surely had amounted to a mass
inestimable? And yet he thought he dealt very favorably with the Flemings,
since he makes no conscience to extort the fifth part yearly of the Indians.
Nay this is not all, the covetousness of this defencible pillar of Christendom,
or rather offencible pillar and poller of other men's possessions, has
encroched even unto the Ecclesiastical rights and livings. For considering
with himself that this intolerable tyranny, unto which he coupled that
barbarous and unchristian Inquisition of Spain, might at the length breed a
coffeehouse amongst his subjects. To give remedy thereunto, he determined
upon this resolution, which was to cut off from the Clergy so much of their
revenue as might suffice to maintain such a number of men at arms, that
therewith he might so bridle them, and so straightly curb them with the yoke
of his subjection, that though he should take all that ever they have from them,
yet should they not once dare to grudge or murmr against him. Which manner of
dealing made them all, both Churchmen, Nobility, and Communaltie join
together to seek some means how to shake off such an insupportable burden,
as lawfully they might do, seeing it merely was repugnant and contrary to
the established laws of their Country, and namelye to that Satute, whereby it
is provided, that he shall not impose any new subsedie or taxation upon the
people without the advice and consent of the States general of the country,
upon which laws both he and his predecessors have been received and
acknowledged for Lords and governors of their society, but with this
express prouiso, that if at any time they should infringe or violate those
laws, they also should ipso facto be discharged from the bond of any oath of
allegiance or other duty, wherein before they had tied themselves unto them.
So I say, these Spanyolized Frenchmen as they know not, or at least wise will
not seem to know how justly the people of Flanders are stirred up to this
war, even so as men wedded to their own ouerweenings for mere blindness,
do they not discern the mischief into the which of a bravery they hurl
them selves headlong, most miserably thrusting both their own and their
posterities necks into the haulter, and in lieu of the freedom wherein they have
been borne and brought up, become the slaves and bondmen of the most savage,
faithless, inhumaine, and barbarous nation, that the circuit of the whole
world does comprehend. Oh wise, and well advised men of Holland and Zeland, and
those other inhabitants of the united Provinces of the low Countries: yea I
will say further, Oh most happy people, if knowing (as in deed you do) whence
springs your bliss and bale, you persist in your sage resolution, whereby
you shall avoid all imminent mischiefs, and in short space infeoffe your
selves with felicity, accompanied with an assured safety from the Spanish
tyranny. Surely you are more near thereunto, then the tyrant is to death,
although he be already old, crazed, and decrepite. And your gladness shall
bring so much the greater griese to our turncote Frenchmen, when they shall see
them selves so mated with misery, deuoide of all hope of deliverance from that
harm, which your prudence and foresight has escaped, and freed your selves
from: and shall serve for an example of folly to all the world, as notable as
your counsel and constancy shall be to your posterity admirable. But let us
return to the Spanish King. Shall we then be such simple sottes, as to believe
that he would not willingly couple France to his other countries. Yea, though
with condition that it were all Hugonots, or of what religion soever? Are we so
blind, that we know not his butte to be the body, and not the soul, his fetch
to be at France, and not at the Heretics? unless in that they are an
hindrance unto his purposes, otherwise, why should he not as well join in
friendship with the French, as heretofore he entertained amity with the
English? until the prize of his pence was by them taken from him, which in the
year of our Lord 1569. he sent into Flanders unto the Duke of Alua? till which
act he had league and alliance both offenciue and deffenciue with them, even
with those that were vowed enemies to the Pope and all Papisme? Oh constant
Catholic, Oh puissant Protector of the faith Catholicall? whom the loss of
his gold, not the lack of religion provoked, the interest of Spain, not the
right of Rome stoong and pricked to the heart. All the dreadful threatenings,
and fearful excommunications thundered out by the Pope against the English
Protestants, could never have power to make him leave league with England, when
a few lost crowns made him immediately let fall both friendship, and faith, and
climb up even unto the clouds with the swell of revenge and vengeance. Let
men say then what they list, let them thunder, and threaten, let heaven and
earth be at jar together, yet shall they never remove me from these two
maxims. The one, that the Spanish religion censisteth in enlarging the metes
and bounds of his dominions, his zeal in commanding his neighbor nations,
and his care in aspiring to the Majesty of a Monarche, that other religion he
has none, but uses that of the peoples according as it may best maintain the
trade of his tyranny. The other is, that he deserves not the name of a
Christian, who does not believe that God can far more safely conserve the
glory of his name by the instructions of good Pastors, godly Bishops, zealous
Ministers, and sincere Preachers of his word, then the Spaniard or other man
living can be able to do with massacres, sackings, blasphemies, robbings,
sacriledges, and incestuous dealings of the most cruel, disordred, licencious
and insolent (though hardy) men of war that ever were assembled together.
Let us bethink us then at length I beseech you, and let us look unto our
selves, let us consider on the one side, the happy estate of those eight or
nine great Provinces that are already in quietness under the obedience and
protection of our King, on the other side, let us behold our own miserable and
accursed condition that live not, but languish in daily expectation of death
through the cruel infliction of famine, which as an handmaide attends on these
wars. Let us well ponder the weight of our enterprise, which tends to no
other end but to continue, to fill France with brigandage, and bourelage, with
rapes, and robberies, with theft and murder, to multiply by millions the
number of poor widows and fatherless children, to no other end but to
maintain the pride of the Spanish usurpation, and make our selves the only
wretched and miserable wretches of the world, and only to please the desires,
and second the humors of certain desperate cast awaies, the horrors of whose
treasons and offenses has clean consumed our Kings comiseration: yielding to
the appetites of those, who by their contracts being counterchanged into
Spaniards, have no more any feeling or apprehension of the griefs and miseries
of France, but rather contrariwife make her miseries, their mirth, her losses,
their riches, and her ruin, their ^singes. If all this can not mollify the
hardness of our hearts, if in our minds there remain no remnant of remorse, yet
at least wise let our eyes inform us, and let us with them behold our selves
beset on every side with the fortunate and flourishing armies of our King: let
us view those great and warlike septentrionall nations which replenishe every
place with men, armor and horses, not only to defend and mantaine the Scepter
of France, but therewithal and with one breath to go and abate the pride and
insolency of these Negroes, who through our negligence have a few years
since so saucely or rather sauagely insulted upon the countries bordering round
about us, making us the instruments of our own scourge, and our butcherly
bloudsheds, the subject of their mirth and triumphs. And in very truth, is not
the hour come wherein the very ashes of our Ancestors ask revenge by our
hands, whom their Pencioners procured to spill each others blood, and commit so
many public paricides? What? do we tarry or expect the arising of a more royal
King, or victorious Captain? Have we not bin long enough the laughing stock
of those who heretofore could never hear us talked of without tre^bling? To
conclude, is it not time to go bid the Spaniard battle in his own country,
where the conquest is so easy, and the fruit so ripe, and so ready at hand?
They of Portingall, and Nauarra, do already hold us out their hands, the way will
be the shorter for to redeem Naples and Milane. It is not the Alps, but the
Pireney mounts yt we must now pass, we must strik home at the head, the blow
is mortal. See how the English men have already pearsed even the very
life-vaines of his golden vent, and in a manner clean shut him out of the sea.
He durst not before Lisbone walls stand to fight with Norris, the general of a
small English army: how will he then dare to encounter a mighty King of
France, a Prince of so great puissance? he durst not once assail the English
infantery, how will he then be able to withstand and escape the fury of the
French Cauallerie? backed and fortified with all the forces of the Countries and
Provinces that are on this side of him? Cheer up your selves, add will unto
your courage, the true adopted children of Bellona, let not the dread of our
King keep any of you back, the gates of his clemency stand wide open for to
receive all, his mercy is mighty, his grace is greater in forgiving, then our
gracelesnes has bin guilty in offending. Yea behold, he holds out his
royal hand unto us all, he is our Father, our natural and lawful Father, we
are all his children: but if we show coldness in confessing him, if we despise
his bounty, if we mock his mildnes, miserable wretches, what can we expect
but the sharp effects of the rod of his indignation, as the rightful and
deserved reward of our execrable offenses, that our just suffering may serve
for others example? Yet if we can take no pity of our selves, let us at least
have some compassion of our wives and children, whose condition is so much the
more miserable, by how much they have yet no feeling of their miseries. Well,
let it now, yea even now appear, if in us there be yet remaining any relic
of true French men, let the desire of preserving our liberty, and the hateful
apprehension of such miserable feruitude, clean wash out of our memory the
remembrance of our fore-conceiued and private quarrels, and let us bury our
old broils and civil dissension, in the entire affection of our dear
Country. There are now no more, nor any other factions but the French and
Spanish. Oh omnipotent God, that have ever held the eyes of thy commiseration
open to France, and have ever plentiously filled her with thy bountiful
blessings. It is now, yea very now, that we have need of thy heavenly help,
and above all, that it will please thee to give sight unto our sealed eyes,
that we may have power to perceive and discern our true enemies, what the
Spaniarde is, what his government, what his pretense to our poor, desolate,
and oppressed Country. Good Lord, leave us not now in the exigent of our
extremity, being upon the point either presently to precipitate our selves
into everlasting bondage, or prosperously to purchase our eternal freedom.
Assist our King, protect our Princes, animate our nobles, and strengthen our
soldiers, send thy holy Angels to aid them, inspire them with an ardent zeal
to maintain thy quarrel, let their foreheads be fraught with fearfulness,
and their arms filled with force. Comfort this consanguinitie, continue to
lighten with thy grace this line of that holy Jews, that holy Saint that
cease not to pray unto thee for his posterity, that thou will not blot them
out of thy book of life, that thou will not take from them the comfort of thy
countenance, that thou will not destroy them, that thou will not put in their
place their enemy, the enemy of their forefathers: but rather that thou will
be pleased to preserve unto his posterity the inheritance of his patrimony,
and restore his France to her former prosperity, to the end that after we
shall have subjected to the yoke of our government those that threaten us with
the rod of their usurping rule, we may take in hand the accomplishment of his
holy vows, and the pursuit of his religious wars against the Infidels,
under the conduct of this Christian Conqueror Henry his eldest son, who is
borne to advance the honor of his house, and for ever to eternize the name of
the French: and that the auri-flame now joined with the Eagle, may be the
guiding of so great a King, so Augustius an Emperor, overthrow the Ensigns
of that proud Mahomet, and free thy people from captivity, who faithfully
affying to thy never failing promises, have long attended the coming of that
happy day.

An extract of the Spanishe Kings declaration, which he sent to the Princes of
France, and others the partakers of the Catholic Religion, against the
Heretics of that Country, their favorers and adherents.
THe Catholic King now grown old and crazed, contenteth him self with such
kingdoms, dukedomes, and seigneuries, as are at this present under his
obeisance, neither has his Majesty any need of that of France. But forasmuch
as he sees the kingdom of France afflicted with Heretics, whom the
Catholics of that Country (albeit they be in number twelve to one) are not
able to master, his Highness has always offered him self to succor and
assiste them, and in deed has both in their first and second troubles aided
and assisted them, as well with men as with money, without intention to receive
any recompense in lieu thereof. All which notwithstanding, they have always
covertly maintained wars against him as well in Flanders as Portingal, whereof
nevertheless he has never bin willing to take revenge, nor ever would consent
to frame any thing against France, since the peace concluded betwixt them.

Hereafter follow the conditions demanded by the Catholics of France, and by
his Majesty assented unto.
1 First that his Highness shall have the title of Protector of the Realm and
Croune of France, and the Cardinal of Bourbon to remain their King, whom his
Majesty shall help to deliver out of captivity, and cause to be consecrated
King.

2 That his Majesty may (if he please) mary one of his daughters to one of the
Princes of the blood of France, who after the disease of the said Lord
Cardinal shall be crowned King, and in respect of such marriage to be had, his
Highness shall give the counties of Flanders, and Burgundy to be joined and
united to the Realm of France,

3 That the ministers of the Gallicane church, shall be reformed according to the
counsel of Trent.

4 That no Spaniard shall be endowed with any benefice, or bear judicial office
in this Realm, nor be admitted to the government of any towns or bordering
places.

5 That the offices of justice shall not be made mercenary, but be freely
bestowed upon good and honest persons, such as shall have bestowed their time
in study and in the practice of the bar.

6 But as for such as not being answerable to these said conditions, shall
have already purchased any such places of dignity or office, being men of
behavior and Catholics: in regard that they have paid for them, and many of
them yet owe rents and fines for the same. It shall be lawful for them at this
time to resign unto others that shall be capable of them, being Catholics and
men learned, and of good and honest reputation, who afterward need not make
any other resignation.

7 That his Majesty shall make a bank or stock of two millions of gold to be
kept in Paris, and employed for the payment of the arrerages of the rents of
the chamber of the City, and that his said Majesty shall at his proper cost
and charges, and with that which it shall please our holy father the Pope to
contribuite, entretain the wars that now we have in hand.

8 And as for tallage money and impositions, that to be reserved and employed
toward the paiments of the debts of the Crown, and not to any other use, and
the debts once discharged, the said impositions to be remitted, except only
one tallage, wherewith shall be entertained a certain number of men of war, as
well horsemen as footmen, for the guard and conservation of the Realm.

9 That from hence forth the soldiers of the Kings ordinances shall be
gentlemen, and shall make their musters, and receive their pay quarterly, as
well in time of peace as war.

10 That the French men shall have free liberty to commerce and have recourse
of trafique and negotiation to the lands of Peru, and other the new conquered
countries of his Majesty, with free election either to associate with the
Spaniards and Portingalls, or if they think good, to sail alone by them
selves.

By virtue of the articles here above agreed on, his Highness for a beginning of
the said stock or bank of two millions of gold, has caused already to be
delivered into the City of Paris, the sum of four hundredth thousand crowns.

FINIS.

