A Short EXPLANATION, Of the EPISTLE of PAVL TO THE HEBREWS.

By DAVID DICKSON, Preacher of Gods Word, AT IRWIN.

ABERDENE, Imprinted by Edw. Raban. Anno 1635.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
BEfore the time that something of mine did pass the PRESS, without my
knowledge, or allowance, I did not mind to come abroad in this Learned Age,
wherein many, more able Men than I am, do keep silence; my Furniture being
fitter for my present Charge, than for more public Edification, in my
judgment; and my Employmentes so frequent, as my spare time is little, for
farther extent of what the LORD has bestowed upon me. But, since that time,
my just Fears, from apparent grounds, that numbers of my SERMONS, which were
rudely, and popularlie, delivered, (as thryse, or four times Preaching
a-weeke, might yield) and taken from my Mouth, as it was possible to over-take
the current of running speech; the judicious Writer making what he had
over-taken, to coheare, the best he could; and Copies going from him, to
many, with numbers of Faults, and misstakinges of the Transcribers; I being
unable to revise, (for straytnesse of time) any thing which was written by
them, first, or last. My just Fears, I say, that these should come to thy
Hands, rude and faulty, as they are, made me willing rather, when GOD should
grant me leisure heere-after, to draw up, in short, the poyncts of Doctrine
delivered by me in these SERMONS; that thou might have a twenty, or
thirty of them, or more, possible, in the bounds and price of one at large.

With this passage of GOD'S providence, another has concurred, to draw forth
this piece unto thy view in the mean time, which is this: When I considered,
how largely GOD has provided HELPS, for understanding of holy SCRIPTVRE, by
large Commentaries, and sweet Sermons, especially from His Church in ENGLAND;
where-by increase of Knowledge is given to the Learned, and such whose means
to buy, and leisure from their calling to read, and victory over their own
laysinesse, for taking pains, does concur with their capacity, for making
use of this the LORD'S Liberality; I have often requested the Father of
Lights* To help such as either could not, or else would not, profit
themselves by that, which is already granted in His Bounty, by some short,
and plain manner of writing; vvhere-by the weaker judgementes might be
supported, and all Excuse taken away from the witty Sluggard, and such whose
worldly Employmentes, and great Effayres, have seemed sufficient Reasons, to
excuse their negligence, and the small and naughty matters of their own
Salvation, and the Kingdom of HEAVEN, and Evidences thereof in SCRIPTVRE.

And, to this purpose, I have been very instant, with the Godlie-Learned of
mine acquayntance, to take this matter in hand; and, to divyde, amongst them,
the hard parts of SCRIPTVRE, at least; that this work might be done by the
hands of many, which could not be done by one. I found their approbation of
my desire, and inclinable willingness, to put hand to work also. But, some of
them, for the weight of their ordinary Charge, some of them for age, and
infirmity of body, some of them for their hands full of the LORD'S work in
another sort, could not adventure to be straytlie engaged in the work. Where
through I was forced, either to forsake my Desires, which daily were kindeled
within me more and more; or else, come forth with something, of this kind,
as might be; and seek amongst my Readers, some to take this Matter to heart;
and, to do there-in, as the LORD should enable them, by themselves, or by
others.

I have made choice of this EPISTLE, which is a piece of hard Meat, in the
esteemation both of the APOSTLE, the Writer thereof, (CHAP. 5. and 6.) and of
PETER, giving his judgment of it, (2. PET. 1.15.16.) That if I should attain
any part of mine intent, in any measure, in so hard a place, I might
encowrage others, to take in hand a more easy part of SCRIPTVRE, with more
hope of success.

The Sum of each Chapter, or the Contents, do stand in stead of Analysis;
and, in some places, of a Paraphrase. The Text does follow, Verse by Verse.
The exposition of the Verse, serves for grounds of Doctrines; which
Doctrines, following upon the grounds, are joined, most part, with the Note
of Collection [THEN.] Plurality of Doctrines from the ground, or from the Text
where the consequence is easy to be perceaved, is distinguished by Figures,
according to their numbers. Terms of Art I have eschewed, because I would
be plain to all. I have spared all enlargement of the Doctrines, which I
could spare; leaving them as graynes of Seed, to get their growth in thy
mind, by Meditation, which is necessary for such as love to make use of this
sort of writing; because I would be short. The special handeling of such
Passages, as the Apostle cites out of the Old Testament, I have left to their
own proper place. Quotations, for confirmation of my Doctrines, drawn from
the ground, I have spared also: Because, I judged, If the Doctrine was
pertinentlie collected from the ground, the Text in hand was sufficient
confirmation. And if it be not pertinentlie collected, I am content that thou
pass by it, and take only what is pertinent. A quotation could prove the
Doctrine true* but not prove it pertinent: and, so, not serve my purpose.
Many more, and more pertinent Consequences, the Learned will find, which I
have not observed: but not for the Learned, or such as are able, and willing,
to make use of larger Wrytinges, do I intend this present.

Therefore, do not look how much thou do miss, which might have been
said; but, what in the first frame of this moulde could be done, in such
brevitie. Which moulde, I trust, the Learned shall help, if it please the LORD
to stir them up, to take this matter in hand. I have preassed, singlie to
poynct out Truth, without Partiality; not wresting the Text, to reach a Blow
to any man. And, what thou shall make of this present Piece, I am not
careful, if I can obtain there-by, that more able Men may be set on work,
to do what I intend, but cannot do.

If the precious Jewel of the SCRIPTVRE may be more esteemed of, and made use
of, which is more necessary for our Souls, than the Sun in the Firmament is
for our bodies; and, the greatest gift next after our LORD JESUS downe-sending
amongst us, that ever the World saw. If I may by this piece, I say, be an
Instrument, to stir up any to the love of searching the SCRIPTVRES, I have
not lost my Pains, what-so-ever shall become of this little Book: Whereunto
I have sollisted for no Patronage under Heaven, but thy Christian Good Will to
my Aim, to have our LORD the more honored, in the sound Knowledge, and right
use of His SCRIPTVRE.

I am confident, that thou will easily judge, with me, That the proud, and
profane Despysers of GOD, are worthy to perish, amongst His Enemies: But,
consider, and judge again, If profane Despysers of holy SCRIPTVRE, who
disdain to read, or obey, what GOD commands therein, be not to be ranked
in the same Roll. For, GOD draws so ^igh unto us in His Word, speaking unto
us, as a king unto his Subjects, or a Master unto his Servauntes; that the
obedience, or disobedience, which we give to His Speeches, resolves,
directly, and immediately, upon GOD HIMSELF. For, what is it else, to
hear, and believe, and obey GOD; but, To hear, and believe, and obey His
Speeches? And, what is it, Nor to take notice of GOD, to despise, and disobey
GOD; but, Not to take notice of His Speeches, not to read His Wrytings, and
not to care for any thing that He commands, promises, or threatens?
Therefore has the LORD written the Great things of His Law unto us, even to
be a Touchstone, not only to try all men's Doctrine there-by, but also to
try all men's disposition toward Himself* and, how they stand affected to
His Honor, whether as Foes, or as Friends. For, What readier way is there, to
get evidence of a man destitute of the Knowledge, Faith, Love, Fear, and the
rest of the parts of the Image of GOD, than to find him destitute of the
Knowledge and Love of the SCRIPTVRE? What surer Sign of a man, who, for the
present, is enemy to GOD, and to the enlargement of His Gracious Kingdom,
than to find him traducing the perfect Law of the LORD, and marring, to his
power, the free course of the Scriptures light, which is the Scepter of
CHRIST'S Kingdom? Again; What surer Sign of a Child of Promise, begotten of
GOD, than to see him, with DAVID, PSALM. 119. making more of the Scriptures, nor
of a kingdom; and pouring out all his Affections upon it, as upon the nearest
Mean where-by GOD'S Spirit may be conveyed into his soul, for perfecting of
Holiness; and the readiest Chariot, to carry up his spirit, to dwell in GOD,
for perfecting of his happiness?

We shall find, also, answerable to GOD'S Purpose of trying men by His
Scripture, His Wisdom, giving a due meeting unto men, as they do make use of
His Scripture* Do they not read it? or, do they read, and not consider it?
Do they not weygh, what is imported by it, in sense, and meaning? It fares
with them, as with those to whom CHRIST said, MATTHEW. 22.29. You err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. Do they not love it? Behold
their Plague, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.12. Because they received not the love of the
Truth, that they might be saved, for this very cause, says the Text, God
shall send them strong delusion; that they should believe a Lie, that they
might be damned. Do they not steadfastlie believe, what they learn in
Scripture? In God's judgment, with the foolish, and unstable, they are
suffered to wrest the Scriptures, to their own destruction, were they never so
great wits, 2. PET. 3.16. Do they not study, to give obedience unto the
known Truth of it? He deals with them, as with Israel, PSALM. 81.11. My
people would not hearken unto My Voice, and Israel would none of Me. (He
counts Himself rejected, because His Word was rejected.) But what follows,
Verse. 12. So I gave them up, unto their own hearts lust: and they walked in
their own counsels. But to such as will be Christ's Disciples indeed,
Students, seeking to grow in Knowledge, Belief, and obedience of His Word;
seeking to love Him, and keep His Sayings, He promises, (JOHN 14.26*) to
send unto them, The Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, the holy Ghost, to teach
them all things: That is, To perfect their knowledge, more and more, by His
Spirit, to fill their hearts with joye and comfort, according to His Truth,
and to make them holy, more and more.

And why are all these styles given? Even to show, that such as will have
Christ's Spirit to work any of these, must seek Him to work all of these,
joyntlie, or not to have Him for working any of them at all. Neither Comfort
without Truth, nor Comfort without Holiness. The same is it which Wisdom
cries, PROVE. 8.34.35.36. Blessed is the man that hears Me; watching daily
at My Gates; waiting at the Posts of My Doors: For, who so finds Me,
finds Life; and shall obtain favor of the Lord. But he that sins
against Me, wrongeth his own Soul: all that hate Me, love Death.

Therefore, how thou do hate Death, and love thine own Soul, how thou
stand affected toward GOD, and the fellowship of the COMFORTER, the holy
SPIRIT, the SPIRIT of TRVETH, and toward the enlargement of the Kingdom of
CHRIST; let thy affection TOWARD the SCRIPTVRES, more abundant dwelling in
thy self, and FOR the SCRIPTVRES more free course amongst others, bear
witness.

Farewell.
THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE HEBREWS.
WHen Peter wrote his second Epistle to the scattered Hebrews, there was
extant an Epistle of Paul, to those same scattered Hebrews also, received in
the Church, for a part of Canonical Scripture, and distinguished from Paul's
^ther Epistles, 2. Pet. 3.15.16. Therefore, amongst other reasons, this may be
one, to make us think this Epistle must be it. For it is without reason to
think, that the Churches should be negligent in keeping such a Jewel,
commended unto them by the authority of two chief Apostles; or lose Paul's
Epistle, and keep Peter's, which makes mention of it.

The sum of the Epistle.
BEcause the Hebrews were hardly drawn from the observation of Leviticall
Ordinances, unto the simplicity of the Gospel, and in danger of making
Apostacy from the Christian Faith, by Persecution, the Apostle Paul seueth
before their eyes the Glory of Jesus Christ, in His person, far above men
and Angels; by whose Ministry the Law was given, not only as God, Chap. 1.
but also as man, Chap. 2. and in His Office above Moses, Chap. 3. Threatening
them, therefore, if they should misbelieue Christ's Doctrine, Chap. 3.4. and
above the Leviticall high Priest, Chap. 5. Threatening them again, if they
should make Apostacy, from Him, Chap. 6. yea, above all the glory of the
Leviticall Ordinances; as He in whom all those things had their
accomplishment, and period of expyring, Chap. 7.8.9.10. Threatening them again,
if they should not persevere in the Faith of Christ: unto which perseverance,
through whatsoever difficulties, he encowrageth them, by the example of the
Faithful before them, Chap. 10.11. and by other grounds of Christian comfort,
Chap. 12. That so in the fruitful obedience of the Gospel, they might follow
upon Christ, seeking for that City that is to come, and not for their earthly
Jerusalem any more. Chapter 13.

The sum of Chap. I.
IF you shall make comparison, O Hebrews, the Ministry of the Gospel shall
be found more glorious than the Ministry of the Law: For, the manner of Gods
dispensing His Will before Christ came, was by part and part, and subject to
His own addition: not after one settled manner, but subject to alteration, and
by the Ministry of men, the Prophets, Verse. 1. But now He has declared His
last Will gloriously, by His own Son, God and Man in one person, Verse. 2.3.
who is as far above, not only the Prophets, but the Angels also, as the
native Glory of His Person and Office, is above theirs, Verse. 4. For He is of
the same Substance with the Father, Verse. 5. and partaker of the same Worship
with Him, Verse. 6. The Angels but servantes to Him, Verse. 7. He is eternal
GOD, and King over all, Verse. 8. and, in regard of His Manhead and Office,
filled with the Spirit, Verse. 9. Yea, He is Creator, unchangeable, and
everlasting, Verse. 10.11.12. Joined with the Father, in the governament of the
World, Verse. 13. The Angels but servantes, both to Him, and to His Children,
Verse. 14.

The doctrine contained in Chap. I.
Verse. 1. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past
unto the Fathers, by the Prophets. ALbeit the Apostle was willing, that these
Hebrews should understand that this Epistle came unto them from him, as
appears Chap. x. verse. 34. yet does he not prefixe his name in the body of
it, as in all his other Epistles; that by the prudent dealing of these
faithful Hebrews, as we may think* others who kept prejudice against his
person, might be drawn on, to take notice of his Doctrine more impartiallie,
and know his name, after they had tasted of ebe truth from him, in a fitter
time. Whence we learn, 1. That it is lawful for godly men, to dispose of the
expression of their names in their Writings, as they see it expedient. 2. That
it is not much to be inquired, who is the Writer of any purpose, till we
have impartiallie pondered the matter written. 3. That it is not always
necessary, that we should know the name of the Writer of every part of
Scripture: for the authority thereof is not from men, but from GOD, the
Inspyre^ thereof.

1. He says not simply, The Prophets spoke, but God spoke to the Fathers,
by the Prophets.] Then, 1. GOD was the chief Doctor of His own Church, from
the beginning. 2. And what the Prophets conveyghed from GOD, to the Church, by
Scripture* as it is called here the speaking of GOD; so it is to be accounted
of still; and not as a dumb letter.

2. He says, GOD spoke at sundry times. By many parts, as the word
imports; now a part of His will, and then a part farther; at another time yet
a part farther. Then, The LORD was in the way only, of revealing His whole
Mind to His Church, before CHRIST came; letting forth Light, by little and
little, till the Sun of Righteousness* JESUS CHRIST, arose, and had not
told His whole will. 2. And for this reason, the Jewish Church was bound to
suspend her determination of the unchangeableness of her Leviticall Service,
till the Lawgiver spoke His last word, and uttered His full Mind, in the
fullness of time.

3. He says, before CHRIST came, GOD spoke in diverse manners.] Not
revealing his Will after one manner; but sometime by viue voice, sometime by
vision or dream, or inspiration, or Vrim and Thummim, by signs from Heaven, by
types, and exercise of shadowing Ceremonies. Then, No reason the Jews should
stick so fast to the ordinances of Levi, (they being instituted in the time
of the alterable courses of the Churches pedagogie) as not to give way to the
abolishing of them by the MESSIAH: Which to show, is a part of the Apostles
main scope.

Verse. 2. Has in these last days, spoken unto us, by His Son; whom He has
appointed Heir of all things: by whom also He made the worlds. 1. He says,
GOD who spoke to the Fathers, has spoken to us.] Then, The same GOD, who is
Author of the Old Testament, is also Author of the Doctrine of the New
Testament: and the Church of old, and now, is taught of the same GOD; that the
faith of the Elect might depend upon the authority of GOD only, both then
and now; and not on men.

2. These are called the last days.] Then, The fullness of time is now come:
The Lawgiver of the Church has spoken His last Will: His Mind is fully
revealed; settled course for the Faith, and service of His Church, is taken;
after which no new alteration of His Constitutions is to be expected.

3. He says, GOD spoke to them by the Prophets, but has spoken to us by His
Son.] Then, 1. As the Son is above the servants; so is CHRIST above the
Prophets. And no reason, that the Jews should think so much of Moses, and the
Prophets, as for them, to misregard CHRIST'S Doctrine, and stick to the
Leviticall Service, under pretense of esteemation of the Prophets. 2. The
Glory of the Gospel, is greater than the glory of the Law. 3. The glory of
the Ministerial Calling of Preachers of the Gospel, is by so much the
greater, as it has the Son of GOD First-man in the Roll thereof; as first
Preacher, and Prince of Preachers. 4. CHRIST'S Sermons are all of them directed
unto us: and so much more highly should the Doctrine of the Gospel be
esteemed of, by us.

4. In describing CHRIST, be says, the Son is Heir of all things: that
is, He has received a Domination over all creatures, from the Father; that as
He is LORD over all, so is CHRIST.] Then, 1. CHRIST is Heir of all things in
the Church also, LORD of the Sabbath, and of all the Service annexed to it, to
whom it is lawful to chop and change the Leviticall Ordinances, at His
pleasure. 2. And Heir of all the Prerogatives and Promises, made to the Jews,
or others; through whom only, as the righteous Owner of all things, both Jew
and Gentile must seek and keep Right to what they have, or can claim: And
therefore, it behoved the Hebrews, to enter themselves Heirs to their
Privileges by CHRIST, or else to be disinherited.

5. He says, GOD, by His Son, made the Worlds.] So he calls the World,
for the variety of times, and ages, and fleeces of the creatures, one
succeeding another. Then, 1. CHRIST is GOD, Creator of all things. 2. He is a
distinct person from the Father; by whom the Father made all. 3. That which the
Father does, the Son does the same; yet so, as in order of working, the
Father is first, and the Son is next; working with, and from the Father.

Verse. 3. Who being the Brightness of His Glory, and the express Image of
His Person, and upholding all things, by the Word of His Power, when He had,
by Himself, purged our sins, sat down, on the Right Hand of the Majesty
on high. IN describing CHRIST, he uses borrowed similitudes: for, what proper
word can be found, to express so great a Mystery? And, what can we conceive
of His Godhead, but by resemblance? Yea, he uses more similitudes nor one; for
it is but little we can conceive of Him by one: and what we might misconceiue
by too hard pressing of one similitude, by another is corrected; and so our
conception helped.

1. CHRIST the Son, is called the Brightness^ of His Fathers Glory.] The
similitude is borrowed from the Son beams. Then, 1. As the Father is
glorious, so is CHRIST His Son glorious, with the same Glory. Therefore, 1.
Cor. 2.8. He is called the LORD of Glory. 2. As the beams of light have
their original from the Sun, so has CHRIST His original of the Father, and
is inseperable from Him: for, as the Sun was never without its light* so
neither was the Father ever without the Son; but coeternallie with Him. 3. As
the Sun is not manifested, but by its own brightness; So the inaccessible
light of the Fathers Glory, is not revealed to the creature, but by the Son.

2. CHRIST is called the express Image of the Fathers Person.] The similitude
is borrowed from a Signets impression, which represents all the lineaments of
the Seal. Then, 1. The Father is one person, and the Son is another person
of the Godhead, having His own proper subsistence distinct from the Father. 2.
The Son resembles the Father, fully, and perfectly; so that there is no
perfection in the Father, but the same is substantiallie in the Son: As the
Father is Eternal, Omnipotent, Omnipresent, infinite in Wisdom, Goodness,
Mercle, Holiness, and all other Perfections; So is the Son Omnipotent,
Eternal, and all that the Father is. 3. Whatsoever Perfection we can perceive
in CHRIST, shyning in His Manhead, or Word, or Works; the same we may
conclude to be in the Father also; whose resemblance, and express Image He
is. Find we CHRIST good and merciful, loving and pitiful, meek and
lowly: not abhorring the most vile and miserable, whether in soul or body,
that comes unto Him for relief; we may be assured, that such a one is the
Father; and no other ways minded to such as seek unto Him through CHRIST.

3. CHRIST vpholdeth all things, by the word of His power.] Then, 1. The
preservation of the creatures, as well as their creation, is from Christ. The
Father vpholdeth all, so does the Son. 2. What He does, He does as
Omnipotent GOD, by His Word, without trouble or burden. As He spoke, and all
was done; So He but by His Word commands, and all stands fast. And this
His Word is nothing else, but His powerful Will, ordayning things to be, and
continue; and powerfullie making them so to be, and continue, so long as He
will.

4. CHHIST by Himself purged our sins. To wit, by bearing our sins upon
his Body on the Tree, 1. Pet. 24. Then, 1. Our sins are a filthiness, that
must be purged. 2. The satisfactorie cleansing of our sins, is not a thing
to be done by men's meritorious doings, or sufferinges* but already done, and
ended, by CHRIST, before He ascended; and that by Himself alone, all
creatures being secluded. 3. He that vpholdeth all things, by the Word of
His own Power; and He that purged our sins, by His own Blood, is but one
self same Person; GOD and Man is He in one person.

5. CHRIST sat down on the right Hand of the Majesty on high.] That is, when
CHRIST had cleansed our sins, by his death, he ascended to Heaven, and
possessed himself as Man, in the fellowship of the same Glory, which as GOD
he had before the World was, John 17.4.5. Then, 1. The Son is joined in the
fellowship of the same Glory with the Father, as well in his Manhead after his
Resurrection, as in his Godhead before his Incarnation. For, though the Glory
of CHRIST'S Godhead was hid, for a while, by the sufferinges of his Manhead, yet
was it not abolished, nor in it self abated thereby: but the Manhead first was
assumed unto the unity of Person with the Godhead* that our Ransom might be
rich; and then, to the union of the same Glory* that the Redeemer, after the
Ransomes paying, might be altogether glorious. 2. Seeing He that has
cleansed our sins, is so glorious a Person, all the means of his cleansing
us how base soever* such as were his Hunger and Thirst, his Poverty and
Weakness* his sh^mefull and paynfull Death, should be glorious in our eyes
also. 3. Majesty, and Magnificence, and Grandour, properly so called, is the
LORDS. The highest excellencies of the creature, are but sparks of his
Majesty, and weak resemblances only, albeit their earthly glory often
hold men's eyes so, as they forget the LORDS Greatness.

Verse. 4. Being made so much better than the Angels, as He has by
Inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than they. 1. He prooveth Christ to
be greater than the Angels, because his Name is more excellent than theirs.]
For they are called Angels, and he GODS Son: which he is said to have by
Inheritance as due to him: both as God by eternal generation, and as Man by
assumption of our nature in unity of one person; according to which he is not
the adopted, but natural Son of GOD: Filius natus, non filius factus. Then,
GOD gives not idle Titles: as GOD calls things, so they are, or are made to
be. CHRIST, as GOD, is called GODS Son, because by eternal generation he
is so: as Man he is called GODS Son, because by assumption of the humane
nature unto the personal union of his Godhead, he is made so to be. 2. As
far as Sonneship is above servile employment, as far is CHRIST more
excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 5. For, unto which of the Angels said He at any time, Thou art My
Son, this day have I begotten Thee? And again, I will be to Him a Father,
and He shall be to Me a Son. 1. He prooveth his point by Scripture, PSALM.
2.7. 2. SAM. 7.19. and puts them to improbation of his Doctrine by
Scripture, if they could. Then, 1. In the true Primitive Church, in matters of
Religion, all Authority was silent, and Divine Scripture spoke, and determined
questioned points of Truth. 2. The Apostle counted it sufficient, to bring
Scripture for his Doctrine; and permits no impugning of it, but by Scripture.

2. Only of CHRIST says GOD, I have begotten Thee.] Then, 1. Howsoever GOD
has many Sons by Creation, by Office, by Grace, and Adoption; yet, a Son
by Generation, a native Son, has He none, but CHRIST. 2. CHRIST is of the
same Nature, and Essence, with the Father, consubstantiall with him; because
begotten of him, in himself, without beginning; the Son being eternally in
the Father, and the Father eternally in the Son, of the selfsame Nature,
and Godhead.

3. This day have I begotten Thee.] Being understood of CHRIST, according to
his Godhead, signifies the Fathers tymelesse, eternal, perpetually constant,
and present generation of his Son, in himself. Being understood according
to his State, in his Manhead, it signifies the Fathers bringing forth of the
Son, to the knowledge of the World, and declaring him to be the Son of
GOD, with power, by his Resurrection from the dead, ROMANS 1.4. These places, it
is true, were spoken of David and Solomon, as Types of Christ, typicallie, in a
slender resemblance, PSALM. 2.7. and 2. SAM. 7.19. But the Body of the Truth
aimed at, and signified, was Christ resembled by them, as here we see. Whence
we learn, That typical speeches in Scripture, have not their perfect
meaning, neither can be fully expounded, nor truly understood, till they
be drawn to Christ, in whom they have their accomplishment, and of whom they
mean to speak, under the name of the Types. And therefore neither could the
old Church of the Jews, nor can we, get comfort in any of them, till
Christ, in whom all the Promises are YEA and AMEN, be found included in them.

Verse. 6. And again, when He brings in the first begotten into the world,
He says, And let all the Angels of GOD worship Him. 1. He says; that is,
The Father says, PSALM. 97.7. Then, The Scripture which elsewhere is called
the Speech of the holy Ghost, is also the Speech of the FATHER.

2. He brings in his first begotten, into the World.] Then, 1. The Father
is the Author of Christ's Incarnation, and of his Kingdom amongst Men, and of
Divine Glory given to him, in his Kingdom. 2. Christ is the Father's first
begotten, both for the eternity of his Person* begotten without beginning,
before the World was; and for the excellency of his Person, being more
glorious than all Angels, or Men, which get the name of Children, either by
Creation, or Adoption.

3. The Father commands; Let all the Angels of GOD adore Him. Then, 1. The
Father communicates to Christ, as his own Nature and Godhead, by Generation;
so also his own Glory, by commanding the creatures to adore him. 2. What the
creatures adore, they acknowledge, by adoration, to be GOD; so GOD esteems.
3. And Christ is the Angels GOD, because they must adore Him.

Verse. 7. And of the Angels He says, Who makes His Angels Spirits, and His
Ministers, a flame of fire. He makes his Angels Spirits, etc. PSALM. 104* 5.
THEN, 1. GOD made not the Angels, to get any part of Christ's rowme in the
Churches worship; but to serve Christ, as lowly as any of the meanest
creatures. 2. And the Angels, indeed, are as ready to do so, and as swift
and active in their service, as the Winds, and fire-flaughts.

Verse. 8. But unto the Son He says, Thy Throne, O GOD, is for ever and
ever: a Scepter of Righteousness, is the Scepter of Thy Kingdom.

Verse. 9. Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity: therefore, GOD,
even Thy GOD, has anointed Thee, with the Oil of Gladness, above Thy
Fellows.

1. BY this place, cited out of PSALM. 45.7. it is evident, that the PSALM 45.
is a Song of the mystical Marriage of CHRIST and his Church: and in this
Passage a number of notable Doctrines, concerning Christ, are poynted at. 1.
He is called GOD, and so is fit to reconcile us to GOD; able, and
all-sufficient, to accomplish our Salvation: a Rock, to lean unto. 2. A King
enthroned, not only over the World; but, in a gracious manner, over the
Church, which he marries to himself in this PSALM: and therefore shall his
Church have Laws, and Direction, and Protection, from him. 3. He has a
Throne for ever and ever: and therefore shall his Church, which is his
Kingdom, endure for ever and ever. 4. He has a Scepter, to rule with: and
therefore, power and authority, to take order with his Subjectes, and with his
enemies also. 5. His Scepter, is a Scepter of Righteousness; because he can
not abuse his power, to do wrong to any, but will do right to all; yea, and
lead on his Subjects, to Righteousness of Faith, to justify them before GOD;
and Righteousness of Conversation, to adorn them before Men.

2. He loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity.] And therefore, 1. His
Scepter can not be sweyed but righteouslie. 2. And so must his subjectes set
themselves to do, if they will please him.

3. Therefore, Christ's God has anointed him, with the Oil of Gladness, above
his fellows. Then, 1. As Christ is God himself, so also is he Man under God,
in regard of his Manhead and Office therein. 2. And God is his God by
Covenant: Christ, as Man, is confederate with God. 3. And he has FELLOWS in
the Covenant: that is, others of mankind, with whom he is part-taker of
flesh and blood, Fellow-brethren, and Coheyres, Shares-men in all the Fathers
Goods with him. 4. He is anointed, with the Oil of Gladness; furnished with
the Spirit that brings joye unto him, and all his subjects, who get conveyed
unto them, by Christ, Righteousness, and Peace, and joye in the holy Ghost.
5. He is anointed above his fellows. The rest of the confederate Saynctes are
anointed also; yet, by measure, receive they the Spirit. But Christ is anointed
above them: the Spirit is not given to him by measure; but to dwell bodily, or
substantiallie, that we of his fullness may all receive, Grace for Grace.

4. Because he loves Righteousness, etc. Therefore he is anointed. Then,
The righteousness of Christ, is the procuring, and meritorious cause, of this
joye to him, and his Subjectes, Fellows in the Covenant.

Verse. 10. And Thou, LORD, in the beginning, have laid the Foundation of the
Earth: and the Heavens are the Works of Thine Hands.

Verse. 11. They shall perish, but Thou remaynest: and they all shall wax old,
as does a Garment.

Verse. 12. And as a Vesture shall Thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed: but Thou art the same, and Thy Years shall not fail.

1. ANother Testimony of Christ, from PSALM. 102.25.26. wherein he is
expresselie called, 1. JEHOVAH, GOD in essence, the same GOD with the Father,
and the holy Ghost; who gives Being to the creatures, and Performance to the
Promises. 2. Who laid the Foundation of the Earth* etc. and so Creator of
Heaven and Earth. 3. And, by consequence, who can create in us a right Spirit,
and make us, of naughty sinners, Sons.

2. They shall perish, wax old, and be changed. Then, The Heavens and the
Earth, now subject to corruption, shall both not continue; and yet they shall
not utterly be abolished, but changed, into an incorruptible estate, for man's
cause, Romans 8*21.

3. Christ remains, and is the same, and his Years fail not. Then, 1.
CHRIST is eternal: and our Mediator can not be amissing, can not die. 2.
Constant, and immutable; and can not change his purpose of love, to his called
Ones, whatsoever changes befall them. And this is the Rock of the Churches
Comfort, when she looks to her own frayltie, and changeableness.

Verse. 13. But to which of the Angels said He at any time, Sit on My Right
Hand, until I make Thine Enemies Thy Foote-stoole? Psalm. cx. 1. TO which of
the Angels said he?] He asks for Scripture, to show what is due to Angels.
Then, 1. The Scripture must determine what is due to Angels, and other
creatures; what is to be thought of them, and done to them also. 2. And no
word in Scripture does countenance the giving of the glory of the Mediator,
to any Angel.

2. The Father has said to Christ, Sit Thou on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy Foote-stoole.] THEN, 1. Christ's Kingdom will not want
enemies. 2. Yea, his enemies shall be such, as there shall be need of divine
wisdom, and power, to overcome them. 3. GOD professes himself Party,
against all the enemies of Christ's Church and Kingdom. 4. GOD will put them
at under, piece and piece; and altogether at length. 5. Their opposition. and
overthrow, shall serve to glorify Christ's Kingdom, and Governament: they
shall be his Foote-stoole. 6. In the mean time of this Battle, Christ, in
his own Person, shall continue equal in Glory, and Majesty, with the
Father; beholding the Victory brought about; and bringing it about, with the
Father, unto his Soldiers comfort.

Verse. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth, to minister for
them who shall be Heirs of Salvation? 1. THE Angels are all ministering
Spirits.] THEN, 1. Angels are not bodies; but their substance is invisible. 2.
They are, all of them, even these that are called Archangels, the greatest of
them, but servantes to Christ; and none of them must have their Master's
honor: that is, any religious worship of prayer, or invocation, made to them.

2. They are sent forth, for Service, or Ministering.] THEN, Their employment
is about God's Children, to attend us, and serve us, at Christ's direction:
not to be served by us, by any devotion.

3. Christ's Subjects are called Heirs of Salvation.] THEN, 1. They are
Sons. 2. And what they get, is by Heyrship, by virtue of their Adoption, and
Sonneship; not by merit of their works. 3. And they shall surely get
Salvation, as an Heritage; never to be taken from them.

The Sum of Chap. II.
FRom the former Doctrine he infers; seeing Christ is so glorious, let his
Gospel be steadfastlie believed, Verse. 1. For if the disobedience of the Law,
given by the Ministry of Angels, was punished, Verse. 2. Far more the
disobedience of the Gospel, so gloriously confirmed, Verse. 3.4. For Christ is
greater than the Angels, even as Man, and has all things in subjection to
him, Verse. 5. As David witnesses, speaking of elected Men, with their Head,
the Man Christ, Verse. 6.7.8. And, albeit we see not that subjection yet fully
accomplished, Verse. 8. Yet it is begun in Christ's personal exaltation. And,
for his short humiliation, under the estate of Angels, by suffering, we must
not stumble: For, it is both glorious to himself, and profitable for us, Verse.
9. For, God's glory required, that our salvation should be wrought by
sufferinges of the Mediator, Verse. 10. And, to this end he behoved to be
part-taker of our nature, as was foretold, Verse. 11.12.13. That he might take
on our due punishment; that is, Death, Verse. 14. And deliver his own from the
fear thereof, Verse. 15. And herein we have a Privilege above the Angels, in
that he took on our nature, and not theirs, Verse. 16. And, by his
sufferinges, a ground of so much greater Comfort in Him, Verse. 17.18.

The Doctrine of Chap. II.
Verse. 1. Therefore, we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
which we have heard; lest at any time we should let them slip. 1. THerefore,
we ought to give heed, etc.] From the Excellency of Christ's Person, he
urges the Belief of his Doctrine. THEN, 1. CHRIST must be esteemed of, as
becomes the Excellency of His Person. 2. The way how CHRIST will be
respected of us, is by respecting His Doctrine. And the Excellency of His
Person, should procure our reverend receiving of His Word, and steadfast
holding of it.

2. He will have us to take heed, lest we should let it slip. The word is
borrowed from rent and leking Vessels, or sandy ground. THEN, 1. The Gospel
is a precious Liquor, worthy to be well kept. And we, of our selves, are
as rent Vessels, ready to let it slip, when we have heard it; or like sandy
ground, which keeps not the rain.

3. For this we ought to give the more earnest heed.] THEN, The Conscience of
the worth of CHRIST, and His Gospel, and of our own unfitness to retain it,
should sharpen our Vigilancie, and Attendance, to keep it: else, we will
doubtless let it slip.

4. He says not, lest shortly; but, lest at any time.] THEN, It is not
sufficient to believe the Word for a while, and for a while to remember it: but
we must gripe it so, as never to quyte i^ by misregarde, or misbeliefe. For,
Faith, and love of the Truth, is the good memory that specially he
requires here.

Verse. 2. For, if the word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, and every
transgression, and disobedience, received a just recompense of reward. 1. He
reasons from the Law spoken by Angels. THEN, The Angels were employed in
giving of the Law; they did blow the Trumpet; they, from GOD, uttered the Word
to Moses.

2. The word spoken by them, was steadfast.] THEN, What GOD delivers by the
Ministry of Messengers, is authorized, and ratified, by GOD.

3. Every transgression was punished. THEN, The punishment of transgressors
of His Law, is a proof of GOD'S authorizing the Doctrine.

4. He calls the Punishment, a just Recompense.] THEN, There is no evil
befalls sinners, more than they do deserve: None has cause to complain of
injustice.

Verse. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which, at
the first, began to be spoken by the LORD, and was confirmed unto us, by them
that heard Him. 1. HOw shall we escape?] The Apostle joyneth himself with
them in the Threatening. THEN, So should Preachers threaten their people, as
willing to vnderlye the same punishment, except they flee the sin, for which
they threaten others.

2. He reasons from the punishment of the Law breaking, to prove the
punishment of misbelieving the Gospel. THEN, 1. The not-embracing of the
Gospel, is a greater sin, than the breach of the Law. The despysing of
Forgiveness, is much worse nor the making of the fault. 2. Examples of
judgment upon Transgressors of the Law, are Evidences of greater judgementes
to come on the misregarders of the Gospel.

3. He calls the Gospel, so great a Salvation; because of the free Offer of
Remission of sins, and eternal Life, in it. THEN, The greatness of the
Benefit to be gotten by the Gospel, aggreageth the sin of the misregarders
of it.

4. He says not, If we reject, deny, or persecute the Gospel; but, if we
neglect.] THEN, The neglect of the Doctrine of the Gospel, the careless
receiving of it, the not-studying to know it, is sufficient to draw down
heavier judgementes, than ever fell on the breakers of the Law; albeit a man
be not an Vnder-myner, or open Enemy, to the Gospel.

5. He descrybeth the Gospel, to be that Doctrine which Christ himself
preached, and his Apostles, from him. THEN, We are not bound to believe any
more for Gospel, than that which is made clear unto us by His Apostles word.
And the misregarding of other doctrine, which is not conveyed so from Him,
falls not under the Threatening.

6. He marketh the Apostles certayntie, of what they have delivered unto us,
in that they were eare-witnesses of his Doctrine. THEN, The more certayntie the
Apostles had from Christ of their Doctrine, the surer is the groundwork of
our Belief, and the greater is the contempt done to Christ in their Message,
by unbelief.

Verse. 4. GOD also bearing them witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and
with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the holy Ghost, according to His own
Will? 1. He says, GOD bare witness to the Apostles Doctrine, by Signs and
Wonders. THEN, 1. What the Apostles have spoken from CHRIST, they spoke not
alone, but GOD with them, witnessed with them. 2. The proper use of Miracles,
and extraordinary Gifts powered out in the Apostolic times, was to testify,
that the Apostles doctrine was divine Truth. Those, then, must be lying
wonders, which are alleged for confirming any doctrine beside theirs.

2. The distribution of the Gifts of the holy Ghost, was according to his
own will; not as possibly the Apostles would have carved, either to
themselves, or others, in the nature of the gift, or measure of it. THEN, The
Apostles were so employed in the working of Miracles, as it was evident, even
then, that not they, but GOD was the Worker of them, while He was seen to
follow His own Will therein; and not man's carving, in distributing His Gifts.
And, the more GOD'S overruling Will was seen in the Miracles then, the more
confirmation have we of that Doctrine now.

Verse. 5. For, unto the Angels has He not put in subjection the World to
come, whereof we speak. 1. He calls the World under the Kingdom of the
Messiah, The World to come: first, to put a difference betwixt the estate of
the World considered as under Sin, and under the Messiah. For, as it is under
Sin, it is said of it, Old things are past away, 2. COR. 5.27. Es. 43.19.
The creature is waxing old, and running to ruin. But under the Messiah it is
said of it, Behold, I make all things new, 2. COR. 5.17. The creature is
lifting up its head, and waiting for the day of liberation from Vanity, and
the manifestation of the Sons of GOD, ROMANS 8.19. THEN, The Kingdom of the
Messiah makes another World, in effect, of that which was of old; changing
the holding, and nature, and use, of all things, to His Subjectes. For, a man,
ere he come in to Christ, is GOD'S enemy; and to him all things in the
world are enemies, the Host and Soldiers of his dreadful Judge. But, after
a man is made Christ's Subject, they turn all to be his Friends, and his
Father's Servantes, working altogether for his good. That is another, and a New
World indeed.

2. Next, it ie called the World to come; because, albeit this change began
with the work of Grace, before Christ came, yet was it nothing in comparison
of the World to come, under the Messiah. And, that which is now under the
Gospel, is little or nothing, in comparison of that Glorious Change of the
nature and use of all things, unto Christ's Subjectes, which is to be
revealed at his last coming. THEN, Whatsoever thing we have hitherto found to
our good, since we knew Christ, it is but little to what shall be: our World
is but to come, 1. COR. 15.19.

3. The World is put in subjection to Christ, that be may dispose of it at
his pleasure. THEN, Christ is twyse Soveraygne LORD of the World: once* as
Creator; again, as Mediator, in his Manhead, to make all the ereatures in
Heaven and Earth serve, ^ill they, will they, to farther the work of full
Redemption, which He has undertaken.

4. He excludes the Angels from this honor. THEN, In Christ's Kingdom the
Angels are in subjection to Christ, for the good of his Subjectes, no less nor
Sheep and Oxen, as the Psalm says; and not to be adored with him, as
Soveraygnes, over us.

Verse. 6. But one, in a certain place, testified, saying, What is Man, that
Thou art myndfull of him? or, the son of Man, that Thou visitest him?

Verse. 7. Thou made him a little lower than the Angels: Thou crownedst him
with Glory and Honor; and did set him over the works of Thine Hands.

1. Being to prove, by Scripture, his purpose, be cites neither Book, nor
Chapter, but the words which are of the eight Psalm, and fourth Verse.

THEN, The Apostle will have the Church so well acquaynted with Text of
Scripture, that at the hearing of the words, they might know where it is
written, though neither Book nor Verse were cited.

2. The Prophet looking on Man, even on Christ's Manhead, wherein he was
humbled, he wondereth to see man's nature so highly dignified, above all
creatures. THEN, 1. The baseness of man's natural being, compared with other
more glorious creatures, makes GOD'S love to us above all other creatures* so
much the more wonderful. 2. Christ's Humiliation, and Exaltation, were both
foreseen, and revealed, by the Prophets.

Verse. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. For, in that
He put all in subjection under him, He left nothing that is not put under
him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. 1. He proves, that
Angels are in subjection to Christ, because the Text of the Psalm says, All
is put in subjection: and so neither Angels, nor other creatures, are excepted.
THEN, 1. For understanding of the meaning of Scripture, it is necessary to
consider, not only what it says expresslie, but also what it says by
consequence of sound reason. 2. And, whatsoever is rightly deduced by evidence
of sound reason of the words of Scripture, is the meaning of the Scripture, as
if it were spoken expresselie.

2. He says, There is nothing left that is not put under Christ. THEN, Not
good Angels only, but all Spirits, and all that they can do also, are
subject to Christ; and he can make them, ^ill they, will they, contribute to
the furtherance of his own Purpose, for the good of his Subjects, and hurt of
his foes.

3. Because Christ's enemies are still troubling his Kingdom, he moves a
doubt, saying, We see not yet all things put under him. THEN, 1. The troubles
of Christ's Subjectes, hinder the natural mind to perceive the Glory of
Christ's Advancement. 2. Carnal reason, the proctor of miss-beliefe, will
admit no more of Divine Truth, nor it is capable of, by sense.

Verse. 9. But we see JESUS, who was made a little lower than the Angels: for
the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor; that He, by the Grace
of GOD, should taste Death for every man. 1. He answers the doubt, saying,
We see JESUS crowned with Glory and Honor: and so a course taken for putting
all that oppose him, farther and farther under him. THEN, ^. The subjection of
all things to Christ's Throne, can not be seen, but in the Exaltation of his
Person. 2. When we see his Person exalted, to such high Dignity in Heaven, it
is easy to see him put all at under that ryseth up against him. 3. That which
may be taken up of Christ, partly by his Word and Doctrine, partly by his
miraculous Works, and extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, powered out upon the
Primitive Church, partly by his ordinary and powerful working upon the
Souls of his own, since that time, unto this day, humbling and comforting,
changing and reforming, men's hearts and lives: I say, these Evidences of his
power, do make a spiritual Eye, in a manner, to see JESUS, the Worker of
these Works, crowned with Glory and Honor.

2. He meets another doubt, arysing from the abasement of Christ, in his
Sufferinges, and Death; to which he answers in the words of the Psalm:
first* that it was fore-tolde in that same Psalm, that he was to be made, for
a little, lower than the Angels; to wit, by suffering of Death. THEN, 1. The
Cross of Christ, is a ready stumbling Block, for a carnal mind: else, what
needed the removing of the scandal? 2. It is true, indeed, Christ, in his
Himiliation, was abased under the Angels, and emptied. 3. This abasement was
but a little, and for a short time. 4. It was fore-tolde in the Psalm that
speaks of his Exaltation. 5. If we look to the Scripture foretelling, we
shall not stumble at Christ's Humiliation.

3. He gives a farther answer, by showing the ^^de of Christ's Suffering, to
be for our cause, in the favor of GOD to us, That he should, by the Grace of
GOD, taste Death, for every one of us.

THEN, 1. Christ's suffering was not for his own deserving, but for ours; and,
therefore, should be glorious in our eyes. 2. Every Believer, and elect
soul, has interest in that Death of his: and so every man bound to love him,
and magnify him, for it, and to apply the fruit of it to himself. 3. This
death was but a tasting of death, because he continued but a short time under
it: for, his short suffering was so precious, that he could not be holden by
the Sorrows of Death; but Death, for a little, was sufficient: and, therefore,
should diminish no man's esteemation of him. 4. It was by the Grace of GOD that
his death, for a short, should stand for our Eternal: and, therefore,
gracious, and glorious, should these his sufferinges be esteemed by us.

Verse. 10. For, it became Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation perfect through Sufferinges. 1. ANother reason of Christ's Suffering.
This way of our saving by Christ's Sufferinges, made for the Glory of GOD, and
our Good.

THEN, When the reasons of Christ's death are seen, the scandal of his Cross
cease.

2. There is a work to do here; A great many of Sons to be brought to
Glory.

THEN, 1. All the Elect, and saved souls, are in the rank of Children. 2.
Albeit they be few in comparison of the world, yet are they, many of them,
all together. 3. There is not one of them all, who can go to Heaven, or
Salvation, but by Christ's leading, and conduct.

3. The Captain of their Salvation must be made perfect, through suffering.
THEN, 1. How perfect soever Christ be in himself, yet before his suffering
he lacked one thing, which his Office, toward us, required; to wit,
experimental suffering of such sorrows as his soldiers and followers are
subject unto. 2. When his sufferinges were ended, he was perfectly sitted to
comfort us, seeing he found our sorrows in himself sometime.

4. He says, it became GOD, for whom, and by whom, are all things, that the
matter should be so brought about. THEN, 1. All things are for God's Glory
at the end: and so should the manner of our salvation be also. 2. All things
are by God's Hand and Power brought about: and reason too, that he dispose of
the means of our salvation, as he pleases. 3. This way became God most of
any: It brought him greatest Glory, by the shame, sorrow, and death, of one,
to bring Glory, and joye, and Life, to many.

Verse. 11. For, both He that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all
of one: For which cause He is not ashamed to call them Brethren. 1. IF any
should farther ask, how could he die? or, how could Justice accept him in our
stead? be answers, Because he is one of our kind, and nature. THEN, 1.
There is a natural Band betwixt Christ and his Followers. They are of the same
stock, of the same natural substance. 2. Christ's natural Band with us,
makes him a direct entresse to redeem us.

2. He calls Christ, him that sanctifies; and the Believers, they who are
sanctified.]

THEN, 1. The Band of nature betwixt Christ and men, is reckoned unto those
only who are sanctified: with none other will Christ reckon Kindred. 2.
Therefore, they must study to Holiness, that would claim Kindred to Christ.
3. The sanctification which it behooves us to have, must proceed from Christ:
no holiness, until a man be in him.

3. He says, Christ is not ashamed to call the Sanctified, Brethren.] THEN*
1. As Christ has dimitted himself to our nature, so also to the styles of
consanguinitie with us. 2. Christ is as kyndlie affectioned to his Followers,
as ever Brother was to another: he will not misken his own, albeit unworthy.
3. That which may serve to our glory and comfort, Christ will think it no
disgrace to himself.

Verse. 12. Saying, I will declare Thy Name unto my Brethren: In the midst of
the Church will I sing Praise unto Thee. He proves that he calls us
Brethren from PSALM. 22. Verse. 22. The Messiah, there, takes upon him, to
preach to Men, and to praise the Father. THEN, 1. With our nature, Christ took
on also the Yoke of the Exercyses of Religion. 2. He joyneth with us, in the
Discharge of them. 3. He is first in the Exercise: not only because he
discharged them in his own proper person; but also because still by his
Spirit, where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he is in the
midst of them; moving, and moderating, the Spirits of his own delectable
Organes.

Verse. 13. And again, I will put my trust in Him. And again, Behold, I, and
the Children which GOD has given me. 1. THE next proof is from PSALM. 18.
Verse. 2. Where Christ, under the type of David, promises to believe in the
Father.

THEN, 1. Christ is one of the number of Believers, one of the Covenant of
Grace, confederate by Faith: and, therefore, he behoved to be a man to this
end. 2. Then have we, in the sense of our unbelief, the comfort of the
soundness and strength of Christ's believing, as well as of his other
Perfections.

2. The third proof is from ISAY 8. Verse. 18. Wherein Christ, under the type
of the Prophet Isaiah, presents himself, with his chosen Children, before
the Father. THEN, 1. Christ is our Father also, and we his Children. 2. We
are given to him of the Father. 3. We are not presented before the Father,
without our Mediator Christ. 4. Christ, and we his little ones, joined
together, and separated from the world, are a pleasant sight, for the Father
to behold.

Verse. 14. Forasmuch, then, as the Children are part-takers of flesh and blood;
He also Himself likewise took part of the same; that through death, He
might destroy him that had the power of death; that is, the Devil. 1. He
gives farther reasons of his Incarnation. And first, he behoved by death to
destroy the Devil, that had the power of Death: and so behoved to be a Man,
that he might die.

THEN, 1. Sinners, without Christ, are under the sentence of death, temporal,
and eternal. 2. Satan has power of Death, as the Burrio has power over the
Pit and Gallows, at death to take them away to torment, who are not
delivered from his power. 3. Christ has destroyed Satan's power, and tyranny,
in this point, in behalf of all his Elect, and true Believers. 4. The way how
Christ has overcome Satan, is, by his own death, ransoming his own. 5. Frae
death behoved to be the way, it behoved also Christ to be a mortal man, as
well as God, that he might die.

2. Again he says, Christ took part of flesh and blood with the Children:
that is, with the Elect given to him.] THEN, 1. Love to the Elect, made the
Son of GOD come down, and make himself a Man also. 2. CHRIST, in his humane
nature, is as kyndlie a Man, as any of the Elect; having flesh, and blood, and
bones, as well as we. His flesh and blood is not only like to ours; but is a
part of our substance; who is come of the same stock of Adam and Eve, as
surely as ours: and not made either by creation of nothing, or by
transsubstantion of some other thing, than our substance.

Verse. 15. And deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life
time subject to bondage. ANother Fruit of Christ's death, is the deliverie of
Believers, from the bondage of the fear of death, wherein they do lie before
Belief.

THEN, 1. There is a natural fear of Death, and the Devil, and Hell, rooted
in all men, all ways: albeit not aye felt, yet easily wakened. 2. This Fear
puts Men in bondage, that they dare not meditate on Death, or GOD'S
Judgment, or Hell, as deserved by themselves. 3. CHRIST'S death delivers his
Subjects from the danger of this evil, and from the bondage of this fear
also. 4. None but a Child of Christ's, can have solid and true Cowrage
against Death: neither is there a Free Man in the world, except true
Christians.

Verse. 16. For, verily, He took not on Him the nature of Angels: But He
took on Him the seed of Abraham. He insisteth in the Doctrine of Christ's
Incarnation, because it is the ground of all our Comfort; and secludeth the
Angels from such a honor, as we have there-by. The Son of God took on him
the seed of Abraham, and not the nature of Angels, says the Apostle. THEN,
1. CHRIST has his proper subsistence, and being, in himself, before the
Incarnation; even his own Divine nature, with personal properties existing:
For, he is the Son of GOD, the second person of the Godhead, before he
took on our nature. 2. He choosed to assume our nature, for our deliverie;
and not the Angels nature, for deliverie of such as were fallen of their kind.
3. The nature that he takes on, is Man's very nature* the seed of Abraham.
4. He preventeth the personal subsistence of our nature; he assumeth the
seed of Abraham. 5. He makes an Union of our nature, with his Divine Nature.
6. The way of making the Union, is ASSVMPTION, or TAKING of our nature unto his
own; whereby, remaining the same which he was before; to wit, The son of
GOD, he joyneth our nature to himself, and becomes what he was not before;
to wit, the Son of Man. 7. He assumeth the seed of ABRAHAM, that he may be
known to be no other, but the same Messiah, which was promised by the
Prophets, to the Fathers. 8. When he has assumed Man's nature, to His Own
Divine Nature. He remains the same HE that He was before, still one
person. So CHRIST JESUS is the promised Messiah; the second person of the
Godhead; very God from everlasting, and very Man since the conception of the
Virgin Marie: before his Incarnation, having only his own Divine Nature in
his person; but now, since that time, having our nature also, personally
united with his Divine Nature, so to remain, both God and Man in one person,
for our good, for ever.

Verse. 17. Wherefore, in all things, it behooved Him to be made like unto His
Brethren; that He might be a merciful and faithful high Priest, in things
pertaining to GOD; to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. He
concludes, That Christ behooved to partake both of our nature, and punishment,
or misery; that we might ceceaue the more good of Him.

1. First, he says, He behooved to be like his Brethren in all things:
that is, for substance of nature, for natural properties, for sinnelesse
infirmiteis, for fellowship in Temptations, and miseries, and in all things
whatsoever our Good did require his making like unto us. THEN, 1. They who
imagine, and worship a Christ, not like to us in all these things, wherein the
Scripture pronounces him like unto us, do misstake the true Christ, and
worship a false. 2. It is very necessary that we conceive rightly of
Christ's person, seeing the Scripture does press the knowledge thereof upon
us, so particularly.

2. He shows the end of his conforming himself unto us, to be, That he
might be a faithful and merciful high Priest. THEN, 1. As Christ took on
our nature; so, in our nature, he took on a special Office of Priesthood,
to do us good. 2. In this his Office, he is faithful, and will neglect
nothing, night nor day, that may help us. 3. In our slippes, and over-sightes,
he will be merciful unto us. 4. Seeing he has conformed himself to us for
this end, we may take his communion of nature, and miseries, with us, for a
Pawn and Pledge, to assure us, that he will both pity and help us.

3. The extent of his Priesthood, he makes, in general, to be, In all
things pertaining to God; and, in special, To make Reconciliation for the
sins of the people. THEN, 1. If GOD have any thing to do with us, any
Direction, or Comfort, or Blessing, to bestow upon us, it must come by our high
Priest, JESUS, unto us. 2. If he command us in any thing, or be to make
covenant with us, or have controversy to debate with us, our high Priest will
answer for us. 3. If we have any thing to do with GOD, to seek any good
thing of him, or deprecate any evil, or to offer any Offering, of Praise, or
Service, Christ's Office stretches it self to all this, to do for us. 4. In
special, as our sins daily deserve, and provoke, GOD'S anger, so does
Christ's Priesthood pacify GOD'S wrath, and work Reconciliation to us.

Verse. 18. For, in that HE Himself has suffered, being tempted, He is able
to succor them that are tempted. 1. He shows Christ's experience, to be
both of Sufferinges and Temptations; that whether of the two annoy us, we may
get Comfort for either, or both, from him. THEN, 1. There are two Evils, which
attend the Children of GOD, to annoy them; to wit, Troubles, and Sin; or,
Sin, and Misery. 2. Christ has experience, albeit not of Sin, in his own
person; yet of temptation to sin, and of suffering of trouble.

2. He applies the Comfort, expresselie to the Tempted. THEN, 1. Men in
trouble have need of Comfort, and Relief: but men under temptation to sin,
much more. 2. Yea, Sin, and temptation to sin, is more grievous to a true
Child of God, when he sees matters rightly, than any trouble. 3. No bearing
out under trials, or standing in temptations, but by succor and help from
Christ. 4. Christ's experience of temptation, may assure us, both of his
ability, and willingness, to succor such as seek Relief from him, In this
case.

The Sum of Chap. III.
THerefore, weygh well what a one CHRIST is and prefer none before him, Verse.
1. For, he is as faithful in his Message, for changing of the typical
Priesthood, as Moses was in his m^ssage, when he delivered it, Verse. 2. And so
much more honorable than Moses, as the Builder is over the Stones builded,
Verse. 3.4. And Moses was faithful, as a servant, in the Church, Verse. 5. But
Christ, as Son, and Lord, over the Church, to dispose of the service thereof,
at his pleasure, Verse. 6. Therefore, beware of Old Isreal's hard heart, lest
you be debarred of GOD'S Rest, Verse. 7.8.9.10.11. Beware of like unbelief: for
it is the ground of Apostacy, Verse. 12. And do your best, to preserve others
from it also, Verse. 13. For, Perseverance in Faith, is necessary to Salvation,
Verse. 14. For, David's words do prove, That there were some, albeit not all
hearers of GOD'S Word of old, that did provoke him. Verse. 15.16. And, who were
these, but such as he punished? Verse. 17. And, whom punished he, but
Unbelievers? Verse. 18. So Misbeliefe debarred them out of GOD'S Rest of old,
and will also do the like yet, if men continue in it, Verse. 19.

The Doctrine of Chap. III.
Verse. 1. Wherefore, holy Brethren, part-takers of the Heavenly Calling,
consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, CHRIST JESUS. 1. AFter
he has taught them somewhat more of CHRIST, he exhorts them, of new, to
consider of him.] THEN, 1. As we get farther light of Christ, we are bound to
farther vse-making of our light. 2. As farther is revealed unto us of Christ;
so must we set our mind on work, to ponder, and weygh, what is revealed:
that the matter may sink deeper in our mind, and in our heart. 3. Except we
shall consider, seriously, what is spoken of Christ, we can make no
profitable use of the Doctrine: For, such high Mysteries are not soon taken
up; and, the heart is not soon wrought upon, so as to receive impression of
his Excellency, except after due consideration.

2. He calls Christ Jesus, The high Priest, and the Apostle, of our
Profession.] The high Priesthood, was the highest Calling in the Jewish
Church: The Apostleship, the highest Calling in the Christian Church. CHRIST is
here styled by both.

THEN, CHRIST has enclosed in his Office, the Perfection and Dignities of the
highest Callinges, both in the Jewish, and Christian Church. Those Dignities
which were divyded in men, or conjoined in Him; in men, by way of ministerial
employment, under Him; in Christ, by original Authority, above all.

3. He calls the Christian Religion, Our Profession, or Confession, THEN, It
is the nature of Christian Religion, not to be smoothered; but, to be openly
brought forth, confessed, and avowed, in word and deed; to the Glory of
Chri, who is the Author thereof.

4. He styleth these Hebrews to whom he writes, Holy Brethren, Part-takers
of the Heavenly Calling. THEN, 1. Christians do not possess their
Prerogatives without a warrandable Title. They have a Calling thereto. 2. The
Calling is Heavenly, because GOD, by his Word and Spirit, calls men to the
communion of his Grace and Glory, by forsaking of themselves, and things
earthly; and following Christ, in an holy conversation: all is Heavenly
here. 3. Christians are part-takers alyke of this Vocation: that is, have
alyke Warrant, and Obligation, to follow him that calls them: albeit all do
not alyke follow the Calling. 4. They are Brethren amongst themselves, for
their Adoption: albeit some weaker, some stronger. 5. And holy is this
Brotherhood: that is, Spiritual; and so, Superior to Civil, or Natural, or
earthly Bands, whatsoever.

Verse. 2. Who was faithful to Him that appointed Him: as also Moses was
faithful in all His House. 1. BEcause the Jews did too highly esteem of
Moses, in appoynting of the Legal Service; and not so highly of Christ as
became, in abrogating thereof; the apostle compares Moses and Christ; giving
to Moses, his due place of a Servant; and to Christ, the place due to the
Master.

THEN, 1. It is no new thing, that people enclyne so to esteem of good men's
authority, as to forget to give Christ his own rowme. 2. The way to help
this, Is, so to esteem of GOD'S Servantes, Fathers, or Councils, more, or
fewer, as the esteemation that men have of them, derogate nothing from the
estoemation due to Christ.

2. In special, he makes all the poyncts of Moses commendations, duly
deserved poyncts of Christ's commendation. 1. Did Moses office reach it self
to all the house of God, under the Law, and all the service of it? So did
Christ's Office reach to all the Church of God, and all the service of it,
under the Gospel. 2. Was Moses appoyncted, to give out what he delivered? So
was Christ appoyncted to institute what he did institute, and abrogate what
he did abrogate. 3. Was Moses faithful to Him who appoyncted him, in all the
matters of God's house; keeping back nothing that he was directed to reveal?
So is Christ faithful to the Father, who did appoynct him in like manner.

THEN, like as if any man should have added or paired, chopped or changed, the
Ordinances of GOD'S House, under the Law, it had been an imputation, either
unto GOD, of not sufficient directing his Church; or unto Moses, and the
Prophets, of unfaithful discharge of their duty in the Church of the Old
Testament. So is it alyke imputation to GOD and CHRIST, if any shall add or
pair, choppe or change, the Ordinance of GODS Church under the New Testament.

Verse. 3. For, this Man was counted worthy of more Glory than Moses; in as
much as He who has builded the House, has more Honor than the House. 1.
HAving equalled Christ unto Moses, he now prefers Christ to Moses.

THEN, CHRIST is not rightly esteemed of, except he be preferred as far
above all his servantes, as the Father has counted him worthy of more Glory
than his servants.

2. He prefers Christ above Moses, as the Builder is above the house. THEN,
As no stone in the house, nor all the house togther, is comparable in honor
with the Builder of the house: So the honor and authority of no particular
member of the Church, nor of the whole Catholic Church together, is
comparable to the honor and authority of Christ. Yea, as far as the Builder
is above the house in honor, as far is Christ's authority above the
Churches authority, which is his house.

Verse. 4. For, every house is builded by some man: but He that built all
things, is GOD. He prooveth Christ to be the Builder of the Church, because
some builder it must have, as every house has. But only GOD, that builds
all things, is able for this work: Therefore, Christ, who builds all
things, is the Builder of it.

THEN, 1. Whatsoever employment a man get of GOD, in edifying of the Church,
yet* in proper speech, he is a part of the Building, builded by another. 2.
The honor of building the Church, belongs to GOD alone properly. 3. The
building of the Church, is a work requyring Omnipotency in the Builder: For,
to make a Saynct of a Sinner, is as hard, as to make a Man of the dust of the
earth, or of nothing.

Verse. 5. And Moses, verily, was faithful in all His House, as a Servant, for
a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after. MOses was
faithful, as a Servant.] Now, a Servant's part, is to do and say by
direction; and not of his own authority. THEN, He is the faythfullest
Servant, that does least in his own authority, and most attends unto the
direction of GOD, bears testimony to what GOD has commanded, and teaches
not for Doctrine, the precepts of men.

Verse. 6. But CHRIST, as a Son over His own House, whose House are we, if
we hold fast the Confidence, and the rejoicing of the Hope, firm, unto the
end. MOses was faithful, as a Servant; but Christ, as a Son, over his own
house.]

THEN, 1. As much difference betwixt Christ's authority in the Church, and
men's, how excellent soever; as betwixt the authority of the Master and the
Servantes. 2. CHRIST'S authority is native over His Church, by virtue of His
Sonneship: by His Eternal Generation of the Father He has this Prerogative.
3. The Church is CHRIST'S own House; and He may dispose of it, and of the
Service thereof, as pleases Him. Men, who are but servantes, must change none
of the Ordinances of GOD'S Worship in it. But CHRIST may change the Ordinances
of His own Worship: and, therefore, alter the ordinances of Levi, and appoynct
a more simple form of external worship, in place thereof.

2. He expounds this House, to be the Company of true Believers. THEN, 1.
The Church of GOD, under the Law, and under the Gospel, are one Church, one
House of GOD in substance; and all the Faithful, then and now, lyuelie Stones
of this House. 2. The Church have GOD dwelling, and conversing* and familiarlie
manifesting Himself amongst them.

3. He adds to a Condition, If we hold fast the Confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope, firm, unto the end. That is, If we continue steadfast
in the Faith, inwardly gryping the promised Glory, by hope; and outwardly
avowing, by confession, Christ's Truth: whereby he neither imports the
possibility of final Apostacy of the Saynctes; nor yet myndeth he to weaken
the Confidence of Believers, more nor he doubts of his own perseverance, or
myndeth to weaken his own faith: for he joyneth himself with them, saying,
If we hold fast. But writing to the number of the Visible Church, of whom
some not being sound, might fall away, and by their example, make some weak
ones, though sound, stumble, for a time, to the dishonor of the Gospel; he
puts a difference betwixt true Believers, who do indeed persever, and
tyme-servers, who do not persever; to whom be does not grant, for the
present, the Privilege of being GOD'S House.

This conditional speech, then, IMPORTS, 1. That some Professoures in the
Visible Church, may make Defection, and not persever to the end. 2. That such
as shall make final Defection hereafter, are not a part of GOD'S House, for
the present, howsoever they be esteemed. 3. That true Believers must take
warning, from the possibility of some Professoures Apostacy; to look the
better to themselves, and to take a better grip of CHRIST, who is able to keep
them. 4. That true Believers both may, and should, hold fast their Confidence,
unto the end: yea, and must aim to do so, if they would persever. 5. That
true Believers have ground and Warrant, in the Promises of the Gospel, both to
hope for Salvation, and to rejoice, and glory, in that Hope, as if it were
present Possession. 6. That the more a man aymeth at this solid Confidence,
and gloriation of Hope, the more evidence he gives, that he is of the true
House of GOD.

Verse. 7. Wherefore, as the holy Ghost says, To day, if ye will hear His
Voice. 1. IN the words of the Psalm. xcv. verse. 9. he exhorts them, to beware
of hardening their heart in unbelief. The words of the PSALM are called
here, The Saying of the holy Ghost; and, of the GOD of Israel, 2. SAM.
23.2.3.

THEN, 1. The authority of the Scripture, is not of man, but of the holy
Ghost. 2. The Scriptures are no dumb letter, but the voice of the holy Ghost,
who by them speaks. 3. The holy Ghost, is God, the Inspirer of the Prophets,
that wrote the Scripture. 4. The holy Ghost, is a distinct person of the
Godhead, from the Father, and the Son; exercing the proper actions of a
person; inspiring the Prophets, dyting the Scriptures, and speaking to the
Church.

2. In the words of the Exhortation, To day, if ye will hear His Voice,
harden not your hearts; OBSERVE, 1. That while men have the offer of
Salvation, and the Word preached unto them, it is their day. 2. That by the
outward hearing, GOD requires the heart to be brought down, and mollified. 3.
That He requires present yielding, To day, while He calls, without delay:
because we can not be sure how long GOD will spare, or continue His offer,
beyond this present. 4. He that studieth not, to yield his heart, to believe,
and obey, GOD'S Word, sounding in his ears, hardens his heart. For, what is
it else, not to harden their heart, but heartily to believe, and give
obedience?

Verse. 8. Harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation, in the day of
temptation, in the Wilderness.

Verse. 9. When your fathers tempted me, prooved me, and saw my Works, forty
years.

He prooveth the danger of this sin, in the example of their fathers: As in
the day of provocation, when your fathers tempted me, EXODUS xvij.7. Whence WE
LEARN,

1. That the ill of Sin is not seen, till the consequences thereof be
seen, what provocation it gives to GOD, and what wrath it draws down on
the sinner. 2. It is safest, to take a view of our danger, by any sin, in
the person of others, who have fallen in the like, and have been punished. 3.
The sins that our Predecessoures have been given unto, we should, most
carefully, watch against. 4. That GOD'S Bounty, Patience, and Means of
Grace, the longer they be abused, aggreageth sin the more.

Verse. 10. Wherefore, I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do
always err in their hearts; and they have not known My Ways. GOD pronounces
the Offenders, guilty; and then, gives Sentence of Doom upon them, for their
guiltiness: They err in heart, says the LORD. THEN, 1. Misbelieving and
disobeying of the Word preached, is not reckoned with GOD, for simple ignorance
of the mind; but for a wilful ignorance, and erring of the heart, which is
worse. For, the ignorance of the mind simply, is, I know not; but the error
of the heart, is, I will not know, I care not, I desire not, I love not to
know, nor obey. And such is the ignorance of those who have the Means of
Knowledge, and Reformation, and yet remain in their sins. 2. Such obstinate
ignorance, and wilful disobedience, provokes GOD to cast away the Sinner,
and not to deal any more with him.

Verse. 11. So I swear in My Wrath; They shall not enter into My Rest. FOR their
Doom, GOD debarreth them from His Rest: That is, from all the Comfortes of His
Fellowship; and gives them Torment, in stead of Rest. THEN, 1. Obstinate
Disobedientes of of the Voice of the Gospel, lie near hand final
off-cutting. 2. If GOD give over a man, to such hardness of heart, as still to
work contrary to the light of GOD'S Word, He has, appearantlie, denounced,
and sworn, to condemn, and seclude from Heaven, such a Soul. 3. It is only
such obstinate ones, as go on, hardening their heart against Admonitions of
the Word, that GOD has sworn to debar. If a man be found mourning, for his
former obstinacy, the Decree is not gone forth against him.

Verse. 12. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be, in any of you, an evil heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living GOD. 1. FRom the former Example, he
warns them, to beware of an evil heart of unbelief; and so to eschew
Apostacy. THEN, 1. Misbeliefe is the main Root of Apostacy. As Belief
draws us to an Union with GOD; so Misbeliefe makes a Separation. 2.
Misbeliefe is a special part of the hearts wickedness, bewraying the
enimitie which naturally we have against GOD, as much as any ill: For,
Misbeliefe denies to GOD the Honor of Truth, Mercy, and Goodness; and
imports Blasphemies in the contrary. 3. Misbeliefe is an ill in the heart,
making the heart yet worse and worse, where it is, and barring forth all the
Remedies which might come by Faith, to cure the heart.

2. He warns, to take heed, lest there be such an heart in any of them,
at any time.

THEN, 1. Misbeliefe is a subtle and deceitful sin, having colors, and
pretenses, a number, to hyde it; and must be watched over, lest it deceive;
and getting strength, overcome. 2. The watch must be constant, at all
occasions, lest this ill get advantage, when we are careless, and
vnattentiue, at any time. 3. Watch must be kept, as over our selves, so
also over others: lest any others misbeliefe not being marked, draw us in
the snare with them.

2. He descrybeth Apostasy, by Misbeliefe, and departing from the living GOD.

THEN, 1. Believing is a drawing near to the Living GOD, and staying with Him.
2. The loss that Misbeliefe brings, should scarre us from so fearful a
sin. 3. Departing from the true Christian Religion, is a departing from the
Living GOD, whatsoever the Apostate, or his Followers, do conceive: for GOD is
not, where Truth is not.

Verse. 13. But exhort one another, daily, while it is called, To day; lest
any of you be hardened, through the deceitfulness of sin. 1. He
prescrybeth a Remedy, to prevent this ill: to wit, That they exhort one
another, daily, while it is called, To day. That is, Beside the public
exhortation from their Preachers, that every one of them, mutuallie, confer,
and stir up one another by speeches that make for decyphring the
deceitfulness of Sin, or preventing hardness of heart, or confirming one
another in the truth of Religion, and constant profession thereof. THEN, 1.
Private Christians not only may, but should keep Christian communion amongst
themselves, and mutuallie exhort and stir up one another. 2. This is a
necessary mean of preserving people from Defection. 3. And a duty daily to
be discharged, while it is to day: that is, as often, and as long, as GOD gives
present occasion, and opportunity for it; lest a scattering come.

^. The inconvenience that way follow, if this be neglected, is, Lest any of
you be hardened, through the deceatfulnesse of Sin.

THEN, 1. There is none, even the strongest of the Flock, but they have need
of this mutual help of other private Christians. 2. Neither is there any so
base, or contemptible, but the care of their standing in the Faith, and of
their safety, belongs to all. 3. Sin has many ways, and colors,
whereby it may beguyle a man: and, therefore, we have need of more Eyes than
our own, and more Observers. 4. If it be not tymouslie discovered, it will
draw on hardness of heart, so as a man will grow senseless of it, confirmed
in the habit of it, and loath to quyte it.

3. In the former verse, he warns them, to beware of Apostasy in Religion:
and, in this verse, That they take course, that they be not hardened in any
sin in their conversation. THEN, The ready way to draw on Defection in
Religion, is Defection from a Godly Conversation. And the way to prevent
Defection in Religion, is to study to Holiness of Conversation.

Verse. 14. For, we are made part-takers of CHRIST, if we hold the beginning
of our Confidence steadfast, unto the end. To stir them up to Perseverance,
he lays a necessity of holding fast grippe of the Principles of Christian
Religion, whereby they were persuaded to become Christians: because only so,
fellowship with CHRIST is gotten. The Truth whereby they were begotten to
Christian Religion, he calls, The beginning of our Confidence: yea, and of
our Spiritual Subsistence; as the word in the Original imports. THEN, 1.
The Gospel is the beginning of our Confidence; yea, and of our Spiritual
Subsistence; of our new being that we have, as Spiritual Men, in the State
of Grace. 2. The man that renounceth the Grounds of the Gospel, and
persevereth not, was never part-taker of CHRIST. 3. Christian Religion is not a
thing that a man may say, and unsay; keep, or quyte; as Prosperity, or
Adversity; Threatninges, or Allurementes, do offer: But such as must in all
Estates, upon all Hazard, be avowed.

Verse. 15. Why lest it is said, To day, if ye will hear His Voice, harden
not your hearts, as in the Provocation.

Verse. 16. For, some, when they had heard, did provoke: how-be-it not all that
came out of Egypt by Moses.

NOw, the Apostle draws Collections from the words of the Prophet in the
PSALM, repeating the words of the Text, which speak of the Provocation of
the Fathers, verse. 15. Whereupon be infers, That there were some, at least,
hearers of the Word, which provoked GOD; albeit not all. For whose cause, David
had reason to give Advertisement to their Posterity, to beware of the like;
and the writer of the Epistle, reason to apply the same unto them, verse. 16.
THEN, 1. From the Apostle's handeling of the Text which he has in hand* all
must LEARN, Not lightly to pass Scripture* but to consider both what is said
expresselie in it, and what is imported by consequence. 2. Preachers practice
is justified, when they consider the circumstances of a Text, and do urge
duties upon their people, or teach them doctrine from the Text.

Verse. 17. But, with whom was He grieved forty years? Was it not with them
that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the Wilderness? HE observes another
thing in his Text, upon the persons with whom GOD was grieved: that, first,
they are marked, to have sinned; and afterward punished. Leaving to them to
GATHER,

That where Sin went before, the Anger of GOD would follow upon the Sin:
and, after the grieving of GOD, Judgment light upon the Sinner.

Verse. 18. And, to whom swear He, that they should not enter into His Rest*
but to them that believed not?

Verse. 19. So we see, that they could not enter in, because of unbelief.

HE has yet another Observation, upon the nature of the Sin, whereby GOD
was provoked to swear their damnation that sinned; that it was Unbelief,
verse. 18. And formallie deduceth his doctrine by consequence; That Misbeliefe
did stop the Sinners Entry into the Rest, and made the Sinner to lie under
an impossibility of entering, verse. 19. The use of which Doctrine he presses
in the next Chapter.

THEN, 1. The Apostle leaves us to gather. That above all other Sins,
Misbeliefe provokes GOD to indignation most. 2. That as long as this Sin
lies on, and gets way, it is impossible for a man to enter into GOD'S Rest.
This Sin alone is able to seclude him.

The sum of Chap. IV.
HE presses the use of the former Doctrine, saying in substance, Therefore,
be feared, to be debarred from GOD'S Rest, Verse. 1. For we have the offer of
it, as well as they; only here are the odds, They believed not, Verse. 2.
But we, who do believe, enter into a Rest, as DAVID'S words import. For
there are three Rests in the Scripture, which may be called GOD'S Rest: 1.
GOD'S Rest upon the first Sabbath: 2. The Rest of Canaan, typical: 3. The
Spiritual and true Rest of GOD'S People, in CHRIST'S Kingdom, which is a
Delyverance, and ceassing from Sin, and Misery. David does not mean of the
Rest of the Sabbath, in his Threatening; because, albeit the Work of Creation
was finished in the beginning of the World, and that Rest come and gone; yet
David speaks of another Rest after that, in the word of Threatening, Verse. 3.
That GOD'S Rest was past at the founding of the World, is plain from Moses
words, Verse. 4. After which Rest, David speaks here of another Rest, Verse.
5. Wherein seeing Unbelievers entered not, Believers must enter, Verse. 6.
Again, David means not of the Rest of Canaan: For, after they had, a long
time, dwelt in Canaan, David yet sets them a day, during which they might
enter into GOD'S Rest, Verse. 7. For, if the Rest of Canaan, which Jesus, or
Joshua, gave unto them, had been this true Rest, then David would not have
spoken of another Rest after that, Verse. 8. But speak he does. Therefore,
there is a Rest beside these, even that Spiritual Rest, proper to GOD'S
People, Verse. 9. I call this a Rest; because, when GOD'S People cease to do
their own works* and will, it is like GOD'S Rest, Verse. 10. Therefore, let us
beware to be debarred from this Rest, by Unbelief, as they were, Verse. 11.
For, GOD'S Word is as effectual now, as ever it was, to discover the lurking
Sins of the Heart, howsoever men would cloak them, Verse. 12. And GOD, with
whom we have to do, sees us thoroughly, Verse. 13. But, rather, seeing we
have so great encowragement, to get Entry through JESUS CHRIST, so Merciful
and Pitiful an High Priest, Verse. 14 15. let us be steadfast in our Faith,
and come, confidentlie, to get GOD'S Grace, to help us through all
Difficulties in the way to that full Rest, Verse. 16.

The Doctrine of Chap. IV.
Verse. 1. Let us, therefore, fear; lest a Promise being left us, of entering
into His Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. 1. IN the
Exhortation he lays down this ground, That there is a Promise of Entry to
this Rest, left unto us. THEN, 1. The Entry into GOD'S Rest is casten open to
the Christian Church, and encowragement given, by offer and promise of entry.
2. While it is to day this promise and invitation to it, is left unto us,
notwithstanding that many bygone occasions of getting good, and doing good,
be spent, and away. 3. As long as this Merciful Offer and Promise is kept to
the fore unto us. we should stir up our selves, to lay hold on it, in time.

2. Therefore, let us fear, lest any of you seem to come short of it. The
similitude is borrowed from the price of a Race. THEN, 1. A Race must be
run, ere we come to our full Rest. 2. The constant Runner to the end,
gets Rest from Sin and Misery, and a quiet Possession of Happiness, at
the Races end. 3. The Apostate, and he who by Misbeliefe breaks off his
Course, and runs not on, at may be, comes short, and attayneth not unto
it. 4. The Apostasy of some, and possibility of Apostasy of more
Professoures, should not weaken any man's Faith; but, rather, terrify him
from Misbeliefe. 5. There is a right kind of fear of perishing; to wit, such
as hinders not assurance of Faith, but, rather, serves to guarde it, and
spurreth on a man to Perseverance. 6. We must not only fear, by misbelieving
to come short; but to seem, or give any appearance of coming short.

Verse. 2. For, unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them: but, the
Word preached, did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. 1. TO make the Example the more to urge them, he says, The Gospel
was preached to them whom GOD debarred, for Misbeliefe, from His Rest. THEN,
1. The Evangell was preached in the Wilderness, for substance of Truth,
albeit not in such fullness of Doctrine, and clearness of Truth, as now. 2.
The preaching of it in clearness now, must make the Misbelievers of it, in no
less danger of being debarred from that Rest, than the old Israelites, yea,
rather, in more.

2. The cause of their debarring, is, The Word was not mixed with Faith in
them: and so profited them not.] THEN, 1. As a Medicinal Drink must have the
due Ingredientes mixed with it; so must the Word have Faith mixed with it;
joining it self with all the parts of the Truth, closely. 2. Faith can wall
with nothing, nor be mixed with any Truth, but the Word: and the Word will
not join, nor wall, nor mix, with Conceats, Opinions, Presumption, but with
Faith: that is, it will be received not as a Conjecture, or possible Truth;
but for Divine, and infallible Truth: else, it profits not. 3. Hearers of
the Word, may blame their Misbeliefe, if they get not profit. 4. Albeit a man
get light by the Word, and some tasting of temporary Joy, and Honor, and
Riches also, by professing or preaching of it, yet he receaveth not profit,
except he get entry into GOD'S Rest thereby: for, all these turn to
Conviction.

Verse. 3. For, we which have believed, do enter into Rest, as He said, As I
have sworn in My Wrath, if they shall enter into My Rest, although the works
were finished from the foundation of the World. Read the sum of this
Chapter, Verse. 2.3.5. for clearing of his reasoning.

HE prooveth, that Believers enter into GOD'S Rest; because GOD excludes, by
His Threatening, Misbelievers only, THEN, 1. Fearful Threatninges of the
Wicked, carry in their Bosom sweetest Promises to the Godly, and the
Faithful. 2. Believers get a beginning of this Rest in this World, and a
Possession of it, in some degrees, by Faith. Their Deliverie from Sin and
Misery, is begun. Their Life, and Peace, and Joy, is begun.

Verse. 4. For, He spoke, in a certain place, of the seventh day, on this
wise; And GOD did rest the seventh day, from all His Works.

Verse. 5. And in this place again; If they shall enter into my Rest.

HE compares places of Scripture, and shows the significations of Rest.

THEN, 1. Words in Scripture, are taken, in sundry places, in sundry
significations. 2. Comparison of places, will both show the diverse acceptions
of any word, and the proper meaning of it, in every place.

Verse. 6. Seeing, therefore, it remains, that some must enter therein; and
they to whom it was first preached, entered not in, because of Unbelief. THe
full sentence of the sixth Verse, is this; Seeing, therefore, it remains, that
some must enter in; and they to whom it was first preached, entered not in,
because of Unbelief; it will follow, by consequence, that Believers do enter
in. This latter part is not expressed in the Text, but left unto us, to
gather, by consequence. Whence WE LEARN, 1. That GOD allows us to draw
consequences from His Scripture. 2. Yea, trayneth us on, by His own Example,
to draw them forth by reason. 3. Yea, He will, of necessity, force us to
draw consequences from His Words; or else, not let us understand His Meaning,
by leaving something not expressed, to be collected by us.

Verse. 7. Again, He limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day; after
so long a time, as it is said, To day, if ye will hear His Voice, harden not
your hearts. IN that he reasons from the circumstance of time, when David
uttered these words, he teaches us, That oftentimes there is matter of great
moment imported in the least circumstances of the Scriptures writing* and,
therefore, that the circumstances of time, place, and person, who speaks, and
to whom, and at what time, etc. should not be passed over, in our
consideration of a Text; but diligently be marked.

Verse. 8. For, if JESUS had given them rest, then would He not afterward
have spoken of another day.

Verse. 9. There remains, therefore, a rest to the people of GOD.

Verse. 10. For He that is entered into His Rest, He also has ceased from His
own works, as GOD did from His.

1. THIS reasoning from the time of David's speaking, SHOWS, How infalliblie
they were led that wrote the Scripture; that they could not fail in setting
down a word; nor speak one word, that could cross any other word, spoken
by any other Prophet, before, or after.

2. David taught of the Spiritual Rest in his time; and so did Moses. THEN, 1.
The old Church was not straytned with earthly promises so, but that they had
Heavenly and Spiritual Promises given them also, as signified by the earthly
and typical promises. 2. Their types had some starrelight of interpretation:
and, they were taught to look through the veil of Ceremonies and Types.

3. He says, He that is entered into His Rest. cease from His own
works. THEN, 1. Before a man be reconciled to GOD, by Faith in CHRIST, he is
working his own works, doing his own will, and not GOD'S. 2. He is working,
without ceasing, his own unrest, and his own torment, which he procures, by
working his own will. 3. The Man that thinks he is entered into GOD'S Rest,
must be GOD'S Worke-man, and no more work what pleases himself, but what
pleases GOD: ceasing from sinful works, and doing what is lawful, and good,
in way of obedience unto Him.

Verse. 11. Let us labor, therefore, to enter into that Rest; lest any man
fall, after the same example of unbelief. 1. IN the third verse he said, the
Believers entered into GOD'S Rest: Here he exhorts the Believer, to labor,
to enter into it.

THEN, 1. The Rest of GOD is entered into by degrees. 2. They who have entered,
must study to enter yet more; going on, from Faith to Faith, and from
Obedience, to farther Obedience, and from Grace to Grace, till they have gone
all the Way that leads unto Glory.

2. He requires Labor and Diligence, to enter in. THEN, 1. GOD'S Rest, is no
rest to the flesh; but Rest to the Soul, as (MATTHEW. xj.29.) CHRIST promises.
2. Without Care and Diligence, a man can not promise to himself to enter in:
For the Way is called STRAYT which leads unto Heaven.

3. He requires this Diligence, lest a man fall, as the Israelites did. THEN,
As some of the Israelites fell in a temporal misbeliefe, and drew on temporal
judgementes upon themselves, as Moses and Aaron: So may Professoures now also
do; even Elect. Again, as some fell in vnbel^efe with hardened hearts, yea,
in obstinate misbeliefe, and perished in their sin: So yet amongst
Professors, some may fall into obstinate misbeliefe, and perish, except they
give diligence, to make progress toward their Rest.

Verse. 12. For the Word of GOD is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged Sword, pearcing even to the divyding a-sunder of Soul and Spirit,
and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the Thoughts, and Intents
of the Heart. 1. LEst any should shift off this Threatening, as expyred with
those to whom it was first spoken; or cloak and dissemble their sins, and
purpose of defection, when they should see their time; he lets them know
the Power of the Word, and of GOD, their Party. THEN, The use, extent, and
nature of GOD'S Word, must be well studied; lest through misstaking, or
ignorance hereof, a man should missapply, or missregarde it.

2. The first property of the Word, it is Quick: That is, dies not when
those die to whom first it was directed; but endures, speaking on with that
same authority, to all that hear it, in all times after.

THEN, The Word is not a dead Letter, nor expyred with former Ages: but the
same to us that it was before to others; fit for operation, and working the
work for which it is sent, for convincing, or converting the hearer always.

3. Again, it is Powerful: That is, not fit to work only, but active,
and operative, in effect: actuallie bynding the Conscience to obedience, or
judgment, make the Sinner what opposition he will. Yea, it falls a-working
on the hearer, if he believe it, presently to clear his mind, rectify his
will, and reform his life, and to bring about his good and safety. If a man
believe it not, it falls a-working also, presently to bind him guilty,
unto judgment, and to augment his natural blyndnesse, and his hearts
hardness, and to bring on some degree of the deserved punishment upon
himself: albeit not of its own nature, but by the disposition of the Object
whereupon it works.

THEN, 1. The Word wants not the own effect, whenever it is preached; but
always helps, or hurts, the hearer, as he yields to it, or rejects,
or neglects it. 2. We shall do well to observe what sort of operation it
has upon us, seeing it must have some; that we may be framed to the better,
by it.

4. Another property of the Word: It is sharper than any two-edged Sword;
because it pearceth speedily through a brazen Brow, and dissembling
countenance, and a lying mouth, and thrusts it self, without suffering
resistance, into the conscience of the most obstinate, with a secret blow, and
makes him guilty within his own Breast.

THEN, 1. Let not Preachers think their labor lost, when they have to do
with obstinate sinners. The stroke is given, at the hearing of the Word, which
will be found uncured after. 2. Neither let dissemblers please themselves,
with a fair countenance put upon the matter; as if the Word did not touch
them: but, rather, give Glory to GOD, in time, when they are pricked at the
heart. For if they still dissemble the wound received of this Sword, the wound
shall prove deadly.

4. Pearcing even to the dividing a-sunder of the Soul, and the Spirit: That
is, Those most secret devyses and plottes of the mind or spirit, and those
clossest affections of the heart or soul, toward any forbidden evil, this
Word will find out: yea, it can divyde a-sunder the Soul and the Spirit, the
heart and the mind, and tell the man how his Soul or heart cleaves to the
sin, and how his mind plotteth pretenses, to hyde the evil of it from
himself, and others, even in those sins which have not broken forth, but
lie as derne in the mind, as the marrow in the bones. And it can put
difference betwixt the purposes of the heart, and the thoughts, how to
compass the design, and how to hyde the convoy. Or those ways ^owe the
Sinner does begayle himself, and secketh to syle the eyes of others, the
Word does decypher, and distinguish all these things which selfe-deceaving
sophistry confounds.

THEN, 1. Secret purposes fall under the judicatorie of the Word, as well as
practices accomplished. 2. Pretenses and excuses will not put off the challenge
of it. 3. Nothing remains, but that we give up our selves to the Words
Governament; fleeing what it discharges, and following what it commands.

Verse. 13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in His Sight:
but all things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to
do. To clear the power of the Word, he brings in the property of GOD,
whose Word it is, and sets up the Sinner's secret thought, in the sight of
the all-seeing GOD, with whom he has to do.

THEN, 1. GOD is the Party with whom the hearer of the Word has to do, and
has his Reckoning to make, and not the Preacher. 2. GOD joyneth with His
Word, and gives it that searching, and discovering, and pearcing Virtue.

3. GOD'S Omniscience, and All-seeing Sight, should make us look to our inward
disposition* so shall this, and other like Exhortations, and Threatninges, have
better effect and fruit in us.

Verse. 14. Seeing, then, that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into
the Heavens, JESUS, the Son of GOD, let us hold fast our Profession. 1. HE
gives them a Direction, for entering into their Rest; To hold fast their
Profession: That is, In faith and love to avow the Doctrine of CHRIST.

THEN, 1. He that would enter into Rest, must be steadfast, in mayntayning,
and avowing the true Religion of CHRIST. 2. He who quyteth the Profession of
the Truth of CHRST, takes courses to cut off himself from GOD'S Rest. For,
if we deny CHRIST, He will deny us.

2. He commands, To hold fast our Profession. THEN, 1. GOD will not be
pleased with backe-slyding, or coldrysnesse, or indifferency in matters of
Religion; because this is not to hold it fast; but to take a loose grippe;
which is the ready way to Defection. 2. There is danger, Lest our Adversaries
pull the Truth from us. 3. The more danger we foresee, the more strongly
must we grippe the Truth.

3. The Encowragement which he gives to hold fast, is, We have CHRIST, a
great high Priest, etc. THEN, 1. As we have need of Threatening, to drive us
to enter into GOD'S Rest; So have we need of Encowragementes, to draw us
thereunto. 2. All our Encowragement, is from the Help which we shall have in
CHRIST: and that is sufficient. 3. CHRIST is always for us in His Office,
albeit we do not always feel Him sensibly in us.

4. He calls CHRIST, A great high Priest; to put difference betwixt the
typical high Priest, and Him in whom the truth of the Priesthood is found.
THEN, What the typical high Priest did in show for the people, that the great
high Priest does in substance for us: That is, reconcileth us to GOD
perfectly, blesses us with all Blessings solidlie, and intercedeth for us
perpetually.

5. He affirms of CHRIST, That He is passed into the Heavens; to wit, in
regard of His Manhead, to take Possession thereof, in our name.

THEN, 1. CHRIST'S corporal presence, is in Heaven only, and not on earth,
from whence He is passed. 2. CHRIST'S corporal presence in Heaven, and absence
from us, in that respect, hinders not our Right unto Him, and spiritual
having, or possessing of Him. 3. Yea, it is our Encowragement, to seek entry
into Heaven, that He is there before us.

6. He calls Him JESUS, the Son of GOD; to lead us, through His
Humanity, unto His Godhead. THEN, No Rest on the Mediator, till we go to the
Rock of His Godhead, where is strength, and satisfaction to Faith.

Verse. 15. For, we have not an high Priest which can not be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: but was, in all poynctes, tempted like as we are;
yet without sin. 1. ANother Encowragement is from the Merciful and
Compassionate Disposition of our high Priest, whose Nature, and Office, and
Experience, makes Him, that He can not be, but touched with our infirmities,
both sinful, and sinnelesse infirmities, of Body, Estate, or Mind.

THEN, 1. He praesupposeth, that the Faithful are subject to infirmities,
both of sin, and misery; and, by reason thereof, to discowragementes, and
dashing of their spirit. 2. CHRIST does pity the infirmities of the
Faithful; their Poverty, Banishment, Sickness, Grief, yea, their sinful
Passions, and Perturbations, and short-comming in holy Duties; He is
compassionate in all these. Therefore may our Faith gather strength from His
Pity, to bear these the better; and st^yue against our sinnefullnesse, with
the greater Cowrage. And, in the sense of our infirmities, we should not stand
abacke from CHRIST* but go to Him the rather, as to a compassionate Physician,
who can and will help us.

2. To give us assurance of His Compassion, he shows us, that He was, in
all poynctes, tempted like as we are; yet without sine. THEN,

1. CHRIST has experience of all trials wherein any of His servantes can
fall; of Poverty, contempt of the world; of being forsaken by friends; of
Exyle; Imprisonment, Hunger, Nakedness, Watching, Weariness, pain of Body,
dashing of Mind, heaviness of Heart, Dolor, Anguish, and Perpl^xitie of
spirit; yea, of disertion to sense; yea, of the Wrath and Curse of GOD; the
feeling whereof may justly be called A descending to Hell; CHRIST in His own
experience knows what all such exercyses are. 2. These His experiences, and
sufferinges, are Pawnes to us of His Compassion on us in such cases; so that we
may as certaynlie believe the Compassion, as the Passion.

3. He makes exception of Sin, whereof he was free; but not of his being
tempted to Sin.

THEN, 1. Albeit our LORD be free from committing sin, yet He was not free
from being tempted to sin: and so can pity our weakness, when we are
overcome of it. 2. His being free of sin, is our Comfort against sin. For,
if our Mediator had been defiled with sin. He could not have washed us: But
now He is able to justify us, and set us free of sin also.

Verse. 16. Let us, therefore, come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we
may obtain Mercy, and find Grace, to help in time of need. 1. FRom these
Encowragementes, he draws another Direction, To come boldly to GOD in
Prayer, for every thing whereof we stand in need.

THEN, The Apostle allows unto the Believer* 1. Certain persuasion of the
acceptance of his person: he bids him Come boldly. 2. He allows
certain persuasion of the granting of his Prayers, in the matter namely of
Grace and Mercy; which includes the Remission of sins.

2. The Throne of Grace, or the Mercy Seat, was above the Arc, within the
Sanctuary, and represented GOD in CHRIST reconciled to His People, gracious
and merciful unto them. To this he alludeth, and by this means TEACHES us,

1. That the substance of that typical Mercy seat, is to be found in CHRIST
under the Gospel. In Him GOD is ever to be found, on His Throne of Grace. 2.
That the Veil of the ceremonial Sanctuary, is rent in CHRIST'S suffering,
and an open door made unto the Holiest, unto every Believer, and not for the
Highest alone, to enter in. 3. That GOD lays aside His Terror and Rigor of
Justice, when His own come unto Him in CHRIST, and offers access unto the
Throne of Grace, unto them.

3. He will have us coming with boldness, to obtain Mercy; including
himself with the Faithful, and joining the meanest of the Faithful, to whom
he writes, in the same Privilege with himself. THEN, 1. Free liberty to
expound all our mind to GOD, as the word imports, without employing the
mediation of Saynct or Angel, or any beside CHRIST, is one of the Privileges
of Christian Religion. 2. This Privilege is common to the meanest of the
Faithful, with the chieffest Apostles. 3. There is Mercy to be had for such
as come for remooving of every sin, and remedy of every misery.

4. He sets before them the hope of Grace, to help in time of need.
IMPORTING HEREBY, 1. That albeeit, for the present, possibly, we be not
touched with the sense of Wantes, Strayts, and Difficulties; yet we are to
expect, that time of need will come. 2. That it is good to foresee this, and
make provision, in the time of Grace, in this acceptable Day, while GOD is on
His Throne of Grace. 3. That our Prayers, if they get not an answer
presently, yet shall they get an answer in the time of need. When our Need
comes, then shall our Help come also.

The sum of Chap. V.
I Have called JESUS, the Son of GOD, a Great High Priest, because the
Leviticall Priests are but a resemblance of Him, and that in their imperfect
measure. For, look what Office they had, Verse. 1. What properties were
required in them, Verse. 2.3. How they were called to their Office, Verse. 4. A
fayrer Calling has CHRIST, and to an higher Priesthood, Verse. 5.6. I called
Him a Compassionate high Priest, because He took on our frail nature, and
had experience of such troubles as ours, both outward, and inward, Verse. 7.
For, the measure of the Mediator's obedience, albeit He was the Son,
required actual and experimental suffering: else, the price had not actuallie
been paid for us. Verse. 8. And, now, being thoroughly fitted for His Office
by suffering, He is become the Cause of the salvation of all that follow Him,
Verse. 9. Authorized for that end of GOD, after the Order of Melchisedek; which
Order is more perfect than Aarons, Verse. 10. Of which mystery I must speak
with greater difficulty, for your incapacitie, Verse, 11. For ye have need
yet more to be catechized in the Rudimentes of Religion, as Babes, Verse. 12.
For, such are they to whom easy doctrine must be propounded, Verse. 13. But
harder doctrines, are for ryper Christians, Verse. 14.

The Doctrines of Chap. V.
Verse. 1. FOr, every High Priest taken from amongst men, is ordained for men,
in things pertaining to GOD; that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins. 1. HE sets down the properties of the high Priest, that he might
show the truth of them in CHRIST. First, the peoples comfort did req^y^e,
that the high Priest should be a man: So is CHRIST a Man, wayled out from
amongst men. The Flower of all the Flock. Therefore we may come the more
homely to Him.

2. The high Priest was ordained for men; that is, was appointed to employ all
his Office for men's good. So does CHRIST: therefore may we expect that he
will do for us, as Mediator, what he can: and that is, all that we need.

3. The high Priest's Office reached to all things pertaining to GOD; to
communicate GOD'S will unto the people, and to lay before GOD the peoples
Necessities. So does CHRIST'S Office to all the business betwixt GOD and us,
for working in us Repentance, and Amendment; and making our persons, and
service, acceptable to GOD: and therefore, in nothing may we pass by Him.

4. In special, the Priest behooved to offer Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin,
for remooving of Wrath, and obtaining of Favor. So has CHRIST done, and
fullfilled the type in this poynct also: therefore, by Him must we obtain the
good which we crave, and have the evil remooved which we fear.

Verse. 2. Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of
the way, for that He Himself also is compassed with infirmity. 1. HE goes
on in the Comparison: The typical high Priest behooved to be compassionate on
the Sinner: So in truth is Christ, even as the misery requires,
proportionallie, as the word imports.

2. He makes two sorts of Sinners, Ignorantes, and Transgressoures. THEN,
Though there be difference of sinners, yet no sinner, that seeks to Christ,
is secluded from His Compassion.

3. Follows a difference, serving to advaunce Christ, above the typical
Priest. The high Priest typical, was compassed with infirmities; not only
sinnelesse infirmities, but sinful also; and so behooved to pity others.
CHRIST* though not compassed with sinful infirmities, but sinnelesse only,
yet does pity Sinners of all sorts.

THEN, Look what compassion one sinner might expect of another, as much may
we expect of our sinnelesse Savior.

Verse. 3. And, by reason hereof, he ought, as for the people, so also for
himself, to offer for sins. ANother difference. The typical Priest had
need of Remission of his own sins, and the benefit of the true Sacrifice:
But CHRIST, because without sin, offered Sacrifice only for our sins, and
not for His own.

THEN, All the Benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, comes unto us.

Verse. 4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but He that is called
of GOD, as was Aaron. HE proceeds in the Comparison. The typical Priest
entered by authority to his Calling, and was honored by his Calling: So
entered Christ. No man, says he, takes this honor unto himself, but He
that is called as was Aaron. THEN, 1. It is an honor to be called to an
Office in the House of GOD. 2. The Calling is null, if it have not GOD for the
Author, and Caller. 3. If a man take an Office, not appoyncted of GOD, or
intrude himself into an Office, without a lawful Calling, it is no kind of
honor unto him.

Verse. 5. So also, CHRIST glorified not Himself, to be made an High Priest:
But He that said unto Him, Thou art My Son, to day have I begotten Thee. 1.
OUR LORD is commended, for not glorifying himself, by intrusion in his Office.

THEN, 1. Such as pretend to be Christ's servauntes, must beware to intrude
themselves into any Office, and must attend, as Christ did, God's Calling, to
God's Employment. 2. He^ that ^su^peth a Calling, does glorify himself, and
takes the honor that is not given him: for which he must give a Reckoning.

2. Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee, does im^o^^e, by the
Apostle's alleging, not only CHRIST'S Godhead, and Declaration to be GOD'S
Son, but also the Declaration of him, To ^ee high ^riest in his Manhead;
taken out from amongst m^n. So deep are the Consequences of Scripture, when
the Spirit brings forth his own Mind from it.

Verse. 6. As He says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever,
after the Order of Melchisedek. HE alleges another place, more clear.

THEN* Howbeeit Truth may be proven from one place, yet it is needful also,
for the hearers cause, to allege more places, till the hearer be convinced.

Verse. 7. Who in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up Prayers, and
Supplications, with strong Crying, and Tears, unto Him that was able to save
Him from Death; and was heard, in that He feared. HAving proven CHRIST'S
Office, he shows his Exercise of it, in offering for our sins a more
precious Obla^ion than the typical: Even himself, with Tears, to Death.

In these words, THEN, CHHIST is poyncted out unto us, 1. An High Priest,
taken from amongst men: a very true Man, of our substance; Flesh, of our
flesh. 2. A Man, subject to the sinnelesse infirmities of our nature, as
Grief, Fear, Mourning. Death. 3. Having a set-tyme, during which he was to
bear these our infirmities, in the days of his flesh. 4. Exercysing his
Priestlie Office in these his days, and offering his precious Tears, and
Cries, yea, his life, for us. 5. One, who how-so-ever Fear was upon his holy
Nature, yet knew he should be delivered from Death. 6. Who, as a Man, in
confidence of delyverie, made Prayers to the Father. 7. Whose Prayers are not
refused* but accepted, and heard, in our behalf. 8. And, That these his
Sufferinges were ended, with the days of his Humiliation.

1. These Acts of Fear, and Tears, etc. are the proper Acts of his humane
nature.

THEN, 1. As the Divine Nature had its own Acts, proper to it self, so had
the humane Nature Acts, proper to it self also; and some Acts were common to
both the Natures: So of Christ's Acts, some are divine, some humane; some are
both divine and humane. 2. As Man, he was unable to bear our Burden, or to
help himself, and, therefore, behooved to have the help of the Godhead. 3.
Albeeit he was God, in his own person, yet as Man he behooved to take our
rowme, and place, and pray for Assistance, both as Cautioner for us, and
Teacher of us: to give us Example, how to behave our selves in Straytes.

2. HE feared Death, and offered Prayers, and Tears, and strong Cries:
Because, not only death temporal presented it self before him; but, which
was more, the Curse of the Law, the Father's Wrath, for Sin, duly deserved
by us, was set in a Cup to his head, which should have swallowed him up for
ever, if he had not, by the worthiness of his person, overcome it, and turned
the eternal Wrath, and Curse due unto us, into a temporal Equivalent to
himself. THEN, 1. The sense of GOD'S Wrath, whom will it not terrifye? since
it wrought so on Christ. And Nature can not choose but fear* when Sense
feels Wrath. 2. Felt Wrath, seems to threaten yet more, and worse: and,
therefore, beside Feeling, does breed yet farther Fear. 3. The Curse of God
due to our sins, virtuallie implying the deserved pains of Hell, is more
terrible than can be told, and such as the creature can not choose but fear,
and abhor. 4. Christ's sufferinges were no fantasy, but very earnest,
vehement, and terrible. 5. No Weapon, nor Buckler against Wrath, but fleeing to
God, by Supplication, and Crying, and Tears.

3. He prayed to Him that was able to save him, and was heard. THEN, 1. Albeit
sense of Wrath sees no out-gate; but black Fears are always before it; yet
Faith, looking to God's Omnipotency, sees an out-gate. 2. Christ's Prayers in
our behalf, receive no Repulse, but are heard. 3. Christ both died, and was
saved from Death also, because it could not keep dominion over him. So shall
we be saved from Death, though we die.

Verse. 8. Though He were a Son, yet learned He obedience, by the things
which He suffered. HE remooveth the scandal of his Cross, by showing the
necessity, and use thereof. Albeit He was the Son, yet He learned obedience
by those things which He suffered.

THEN, 1. In the time of Christ's deepest humiliation, the union betwixt his
Godhead and Manhead was not loosed: he remained the Son of God still. 2. The
Excellency of his person exempted him not from suffering, having once taken on
our debt. 3. Christ knew what suffering was, before he suffered: but he knew
not by experience, till he actuallie suffered. 4. Christ's holy Life, was a
part of his Obedience to the Father: but his Obedience in suffering for our
sins, was Obedience in an higher degree. 5. To obey God by way of Action, is
a common Lesson, to every holy creature: but, that a sinnelesse, and holy
person, should suffer for sin, was a New Lesson, proper to Christ; a
Practique which never passed* but in Christ's person only.

Verse. 9. And being made perfect, He became the Author of eternal Salvation,
unto all them that obey Him. 1. THE Suffering of CHRIST is called his
Perfection. THEN, 1. CHRIST though perfect in his person, yet he wanted
something, to make him perfect in his Office, till he suffered: for he could
not satisfy the Father's Justice, till he suffered; nor yet could he have
fellow-feeling from experience, of the miseries of his members. 2. After
suffering Christ lacks nothing that may pacify God, or comfort and save
sinners.

2. The Fruit follows. Being perfected, he is become the Author of
Salvation, to all that obey him. THEN, 1. The proper cause of our salvation, is
to be sought in Christ, perfected by suffering: not in any one part of his
holiness, or obedience in doing, or any part of his suffering; but in him
perfected, by his obedience, even to the death of the Cross. We may take
Comfort from, and make use of, his holy Conception, Life, and several
Virtues: but we must remember* that his accomplished Obedience, in doing, and
suffering, is our Ransom, joynctlie considered; and not any particular Act
looked on alone. 2. None should stumble at Christ's sufferinges, which
perfected him in his Office, and likewise perfected our Ransom to the Father.
3. Christ felt the Bitterness of his own sufferinges himself: but we got
the sweet Fruit thereof; even Eternal Life. 4. Only they who obey Christ,
can claim Title to the Purchase of Eternal Life, by him. Now, these are they
who obey him, who in uprightness of heart believe in his promises, and aim to
draw strength out of him, for new obedience.

Verse. 10. Called of GOD, an High Priest, after the Order of Melchisedek. HE
prooveth, that Christ is Author of Eternal Salvation, to his Followers, from
the nature of his Priesthood, which is Eternal: not after Aaron's Order, but
Melchisedecke's. THEN,

The nature of Christ's Priesthood, after Melchisedecke's Order, and the
Father's authorizing him in the Office, is the Evidence of our Eternal
salvation to be had by him, with the Father's Approbation.

Verse. 11. Of Whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered,
seeing ye are dull of hearing. BEING to speak more of this Mystery, be
prepares them, by checking their dullness; and advertising them, of the
difficu^tie of expressing himself, because of the same. THEN,

1. Even the Children of GOD are not free of this Disease, of slownesse to
conceive Spiritual things aright. 2. The incapacitie of Auditors, will
breed, even unto the best Preachers, difficulty of expressing their mind. 3.
Preachers should rebuke the dullness of people, to stir them up the more.

Verse. 12. For, when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need
that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of GOD;
and are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong Meat. 1. HE makes
their Fault the more, because by reason of time, they ought to have been
Teachers: that is, both well grounded themselves, and laboring to inform
others. THEN, 1. As we have had longer time to learn, so should we make more
progress in knowledge. 2. As we are rooted in knowledge our selves, so ought
we to communicate our knowledge* and inform others.

2. He calls the Catechizing of the Ignorant, the Teaching the first
Principles of the Oracles of GOD; and compares it to the giving of Milk.
THEN, 1. Catechizing of the rude and ignorant, is the first thing must be
done, for making sound Christians. 2. There is an order to be kept, in
bringing men unto knowledge: The first Principles, and fundamental Doctrines,
must first be taught. 3. Nothing is to be taught, for grounding men in
Religion, but GOD'S Oracles; that which is in GOD'S Word only. 4. The manner
of teaching the Principles of Religion, should be easy, and plain, as Milk
for Children.

Verse. 13. For, every one that uses milk, is unskillful in the Word of
Righteousness: For he is a Babe. HE prooveth them to be rude in knowledge,
by the description of one weak in knowledge, whom he calls a Babe, using
Milk, and unskillful in the Word of Righteousness: so called, because, how
to be righteous, is the Sum of the Doctrine of it.

THEN, 1. There are degrees of knowledge in Christianity: Some are weak, like
Babes; some, more instructed, and of full age. 2. All knowledge in
Christianity, is to be reckoned by acquayntance with the Scripture, and Skill
therein: Not by humane learning.

Verse. 14. But strong Meat belongs to them that are of full age; even those
who by reason of use, have their senses exercysed to discern both good and
evil. 1. HE descrybeth the well-instructed Christian, by his Meat, and
exercysed Senses. The Meat that he is sit for, is strong Meat: that is,
more profound Doctrine.

THEN, 1. All the Scripture, and Doctrine frae it, is either Milk, or stronger
Meat: but whether this, or that, yet, always, it is Food, fit for
nowrishment of men's souls. 2. Discretion must be used by Teachers, to fit
their Teaching, as their people are advaunced for Milk, or stronger Meat; so
as they may best be fed.

2. For the exercise of his Senses, or Wits, to discern good or evil, he
has it by use habit, and frequent acquaynting himself with Scripture.

THEN, 1. The use of the Scripture, and knowledge gotten thereby, is to
discern by it, what is good, what is evil; what is Truth, what is Error;
what is right, what is wrong. 2. Though Scripture be the Rule, yet not every
one can take it up, or make right application of the Rule, to the poynct in
hand. 3. To get a man's Wits exercysed, requires frequent use of, and
acquayntance with, the Scripture. And, without this haunting our mind in the
Scriptures, and observing the LORD'S Counsel therein, a man can not be able,
albeeit he were versed in humane writs, to discern false doctrine, from true.

The sum of Chap. VI.
THEREFORE, allbeeit you be rude, yet praesupposing you are so settled in the
grounds of Faith, Repentance, Baptism, etc. that you shall not renounce them
again, I will lead you on a little farther, if GOD please, Verse. 1* 2.3. For,
if after clear conviction of the Truth, a man, voluntarily, revolt, and fall
away, from the grounds of true Religion, there is neither Repentance, nor
Mercy, for such a man; because he, maliciously, does what he can, to put
Christ to as great a shame, as those who first crucified him, Verse. 4.5.6. And,
as GOD blesses those who bring forth Fruits by his manuring of them, Verse. 7.
So is it justice, that he curse such as grow worse after manuring, Verse. 8.
But I hope better of you, Verse. 9. As the Fruits of your Faith give me
warrant, Verse. 10. Only that you may be more and more assured, continue
diligent, Verse 11. And follow the Example of the Faithful before you; in hope
of the Inheritance, Verse. 12. For, the Promise made to Abraham, and the
Faithful his Children, is very sure, confirmed by an Oath, Verse. 13.14. And
Abraham, at last, obtained it, Verse. 15. For, as an Oath ends strife amongst
men, Verse. 16. So, to end our strife with GOD, in missbelieving of him, he
swear the Promise to Abraham, and to his seed, Verse. 17. That upon so solid
Grounds, as are GOD'S Promise, and GOD'S Oath, we might have Comfort, who
have fled to CHRIST* and hope for his help, Verse. 18. Which Hope, i^ as an
Ancre, which will not suffer us to be driven from Heaven, where CHRIST is
established, Eternal PRIEST, after the Order of Melchisedek, Verse. 19.20.

The Doctrine of Chap. VI.
Verse. 1. THerefore, leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of CHRIST, let us
go on, unto Perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from
dead works, and of faith toward GOD. 1. FROM the Reproof of their dullness,
be draws an Exhortation, To amend their pace, and go forwards. WHICH
TEACHES US, That the conscience of our bygone slippes, and sloathfullnesse,
should be a sharp spur, to drive us to a swifter pace, for overtaking of
our Task.

2. He calls the Principles of Religion, (...) Principles of the Doctrine of
CHRIST.

THEN, 1. The Doctrine of CHRIST, is the sum of Religion. He that has
learned CHRIST well, has learned all. 2. Nothing to be taught in CHRIST'S
House, but HIS DOCTRINE, which comes from him, and tends to him.

3. He leaves the Principles, and goes on to Perfection. THEN, 1. There are
two parts of Christian Doctrine: one, of the Principles of Religion; another,
of the perfection thereof. 2. The Principles must first be learned, and the
foundation laid. 3. When people have learned the Principles, their Teachers
must advaunce them farther, toward Perfection.

4. He says, he will not lay again the foundation: praesupposing it is so
laid, as it needs not to be laid again. Or, if they make Apostasy, after
once laying, can not be laid the second time.

THEN, The grounds of Religion, must be so solidlie learned, as they may well
be bettered afterward, by addition of farther knowledge; but never raised
again: and must be so soundly believed, as they never be renounced again.

5. He reckons a number of fundamental poyncts of Doctrine: and first, of
repentance from dead works: so he calls our works, before conversion.

THEN, 1. It is a main poynct of the Catechism, to believe, that all our
works, before repentance, and conversion, are but dead works: that is, sins
making us liable to death. 2. If repentance be not learned from these works,
the rest of the Building wants so much of the Foundation.

6. In joining the Doctrine of Faith, as the next poynct, HE GIVES US TO
UNDERSTAND, That it is as necessary a ground of Religion, to teach a penitent
to believe in GOD, as to teach the Believer to repent.

Verse. 2. Of the Doctrine of Baptismes; and, of laying on of Hands; and, of
resurrection of the dead; and, of eternal judgment. 1. THE Doctrine of
BAPTISMES, in the plural number, he makes a third fundamental Doctrine: And
so makes it NECESSARY, That the significations of Baptism be taught, that
the people may learn to put difference betwixt outward Baptism by the
Minister, which an hypocrite may have, and the inward Baptism by the Spirit,
which CHRIST bestows upon his own Elect; and, that they be instructed in
the nature of this Sacrament, and the signification thereof: yea, and of the
Baptism of suffering affliction for the Gospel, whereunto the outword
sacrament of Baptism obliedgeth.

2. The fourth fundamental Poynct, of the Doctrine of the Catechism, he
makes the Doctrine of the laying on of hands. Now, hands were in a special
manner imposed: First, In the bestowing of Spiritual and miraculous Gifts,
for the confirmation of new Convertes in the Primitive Church, ACT. viij.17.18.
Which endured until Christian Religion was sufficiently confirmed unto the
World, to be Divine. Next, Imposition of hands was used in the Ordination of
Office-bearers in the Church, both Extraordinary, and ordinary, I. TIM
iiij.14. and Chap. v. 22. ACT. vj.6. THEN, In the Apostle's esteemation, it is
necessary, for grounding of people in Religion, that they be instructed, not
only how the LORD founded the Christian Religion, and confirmed it, by
extraordinary Gifts of the holy Spirit, in the Primitive Church: But, also,
what Offices, and Office-bearers, he has ordained, for ordinary
edification, and ruling, and mayntayning of his Church* unto the end of the
world: that they may acknowledge such as are sent of GOD, and submit
themselves unto them.

3. The Doctrine of Resurrection of the dead, he makes the fifth poynct of the
Catechism: and of the last Judgment, the sixth. Under which six, the sum of
Christian Religion may be compryzed; and in this order wherein they are set
down, may be best learned, believed, and made use of.

Verse. 3. And this will we do, if GOD permit. BY this manner of speech, if
GOD permit, he TEACHES us,

1. That a Preacher's endeavor to instruct a people, can have no success,
except GOD make way unto him, and concur with him. 2. That he who is busied
in the most necessary part of GOD'S Service, suppose it were in writing
Scripture; let be in ordinary preaching, and writing; must do it with
submission to GOD, to be stopped in the midst of his work, and cutted short;
yea, and that in the midst of a meditated speech, if it so please GOD.

Verse. 4. For, it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Part-takers of the Holy Ghost,

Verse. 5. And have tasted the good Word of GOD* and the Powers of the World to
come;

Verse. 6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance: seeing
they crucify, to themselves, the Son of GOD a-fresh, and put Him to an open
shame.

1. MYNDING to stir them up, to make progress in Knowledge, he sets
before them the danger of Apostasy. THEN,

1. He praesupposeth, Except they study to make progress, they shall go
backwardes: and that going backwardes, tends to Apostasy: and that
voluntary, and complete Apostasy from known Truth, does harden the heart
from Repentance, and cutteth off a man from Mercy. 2. He accounts our
natural security so great, that there is need of most fearful
threatninges, to awake us out of it. 3. That the only way to be fred from
Apostasy, is to be aiming at a Progress.

NEXT, OBSERVE, 1. That he does not speak here of every sin against
Knowledge, albeeit indeed those be fearful, and dangerous; but of Apostasy
from Religion, and the Doctrine of Christ. 2. Not of the Apostasy of
Ignorantes, who never were informed in the matter of Religion; but lightly
came, and lightly went away: (allbeeit the shame done to Christ by them, is
great, and grievous:) but of such, who after illumination, and feeling somewhat
of the power of the Truth, do revolt. 3. He speaks not beer of Apostasy
of infirmity, for fear, in ^itte of a passion, or hasty passage of ones
life: But, of a voluntary, and deliberate falling away, after clear
conviction of the Truth. This is that Sin against the holy Ghost, which
here he speaks of. 4. He does not praesuppose here, that an elect Child
of GOD, and renewed, may fall into this Sin: But, that a Professor, and some
in the visible Church, may fall away, and die in this Sin. (Now, a
Professor may be endewed with many Gifts, and yet be a Temporizer, and
remain unrenewed inwardly; and so may possibly fall into this Ill*) And,
therefore, every Professor should be the more circumspect, because of the
possibility of some men's Apostasy; and the more diligent to attain to that
Faith which purifyeth the heart, and works by Love, which fails not. 5. In
telling what is the danger of a Professour's Apostasy, the Apostle myndeth
not to weaken any man's Faith, or to discowrage him from progress making:
But, by the contrary, his intention is, that men strengthen themselves so much
the more in the Faith. And, therefore, such as have felt no more in their own
esteemation, but these Tastinges, should be so far from discowragement, and
faynting, that rather they must look to a necessity laid upon them, to make
progress in Faith, and the fruits thereof, and to draw near to GOD, who can
preserve them from falling away.

But, because some do trouble themselves, and other some do harden themselves
in Error, by this place, (as our intended brevitie will suffer) let us study
to give some light to both Compare this place, with Verse. 9.10. etc. of this
Chapter, to the end. First, in these Verses, the 4.5. and 6. he is speaking
of Professoures in general, conditionally. But verse. 9.10. etc. he is
speaking to the true Believers amongst these Hebrews, particularly.

2. HEre in these Verses, are glorious Gifts, Illumination, and tasting of
Spiritual things: There in those Verses, is Faith, working by Love, to the
Glory of JESUS, and Weal of HIS Saynctes. 3. Here are Men enrolled amongst
Christians, so holden, and esteemed, both of themselves, and others: There are
sensible Souls, in the feeling of Sin, and fear of Wrath, and hope of
Mercy, fleeing to JESUS, as to a Refuge, and casting the Ancre of their tossed
Souls within the Veil, where JESUS is in Heaven. 4. Here Men, receaving from
the holy Ghost, good things: There Men, receaving from him, beside these good
things, better things also. 5. Here things glorious indeed, yet not
always accompanying Salvation; but in some going before Saving Grace; in
others, possibly alone, without Saving Grace: But there are Saving Graces,
always joined with Salvation. 6. Here in these Verses, the Apostle is not
confident, but such as have received these things here mentioned, may fall
away, except they go forwards, and study to make progress. But there, in
those Verses, the Apostle is persuaded, that they shall not fall away, but be
saved; and thereupon encowrageth them, to go forwards.

FROM THIS COMPARISON IT IS CLEAR, THEN* 1. That there is a possibility of
the Apostasy of Professoures, and titular Saynctes; but not of the Apostasy
of renewed souls, and true Christians, true Saynctes. 2. That there is ground
of Fear, from these words, to such as are secure, and puffed up with the
conceat of their Spiritual Gifts; but not of those who in fear are fled to
CHRIST. 3. That in this place, carnal confidence only is shaken in such, who
as if they had done well anough, study not to make progress: but Faith
nowayes weakened in such, who still study to advaunce, and make more and more
progress. 4. That here fruitless Light, and fruitless Feeling, is called in
question; but not Faith, and labourious Love, bringing out Fruits to CHRIST'S
Glory, and good of his Saynctes.

Again from this Comparison, it is evident, That the holy Ghost is Author,
both of these common Spiritual Gifts, and of these special Saving Graces
also. Of these common Gifts, he is Author, as dwelling amongst Professors,
and distributing good things unto all Professoures, that are in the visible
house of his Church. But he is Author of those Saving Graces, as dwelling in
true Professoures, who are his own house; bringing with himself better
things than these Gifts, and Salvation also, unto them, infalliblie.

Thirdly, from this Comparison, it is clear, 1. That there are some Converts,
external, from the world, to the Church, who yet stick in their naturalls;
and are not, in the sense of Sin, fled unto CHRIST, for Refuge, nor
converted, from nature, to Saving Grace; to whom the Apostle will not deny
rowme in the Church, if they will study to make progress. And, 2. That
illumination, and tasting of Spiritual things, may be given as well to such,
who are not renewed in their heart, as unto sound Convertes.

FOR, 1. The natural man may be convinced, That the Church is a blessed
Society, and join himself unto it. 2. Yea, change his outward conversation,
and cast off his pollutions which are in the world through last, and take
himself to be ruled, outwardly, by CHRIST'S Discipline, and call Him LORD,
LORD. 3. And be so blameless, before men, that he may look, with his Lamp,
like a wise Virgin, waiting for the Wedding; and yet be a graceless Fool
inwardly. 4. Yea, he may be illuminated, not only by learning the literal
knowledge of the Gospel, as men do their Philosophy: but, also, may be
illuminated supernaturallie, with in-sight in many profound things in the
Scripture. For, supernatural gifts may be in a natural and unrenewed man, so
as he may say to Christ, I have prophesied in Thy Name, and yet be unrenewed
in Christ's esteemation. 5. He may taste of the heavenly Gift, partly by
historical believing the truth of the Gospel, partly by contemplation of
the truth credited. Now, historical faith, is a taste of that heavenly gift
of justifying faith, because it is a good degree toward it: and contemplation
of this truth, brings a taste of the thing credited; and so of the heavenly
Gift revealed in the Gospel. For, the contemplation of every truth, brings
with it, naturally, a delectation, such as Philosophers do find in their
studies. And the more eminent the truth be, no wonder the delectation be the
greater. For, many heard Christ's gracious Sermons, and wondered, and believed
his words to be true: but Christ did not commit himself unto them; for he
knew what was in them. 6. He may be made part-taker of the holy Ghost, and
have his share of Church gifts, distributed by the holy Ghost; so as he can,
from the light which the holy Ghost gives him, answer other men's doubts,
comfort the feeble minded, and edify others in their faith, by his speeches;
yea, have the gift of expressing his brain light, both in conference to men,
and in formal prayer to GOD, if he be a private man only: and if he be
in public office, may have the gift of formal preaching, and praying in
public: yea, in those days of the Apostle, might have had the extraordinary
gifts of Tongues, Prophesying, and Miracles working. Therefore, says Christ,
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? and in thy Name have casten out Devils? and in thy Name done many
wonderful works? To whom Christ will aunswrre, I never knew you: Depart
from me, ye that work iniquity. MATT. vij.22.23. Now, this knowledge,
convincing light, and gifts of utterance, etc. are from the holy Ghost; or
else, how could such Apostates, as here are descrybed, sin against the
holy Ghost? 7. He may taste of the good Word of GOD: that is, find
sweetness in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and be convinced of the Goodness
and Mercy of GOD toward sinners, shyning therein: yea, and by beholding the
possibility of his own salvation, upon this condition, If he will sell all,
and buy the Pearl, he may taste of GOD'S Merchandise, in the blocking for
them; beside all the false joys, and delusions, which he may get by presuming
of the certayntie of his own salvation: and yet, in the mean time, as a
fool, will not lay down the price; will not renounce his earthly, and
beastly affections; will not deny himself, and his own corruptions: The
care of this world, and the deceatfullnesse of Riches, choking the fruits
of the Word heard, as they who receive the seed amongst thorns. Wherefore,
in time of persecution for the Word, he may by and by be offended, and quyte
the Truth, allbeeit with the stony hearted hearers, in time of prosperity,
he heard the Word, and anon, with joye, received it, MATT. xiij.20.21.22. 8.
Lastly, he may taste of the power of the world to come: that is, in
contemplation of the Blessedness promised to the Saynctes in Heaven, be taken
with admiration of it, yea, and have a natural desire of it, as Balaa^ did,
when upon such a speculation, he did wish to die the death of the Righteous,
and to have his last end as his: and yet love the wages of Iniquity so well,
as he quyte not his greede, for all his wish of Heaven. In a word; It is
possible, that a man impenitent, and unrenewed in his heart, may be a glorious
Professor, for his out ward behavior, and have fair gifts; and yet make
Apostasy from the truth, when he gets a fit Temptation: or else, how
should it be possible, that the Devil should make glorious Professoures, and
Churchmen, in all Ages, Apostates, Persecuters, Betrayers of the Truth to the
Adversary, Vnder-myners of the Church of Christ; Except they* under all their
show, did lodge in their heart, the love of Money, and worldly Riches, more
than the love of Heaven? the love of the praise of men, rather than GOD'S
Approbation? the lust of their fleshly ease, and pleasure, more than the
pleasure of OOD? the fleshly fear of those that can kill the Body, more than
of GOD, who can cast both Soul and Body into Hell? And, therefore, no wonder,
if for satisfaction of their Ambition, Avarice* Lusts, and earthly
Affections, they become ready to sell CHRIST, and His Truth, and His Church,
and their Country, and All, when they find their Mer^hand, and the beloved
Price offered unto them.

4. OBSERVE HERE; HOW glorious soever these Illuminations, and Gifts, and
Tastinges seem, yet there is no farther here granted, but Tastinges, to such
rotten Professoures. That which they get, is either only in the Brain, by
Knowledge; or, if there be any Feelinges, they are but sleeting Motions,
slowing from temporary grounds, which proceed not from any Spiritual life
in the man, nor from a root in himself: that is, not from the Spirit dwelling
in him. Such feelinges do neither foster, nor strengthen him, for any
Spiritual Obedience; but evanish, without changing the heart. It is true, all
that the Godly get, in comparison of what he shall get, is but Tastinges:
Yet, in comparison of these fruitless tastinges of the unsound Professoures,
that which he gets, is true Eating, and Drinking, a real Feeding; holding
his soul in life, and enabling him to work the works of GOD; to mortify his
Lusts, and serve GOD in his spirit.

5. OBSERVE, That here he does not challenge those who have felt these
Tastinges, for unsound, nor threaten them, if they hold on, and make
progress. THEN, 1. The having of Illumination, and spiritual Gifts, and
tastinges of heavenly things, is not to be lightly esteemed of; but
acaccounted as steps, and degrees, unto a farther progress: vvherefrae, as
it is possible some fall away; so it is a piece of Advauncement, to encowrage
men to go on, that they fall not away. 2. There is no danger in having this
Illumination, o^ these light Tastinges: But all the hazard is, to rest upon
them, and not to tend toward Perfection; or, to fall away, after receaving
so much Encowragement. 3. And, therefore, we must not rest on Illumination, or
common gifts, how glorious soever; nor tastinges, and feelinges, how sweet
soever: but seek still in to a more near Communion with CHRIST, and still
more to mortify our lusts* and still to abound in the Fruits of Love to
CHRIST* and His Church.

Verse. 6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance;
seeing they crucify, to themselves, the Son of GOD a-fresh, and put Him to
an open shame. 1. HE says not, It is impossible they shall be saved; but,
that they shall be renewed by Repentance. THEN, Apostates salvation, is not
impossible, but because their repentance is impossible: and where Repentance
is, there is no impossibility of salvation; but a certayntie of salvation
rather. For, He that gives the Repentance, He declares His purpose, to give
Remission also.

2. He gives a reason, why they cannot get Repentance; Because they,
maliciously, renounce Christ, and crucify Him a-fresh unto themselves. That
is, draw on the guiltiness which His Enemies who crucified Him, did lie
under, by Apostasy, allowing their crucifying of Him. THEN,

1. An Apostate from CHRIST'S Doctrine, does CHRIST as open shame as he can;
and says, in effect, of CHRIST, that His Doctrine is false, and not to be
mayntayned. 2. An Apostate allows Judas, and the Jews, for crucifying of
CHRIST; and accounts CHRIST no other worthy, than so to be dealt withal.
3. Renouncing of CHRIST, makes Repentance impossible: For, He is a Prince, to
give Repentance unto ISRAEL. And, therefore, he who will not quyte CHRIST,
nor His true Doctrine, is not debarred from Repentance having, nor from
Salvation.

Verse. 7. For, the earth, which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth Herbs, meet for them by whom it is dressed, receaveth
Blessing from GOD.

Verse. 8. But that which bears thorns, and briers, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing; whose end is to be burned.

HE gives a reason of the punishment of Apostates, from the less, to the
more, under a similitude from Land-labouring, thus: As GOD blesses such men,
who, after pains taken on them, bring forth the Fruits of good Works; So
does He curse those, who, after pains taken on them, do bring forth but
evil works. And if it be but equity, that GOD curse Professoures, who bring
forth but evil fruits in their life; Much more equity He should curse
Apostates, who profess open hostility against Him.

The similitude SHOWS, 1. That men are like unmanured land, before they be
brought within the Church: but after they are made part-takers of the Gospel,
then are they like manured Land, within Hedges, GOD'S Husbandry. 2. That such
as begin to bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance, GOD blesses, and
makes more fruitful. 3. That the Means of Grace, under the Gospel, are to
our Souls, as Rain, and Laboring, and other Husbandry is to the Ground.

Verse. 8. But that which bears Thorns and Brieres, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing; whose end is to be burned. THE Similitude SHOWS, 1. That a
man may perish, for not bringing forth the Fruits of the Gospel, allbeeit
he fall not into the sin against ^he holy Ghost. 2. That there is as great
reason, why GOD should cast away a man, who amendeth not his life by the
Gospel, as that an Husbandman should give over laboring of a piece of evil
ground. 3. And, by this means also shows, That God's most severe Judgments,
have, all of them, most equitable reasons. 4. That there is a necessity of
bringing forth the Fruits of Well-doing, if a man would be free of the Curse,
either of Apostates, or of the barren Land.

Verse. 9. But, Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things
that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak. 1. HE mittigateth his
threatening of them, for fear of hurting their Faith: Beloved, says he, we
are persuaded better things of you, though we thus speak. THEN, 1. A
Preacher may threaten, fearfullie, those of whom he has good hopes; yet with
prudencie, lest he harm them. 2. And people threatened, must beware of
weakening their own Faith: knowing, that threateninges are not used to weaken
Faith; but to put away Security, and Sloathfullnesse.

2. He takes his Assurance of them, from such things as accompany
Salvation. THEN,

In the Fruits of Faith, there are Marks, and Evidences, of a man's salvation
to be found, which may give a charitable persuasion of their blessed Estate,
to such as know them.

Verse. 10. For, GOD is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of
love, which you have showed toward His Name, in that ye have ministered to the
Sayncts, and do minister. 1. THE reason of his good hopes of them, is their
bygone, and present Fruits of Love toward CHRIST'S Name, and His Sayncts.
THEN, 1. The Works of Love, done for the Glory of CHRIST, or to His Sayncts,
for CHRIST'S sake, from time to time, as GOD gives occasion, are evident
Marks of a man's salvation; and, more sure Tokens of saving Grace given, than
Illumination, and Tastinges, spoken of before. 2. No love is to be reckoned for
Love, but working Love. 3. No works are right Works, which flow not from
Love, to CHRIST.

2. Of such Works, he says, that GOD is (...) unrighteous, to forget them:
and so prooveth their Salvation, because such Fruits accompany Salvation.
THEN, 1. With the Grace of laborious Love toward CHRIST'S Name, the Grace of
Salvation does go in company. 2. Justice does agree with Grace, in the
Reward of Well-doing; because the Reward is graciously promised; and
Righteousness makes Promises to be performed. 3. The man that loves CHRIST
(...) deed, and in truth, has that which is most ^errible in GOD, for the
Pawn of his Salva^ion; even His Justice.

3. These are they whom he reprooved, for weak^esse of Knowledge, Chap. v.
Verse. 12. whom (...) he commends, for their good Affection, and ^^^ites.
THEN, 1. Mean knowledge, if (...) be sanctified, and sound, will be
fruitful in the ^orks of Love. 2. This Virtue of Love, is no ex^use for
sloathfull following of the Means of Know^edge: we must grow in Love, and
grow in Know^edge also.

Verse. 11. And we desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence,
to the full assurance of hope, unto the end. 1. HE exhorts, to continue
diligent, unto the end. THEN, 1. The diligent have need of exhortation, to
go on. 2. Exhortation to perseverance, Imports not suspicion of falling
away; but serves to farther Perseverance rather* 3. No other Tearme-day is set
to our diligence, but the end. No license to slack, or give over.

2. The end of their going on in diligence, is their f^ll assurance of hope.
THEN,

1. Whatsoever measure of assurance men have, they may yet obtain a fuller
measure of it. Still we must study to grow. 2. Constant diligence in the
works of Love, is the ready mean to foster and augment our Assurance. 3.
Christian Hope is not a Conjecture, or Probability, but an Assurance.

Verse. 12. That ye be not sloathfull: but followers of them, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. 1. HE sets the Example of the
Fathers before them, to be imitated. THEN,

1. So many examples as we have in Scripture, of the Godly gone before, as
many Leaders, and Encowragers must we reckon our selves to have. 2. The
Paynfull, and not the Sloathfull, are the true Imitators of allowed Examples.
3. In the Way to Heaven, there are many things befalling us, which make it
vnlyklie we shall come there: for which cause, there is need of Faith. 4. A
time must interveane, and troubles also, ere Heaven be possessed: There is,
therefore, need of Patience also.

2. They inherit the Promise, says he. THEN, 1. The most patient and
paynfull Servauntes of GOD, get not Heaven by Merit; but by Inheritance. 2.
They get not Heaven by Merit; but by Promise. Now, the Promise is of Grace.

Verse. 13. For, when GOD made promise to Abraham, because He could swear by
no greater, He swear by Himself;

Verse. 14. Saying, Surely, blessing, I will bless thee; and, multiplying, I
will multiply thee.

Verse. 15. And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the Promise.

1. FOR many Examples, he brings one of Father Abraham, from Genes. xxij.
verse. 16.17. and makes use of it by application.

THEN, Because we can not have all Examples at once before our Eyes, we shall
do well, for several duties, to have some select Examples singled out, for
our own more ready use.

2. He does not bring forth all Abraham's Virtues, but such as made for his
purpose.

THEN, When fit Examples are found out, those poynctes which most serve for
our edification, must be most in our Eyes.

3. He marketh, first, the Promise made: next, the confirmation of it, by an
Oath: then, the fast and constant hold laid on it, by Abraham: last, the
fruit of the holding fast; He obtained the Promise. THEN, 1. In the Example
of Believers, the nature of the Promise, and how they came by it, must
especially be marked, for helping of our Faith. 2. Preachers have Paul's
Example here, how to handle a Text.

4. He sets Abraham's Obtaining, for a Pawn of their Obtaining; allbeeit
he knew their Faith should be weaker, in degree, than Abraham's.

THEN, In making use of Examples, it must be held for a ground, that the
honest and upright Imitators, allbeeit weak, shall find the same success,
that the stronger, gone before them, have found.

Verse. 16. For, men, verily, swear by the greater: and an Oath for
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife. 1. THE Apostle being about to
comment upon this Oath, first, be shows the end of an Oath amongst men,
verse. 16. and then, the use of the Oath made to Abraham thereafter. 1. Men
swear by a Greater, says he, that the authority of him by whom they
swear, may ratify the Oath, one way, or other. But GOD has not a greater:
and, THEREFORE, Himself, and all His, is laid in pawns, to make His Oath
good. 2. He who is the Greatest, and gives authority, and weight, to all
Oaths amongst men, must be esteemed worthy to give weight, and authority,
to His own Oath. This is the Force of his reasoning.

2. The end of an Oath, is to end Controversy. Then, this similitude
IMPORTS. That as long as we are in missbeliefe, there is a Controversy
betwixt GOD and us: we testifying, that we are in suspicion of His good
affection toward us, and of His Promise keeping unto us: and GOD is offended
with us, for our wicked thoughts, entertained of Him.

3. GOD has sworn His Promise to us, to take away the Controversy. THEN, 1.
A man could condescende no farther, to give his party satisfaction, nor GOD
has condescended to satisfy us. 2. Except we will deny GOD the honor,
which we can not deny unto an honest Man* we must believe the sworn
Covenant of GOD* and particular Articles thereof. 3. Except we believe, the
Controversy remains; yea, and is doubled, after the Oath.

Verse. 17. Wherein GOD, willing more abundantly to show unto the Heyrs of
Promise, the immutabilitie of His Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. 1. ONE of
the ends of GOD'S swearing to Abraham, is the Confirmation of the Faithful,
or the Heirs of Promise, concerning the unchangeableness of GOD'S Counsel,
in making the Promise. THEN, Every Believer has the same ground of Certayntie
with ABRAHAM; seeing the Oath sworn to ABRAHAM, is sworn for their
Confirmation.

2. He calls Believers by Isaak 's style, Heirs of the Promise. THEN,
Believers are all reckoned by GOD, as so many Isaaks, and entitled with
Isaak, to be Heirs of Abraham with him, and Heirs of the Good promised to
him, and Heirs begotten by the force of GOD'S Promise, and Word, and not by
the force of nature.

And, certaynlie, allbeeit the Law serve for a Preparation, yet it is the
Gospel, and the Word of Promise, which pulls in the heart of a man to GOD,
in love, as a reconciled Father, and converteth him. Wherefore, even because of
the Believers begetting to GOD, by the immortal Seed of the Word of Promise,
he may be called the heir of Promise also.

3. By the Oath GOD declares himself willing to show the immutabilitie of
his Counsel, concerning the Salvation of Believers. THEN,

1. As many as believe in JESUS, and are begotten by the Promise, are
fore-ordayned, in GODS Counsel, for Salvation. 2. The Purpose and Counsel of
GOD, concerning such men's Salvation, is immutable. 3. GOD will have Believers
knowing this His Counsel, concerning themselves, and their Salvation, and
assured of the immutabilitie thereof. 4. HE will have the sworn Promise made
to Abraham, and his Seed, serving in particular, to the Heirs of Promise, or
Believers, to make evident this His Counsel to them in particular, as well as
to Abraham, because He swear to Abraham, to show them this His Purpose.

4. By the Oath he says, GOD is willing more abundantly, to show the
immutabilitie of His Counsel. THEN,

1. Till the immutabilitie of the LORD'S Counsel, concerning our Salvation,
be laid hold upon. Faith can not be steadfast, as the LORD would have it.
2. GOD is willing, that we should look in upon His Counsel, by the Eye of
Faith, and read our Names written in Heaven, in His Decree: and so be made
sure. 3. The Promise of Salvation, or of the Blessing to Believers, is of it
self sufficient anough for Assurance, allbeeit it were not sworn: and the
Oath is, added, not of necessity, for any weakness of the truth of the
Promise; but out of super-aboundant good will, to have us made sure. 4. It
behooveth to be most pleasant to GOD* that Believers have full assurance of
Faith, and overcome all doubting, seeing He swears the Promise, only for
this end.

Verse. 18. That by two immutable things, in the which it was impossible for GOD
to lie, we might have a strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay
hold upon the Hope set before us. ANother end of the Oath, is, That with
assurance the Believer may have strong Consolation, upon solid grounds.

1. But how descrybeth he the Believers, to whom this Comfort is allowed?
We, says he, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the Hope set
before us. That is, We, who to flee from deserved wrath, have taken our course
toward JESUS; in hope to get the Salvation offered unto us in Him. Fleeing for
refuge, a similitude, whether from nature, or from the ordinance of Moses Law,
NVMB. XXXV. verse. 6. GIVES US TO UNDERSTAND, 1. That every true Believer, of
necessity, must be^ sensible of his own sins, and the deserved Wrath of GOD
persuing him for sin. 2. Must have this esteemation of JESUS, That He is
both a ready, and sufficiently strong Refuge, to save a man from Sin and
Wrath, when he runs toward Him. 3. That in this sense of Sin, and
Wrath, and good esteemation of CHRIST, he set his Face toward Him only:
avoiding all by-ways, leading elsewhere, than to this Refuge; and running for
death and life, to be found in Him.

2. Again, while he says, To lay hold upon the Hope set before us, he
gives us to understand, 1. That in CHRIST, our Refuge, not only is there
deliverance from persuing Wrath; but also Eternal Life to be found, as it is
set before us in the Gospel. 2. That the Believer must have Hope, to obtain
this Offer. 3. And, as he is driven, by Fear of the Law, unto CHRIST; So
must he also be drawn, and allured, by this Salvation set before him;
gripping undeserved Grace, as well as fleeing deserved Wrath.

3. While he descrybeth the Believer, after this manner, as the man to whom
all these things appertain, he TEACHES us,

That, Whosoever finds himself in any truth, to be such a one as here is
descrybed, so driven, and so drawn to CHRIST; fleeing from Sin and Wrath,
and running on to CHRIST, in Him alone to be saved; may be well assured, he
is a man endewed with saving Faith, One of Abraham's Children, An Heir of
Promise, One of the society of the Saynctes, and fellowship of the Apostles*
whom the Apostle here takes in with himself, in this Text; A Man in GOD'S
Counsel, Fore-knowne, Elected, Predestined: A Man to whom GOD intended both
to speak and swear, in Abraham's person; to whom GOD allows both strong
Consolation here, and the Possession heere-after of what-so-ever is set before
him, in the Offer of the Gospel.

4. The end of the Oath; That we might have strong Consolation, by two
immutable things, ( that is, GOD'S Promise, and GOD'S Oath) in which it is
impossible that GOD should lie.

THEN, 1. The Consolation which GOD allows upon the Faithful, is strong,
able to overcome the Challenge of Sin, fear of Judgment, Death, and Hell,
and feeling or fearing of any misery what-so-ever. Other consolations are but
weak, in comparison hereof, and can overcome none of these. 2. GOD has laid
immutable Grounds for this Consolation; His unchangeable Promise, and His
unchangeable Oath. 3. GOD can not lie, nor deceive, whether He say, or swear.
4. His nature makes this impossibility of lying, and immutabilitie in
promising, and swearing. 5. GOD allows this strong Consolation, to come by
Fayths resting on these two immutable things, His Promise, and Oath. So that
the less a man apprehende the grounds of his Faith to be solid, the less
he shall be comforted: and the more he apply the Promise to himself, and
apprehende the unchangeableness of the Promise and Oath of GOD, the more
strong shall his Consolation be.

Verse. 19. Which Hope we have as an Ancre of the Soul, both sure, and
steadfast; and, which enters into that within the Veil,

Verse. 20. Whither the Forer-unner is for us entered; even JESUS: made an High
Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedek.

1. HE has told the soliditie of the ground whereupon the Believer does
rest: and now he shows the stabilitie of the grippe which the Believer
takes of these grounds, in the similitude of the grippe which a Ships Ancre
takes, being casten on good ground. In the former Verse, by Hope, was meaned
the thing hoped for, and laid hold on by Hope. In the Relative, which, in
this Verse, he understands the Hope which does lay hold. In the
similitude of an Ancre casten out of a Ship, HE GIVES US TO UNDERSTAND, 1.
That allbeeit we have not gotten full Possession of the Promises in this life,
yet we get a grippe of them, by Faith, and Hope. 2. That Hopes grippe is not a
slender imagination; but solid, and strong, like the grippe of an Ancre. 3.
That the Believer is not exempted from some tossing of Trouble, and
Temptations, while he is in this World; yea, subject, rather, to the same, as
a Ship upon the Sea. 4. That what-so-ever tossing there be, yet all is safe:
The Souls Ancre is casten within the Heaven: The Soul is sure.

2. He gives the Ansre all good Properties: It is weyghtie, solid, and
firm: It will not drive, nor bow, nor break, it is so sure, and steadfast.
Again, it is sharp, and piercing: It is entered into that within the Veil;
that is, into Heaven, represented by the Sanctuary beyond the Veil. And so
the Ground is good, as well as the Ancre, to hold all fast.

Verse. 20. Whither the Forerunner is for us entered; Even JESUS: made an High
Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedek. 1. HE commends our
Ancre-Ground for this, That CHRIST is there, where our Ancre is casten, as our
Forerunner. In continuing the Comparison, and calling CHRIST our Forerunner,
HE BRINGS TO MIND,

1. CHRIST'S being once in the Ship of the Militant Church, tossed, and
tempted as others, allbeeit without sin; 2. That He is now gone a-shoare,
to Heaven, where the Ship of the Church is seeking to land. 3. That His going
a-shoare, is as our Forerunner: and so His landing is an Evidence of our
landing also, who are to follow after Him. 4. That His going before, is to
make easy our Entry. He is Forerunner for us, for our behoof, to prepare a
place for us. 5. That our Ancre is, where CHRIST is; and so must be the surer,
for His being there, to hold all fast, till He draw the Ship to the
shore.

2. CHRIST is entered into Heaven, and made an High Priest for ever.

THEN, 1. CHRIST in Heaven, is invested in an Office for us. 2. His Office is
the High Priesthood: The Truth, and Substance, of the Typical Priesthood.
3. His Office is for ever: and so, for the Benefit of all Ages: that we now,
as well as others before us, may have the Benefit of His Intercession.

3. He is said to be made an high Priest, after his entry in Heaven. THEN,
Albeit Christ was Priest for His Church from the beginning, yet was it never so
declared, as after His Ascension, when He sent down Blessings sensibly upon
His Church: since which time, He does so still.

The Sum of Chap. VII.
I Brake off my speech of MELCHISEDEK, (will the Apostle say) Now I return to
him again, and in his excellency, will show you CHRIST'S Excellency, who is
Priest after his Order. We have no more of him in Scripture, but what we
find GENES. XIV.19.20. And there he is King and Priest both, Verse. 1. Bearing
a Mystery in his Name, and Office, Verse. 2. Without Father, or Mother, or ^^de
of life, as he stands in Scripture; that he might resemble CHRIST, Verse. 3.
Acknowledged Superior to ABRAHAM, by his paying of Tithes unto him, Verse. 4.
Even as LEVI, for that same cause, is Superior to the Brethren, Verse. 5.
Superior also, because he blessed ABRAHAM, Verse. 6.7. Superior to LEVI, for
his typical immortality, Verse. 8. And, for his taking Tithes of LEVI, in
ABRAHAM'S loins, Verse. 9.10. Yea, the Priesthood of LEVI, because imperfect,
calls for a Priest of another Order, to give Perfection; which is CHRIST,
Verse. 11. And so, both the Priesthood, and all the Ordinances thereof, are
abolished, by the MESSIAH, who behooved to be of another Trybe than LEVI,
Verse. 13.14. And of another Order also, Verse. 15. Bodily shadows were in the
Priesthood of LEVI; but endless Truth in CHRIST, Verse. 16. As DAVID'S words
do prove, Verse. 17. By which also it is prophesied, That AARON'S Priesthood
shall be disannulled, when CHRIST'S Priesthood is come, because it was not
able to do men's turn under the Law, as CHRIST'S does under the Gospel,
Verse. 18.19. And GOD obliedged not Himself to make AARON'S Priesthood stand,
as He swear to establish CHRIST'S, Verse. 20.21. And, so, the Covenant, under
the MESSIAH, is declared, to be better than under LEVI, Verse. 22. Again, the
Priesthood of LEVI had sundry Office-bearers, but CHRIST has none in His
Priesthood with Himself, nor one after Himself, Verse. 23.24. Therefore, He
is able, alone, to work out our Salvation thoroughly, Verse. 25. For, such a
Priest have we need of, who needs not offer up daily His Sacrifice: for
He has offered one, and never more, Verse. 26.27. And no wonder; for under the
Law, mortal men might be Priests; but under the Gospel, only the Son
of GOD is Priest, and that for evermore, Verse. 28.

The Doctrine of Chap. VII.
VERSE. 1. FOr, this Melchisedek, King of Salem, Priest of the most High GOD,
who met Abraham, returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him.

BY saying FOR, he gives a reason, why he calls CHRIST a Priest after the
Order of Melchisedek; because such a one was Melchisedek, His type: therefore,
such a one behooved CHRIST in Truth, and Substance, to be, as the type
imported He should be.

1. He repeateth from GENES. XIV.18.19.20. as much as served to resemble any
thing in CHRIST: but never a word touches be of Melchisedek's bringing forth
of Bread and Wine to Abraham. THEREFORE, He did not account this any typical
action, having any resemblance of that which was to be done by CHRIST his
Antitype: for then should he not have failed to mark it, seeing he
observes the mystery of his name, and place of dwelling, which is less.

2. Melchisedek, and the Church in Salem, where Melchisedek was Priest, were
not of Abraham's Family. THEREFORE, Albeit GOD did choose Abraham's Family,
as the Race wherein he was to continue the ordinary Race of his Church; yet
had he Churches, and Saynctes, beside.

3. This meeting of Abraham, and entertayning him, and his company, with Bread
and Drink, being the exercise of an ordinary Virtue, SHOWS, That it is the
duty of all men, and namely of Kings, Great men, and Churchmen, to
countenance, and encowrage, according to their place, and power, those who
hazard themselves in GOD'S Service, and good Causes.

4. To come to a particular Comparison of the Type, and the Truth. 1. As
Melchisedeck was both King and Priest, in his Kingdom; So is CHRIST King and
Priest in his Kingdom, to care for the Religion, and outward conversation of
his Subjectes; to see to the Weall of their Souls, and Bodies; both amongst
men, and toward GOD; in this life, and heere-after. 2. As Melchisedeck is the
blesser of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, in the Type; So is CHRIST, in
Truth, the Blesser of Abraham, and all the Faithful; the Fountain of all
Blessing; in whom alone every one is blessed, who gets Blessing.

Verse. 2. To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all: first being, by
interpretation, King of Righteousness; and, after that, also, King of Salem;
which is, King of Peace. 1. TO go on, in the Comparison: As Melchisedek, the
Type, was honored, by Abraham's paying of Tithes unto him: So is CHRIST to be
honored by all Abraham's Children, by giving of their Substance, and worldly
Goods, what is sufficient to maintain the honor of his Kingdom, amongst them.

2. Praesuppose the Type were laid aside, yet this thankful Meeting that
Abraham gave to the man, whose Office was to bless him, in the Name of the
LORD, does TEACH All the Faithful, Abraham's true seed, a duty of
Thankfulness, to GOD'S Servantes set over them, to bless them, in the Name of
the LORD: even to honor them, by giving of their Goods, for their sufficient
mayntaynance.

3. As Melchisedek, the Type, is by interpretion, King of Righteousness; So is
CHRIST, in Truth, King of Righteousness: 1. For the personal Righteousness
in himself. 2. Because he is the Righteousness of his Subjectes; made of
GOD, unto us, Righteousness by imputation. 3. Because he frames his
Subjectes, piece and piece, unto a righteous Disposition, by sanctifying them.

4. As Melchisedek, the Type, is King of Salem, that is, King of Peace; So is
CHRIST, in Truth, King of Peace, to his Subjectes, by reconciling them to the
Father, by giving Peace of Conscience within themselves, by making all the
creatures at peace with them, and all things turn together for their Good,
and by working still on their eternal Welfare, and Blessedness, until he
perfect it.

5. As Melchisedek was first King of Righteousness, and then King of Peace, in
the Type; So is CHRIST, in Truth, in this Order; First, King of
Righteousness, to his Subjectes, to take away their sins, and to give them
Righteousness: And then, King of Peace, because he gives them his peace, as
the Fruit of Righteousness. This is the Order of his Kingdom;
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost.

Verse. 3. Without Father, without Mother, without Descent; having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life: but made like unto the Son of GOD,
abides a Priest continually. MELCHISEDEK, certaynlie, was a very man, King,
and Priest, in such a City, if we consider him in his natural being: But,
if we consider him in his Scripturall being, as he stands in Scripture,
under this name, he has neither Father, nor Mother; beginning, nor end.
There is no more mention of him, what he was, or of whom he came, or of his
death, but these three Verses of Genes. XIV. As, then, he is in typical
being in Scripture; So is CHRIST, in Truth, in his personal being, as GOD,
without Mother; as Man, without Father; as GOD, without beginning; as GOD and
Man, without ending of life.

2. As Melchisedek, looking how he stands in his Scripturall being,
abides a Priest continually; so that where-so-ever he is named in Scripture,
there he is ever found a Priest also; and never a word of his laying down of
the Priesthood: Even so is CHRIST'S Priesthood inseperable from his person:
he abides a Priest continually, in real accomplishment.

3. By saying, he is made like unto the Son of GOD, HE GIVES US TO
UNDERSTAND, That GOD'S Purpose was, in those particulars, so to descrybe him,
as he might resemble the Person, and Offices, of the Son of GOD: And so is a
Type, of GOD'S own appointment.

4. And if he was made a lyklie Type of CHRIST, in his Office of Priesthode,
then it follows, as Melchisedek had neither any joined with him, in his
Priesthood, nor Deputy, nor Vicar, under him in it, nor Successor to his
Office: So neither has CHRIST any joined with him, or Substitute, or
Successor to him, in his Priesthood.

Verse. 4. Now, consider how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch
Abraham gave the Tenthes of the Spoils. TO show CHRIST'S Excellency, he
draws them to consider Melchidek's excellency above Abraham's: that so they
might see CHRIST'S Excellency to be far more. The reason, in force, goes
thus: 1. If Melchisedek, the Type, be more excellent than Abraham; much more
must CHRIST, of whom he is a Type. 2. And if Melchisedek's greatness be not
easily perceaved, except there be a due consideration of it; much more
CHRIST'S Greatness requires consideration, and is worthy of contemplation.
3. If Abraham, by paying of Tithes, acknowledge Melchisedek's superiority;
Much more should all Abraham's Offspring acknowledge CHRIST'S Superiority,
whom Melchisedek, typicallie, represented; by paying of what is due, for the
mayntaynance of his Service, and bestowing on his Ministers, who are appointed
to bless in his Name, (whether it be less, or more, which they bestow) in
such a manner, as it vilify not, nor disgrace their high Employment, which
CHRIST has put upon them; and so dishonor him, whose Servantes they are.

Verse. 5. And, verily, they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the
Office of the Priesthood, have a commandment, to take Tithes of the people,
according to the Law; that is, of their Brethren, though they come out of the
loins of Abraham. HE prooveth, that in Tithes taking, Melchisedek was greater
than Abraham, who did pay Tithes; Because, for the same respect, the Levites,
by taking Tithes of their Brethren, as Priests, had a Superiority over them,
for their Office cause, who, other-wayes, were their equals.

THEN, 1. The Priestlie Office lifted up the Levites, above their Brethren, who
were sprung of Abraham, as well as they. 2. The command of taking Tithes, was
annexed to the Office of the Priesthood, in token of their Superiority by
Office, over them who by nature were at least their equals.

Verse. 6. But he whose Descent is not from them, received Tithes of Abraham;
and blessed him that had the Promises.

Verse. 7. And, without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better.

HE prooveth, again, Melchisedek to be greater than Abraham; and, so,
greater than Levi; because he blessed him: and, therefore, behooved to be
greater. THEN, 1. Abraham, notwithstanding he he had the Promises, yet got
he the Blessing by Melchisedek, in Type; and, from CHRIST, represented by him,
in Truth. 2. If Melchisedek was greater, because he blessed him, as Type:
Then CHRIST far more, who blesses in effect.

Now, there are sundry sorts of Blessings. 1. There is a Blessing of
Reverence, and Worship: So Men bless GOD. This sort imports no Greatness
in the Blesser, but Subjection. 2. There is a Blessing of Charity: So Men
bless one another, by mutual Prayer. This sort imports no Superiority
neither. 3. There is a Blessing of Authority ordinary: So do GOD'S Ministers
bless the People, in the LORD'S Name. 4. A Blessing of Authority
extraordinary: So Melchisedek blessed Abraham, and the Prophets, and
Patriarchs, such as by inspiration they were directed to bless. And this
Official Blessing, with Authority, prooveth Superiority; whether it be
ordinary, or extraordinary. 5. There is a Blessing of Power, of it self,
effectual: So blesses CHRIST; and so GOD blesses Men.

FROM THIS, 1. The Excellency of the Office of GOD'S Ministers is evident, who
are appointed to bless the people, in GOD'S Name. 2. And how they should be
respected, in love, for their Work sake. 3. And how they should walk worthy
of that high and holy Employment; lest their sins make them vile, and
contemptible, before the people, as in Malachie's time, Mal. 2.9.

Verse. 8. And, here men that die, receive Tithes: but there he receaveth
them, of whom it is witnessed, that he lives. ANother point of Comparison,
tending to this end: The Levites, in their Tithing, were mortal men; one
succeeding another. But Melchisedek, in type of his Priesthood, and
Scripturall being; and CHRIST, in the Truth of his Priesthood, are
immortal: And, therefore, Melchisedek, as the typical priest, and CHRIST, as
the true Priest, are greater than Leviticall priests, by as much as
Immortality is above mortality. THEN,

Every Age has CHRIST for a Priest, living in their own time, to deal for
them, with GOD: And what Benefit they get by him, in their own time, he can
make foorth-comming unto them, even for ever.

Verse. 9. And, as I may so say, Levi, also, who receaveth Tithes, paid Tithes
in Abraham.

Verse. 10. For he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedek met
him.

ANother Reason, to this same purpose: Levi paid Tithes to Melchisedek, in
Abraham's loins: Therefore, Melchisedek is greater in his priesthood, than
the Leviticall priests. So was CHRIST in Abraham's loins, will you say. I
answer; CHRIST was the true represented priest, even when Melchisedek met
Abraham: and in Melchisedek's person, as type, the honor was done to CHRIST,
in truth, and to his Priesthood, by Abraham. And, again, CHRIST was in
Abraham's loins only in regard of the matter of humane nature; not for the
manner of propagation: and, so, is exempted from the law of natural
posterity.

1. Always, from this reasoning, WE LEARN, That, as receaving Tithes,
prooveth superiority in Office: So, paying of Tithes, or Mayntaynance in town
of Tithes, prooveth subjection to that Office, and Office-bearers, which
receive the same. And, so, Mayntaynance of Ministers, should be a Matter of
Honoring of them; or, rather, of Him that sent them, of its own proper
institution; though men turn it into a beggarlie Steepende; and count the more
baselie of the Office, because of the manner of Mayntaynance.

2. From the Reason of Levie's paying of Tithes in Abraham's loins, WE LEARN,

That there is ground in Nature, for imputation of the Father's deed, unto the
Children descended of him by natural propagation: so that as justly may GOD
impute unto us Adam's sins, as to Levi Abraham's Tithes paying.

Verse. 11. If, therefore, Perfection were by the Leviticall Priesthood, (for
under it the people received the Law) what farther need was there, that
another Priest should rise, after the Order of Melchisedek; and not be called
after the Order of Aaron? TO the end of the Chapter, he shows a Necessity,
of the abolishing of the Leviticall priesthood, and establishing of Christ's.
One Reason is in this Verse; because Perfection was not to be bad by the
Leviticall priesthood. By Perfection, is understood a perfect Satisfaction
for our Sins, and a perfect ^urchase of all that we have need of unto
eternal Life. He prooveth, that such perfection could not ^ee had by Aaron's
priesthood; because, then, there had been no need of another priesthood
after Aaron's, if perfection could have been by his priesthood. But the
Scripture shows, that there behooved to arise a Priest after Melchisedek's
Order; by whom Perfection was to be gotten, PSALM CX.

1. Therefore, Perfection could not be by Aaron's priesthood. FROM THIS WE
LEARN, That under the Law, Remission of sins, and eternal Life, was not
obtained by virtue of any sacrifice then offered: but by the virtue of
CHRIST'S Sacrifice, and CHRIST'S Priesthood, represented there-by.

2. But why could not Perfection be by that Priesthood? He gives a Reason,
saying; For under it the people received the Law. The word imports as much,
as the people were then legalized, disciplined, after a legal manner: that is,
The Law was still urged upon them; still they were pressed to give perfect
obedience, under Pain of the Curse* still GOD dealt in the external form of
handeling them; as one not satisfied for any thing that was offered, as yet,
in their name. Therefore, Perfection could not be had by that Service: For it
was evident, that neither GOD was pacified, nor their Consciences quyeted, by
any thing in that Priesthood: but all were sent to the thing signified, and
to the time which was to come, in the Messiah manifestation.

THEN. Comparing their time, and ours, for outward manner of handeling, as they
were legalized; that is, straytlie urged, by the Yoke of the Law: we are
Evangelized; that is, smoothly entreated, under the Gospel; GOD laying aside
Terror, entreating us to be reconciled, and to come, and receive Grace for
Grace.

Verse. 12. For, the Priesthood being changed, there is made, of necessity,
a change also of the Law. FROM the change of the Leviticall Priesthood, he
infers, of necessity, the abolishing of the Leviticall Law, and of our
Obligation thereunto.

THEN, 1. The Leviticall Priesthood, and the Leviticall Law, do stand and
fall together. 2. The Leviticall Law can not stand with any other priesthood
than Aaron's: it can not stand with Christ's, under the Gospel. 3. Christ's
Priesthood, seeing it is another than Aaron's, must have another Law, other
Ordinances, and statutes, than Aaron's: a Law and Ordinances suitable unto it
self. 4. To use Leviticall Ceremonies under the Gospel, is to confound the
priesthood of Aaron and Christ.

Verse. 13. For, he of whom these things are spoken, pertayneth to another
Trybe; of which no man gave attendance at the Altar.

Verse. 14. For, it is evident, that our LORD sprang out of Judah; of which Trybe
Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood.

Verse. 15. And, it is yet far more evident: For, that after the similitude of
Melchisedek, there aryseth another Priest.

1. HE prooveth, that Aaron's Priesthood is changed, and the Ordinance
thereof; because PSALM. CX. speaks of Christ's Priesthood; that is, fred from
the service of the Altar. By the Altar, he means the material Altar,
commanded in the Law: Another Altar he knows not. And Christ's Priesthood
he declares to be fred from the service of this Altar; beside which, no Law
could tie it to any other Altar.

THEN, Christ's Priesthood is fred from the Altar which GOD commanded, and
all the service thereof. And, who-so-ever will erect another material Altar in
CHRIST'S Priesthood, and tie his Church unto it, must look by what Law they
do it.

2. From Verse 14. WE LEARN. That Christ's Genealogy was well known in the
Apostle's times; and no controversy about it. And, it suffices us, that we
know this by the Apostle's Testimony; albeit we could not lineallie deduce
the same.

3. Observe how he reasons; That none of the Trybe of Judah attended the
Altar, because Moses spoke nothing of that Trybe, concerning the Priesthood.

THEN, Negative Conclusions, in Matters of Faith, and Duties, follow well
from the Scriptures silence. It is not warranded from Scripture; therefore I am
not bound to believe it. The Scripture does not require any such thing of
me; therefore GOD accounts it not service to Him to do it; is good
reasoning.

4. From Verse 15. The Apostle comparing the Proofs of his Argument, calls
this last in plain terms, Far more evident.

THEN, Of Reasons drawn from Scripture, by Consequence, some will be less
evident, some more evident; and yet all be good Reasons, and prove the
Purpose strongly.

Verse. 16. Who is made, not after the law of a carnal commandment; but after
the power of an endless life. HE enters into a more particular comparison,
of the Leviticall Priesthood, and CHRIST'S; to show the weakness of the one,
in comparison of the other. The Leviticall Priests, in their Consecration, got
a commandment, for the Exercise of bodily and carnal Rites, some few
years of their mortal life; without power to convey the Grace signified by
those bodily Rites. But CHRIST, in his Consecration, is endewed with Power, to
confer Grace, and Life eternal, from Generation, to Generation, to all that
seek the Benefit of his Priesthood.

THEN, We may be assured of Christ's power, to make the means which he
uses for our salvation effectual; as we may be assured of his endless life.

Verse. 17. For, He testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchisedek. HE prooveth this by Scripture, because GOD calls Him a Priest
for ever: Therefore, He has Power for ever, as living for ever, to make His
own Priesthood effectual. So, The eternity of CHRIST'S Priesthood,
prooveth it to be forcible, to g^ue Eternal Life. For, if it did not endure
in his person, it could not give Eternal Life; and peoples hearts would not
rest upon it, with any ground: And so it behooved to be renounced, and
another Priesthood sought. But seeing it is not to be changed, but shall
endure; Then, of need force, it has the thing to give us, which we are
seeking: that is, Eternal Life. THEN,

As long as Christ endures, we want not a Priest, to hear confession of
sin, to give absolution, to bless us, and give us Eternal Life.

Verse. 18. For, there is, verily, a disannulling of the Commandment going
before, for the weakness, and unprofitableness, thereof. 1. BY the same
words, of establishing Christ's Priesthood, PSALM. CX. he prooveth, that the
Leviticall Law was to be abolished, when Christ came: Because the
establishing of Christ's Priesthood, and bringing it to light, is the
disannulling of the Leviticall. THEN, There needs no more, to declare, That
the Leviticall Priesthood, and Law, is abolished, and we fred from the
Ceremonies thereof, but the coming of CHRIST, and His entering to his Office
of Priesthood.

2. He gives a Reason, of the abolishing of this Priesthood; Because it was
weak, and unprofitable.

Question. How can that be, seeing it was ordained, to strengthen the
Believers, then, and was profitable for that end?

I answer. It is called weak, and unprofitable, in regard of any power, to
make satisfaction to GOD'S justice for our sins, or to purchase any
Salvation unto us: For, other ways, as a Mean, to lead men, for that time,
unto the MESSIAH, who should satisfy for us, it was not weak, nor
unprofitable: But, to pacify GOD, and purchase Salvation, as the missbelieving
Jews did use it, it was weak, and unprofitable, altogether. Again, being
considered as a Mean, to praefigure CHRIST, it was profitable still, till
CHRIST came; namely, for that end, and use. But when He is come, no end,
nor use, more for it; but that i^ should be abolished; having served the Turn
whereunto it was ordained.

THEN, 1. Leviticall Ceremonies, what-so-ever use they might have had before
CHRIST, are weak, and unprofitable, after His coming. 2. It is evil
reasoning, to say, such Rites and Ceremonies were used before CHRIST came;
therefore, they may be used now also.

Verse. 19. For, the Law made nothing perfect; but the bringing in of a better
Hope did: by the which we draw nigh unto GOD. HE prooveth, That those Rites
were weak: Because the Law, whether Moral, or Ceremonial, could not perfect
any thing: that is, justify, sanctify, and save any man.

1. They served as a Pedagogue, to lead a man to CHRIST, for expiation of
Sin, and purchase of Salvation: but could not effectuate this, by themselves.
And this makes good the Answer to the Question in the former Verse. THEN,

To seek to be perfected, justified, and saved, by works, is to seek that
by the Law, which could never be brought to pass, by it.

2. What, then, does perfect all? He answers: The bringing in of a better
Hope, perfecteth all. That is, CHRIST then bo^ed for, and looked unto, who is
that Better Thing; ^^en the End, and the Signification, of those Legal
Ordinances, being brought in unto Believers; He d^eth perfect all. THEN, 1.

What the Believers could not get under the Law, by their outward service,
they got it by CHRIST, hoped for, and believed into. 2. The Believers of old,
rested not on the shadows; but had the Eye of their Hope on CHRIST.

3. He commends this Better Hope: that is, CHRIST'S Priesthood hoped for
under the Law; Because by it we draw nigh unto GOD. Now, Drawing nigh,
imports a distance before drawing nigh: and, again, Drawing nigh, was the
Priests prerogative under the Law. THEN,

By Nature, and without CHRIST, we are Aliens from GOD, and far away from
Him: But, by CHRIST, we get Liberty, to come nigh; not only is GOD'S people,
but as Priests, through CHRIST, to offer our Spiritual Oblations. The
Priests Privilege of old, is common to Bel^evers now.

Verse. 20. And, in as much, as not without an Oath, He was made Priest:

Verse. 21. (For, those Priests were made without an Oath: but This, with an
Oath, by Him that said unto Him, The LORD swear, and will not repent, Thou art
a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedek)

Verse. 22. By so much was JESUS made a Surety of a better Testament.

1. HE goes on, to compare the Leviticall Priesthood, with CHRIST'S. Two
Comparisons are here conjoined: First, Leviticall Priests, were made without
an Oath, only by way of simple Ordinance, and Direction; GOD leaving rowme to
himself, how long he pleased to hold on the Direction; and when he
pleased, to change it* But CHRIST was made Priest with an Oath, that he
should never be changed.

THEN, 1. When GOD gave forth the Ceremonial Law, he reserved rowme to
himself, to change it: yea, gave evidence, that he was to change it: for,
he obliedged the people, during his will; but not himself. 2. But, for
CHRIST'S Priesthood, GOD is bound with an Oath, Never to change it: and, it
leans on his nature, which can not alter, nor repent; and, upon his Oath,
which can not be violated.

2. Another Comparison, betwixt the Leviticall Covenant, and the Evangelicall
Covenant. As far as the Oath is above the chaungeable commandment, by so
much is the New Covenant better than the Covenant under the Law. TEHN, 1.

There was a Covenant, or Testament, whereby Believers were saved, as well
under the Law, as under the Gospel. 2. The Covenant now, though, in substance
of Salvation, one with the former; yet, in the manner of downe-setting the
Articles, and the form of it, is better than the Covenant then, more clear,
more free, more full, more largely extended, and more firm.

3. CHRIST is here called Surety of this Covenant. THEN, 1. CHRIST must see
the Covenant kept, and be good for it. 2. GOD has CHRIST to crave, for our
performance of the Covenant: and we have CHRIST to crave, for GOD'S part of
the Covenant: Yea, and CHRIST to crave, to give us grace, to perform that
which GOD requires of us in his Covenant. 3. JESUS is content to be Surety:
and the Father has consented, and ordained, and made him Surety. So, it
rests only, that we be content also, and make much of CHRIST, that he
may do all our Work for us, and all GODS Work in us.

Verse. 23. And they, truly, were many Priests; because they were not
suffered to continue, by reason of death.

Verse. 24. But, this Man, because He continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood.

ANother Excellency of Christ's Priesthood, above the Leviticall; which may
be braunched out in these particulars following:

1. The Leviticall Priests were many, both at one time, and one after
another: by reason whereof, that Priesthood was weakened, while one part of
the Office, for such a time, was in the hands of this man; and another part,
for another time, was in the hands of that man. And, because one man could not
be ready to take the Sacrifices from all the people, therefore, several men
behooved to take several parts of the burden. But, in Christ's Priesthood,
there is but one Man, even Himself; His Priesthood is undivided: no man
bears a part of the burden with him: He, alone, attends all men's
Sacrifices, by himself: He is at leisure, for every man's employment, at all
times, in the greatest throng of Sacrifices.

THEN, As long as CHRIST is at leisure, no reason to employ another, to carry
our Prayers.

2. The Leviticall Priesthood, did pass from one person, to another: Death
made interruption. But CHRIST'S Priesthood can not pass from his own person,
to any other: neither Death, nor any other infirmity, can interrupt his
Office.

THEN, 1. To make any Priest, by special Office, in the New Testament* beside
CHRIST, is to vent the Priesthood of CHRIST* and make it imperfect, like
AARON'S; which, for the same reason, That it had many Priests, was weak, and
imperfect, and inferior to CHRIST'S. 2. To make Priests, by Office, in the
New Testament, to offer up any corporal sacrifice, is to make CHRIST'S
Pristhood separable from his own person: which is against the nature of
CHRIST'S Priesthood, which can not pass from one, to another: for so imports
the word. 3. To make plurality of Priests in Christ's Priesthood, Vicars, or
Substitutes, or, in any respect, part-taker of the Office with him, is to
praesuppose, that Christ is not able to do that Office alone; but, is either
dead, or weak, that he can not fulfill that Office: contrary to the Text
here, which says, Because he continues ever, he has an unchangeable
Priesthood: or, a Priesthood which can not pass from one, to another.

Verse. 25. Wherefore, He is able also to save them, to the uttermost, which
come unto GOD by Him; seeing He ever lives, to make intercession for them. 1.
HE shows the Fruit of Christ's keeping still the Priesthood, altogether in
his own person, to be, The perfect Salvation of all Believers for ever: He
is able to save, to the uttermost, them that come unto GOD, through Him. THEN,
1. Who-so-ever communicates Christ's Priesthood, with any other beside his
own person, makes Christ not able, alone, to save, to the uttermost, those
that come unto GOD, through Him. 2. From this ground also, it does follow,
that Christ not only begins the Believers salvation; but perfecteth it
also. He does not work a part of a man's salvation, and leave the rest to
his own merits, (or the merits of others;) but perfecteth it Himself, even
to the vttermoste. 3. And if a man join any thing meritorious unto Christ's
Priesthood, or any Mediator, for intercession, beside him, or seeks, by his
own works, to purchase salvation, he denies Christ to be able to save him
to the vttermoste.

2. He descrybeth Believers, to be those that come to GOD, through CHRIST.
THEN, 1. Christ is the Door, and the Way, through which only Access is
gotten to GOD. By Saynctes, or Angels, there is not a way to come to GOD; but
by Christ only. 2. They that come not through Him alone to GOD, seclude
themselves from the sufficiency of salvation to be had in Him. 3. The nature
of Believing, is to make a man come toward GOD, to get communion with Him,
through Christ. 4. And none but such as come in Faith to GOD, through Christ,
can take comfort from His Priesthood, or look for salvation.

3. He gives a Reason, why perfect Salvation is to be had for such as come
to GOD, through CHRIST: Because He lives for ever, to make intercession for
them. He says not, To offer, or cause offer up, the Sacrifice of his body
for them: But, He lives, and is not to be offered any more: and, lives, to
make intercession.

THEN, 1. The sacrificing part is done, and ended: His intercession has now
the place: and, by His intercession, we get the Merit of His Death and
Passion, applied unto us: and not by any new Oblation. 2. If He brook His
life, He will not fail to intercede for us, who come unto GOD, through Him;
and not through Saynct, or Angel, or any person beside: For, He lives for
ever, to make intercession for us.

Verse. 26. For, such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens. TO the end
he may force the Hebrews, to forsake the Priesthood of Levi, he draws a
strong Reason, from the nature of our Estate under the Gospel; where-by he
prooveth, not only, that the priests of Aaron 's Order are abolished; but,
also, every son of Adam is excluded from the Office of the Priesthood,
except JESUS CHRIST in his own person only. Because, every Priest that
wants the properties of JESUS CHRIST, is unbeseeming for us under the
Gospel. A sinful man might have been a Priest under the Law, to praefigure
CHRIST, before He came: But, now, no sinful man may be a Priest by Office,
but CHRIST only, in whom there is no sin. When the sacrifice was a beast,
then a sinful man might be a priest: But, now, when the Son of GOD is the
Sacrifice, and has offered up himself already, and is gone in, into the
Sanctuary, with his own blood, to make intercession; there must be no more
any sacrificing, till he come out of the Sanctuary again, at the Day of
Judgment: nor any priest, but he, till he have ended his Intercession. For,
such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, etc. Question. But why
is it unbeseeming us under the Gospel, to have a priest without these
properties? I answer. The Sacrifice of the New Testament, is the unspotted
Lamb of GOD, JESUS CHRIST, holy, harmless, etc. Therefore it becomes us to
have such a priest, who is holy, harmless, and undefiled. For, it were
unseemly, that the priest should be worse than the sacrifice. Next, our
Priest has our sins, original, and actual, to remove, and Heaven to open
unto us: And, therefore, it were unbeseeming, that any should be our priest,
who has not his own sins altogether remooved, nor yet has gotten entry,
as yet, into Heaven himself.

1. In that he draws them, of necessity, to quyte all men's priesthood, and
betake them unto Christ, as Priest only, WE LEARN, That our necessities
being well weighed, with the insufficiency of any beside CHRIST, to do our
Turn, we shall be forced to quyte all priests, but CHRIST only: For,
what priest can know all our needs, all our sins, all our thoughts, all
our desires, all our prayers, all our purpose^, and wayt on upon our business,
with GOD, night and day, to see that no wrath break out upon us? Who can do
this, but CHRIST only? What Man? What Saynct? What Angel?

2. In that he reckons a number of Perfections, necessary to be in a
priest, in the time of the Gospel, all of them in CHRIST, and, all such as we
stand in need of, WE LEARN, That all the perfections whereof we have need
in a priest, are all in CHRIST: And, the perfections which are in CHRIST, we
have need of them all, and should make use of them all.

3. The first property of a priest under the Gospel, is this, He must be
holy: that is, of his own nature holy, in his original holy. THEN, No
sinful man can be a sufficient priest in the New Testament, to do for us, who
wants holiness by nature.

4. The next property: Our priest must be harmless, ill-lesse, free from
any original guiltiness.

THEN, No man, come of Adame, by natural propagation, can be a priest for us
now, to satisfy our necessities, who have sin original in us.

5. The third property: We have need of a priest undefiled; that is, free
from actual sin.

THEN, No priest can suffice us, who are defiled with actual sin, but
CHRIST, who never sinned.

6. The fourth property: A priest meet for us, must be free from the
pollution of these amongst whom he converseth. THEN, We who are of polluted
lips, and lives, and dwell amongst such a people, communicating, many ways,
of their guiltiness, can not have sufficient comfort, through any priest, who
can be infected with sin. And, he who is a man of polluted lips, is not
meet to be a priest for us.

7. The fifth property: A priest meet for us, behooved to have his Residence
in Heaven, and have commandment over Heaven, to open it unto us, and give us
entry. THEN, None other, but CHRIST, could suffice us, on whom, by nature,
the Doors of Heaven are closed. No priest, out of Heaven, is meet for us.

Verse. 27. Who needs not daily, as those High Priests, to offer up
Sacrifice, first, for his own sins, and then, for the peoples: For, this He
did once, when He offered up Himself. 1. THE sixth property of a fit priest
for us: He must have no need to offer Sacrifice for his own sins. THEN,
Neither LEVI, nor any sinful Man after him, can be a priest under the New
Testament; but CHRIST only, who never sinned, and so had never need to offer
for Himself.

2. The seventh property: He must not have need to offer daily for the
peoples sins, who must be our priest: For, if he should offer the second
day, then the first days Sacrifice should be declared insufficient: Or,
else, why offers he again, after that which is sufficient? THEN, 1. The
Priest of the New Testament, needs not to offer oftener nor once. 2. And if
CHRIST'S Sacrifice were offered oftener nor once, or daily, He could not be
a fit priest for us, nor offer a perfect sacrifice for us; for, the often
offering, should declare the former offeringes, insufficient, and imperfect.

3. He gives a Reason, why Christ needed not to offer up oftener; Because he
has offered up himself, once, for the sins of the people.

THEN, 1. CHRIST was both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, in His own Offering.
2. CHRIST'S Sacrifice can not be offered up by any, but Himself: another nor
CHRIST'S self, can not offer up CHRIST. 3. Betwixt the coming of CHRIST, and
the writing of this Epistle, which was sundry years after CHRIST'S Ascension,
the Apostle knew no Offering of CHRIST, but that only once, upon the Cross:
and yet, times out of number, was the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S Supper celebrated
before this time.

4. In that he makes that once offering, the Reason of his not offering
daily, it TEACHES US, That the perfection of that once offered sacrifice,
makes the repetition needless: and, whosoever makes it needful, that CHRIST
be offered daily, makes both CHRIST an imperfect Priest, and His sacrifice
imperfect also.

Verse. 28. For, the Law makes Men High Priests, which have infirmity; but,
the word of the Oath, which was since the Law, makes the Son, who is
consecrated for evermore. HE gives a special Reason, why it beseems not us
under the Gospel, to have a sinful man for our priest; because this is the
very difference betwixt the Law, and the Gospel.

1. The Law makes Men, which have infirmities, high priests: But, the word
of the Oath, which was since the Law, makes the Son; and, none but the
Son, who is consecrated for evermore.

THEN, The Scripture knows no priest, but the Leviticall priests, of AARON'S
posterity, for the time of the Law: or, else, that one priest which was made
by an Oath, for the time of the Gospel. Beside these, the Apostle
acknowledges none; nor were there any other, in his time, in the Church.

2. He makes the difference of the Law, and the Gospel, to stand, amongst
other things, in the difference of priests: so as the Gospel can not admit
such pristes, as the Law admitted.

THEN, To have priests now, after the similitude of the priests under the
Law, were to remove the difference which GOD has made betwixt the Law, and
the Gospel.

3. The Differences, as the Apostle sets them down here, are, 1. The
Course taken about priests, under the Law, was alterable: they were made
without an Oath; the Lawgiver declaring it to be his will, to change that
Course, when he saw it fit. But the Course taken about the priests of the
New Testament, is with an Oath: and, so, can not be changed. THEN, To make a
priest in the Gospel, who is not consecrated by an Oath, to abide for evermore
in the Office; but may be changed, and another come in, in his place, is
contrary to the institution of the Evangelicall Priesthood.

2. The next Difference, he makes this: The Law admits Men, in the
plural number; a plurality of priests: but the Gospel admits no
plurality of priests; but the Son, only, to be priest. Melchisedek's
Order in the Type, has no priest but one in it, without a Suffragane, or
substituted priest. Therefore, CHRIST, the true Melchisedek, is alone in his
Priesthood, without Partner, or Deputy, or Suffragane. THEN, To make
plurality of priests in the Gospel, is to alter the Order of MELCHISEDEK,
sworn with an Oath; and, to renounce the March set betwixt the Law, and the
Gospel.

3. The third Difference: The Law makes men priests, but the Evangelicall
Oath makes the Son of GOD Priest for the Gospel.

THEN, To make a man priest now, is to mar the Son of God's privilege, to
whom the privilege only belongs.

4. The fourth Difference: The Law makes such priests, as have infirmity:
that is, Sinful Men, who can not make the sacrifice which they offer,
effectual, to pacify; nor the Blessing which they pronounce, to come; nor the
instruction which they give, forcible to open the Eyes. But the Evangelicall
Oath, makes the Son, who is able to save, to the uttermost, all that come to
GOD, through Him.

THEN, To make a sinful and weak man, a Priest now, is to weaken the
Priesthood of the GOSPEL, and make it like the Law.

5. The fifth Difference. The Law makes men Priests, which have infirmities,
over whom Death had power, that they could not be consecrated, but for their
short life time. But, the Evangelicall Oath, makes the Son, whom the
Sorrows of Death could not hold; and has consecrated Him for evermore.

THEN, As long as CHRIST'S Consecration lasts, none must meddle with His
Office.

6. The last Difference. The Law instituting Priests, was not GOD'S Last
Will, but might suffer Addition. But, the Evangelicall Oath, is since the Law,
and GOD'S last and unchangeable Will.

THEREFORE, To add unto it, and bring in as many Priests now, as did serve
in the Temple of old, is to provoke GOD to add as many Plagues as are
written in GOD'S Book, upon themselves, and their Priests also.

The Sum of Chap. VIII.
THIS is the sum of all that I have spoken: We have no priest now, but
CHRIST, who is equal in Glory to His Father in Heaven, Verse. 1. The Offerer
of His own Body, signified by the Tabernacle, Verse. 2. For, every priest
must offer something: therefore, so must Christ, Verse. 3. But, the Typical
Sacrifice He could not offer, by the Law; albeit He were on earth, Verse. 4.
Because He is not of the Tribe of LEVI, whose proper Office was to meddle with
the shadows. Therefore, He must be the Offerer of the Substance; that is, of
His own Body, signified by the shadows, Verse. 5. And, so, now, He has
taken the Office over the Levites head; and has an Office more excellent than
they; and is Mediator of a better Covenant, than the Covenant which was in
their time, Verse. 6. For, if that Covenant had been perfect, another had been
needless, Verse. 7. But, another Covenant was needful: and GOD promised to
make a New one, Verse. 8. A better Covenant, than that old, which the people
brake, Verse. 9. For, in this Covenant, GOD undertakes, to make us keep our
part of it, Verse. 10.11. And, to pardon, where we fail, Verse. 12. Now, when
GOD promised a New Covenant, He declared the other to be old; and, to be
abolished, when the New came. Verse. 13.

The doctrine of Chap. VIII.
VERSE. 1. NOw, of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum: We have
such an High Priest, who is set on the Right Hand of the Throne of the
Majesty, in the Heavens.

1. THE Apostle, accommodating himself, to help the capacity and memory of
the Hebrews, and urging the special Poynct of his Discourse, is worthy of
imitation.

2. In saying, We have such an High Priest, who is set down on the Right
Hand, etc. he sets forth the Glory of Christ's person, that he may
commend His Priesthood.

THEN, 1. The Glory of CHRIST'S Office, is not seen, till the Glory of His
Person be seen. 2. The Glory of His Person is not seen, till His glorious
Soveraygnitie; and Governament of the World be seen. 3. Yea, the Glory of
CHRIST is not rightly seen, till His Equality with the Father, in Glory,
be seen, and acknowledged.

3. In saying, that Christ, as high Priest, is set down on the Right hand of
the Throne, he gives us to UNDERSTAND, That CHRIST, as in His Divine Nature,
He is undivided from the Father, in Glory, and Dominion; So, in His Humane
Nature, He is exalted to the Fellowship of Divine Glory, with the Father:
Because of the Union of the Humane Nature, with the Divine, in one Person of
the Mediator: The two Natures still remaining distinguished; but not divided,
nor separated, the one from the other.

4. He notes the place of this Glory, to be in the Heavens, wherein he
prefers Christ, above the Leviticall Priests: for, their Priesthood is
only exercysed on Earth; but Christ's, in Heaven.

AND, THEREFORE, When we will employ our high Priest, we have no earthly
City to seek Him in; but in the Heaven, the only Place and Palace of His
residence.

Verse. 2. A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the
LORD pitched, and not man. 1. FOR all this Glory, yet Christ is still called
here a Minister; TO SHOW US, That His High Honor, hinders Him not to do
His Office, for our Good.

2. He is called a Minister of the Sanctuary, or, of the holy things; for
the word will agree with both, and both tend to one purpose: for, the holy
things, were all tied to the Sanctuary: and, he that was Minister of the
Sanctuary, was Minister of the holy things also; and that, in name of the
Saynctes. Now, the Sanctuary, or the holy things, which here is spoken of,
is the thing signified by the Sanctuary, and by the holy things. And, so,
taking all the significations of the word together, WE ARE TAVGHT,

That CHRIST, in his Glory, is not idle; but, as a faithful Agent, in the
heavenly Sanctuary, taking the care of all the holy things, which his
saynctes, and people, are commanded to present, procuring, and giving forth,
all holy, and spiritual things, from heaven, to his saynctes, which their
estate requires.

3. He is called, a Minister of the true Tabernacle, which GOD pitched, and
not man: That is, The Minister of his own Body, miraculouslie formed by GOD;
not after the ordinary manner of other men, signified, and represented by the
Typical Tabernacle.

THEN, The Tabernacle, and Temple, under the Law, was but the shadow; and
Christ's Body was the true Tabernacle. For, 1. As the symboles of GOD'S
presence, was in the typical Tabernacle; So the fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily in Christ. 2. As the typical tabernacle had enclosed in it
all the holy things, the Candle-sticke, Table of Shewbread, Laver, Altar,
etc. So has the humanity of Christ, or Christ the Man, all holiness, and
perfection; the fullness of all good, and all holy things, in him, Light,
Food, Washing, and Reconciliation, and all in himself; that out of his
fullness, we may all receive Grace for Grace. 3. As the Tabernacle, in the
outmost Coveringes, seemed but base, yet had better stuff within; So, our
LORD, when he dwelt in the tabernacle of his flesh amongst us, was found in
form as a man, and in the shape of a servaunt: but, inwardly, was full of
Grace, and Truth.

4. In calling Christ's Body, The true Tabernacle, which GOD builded, and not
man, he teaches us, To make use of Christ in truth, as the Church of old
made use of the Tabernacle in the Type: That is, In him seek GOD, Toward him
turn the Eye of our soul, when we seem, to our selves, to be far
remooved, to the end of the earth; In him offer all our spiritual sacrifices;
In him seek our Washing, our Food, our Light, our Comfort: In him, as his
Priests, make our Abode, and daily Dwelling. In him let us live, and breathe.

5. In so calling Christ, he appropriateth the sacrifcing of his Body, to
himself, in his own person, as the personal and proper Act of his
Priesthood: for the offering of the which Sacrifice, once, and never oftener,
(as HEBR. vij. 27. shows) he keeps still the style of the only Minister
of the true Tabernacle, as his own incommunicable Prerogative.

AND, THEREFORE, Who-so-ever presumes to offer his Body, presumes also to
take his place.

Verse. 3. For, every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts, and Sacrifices:
wherefore, it is of necessity, that this Man have somewhat also to offer.
HE prooveth, That Christ is the Minister of the Tabernacle of his own Body,
by offering it up; because it behooved him, seeing he is a Priest, to offer up
something, either the typical Oblations, or else his own Body, represented
by them. But the typical Oblations he could not offer, according to the Law,
not being a Levite: Therefore, he behooved to offer up himself, represented
by the typical Oblations. THEN,

The Apostle acknowledges no Priest, but either the Leviticall priest, or the
Priest that offers up his own Body. And, who-so-ever pretends to have the
Office of a priest now, usurps either the Office of the Levite, or Christ's
Office.

Verse. 4. For, if He were on earth, He should not be a Priest; seeing that
there are Priests, which offer Gifts according to the Law. 1. HE prooveth,
That Christ can not offer up the typical Oblations; Because he can not be a
Priest on earth, albeit he were on earth: Because Priesthood on earth, is
proper to the Levites only: For, they are the only Priests, by Law, on
earth, and have praescrybed to them, by Law, what they should offer.

Question. You will ask me here, Was not Christ a Priest, when he was on
earth? I answer; Yes. How, then, says the Apostle here, If he were on earth,
he should not be a Priest? I answer; Because, albeit he began his
Priesthood upon earth, yet he could not brook his Office of Priesthood on
the earth. For, as the high Priest, who was the Type, carried the Sacrifice,
once a-yeare, through the Court, and before the Sanctuary killed the
Sacrifice, and then took the blood thereof in unto the Holiest of all, and
presented himself there before the LORD, with the blood, to intercede for the
people, and there remained, during the time of Intercession appoyncted to him:
So Christ, carrying his Sacrifice out of the City, offered up his Body, on
the Altar of his Godhead, to his Father* and, by his own blood, entered into
the heavenly Sanctuary, and sat down, on the Right hand of the Majesty on
high; and there he lives for ever, to intercede for us, having then ended his
Sacrifice, as this Apostle prooveth, Chap. vij.17. and Chap. ix.25.26. And,
having no Sacrifice now to offer on earth, it is with reason, that the Apostle
says, If He were on earth, He should not be a Priest.

WHENCE WE LEARN, 1. That Christ is not now on the earth, nor in any place
thereof: and, therefore, if any man say to us, Lo, here he is; Lo, there
he is, we must not believe him: it is a false christ he shows us, and not
the True, as CHRIST himself fore-warneth, MATTHEW. XXIV.23. 2. That it is
impossible, that Christ should now be on the earth; for then should he lose
his Priesthood, which is impossible. For, if he were on earth, he should not
be a Priest, says the Apostle here. 3. That Christ's Priesthood is only
discharged now in heaven, seeing he can not be a Priest on earth.

2. His Reason is; They are Priests, which offer Gifts, according to the
Law. THEN, Every Priest, who brooketh his Priesthood on earth, must offer
Gifts, according to the Law, as the Apostle here reasons: And, such
Priests as those, Christ has abolished, having changed the Priesthood, and
the Law also.

THEREFORE, There can be no Priest by Office on earth at all, with GOD'S
allowance.

Verse. 5. Who serve unto the Example, and Shadow, of Heavenly things: as
Moses was admonished of GOD, when he was about to make the Tabernacle: For,
see (says He) that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed
unto thee in the Mount. HE descrybeth, the proper use of the Leviticall
Priests, to serve unto the Example of heavenly Things. THEN, 1. The
Incarnation of Christ, his Death, and the Benefits thereof, signified by
Leviticall Shadows, are heavenly things, in regard of their heavenly
Fruits, and Effects, and other heavenly Respects; and, are with an
heavenly Mind to be looked upon. 2. The Ceremonies of the Law, were not
idle Rites; but, Examples, and Figures of Christ, and his Graces; by the which
men were led, then, as by the hand, to Christ, who was to come.

2. From EXODUS XXV.40. he prooveth, they were Shadows of heavenly things;
because the Pattern in the Mount represented the heavenly things; and Moses
Tabernacle represented the Pattern in the Mount: Therefore, it represented
heavenly things. And, unto this Pattern was Moses tied.

THEN, 1. GOD would not, no, not in the time of Types, suffer any devyse of
man to come in, for representing any thing heavenly: Much less will he
now. 2. Those which himself ordayneth, he will have observed, and none
omitted.

Verse. 6. But now has He obtained a more excellent Ministry; by how much
also He is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon
better Promises. 1. THE offering of the Typical Oblations, he has made
proper to the Levites. Now, the offering of the true Sacrifices, and service
belonging thereunto, he appropriateth to Christ; and calls it, A more
excellent Ministry.

THEN, 1. The offering of the thing signified by the Leviticall Types, is more
excellent than all their Offeringes. 2. This Ministry is proper unto Christ
only, in his own person.

2. From this he prefers the Mediatourship of Christ, to the Typical: The
Promises, and the Covenane now, to the Covenant then. His reasoning, is: As
the Ministry is, so is the Mediator. The Ministry is more excellent, in
offering up himself, than the shadows. Therefore, the Mediator is more
excellent now, than the typical of old.

THEN, The offering of Christ's Body, which is the more excellent Ministry,
is still annexed to the Person of the Mediator only. And, who-so-ever
intrudeth himself into that excellent Ministry, of offering up Christ's
Body, intrudeth himself also into the Office of the Mediator.

3. In comparing the Covenant then, and now, he makes this the better;
Because the Promises are better. WHENCE WE LEARN, 1. That there was a
Covenant betwixt GOD, and his Church, of old, under the Law: And, so,
Reconciliation to be had with GOD then. 2. That how-so-ever in substance of
Grace, both the Covenantes agreed; yet the form of this Covenant under the
Gospel, is better: Because the express conditions are better, the Promises
are more spiritual, and more free of strayte conditions.

Verse. 7. For, if that first Covenant had been faultlesse, then should no
place have been sought for the second. TO clear the abolishing of the old
Covenant, he prooveth it, not to be faultlesse; Because a New Covenant was
promised in place thereof. Not that any thing was wrong in that Covenant; but
because it was imperfect, and all things needful not expressed in it
clearlie. WHENCE WE LEARN,

1. That the LORD'S proceeding with his Church, has ever been from the less
perfect, to the more perfect, till Christ came. 2. That where ever GOD adds,
or alters, what he once did institute; by so doing, he shows, That before
his Addition, he had not expressed all his Mind, as in the time of the Old
Testament. 3. When once he has perfected his course taken with his Church, as
now he has done under the New Testament, he alters the matter no more.

Verse. 8. For, finding fault with them, he says; Behold, the days come,
(says the LORD) when I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel,
and the House of Judah. 1. HE prooveth, That there was an imperfection in the
Old Covenant; Because GOD sound fault with the people under it.

THEN. The imperfection of the Covenant of old, was especially in default of
the parties with whom it was made; who, by their inabilitie to fulfill it, or
behold the drift of it, made it unable to save themselves.

2. In the words of Ierem. xxxj.31. the LORD promises, to make a Covenant,
afterward, with the house of Israel, and Judah.

THEN, 1. The party in the New Covenant, is not all Man-kynde, but the Church
of the New Testament; the spiritual Israel, and Judah. 2. This Covenant was
not brought to light of old; but had its own time of manifestation. 3. Even
then, the Church was made wise of the imperfection of the Old Covenant; that
they might learn to look through the outward form of it, to a better. 4. The
Hope, and Too-looke, which they had toward the New Covenant, held up their
heart; that they, without us, and our Privileges, should not be perfected.

Verse. 9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the
day when I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt;
because they continued not in My Covenant; and I regarded them not, says the
LORD. 1. THE Prophet distinguishes the Old Covenant, from the New, by
descrybing the Old, what it was, how broken, and how punished. For the
first, the ten Commandments, and the rest of the Law delivered unto them,
when they came out of Egypt, was the Covenant of old; wherein GOD promised,
To be their GOD, upon Condition, That they did all that he commanded them:
and, they accepted the Condition. So, Albeit there was Grace here, in sundry
Articles, covenanted, yet the form of the Covenant, was like the Covenant of
Works. Compare Ierem. xvij.23. with Ierem. xxxj.31.32.33. etc.

2. For the next: They continued not in it, through leaning to their own
strength, and seeking to establish their own Righteousness; being ignorant
of the Righteousness of GOD. They dealt deceatfullie in the Covenant, and fell
to open Idolatry, from time, to time. SO, By the Covenant of Works, no man
will be found steadfast.

3. For the punishment of it: I regarded them not. In the Hebrew it is as much,
as, I Lorded it over them: That is, Used My Husbandlie, and Lordly Authority
over them, and so misregarded them.

Whereof we have to learn, 1. That as GOD'S Lordship, and Husbandship, is an
Obligation of doing well to the Covenant keeper; So is it a Declaration, of his
just Freedom, and Authority, to punish the Covenant breaker. 2. That when GOD
is pleased, to exercise his Dominion, and Authority, over Covenant breakers,
the transgressour falls in missregarde with GOD: that is, As little account
is made of his life, as of one without the Covenant. 3. That to be
missregarded of GOD, is the sum of all Judgment. 4. That the impotencie of
the people, to keep the Old Covenant, did not exeeme them from the punishment
due to the breaking of it.

4. The LORD makes their instabilitie in the Old Covenant, the Reason of his
making of a New one. Wherein the Lord's Bounty is very remarkable; Who, out
of our evil, takes occasion, to do us so much more good: And, because of
men's instabilitie in the Old Covenant, makes another Covenant, whereby he
makes us to persevere in obedience.

Verse. 10. For, this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of
Israel, after those days, says the LORD: I will put My Laws into their
mind, and write Them in their hearts; and I will be to them a GOD, and they
shall be to Me a People. THIS is the better Covenant, containing better
Promises, whereof CHRIST is Mediator, and Surety, unto all them that believe
in Him.

Wherein consider, 1. That all the Articles are Promises; and, so, do require
in the party that will join in the Covenant, Faith, to embrace the Promises;
that the Covenant may be agreed unto on both sides: GOD promising, and the
needy Sinner heartily accepting. 2. That, what is required in the Old
Covenant, as a Conditoin, is here turned into a Promise, by GOD, in the New.
In the Old Covenant, he required obedience to his Commandments: and here
he promises, to write his Laws in our hearts. GOD undertakes to do our
part in us, if we will believe in Him. 3. That the sense of Wantes, and the
feeling of our Imperfections, yea, of our hearts wickedness, and
carelessness, both of heart and mind; yea, the feeling of the inlacks, or
defects, of repentance and faith, are not just hindrances, to make a soul
that gladly would be reconciled with GOD, in CHRIST, stand abacke, from
embracing this Covenant: But, by the contrary, the feeling of sinfulness, in
mind, and heart, are Preparations, to fit us, and set us on, to join in
this Covenant, wherein GOD undertakes to help, and remede, all these felt
evils, through His CHRIST; by putting His Laws in our Mind, and writing them
in our Hearts. For, what is this else, but to illuminate our Mind, more and
more, with the understanding of His Will; and, to frame our Heart, and
Affections, to the obedience of the same? 4. That, by the Covenant, Comfort is
provided for sinners, who are humbled in the sense of their sins: and no
door opened for presumption, nor rowme given to profane persons, to go on
their ways, blessing themselves. For, the maker of the New Covenant
praesupposeth two things: First, That His party renounce his own
righteousness, which he might seem able to have by the Old Covenant. Next,
That he flee, for Relief, to GOD, in CHRIST, to have the Benefits promised
in this New Covenant. Which if he do, it is impossible that he can either
lean to his own Merits, or live in the love of his sinful Lusts. 5. That,
by this Covenant, such an Union is made betwixt GOD and the Believer, that the
Believer is the LORD'S Adopted Child, and the LORD is the Believer's GOD,
All-sufficient for ever; promising to be All to the Believer, which, TO BE
OUR GOD, may importe; and, to make the Believer All that one of HIS PEOPLE
should be.

Verse. 11. And, they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord: For, all shall know Me, from the least,
to the greatest. 1. While He says, They shall not teach every man his
neyhgbour, he does not mean, that his Word, and Ordinances, and Ministry
appointed by him, or brotherly communion, for mutual edification, shall be
missregarded, or not made use of: But, by the contrary, That he will himself
be their Teacher, in these his own Means: First, giving his Children a
greater measure of the Spirit, and a more near communion with himself, than
of old. 2. Making his Children so wise unto Salvation, as they shall not hang
their Faith upon man's authority: but search, by all means, till they
understand the Mind of GOD, the infallible Teacher, as he has revealed
himself in his Word. 3. So, clearing the Truth, which is outwardly taught
unto them, by his own Instruments, after so sure, and perswasiue a manner, by
his Spirit, inwardly; that the outward Teaching, shall be no Teaching, in
comparison of the inward Concurrence; according as we hear those Samaritanes
were taught, who believed indeed the Woman's report, that they might go to
Christ: but when they were come to him, got so great satisfaction from
himself, that they said unto her; Now we believe, not because of thy saying
for we have heard him our selves, and know, that this is indeed that Christ,
JOHN IV.42. So will the LORD inwardly make his Truth powerful unto Salvation
to his own; that they may say to those that are his Instruments; Now we
believe, not because of your saying, but because we have heard him our selves.

THEN, 1. It is not GOD'S will, that other men's Belief, should be the Rule of
our Belief: but that we all search to understand the Scriptures, and GOD'S
Will revealed therein. 2. It is easy, from this Ground, to answer that
famous Question: How know you such and such Grounds of Salvation? We answer:
It is an Article of the New Covenant, They shall be all taught of GOD.

2. He says; They shall all know Me, from the least, to the greatest.

THEN, 1. The New Covenant admits all Ranks, and Degrees of Persons; and
excludes none, high, nor low, that love to embrace it. 2. It may be, in
sundry poynctes of Truth, some of them be ignorant, and misstaken, more nor
other some: But of the saving Knowledge of GOD, in CHRIST, they shall all have
light, in a saving measure. 3. The greatest, as well as the meanest, in
what-so-ever respect of Place, or Gifts, must be GOD'S Disciples, in the
study of Saving Knowledge, and hearty obedience.

Verse. 12. For, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness; and their
sins, and their iniquities, will I remember no more. 1. TO make us believe
the former Promises, he adds to a New Article, of Remission of Sins:
because from the Conscience of those, ordinarily, do arise our Doubts, and
difficulty of drawing near to GOD. THEN, 1. The Conscience of Sin, must not
drive us away from GOD: but, rather, force us to run unto GOD, more humbly:
because, only to such as come unto Him, in His CHRIST, is Remission of Sin
promised. 2. What-so-ever sort of sins they be, Unrighteousness, or Sin,
or Iniquity, they shall not hinder GOD to be gracious to the Penitent,
fleeing to this Covenant, for Refuge.

2. In saying, For I will be merciful, 1. He makes His Mercy, pardoning
Sin, the REASON of His bestowing the former good things: His giving of one
Grace, the Reason of giving another: even Grace, for Grace. 2. He makes His
Mercy, the Ground of all this Favor, and nothing in the man's person, or
works, or worthiness of his faith. 3. The word MERCIFVLL, is in the
Original, PACIFIED; and does importe both GOD'S respect to the Propitiatory
Sacrifice of CHRIST, which pacifieth Him toward us; and, also, our duty, in
looking toward it, as the Price of our Reconciliation.

3. In that the LORD joyneth the Promise, of putting His Law in the mind, and
writing it in our heart, with the Promise of Remission of Sins, HE TEACHES
US, That He will have every Confederate Soul, that seeks the Benefit of
this Covenant, to join all these Benefits together, in their Claim; with
Remission of Sin, seeking to join the illumination of their mind,
renovation of their heart, and life, at least in their desires, and endeavors:
and not to fever one of them from another; but study, in uprightness, to have
them all.

4. While He says, He will remember their sins no more, HE TEACHES, 1.
That He will never forgive sin, nor forget it, but set it ever in His sight,
till a man enter into this Covenant with Him, through CHRIST. 2. That when He
has forgiven sin, He forgets sin also: what-so-ever He remitteth, He
remooveth from His rememberance.

Verse. 13. In that He says, A New Covenant, He has made the first old.
Now, that which decays, and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. FROM the
name that the LORD gives this Covenant, in calling it New, he draws two
Consequences: The first, That the former Covenant, by this word, was declared
old. Next, That as it was declared old; so was it declared, shortly after,
to be abolished.

THEN, 1. The least word that proceeds out of GOD'S Mouth, is weyghtie, and
worthy of consideration. 2. What-so-ever GOD'S Word does importe, by due
consequence, must be taken for GOD'S Truth, and GOD'S Mind, as if it were
expressed. 3. Seeing CHRIST is come, and the time is now of this New
Covenant, we know, that by GOD'S authority, the Leviticall Ordinances, and
whole form of the Legal Covenant, and Ceremonial forms of worship, are
abrogated.

The sum of Chap. IX.
THEN, That you may see this more clearlie, Let us take a view of the typical
Ordinances, in the old Covenant, and of their accomplishment in CHRIST. Under
the old Covenant, and typical Tabernacle, there were sundry shadows, Verse.
1.2. The Tabernacle divided in two rowmes, and their furniture within them
both, Verse. 3.4.5. In the utter rowme the Priests resorted daily, Verse. 6. In
the inner rowme, only the high Priest, once a-yeare, Verse. 7. The
close-keeping of which rowme, signified, That the Way to Heaven, was not to be
fully clear, during the time of those shadows, Verse. 8. Nothing done then,
externallie, could quiet the Conscience, Verse. 9. All being but tempora^ie
shadows, imposed till CHRIST came, to reform all, Verse. 10. But when CHRIST
came, He gave to those shadows, accomplishment. For, He was Priest of the
true Tabernacle of His own Body, signified by the typical Tabernacle, Verse.
11. And, by His own Blood, entered into Heaven, for our aeternall Redemption,
Verse. 12. For, if the Types procured a Ceremonial cleansing, Verse. 13. How
much more shall His Blood, truly, and in effect, procure our Justification,
and Sanctification? Verse. 14. And, therefore, that Remission of Sins, and
aeternall Life, might be given to the Faithful, both then of old, and now,
He behooved, by His Office, to make His Testament, and die, Verse. 15. For, so
requires the nature of a Testament, Verse. 16.17. Wherefore, the typical
Testament, of old, also behooved to have a typical death, as LEVIT. xvj.
makes plain, Verse. 18.19.20.21. Yea, every Cleansing of the Types, and
every Remission, behooved to be with Blood, Verse. 22. Therefore, the things
represented by the Types, behooved to be cleansed by better Blood, even the
BLOOD of the MESSIAH, Verse. 23. For, CHRIST entered not into the typical
Sanctuary; but into Heaven it self, Verse. 24. And, offered not Himself
often, as the imperfect Leviticall Sacrifice was offered, Verse. 25. For, then
should He have often died. But His once Offering, was sufficient for ever,
Verse. 26. And, as GOD appointed men but once to die, Verse. 27. So CHRIST was
but once offered, till the Time He come to Judgment, for the Salvation of the
Faithful* Verse. 28.

The doctrines of Chap. IX.
VERSE. 1. THEN, verily, the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine
Service, and a worldly Sanctuary.

THE word [Ordinances] in the Original, is also Iustifications, in the plural
number: so called, because they represented our Justification.

WHEREOF WE LEARN, 1. That as other things were typed under the Law; so
also was our Justification, and the manner of obtaining the same, shadowed
forth. 2. That those things which then were called IVSTIFICATIONS, were so
called only because they were the Representations of the way of obtaining
JUSTIFICATION: for they did not justify. 3. That albeit JUSTIFICATION be
only one; yet the types thereof were many: no one of them being able to
express the Truth, but in part.

2. By calling them Ordinances of Divine Service, he teaches us, That,
sometime, those Ceremonies which are now abolished, were, during their own
time, parts of GOD'S external Worship, in regard of the Commandment of GOD
injoyning them.

3. By calling the Sanctuary Worldly, he teaches us, To think of all the
external Glory of Leviticall Service, only as the earthly representation of
Heavenly things: and, under all these earthly shadows, to seek in, to an
Heavenly signification.

Verse. 2. For, there was a Tabernacle made, the first, wherein was the
Candle-sticke, and the Table, and the Shewbread, which is called the
Sanctuary.

Verse. 3. And after the second Veil, the Tabernacle, which is called the
Holiest of all*

Verse. 4. Which had the Golden Censer, and the Arc of the Covenant, overlayd
round about with Gold; wherein was the Golden Pot that had Manna, and Aaron's
Rod that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant.

Verse. 5. And, over it, the Cherubims of Glory, shadowing the Mercie-Seate: of
which we can not now speak particularly.

Verse. 6. Now, when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went
always into the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the Service of GOD.

Verse. 7. But into the second, went the high Priest alone, once every year;
not without Blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
people.

HE sets before our Eyes, the pleasant Face of GOD'S outward Worship; that,
in the wise appoynting of every thing, for place, for division of rowmes, for
Furniture, for Ornaments, for Materials, for Persons, for Actions, for order
of doing, we may behold the Glory, not only of the Appoynter of them; but,
also, the Glory of the Church, and of Heaven, and of CHRIST, and of His
Saynctes, represented there-by; as far above the Glory of those outward
things, as Heavenly, and Spiritual things, are above earthly; as the
particular Exposition of the meaning of the Types, in their own proper place,
will make plain; which we can not meddle with here, seeing the Apostle
judges it, not pertinent.

Verse. 8. The holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of
all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing.
HE expounds, what the high Priest's going through the Veil, but once
a-yeare, did mean, saying, The holy Ghost signified something there-by.
THEN, 1. The holy Ghost, is the Author of these Ordinances of LEVI, and of
Matters appoyncted about that Old Tabernacle, as of the Expressions of His
own Mind to the Church: and, so, He is very GOD. 2. The holy Ghost, is a
distinct person of the Godhead, exercising the proper actions of a person,
subsisting by Himself; directing the Ordinances of the Church, teaching the
Church, and interpreting the meaning of the Types unto the Church. 3. The
Church under the Law, was not altogether ignorant of the Spiritual
Signification of the Leviticall Ordinances; because the holy Ghost was then
teaching them the meaning. 4. Those Rites, and Ceremonies, were not so dark in
themselves, as they could not be, in any sort, understood: but were
Expressions of the Mind of GOD, to the Church of that time.

2. That which the holy Ghost did signify, was this, That the way unto the
Holiest of all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was
yet standing. THEN,

That the Holiest of all, represented Heaven, the Old Church did know.

3. He says not that the way to Heaven was closed* but not clearlie
manifested. THEN,

They knew the way to Heaven, darkly, through the Veil of Types. 2. They
knew there was a time of clearer Light coming.

4. The time of the endurance of this not clear manifestation of the way to
Heaven, is set down to be, While the first Tabernacle was standing.

THEN, The Old Church was taught, 1. That the clear light of the way to
Heaven, was not to be revealed while those shadows, and that Tabernacle
endured. 2. That when the clear Manifestation of that way should come by the
MESSIAH, that Tabernacle was not to stand. 3. That when GOD should cause that
first Tabernacle to be remooved, the true Light was at hand. 4. That none
should receive the clear light of the way to Heaven, but such as should
renounce the Ordinances of the first Tabernacle.

And so the Apostle, by the authority of the holy Ghost, enforces these
Hebrews, either to renounce the Leviticall Ordinances, or to be depryved of
the true light of the way to Heaven now revealed.

5. While he calls this Typical Tabernacle, The first Tabernacle, be
imports, 1. That Christ's Body was the next Tabernacle: 2. That the Temple
is comprehended under the name of the Tabernacle, in this Dispute.

Verse. 9. Which was a Figure, for the time then present, in which were offered
both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service,
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience. HE shows the use of the
Tabernacle, and the imperfection of the service thereof, saying, The Tabernacle
was a Figure for the time then present. Whereby he gives us to understand, 1.
That the Tabernacle was a Type, and Figure of CHRIST. 2. That it was not
appointed for all time to come, but for that present time of the Churches
Nonage. 3. That how-so-ever it was an obscure Figure; yet, having some
resemblance of the thing signified, it was fit for those of that time.

2. Next, he shows the weakness of the Offeringes, offered in the
Tabernacle; that they could not make the man that did the service, perfect, as
concerning the Conscience: That is, They could not perfectly satisfy the
Conscience, that Sin was forgiven, and Life granted, for any worthiness of
those Offeringes: they could not furnish the Conscience with a good Answer
toward GOD, for saving of them who did that Service, 1. Pet. iij.21. Because
the Conscience could not have sound ground of satisfaction, how GOD'S Justice
would be made quiet by those Offeringes. And, that which does not satisfy
GOD'S Justice, can no^ satisfy the Conscience: because the Conscience is GOD'S
Deputy, and will not be quiet, if it be well informed, till it see GOD
pacified.

THEN, It follows, from this Ground, seeing those Offeringes could not
perfect a man in his Conscience, 1. That CHRIST'S Sacrifice, signified by them,
must perfectly satisfy GOD'S Justice, and the Conscience also, and purge the
filthiness of it, and heal its wounds. 2. That as many as were justified
before GOD, and in their Conscience truly quyeted under the Law, behooved,
of necessity, to see through these Offerings, and flee in to the Offering of
the Sacrifice represented by them, as PSALM. Lj.7. For, otherwise, the Apostle
testifies here, the outward Offeringes could not perfect them in the
Conscience. 3. That when Remission of Sin, and Atonement, is promised in the
Law, upon the Offering of these Gifts, as LEVIT. XIV.9. and XVII.11. the
form of speech is Sacramental, joining the Virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ,
signified with the Offering of the figurative Sacrifices unto the Believer. 4.
That true Believers, notwithstanding of many inperfections of their life, may
be perfected, as concerning their Conscience, by fleeing to the Mediation, and
Sacrifice of Christ, which washes the Conscience thoroughly.

Verse. 10. Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washinges,
and carnal ordinances, imposed on them, until the time of Reformation. HE
gives a Reason, why those Ceremonies could not perfect the Conscience; Because
they stood in Meats, and Drinks, and diverse Washinges, and carnal
Ordinances: To wit, If they be considered by themselves, separate from their
signification, as many of the Jews took them.

THEN, There is a two-folde Consideration to be had, of the Leviticall
Ceremonies: One, as they are joined with the Significations; and, so, Promises
were made of Atonement, by them, in the Law. Another, As they were looked
upon, by themselves, separate from their signification, as the carnal Jews
took them, and rested on them; and, so, they could not perfect the Conscience.

2. He shows their endurance, saying, They were imposed on them, until the
time of Reformation: That is, Till the time of the Gospel, that CHRIST came,
with clear light, to perfect Matters. THEN, 1. These Ceremonies were by GOD
imposed upon no people, but them; That is, The Jews only. 2. Neither were
they imposed on the Jews for ever, but for a time only* until the time of
Reformation. 3. Seeing the time of Reformation by Christ is come, these
Ceremonies are expyred, and abolished.

3. Seeing the time of the Gospel, is the time of Reformation, or Correction;
THEN,

1. The Shadows are fulfilled, and the Substance is come. 2. The Darkness of
Teaching is remooved, and the time of Clearness is come. 3. The Price of
Redemption, promised to be laid down, is now paid. 4. The Difficulty, and
Impossibility, of bearing the Yoke of GOD'S external Worship, is remooved;
and CHRIST'S easy Yoke, in place thereof, is come. In a word, What-so-ever
was then wanting under the Law, of the measure of the Spirit, or the means to
get the Spirit, and Fruits thereof, is now helped, in the Frame of the
Gospel.

Verse. 11. But CHRIST being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands; that is to say, not
of this building. TO show the Accomplishment of these things, in CHRIST'S
Priesthood, he opposes His Excellency, to the Imperfection of the
Leviticall high Priest's Service, thus: 1. The Leviticall Priest, was Priest of
the Shadows of good things: but CHRIST, Priest of the good things
Themselves; keeping the Dispensation of them proper to His own person; such as
are Reconciliation, Redemption, Righteousness, and Life, etc.

2. The Leviticall high Priest, had a Tabernacle builded with hands, wherein
he served: but CHRIST served in a Greater, and more Perfect Tabernacle, not
made with hands: That is, In the precious Tabernacle of his own Body,
wherein he dwelt amongst us, JOHN I.14. represented by the material
Tabernacle.

3. He expounds, how the Tabernacle of Christ's Body is not made with
hands, by this, That it is not of this building: First, Because it was not
formed by the Art of any Bezaleel, or Aholiab, but by the holy Ghost. 2.
Albeit the Tabernacle of his Body was like ours, in substance; yet, for the
manner of his holy Conception, he is of another building nor ours. For, our
Tabernacles are builded by natural Generation, of Man and Woman, with
propagation of Original Sin: But, CHRIST'S Body, in a singular manner, even
by the special Operation of the holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin: And,
so, without Original Sin.

Verse. 12. Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves: but by His own Blood He
entered in, once, into the Holy Place; having obtained aeternall Redemption
for us. THE Opposition goes on: 1. The Leviticall high Priest entered into the
Typical holy place: But CHRIST entered into the Holy Place properly so
called: That is, into Heaven.

2. The Leviticall Priest entered often into the holy Place: CHRIST entered
but once into Heaven. Hereby the Leviticall Priest's entry was declared to
be imperfect, because it behooved to be repeated: But CHRIST'S entry into
Heaven, to be perfect, because but once, not to be repeated.

3. The Leviticall Priest entered by the blood of Goats, and Calves: But
CHRIST entered by His own Blood.

1. AND if CHRIST entered but once into Heaven, after His Suffering; THEN, We
must not think, that His Body is anie-where else, but in Heaven only,
wherein it is once only entered.

2. If the Blood whereby CHRIST entered into Heaven, was His own Blood:
THEN, 1. Verily, CHRIST'S Body was like ours, in substance; having BLOOD in
it, as ours: and, we must not conceive otherwise of His Body, than to be of
the same substance, and substantial properties, with ours. 2. The Blood
belonged to the same person, to whom the properties of GOD belongs, so often
in this EPISTLE attributed unto CHRIST. His Blood, was the Blood of GOD, ACT.
XX.28. That is, The same JESUS, was GOD and Man, with Flesh and Blood, in one
person.

3. The Fruit of CHRIST'S bloody Sacrifice, he makes, The aeternall
Redemption of those for whom He offered it: And, to the Typical Sacrifice,
he ascrybeth no Redemption at all, in the Comparison. There-by giving us to
understand,

1. That from the Worlds beginning, to the end thereof, Salvation of Sinners
is by way of CHRIST'S Redemption: That is, By His loosing them, through Payment
of a Price. 2. That the Redemption was manifested to have force, when after His
bloody Sacrifice He entered into Heaven. 3. That such as are once redeemed by
CHRIST, are aeternallie redeemed: not for a time, to fall away again: but
aeternallie to be saved, most certaynlie.

Verse. 13. For, if the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the ashes of an
Heyfer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh:

Verse. 14. How much more shall the Blood of CHRIST, who, through the aeternall
Spirit, offered Himself, without spot, to GOD, purge your conscience from dead
works, to serve the Living GOD?

TO prove, that aeternall Redemption is the Fruit of CHRIST'S Sacrifice, he
resoneth thus: If the Typical Sacrifices, and Rites of old, were able to
work that for which they were ordained; that is, external Sanctification:
Much more shall CHRIST'S true Sacrifice be able to work that for which it was
appoyncted: That is, Eternal Remission of Sins, and inward Sanctification,
unto aeternall Life.

THEN, There are two sorts of Sanctification: One, external, of the flesh,
which makes a man holy to the Church, what-so-ever he be within. Another,
internal, of the Conscience, and inner man; which makes a man holy before
GOD.

2. The purifying of the flesh, he makes to be by the exercise of such and
such Ordinances of Divine Service for the time. THEN,

External, or Church-holinesse, of the outward man, is procured by such and
such Exercyses of Divine Ordinances in the Church, as serve to make a man to
be reputed, and holden for clean, before men; and, so, to be received, for a
member of the Church: as is to be seen NVMB. XIX.

3. From his form of reasoning, WE LEARN, That what-so-ever liberty, and
access of coming to the Church, was made to the Jew of old, by those
Ceremonies of the Law; as much, and more liberty is made to the Christian, to
come in to GOD, by the Blood of CHRIST.

4. In descrybing CHRIST'S Sacrifice, he says, Christ, through the aeternall
Spirit, offered Himself, without spot, to God.

THEN, 1. CHRIST is both the Sacrifice, and the Priest, in one person. He
offered Himself as Man, through the aeternall Spirit: that is, By the virtue
and power of His own Godhead, by which He preached, before His Incarnation,
to Sinners, I. PET. III.19. 2. His Sacrifice was without spotte. He was that
spotless Lamb, in whom was no sin, nor imperfection, nor defect of any
thing that the Sacrifice required. 3. The virtue of the Sacrifice, which made
it to purchase aeternall Redemption unto us, flows from the infinite worth of
His aeternall Godhead. 4. Albeit CHRIST'S two natures, have their distinct
respects in the actions of His Office; yet CHRIST is one, and undivided, in
the execution of His Office.

5. The fruit and force of the Sacrifice, is set down in this, that this
Blood shall purge our Conscience from dead works, to serve the living GOD:
That is, Shall both absolve a man from bygone Sin, and also enable him to
serve GOD for time to come. THEN,

1. Sins are but dead works, flowing from nature dead in sin; and, not
only deserving, but also drawing on Death, upon the Sinner. 2. The Conscience
lies polluted, with the filthiness of dead works, till the virtue of the
Blood of JESUS applied, bring intimation of Absolution. 3. Christ's Blood
does not purge the Conscience from dead works, that a man should go wallowe
in them again: but, that he may serve the living GOD more acceptablie. 4. The
purging virtue of Christ's Blood, is joined with the Sanctifying, and Renewing
of the absolved Sinner: and, what GOD has conjoined, let no man put a-sunder.

Verse. 15. And, for this cause, He is the Mediator of the New Testament; that,
by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions which were under
the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of
aeternall inheritance. NOw, lest any man should stumble a^ Christ's Death, he
shows a necessity thereof, in respect of His Office of Mediation, and the
Purchase to be made by His Redemption. The force of the Reason, is this:
Remission of Sins could not have been given under the Law, except the
Mediator had been to pay the price of the same under the Gospel: Nor could
the Faithful, and called Ones, either then, (...) now, obtain aeternall Life
for an Inheritance, otherwise than by the Mediatour's Death. Therefore, it
behooved the true Mediator, by means of Death, to pay the promised Price of
the Purchase of Remission of Sins, and aeternall Life.

THEN, 1. The Remission of Transgressions, and the Inheritance of aeternall
Life, are both Fruits of Christ's Passion. 2. The Fruits of His Passion,
extended themselves unto them who were under the Old Testament, as well as
unto us under the New. 3. The Way of Purchase of these Benefits, was by
Redemption: that is to say, by lawful Purchase, such as might satisfy
Justice. 4. The Way in special, was by Means of the Mediatour's Death: His
life was laid down, to redeem ours: His one life, as good as all ours. 5.
For this cause, Christ ^^oke the Office of a Mediator unto Himself, that He
might have Right, and Enteresse by Death, to make this Purchase. 6. And,
therefore, except He had reallie died, the Purchase could not have been
lawfully made.

Verse. 16. For, where a Testament is, there must also, of necessity, be the
death of the Testatour. ANother Reason, to prove the necessity of Christ's
death, from the force of the word COVENANT, which signifies also a Testament.
The force of the Reason, is this: CHRIST (IER. xxxj.31.) promised, to make a
New Covenant; and therefore, also, a New Testament: and, if to make a New
Testament, then also He promised to die. The Articles of the Covenant also
evinceth it to be a Testament; and the Promiser bound, to make His Word good,
and so to die. For, IER. xxxj. the Lord Christ promises, to reconcile his
People to GOD, to take away their sins, and to be their GOD. Justice
required satisfaction of them, before they could be reconciled: Satisfaction
they could not make themselves; therefore, he who promised to make the
Reconciliation with GOD, was bound to make the Satisfaction for them to GOD:
and if Satisfaction for them, then to vnderl^e the Curse of the Law for them,
and so to die.

THEN, 1. The New Covenant, is of the nature of a Testament; and the Benefits
promised ^herein, to wit, Remission of Sins, Reconciliation, Sanctification,
and Life aeternall, are Legacy, freely left unto us, by our Defunct LORD, who
was dead, and is alive, to execute His own Will for evermore. The Scripture is
the Instrument, and Evidence; the Apostles, Notares; the Sacraments, are
Seals; Witnesses from Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; Witnesses
on earth, the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit. 2. Christ Jesus, is both the
Maker of the Covenant which is in I^REMIE xxxj* and the Mediator thereof also:
the Testatour, and Executour, of that blessed Testament. 3. Christ's Death was
concluded, and resolved upon, and intimated, before He came into the World.

Verse. 17. For, a Testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise, it is of
no strength at all, whylest the Testatour lives. HE clears his reasoning,
from the nature of Testaments amongst men; which, not before, but after a man's
death, have force. But here it may be objected, How can this be, seeing by
virtue of the Testament of Christ, Benefits not a few, were bestowed upon the
Church, before his death, from the beginning of the World; not only
Remission of Sins, and aeternall Life; but also many Graces and Blessings in
this life, both bodily, and Spiritual? I answer: Albeit CHRIST'S death was
not accomplished in act till of late, yet, for the certayntie of his death to
follow, and the vnchaungeablenesse of his Mind toward his Church, before
his death, he was reckoned, both with GOD, and the Church, for dead; and the
Promise, of laying down his life for his People, accepted, for the time, as if
it had been performed. For which cause he is called, (Revel. xiij.8.) The
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. And Christ was still represented
as a slain man, in all these Sacrifices, which the Apostle poynteth at; as
meeting this Doubt, in the next words which follow heere-after, Verse. 18.

Verse. 18. Whereupon, neither the first Testament was dedicated without blood.
HE prooveth the necessity of Christ's death yet farther. Under the Law his
Bloodshed was represented by types of bloody Sacrifices: therefore, it
behooved those Types to be answered by his real bloodshed and death. THEN,

1. What the types of the Law did signify, Christ behooved to accomplish in
verity. 2. The Old Church was taught, that by virtue of the blood signified
by these types, the Covenant stood betwixt GOD, and them.

Verse. 19. For, when Moses had spoken every Precept, to all the people,
according to the Law, he took the blood of Calves, and of Goats, with
Water, and Scarlet Wool, and Hyssope, and sprinkled both the Book, and all
the people;

Verse. 20. Saying, This is the Blood of the Testament, which GOD has enjoined
unto you.

Verse. 21. More-over, he sprinkled with blood, both the Tabernacle, and all
the Vessels of the Ministry.

FRom Moses Example, WE LEARN, 1. That the LORD'S Word should be manifested
to all the people; and none of them debarred from ^aking knowledge thereof. 2.
That the Word must be spoken playnlie, with a distinct Voice, in the common
Languague; and not muttered, in an unknown Tongue. 3. That with the use of
holy Rites, appointed of GOD, the Preaching of GOD'S Word should be joined,
to show the Institution, and Force of GOD'S Ordinances, to His People.

2. In that the Book, and the People, and Instruments of Service, were all to
be sprinkled, WE LEARN, That every thing which we touch, or meddle with,
or make use of, is unclean unto us, were it never so holy in it self, except
the Blood of JESUS make it clean unto us, and cleanse us in the using of it.

Verse. 22. And, almost all things are by the Law purged with blood: and,
without shedding of blood, is no Remission. HE says, ALMOST, because of
some Purging which was done by Washing; and yet even that Washing, also, drew
the Virtue of Ceremonial Purging from the Sacrifice whereunto the Washing was
annexed.

2. In saying, Without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins, HE
TEACHES US, That wheresoever a Sacrifice is offered, for obtaining Remission of
Sin, there shedding of blood must reallie be: and, where an unbloody
Sacrifice is pretended to be offered, for obtaining Remission, it serves not
the purpose; because, Without shedding of blood, there is no Remission.
Either, therefore, must such as pretend to offer Christ, for obtaining the
Remission of sin, grant, that Christ is daily murdered by them, and His
Blood shed of new, in their pretended Offering; or else, that by their
Offering, no new Remission is purchased. But, the truth is, Christ's Blood
is once shed, and never to be shed again: and, that once Offering, and
Bloodshedding, is sufficient for ever-lasting Remission, without any new
Offering of Him again.

Verse. 23. It was, therefore, necessary, that the Patterns of things in the
Heavens, should be purified with these: but the Heavenly things themselves,
with better Sacrifices than these. ANother Reason, of the necessity of
Christ's Death, in force, thus much: If things figuratiuelie holy, behooved
to be cleansed, with the Typical Blood of Beasts: Then, Things truly
holy, behooved to be cleansed with better Blood; even the Blood of the
MESSIAH.

HENCE WE LEARN, 1. That for the significations cause, GOD would not have the
Tabernacle, nor any Instrument of Service about it, to be esteemed holy,
till blood was shed, to sprinkle it: That it might be known there-by, That
without the shedding of CHRIST'S Blood, He would not accept of any thing from
us, as holy. 2. That the blood of Beasts was sufficient, to make
representation: but better Blood; even the Blood of the MESSIAH, behooved to
be shed, to give the truth of the signification. For, as far as Heaven is
a^oue the earthly sanctuary, and men's Souls above the vessels thereof; As
far better behooved to be that Blood, which made Souls acceptable to GOD,
and to get entresse into Heaven, than the blood of Leviticall sacrifices was.

Verse. 24. For, CHRIST is not entered into the Holy Places made with hands,
which are the figures of the True; but into Heaven it self, now to appear, in
the presence of GOD, for us. HE clears the matter, how CHRIST has offered
a better Sacrifice, than the Leviticall: yea, and behooved to offer a better,
because He is entered into a better Sanctuary; another Man, in another
manner, and to another end, than the high Priest under the Law entered. The
Comparison goes thus.

1. The Leviticall high Priest, entered into the material, and artificial
Sanctuary; and a Typical Sacrifice became him: But CHRIST entered not into
that Typical Sanctuary: Therefore, a Typical Sacrifice became not Him.

2. The Leviticall high Priest, entered bodily into the figurative Sanctuary:
But CHRIST did enter bodily into the true Sanctuary in Heaven it self.

3. The high Priest entered in behalf of the people, with the names of the
twelve Tribes upon his breast and sholders: But CHRIST is entered in, in
behalf of us all His People, to appear for us; bearing the particular
memorial of every Saynct in His Memory.

4. The high Priest entered in, to appear for a short time; and stayed not
within the Sanctuary: But CHRIST is entered in, to appear now all the time
from His Ascension, unto this day, and constantly still, while it is called
Now.

Verse. 25. Nor yet that He should offer Himself often, as the high Priest
enters into the Holy Place, every year, with blood of others. HE
prooveth, that He had offered a better Sacrifice, than the Leviticall; Because
He behooved to offer an Offering, not to be repeated, as the Leviticall: and,
so, a more perfect Offering. The Comparison goes in Dissimilitudes.

1. The high Priest entered in, with the blood of others: But CHRIST entered
in, with His own Blood.

2. The high Priest, made an Offering of other things than himself: But
CHRIST did offer Himself. THEN, The Offering of CHRIST, is the personal
action of CHRIST Himself. None can, nor may, offer Him, but Himself. For, the
Priest must be either better than the Sacrifice, or as good, at least, as the
Sacrifice: but none can be so good as CHRIST, let be more excellent, or
better: Therefore, none can offer CHRIST, but Himself.

3. The high Priest offered his Sacrifice oftener: But CHRIST offered not
Himself oftener than once. THEN, To imagine an Offering of CHRIST often, is
both to give the Lie to this Text, and to make CHRIST'S Offering, by repeating
of it, imperfect, and like to the Levitall. For, if once offering of Christ be
sufficient, often offering is superfluous. And, if often offering be needful,
then that once offering was not sufficient; and, so, was not perfect; which
were blasphemy to say. 2. If any man pretend to offer CHRIST often, it is
not CHRIST that gives him warrant so to do: for, here it is declared, That
He has no hand in offering Himself often.

Verse. 26. For, then, must He often have suffered, since the foundation of the
world: But, now, once, in the end of the world, has He appeared, to put
away sin, by the Sacrifice of Himself. HE prooveth, That Christ can not be
often offered; Because, then, ( says he) must He often have suffered. THEN,

1. No Offering of Christ, without the Suffering of Christ: His Passion and
Death, is inseparable from His Sacrifice. If Christ were often offered, He
behooved to be often slain, and put to death. But that can not be, that He
should suffer, and be slain oftener: therefore, He can not be offered up in
a Sacrifice oftener. And, they who will take upon them, to offer Christ again,
and again, take upon them, to slay Him, and put Him to new suffering again,
and again. 2. The offering of Christ in an unbloody sacrifice, is a vain
imagination, which the Apostle acknowledges not: For, if that were possible,
then were the Apostle's words here false, and his reasoning ridiculous; which
were blasphemy to say.

2. He says, He behooved to have suffered often, since the beginning of the
world; Because, as often as new sins were committed, and new Remission was
to be bestowed; as often behooved he to have suffered, to expiate these
sins, and to purchase the new Remission, since the beginning of the world:
But this is impossible; Therefore, his Offering often, is impossible. THEN,

1. They who make it needful, to offer Christ often, make it needful, also,
that He should have taken on flesh sooner nor He did, and been slain sooner
nor He was* and slain as often as new sins were to be expiated, and
forgiven, from the beginning of the world. And, so, by this vain Conceat,
they do ranverse all the wisdom of God about Christ, and set to Him an Order,
and Course of their own; making themselves wyser than God. 2. It is, by the
Apostle's esteemation, as vain a Conceat, and as impossible, to offer Christ
oftener nor once, now, in the end of the world, as to have offered Him
before He came in the flesh, since the beginning of the world.

3. But, now, ( says he) once, in the end of the world, he has appeared,
to put away Sin, by the S^crifice of himself. THEN*

1. No Sacrifice of Christ, does the Apostle acknowledge; but such as is
joined with His bodily appearance in the world for that end. Once has He
appeared; and once only has He sacrificed Himself, says the Apostle. 2.
The Apostle understood no Offering of Christ, but only one; and once to be
offered, for time bygone, or time to come, from the beginning of the world,
unto the end thereof. 3. This one Offering, once offered, was sufficient, to
expiate the sins of the saved, before it was offered: and, therefore, must
have force also, to expiate the sins of the saved, without repetition now,
after it is once offered. 4. Whose sins Christ does take away, for those He
appeared, for those He made a Sacrifice of Himself: And, whose sins He
does not put away, for those He appeared not, He sacrificed not.

4. In calling the time of Christ's Suffering, The end of the world, he
gives us to understand, That there can not be so much time betwixt Christ's
First and Second Coming, as was betwixt the worlds beginning* and his first
coming: But a great deal of less time, need force: else, were not that time
the end of the world.

Verse. 27. And, as it is appoyncted unto men, once to die; but, after this, the
Judgment. ANother Reason, to prove, That Christ neither could, nor should,
offer oftener nor once, from the Common Law laid upon Man, of Once dying.
Which Law, Christ having once satisfied, by dying, when he offered up
himself; there is no reason, he should offer himself again; and, so, die
again.

1. It is appoyncted ( says he) for men once to die. THEN, 1. It is come by
GOD'S just appoynctment, that men should die, since His Law is broken by men.
2. The Common Law of Nature appoyncteth but one Death, once to be suffered.
And, though GOD, by singularity of Miracles, make some Exceptions, yet the
Common Law stands for a Rule; beyond which, no reason Christ should be
tied, since His once dying is sufficient. 3. Every man must take Death to him,
and prepare himself to obey the Appoynctment.

2. He says, After Death, comes Judgment. THEN, 1. Every man's
particular Judgment Day, follows his departure out of this life; and
General Judgment* abides all, at length 2. The time of Grace and Mercy
getting, is only in this life: nothing but Justice remains; either to
absolve the Reconciled, or to condemn the unreconciled sinner. Men's Devyses,
for the Relief of the Dead, are but Delusions of the Living.

Verse. 28. So CHRIST was once offered, to bear the sins of many: and unto
them that look for Him, shall He appear the second time, without sin, unto
Salvation. HE applies the Common Law, of dying once, to CHRIST, saying,
Christ was once offered, to bear the sins of many. THEN, 1. It is as
unreasonable, that Christ should offer Himself oftener nor once, as it is to
exact of Him, the laying down of His life oftener nor once: for, that is to
exact more nor the severitie of GOD'S Justice requires of Him. 2. Christ's
Death was not for any sin in Him; but for our sins. 3. He took not away
the sins of every man in particular, (for, many die in their sins, and
bear their own judgment) but the sins of many: the sins of His own
elect People. MATTHEW. I.21. He shall save his People from their sins.

2. He says, that unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second
time.

THEN, 1. After that once Offering of Christ, and ascending to Heaven, He is
not to be corporally present on earth again, till the Day of Judgment. The
Apostle acknowledges corporal presence no oftener. 2. To look for Christ's
corporal presence upon earth then, and not till then, is the property of true
Believers. 3. Corporal presence, is joined with Appearance: the one is put
here for the other.

3. He will appear the second time, without sin, THEN, In his first
coming, he was not without our sin yet lying upon him, by imputation; as
his baseness and misery declared. But the glorious manner of his second
coming, shall make evident, That he is without sin; that is, Fully
exonored, by that one Offering, of the debt thereof, which he took upon Him.

4. In stead of saying, that those who look for him, shall be without sin,
he says, that Christ shall appear without sin; To TEACH US, 1. That the
defraying the Debt of (...) sins, of such for whom CHRIST has vnder^aken,
lies upon CHRIST, and not upon the Be^^evers, for whom He undertook. 2.
And, that if (...) once sacrificing Himself for them, did not ex^^ate their
sins sufficiently, then Sin should ^^aue unto CHRIST, vntlll His second
coming. 3. That CHRIST'S freedom from Sin, ^^all evidence our freedom from
Sin, for whom He became Surety.

5. He will appear unto them who look for Him unto Salvation. THEN,

1. The full accomplishment of the salvation of the Believers, shall not be
until CHRIST'S second coming: Though their souls be blessed before, yet the
full blessedness of soul and body, is deferred till then. 2. As CHRIST'S
Glory shall testify then, that His once offering fred Him of the Suretieship
for our sins: So our Salvation shall testify, that His offering was
sufficient to exoner us. 3. They that love not His coming, can not look for
Salvation.

The sum of Chap. X.
THIS ONCE OFFERING of CHRIST, puts the main difference betwixt this
Sacrifice, and those Offeringes of the Law; which, because they were repeated,
could never perfect the worshipper, Verse. 1. For, if they could have perfected
the worshipper, they should have ceased to be repeated, Verse. 2. Now, cease
they did not, but were repeated, Verse. 3. Because they could not take away
sin, Verse. 4. Wherefore, as the Scripture does witness, (PSALM. xl.)
Sacrifices of the Law were to be abolished, and Christ His Sacrifice to come
in their rowme, Verse. 5.6.7.8.9. By which Sacrifice, once offered, we are for
ever sanctified, Verse. 10. And, as their sacrifice was imperfect, so was their
priesthood also, ever repeating the same sacrifices, which could not (because
they were repeated) abolish sin, Verse. 11. But Christ has ended His
sacrificing, in His once offering; and entered to His Glory, to subdue His
Enemies, Verse. 12.13. Having by that once offering, done all to His Followers
that was needful to perfect them, Verse. 14. As the word of the New Covenant,
IEREM. XXXI. prooveth, verse. 15.16.17.18. Having spoken, then, of Christ's
Divine Excellency, and of the Privileges which the Faithful have in Him, I
exhort you, to make use of it: in special, seeing we have, by Christ's
Blood, access unto Heaven, Verse. 19. By so perfect a Way, as is Christ's
Fellowship, of our nature, Verse. 20. And so great Moyen, by Christ, before us
there, Verse. 21. Let us strengthen our Faith, for the better gryping of our
Justification, and Sanctification, through Him, Verse. 22. And let us avowe our
Religion constantly, Verse. 23. And help forwards one another, Verse. 24.
Neglecting no Means, public, nor private, for that end, as some Apostates
have done, Verse. 25. For, if we make wilful Apostasy from His known Truth,
no Mercy to be looked for, Verse. 26. But certain Damnation of us, as of His
Enemies, Verse. 27. For, if the Despysers of the Law were damned to death,
without mercy, Verse. 28. What Judgment abides those, who so abuse JESUS, His
Grace, and Spirit, as wilful Apostates do? Verse. 29. For, GOD'S Threatening
in the Law, is not in vain, Verse. 30. And, it is a fearful thing to fall, as
a Foe, in GOD'S Hand, Verse. 31. But, rather, prepare you for such Sufferinges,
as you began to feel at your Conversion, Verse. 32. Partly in your own
persons, and partly by your fellowship with Sufferers, Verse. 33. Which you did
joyfullie bear, in hope of a Reward, Verse. 34. Therefore, retain your
Confidence, Verse. 35. And be patient, Verse. 36. GOD will come, and help,
shortly, Verse. 37. And, till He come, you must live by Faith, and not by
Sense: But, if you will not, you shall be rejected, Verse. 38. But I and you
are not of that sort that shall make Apostasy; but of the number of true
Believers; who shall persevere, and be saved, Verse. 39.

The doctrine of Chap. X.
THAT he may yet farther show the impossibility of offering Christ oftener,
he gives the often repetition of Leviticall sacrifices, year by year, for a
reason of their imperfection, and inhabilitie to perfect the worshipper: and
therefore, of necessity, Christ's sacrifice could not be repeated, except we
should make it imperfect, like the Leviticall, and unable to perfect the
worshipper, is the Legal sacrifice was.

The force of his reasoning, is this: The most solemn sacrifice offered by
the high Priest himself, L^VIT. xvj. and least subject to repetition of all
the sacrifices, being offered not so often as each month. or each week, or
each day, as some sacrifices were; but once a-yeare only; yet, because they
were repeated, year by year, they were declared, by this means, unable ever
to make the comers thereunto, perfect. Therefore, Christ's sacrifice could not
be often offered; lest, for that same reason, it should be found imperfect
also. And, this is his drift in Verse. 1.

He prooveth his reason to be good, thus: If they could have perfected the
commer, then they should not have been repeated, but ceased from being
offered, because they should have delivered the worshipper, perfectly, from
sin: and, having done that, the repitition was to no purpose, Verse. 2. But
they did not free the worshipper from sin: for, still after offering, he
professed himself guilty, (for any thing these sacrifices could do) by
offering of a new Offering, Verse. 3. And no wonder; because such sacrifices
were not worthy to expiate sin; and, so, unable to take away sin; and, so,
also, unable to quiet the Conscience.

VERSE. 1. FOR, the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the
very image of the things, can never, with those sacrifices which they offered
year by year continually, make the comers thereunto, perfect.

THE Old Covenant, is called the LAW, because it was drawn up in a Legal
form, upon conditions of obedience to the Law: and Grace and Life in JESUS
CHRIST to come, were set before them in Shadows; not in a clear manner, as in
the Gospel.

THEN, 1. In the Old Covenant, the Law was expresslie urged, and Grace in the
MESSIAH covered, and hid, under Vayles. 2. Christ, and his Grace, and the good
things which come by him, were not so hid, but they might have been seen,
albeit but darkly, being, as by their shadows, represented. 3. The revealing
of Christ, and his Benefits, under the Gospel, and under the Law, differ as
far in measure of light, as the shadow of a thing, and the lyuelie image
thereof, drawn with all the lineamentes. For, they saw Christ, and
Righteousness, and aeternall Life through him, as those which are in the house
see the shadow of a man coming, before he enter within the doors: but, we,
with open face, behold in the Gospel, as in a Mirror, Christ's Glory
shyning; Christ, in the preaching of his word, crucified before our Eyes, as i^
were, and bringing with him Life, and Immortality, to light.

2. He makes the repeating of the Sacrifices, a reason of their inhabilitie
to perfect the comers thereunto: That is, Perfectly to satisfy for those,
who came to the Sacrifice, and to sanctify, and save them, in whose name it
was offered.

THEN, 1. A sacrifice that perfectly satisfies God's justice for sin, can
not be repeated: and, a sacrifice which has need to be repeated, has not
perfectly satisfied God's justice for the sinner, nor perfected the sinner,
for whom it is offered, by doing all that Justice required, to purchase
justification, sanctification, and salvation, to him. 2. Whoso-ever will have
Christ offered up in a sacrifice oftener nor once, whether by Himself, or by
another, denies the perfection of that sacrifice on the Cross; denies, that
by that one sacrifice purchase is made of all that is required to perfect
sinners; which is fearful blasphemy.

Verse. 2. For then would they not have ceased to be offered; because that the
worshippers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sin. BY way of
question, he asks; Would not those Sacrifices have ceased to be offered, if
they could have made the comers thereunto, perfect? THEN,

The Apostle esteems this Reason so clear, that any man, of sound
judgment, being asked the question, must, of necessity, grant it. For,
Natures light does teach thus much, That if a sacrifice do all that is to be
done for the sinner, it stands there, because there is no more to do. If it
pay the full price of the sinners expiation, at once offering, what need can
there be to offer it over again? And, therefore, if Christ's one sacrifice,
once offered, perfect the comers thereunto, must it not cease to be offered
any more, by this reasoning of the Apostle? For, if He have made a perfect
purchase of what-so-ever is required to perfect us, by once offering, Wisdom
and Justice will not suffer the price of the purchase to be offered again.
And if He must be offered again, He has not perfected the purchase for us,
by any Offering going before.

2. The Apostle his Reason, why a Sacrifice which perfecteth the worshipper,
must cease to be offered, is; Because, that the worshipper, once purged,
should have (...) more conscience of sins. By which he means not, that the
purged worshipper may do, hereafter, what he lists, and make no conscience
to sin: nor ^et, that after he is purged, and falls into a new sin, he
should not take with his guiltiness, and repent, and run again to the
Benefit of that Sacrifice: But this he means, That the purging of his
Conscience, by virtue of a perfect Sacrifice, is such, that he is fred from
the just Challenge, and condemnatorie Sentence of the Conscience, for that
sin where-from he is purged.

QVESTION. How is it, then, will you say, that many of GOD'S Children are
often times troubled with the guiltiness of their Conscience, for those same
sins, which they have repented, and sought pardon for, through Christ's
Sacrifice, and found Remission intimated, and Peace granted?

I ANSWER. Not for any imperfection of the Sacrifice, or of their Remission;
but for the weakness of their gryping of the ever-flowing Virtue of that once
offered Sacrifice, and the Remission granted therethrough.

THEN, 1. He that is purged by Virtue of the sacrifice of Christ, has God's
Warrant, to have a quiet and peaceable Conscience. 2. And if he have a
Challenge, after he is fled to this sacrifice, he may, by God's approbation,
stop the same, by opposing the Virtue of that perfect sacrifice, to the
Challenge.

3. The comers unto the Sacrifice, to have bene^^te there-by, verse. 1. are
here called Worshippers, verse. 2. THEN, The LORD reckonet^ it a part of
Divine service, and Worship done unto him, to come, and seek the Benefit of
that sacrifice, where-by He is pacified, and we ransomed.

4. To make the worshipper perfect, verse. 1. is expounded, by purging them, and
delivering them from the conscience of Sin, verse. 2.

THEN, That sacrifice which purges the Conscience from sin, does also
perfect the Man: Neither needs he any thing unto salvation, which such a
sacrifice does not purchase. And, such is that once offered Sacrifice of
CHRIST.

Verse. 3. But, in those sacrifices, there is a rememberance again made of
sins every year. HE prooveth, That the Leviticall Sacrifices took not
away the Conscience of Sin* because there was a yearlie commemoration made of
the same sins; not only of that year, but also of former: yea, beside the
commemoration expresslie done by the Priest, ^ven in these repeated Sacrifices,
says he, there was, ^^ effect, a real taking up again of those sins* for
which Sacrifice had been offered before: because the offering of Sacrifice of
new, did playnlie importe, That by no praeceeding Sacrifice, was the Ransom
of the Sinner paid. And, so, in effect, the Sacrificers did profess, That for
any thing which the former Sacrifice could merit, their sins remained
vnexpiated.

QVEST. But you will ask* Were not Believers, under the Law, purged from their
sins, and made clean, and white as Snow? PSALM. lj.7. I ANSWER. Yes,
indeed; but not by virtue of those Typical Sacrifices; but by Virtue of the
Sacrifice signified by them: To wit, The Sacrifice of the true Lamb of GOD,
which takes away the sins of the World. And, therefore, when Atonement,
and expiation of sin, is attributed to the Leviticall Sacrifices, as LEVIT.
xvij. verse. xj. The form of speech is Sacramental, the property of the thing
signified being ascrybed to the sign, as was marked before.

QVEST. But do not we Christians make a commemoration of our sins, year by
year? yea, daily, remembering even the sins of our youth, and deprecating
the wrath which they deserve? I ANSWER. It is true, we do* but not by way of
offering a Sacrifice, as they: for, of them it is said here, In those
sacrifices, there is a rememberance of sin.

QVEST. What is the difference betwix^ commemoration of sin, without renewed
Sacrifice, and commemoration of sin, with ^enewed Sacrifice? betwixt the
Jews commemoration of sins, year by year, spoken of in this place, and the
commemoration which true Christians do make?

I ANSWER. The Jew in his solemn Commemoration of sin, by renewed
Sacrifice, did reallie profess two things: One, That no Sacrifice, formerlie
offered, was sufficient to expiate his sin, or cleanse his Conscience.
Another, That he had not sufficiently gryped, by Faith, that signified
Sacrifice, which was to come; but had need, through the Spectacles, and
Transparent of these Typical Sacrifices enjoined for his help^, to take a new
view of that true Sacrifice which was to come; of both which, the repeated
Sacrifice did bear witness. But, we, by Commemoration of our sins, and not
sacrificing, profess, That by Christ's Sacrifice, already past, GOD'S Justice
is so well satisfied, as there is no need of new Sacrifice, nor ofter
offering of that one: and, therefore, that we desire no other Ransom, but
Christ's, which is paid already on the Cross; but only crave, to have, by
Faith, a better grip of Christ, who has paid the Ransom for us; that we may
find the Virtue of his Ransom yet more and more in our selves.

QVEST. But, what if with the Commemoration of sins, year by year, and day
by day, we should pretend to join a Sacrifice, that new expiation might
be made, by offering of Christ over again, as is pretended to be done
now-a-dayes?

I ANSWER. By so doing, we should take away the Difference, which the Apostle
here puts betwixt the Leviticall Sacrifices, and Christ's; and, make
Christ's no better than theirs: We should avow. That Christ's Sacrifice on the
Cross, done by himself, was not a full Ransom for our sins; but, That ^
man's offering were able to do that which Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross had
not done. Finally, with the Jew, we should avowe, That the True, and
Satisfactorie Sacrifice, were not as yet come; nothing heretofore being done,
which were able to pacify GOD, or purge the Worshippers from the Conscience of
Sin. For, if a man think, that the price of expia^ion of sin be already
paid, he does but mock GOD'S Justice, and disgrace the Price paid, if he
pres^^e to pay the Price over again.

Verse. 4. For, it is not possible, that the blood of Bulls, and of Goats,
should take away sins. HE gives a Reason, why these Sacrifices could not
pacify the Conscience; even because it is not possible, that they should take
away sin.

THEN, 1. The Conscience can never be purged, except it see sin taken away,
by a perfect Sacrifice, and a Ransom* so worthy, as Justice may be
satisfied. 2. It is impossible* that Atonement was properly made by the
Leviticall sacrifice, but only figuratiuelie* because here it is said, It
was impossible they could take away sins. 3. Sin is not wyped away by any
unworthy mean: for, sin being the breach of the Law of Nature, and of the
written Law, GOD'S Majesty so glorious, His Justice so exact, His Truth, in
threatening death to the offender, so constant, no less worth^e Sacrifice can
expiate sin, than that which is of valor to answer all these.

Verse. 5. Wherefore, when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice
and offering thou would not; but a body have thou prepared me.

Verse. 6. In burnt Offeringes, and Sacrifices for sin, thou have had no
pleasure.

HE prooveth, by testimony of the xl. PSAL^, verse. 6.7. etc. that these
Sacrifices did never, by themselves, pacify GOD: and, therefore, were not to
endure longer than Christ should come, to fulfill what they did signify; and,
so, abolish them.

THEN, Neede-force, the Old Church was not altogether ignorant of the
imperfection of their Legal service, for remooving of their sins; and, that
the true expiation of their sins signified by these sacrifices, was to be
sought in the MESSIAH.

2. CHRIST is brought in by the Prophet, coming into the world: That is,
Taking on our nature, and manifesting himself in the flesh: because, by the
Word, he is set before the Church of that time, as incarnate; remooving the
Leviticall Sacrifices, and offering himself in their place.

THEN* The Word of GOD brings all Divine Truth to a present being unto
Faith: and, so, by prophecy, made Christ, incarnate, present unto the Faith of
the Fathers, under the Law.

3. CHRIST'S words unto the Father, ^re, Sacrifice and oblation thou would
not; but a body have thou prepared me. Which is, in substance, the same with,
Mine ear have thou opened, or bored unto me, in the HEBREW, PSALM xl.6. For,
if the Father open the Ear of his Son, by making him a wise Servant, for the
work of Redemption: if he bore his Ear, by making him a willing and obedient
Servant; then must be also prepare a Body unto him, and bring him into the
world, by incarnation, that he may accomplish that Service as became.

THEN, 1. CHRIST'S Body is of GOD'S preparation, and fitting; made of GOD, so
holy, and harmless, so free of sin, as it should be fit to be joined
with the Godhead of the Son, and fit to be an expiatorie Sacrifice for
sin. 2. The Sacrifice of Christ's Body, and the obedience done to GOD in it
by him, is the Accomplishment and Substance of these Sacrifices. 3. GOD was
never pleased, nor pacified by these Sacrifices, in themselves; but by Christ's
Sacrifice, signified by them. 4. GOD prepared a Satisfaction to Himself, for
us, when we could not.

Verse. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come, (in the Volume of Thy Book it is written
of Me) to do Thy will, O God. THen, said CHRIST, Lo, I come, to do Thy
will, O GOD: That is, When the Legal Sacrifices are found and declared unable
to pacify GOD, CHRIST THEN finds it the fit time to come into the world;
and, to do that which the Sacrifices did fore-signifie, but could not
effectuate. THEN, 1. CHRIST did not think it the due time for himself to come
into the world, till it should be found, that without him, neither GOD could
be satisfied, nor Man saved, by any other mean, but by His obedience. 2.
CHRIST assumed our nature, and offered Himself in our rowme, to the Father,
willingly; ready to perform what the Father's Will could exact of us: yea,
earnestly desired he to discharge that service for us. BLESSED BE HIS NAME,
for that Willingness, even for evermore. 3. Speaking as in our nature, now
incarnate* he calls the Father, his GOD. So Christ, as Man, has our GOD,
for his GOD.

2. One of the Reasons of His Offer-making, is, In the Volume of Thy Book it
is written of Me: That is, So is it decreed, and fore-prophesied, in the
Scripture of Me, That I should satisfy Thee, O Father, and do Thy Will, for
Man.

THEN, 1. CHRIST has a great respect to the Scripture, to have all things
fulfilled which are there spoken: though it should cost him his life, he will
have it done. 2. He desires, that before we book upon his manner of
redeeming us, we should book to the prophesies which went before of him in the
Scripture. 3. The sum of GOD'S Decree, and of his Scripture, which reveals
his Decree, is, That GOD will save Man, by Christ: or, That the Son shall be
incarnate, and do the Father's will, for redemption of Man: That the Seed of
the Woman, shall tread down the head of the Serpent, is amongst the first
Oracles of GOD'S Good Will to Man.

Verse. 8. Above, when he said, Sacrifice, and Offering, and Burnt-offeringes,
and Offering for Sin, Thou would not; neither had Thou pleasure
there-in, which are offered by the Law:

Verse. 9. Then said He, Lo, I come, to do Thy Will (O GOD.) He takes away
the first, that He may establish the second.

NOw, the Apostle gathers from the words of the PSALM set down verse. 5.6.
that the Leviticall Sacrifices are abolished, and taken away, because they
could not please GOD: and, from the words of the PSALM set down verse. 7.
declares, That CHRIST'S Sacrifice is that only which pleases GOD, now come
in the rowme of the Leviticall.

THEN, 1. Clear Consequences drawn from the Scripture, are sound Doctrine. 2.
Collation of places, does yield both ground of good Consequences, and ground
of clearness. 3. The abolishing of Leviticall sacrifices, is necessary, that
CHRIST'S Sacrifice may have the full place, and rowme, for pleasing of GOD, and
saving of us.

Verse. 10. By the which Will, we are sanctified, through the Offering of the
Body of JESUS CHRIST, once for all. THE Apostle shows what this Will was,
and how it is accepted by the Father. The Will is, That CHRIST should offer up
His own Body, in a Sacrifice, once, for all. If but once, THEN, 1. It is not
the Father's Will, that CHRIST'S Body should be offered oftener than once. 2.
If but once for ALL; THEN, These ALL, for w^^me he offered, were condescended
upon, betwixt the Father, and the Mediator. GOD knew those whom he gave to
the Son, to be ransomed: and CHRIST knew those whom he bought. 3. If but
ONCE for those ALL; THEN, That ONCE made a perfect Purchase for all those: The
Father craved no more for their Ransom. Another offering for them, is
needless: For, if it had been needful to offer aga^ne, once offering had not
satisfied GOD'S Will, for their Ransom.

2. For the Father's Acceptance, and Fruit of it, he says, By this Will;
to wit, being obeyed, we are sanctified: That is, I and you, and the (...) of
our societie^ Elect, are separated from the peri^^ing worlde^ and consecrated,
as devoted souls, unto GOD'S use, as holy Vessels of Honor, reconciled in
(...) time, regenerate, and by degrees, at length, thoroughly made free of
sin, and endewed with GOD'S Image, in holiness.

THEN, 1. Those only who are of the Apo^^le's society, set aparte for GOD'S
use, by Election, before time; and Regeneration, in time; those sanctified
Ones, are those ALL, for whom CHRIST offered Himself. 2. All those, for whom
CHRIST did offer Himself, are sanctified in GOD'S Decree; and, in due time, by
virtue of CHRIST'S Offering. 3. Those who are never sanctified, the Body of
CHRIST was never offered for them.

Verse. 11. And every Priest stands daily, ministering, and offering,
oftentimes, the same Sacrifices, which can never take away sins.

Verse. 12. But this Man, after He had offered one Sacrifice, for sins, for
ever, sat down, on the Right Hand of GOD.

THAT he may end the Comparison of Aaron^ Priesthood, and CHRIST'S, he
heapeth together a number of the imperfections of the Leviticall Priesthood,
to show the Reasons, why it must be abolished, verse. 11. And, in the verses
following, unto the 15. he lays open the Perfection of CHRIST'S Priesthood,
which is to endure for ever. Let the words of the Text be observed.

1. In the Leviticall Priesthood, there is a plurality of Priests, [everie
Priest] importing many. But in CHRIST'S Priesthood, not a Priest, but
Himself alone. THIS MAN, verse, 12. is opposed to their EVERY PRIEST, verse. 11.

THEN, To make more Priests under Christ's Priesthood, by special office to
offer up Christ, is to make the Priesthood of Christ imperfect, like that of
LEVI.

2. In the Leviticall Priesthood, every Priest stands, as a servaunt,
mooueable in his office. But Christ sat down, verse. 12. established with
Dignity in his Priesthood, as Master, and Lord.

3. In the Leviticall Priesthood, every Priest stands, daily offering,
often times. But Christ, verse. 12. offered but one Sacrifice, for ever.

THEN, Christ's Sacrifice never was offered, nor shall be for ever offered,
but once; say the contrary who will.

4. In the Leviticall Priesthood, they offered the same Sacrifices oftentimes:
That is, Multitudes of sacrifices, of the same kind. But Christ offered one
sacrifice, for ever, verse. 12. That is, A sacrifice, one in number, and one in
offering; one individual Offering, one time only, offered He.

THEN, No sort of plurality does Christ's Sacrifice admit; seeing it is one
only, and only once offered. The Apostle leaves no rowme for an unbloody
sacrifice, beside the bloody: nor another offerer, but Himself only: nor
another time, but that ONCE, on the Cross.

5. In the Leviticall Priesthood, many Priests, many sacrifices, oftentimes
offered, could never take away sin: But CHRIST, our Priest, offered one
Offering; to wit, his own Body; once, and not oftener: and this suffices for
sin, for ever, verse. 12.14.

THEN, That Sacrifice which takes away^ sins, must do it at once, and for
ever: and that sacrifice which does not take away sins at once, and at one
offering, shall never be able to take away sins by repetition, how often
soever it be offered.

6. From the Apostle's Artifice, WE LEARN, 1. To gather together in our
mind, in a heap, the evils and imperfections of every thing which is like
to draw, or divert us from Christ: and* on the other hand, the Properties and
Excellencies of Christ, that we may be tied fast unto Him. 2. In special,
when any Mean, or Instrument appoyncted of GOD, to bring us to CHRIST, is
like to come in more esteemation than becomes; we are taught to rid Marches
betwixt the same, and Christ: that the Mean may have the Means rowme, and
CHRIST may have GOD'S rowme.

Verse. 13. From hence-foorth expecting, till His Enemies be made His
Foote-stoole. WHAT is Christ doing now, then, seeing he has no sacrifice to
offer? He is sitting at the Right Hand of GOD; from hence-foorth expecting,
till his enemies be made his foote-stoole: That is, his Manhead being no more
on earth now subject unto suffering, is entered into the Fellowship, and
Fruition of the Glory of his Godhead, to exercise his Power and Authority,
for the good of his Church, and overthrow of his Enemies.

THEN, 1. Albeit all CHRIST'S Personal Sufferinges are ended; yet the
Warre-fare of the Subjectes of His Kingdom, endures still against Enemies,
such are as Satan, and the Wicked of the World, and Sin, and Death. 2. That
Battle is CHRIST'S: He is Party to all the Foes of His Kingdom: They are
His Enemies. 3. He is not alone in the Battle: the Father is joined with Him;
and is set on work, to subdue His Enemies; as it is said, PSALM. CX.1.2.
Whereunto this place has reference; His Enemies shall be made his
foote-stoole. 4. Albeit this Victory be not completed for a time, yet it is
in working, and shall surely be brought to pass. 5. As our LORD expects,
and wayteth on patiently, till it be done; So must we His Subjectes do
also. 6. At length, the highest of His Enemies, shall be made lower, than the
basest of CHRIST'S Members. They shall be made His FOOTE-STOOLE, subdued under
Him, and tramped upon.

Verse. 14. For, by one Offering He has perfected, for ever, them that are
sanctified. HE gives a Reason* why Christ now has (...) more Offering to
make, nor no more Suffering to endure; but only to behold the fruit of his
Sufferinges, brought about by the Father; and, to concur with the Father, on
his Throne, for that end: Because, by one Offering, he has perfected, for
ever, them that are sanctified. That is, By that once Offering on the Cross,
done and ended before he sat down on the Right Hand of GOD, he has paid
the full Price, for ever, of the Purchase of Remission of sins, and
salvation, to those that are consecrated to GOD, in holiness.

THEN, 1. Who-so-ever will have any more offering up of CHRIST, than that One,
once offered before His Ascension; denies, that CHRIST, by Once Offering, has
perfected, for ever, them that are sanctified. 2. How-so-ever you take the word
SANCTIFIED, whether for those that are separated from the World, and dedicated
unto GOD, In CHRIST, in GOD'S Purpose, and Decree; comprehending all those
whom the Father has given unto CHRIST, out of the World; that is, the Elect:
or whether you take it for the Renewed, and Sanctified in time; the Offering of
CHRIST is not but for the Sanctified; that is, for such as are consecrated, and
separated out of the World, and dedicated to be Vessels of Honor, unto GOD.

2. They for whom Christ has made that Offering once; those, says he, he
has perfected, for ever. THEN, 1. He has not made Purchase of a possibility
of their salvation only: but He has perfected them, in making Purchase of
all that they need to have, even to their full Perfection. 2. He has not
purchased unto them the remission of some sins, and left the satisfaction to
be paid by themselves, for other some: but has PERFECTED them, perfectly
satisfied for them, and perfectly expiated all their sins. 3. He has not
made Purchase of some Graces unto them only for a certain time, so as He
will let them be taken out of His Hand afterward, and perish: but He has
PERFECTED them, for ever. 4. He has not appoyncted any offering for them, to
be made by any other, after Him: But, has made ONE Offering, HIMSELF, for
them, which satisfies for ever: so as the Father craveth no more offering, for
expiating their sin, for ever. For GOD has set forth CHRIST, to be a
Propitiation, through Faith, in His Blood, ROMANS lij.25. That is, GOD makes it
manifest, by His Gospel, that He is pacified, in CHRIST, toward them that
believe in His Blood, that believe in Him crucified.

Verse. 15. Whereof the holy Ghost, also, is a Witness unto us: For, after
that He had said before;

Verse. 16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them after those days,
says the LORD; I will put My Laws into their Hearts; and in their Minds
will I write them:

Verse. 17. And their sins, and iniquities, will I remember no more.

HE prooveth, that it is needless there should be any repetition of a
sacrifice for sin, in the New Testament: Because, Remission of sins,
purchased by Christ's death, who is the Testatour, is still in force,
continually, in Christ's Kingdom; there being an Article of the Covenant,
for Remission of sins, to the Confederated. And, if Remission of sins be,
no Oblation for sin can be, verse. 18.

1. He says, that the holy Ghost is Witness unto us, of this Truth, That
Christ can not be offered again. THEN, 1. We who do teach this Doctrine,
and deny any more offering of Christ* as a sacrifice, have the holy Ghost
testifying for us. 2. The holy Ghost is Author of the Scripture, and does
speak unto us there-by.

2. He declares, the New Covenant to be of the holy Ghosts making; and
calls Him THE LORD. Wherein he teaches us, 1. That the holy Ghost it a
distinct person of the Godhead, bearing witness, by Himself, to the Church,
of the Truth. 2. And one in essence with the Father, and the Son; even the
LORD, JEHOVAH; Author of the New Covenant, with the Father, and the Son.

Verse. 18. Now, where Remission of these is, there is no more offering for
sin. FROM this Article, of Remission of sins, in the New Covenant, he
concludes, No more offering for sin, but once, under this Covenant; Because,
sin is expiated.

QVEST. How, then, could there be Remission of sin under the Law, where
there was daily offering for sin? Or, if there was Remission, how could
there be offering for sin? I ANSWER. There is a Remission granted, upon
Surety given, for Satisfaction to be made for the party remitted: and, there
is a Remission granted, for Satisfaction already made for the party remitted.
The Remission that the Fathers under the Law had, was of the first sort; Upon
Promise of the Mediator to come, and to satisfy. And with Remission of this
sort, a typical sacrifice might stand, for signifying, that the true
expiatorie Sacrifice was not yet paid, but was coming to be paid. But, the
Remission that we get under the Gospel, is upon Satisfaction already made by
the true Expiatorie and Satisfactorie Sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST, done, and
ended, with the personal suffering. And this sort of Remission is it, whereof
the Apostle here speaks; and it admits no manner of offering for sin:
neither typical offering, because Christ is come, and has fulfilled what the
typical sacrifice did signify: neither the repeating of the true Expiatorie
Sacrifice of Christ's Body; because, then, Christ behooved to suffer daily,
and die daily, after that he has made satisfaction. And, beside these two
sorts of offering, the ^ewish bloody sacrifices typical, and the true
Expiatorie bloody Sacrifice of Christ's Body on the Cross, the Scripture
acknowledges none. So, the meaning of (...) Apostle, in these words, must be
this: Where Remission of sins is already purchased, by offering of the true
Expiatorie Sacrifice, as now it is, under the New Covenant, there no more
offering can be for sin any more. THEN, 1. The Apostle acknowledges no use
for any sacrifice under the New Testament, after Christ's Ascension: else,
his Reason should not hold. 2. The sacrifice which is offered, to wit, the
Body of JESUS, has already suffered for sin: so that now the Remission of
those, that is, of sin and iniquity, ALL SORT of the Elects sins, is
obtained there-by already. 3. Not only NO SACRIFICE is any more to be
offered for sin under the New Covenant; but, also, No OFFERING, says he,
bloody, or unbloody, is to be offered. 4. That Church which pretends to
offer any Offering for sins, of quick, or dead* now under the Gospel,
professes, That no Remission of sin is to be had in such a Church: Because,
where there is Remission of sin, there is no more offering for sin, says
the Apostle, expresslie.

Verse. 19. Having, therefore, Brethren, boldness, to enter into the Holiest,
by the Blood of JESUS. FROM the bypast Doctrine, of Christ's Excelcellencie,
and Riches of Grace, which comes unto us through him, he draws
Exhortations, for vse-making of this Doctrine, in soundness of Faith, and the
Fruits thereof, unto the end of the Epistle. And, first, he exhorts, To
seek unto Communion with GOD in Heaven, through Christ; using the terms of
the Ceremonial Law, but mixed with words touching the Excellency of the
thing signified, above those Ceremonies: to show the Hebrews, That those
Ceremonies had nothing in themselves, but did serve to represent Christ, and
his Benefits: And, so, to draw them from those shadows, unto the truth of
that, which once being signified by them, is now manifested in Christ.

To make the Exhortation to be the better received, be sets down sundry
Privileges of the Faithful, verse. 19.20.21. From which he infers his
Exhortation, verse. 22. For the first Privilege, he says, We have liberty
to enter into the Holiest: That is, Into Heaven.

1. In that he makes this Privilege proper to the society of Christians,
himself, and others; he teaches us, 1. That so long as men are without
Christ, they are debarred out of Heaven; no Door nor Way open, but the flaming
Sword of GOD'S Justice, to keep out every one that shall preasse to enter,
before Christ bring them. But, such as come to Christ by Faith, Heaven is
opened unto them, and the Door cast up, for them to enter in, who were exyled
before.

2. Next, he commends this Privilege, by calling the Place. The Holiest,
the Place where GODS HOLINESS dwells, represented by the Sanctuary; where
nothing can enter, but that which is holy. Teaching us there-by, That the
Faithful are so washen from their sins, through Faith in Christ, that GOD
will admit them into the Place of His Dwelling, into His Heavenly Sanctuary,
by Faith now, and Fruition heere-after.

3. He commends this Privilege, by calling it a Liberty. The word,
properly, signifies, Liberty to speak all our mind; as has been marked
before. Where-by he teaches us, 1. How we do enter into the Holiest; to
wit, by Prayer, sending up our Supplications to Heaven. And, again, 2. That in
our Prayers to GOD, we may use freedom of speech, telling Him all our Mind,
all our Griefs, all our Fears, all our Desires, and even power out our
hearts before Him, at all times.

4. He commends this Privilege, by the Price of the Purchase thereof, even
the Blood of JESUS. Where-by he teaches us, 1. To have this Privilege in
high esteemation. 2. To make good use of it. 3. To be confident of the
standing of it: and all, because it is so dearly bought.

5. Lastly: he commends this Privilege, by the Common Right which all
Believers have unto it, the Apostle, and these Hebrews, as his Brethren, and
all other of that Society. Where-by he teaches, That albeit there be great
difference in the measure of Faith, and other Graces, betwixt Christians; some
being stronger, some weaker, some as Apostles, some as these weak Hebrews,
etc. yet all are the Children of one Father, all are Brethren, and all are
admitted, by Prayer, to come, and enter into Heaven, freely to power out their
souls, at all times, unto GOD.

Verse. 20. By a New and Living Way, which He has consecrated for us,
through the Veil; that is to say, His Flesh. THIS is one Privilege, That we
have liberty to enter into Heaven, follows another. There is a Way made, to
lead us on thereunto, which is Christ's Flesh, compared to the Veil of the
Sanctuary, which both hid those things which were within the Sanctuary, and
yet yielded an enterie through it self, unto the Sanctuary. So is Christ's
Flesh, the Veil of his Godhead, which did bide the Glory of his Deity, from
the carnal beholders, who stumbled at his baseness; and yet opened a Door,
for the spiritual man to look in, upon him that was invisible, while as he
observed the brightness of the Glory of GOD, breaking through the Doctrine,
and Works, of the Man CHRIST.

1. He makes the Way, to be Christ's Flesh, or Christ as incarnate, or
Christ considered according to his humanity: Because, Christ's taking on our
nature, is the only Mean of reconciling us unto GOD. No man ever came to the
Father, but by him. No other Name where-by men are saved, but the NAME of JESUS
CHRIST. And, therefore, as in the way, a man must enter, and hold on still,
till he come to the end, to the place where he would be: Even so must
every man, who would be at Heaven, begin at Christ, and hold on, making
progress in him still, from Faith to Faith, from Grace to Grace, till he come
to his Rest.

2. This Way is of Christ's own making: he has devysed it, and consecrated
it. He who is the Father's Wisdom, has thought it the best Way, to bring
Man to GOD, that GOD should become Man, that the Word should be made Flesh.
The best Way to bring men to Heaven, that GOD should come down, to the earth,
to take on Man's nature upon him, that he might make Man Part-taker of the
Divine Nature.

3. He has consecrated and dedicated his Flesh, his humane nature, set
aparte, and sanctified himself, to this same end, that Men might make their
Moyen with GOD, by him, as Man; and, by the Bands of Nature, with him, he
helped up to the Bands of Grace, with GOD; by coming to the Man CHRIST, might
find GOD in CHRIST.

4. He calls it a New Way, 1. Because of the clear manifesting of the Way
to Heaven, under the Gospel, in comparison of the time of the Law. 2. Because
a ready, plain, and safe Way, without stumbling Blocks, Pittes, or Snares,
Dangers, or Inconveniences, to such as keep themselves there-in, such as
new-made ways use to be. 3. Because it waxes never old; is now established,
and never to be altered, or abolished.

5. It is a Living Way, 1. Because Christ lives for ever, to help them all to
Heaven, who seek unto GOD, through Him only. 2. Because Life is here in
Christ, as in the Fountain; that he may give Life to whom-so-ever he will:
that is, unto all that come unto him. 3. Because it gives Life, and
refreshment, to the weary Passenger, and quickens his dead and dumpish
heart, when he considers that his Savior is a Man indeed, so earnest to
have us saved, that he has yoaked himself in communion of nature with us,
there-by to save us. It is Meat, indeed, to his Soul, that the Word is made
Flesh: It is Drink, indeed, to consider, that he has suffered for our
sins. As Elias Chariot, so is CHRIST'S Manhead, and Sufferinges. Get up here,
by Faith in him, and thou shall go up to GOD. This Way is as that of Eagles
wings. Lay first grippes upon JESUS CHRIST, GOD manifested in the flesh: and
he will mount up with thee, and carry thee through the Wilderness, to Canaan:
From the natural Misery, and sins which thou lie in, unto Heaven.

6. This Way leads through the Veil, To teach us, That we coming to
CHRIST'S Manhead, must not subsist there: but by this mean seek in to GOD,
who dwells in Him; that our Faith and Hope may be in GOD. We enter by the
Man CHRIST, and do rest on GOD, in CHRIST, on the fullness of the Godhead
which dwells bodily in CHRIST. This is to distinguish the natures of CHRIST,
and to keep the unity of His Person rightly.

Verse. 21. And, having an high Priest over the House of GOD. FOR our farther
satisfaction, he gives us Christ over again, to make yet more use of him, to
direct, guide, and convoy us, in the Way, to lead us to the Father in Heaven,
through the Courts of his Dwelling, and to bring us in to him, and make us
welcome There.

1. We have Christ for a PRIEST to us, whose Lips do always preserve
Knowledge, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, who
will inform our Minds, and persuade our Hearts to believe, and obey: who
will reconcile, by His once offered Sacrifice, the Believer; will intercede for
the Reconciled, to keep him still in Grace: will bless us, with all
Spiritual Blessings: will take our Prayers, Thankes-giving, and the
Spiritual Sacrifice of all the good Works of our Hands, and wash the
pollutions from them; will offer them, in our name, with the Incense and
Perfume of His own Merits; and lead our selves in, where our Lamps shall
be furnished, and our Table filled, till we go in to Heaven; and There He
will welcome us, in a Mansion prepared for us.

2 He is a high PRIEST, adorned with all Authority, and all Perfections;
having all in substance, which the Types did signify; who bears our names,
yea, our selves, on the Sholders of His Power, and in the Breast of His Hearty
Love: who bears the iniquity of the Holy Things, and Holiness in His
Forehead, for us. In whom the Father is well pleased with us, and has made
us acceptable, as in His Well-beloved.

3. He is OVER THE HOUSE OF GOD: He has Authority, and Power, to bring in
whom He pleases, and to give forth of the Treasure as much as he will: All
the Mansions in his Father's dwelling house, are his; and all at his disposing,
to open so as none shall shu^: To him belongs to give forth the sentence of
Admission to Heaven; and to say, Come, you blessed of the Father. Yea, to make
this his Authority manifest, he will come again, and take us unto himself:
that where he is, we may be there also.

4. WE HAVE this high Priest: that is* he is ours, because, 1. Taken out from
AMONGST us, one of our number, albeit not of our conditions; of our nature, but
separate from our sinful manners; holy, and harmless. 2. Because he is FOR
US, in things appertayning to GOD, to employ his Moyen and Power, for our
behooue, toward GOD. 3. Because, bound in all Bands, WITH US, of Nature, of
Grace, and Good Will, of the Father's Gift, and Appoynctment, and his own
Covenant* and special Contract, with us. So that albeit an uncouth man may
possibly leave a stranger in his journeye alone, yet Christ can not choose to
do so to us: but, for the Bands betwixt him and us, he will never leave us,
nor forsake us.

Verse. 22. Let us draw near, with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith;
having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
with pure water. FROM these Privileges, he presses an Exhortation, To draw
near to GOD; and prescrybeth the Disposition required of us, in our drawing
near.

1. This Exhortation shows, 1. That true Christians are often times so
sensible of their own unworthiness, that under that sense, they are enclyned,
of themselves, to stand a-farre off; and have need of encowragement, and
invitation, to draw near. 2. That such as are most sensible of their own
unworthiness, are most called, to come forwards, unto GOD: for He gives
grace to the humble.

2. He lays down the Privileges in the former Verses; and, in this,
draws on the Exhortation: TO TEACH US, 1. That such Privileges as are
granted unto us, in Christ, must be received, and believed, as Truth. 2.
That we must study to make use of our Privileges, and challenge them for our
own. 3. That the weakest of true Believers in Christ, may thrust in themselves
at the Doors of Grace, amongst the holy Apostles: for the Apostle puts the
HEBREWS with himself, in the Exhortation, for this end.

3. For our disposition, and fitting to draw near, be requires, first, That
we have a true heart. He says not, a sinlesse heart; but, a true heart;
that is, such a heart, as in the matter of believing myn^e^h no confidence, but
in GOD'S Grace, through Christ only; and, in the matter of GOD'S Service,
myndeth only His will in its aim, and allows only that which is His will
in its censure.

THEN, An honest heart, which honestly acknowledges its own sins, and
flees to Christ's Blood, for sprinkling; whose aim is upright, endeavor
upright, and censure of it self upright; allowing in it self nothing but what
GOD allows, and displeased with that which dispeaseth GOD, albeit, many
ways, weak and imperfect, yet has liberty to draw near unto GOD.

4. The next thing he requires, is full assurance of Faith: That is, a
settled, and full persuasion, to be accepted, even through JESUS CHRIST. THEN,
Albeit the LORD will not despise the weakest measure of Faith, and will not
quench the smoking flax; yet it pleases Him better, yea, it is His
Commandment, that men study unto the full assurance of Faith: for, the more
thou restest on GOD'S Covenant with thee in JESUS CHRIST, the more thou sealest
His Truth, glorifiest Him, becommest the more like unto faithful Abraham, and
gettest the deeper rooting in CHRIST.

5. The third is, That the heart be sprinkled from an evil conscience. The
heart is sprinkled, when a sinner, sensible of sin, makes hearty
application to himself, of the Blood of JESUS, for remission of sins: after
this hearty application of CHRIST'S Blood, the Conscience is furnished with a
good Answer unto all Challenges; and, so, is made good, a comfortable
Conscience, absolving the man, through faith in JESUS, whom it tormented with
Challenges, before it ran to the Blood of JESUS for sprinkling.

THEN, When-so-ever the Conscience is evil, accuses, and vexes, let the
vexed heart run to CHRIST'S Blood; and then shall it be free from an evil
conscience: For, the Blood of JESUS cleanses us from all sin. Let the Heart
be sprinkled, and the Conscience will be good.

6. The fourth thing required in him that draws ^are as he should, is, That
his body be washed with ^^re water: That is, That according to the
sigification of that Legal Rite, their outward conversation be ^^amelesse,
and holy; sin being so curbed within, that it reygne not in their mortal
body; so foughten against within, as it break not forth in scandalous works
of darkness, in the actions of the body.

THEN, 1. With a sprinkled Conscience within, men must join an holy, and
blameless conversation without. 2. The washing of the conversation without,
must proceed from an heart sensibly acquaynted with the power of the Blood of
JESUS. 3. And this outward holiness of the body, must be wrought with pure
water; that is, by the Spirit of Sanctification; to distinguish the
reformation of a Believer, from a Counterfeyt, who without may look like a
righteous man, but within be as a why^ed Tomb, full of rottenness.

Verse. 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wavering:
(for He is faithful that promised.) ANother Exhortation, to avowe the Faith
of CHRIST; that is, the Doctrine of CHRIST, the Truth received from CHRIST,
and believed; and not to quyte it in the time of trial, upon any condition.

1. The requyring to hold fast the Confession of our Faith, or Hope, as the
word imports, TEACHES, 1. That a true Christian must not only hold the
Truth of CHRIST secretly; but must confess it, profess, and avowe it
openly, where GOD'S Glory, and others good, requires the same. 2. That he
must look for adversary powers, and Temptations, to take that Truth, or at
least the confession of it, from him. 3. That in these Trials and Essays, he
must hold the faster grippe, and avow it so much the more steadfastlie, as he
is tempted to quyte it. 4. That when he is put to the Trial of this
Confession, of any poynct of his Faith, he is also put to the Trial of the
Confession of his Hope; Whether his hopes of the promised Salvation in JESUS,
be stronger to keep him steadfast, or the Terror, and allurement from men,
stronger to make him quyte the poynct of Truth controverted. 5. That nothing,
but this Hope, is able to make a man stand out in Trial, if he be hardly
urged.

2. He will have the avowing of the Truth of CHRIST, to be without wavering.
THEN, 1. Men must so learn the Truth, that they need not to change again:
That is, Must study to know the Truth soundly, and solidlie. 2. And having
learned it, must not say, and unsay; one day avowe it, and another day quyte
it: For so GOD gets not His due Glory. Beholders are not edified, the man's
Testimony wants weight with the Adversary. But he must be invincible in
the Truth, who will neither alter, nor change, or diminish any thing of it,
for fead, or favor.

3. He gives this for a ground of Constancy; For He is faithful who has
promised: That is, The Promises which JESUS has made to such as constantly
believe in Him, shall be surely informed, that no constant Professor of His
Truth shall be ashamed.

THEN, 1. Where we have a Promise of any thing made unto us in Scripture, we
may be confident to obtain it, and bold to avowe our hope thereof, against
such as would teach us the doctrine of Doubting, whereunto we are, of our
selves, prone and enclyned; and against such as shake the assurance of the
Sayncts perseverance. 2. The ground of our Confidence, is not in our selves,
but in the faythfulnesse of JESUS CHRIST, who has promised such Graces to His
Children. 3. Our bold avowing of our Hope, is not a bragging of our own
strength; but a magnifying of CHRIST'S Faythfulnesse.

Verse. 24. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good
works. HE strengthens his former Exhortation, by giving of Directions, to
farther their Obedience thereunto. And, first, for mutual vp-stirring one of
another. WHEREOF WE LEARN,

1. That mutual Edification of Christians amongst themselves, and sharpening
one of another, is a special help to Constancy in true Religion, and a
Preservatiue against Apostasy. 2. Prudence is required hereunto, that
mutuallie we observe one another's Disposition, Gifts, Experience, Virtues,
and Faults; that we may the better fit our selves, to do good, each one of
us, to another; and to receive good each one of another, in our Christian
conversing together. 3. A Godly stryving one with another, who shall be first
in love, and well-doing, is better than the ordinary strife, who shall exceed
others in Vanity, and superfluity of Apparel and Fare.

Verse. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is: but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the Day
approaching. ANother Mean to this same end, is the frequenting of Christian
Assemblies, and Meetinges, which may farther this purpose of mutual
edification, AND THEREFORE, 1. Church Assemblies must be well kept, by such
as do mind to prove constant in the true Religion. 2. Christian Meetinges
also of private Christians, for mutual conference, and exhorting one of
another, is not to be neglected, nor forsaken; but to be used, for keeping
unity in the Church: and not to foster Schism, or hinder the public
Assemblies.

2. He taxes the fault of some amongst them, who in Schism, or purpose of
Apostasy, with-drewe themselves from all Church Assemblies, and Christian
Meetinges, and fell back again, or were in the way of falling back, to the
denial of CHRIST openly.

THEN, 1. Separation from the true Church, and Christian Society of the
Faithful, is a remarkable evil. 2. The Schism, or Apostasy of others,
should not weaken us in following any good Mean of Edification: but, rather,
stir us up, unto more diligence; lest, by negligence, we fall, piece and
piece, back, after their example.

3. He makes the approaching of the Day, to wit, of GOD'S Judgment, a
special motive, to use the Means diligently, and make us constant in the
Faith.

THEN, 1. The Day of GOD'S Judgment should still be looked unto, as a thing
neare-hand, even at the doors; because it is but a very LITTLE, and our Day
shall come; yea, and but a LITTLE time, till our LORD shall come to Judgment.
2. The consideration of the Day of Judgment, is a fit Mean to sharpen us,
unto all good Duties, which may make our reckoning to be farthered at that
Day, and to make us boldly maintain the Truth, against all fear of men.

Verse. 26. For, if we sin, wilfully, after that we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. ANother
Motive, to constancy in the truth of Religion, taken from the fearful case
of wilful Apostates, who sinning the Sin against the holy Ghost, are
secluded, for ever, from Mercy. I say, the Sin against the holy Ghost;
because we shall find the Sin here descrybed, not to be any particular
sin against the Law, but against the GOSPEL: Not a sin against some
poynct of Truth, but against CHRIST'S whole Doctrine: Not of infirmity, but
wilfulness: Not of rashness, but of deliberation; wittinglie, and willingly:
Not of ignorance, but after Illumination, and Profession: Such as Jews turned
Christians, revolting from Christianity, back again, to their former
hostility, against CHRIST, did commit. It is true, many who commit lesser
sins, get never grace to repent: and many who make defection, in some poynct
of their profession, may be secluded from Mercy there-after: but this sin
here descrybed, is a wilful rejecting of CHRIST, and the Benefit of His
Sacrifice, after Illumination, and Profession, of the Faith of CHRIST.

THEN, 1. As Apostasy from the true Religion lies nearest unto this Sin; so
they who desire to be fred of this Sin, must be the more careful to be
constant in the profession of every poynct of the Truth of the Gospel. 2. If
a man reject the Benefit of that ONCE OFFERED SACRIFICE of CHRIST, there is no
other Sacrifice for Sin after that, nor any other mean to help him. But,
if a man seek unto JESUS CHRIST, and will not quyte Him, what-so-ever he may
think of the haynousnesse of his own sins, the Sacrifice which JESUS
offered for sins, remains, where-by he may be saved.

Verse. 27. But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. HAving secluded the Apostate
from Mercy, he goes on, in these words, to show his miserable estate.
WHERE-OF WE GATHER,

1. That the wilful Apostate from the Faith of CHRIST, is also a wilful
Adversary to CHRIST, of the highest sort: Part-taker of Satan's sin, and
Satan's profession. 2. That every Apostate of this sort, is destitute of
GOD'S Peace, selfe-condemned, desperate of Salvation, hopeless of Relief,
without all purpose of Repentance, or using means of help, stricken with the
foresight of the Wrath coming upon him, and made to expect it, although he
should dissemble it never so much. 3. The Apostate's fear shall come upon him,
judgment aunswerable to his sin, the indignation and wrath of GOD, yea,
fiery ^ndignation, the most terrible that can be thought upon, which he
shall not escape; but it shall devour him, swallowe him up, and feed upon his
body and soul, even for ever.

2. In that he makes this the judgment of CHRIST'S Adversaries, WE LEARN,

That the soul which loves CHRIST, and can not quyte Him, can not endure to
think of a separation, will not quyte the true Religion, nor any known
poynct of CHRIST'S Truth, and is using the means to get GOD'S Peace: albeit
it might seem to it self, because of the present sense of wrath, to be in
the selfsame estate that is here descrybed; yet is it free, as yet, of the
sin against the holy Ghost; and not to be reckoned amongst Adversaries; but
amongst the Friends and Lovers of CHRIST, how vehemently so-ever Satan's
suggestions bear in the contrary.

3. In that by setting before them the fearful estate of Apostates from the
known Truth of the true Religion, he labors to strengthen them against
the fear of persecution. WHENCE WE LEARN,

That if Apostates, before they make Apostasy from the true Religion, did
foresee their own danger, as after Apostasy they are made to foresee their
own condemnation, all the terror of all the torment which man could put them
unto, and all the allurementes which this world could give them, would not
move them to quyte the least poynct of the Truth of true Religion.

Verse. 28. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses.

Verse. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of GOD, and has counted the
Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has
done despyte unto the Spirit of Grace?

HE prooveth the equity of their judgment, by the proportion of their
punishment who despised the Law of Moses. THEN, As sins are greater, so must
the punishment be greater: and the Conscience being posed as here, can not
but subscrybe to the proportion.

2. To make the Sin appear the better, he poyncteth out some particular
sins, involved within this great Sin. For clearing whereof, it may be
asked; How can the Apostates tread the Blood of the Son of GOD under
foot? etc.

I ANSWER: They can not, indeed, by physical action: but by doing the
equivalent sin, they are accounted of GOD to do it, by judicial
interpretation. Their Apostasy imports, their agreeing, to do CHRIST as
much indignity, as if they did offer Him this personal violence. Their deeds
show, that they have this base esteemation of CHRIST, and His blood: and no
better. For, what says the Apostate of CHRIST, by his deed, but, That He is
not worthy to be professed, or avowed, or followed?

And what is this in effect, but to tread Him under all these base things,
which the Apostate prefers before Him? And so is to be understood of the
Blood of CHRIST, and His Spirit.

QVEST. But how can the Reprobate be said to be sanctified, by the Blood
of the Covenant? I ANSWER. There is a sanctification to the purifying of the
flesh, and a sanctification to the purifying of the conscience, from dead
works, to serve the Living GOD, HEBR. ix.13.14.

The sanctification external to the purifying of the flesh, consists in the
man's separation from the world, and dedication unto GOD'S service, by Calling
and Covenant, common to all the members of the visible Church* and it is
forcible thus far, as to bring a man into credit and esteemation, as a
Saynct, before men, and unto the common Privileges of the Church; whereupon,
as Men, so GOD also, speaks unto him, and of him, as one of His People; and
deals with him, in his external dispensation, as with one of His own
People. In this sense all the Congregation of Israel, and every one of them,
is called holy, yea, Core also, and his followers, Numb. 16.3. The
Sanctification internal, by renovation, consists in a man's separation from
the state of Nature, to the state of Grace; from his old conditions, to be a
new creature indeed. By this latter sort, a Reprobate can not be called
sanctified; but by the former, he may be called sanctified, and that by
virtue of the Blood of the Covenant, albeit he should not get any farther
good thereby: For, as the Blood of CHRIST has virtue to cleanse the
Conscience, and renew the Soul which comes unto it truly, and
spirituallie; So it must have force to do that which is less; that is,
purify the flesh, and external condition of the man who comes unto it
outwardly only, as the Types did under the Law; whereupon an hypocrite in
the Christian Church, must be accounted one of the Congregation of the
Saynctes, as well as an hypocrite under the Law was so called; because
Christ's Blood can not be inferior to the Types, which were of this force,
to sanctify men to the purifying of the flesh. Or we may say more shortly:
There is a sanctification by consecration, when any thing is devoted, or
dedicated unto GOD, and a sanctification by inhabitation of the holy Spirit,
2. Cor. vj.16.17.18. Of the former sort, the Censers of Core, Dathan, and
Abirim, are called holy. And the reason is given, Because they offered them
before the LORD, therefore they are hallowed, Numb. xvj.38. And, in this sense,
all the members of the visible Church, even such as afterward do prove
Apostates, are sanctified, because they are offered, and offer themselves unto
the LORD. But the inhabitation of the holy Spirit, is proper only to the
Elect, and GOD'S Children.

HENCE LEARN, 1. That all the members of the visible Church, are so
confederate unto GOD, that it is sacrilege for them, not to seek GOD'S Honor
in all things, or to bestow themselves any other way, than for GOD. 2. Men
are reckoned by GOD, so to deal with CHRIST, and His Blood, and Covenant, and
Spirit, as they make account thereof, as they have esteemation of CHRIST, and
His Blood, and Spirit. 3. And their esteemation is not reckoned by their
words, or pretenses, but by their deeds, as these do importe, so are they
judged to esteem. 4. Because Apostasy from CHRIST, imports as much, as He
and His Doctrine, are unworthy to be avowed, or mayntayned; by consequence it
imports also, that CHRIST was not the Man He called Himself; and, that all
His Spirit had taught them, was untruth: and, therefore, justly here does
the Scripture challenge the Apostate, of counting CHRIST'S Blood no better
than the blood of a common Malefactor; and, of giving the Lie to the HOLY
SPIRIT. So fearful a thing is it, to make Defection from any known part of
true Religion.

Verse. 30. For we know Him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto Me; I
will recompense, says the LORD. And again, The LORD shall judge His People.
IN that he prooveth the certayntie of their punishment, out of Deuter.
xxxij.35.36. LEARN, 1. That the justice and constancy of GOD'S Truth, in
general threatninges, is sufficient to prove the certain punishment of
particular sins. 2. The punishment of Apostates, of one kind, may evidence
the punishment of Apostates of another kind. For, it is the JEWS Apostasy,
to Idolatry, and worshipping of Images, which in that place the LORD does
threaten.

2. He makes the knowing of GOD who speaks, a proof sufficient for the
certain performance of His Word. THEN, As men understand GOD'S Nature, so
will His Word weygh with them: And, such as know Him best, will stand most
awe of, and believe, His Word most.

Verse. 31. It is a fearful thing, to fall into the Hands of the Living GOD.
FROM this knowledge of GOD'S Nature, he pronounces how fearful a thing it
is, to fall into his hands, as an adversary, to be punished.

THEN, 1. It is praesupposed, that such as reject the Mercy of CHRIST, shall
not be able to reject Justice; but must fall into His Hand. 2. The aeternitie
of GOD, makes His Wrath terrible: For He lives for ever, to avenge Himself
on His Foes. 3. The Terror of the LORD, what Torment He is able to inflict,
and that for ever, is a fit Mean to make men beware to make Apostasy from
CHRIST.

Verse. 32. But call to rememberance the former days, in which after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions. FOR a Mean to help
them constantly to go on, he directs them, to make use of their former
patience, and experience of troubles for the Gospel.

THEN, 1. Even they who have suffered for CHRIST, have need to be stirred up
to constancy, and to be terrified from Apostasy. 2. The more men have
suffered for CHRIST, they ought to be the bolder in the Profession of His
Truth, and the more ready for new Sufferings.

2. He makes the time of their first troubles, to be, after Illumination.
THEN, Some do enter into troubles for Religion, at their very first
conversion, and are yoaked in Battle against Persecuters, beside other Onsets,
of Satan, and their own nature.

Verse. 33. Partly whylest ye were made a gazing stock, both by reproaches,
and afflictions: and partly whylest ye became companions of them which were so
used. HE makes their troubles, in their own persons, by reproaches, and
afflictions, the first part of their fight, wherein they were a gazing flock
to the world. THEN, 1. Such as are called to suffer for CHRIST, are set upon a
Theater, to give proof of their Faith and love to CHRIST, before the world.
2. The blind world wondereth at such as adventure to suffer any thing for
the Truth of CHRIST, and think but ignominiouslie of CHRIST, and His Cause,
and of those that maintain the same. 3. Reproaches and tauntes of the Godly
by the world, are reckoned up to them for parts of their Christian Cross,
and of their Glory before GOD.

2. The next part of their Fight, was their parttaking with such as did suffer
the like. THEN, 1. It is the part of true Christians, to countenance them that
confess CHRIST, yea, and to join with them that suffer for Him. 2. Communion
with the sufferinges of others, is reckoned up for a part of our own
sufferinges. 3. To suffer patiently our selves, or take a part with others in
their sufferings, will cost us a Battle.

Verse. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my Bonds, and took joyfullie the
spoiling of your goods; knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven, a
better, and an enduring Substance. HE comes to particulars; and first, their
compassion toward himself, in his bonds, is remembered by him. THEN, 1.
Compassion with Sufferers, especially when it is manifested to the afflicted
party, for his Comfort, makes the compassionate person a part-taker with the
sufferer. 2. Such compassion should be remembered by the sufferer thankfully,
and recompensed by seeking their aeternall Welfare, who have showed them such
great kyndnesse.

2. Another particular, is their joyful enduring the spoliation of their
goods. THEN, 1. When trial comes of men's faith in CHRIST, such a^ mind to
be constant, must prepare themselves to quyte their goods, if GOD please so to
honor them with employment. 2. When we see we must lose our goods for
CHRIST'S sake, or suffer any other inconveniencie, we ought to do it
cheerfully, and count our gain in CHRIST more than our loss in the world:
and if we find trouble, to le^ our Adversaries know as little of it as we
can: namely, seeing there is no cause of grief, if our eyes were opened, and
our earthly affections mortified.

3. Their encowragement, and cause of joye, was the sensible feeling within
themselves, of the Comfort of aeternall Riches in Heaven, keeping for them.

THEN, 1. It is the assurance of our healenlie Inheritance, which must make us
ready to quyte our earthly mooueables. 2. Who so gets a heart to quyte
any thing on earth, for CHRIST, shall have better in Heaven, than he can lose
here. 3. GOD uses to give Earnest of what Hoe is to give, in sensible feeling
of spiritual Riches, to such as believe in Him. 4. When men can esteem of
things heavenly, as they are; that is, enduring goods: and of things
earthly, as they are; that is, perishing mooueables; then shall they,
readily, quyte the earthie, in hope of the heavenly.

Verse. 35. Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward. NOw, he exhorts them, to go on, in this bold
avowing of CHRIST: For, this Confidence, in the Original, is such as has with
it a full and free profession of all their faith.

THEN, Confidence, and bold avowing of the Truth, is required: A plain and
full testimony must we give to CHRIST'S Truth: Our confidence in profession,
is, in part, casten, when our testimony is sparing.

2. The encowragement he gives, is the hope of a reward. THEN, 1. Constancy
in avowing of CHRIST, shall be well rewarded, although not of deserving, yet
of GOD'S Grace. 2. He that quyteth his profession, renounceth the Reward
promised to the Constant.

QVESTION. But, does not this Exhortation importe the Elects unsettledness,
and uncertainty of perseverance* I ANSWER. Not; but only his weakness of
himself, and need of such Exhortations, to farther his constancy. 2. The
danger of dishonouring GOD in some particular slip or fall, is ground
sufficient for this Exhortation; and this is the most of necessity it can
importe. 3. The Exhortation being given to the common Body of the visible
Professoures, touches them properly, and no^ the Elect formallie.

Verse. 36. For, ye have need of patience; that after ye have done the will of
GOD, ye might receive the Promise. HE gives a Reason: Because they have
need of Patience, therefore they must not cast away their Confidence. THEN, 1.
The Reward will not be given, till a time interveane. 2. And Troubles will
lie on, in the mean while, to make the time seem the longer. 3. Patience is
needful, as a Mean, to fit us to attend. 4. Confidence of the Truth, must
supporte our patience.

2. The time of their patience, he sets as long as GOD thinks good to
employ them: and, after that, the Reward comes. THEN, 1. The time of
patience, is as long as GOD has any thing to do with us in this world. 2.
Patience must not be joined with idleness; but, with active obedience of
GOD'S will, as He requires it. 3. After that employment is ended, the
promised Reward is given.

Verse. 37. For, yet a little while; and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry. HE encowrageth them to patience, by promise of the LORD'S
coming, to relieve them shortly. THEN, 1. The term of Patience, is, until
the LORD come, to deliver. 2. The patient attender on His coming, shall not
be disappoyncted: For, He will come, and will not tarry beyond the due time
of our necessity. 3. It should strengthen us unto patience, that the time is
short, and the Deliverie certain:

Verse. 38. Now, the Just shall live by Faith: but, if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. HOw shall they fend in the mean time?
He answers from HABAC. 2.4. The Just shall live by Faith: That is, The man
who will be found righteous, must not look to present sense; but sustain his
soul, with the Word of Promise.

THEN, 1. In the midst of Troubles, and GODS felt absence, Faith will content
it self with the only Promises of GOD. 2. Looking to GODS Word by Faith, is
able to keep a soul in life, and patience.

2. He threatens the missbelieving Apostate, that chooses to draw back,
and not to live by faith. The words of the Prophet, are, He whose soul is
lifted up in him, is not upright. The Apostle betaketh him to the meaning;
which being compared with the Prophet's words, DOES TEACH US, 1. That he
who refuses to live by Faith, is lifted up with the false confidence of some
other thing than GOD: he has some strong hold within himself, wherein he
does trust. 2. He that lifts up himself, in his vain confidence, will
draw abacke from believing in GOD'S Word, in the time of trial. 3. He that
draws back in the time of trial, bewrays the want of this sincerity. 4.
A back-slyder from the profession of the Truth, is loathsome, both to GOD, and
to His Sayncts.

Verse. 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them
that believe, to the saving of the soul. HE mittigateth the Threatening, lest
he should seem to suspect them of inconstancy. THEN* 1. Such Threatninges
and Exhortations as have been given here, do not importe the uncertainty of
their perseverance who are threatened; but stands with the assurance of the
contrary. 2. He who threateneth, should be as wary to weaken his hearers
faith, as his own. 3. Hearers must understand, that the right use of
threatening, is, to rowse men out of security; and not to discowrage them.

2. We are not of them ( says he) who draw back unto perdition.

THEN, 1. They who draw back, from constant avowing of the Faith, draw near
unto perdition. He that forsakes the Cross, runs himself on the Rock of
his own destruction; which is worse. 2. The Elect are not of that kind, or
sort of men, who fall into Apostasy, unto perdition. They may fall for a
time; but are not of them that draw back, unto perdition.

3. We are of them ( says he) who believe to the salvation of the soul.
THEN, 1. True Believers are of that kind, of whom all do persevere. 2.
Persevering in the Faith, is a going on to Salvation.

The sum of Chap. XI.
NOw, that you may know the better how to live by Faith, consider, that Faith
apprehends things to come, as present, and subsisting, by gripping them, in
their original Fountain, which is the Word of Promise, and beholding in the
Mirror of the Word, the clear certayntie of things, as yet not seen to
sense, Verse. 1. For, so were the Elect Beholders and Part-takers of CHRIST
before He came, and were justified, Verse. 2. And so have we certayntie of the
Creation of the World of nothing. Verse. 3. By it was ABEL'S person and
sacrifice accepted, and preferred before his elder Brother, Verse. 4. By it was
ENOCH made ready for Heaven, Verse. 5.6. And NOAH, by it, saved, both in body
and soul, Verse. 7. Faith made ABRAHAM leave his ^ountrey, in hope of Heaven,
Verse. 8.9.10. By it, SA^IA, being old, got strength, above the course of
nature, to become a fruitful Mother, Verse. 11.12. All these, unto their dying
day, were contented with the foresight of the Performance of GOD'S Promises;
and, in hope thereof, renounced the World: therefore GOD honors them, as
His Confederates, Verse. 13.14.15.16. Faith made ABRAHAM to offer his only
son, Verse. 17.18.19. ISAAC, and IAAKOB, and JOSEPH, by Faith* at their death,
comforted themselves, and others also, in hope of the Performance of GOD'S
Truth, Verse. 20.21.22. The Parents of MOSES overcame the fear of man by
Faith, Verse. 23. MOSES, by Faith, got strength to choose the Cross of CHRIST,
before the Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures of EGYPT* Verse. 24.25.26. Faith
made him constant in his choice, and patient, Verse. 27. By Faith he got the
People of ISRAEL to be saved, when the firstborne of EGYPT were slain,
Verse. 28. By Faith the deep Sea gave open way, Verse. 29. High walled Towns
were thrown down, Verse. 30. Rachab was saved, when others perished, Verse. 31.
By Faith numbers of GOD'S Children did wonderful things; and received
wonderful Comfortes; and overcame all Persecutions, Verse.
32.33.34.35.36.37.38. All these died in the Faith of CHRIST, and were
justified, albeit CHRIST was not yet come, Verse. 39. GOD having reserved the
accomplishment of the Prophesies and Types in the coming of JESUS CHRIST,
until our time, that the Fathers might not get Salvation, except by looking to
our times, and joining with us in the Faith of JESUS; in whom they, and we
also, are perfected. Verse. 40.

The Doctrine of Chap. XI.
VERSE. 1. NOw, Faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of
things not seen.

HE poyncteth out the nature of Faith, to help them to live by it. THEN, He
that would live by Faith, had need skilfullie to search out the nature thereof.

2. In descrybing Faith, he ascrybeth unto it the property of the Word which
Faith lays hold upon: For, it is the Word properly, which is the substance
of things not seen.

THEN* There is such an union betwixt Faith and the Word, that what the Word
is in force and effect, that Faith is said to be, in force and effect also.
As Faith honors the Word, so GOD honors Faith, in giving it the like
commendation, for force with the Word. What is the original of the being,
and existence of any thing, but this? GOD wills it to be, or promises it
shall come to pass, or commands that it may be. Therefore, let Faith get a
grip of the Promise, or Word, and it takes hold of the thing promised by the
foot thereof. And in the hand of Faith does Truth budde out, and flowrish,
unto the type Fruit of full satisfaction in performance.

3. The word EVIDENCE, in the Original, is a term of Logic, importing,
that it is the nature of Faith, by Disputation, to convince.

THEN, It were wisdom, for helping of our weak Faith, to make Syllogismes
from the Word, and to reason so convincinglie against all opposition of
incredulltie in us* as there might be a consent, and yielding, to the Truth,
extorted from us.

As for example: When we can not take to heart the danger we are into, by
entertayning any known sin, from ROMANS viij. verse. 13. we may reason thus;
The Scripture says, If ye live after the flesh* ye shall die. But, if I
forsake not, and mortify not this known sin in me* I live after the flesh.
Therefore, if I forsake not, and mortify not this known sin, I shall die.
Again, the Scripture says, If ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. Therefore, if I, by the Spirit, mortify
such and such Lusts, I have GOD'S Promise, that I shall live. And so in other
particular^.

Verse. 2. For, by it the Elders obtained a good report. HE prooveth the
nature of Faith, to be as he has said; because the Elders were approven of
GOD, as blessed, in their believing* who could not otherwise be part-takers
of the promised Blessing in the MESSIAH to come, except Faith had furnished
unto them the Substance and Evidence of that hoped-for Blessing.

THEN, 1. The Fathers under the Law, were endewed with justifying Faith, and
accepted of GOD, even as we. 2. Men, how base soever, are brought into credit
with GOD, and into good esteemation with His Church, by Faith.

Verse. 3. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word
of GOD: So that things which are seen, were not made of things which do
appear. ANother proof, to show, that Faith is the Evidence of things not
seen; Because we can have no other Evidence of the Worlds Creation, but by
looking thereupon in the Word, as it were in doing before our Eyes. THEN, 1.
Faith must not stand whether there be Appearances, or Probabilities, or not,
of such things as are promised in the Word: or else it could not believe the
Creation, which is the making of all things, of nothing. 2. The whole works
of Creation, are Pawnes and Evidences of the possibility, yea* Certayntie of
every thing promised: For, the works of Creation stand upon no better ground,
than GOD'S Word. This sentence, GOD shall make our vile bodies, like unto the
glorious Body of CHRIST JESUS, is as powerful to make us so, as this
sentence, Let there be Light, was powerful to create Light, when there was
none before.

Verse. 4. By Faith Abell offered unto GOD a more excellent Sacrifice than Kayn;
by which he obtained witness, that he was righteous, GOD testifying of his
Gifts: and, by it, he being dead, yet speaks. IN the Catalogue of
Believers, he begins at Abell, the first persecuted Man for Righteousness,
and that by Kayn, professing the same worship with him. WHEREIN WE LEARN,

1. That the Wicked may join in the outward worship, and pure forms of
Religion, with the Godly* as KAIN did with ABELL. 2. That Faith puts the
difference betwixt their persons, and service. 3. That a man's person must
first please GOD, before his actions can please Him; For, therefore was ABEL'S
Sacrifice accepted, because by Faith his person was justified. 4. Faith makes
ABEL still a speaking Doctor to the Church: directing all, who love to have
such reward, to cleave unto GOD, as he did: and, albeit they should die for
it, by the hand of their persecuting, and bloody Brethren, not to wonder at it.

Verse. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death; and was
not found, because GOD had translated him. For, before his translation, he had
this Testimony. That he pleased GOD. ENOCH'S full felicity, is expressed by
GOD'S translating of him. THEN* If we ask where ENOCH went to, we must
search for him by Scriptures warrant, only in the company of GOD, the
Translator of him. For, before he was translated, he lived a blessed Man, in
fellowship with GOD: and it is injurious to GOD, and ENOCH both, to put him out
of GOD'S fellowship, as not blessed, when he is translated.

2. ENOCH'S Translation bears witness, 1. That the blessedness of
everlasting Life, with GOD, after death, was known in the Old Testament. 2.
That the Fathers got possession of it. 3. That this Felicity could not be
attained unto, but by flitting, and remooving out of this life. 4. That the
Body is a Partner with the Soul, of Life aeternall. 5. That how-so-ever it
be appoyncted, for all men, once to die; yet GOD can make, when He pleases,
Translation, or a Change, to stand in rowme of Death.

3. Before ENOCH was translated, he had this Testimony, That he pleased GOD.
THEN, Who-so-ever desires to be blessed with GOD, after they are remooved from
this life, must first learn to please GOD, before they depart hence.

Verse. 6. But, without Faith, it is impossible to please Him. For, he that
comes to GOD, must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him. HE prooveth, that ENOCH'S Translation, and
pleasing of GOD, was by Faith; because pleasing of GOD can not be without
Faith. He names no other of GOD'S Graces in him, but Faith only; because it
only of all other Graces, strippeth a man naked of the worth of any thing in
him, and sends him to GOD'S Mercy, in the Mediator.

THEN, 1. What-so-ever glorious Virtues be found in Gods Children; yet it is
not by any of these that they are justified or acceptable to God, but only
by their Faith: For, it is by Faith, that it may be by Grace: And if it be by
Grace, it is not by worthiness of works. 2. In the matter of Justification,
and acceptance with GOD, to be justified by Faith, or accepted not without
Faith; is all one with to be justified, and accepted, by virtue of nothing in
a man beside Faith: Else, the Apostle's reasoning were not strong. 3. Except a
man have this commended Faith in GOD'S Mercy, he can not please GOD: Let him
do else what you can name, without this Faith, it is impossible to please GOD.

2. He expounds, what the Faith is, of which he means: To wit, A coming
to GOD, All-sufficient, and merciful. THEN, 1. GOD is Selfe-sufficient, and
All-sufficient. 2. GOD is so gracious, as none can seek unto Him, by that Way
which He has revealed, but He will give them that which they seek. 3.
Except a man believe GOD'S All-sufficiencie, and merciful Bountifulness, he
can not come unto Him, to seek suppli^ of wantes, or relief from evil.

3. From these words also we may observe the nature of Faith. 1. It makes a
man sensible of his indigence, and misery: else, it could not send him
a-begging. 2. It makes him to acknowledge his natural alienation, and
farrenesse from GOD: else, it could not set him on work, to seek GOD, and to
come unto Him. 3. It emptieth him of the confidence in his own* and all the
creatures help: else, ^t could not send the man away, from all these, to GOD.
4. It poyncteth out GOD, both able, and willing, to help: else, it could not
encowrage, to take course, for relief, in him. 5. It sets a man on work,
to use the appoyncted means, to find GOD. 6. It certifieth a man, of GOD'S
impartialitie toward every one that seeks to Him; and makes him to hold
on the way, seeking diligently, and never to give over: And, so, it brings a
man to deny himself, and to have communion with GOD.

Verse. 7. By Faith, Noah, being warned of GOD of things not seen as yet,
moved with fear, prepared an Arc, to the saving of his House: by the which
he condemned the world, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by
Faith. IN NOAH'S example, observe, 1. He believes the Deludge is coming, and
fears, and prepares the Arc. THEN, 1. Faith apprehends Judgments
threatened in the Word, as well as Mercies in the Promises. 2. Faith
apprehending the Threatening, mooveth to fear. 3. That is right Fear, which
sets a man on work, to prevent the Danger.

2. By his diligence he condemned the world. THEN* The pains which the
Godly take to eschew wrath, condemns careless beholders of their diligence.

3. By this he became Heir of the Righteousness, which is by Faith: that is,
came evidentlie to be seen to be such. THEN, 1. There is a Righteousness,
which is only by Faith. 2. That Righteousness, is Heyrship to all true
Believers. 3. Some special poynct of Faith, may bring this Heyrship unto
^ight, and give evidence of a man's Right thereunto.

Verse. 8. By Faith, Abraham, when he was called, to go out, into a place
which he should after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed: and he went out,
not knowing whither he went. ABRAHAM'S following of GOD'S Calling, and leaving
of his Country, is counted a work of Faith. From ABRAHAM'S Example, then, let
us learn, 1. That Faith in GOD, will cause a man quyte his Country, and
Parents* and every dearest thing, at GOD'S Calling. 2. Faith counts GOD'S
Promises better than present Possessions, and is content to quyte the one for
the other. 3. Yea, it is content with a Promise of better in general; and for
the special manner of performance, stands not to be blind. 4. Faith is
willing to obey, as soon as it sees a Warrant.

Verse. 9. By Faith, he sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange
country; dwelling in Tabernacles, with Isaac and Iaakob, the Heirs with him
of the same Promise. ABRAHAM's sojourning in Canaan, is counted another work
of his Faith. Wherein we learn, 1. That Faith can, for a while, suffer to be
a Stranger, even from that whereunto it has best Right. 2. When Faith has
certayntie of an heavenly Inheritance, it can be content with a small Portion
of things earthly. 3. A man who sojourneth amongst Idolaters, should be sure
of a Calling thereunto: and being amongst them, ought to behave himself as a
Stranger, and Sojourner. 4. Yea, where he has best Right on earth, he ought
to have a Pilgrims mind.

Verse. 10. For, he looked for a City which has Foundations* whose builder,
and maker, is GOD. THAT which moved Abraham to behave himself as a Sojourner
on earth, was the hope of a settled during place with GOD, in the society of
the Saynctes in Heaven. THEN, 1. Heaven is a settled, commodious, and safe
Dwelling Place: All places here, are but mooueable Tabernacles. 2. The Fathers
under the Law, looked for entry into their ^ternall rest, in the Kindome of
Heaven, after the ending of their Pilgrimage here. 3. The hope of Heaven, is
able to make a man content with Pilgrims Fare, and Lodging, heere-away.

Verse. 11. Through Faith* also, Sara her self received strength, to conceive
Seed; and was delivered of a Child when she was past age; because she
judged Him faithful, who had promised. SARA is reckoned in the Catalogue of
Bel^evers: and, her laughing, through unbelief, is not remembered; but her
victory, over her missbeliefe, is commended. THEN, 1. Even Women are made
Patterns of believing, and wyselie walking with GOD: worthy to be imitated
of Men. 2. GOD marketh not the defects of Faith, but the soundness thereof,
how small so ever it be; what good is in His Children, and not what sins
they are clogged with.

2. When she is past age, by Faith she gets strength to conceive. THEN, 1.
Faith rests on GOD'S Promise, albeit carnal reason seem not to second it.
2. Faith makes us capeable of Benefits, which otherwise we could not
receive. 3. The more hindrances that Faith has, it is the more commendable.

3. That which vphelde her, was the faythfulnesse of GOD. THEN, 1. The
consideration of the properties of GOD* who promises, is a special help, to
make us rest on the Promise which He makes. 2. He that gives unto GOD the
Glory of Faythfulnesse, shall receive, for a Reward, the full Performance.

Verse. 12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so
many as the Stars of the Sky in multitude; and as the sand which is by the
Sea shore, innumerable. THE Promise was, of innumerable Children, as the
Stars of Heaven: And so was the Performance. THEN, Justifying Faith not
only believes the Great Promise of Redemption; but also other inferior
promises, which depend thereupon: the believing whereof, gives evidence of
believing the Main Promise of Salvation, through the MESSIAH. And therefore it
is, that by the Faith of such Promises, the Faithful are here declared to be
justified.

QVESTION. How can this be, that ABRAHAM'S Seed should be so many?

I ANSWER. 1. Because the one is as innumerable as the other: For they are
compared together, in this respect. 2. Superlatiue speeches are to be
expounded according to the scope, and not captiouslie to be wrested, beside
the purpose of the speaker, and beyond the common acceptance of the bearer.
Now, the scope of the speech, is to raise the dullness of the mind, in
weyghtie matters, to the due consideration of a truth, in the due measure:
which, otherwise, should have been vnder-valued. This is the proper intent of
the ^igure hyperbolicke, in the ordinary use of Rhetoric.

Verse. 13. These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises; but
having seen them a-farre off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them;
and confessed, that they were Strangers, and Pingrimes, on the earth. HE
commends the Faith of the Patriarchs, and SARA, that they died in the Faith,
not having obtained the Promises. THEN,

1. Faith loses the commendation, except we persevere therein, even until
death. 2. Where we have a word of Promise made to the Church, or to
our-selues, albeit we see it not performed in our time, we may go to death,
in assurance, that it shall be performed. 3. They who would die in Faith, must
live in Faith.

2. Though they received not the Promises, yet they saw them a-farre off, and
were fully persuaded of them, and embraced them. THEN,

Albeit Faith come not unto a Possession, yet it comes unto a beholding of
the Possession coming, unto a Persuasion of the Possession, and a sor^ of
friendly Salutation thereof, as the word imports; such as Friends give one
to another, whyl^^ they are drawing near to embrace one another, after a long
time separation.

3. They confessed in their life time, that they were Strangers, and Pilgrims,
on the earth. This we read only of Iaakob, before Pharaoh* But the mind of
one of the Faithful, in the main matters, makes evident what is the mind of
the rest.

THEN, 1. It is the part of true Believers, to profess their Faith before
all, even before Idolaters, amongst whom they live. 2. They who know Heaven, to
be their own Home, do reckon this World a strange Country.

Verse. 14. For, they that say such things, declare playnlie, that they seek a
Country.

Verse. 15. And, truly, if they had been myndfull of that country, from
whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.

Verse. 16. But now they desire a better Countreye; that is, an Heavenly.
Wherefore, GOD is not ashamed to be called their GOD: For, He has prepared
for them a City.

FROM their Profession, That they were Strangers, he draws Consequences,
thus: That they desired an homely Country: And if a Country, then either
their own earthly Country, or a better. Not their own earthly Country:
for they might have returned, when they pleased. Therefore, they desired a
better Country. And if a better Country, then an Heavenly Country: That is,
They desired even Heaven it self for their Country.

1. This deducing of Consequences, from the Profession of the Patriarchs, That
they were Strangers, TEACHES US, 1. So to read the Scriptures, as we may
mark, not only what is spoken; but, also, what is thereby imported, by
consequence. 2. That, what is imported by a speech, is a plain Declaration of
the mind of the speaker; and not an obscure Deduction, as Mockers call it.
They who say they are Strangers, declare playnlie, that they seek a Country,
says the Apostle, 3. Yea, that it is lawful to proceed, drawing one
Consequence after another, till we find out the full mind; provyding the
Collection be evident, in the course of sound Reason, as here it is.

2. The Apostle has proven here, That the Patriarchs sought Heaven for their
Country; Because they sought a better than any on earth.

THEN, 1. The Apostle knew no place for Residence of departed Souls better nor
the earth, except Heaven only. If there had been any other place, such as
is feygned to be, his reasoning had not been solid. 2. The PATRIARCHS, after
the ending of their Pilgrimage here on earth, went Home, to Heaven.

3. Because they counted themselves Strangers, till they came Home* to Heaven,
GOD is not ashamed to be called their GOD. THEN, 1. GOD will honor them, that
honor Him. 2. GOD will avowe Himself to be their Portion, who for His Cause
do renounce the World. 3. Yea, that the LORD may honor such as honor Him,
He will even abase Himself, to exalt them. 4. When the LORD has so done. He
thinks it no dishonor to Himself, to do any thing that may honor His
Servants.

4. GOD did prepare them a City, which the Apostle before has called Heaven,
or the Heavenly Country. THEN, Heaven was preapared for the Patriarchs, and
the rest of GOD'S Saynctes, before they had ended their Pilgrimage on earth.
And, to put them into Hell, or any other place, there must be a doctrine not
from Heaven.

Verse. 17. By Faith, Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: And he
that had received the Promises, offered up his only begotten son;

Verse. 18. Of whom it was said, That, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

ANother Commendation of Abraham's Faith, from the proof given thereof in his
trial about ISAAC. WHENCE WE LEARN,

1. That where the LORD gives Faith, there Trial must be expected: And, the
greater Faith, the greater Trial. 2. That Faith is most commendable, when it
stands strong in trial.

2. He is said to have offered up Isaac, by Faith. THEN, 1. There is nothing
so dear, but Faith in GOD will make a man quyte it, at GOD'S Command. 2. The
LORD counts that to be done, which a man is about to do. ISAAC is counted
offered, because so was he, in ABRAHAM'S Purpose.

3. His receaving of the Promises, is here in another sense, than verse 13.
for, there to receive the Promises, is to receive the thing promised; or the
Promises in performance. But here it is to have the Promises first and
immediately made unto him.

THEN, The meaning of forms of speech in Scripture, is to be found by
consideration of all circumstances of the place, where they are spoken; and not
of some circumstances only.

4. It serves to the commendation of his Faith, that he obeyed GOD'S Command,
when It seemed to make the Promise null.

THEN, 1. To adhere to the Promise, when by appearance of reason, it is lyklie
not to be performed, is tried Faith indeed. 2. When Reason fights against
Faith, it is wisdom to quyte that Reason, which would make us quyte the
Promise. 3. When GOD'S Commandments, and Promises, unto us, seem to cross
one another, it is wisdom for us, to justify them both. All His Words, are
truth.

Verse. 19. Accounting, that GOD was able to raise him up, even from the dead:
from whence also he received him in a Figure. ABRAHAM'S looking to GOD'S
Fidelity, and Omnipotency, made him victorious over every difficulty; and
so to give obedience to this hard Commandment. THEN, 1. When we get hard
Commandments, we must lay our reckoning, how we may obey them; and not
how we may shift them. 2. Difficulties, and impossibilities, as would
appear, must be rolled over, upon GOD. 3. GOD'S Omnipotency makes that His
Promise can not miss, but take effect.

2. ABRAHAM, as he expected, so he found. He expected Isaac's resurrection
from the dead: and, in ^ Figure, or Similitude, he received Isaac back from
the dead; that is, from the jaws of Death, no less vnexpectedlie, than from
the dead.

THEN, 1. The Believer shall find as much as he can expect from GOD'S Word.
2. If the Performance be not as he does forecast, yet it shall be by a way
as comfortable and profitable.

Verse. 20. By Faith Isaac blessed Iaakob and Esau, concerning things to come.
ISAAC'S blessing of his sons, is said to be by Faith. THEN, Patriarchall
Benedictions, were given by ordinary Faith, albeit from the ground of
extraordinary revealed Truth. For, Faith ordinary, believes GOD'S Truth,
revealed how-so-ever, ordinarily, or extraordinarily.

2. In that this Example is propounded for ordinary imitation, in believing of
GOD'S ordinary revealed Word, IT TEACHES US, That he who has the ordinary
Word of GOD, has as sure a ground to rest upon, as if he had a particular and
extraordinary Revelation.

Verse. 21. By Faith, Iaakob, when he was a-dying, blessed both the sons of
Joseph, and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his Staff. IAAKOB a-dying,
blesses his Offspring, and worshippeth GOD, in bodily weakness.

THEN, 1. Faith can look through the Cloud of Death, and behold both its
own, and others Felicity. 2. In the solid assurance which it has, it can
worship, or glorify GOD, for things to come, as if they were already past.

2. It is not said, that he worshipped the top of his Staff; but, upon the
top of his Staff, leaning, for his weakness cause, by approaching death:
because he would, for this foreseen Blessing of GOD upon his Posterity,
testify, by Signs of Worship in his weak body, how he esteemed of that
Favor. THEN, 1. Faith will make the body, albeit it be weak, concur with
the Spirit, in the LORD'S Worship. 2. When the infirmity of the body makes
it unable to concur with the Spirit, it must be helped with a Stone, as
MOSES praying against AMELEK; or Staff, as IAAKOB here; or any thing else,
which may enable it to perform the Worship the better; being put under
Breast, or Arms, or Knees. 3. IAAKOB'S bending of his body, in so great
weakness thereof, must bear witness, against the profane ease which many
men, now-a-dayes, take unto themselves, both in private and public Worship.

Verse. 22. By Faith, Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of
the Children of Israel; and gave commandment, concerning his bones. JOSEPH
also testified his Faith, in his death, concerning the Deliverie of Israel ou^
of Egypt, by direction giving, for transporting his Bones, in sign of his
assurance of their going to Canaan; because GOD had promised so.

THEN, The LORD'S Promises, are sure Comfortes in death, whereby Faith both
sustayneth it self, and is able to encowrage and strengthen others: And Faith
makes a man to keep them in memory, and to make use of them in due time.

Verse. 23. By Faith, Moses, when he was borne, was hid three months of his
Parents; because they saw he was a proper Child; and they not afraid of the
king's commandment. HOw great weakness Moses Parents did bewray, the
History makes evident* yet is their Faith commended, as victorious over the
fear, wherein their weakness did most appear.

WHENCE WE LEARN, 1. That nothing is commendable, but because done in Faith:
Their natural love is not mentioned, but their Faith. 2. That GOD so loves
Faith in His Children, that He commends it in the measure it has, albeit it
go not so far as it ought; and marketh what Faith has, and not what it
wants of the perfection.

2. The Evidence of their Faith, he makes this; Tha^ they were not afraid of
the king's commandment. THEN, 1. GOD allows not that kings commandments
should be regarded, when they command impiety, and wickedness: for then
should they be honored above GOD, if for their commandment, we should do
that which He forbids. 2. Nothing but Faith in GOD, is able to make a man
overcome the fear of that, which Potentates may do unto him: And, it is a
commendable work of Faith, to get this victory.

3. The beauty of the Child, stirred up his Parents to this work of Faith;
thinking with themselves, that it behooved to be for some special end, that
GOD had so fashioned the Child.

THEN, 1. The LORD has ways an^^w to excitate the Faith of His own, and
bring it forth to act. 2. Where special Endewmentes are given, there is good
Evidence of special Employment to follow.

Verse. 24. By Faith, Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh's daughter. MOSES refusing the Honor which he might have
had in PHARAOH'S Court, because it might have hindered him from the Honor of
one of GOD'S People, is commended, for a work of Faith.

THEN, It is better to be a Member of GODS Church, amongst GOD'S People, than
to be a Prince, in a great Kingdom, without the Church.

2. Because he would not have chosen to be the son of PHARAOH'S daughter,
therefore he refused to be called so. THEN,

That which a man dare not avow himself to be, or may not lawfully choose to
be, he must refuse to be esteemed to be; he must refuse to be called such.

3. His manner of refusing this unhallowed honor, is expounded to be by
joining himself with the People of GOD; and so forsaking of PHARAOH'S Court.

THEN, 1. That is the true way of refusing unlawful honor, to quyte the place
whereunto the unlawful honor is annexed, and betake themselves to what they
may brook with GOD'S Approbation, how mean so ever it seem before the
world. 2. When Honor and a good Conscience can not be kept together, let the
Honor be quyted, and the Preferment go.

4. When he was come to years he did this.

THEN, 1. What one has done in his nonage, or ignorance, is not reckoned,
when after ^yper consideration he amendeth it. 2. The more ryplie, and
advysedlie, a good work be done, it is the more commendable.

Verse. 25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of GOD, than to
enjoye the pleasure^ of sin for a season. THe reason of his refusal, is the
esteemation which he had of the estate of GOD'S People, how afflicted so ever,
above the pleasures of sin.

THEN, 1. He who chooses the Privileges, and Fellowship, of GOD'S People,
must choose their Affliction also. 2. The Riches, Honor, and Pleasure, which a
man enjoys, with the disavowing of true Religion, and want of the Society of
GOD'S People, which he might have, are but the pleasures of sin. 3. What
pleasure a man can have by sin, is but for a season. 4. It is better to be
afflicted for a season, with GOD'S People, than to live with the Wicked, with
pleasure, for a reason: and it is greater misery to be in a sinful state,
than in an afflicted state.

Verse. 26. Esteeming the reproach of CHRIST greater Riches, than the Treasures
of Egypt: For, he had respect unto the Recompense of the Reward. HE
commends the work of MOSES his Faith, by the Motives thereunto* whereof the
first was, The high esteemation of the reproach of CHRIST.

THEN, 1. MOSES, and GOD'S People in his time, did know CHRIST: or else, they
could not have borne His Cross, and suffered for Him. 2. Christianity is as
old, as true Religion. 3. The Cross, and Reproach, has attended on true
Religion, in all Ages. 4. What reproach men suffer for true Religion, is
reckoned to be CHRIST'S Reproach, and not theirs. 5. Reproach and Shame, is
the heaviest part of the Cross; for, under it, is all compryzed here.

2. The next Motive, was, His Respect unto the Recompense of the Reward; which
also made him to este^me the Reproach, his Riches.

THEN, 1. There is a Reward for such as suffer reproach for CHRIST. 2. It is
lawful, yea, needful, for men, to have respect unto this Reward, and to draw
encowragement from it, even for their own streng^hening. 3. Though the Cross
seem terrible, yet Faith can pierce through it, and behold the Reward
following it. 4. When Sufferinges for CHRIST are rightly seen, they are the
richest, and most glorious Passage, in all our life.

Verse. 27. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king:
for, he endured, as seeing Him who is invisible. ANOTHER Work of Faith, is,
His leading of the People, from their dwelling places in Egypt, to the
Wilderness, with the hazard of the wrath of Pharaoh, if he should overtake
them.

THEN, Whatever it seem unto us now after it is done, it was no small Faith,
at that time, to undertake such a Business, to turn his back upon a fertile
Land, and go, with such a Company, without Provision, to the Wilderness.

2. His Faith is commended, for not fearing the wrath of the king. Exodus 2.14.
Moses feared the wrath of Pharaoh, and fled. After that, Exodus 10.29. He
feared not another Pharaoh, as terrible as the former. THEN, Where natural
Cowrage would succumbe, Faith will sustain; yea, and make a man endure; (as is
spoken in the next words) where natural Cowrage, having led him on a little,
would forsake him at length.

3. The Encowragement unto this Work, was, He saw Him that is invisible: That
is, He apprehended, by Faith, GOD more powerful, than Pharaoh, and more
terrible.

THEN, 1. Faith opens the Eyes, to see GOD in a Spiritual manner; who by
sense, or imagination carnal, can not be conceaved. 2. The beholding of the
invisible GOD, is able to supporte a Man's Cowrage, against the Terror of Men,
and all things visible: and nothing else can do it.

Verse. 28. Through Faith he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of blood;
lest he that destroyed the firstborn, should touch them. ANOTHER Work of
his Faith, is, His keeping of the Passover: That is, The Sacrament of the
Angels passing over, and not destroying the people.

THEN, 1. It is usual for Scripture, speaking of Sacraments, to give the name
of the thing signified, to the Sign; because the Sign is the memorial of the
thing signified. CIRCVMCISION is called the COVENANT, GENES. xvij.13. because
it is the Memorial thereof. The PASCHALL SVPPER, for the like cause, is here
called the PASSOVER, which was the work of the Angel; because it was, by
appoynctment, the Memorial of it. So the CVPPE, in the LORD'S SVPPER, is
called THE NEW TESTAMENT IN CHRIST'S BLOOD: and the Bread, in the same Supper,
is called THE BROKEN BODY OF CHRIST; because it is the Memorial thereof. 2.
It is the work of Faith, to celebrate a Sacrament rightly. 3. As MOSES
celebrated the Passover, in assurance, that the Destroying Angel should not
touch the People of Israel; So may every Believer be certified, by using the
Sacrament; That the Grace promised, and sealed in the Sacrament, shall be
bestowed.

Verse. 29. By Faith, they passed through the red Sea, as by dry land: which
the Egyptians essaying to do, were drowned. HE joyneth the Faith of the true
Israelites, with the Faith of Moses; for whose sake^, the rest of the
incredulous multitude, got the Benefit of Deliverie also through the red Sea;
which was the Fruit of the Believers Faith.

WHENCE WE LEARN, 1. That Faith will find unexpected Deliveries, and
Out-gates, where it might seem altogether impossible. 2. Yea, Means of
Destruction, by Faith, may be turned into Means of Preservation.

2. The Fruit of Faith is evidenced, by the drowning of the Egyptians,
essaying themselves to follow that way, which Faith had opened to Israel.

THEN, 1. Presumption in Unbelievers, will set them on work, to go through the
same Dangers, which Believers pass through; but without all success: For,
Believers shall escape, where Unbelievers shall drown. 2. The Benefit of
Faith, is best seen, when the evil of unbelief is seen.

Verse. 30. By Faith the Walls of Hiericho fell down, after they were
compassed about seven days. HE ascrybeth the downe-throwing of the Walls of
Hiericho, to Faith; making the Believers only to compass them seven days.

THEN, 1. What GOD does for Believers, is reckoned the work of Faith;
because Faith sets GOD on work, so to say, and His Power, employed by
Faith, works the work. 2. Faith will throw down strong Holds, and overcome
seeming-impossibilities. 3. Faith must use such Means as GOD appoyncteth,
albeit they seem but weak. 4. It mat^ers not how weak the means be, if
Faith have a Promise to prevayle thereby. 5. The Means must be constantly
used, during the time that GOD appoyncteth them to be followed.

Verse. 31. By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
when she had received the Spies with peace. RAHAB the Harlots Faith is
commended, by the Fruit of her safety, when Missbelievers perished.

QVESTION. How heard she GOD'S word, to beget Faith? or, how heard they of
Hiericho GOD'S Word, that they should be called Unbelievers?

I ANSWER. The common report of GOD, and His Works, joined with GOD'S
Blessing, was sufficient to beget Faith in her: And the same report, albeit
carried, as other News, by common Messengers, being despised, and counted
unworthy to be farther enquired for, and sought after, was sufficient to make
them guilty of Missbeliefe.

THEN* 1. In this Example it is evident, that Faith is as acceptable in an
Heathen, and an Harlot, as in a Professor, and person of better condition. 2.
That Faith can change an Heathen, or vile person, into a Saynct. 3. That the
Faith of Women is worthy to be observed, and imita^ed, even as well as Men's
Faith. 4. That the unworthiness of the party believing, gives commendation
so much the more unto the excellency of Faith.

2. No word here of her Lie, in receaving the Spies; but only of her Faith,
and peaceable behavior toward them.

THEN, 1. Where GOD sees Faith* He hydeth His Eyes, as it were, from any
thing that might deface the Glory thereof. 2. He gathers up the smallest
good Fruits which Faith brings forth; and makes not small reckoning
thereof, how small so ever they be.

Verse. 32. And, what shall I more say: For the time would fail me, to tell
of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Iephthah; of David also, and
Samuel, and of the Prophets. HAving reckoned a number, and having more to
produce, he stays his course, TO TEACH,

1. That Prudencie must moderate, and make seasonable use of the abundance of
a man's knowledge, and memory. 2. That the Scripture gives us to make use of
the Faith of all that are recorded therein, albeit they be not in this
Catalogue.

2. The diversity of those that are here recorded, TEACHES US, That albeit
there be difference of Believers; some stronger, as DAVID; some weaker, as the
rest; some base Bastardes, as IEPHTHAH; some of better sort; some of them
notable in holiness, and conversation; some of them taynted with notorious
falls in their life; Yet are they all enrolled by GOD, in a Catalogue of
Honor, amongst His Saynctes.

Verse. 33. Who, through Faith, subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness,
obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,

Verse. 34. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the Sword; out
of weakness, were made strong; waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight
the Armies of the Aliens.

HE reckons the Works of their Faith, whose names he suppresseth; of whom
some subdued Kingdoms, by their Faith, as Joshua, and the Judges: Some wrought
Righteousness; that is, attained unto a righteous Behavior, in their
difficile Employmentes, as David and Samuel, in Peace and War: Some obtained
Promises, as Gideon, Barak, etc. Some quenched the violence of Fire, as the
three Children: Stopped the mouths of Lions, as Sampson, Daniell: Escaped the
Sword, as David, Elias: Of Weak, were made Strong, as Ezekias: Waxed valiant
in sight, as Joshua, Sampson, David: Put to flight the Aliens, as Jonathan,
Gideon, Iehosaphat: Women received their dead alive, as the Widow of Sareptha,
and the Shun^mite^^e, etc.

WHENCE WE LEARN, 1. That in the old Church, under the Law, when the
grounds of believing were not so clear as now they are, excellent things
are recorded to be done by Faith, for vp-stirring of such as are under the
light of the Gospel, to make use of Faith. 2. That neither Fire, nor Water,
nor Man, nor Beast, is so strong, but Faith may make a weak Man victorious
over them all. 3. Yea, nothing so terrible, or difficile, but a Man, who has
GOD'S Word to be a ground for his Faith, may adventure upon it, with assurance
of prevayling. If he be called, he may encounter with the hardest Party.

Verse. 35. Women received their dead, raised to life again: and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection.

Verse. 36. And others had trial of cruel Mockinges, and Scourginges; yea,
more-over, of Bonds, and Imprisonment.

Verse. 37. They were stoned, they were sawen a-sunder; were tempted, were
slain with the Sword: They wandered about in Sheep Skins, and Goat
Skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented.

WHether the Apostle has taken these particulars from the Records extant in
the time, from the Books of Maccabees, and others, or not, it matters not
much; seeing this stands sure, that the certayntie of the truth thereof, was
from Divine Inspiration, the ground of all Scriptures out-giving.

And hence we learn, 1. That as Faith enableth Men to do, so also to suffer.
2. That there is no trouble in the flesh, but GOD'S Children may fall
thereinto; no Torment so cruel, no Terror, nor Allurement, but they may be
essayed in them, by Persecuters. 3. That there is no Pain, nor Grief, nor
loss, so great, but Faith knows how to make Gain of it, and to despise
all, in hope of the Reward. 4. That the Old Church believed the Resurrection,
and comforted themselves in Martyrdom, by the hope thereof.

Verse. 38. Of whom the World was not worthy. They wandered in Desartes, and in
Mountains, and in Dens, and in Caves of the earth. IN calling the World
unworthy of the company of these Children of GOD, LEARN,

1. That one Believer is more worth in GOD'S esteemation, than all the World
beside. 2. None despise GOD'S Children, but worthless and despyseable souls.

2. In that he reckons the solitary and Heremiticall life of GOD'S
Children, and their Apparel suitable to their Dwelling, amongst their
Troubles, Sufferinges, and Persecutions, which they did not choose, but were
driven unto, of necessity, by the cruelty of the time* HE TEACHES US,

1. That the Heremiticall, and solitary life, and separation from amongst the
society of Men, is only then commendable, when Men being driven thereunto,
of necessity, do bear it in a Christian manner. Otherwise, to sequestrate
our selves from the fellowship of Men, to whom we owe the Duties of Love, so
long as we may do them any good, or so long as they will suffer us to live
amongst them, is, in short to loose from our Necks, the Yoke of the Second
Table of GOD'S Law, under pretense to keep the First Table the better. 2. The
Saynctes shall find peace amongst the wild Beasts, rather than amongst
wicked men.

Verse. 39. And these all having obtained a good Report, through Faith,
received not the Promise. BY the Promise, is meaned the Main and chief
Promise of CHRIST'S Incarnation, wherein they were inferior unto us; and yet
both were contented, to rest by Faith, upon the Promise, with the light which
they had; and obtained a good Report thereby: That is, Were approven, and
justified of GOD.

THEN, The Faith of those who lived before CHRIST, having less clearness of
the ground, than we; and yet sufficient to supporte them in all troubles, and
to obtain Justification before GOD, is a great Encowragement unto us, under
the Gospel, to believe; and a great conviction, if we believe not.

Verse. 40. GOD having provided some better thing for us; that they without us,
should not be made perfect. HE gives a reason hereof; Because GOD had
appoyncted, the accomplishment of the Promise, of sending the MESSIAH, to be
in the last times; that they should not be perfected, that is, justified, and
saved, by any thing done in their time; but by looking to our time, and
CHRIST'S satisfaction made therein: whereby they and we are perfected
together. THEN, 1. CHRIST'S coming in these last times, is a better thing than
all the Glory of the Old Church, and Service, and Prerogatives thereof. 2.
All the Shadows in their time, without CHRIST, who is the Substance of them
all, in our time, exhibited, was unable to perfect the Fathers; that is, to
justify, and save them. 3. The perfecting of the Fathers, in the Old
Testament; and the perfecting of us, in the New Testament, do meet together,
in that One better thing, CHRIST JESUS; by whom, they and we both, are saved:
And, so, they are not perfected, without us.

2. In that he leads us unto GOD'S foreseeing and fore-provyding of this,
he loses all curious questions, about this Course which GOD has taken, to
make the Case of His Church better now, than of old.

THEN, That GOD has thought good so to do, is sufficient, for stopping our
minds from all curious enquyring of the LORD'S Dispensation.

The sum of Chap. XII.
THE use of all these Examples, is, That we hold on in the course of
Christianity, what-so-ever trouble may meet us in the way, Verse. 1. Looking
on CHRIST, for your Pattern, Verse. 2. And for your Encowragement also, lest
you faint, Verse. 3. For you have not suffered so much, as you must be ready
to suffer, Verse. 4. And you have forgotten, that Chastisementes are Tokens of
GOD'S Favor, Verse. 5. For He loves, whom He chasteneth, Verse. 6. And your
enduring thereof, shall prove you Sons, Verse. 7. But immunitie should prove
you Bastardes, Verse. 8. We have borne our Parents Correction; and why should
we not now bear GOD'S? Verse. 9. For, they chastened us to satisfy their
own passions; but GOD, for our profit, Verse. 10. And, albeit Affliction be
grievous now; yet the fruits shall be sweet afterward, Verse. 11.
Wherefore, take your Comfort, Verse. 12. And Cowrage, to go stoutly on: lest
by discowragement, you fall into Apostasy: But rather seek to recover the
Cowrage which you have lost, Verse. 13. Follow Peace with all men: But Holiness
also, as you would be saved, Verse. 14. Beware of the unmortified Roots of
Sin; lest they break out in Scandalls, Verse. 15. Beware lest there be any
filthy or profane body suffered among you, as ESAV was, Verse. 16. Who sold
the Blessing, for a short Pleasure, and could never recover it again, Verse.
17. And to this are you obliedged, because the Old Church was not so
privileged as you are; but, for their external estate, and manner of
Religion, in a great deal of more bondage, Verse. 18.19.20.21. But you, by the
light of the Gospel, are brought into the high Way, to have society with
Heaven, and Angels, and the Catholic Church of elect Souls, and GOD, the
Judge; and CHRIST, the Mediator, and His Benefits. So clear now is the
Doctrine, Verse. 22.23.24. Therefore, beware, lest, by your Apostasy, you
reject CHRIST'S offer, and be destroyed more fearfullie than the despysers of
the Law, Verse. 25. For, CHRIST is a terrible LORD to His Foes: His Voice
shook the Earth, in giving of the Law: But He has promised to shake Heaven
and Earth once more, Verse. 26. And ONCE MORE imports the remooving of these,
and making of a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness,
for the settled and perpetual remaining of His Kingdom, Verse. 27. Therefore,
let us keep a fast grip of His Grace, that we worship Him with fear, Verse.
28. For, if we do not so, even our GOD is a consuming Fire, Verse. 29.

The doctrine of Chap. XII.
Verse. 1. WHerefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a clowd
of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset us; and let us run with patience the Race which is set before us.

THat right use may be made of all the former Examples, he exhorts to a
constant and patient persevering in the Course of Christianity.

1. The Similitude is borrowed from a Race: To TEACH US, To endeavor for
overtaking all the Duties of the Christian Man, with all the Skill, and
Strength, and Speed, we can.

2. The Original imports a Stryfe-Race: To ADVERTISE US, Both of our
Spiritual Adversaries, against whom we must fight still as we go on; and
of our Compartiners, who run in the Race with us: with whom we may strive in
an holy emulation, who shall go foremost in the Course of Pleasing GOD.

3. It is a Race limited; the Race set before us: TO TEACH US, What way we
should hold on our Course, not doing that which pleases us; every man running
his own way of Religion: but all running in the beaten Way, the Royal Way of
GOD'S Commandments.

4. For the Motives unto this Race, he uses the Examples rehearsed in the
former Chapter, Who compass us about as a Cloud of Witnesses: TO TEACH US, 1.
To hearken to the deposition of these worthy Witnesses, who are recorded in
Scripture, who can best show what is the best Christian Way, which we must
hold in our Course toward HAPPINESS. 2. That all our behavior is marked by
Spectatours, GOD, Angels, and Men. 3. That albeit there were none to see us,
except our Conscience, the Examples of GOD'S Saynctes in Scripture, should
stand as Witnesses against us, if we run not as becomes.

5. For direction how to run, HE TEACHES, 1. To lay aside all Weyghts, which
do press our minds downwardes; such as is the setting of our affection upon
things which are on earth; either wittinglie, upon unlawful objects; or
inconsideratelie, exceeding the bounds of Christian Moderation, upon things
lawful. 2. To lay aside the sin which so easily does beset us; that is, by
studying to mortify the body of our corrupt inclination, to cut off the
wood-binde growth of violent predominant and wily sins, which most
frequentlie get advantage of us. 3. Because we can not end our Race, but
after some progress of time, and must meet with many impedimentes in the
way, and troubles, and temptations, to arm our selves with Patience.

Verse. 2. Looking unto JESUS, the Author and finisher of our Faith; who, for
the joye that was set before Him, endured the Cross; despysing the shame; and
is set down at the right Hand of the Throne of GOD. WIth Direction, he
joyneth Encowragement, by setting our Eye on JESUS, who shall both guide us in
the way, and carry us on, when our strength fails. THEN, 1. The Christian
Racerunner has JESUS before him, in the way, to help him in every thing that
may befall him in his course. 2. CHRIST must be looked upon, by him who would
be helped in his Race: the Eye of the Soul being drawn off of every thing
which might divert the Man, or discowrage him, (such as are the multitude of
Backe-slyders, the multitude of Mockers, the multitude of by-ways, and runners
therein, the multitude of fears, from our own unworthiness, and sinfulness,
and temptations on all sides) and our Minds fixed on CHRIST, with loving and
longing Looks, which may draw Life and Strength from Him. 3. We must look on
Him, as JESUS, the Deliverer from Sins, and Giver of Salvation; even Him who
saves His People from their Sins. 4. We must look upon Him, as the Author
and finisher of our Faith; that is, as our GOD, who has begun His Good Work
in us, and will also perfect it: Who has given us grace to believe, and will
surely continue this Grace with us, even to the end: lest the fears of our
Faith failing, make us to faint. 5. We must look upon Him, as our Pattern,
and Example, who having run the Race before us, has set forth Himself for
our imitation; that in Him we might find all whereof we stand in need.

2. How JESUS ran this Race, he shows, for our Example, 1. He had joye set
before Him; which He was to receive by our Salvation wrought. So have we joye
set before us also. 2. For the hope of that joye, He ran with cowrage: so must
we. 3. He ran with the Cross upon His Back all the way, being a Man
acquaynted with Sorrows: so must we resolve also. 4. In His Griefs and
Sorrows, Shame set upon Him from the World, and powered out Contempt upon Him:
so must we resolve to find it. 5. For the hope of the joye, he endured
patiently, and went on, under the Cross, and wearied not: so must we. 6.
Albeit Shame was the sharpest of His Griefs from the World, yet He regarded
it not; but despised all Despysing, and shamed Shame, as unworthy to be taken
notise of, in comparison of His Design: so must we. 7. He overcame all at
length: so shall we through Him also. 8. He has gotten the Joy, and the
Glory, for which He ran: so shall we with Him. If we suffer with Him, we
shall also reygne with Him. 9. He is set down on the Right Hand of the Throne
of GOD; that is, is joined with the FATHER, in the Glorious Governament of
Heaven, and Earth, and all things therein, for the good of all His Followers:
so that we need to fear nothing in our way, seeing He has the Governament
of all.

Verse. 3. For, consider Him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
Himself; lest you be wearied, and faint in your minds. HE poyncteth forth
a special part of His Suffering; namely, The contradiction of sinners:
willing them, to ponder this well, for their Uphold. THEN, 1. Nothing more
forcible to discowrage a persecuted Christian, than Contradiction. A man will
suffer much, if he know it be for Truth: but if the Truth for which he
suffers, be called in question, and Scrybes, and Pharisees, and chief
Churchmen, shall contradict him, and brangle his Faith, in the Truth, it is
more paynfull than a Rack-stocke unto him. 2. The consideration of our LORD
JESUS, His being exercysed this way, is a special Mean to guarde us in such
a Temptation. 3. If we be not armed against Contradiction, by certain
knowledge of the Truth, and Faith in JESUS, we can not bear out, but,
neede-force, weary under the Cross; and be loosed, or dissolved, like water,
and fall by, as the word imports.

Verse. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, stryving against Sin. THese
Hebrews were somewhat dashed, and discowraged, by the persecution which they
had already b^rne, and were like to faint. Therefore, he sets them on* to
prepare for suffering to the blood; that every suffering less no^ that, might
be the more tolerable in their eyes.

1. He makes their Party, Sin. THEN, 1. Christians must remember in their
Troubles, that they are tried, whether they will choose to sin, or to suffer.
2. When they disobey their Persecuters, they must not be interpreted, to be
stryvers against them, so much as against sin. 3. With what color, or
p^e^ense so-ever, sin be urged upon Christians, they must not yield; but
resist, in a Christian manner; and fight Christianly, against that sin
whereunto they are tempted 4. The more steadfastlie they resist, they must
prepare themselves for the more suffering, and resolve, at length, to lay
down their blood in suffering. No yielding to sin must be, while life is in
us.

2. He makes the greater Sufferinges which remain, a Reason, to make them
bear the present the better. THEN, 1. Suffering in a man's person, is the
highest degree of suffering. 2. Resolution for the worst that can come, makes
lesser troubles, more comportable. 3. Except a man prepare himself, for the
worst that can be done unto him, by man, for the Truth, he will faint in
lesser sufferings.

Verse. 5. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks unto you, as
unto Children; My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord; nor
faint, when thou art rebuked of Him. FRom the general Doctrine, of bearing
Afflictions, Prove. 3.11.12. he stirs them up, to Christian patience, in
Persecution, and every other Trouble. THEN, Persecution for Righteousness,
comes in the Account of Chastisement; and, is appoyncted, amongst other
ends, to amend our Faults.

1. He makes these Hebrews the party to whom the Proverbes were directed,
and GOD the speaker thereof. THEN, 1. Whosoever be the Penmen of the
Scripture, it is GOD who speaks in it. 2. The Scriptures do direct their
speech to every Age, and Church, and Person, no les^e than to those who lived
in the Church of old, when it was first written.

2. He charge them, for their forgetting of such a kindly speech, as is the
styling of the Afflicted, by the names of Sons. THEN, 1. The special poynct
of Faith, which the LORD will have fostered under the Cross, is the Faith of
our Adoption; That we never misstake our Father's Affection, nor our Gracious
estate by Calling, for any hard dealing wherewith possibly we may be
exercised. 2. He will have us assured of our Adoption, by GOD'S manner of
speaking unto us, as a Father to his Children. 3. He shows us, That the
not-remembering of the Word of GOD speaking unto us, according to our estate,
is the cause of faynting, and of misstaking.

3. The Exhortation discharges despysing of the Rod, and faynting under the
Rod. THEN, 1. These are the two evils which we are inclyned unto; Either to
harden our selves against Corrections, and count light of them; or else, to be
discowraged, and casten down by them. Both of which, we must eschew. 2. Though
the LORD both stryke and rebuke for sin, yet esteems He us to be Sons not
the less.

Verse. 6. For, whom the Lord loves, He chasteneth; and scourges every son
whom He receaveth. He gives a reason, to confirm the afflicted, in the
certayntie of their Sonship: TEACHING US, 1. That neither Chastisement, yea,
nor Scourging, which is the sharpest measure of correction, is a sign of Gods
hatred; but of His love rather. 2. That Gods dealing with all His Children in
general, being considered, may mitigat the case of any of them in particular.

Verse. 7. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you, as with sons: for,
what son is he, whom the father chasteneth not? FRom this he urges the
patient bearing of Gods chastisements, that they may know adoption the better.
THEN, Though God be the afflicted persons Father, yet is he not perceaved to
deal as a father, but when th'affliction is patiently borne, and endured.

Verse. 8. But, if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then
are ye bastards, and not sons. ALbeit men desire, naturally, to go free
from trouble, yet he shows, that this is not to be chosen: And to this end
teaches, 1. That it is the common lot of all God's Children, without
exception, to be acquaynted with some Cross, and exercysed with some
Correction, of one kind, or other. 2. That to be exempted from the Cross,
and common handeling of Gods Children, is to be put out of the Roll of
Children. 3. That in the visible Church, all are not free borne Children; but
some are Bastardes: which the Church holds possibly for Children; but God
reckons to be none. 4. That among other marks, this is one of a Bastard; If
God let him alone, and suffer him, without Discipline, to follow his own ways.

Verse. 9 Farthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and
we gave them reverence: shall we not, much rather, be in subjection unto the
Father of spirits, and live? FRom submitting to our Parents correction, he
urges to bear the Lords correction. Whence we learn, 1. That as it is a part
of the Parents duty, to correct their Children; so it is a part of that
reverence due to Parents, that Children receive their correction without change
of affection toward their Parents. 2. That God is the Father of Spirits, in a
special manner; because they are immediately created by Him, and do not run in
the material channel of fleshly descent; and, because they have a more near
resemblance unto His Divine Nature. 3. That receaving correction, is counted
subjection to God; and, refusing correction, is refusing of subjection. 4. That
submission to chastisement, is the way to Life.

Verse. 10. For they, verily, for a few days, chastened us after their own
pleasure; but He, for our profit; that we might be partakers of His Holiness.
HE compares the chastisement of our earthly Parents, with Gods chastisement.
Whence we learn, 1. That Parents, sometimes, chastise their Children out of
mere passion* and, at the best, have some mixture of their own humors in
chastising: but God never mixeth passion with His Rod; but intends our profit
therein only. 2. The special profit intended by God in our corrections, is the
making of us partakers of His Holiness; partly, while He dryveth us thereby
to seek our Righteousness in Himself* and partly* while He mortifieth our
nature, and renews our affections, and sanctifies us for Himself.

Verse. 11. Now, no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness, unto them which are exercysed thereby. HE meets the doubt of
the felt grief of present affliction, by showing the fruit which follows
thereupon at after: and teaches us, 1. That it is the pain of present
affliction, which makes us unwilling to vndure. 2. That we must not, like
Children, judge of affliction by our present sense; but by looking to the fruit
which does follow, must season to our selves the felt bitterness. 3. That the
fruit of affliction, is Righteousness, or Sanctification, which brings peace
with it. 4. That this fruit possibly will not be found incontinent after one
affliction, or two; but after we be exercised, acquainted, and made patient in
bearing the yoke.

Verse. 12. Wherefore, lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.
FRom these considerations, he will have them to draw comfort, and cowrage; and
to recover themselves from their dejection of mind. Teaching us, 1. That
afflictions bring discowragementes with them, whereby hand and heart fail in
Gods service. 2. That discowragement must be resisted, by consideration of GOD
the Author, and His wise ends of afflicting of us.

Verse. 13. And make straight paths for your feet; lest that which is lame, be
turned out of the way: but let it rather be healed. Under a similitude borrowed
from walking in a narrow and dangerous path, he exhorts them, boldly to
avow the Truth; lest their fearfulness, and apparent doubtfulnesse, should
tend, at length, to defection. THEN, 1. No trouble must so dash us, as to make
us seek bypath, for eschewing thereof. 2. In a good course, we must not
hault, not walk feeblie, nor fearfullie; but stoutly, and straight up;
avowing what is right. 3. As a man in a dangerous path, by haulting, may be
swayed to the one side, and thrown over the Bray: So a man that faintly
maintains a good cause* may be overcome* at length, and driven from it.

2. The Apostle's diligence and prudencie, to recover these faynting Hebrews,
Teaches, 1. That we must not cast down our countenance on weak Brethren,
who do not so boldly avowe the Truth, as they should do: But rather ought
to strengthen and heal them, and hold their staggering faith on foot. 2.
That such feeble souls must be timously dealt with; that they may be healed, as
long as they are yet in the way, and have not shaken hands with an evil course.

Verse. 14. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without the which, no man
shall see the LORD. HAving thus dealt with them, for strengthening them in the
Faith, and bold profession thereof, be givith them a number of wholesome
Precepts, for ordering of their life, and conversation.

From the Precept, for following of Peace and Holiness, LEARN. 1. That we
must beware of all provocation of any amongst whom we live: For we have
troubles aniew, albeit we make none to our selves. 2. That how wicked soever
the world be, we may follow a course of living in peace with them: and if Peace
flee from us, we may, and should, pursue after it, as far as is lawful. 3.
The farthest we may follow Peace with men, is, as it may stand with Holiness
and Duty toward God. 4. It is more dangerous to quyte Holiness, than to
quyte Peace: for, he that follows Holiness, shall see God, albeit he find not
peace amongst men. But, if any man prefer men's peace before Holiness; while
he gayneth men, he loses GOD. 5. To see GOD; that is, to enjoy GOD'S
Fellowship, is the Sum of our Blessedness.

Verse. 15. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest
any root of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled. HE gives direction here, for eschiwing a fall from Grace; that is,
from the Doctrine of Grace in begun Knowledge, Faith, Love, Renovation, or any
measure thereof. THEN, 1. Albeit the Elect can not fall away fully, and
finally; yet some Professors in the visible Church, may fall away from their
Profession, and what degrees of Grace they had attained unto: for whose cause,
warning must be given to all, as a mean to keep the Elect from a fall. 2.
Albeit the Elect can not fall away finally from Grace; yet may they fall, for a
time, from the purity of the Doctrine of Grace, and from some degrees of the
work of Grace; from the measure of their first love, and zeal; and, at
length, fall into scandalous Sins.

2. He joyneth another poynct of advertisement with the former; That they
beware, lest any bitter root break forth, whereby many be defiled: that is,
lest any scandalous sin break forth amongst them. THEN, 1. As men do fall
from any measure of the work of Grace; so does the bitter root of unmortified
sin, spring out, and grow. The ones decreasing, is the others increasing. 2.
When any Scandal breaks forth in the Church, it troubles the whole Body,
and polluteth them* by the contagion thereof, till it be remooved. 3. Watch
must be kept* diligently, by every man, to curb this bitter root,
preventing the out-shooting thereof.

Verse. 16. Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for
one morsel of meat, sold his birthright. HE expounds this bitter root, in
the example of fornication, and prophanitie, like Esau's. THEN, 1. Fornication
and prophanitie, are the bitter roots of other evils, and able to defile a
Congregation. 2. Such as count more of the satisfaction of their sensual lusts,
than of their Spiritual Prerogatives, do prove themselves profane persons,
and are justly ranked in with ESAIAS.

Verse. 17. For, ye know, how that afterward, when he would have inherited the
Blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully, with tears. HE shows God's judgment on Esau, to
terrify all men, to hazard upon the sinful satisfaction of their own lusts, at
any time* THEN, 1. Esau's judgment should be a terror to al men, to keep
them from presuming deliberatelie to commit that sin, which they know may cut
them off from the Blessing: because sundry times (albeit not always) God does
punish presumptuous sinners, with giving over the man to his own ways, and
final impenitencie. 2. Esau's example shows, how justly they may be
depryved of the Blessing, annexed to any Sacred Symbol, or gracious Mean,
who do despise the mean whereby the Blessing is conveyed. For, the Birthright
amongst the Patriarchs, was a Pawn of the blessing of being an heir of
Promise: and therefore was Esau counted to reject the Blessing, when he counted
light of the Birthright. 3. His example shows, how little sinners consider
for the present, what Merchandise they are making with Satan, when they meddle
with known sins; and how they will be made to know it afterward.

2. He says, that afterward he would have inherited the Blessing; but was
rejected. THEN, It agrees with ^he profane man's disposition, to desire the
Blessing; and yet despise the Means whereby the Blessing is gotten: to satisfy
his fleshly lusts for the present, and to desire the Blessing withal
afterward. But God will neither sever the Means from the Blessing, nor join
the Blessing with the satisfaction of men's lusts. Therefore, he who will have
the Blessing, must use the Means to obtain the same, and renounce the
satisfaction of his sinful lusts; or else, be rejected* when he thinks to
get the Blessing.

3. He says, he found no place of repentance, albeit he sought the Blessing
with tears: that is, he could not obtain, that his father should repent the
bestowing of the Blessiag beside him; nor, that God should repent His righteous
judgment on him. For, Repentance here, is, recalling the sentence given out.
And why? Because he, for all his tears, and vntymous seeking of his sold
Blessing, repented not himself of his sin; for he continued as profane as
before, and resolved to murder his Brother, as soon as he found opportunity.
THEN, 1. Esau did ^he his deed, but repented not his sin. It is one thing, to
rue a deed done, and another thing to repent the sin in doing of the deed, and
every known sin, for that sins cause. 2. Tears may follow upon ruing, as
well as on repenting: and, it is possible, that the loss, or harm, procured
by sin, may draw forth the Tears, and not the Sorrow for the offending of God
by the sin. 3. Esau here is not brought in, dealing with God, for pardon of
sin, and the heavenly Inheritance: but with the man, who had the ministry of
dispensing the earthly blessing only.

We read, then, that a blessing was sought carefully from a man, with tears,
and not obtained: but we read not, that God's Mercy, and Blessing, was ever
sought from Himself, carefully, and not obtained.

Verse. 18. For ye are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, and that
burned with fire; nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest. BEside the
example of Esau 's judgment, here is another reason, to move us, who are under
the Gospel, to beware of licentiousness, and prophanitie; because we are
delivered from the terror of the Law, verse. 18.19.20.21. and brought, by the
Gospel, to the society of so holy a company, as beseems no profane man to
enjoy* verse. 22.23.24. The sum tends unto this, You are not under the Law,
but under Grace. In stead of saying whereof, he says, You are not come unto
Mount SINAI, but unto MOUNT SION. For, the Lord's manner of dealing with the
people at Mount Sinai, represented the state of men in nature, under the Law,
liable to the Curse: His manner of dealing with them at MOUNT SION, represented
the state of men reconciled through Christ, and under Grace. Let us take a view
of both, as the Apostle sets them before our eyes: and first, how the state
of a man unreconciled, in nature, and under the Law, and curse thereof, was
REPRESENTED. 1. Before we come to Christ, we have to do with God, as a terrible
Judge, sitting on the Throne of His Justice, shadowed forth by Mount SINAI. 2.
Our Judge is offended with us, His Wrath is kindled, ready to consume us, as
His Adversaries, in our transgressions* represented by the burning of the
Mount. 3. When GOD begins to show Himself as our Judge, offended with us,
we are filled with confusion, and perplex^tie, and fire; represented by
Blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest.

Verse. 19. And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice,
they that heard, entreated, that the word should not be spoken to them any more.

Verse. 20. For, they could not endure that which was commanded: And if so much
as a Beast touch the Mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.

WHAT FARTHER? 4. There is no fleeing from Compearance before our Judge;
Summonds, and Citations, go forth from Him, and powerfullie s^asse upon the
Conscience, to cause it acknowledge the Judge; represented by the sound of the
Trumpet* 5. The killing letter of the Law read out unto us, showing us our
Dittie, what we should have done, and have omitted; and, what we should not
have done, and have committed; without giving any strength to obey for time to
come; represented by the sound of words. 6. By this Charge, and new exaction of
the Law, an unsupportable weight lies upon the Conscience, pressing it down,
to Desparation, and Death; that we would give all the world, if we had it, to be
free of the terror of the Lord, and challenge of the Conscience, upon so
fearful a dittie; represented by the peoples entreating* That the Word should
not be spoken to them any more. 7. There is an impossibility to help our
selves by any thing we can do, or to do any thing better nor we have done:
and the s^ene impotencie of our cursed nature, makes the Commandment, for
time to come, a matter of Desparation, as well as the Challenge for breaking
the Law in time bygone; represented by their inabilitie, to endure the thing
which was commanded. 8. No drawing near to God here; such terror in His
Majesty; Justice being only seen, and no Mercy; represented by their
debarring from touching of the Mountain. 9. Such uncleanness, and vylnesse,
as not only our selves, but our Beasts, and Cattle, and all that we have, is
counted unclean, for our cause, and liable to the Curse with us; represented
by the debarring of the Beasts from the Mount. 10. Such a loathsome
abomination in the Guilty, as the Judge will not put hand in the Malefactor
Himself, nor employ any of His clean Angels; but give them over to Death, if
they remain in that estate, to be destroyed ignominiouslie; represented by
stoning, or darting^ where the stone, or dart, lights upon the Malefactor,
but not the hand which threw it.

Verse. 21. And so terible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and quake. YET FARTHER. 11. If God deal with us as Judge, and by the Rule of
the Law examine our works, were we, like MOSES, the meekest men under Heaven,
the least harmfull, and innocent in the world, richest in good works, for
service done to God, and to His Church; yet could we not stand before this
Tribunal: all that ever we had done, al our works were not able to free us from
the Curse of the Law, and Gods fearful Wrath, for our sinfulness mixed
amongst our works; represented by MOSES his confessed fear and quaking. 12.
And, with all this, no place to flee unto, no place to remain in; no company,
but an evil conscience within, and matter of terror without; represented by
the Wilderness, wherein this Throne of Justice was set up. And this is
the estate wherein we are by nature* acording to the Law; wherefra we are
delivered by Christ* according to the Gospel, as follows.

Verse. 22. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living
God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels. THis is
the estate whereunto we are advanced under the Gospel, by Christ, which, by
comparison with the former, shall be more clear, thus. 1. Before we come to
Christ, we have to do with God, as Judge, sitting upon His Throne, terrible*
After we come to Christ, we find God upon a Throne of Grace, reconciled unto
us; resembled by Mount SION. 2. Without Christ, we are kept under, upon the
earth, depressed in the Valley, and may not touch the Mount, to ascend; But,
through Christ, we get access to climb up toward God, and to advance, piece
and piece, above the world, and sin, and misery, toward Heaven; resembled
by going up Mount Sion. 3. Without Christ, Vagabonds, wand^ing abroad in a
waste Wilderness: but, through Christ, collected together, under a head, and
brought to a place of Refuge, and Rest, and commodious Dwelling, to the
Kingdom of Heaven; resembled by the City where Mount SION stood. 3. Without
Christ, exposed to the wrath of the living God: Through Christ, admitted to
remain, as reconciled, in the City of the living God. 4. Without Christ,
affrayde, by the terrible sight of Wrath and Judgment: Through Christ, brought
into Jerusalem, the Vision of Peace; not only in this world, by Faith; but
in Heaven, by Fruition; resembled by HIERVSALEM. 5. Without Christ, heyrs of
Hell: Through Christ, Citizens of Heaven. 6. Without Christ, exposed to the
fellowship of Devils, in sin, and torments: Through Christ, admitted to the
society of innumerable Angels; resembled by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem on
earth. 7. Without Christ, Angels our foes: Through Christ, our Fellow-Citizens.

Verse. 23. To the General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, and to God, the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just
men, made perfect. 2. WIthout Christ, we are as scattered Sheep, in the
Wilderness; a Prey to all the ravenous Beasts: But, through Christ, gathered
together in one, to the society of the true Catholic Church of the Elect,
under the governament of one Head, even CHRIST. 9. Without Christ, living with
the world, in the Suburbs of Hell: Through Christ, made Members of the True
Church, and Company, which is called out of the world, by the effectual
Calling of His Word, and Spirit. 10. Without Christ, forlorn Children, who
have depryved our selves of our Inheritance, and wasted all our Father's
Benefits on Vanities: Through CHRIST, our forfaulting is reduced, our
Inheritance redeemed, we brought back to the Family, restored to the
Inheritance, dignified with the Firstborn, and made Priests to our GOD, as
His Portion from amongst men. 11. Without Christ, living amongst them whose
names are written in the earth, and whose portion is beneath: Through Christ,
our Names are enrolled in Heaven, amongst those who are written in the Book of
Life, elected, and predestined, unto Grace, and Glory. 12. Without Christ,
without God in the world; having God our Judge, against us: Through Christ,
we are reconciled to God, get access unto Him, and have our God, Judge of
all, upon our side, to absolve us, and to plead for us, against all our Foes.
13. Without Christ, we are, for guiltiness, in the Rank of those, who are
already damned, and brethren to those, whose spirits are in prison: But
through Christ, we are Brethren to those, who are already saved; whose
Souls, and Spirits, are fred from Sin, and Misery; and made perfect, in
Holiness, and Glory: having the same Grounds of Right to Heaven, through
CHRIST, which they have who are entered already into Possession.

Verse. 24. And to JESUS, the Mediator of the NEW COVENANT, and to the Blood of
Sprinkling, which speaks better things, than that of Abell. HE GOES ON.
14. In our natural estate, we are under the Law, and the Covenant of works;
which binds us to Perfect Obedience, or to the Curse. When we come to
Christ, we are under the Covenant of Grace, which proclaymeth Remission of
Sins, unto all who are in Him. 15. Yea, now, under the Gospel, coming unto
Christ, we are in better case, than they who lived before Christ; because they
were bound to all the Ceremonial and Typical Ordinances of the Law, under
the Old Covenant: but we are exempted from that Old Covenant, and are
entered into the New; which freeth us from that Yoke, which the ISRAELITES
could never bear. 16. Without Christ, we stand alone, and none to plead for
us, before our Judge: But when we come to Christ, we find Him a Mediator,
both to deliver us from the Old Covenant, and to take Burden for us, for
keeping of the New Covenant. 17. Without Christ, unrighteous, and unholy:
When we come to Christ, we come to be^ sprinkled with His Blood, for
Justification, and Sanctification also, and for receaving of all other
Benefits, bought by that Blood.

He compares this Blood, with Abel 's, as speaking better things. For,
albeit we, by our sins, have made our LORD to serve, yea, and to die also,
yet does His Blood not speak against us, as ABEL'S did speak against KAIN,
and the Earth, for drawing down of a curse on both: but speaks to GOD,
still, to pacify His Wrath, and to pardon us; and to our Conscience, to
cleanse it, and make it quiet within us.

From this comparison, of Men under the Law, and under Grace, WE LEARN,

1. That the impenitent, and unrenewed man, how secure soever he sit, yet he
is in a fearful estate; the Wrath of the Judge, from His Justice Seat, being
ready to break out upon him. 2. That the wakened Conscience, lying in the
sense of its own sins, and fear of the offended Judge, is much to be
pitied. 3. That the holiest man on earth, if GOD reveal unto him the terror
of His Justice, he will be shaken with fear. 4. That the only remedy
against the challenge of the Conscience, and fear of the Law, and Wrath, is
to have recourse to JESUS CHRIST. 5. That he who is fled, as a true penitent,
to JESUS CHRIST, for Refuge, to be saved, and directed and ruled by Him, is a
true Member of the true Catholic Church, of the Elect, what-so-ever be men's
esteemation of him. 6. That the more graciously we be dealt with under the
Gospel, the more must we beware of fleshlinesse, and prophanitie. For, to
this end all his speech does tend.

Verse. 25. See that ye refuse not Him that speaks: for, if they escaped not
who refused him that spoke on earth; much more shall not we escape, if we
turn away from Him that speaks from Heaven. FRom these Considerations, he
charge them, to beware, lest they make light account of CHRIST'S Doctrine.
The word imports a shifting of CHRIST, speaking, by some excuse, or pretense.
THEN,

1. The way to eschew Prophanitie, and Apostasy, is to embrace, and make much,
of CHRIST'S speaking unto us in His Word. 2. VVhat-so-ever pretenses, and
excuses, a man use, to cloak his not-giving hearty obedience to the Doctrine
of CHRIST; it is but a refusing of Him, and a turning away from Him, make of it
what he will.

2. He urges this, by threatening more certain and heavy judgementes, than
upon the despysers of Moses, who is said to speak on earth; because he was
but the earthen Vessel which carried GOD'S Will to His People* and, by
earthly Types, and Figures, made offer of Grace unto them. But CHRIST, as GOD,
by His own authority, casting Heaven open, in the playnnesse, and
spiritualitie of the Doctrine, is said to speak from Heaven.

THEN, As much as CHRIST'S Person is more excellent than MOSES, and His
Authority above his; and, the Heavenly Clearness of CHRIST'S Gracious Offer,
above his dark Types: As much more heavy and certain Wrath shall overtake
the despysers of His Doctrine, nor the despysers of MOSES Law.

3. He joyneth himself in the same danger with the people, if he should
turn away, or refuse.

THEN, Preachers shall do well, to lay the edge of their Threateninges to
their own Hearts, and to enroll themselves amongst the threatened; That
bitterness toward the people may be seen to be remooved, and their own
sluggishnesse may be rowsed up; seeing they have none to preach unto them, but
themselves.

Verse. 26. Whose voice then shook the Earth: but now He has promised,
saying, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. To put an
edge upon the Threatening, he shows, how terrible CHRIST is, in shaking of
the Earth, by His Voice, at Mount Sinai; and, by the shaking of Heaven and
Earth, at the Day of Judgment.

THEN, 1. The terrible quaking of the Earth, and burning of the Mount SINAI,
was pronounced by the Voice of CHRIST; who, therefore, is declared to be the
LORD GOD: for so, EXODUS xix. is He called. 2. His Terror, at the Day of
Judgment, may be seen in that little Resemblance of Mount SINAI. 3. The
terriblenesse of CHRIST, should make us stand in awe of His Word.

Verse. 27. And this word, Yet once more, does signify the remooving of those
things which are shaken, as of things which are made; that those things which
can not be shaken, may remain. He commenteth upon the Testimony of HAGGAI,
Chap. 2.6. and from this word ONCE, concludes, That Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, and be changed, at the power of CHRIST'S uttering of His Voice:
That these chaungeable Heavens and Earth being remooved, He may make a New
Heaven, and a New Earth, wherein His Subjectes, and His Kingdom over them, may
remain for ever settled.

THEN, 1. It is a good Mean, to get the understanding of GOD'S Mind in the
Scripture, to consider, and weygh, the force of the words thereof, and what
they do importe, by due consequence. 2. No more change shall be of any
thing after the Day of Judgment: because, but ONCE MORE, and no oftener, is
CHRIST to shake the same. 3. It is for the standing of CHRIST'S Kingdom, that
the creature is moved, shaken, and changed. All things made, shall be
shaken: but CHRIST'S Kingdom, and the Salvation of His Subjectes, shall never
be shaken.

Verse. 28. Wherefore, we receaving a Kingdom, which can not be moved, let
us have grace, whereby we may serve GOD acceptablie, with reverence, and
godly fear. FRom the nature of this Kingdom granted unto us in CHRIST, and
from His terriblenesse, he exhorts us to steadfastnesse of Faith, and humble
obedience. He says, We have received it, because we have received the
Right and Title, by the Gospel, and so^e beginning of it.

THEN, As we receive CHRIST in the Gospel, we receive the Kingdom of Heaven
with Him, in Right and Title; yea, in begun Possession, which grows by
degrees.

2. He requires of a Receaver of this Kingdom, reverent serving of GOD.

THEN, Right is given to this Kingdom, before our service be done: Not
because we have served heere-to-fore; but to obliedge us to serve GOD
heere-after.

3. He will have us to serve GOD acceptablie; that is, pleasantly, and
cheerfully. Next, with reverence, or shame fastness, and Godly fear.

THEN, 1. It is not anough* that we do such works which belong to GOD'S
Service: but we must take heed to the manner of doing of them; that they may
be done with a ready affection, and good will. 2. Next, That they be done in
the sense of our own weakness, vileness, and unworthiness. 3. And thirdly.
That they be done with reverende regard to GOD, in such a Godly fear, as
may make us circumspectly handle, and meddle with, His Service, as the word
imports.

4. That this may be the better done, let us have grace, or hold fast the
grip of grace, whereby we may serve GOD, says he.

THEN, He that would have strength to serve GOD, must study, by Faith, to lay
hold on GOD'S Grace, in the Gospel: and having laid hold thereon, to hold it
fast: for, other ways, we can neither have heart nor hand to serve GOD. But
he that is fastened on the Grace, and good will of GOD toward him, will
draw Cowrage, and Strength, from this believed Grace, to serve GOD,
cheerfully, and reverentlie.

Verse. 29. For our GOD is a consuming Fire. BEcause the holiest men, have need
of the Spurs of GOD'S Terror, to stir up their laysie flesh, he closes
with a Watchword of MOSES* DEVTER. 4*24. terrifying the people from ldolatrie,
or Imagerie; which he applies for making men circumspect in their manner of
worship.

TEACHING US THEREBY, 1. That to serve Idols, and follow a false Religion; and
not to serve GOD, in reverence, and Godly fear, in the true Religion, will
be both alyke plagued. 2. The words do teach us, That GOD'S entering into
Covenant, and laying down of the fead and enimitie against us* makes Him not
to lay down His awful Majesty over us. 3. And therefore, we must be so
confident of His love toward us, as we remember in the mean time, that He
is a consuming Fire, to the ungodly, and profane Professors of His Name.

The sum of Chap. XIII.
Now, that you may be fruitful in the Faith, I recommended to you, in short,
BROTHERLY LOVE, Verse. 1. HOSPITALITY, Verse. 2. COMPASSION with sufferers for
the Truth, Verse. 3. CHASTITY, Verse. 4. CONTENTATION, Verse. 5.6.
STEADFASTNESSE in the TRVETH, which GOD'S Messengers have taught you, Verse. 7.
For, change who will, CHRIST, in Himself, and in His Doctrine, changes not,
Verse, 8. Beware of the Leven of JEWISH Doctrine, such as is DISTINCTION OF
MEATS, and others like, Verse. 9. For, they who maintain the Leviticall
Service, can not be part-takers of CHRIST, with us, Verse. 10. This was
praefigured in the Law, Verse. 11. So was CHRIST'S contemptible usage, Verse. 12.
And we must follow Him, and be contented of reproach for Him, Verse. 13. For
we have no place of Rest here, but look for it heere-after, Verse. 14.
Therefore, let us follow the Spiritual Signification of those Ceremonies, and
sacrifice unto Him our Prayers, and Praise, and good works, Verse. 15.16. Obey
your Ecclesiastical Governoures, in their Office: for their Charge is great;
and you have need not to grieve them, Verse. 17. Pray for me; for I shall be
found an honest Man, what ever be men's speeches of me, Verse. 18. But, pray
you for me, for your own good, Verse. 19. And, I pray GOD, to finish His begun
work in you graciously, Verse. 20.21. And, because I have but touched things
briefly, in this short Epistle, take Exhortation in good season, when your
Teachers do preasse such Doctrine upon you, more at length, Verse. 22. It may
be, that TIMOTHY and I see you shortly, Verse. 23. Deliver our Commendations,
Verse. 24. And, Grace be with you all: AMEN. Verse. 25.

The doctrine of Chap. XIII.
VERSE. 1. LEt Brotherly love continue.

FRom this first Precept, LEARN, 1. That the first Fruit of Faith which GOD
requires, is Love, and constant love, amongst His Children. 2. That our
mutual love, must be sincere, and kyndlie; as if it were grounded on Bands of
Nature.

Verse. 2. Be not forgetful to entertayne Strangers: for, there-by, some have
entertained Angels unawares. FRom this Precept, LEARN, 1. That we are ready
to forget Charity to Strangers, especially to be Hospital unto them. 2.
That the possibility of finding Strangers better men nor we take them to
be, should overbalance the suspicion of their sleightnesse, and should set
us on to do the duty. 3. That if a man, intending to do good, do more nor
he intended to do, it shall be imputed unto him, no less, than if he had
intended the same.

Verse. 3. Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. FRom this, LEARN,
1. That it is no new thing for the World, to put Bonds on them who seek to
bring them out of Bondage. 2. That Prisoners for CHRIST, are readily forgotten
of such as are at freedom. 3. Such Men's Bondage should be esteemed, as our
own, even until GOD set them free. 4. That other distressed People also shall
be helped by us, if we consider, what may befall our selves* before we die.

Verse. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled: But
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, GOD will judge. FROM THIS WE LEARN, 1. That
Breakers of Wedlock, and unclean persons in a single life, are both reserved
unto GOD'S judgment, how lightly soever men let them pass. 2. That Marriage
being provided of GOD, for a Remedy of Incontinencie, makes Uncleanness the
heavier sin. 3. That seeing it is GOD'S DOCTRINE, to commend Marriage, for
Honorable; and has pronounced it, not only Lawful, but Commendable in all
persons, of what-so-ever Place, or Calling, and has justified it, for
Undefiled; to traduce this estate of life, as not holy, or not beseeming an
holy man, or an holy Calling, and to forbid Marriage, to persons of any
calling, must be, as it is called, I. TIM. CHAP. iiij. verse. 1.2. The doctrine
of the Devil.

Verse. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness; and be content with
such things as you have: For He has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. HEre we are TAVGHT, 1. That the enlargement of our Desires, to
have more and more worldly goods, whether we be rich or poor, is disallowed
of GOD. 2. That GOD requires Contentation with our present estate, how mean
soever it be; and counts it, Covetousness, not to be contented.

2. To make us contented, he gives us GOD'S Promise, made to IOSHVA, Chap.
1.5. for our provision innecessaries. THEN, 1. The Promises made to IOSHVA, or
any other holle Man, in Scripture, for Furniture in his Calling, may be very
well applied unto us, for Help, and Furniture, in our Calling. 2. Faith in
GOD'S Promise, for our Mayntaynance, must both stay our fear of want in time
to come, and give us contentment with that which we have for the present. 3. A
general Promise, of GOD'S being with us, and assisting of us, is as
sufficient for all particulars whereof we stand in need, as if they were
expressed.

Verse. 6. So that we may boldly say, The LORD is my Helper; and, I will not
fear what man shall do unto me. BY applying of the Promise made to IOSHVA,
he concludes Warrant, to apply DAVID 'S gloriation, against all perils, PSALM.
118.6.

THEN, 1. He that can apply one Promise to himself, may confidentlie apply
another also. 2. The weakest true Believer, has as good ground of confidence
in GOD, for every good, needful for Soul or body, as the LORD'S chief
Prophets, and as good Warrant to apply the Scriptures, to their own use, which
speak of them. 3. He who believes in GOD, needs not to fear what flesh
can do unto him. 4. Faith, then, does its part duly, when it glories in
the LORD, against all opposition.

Verse. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the Word of GOD; whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation. THat they may be steadfast in the Faith, he sets before them
the Example of GOD'S Messengers, who had instructed them in the Truth, and led
a life conform thereunto.

WHEREIN HE TEACHES US, 1. Who is worthy to be a Guide to a People; to wit,
the man who speaks the Word of GOD, and not his own Dreams; believes the
Truth which he teaches, and has his conversation answerable. 2. The best
respect that a Preacher can crave, or that a People can give to a Preacher,
either in his lyfe-tyme, or after, is to remember the Truth of GOD, taught by
him, and to make use thereof. 3. In as far as Preachers have spoken the Word
of GOD, and made it the end of their conversation, People are commanded here,
to remember Them, and imitate Their Faith; but no farther.

Verse. 8. JESUS CHRIST, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. THis
Sentence SERVES, FIRST, To show the aeternitie, and immutabilitie, of JESUS
CHRIST, in Himself, and all His Properties, of Truth, and Love, and Pity,
etc. AGAIN, It serves for a Reason, of keeping fast the Doctrine taught from
Him, by our faithful Leaders: because JESUS CHRIST will still allow, and
maintain that Truth once given out by Himself, and can not choose to change
His Truth, being first and last like Himself. AND THIRDLY, It serves to
encowrage us, to be constant in the Faith: because JESUS CHRIST is
vnchangeablie the same, in love and care toward those who believe in Him, in
all Ages, for their preservation, and deliverance, in all Cases, wherein they
can fall, for His Truth; as He has given proof in former times, toward
others.

Verse. 9. Be not carried about, with diverse and strange Doctrines: For, it is
a good thing, that the heart be established with Grace; not with meats, which
have not profited them that have been occupied therein. THat they may be
steadfast in the Faith, he warns them, to beware, that they be not carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines. THEN, 1. Doctrine which agrees not
with the Word of GOD, uncouth and strange Doctrine, which the Apostles did not
acknowledge, and recommende unto us, must be rejected. 2. There was such
uncouth Doctrine, beginning to creep into the Church, even in the Apostles
time. 3. Apostolic Doctrine, such as they acquaynted the Church with, must
be steadfastlie believed, and stood unto; and not looselie laid hold upon;
lest we lie open to the wind of false Doctrine.

2. He brings in, for example, the Doctrine of Distinction of Meats,
wherein the Iewishlie affected did place some holiness, and help to
Salvation: and yet they who most leaned to the same, were least profited
there-by.

THEN, 1. To place some holiness in Distinction of Meats, and to count the
observation thereof, helpful to Salvation, is an old Error, which even in
the beginning, did trouble the Church. 2. Never man got profit, by leaning any
thing to the observation of Distinctions of Meats. For, under the Law,
Distinction was commanded, for the leading of men to some Duties, signified
there-by: but never did GOD give way, that men should esteem of this
observation, as a thing conferring any whit, to the purchase of Salvation.

3. To keep out this Error, of leaning to Ceremonial Observations, he
opposes the Doctrine of Grace; wherewith he will have the heart established,
and not with Meats.

THEN, 1. The ground of devysing, and urging of Superstitious Ceremonies, is
the unquietness, and unstableness, of men's hearts, wanting satisfaction in
GOD, and His Ordinances; and therefore, seeking to supporte themselves, by
means of their own devysing. 2. It is the Doctrine of Justification by Grace
only, and nothing of our doings, which gives true rest to our hearts, and
quiet settling to the Consciences.

Verse. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve
the Tabernacle. SVch as pertinaciouslie did plead, for the standing of the
Leviticall Service, and Ceremonies thereof, he secludeth from the enjoying of
JESUS CHRIST, who is our Altar.

THEN, Such as maintain the Leviticall Ceremonies, and do urge them on the
Christian Church, do cut themselves from Right to CHRIST. 1. Because they
deny, in effect, that He is come, seeing they will have those Figures to
remain, which did serve to praefigure His coming; and will have His Church
still under Ceremonial Pedagogie, as it was under the Law. 2. Because they
join unto CHRIST, their own Devyses; as if either JESUS were not sufficient
for Salvation, or His Ordinances were not sufficient, for means to attain
thereunto. 3. The Observation of the Distinction of Meats, is a poynct of
serving the Tabernacle: for, so does the Apostle reckon. 4. Such as will eat
of JESUS, and be part-takers of Him, must beware to serve the I^wish
Tabernacle* by keeping on foot, and continuing the Ceremonies, and
appertaynances annexed thereunto: such Feasts, such Iubilies, such Altars*
such Sprinklings, and holy Water, such Priests, and Vestementes, etc. as LEVI
had.

2. He calls CHRIST, by the name of the Altar; because HE is the thing
signified by the Altar, and by the Sacrifice, and by the rest of the Leviticall
Ceremonies.

THEN, 1. Those Ordinances of Leviticall Service, were Figures of CHRIST, some
in one part, and some in another; and He is the Accomplishment of them, even
the Truth of them ALL: The true Tabernacle, the true Priest, the true
Sacrifice, the true Altar, etc. 2. CHRIST'S Self is all the Altar that the
Christian Church has. Our Altar is He only; and nothing but He. The
Apostle knows no other.

3. In that he says, they have no right to eat, LEARN, 1. That JESUS is
our Food* who believe in Him, by whom our Souls are kept alive, and
mayntayned every day Spirituallie, as the Priests were mayntayned by the old
Altar, bodily. 2. That before a man attain to eat, or draw Benefit from
CHRIST, he must have a Right unto Him* There is a Possession following the
Right; and the Right tends to the Possession. 3. He who loves to have the
Right, must take the Course which CHRIST praescrybeth, without mixing any
thing therewith.

Verse. 11. For, the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
Sanctuary, by the high Priest, for sin, are burnt without the Camp. HE
shows, that this was praefigured in the Law: For, LEVIT. 16.27. the
Sinne-Offering was burnt, and none of the Priests, the servantes of the
Tabernacle, did eat thereof. TO SHOW,

1. That such as adheared to the Tabernacle, and Leviticall Service, a^
needful to their Salvation, (specially after CHRIST, the Sinne-Offering that
was offered) should not be part-takers of Him. Again, The Sinne-Offering was
offered without the Camp; to show, that such as would be part-takers
thereof, must forsake the Jewish Synagogue, and come out of it, toward
CHRIST, who will not have His Church mixed with the forms of the Jewish
Church. Thirdly. The bodies of the Sacrifices of Sin, were then taken from
the use of the Priests of the Tabernacle, when the blood was now brought in to
the Sanctuary: To show, That CHRIST should be taken from them; who, after
His Blood was shed, and had made Atonement within the Sanctuary of Heaven,
should not relinquish the Jewish Tabernacle, and the shadowing Figures thereof.

Verse. 12. Wherefore, JESUS also, that He might sanctify the People, with
His own Blood, suffered without the Gate. ANOTHER end of the burning of the
Sinne-Offering, without the Camp, he shows, first, To be, The
praefiguration of the ignominious usage of CHRIST'S Body, casten out of the
City of Jerusalem. 2. Again: Like as the Sinne-Offering, how-be-it the body
thereof was burnt without the Camp, yet the blood of it was brought within
the Sanctuary, to make a Figurative Atonement: Even so, how baselie so-ever
men did use CHRIST'S Body, in casting of it without the City; yet was his
Blood in high esteemation with GOD; made Atonement for the People, and
sanctified them.

Verse. 13. Let us go forth, therefore, unto Him, without the Camp, bearing
His Reproach. HENCE he draws an Exhortation. To be ready to renounce the
World, and to take up our Cross, and follow CHRIST. Wherein he TEACHES US,
1. That CHRIST'S Sufferinges without the City, represented the state of His
Mystical Body, and Kingdom, thrust forth, and contemptiblie rejected of the
World. 2. That such as will be part-takers of CHRIST, must resolve to be so
handeled also, and must sequestrate their affections from the World, and must
be contented to be crucified unto the World, with our LORD and Master,
CHRIST JESUS. 3. That what reproach is suffered for CHRIST'S sake, is not the
man's, but CHRIST'S reproach, for whom it is suffered: And, so, the Reproach
is as honorable before GOD, as it is ignominious before the World.

Verse. 14. For, here we have no continuing City; but we seek one to come.
HE gives a Reason of this Exhortation, TEACHING, 1. That the instabilitie of
this present World, and our short and uncertain time of Pilgrimage there-in,
should be a Motive, to make us loose our affections off it in time. 2. That
the hope of a quiet, and sure, and blessed Place of Rest heere-after, should
be another Motive, to make us renounce this World, with the better will. 3.
That the true Pilgrims Employment in this World, is, To be seeking, how to
come Home, to his own Country, and City, prepared for him.

Verse. 15. By Him, therefore, let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to GOD
continually: that is, The Fruit of our Lips; giving Thanks to His Name.
ANOTHER Exhortation, to offer Spiritual Sacrifices. WHEREIN WE LEARN,

1. That as CHRIST has abolished all properly called Priests by Office; So
has He made all Christians Spiritual Priests, by common Duty. 2. As
CHRIST has offered the Propitiatory Sacrifice of His own Body, once for all
that are to be saved, and has left no properly called Sacrifice, no Offering
for Sin, no Propitiatory Offering, now to offer; So has He appoyncted the
Spiritual Sacrifice, of Thanks, to be offered by every faithful Man, and
Woman; such as is Prayer, Praises, and Thankes-giving to GOD. 3. That these our
Sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise, is the Spiritual Service of Saynctes,
aunswerable to the Thanke-Offering of the First Fruits, and Calves, and
Bullockes; which was the external Sacrifice of the Old Church. 4. That the
offering of these Spiritual Sacrifices, is not tied unto set hours, as the
Legal; but, to be done continually. 5. That these our Sacrifices of Prayer,
and Praises, are not to be offered by the mediation of Saynct, or Angel, but,
by JESUS CHRIST only. 6. That albeit they be unworthy, as from us, yet
being offered by CHRIST'S Mediation, they shall be accepted for Service, at
our hands.

Verse. 16. But, to do good, and to communicate, forget not: for, with such
Sacrifices, GOD is well pleased. ANOTHER Exhortation, to good Works, and Alms
deeds: TEACHING US,

1. That good works, and Alms deeds, are appoyncted to be of the number of
Spiritual Sacrifices, and a part of the THANK-OFFERINGS of the Saynctes.

2. That because they are Sacrifices, they must not be offered to the Idol of
our own credit, and esteemation, or our own private ends; but unto GOD,
even in obedience unto Him, and for the Glory of Him. And, because they are a
part of the THANK-OFFERINGS of the Sayncts, they must not incroach upon the
SINNE-OFFERING of the SAVIOVR, the only Expiatorie, the only Propitiatory,
and the only Meritorious Sacrifice.

3. That being so offered, they are well pleasing unto GOD: The smell of
CHRIST'S SINNE-OFFERING, once offered, making our THANK-OFFERING to be sweet
smelling unto GOD.

Verse. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit you selves: for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account: that they may do
it with joye, and not with grief; for, that is unprofitable for you. ANOTHER
Exhortation, To obey such as had the rule over them; their Guydes, and Leaders,
as the word imports: That is, Public Office-bearers in the Church,
appoyncted of GOD, to teach, and govern them, by the Word, and
Ecclesiastical Censures.

THEN, 1. The Churches of CHRIST are not Dens of Confusion, but Houses of
Order; having some to be Guydes and Rulers, and some to be instructed and
guyded, by the direction of GOD'S Word, and Ordinances.

2. Even the meanest and poorest Churches, albeit no more powerful than were
the Churches of these scattered HEBREWS, must be so provided.

3. The right duty of the Office-bearers in the Church, is, First, To be
Guydes, poyncting out the way in GOD'S Word, which the people should keep,
toward Heaven. Next, To be Leaders, going before them in the example of
Faith, and the Fruits thereof, in their conversation. And thirdly, Rulers by
the Rod of Discipline, to take order with the scandalous, and to recall
Wanderers, to encowrage the obedient; for, thus much does the word importe.

4. The duty of the people, is, To obey the direction of such Guydes, and
Rulers, and to submit themselves unto their censures, and to maintain them in
their Office, every way; that this Order may be continued, and not fall by
any want, which the people may supply.

2. The Reason which he uses to induce them, is, They watch for your Souls,
as they who must give account.

THEN, 1. The Charge of Church Rulers, is the heaviest of all Charges, because
of Souls.

2. The most assiduous, and paynfull, setting, not of the body only, but
the spirit on work; because it is a Charge, of WATCHING.

3. The most dangerous of all Charges, because the account of lost souls
within the Church shall be craved at their hands, whether they have done all
that which became them to do, to save them, or not.

4. The weyghtinesse of their Charge, should affect their people, and move
them, to concu^re, for their parts, as they are able, for their encowragement.

3. Another Motive, is, That they may do their work with joye, and not with
grief: for that is unprofitable unto you, says he.

THEN, 1. Church Men's chief joye, should be their peoples obedience unto
GOD'S Directions in their Mouth: and their chief grief, if it be other-wayes.

2. Whether they will get joye or grief from their people, they must do their
work, and follow their Charge.

3. The less comfortable people be unto their Leaders, their Teachers, and
Rulers; the less profit shall they have by their Ministry.

Verse. 18. Pray for us: For we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things, willing to live honestly. HIS craving the benefit of their Prayers
for him, TEACHES US, 1. That albeit the Scripture gives no warrant, to seek
the benefit of the Prayer of Saynctes departed, or of Angels; yet it gives
warrant, for seeking of the mutual concurrence in Prayer, of these that are
living together, and militant here on Earth together. 2. That the greatest
Apostle has need of the Prayers of the meanest Christian; and may be helped
there-by.

2. He gives a Reason, aunswering all the Calumnies which were spread of him
by his Adversaries; that they might, with greater freedom, pray for him, as
for an honest Man.

THEN, 1. They who are vnjustlie reported of, must comfort themselves in the
testimony of a good Conscience. 2. An honest heart may expect the better
Fruit of their own Prayers, and others. 3. And such as we know are
sincerely set to serve GOD, we may, with the better cowrage, pray for them.

3. He expounds what he calls a good Conscience; by saying, that he was
willing to live honestly.

THEN; The purpose, desire, and endevoure to live honestly, is the evidence of
a good Conscience, and the ground also of the good Testimony; because such a
disposition escheweth to do evil, and is careful to do good.

Verse. 19. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to
you the sooner. HE joyneth a Reason, for their own good, to pray for him;
that the impedimentes of his coming unto them being remooved by their
Prayers, he might come the sooner.

THEN, 1. When our own good is joined with the good of such as call for our
Prayers, we have the more inducement^s, to set us on work. 2. Many
hindrances of our good and comfort, do stand in the way, which by Prayer
might be remooved.

Verse. 20. Now, the GOD of Peace, that brought again from the dead our LORD
JESUS, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Ever-lasting Covenant. Now, he prays for them, whom he has in the former
words requested to pray for him.

THEN, 1. Prayer is a mutual Duty, and ought to be made by us, for such as
we desire to pray for us.

2. He styleth GOD, to whom he prays, first, The GOD of Peace. TO TEACH
US, That Peace proceeds from GOD, and ^s preserved by Him, in His Church;
and, That it does please Him well, that His Children should be in peace, and
should study thereunto.

3. Again: He descrybeth GOD, by the Great Work of CHRIST'S Resurrection,
wrought by Him.

THEN, 1. As CHRIST'S Resurrection, is the Work of His own Power, JOHN 10.18.
So also is it the Work of GOD the FATHER, in this place: For, JOHN 10.30. the
FATHER and CHRIST, in power are one.

4. The Proppes of his Faith in Prayer, are, first, The Office of JESUS, who is
the Great Shepherd of the Sheep.

THEN, 1. Those who come under the reckoning of CHRIST'S Sheep, are the only
People, of whom He, by special Office, professes to take charge. 2.
How-so-ever He employe the Ministry of Men, to feed His Flock under Him;
yet does He keep the Place and Style of ARCH-PASTOR, or GREAT SHEPHERD, to
Himself. 3. People, how-so-ever they be furnished by Ministers, yet they have
the Great Shepherd to acknowledge, and rely upon: of whose care and
fidelity, for their feeding, and preservation, they may be confident.

5. The next Prop of this Prayer, is, The power of GOD, who brought again from
the dead the Great Shepherd.

THEN, 1. The Sheep must not think to be above the Shepherd: but, must
resolve, for bearing witness to the Truth, and to be put to death as He
was, if GOD please. 2. Nor need they fear to be used so, seeing He is risen
again: because, He that raised the Shepherd, for the Sheep cause, can
raise the Sheep from death also, for the Shepherds cause.

6. The third Proppe of Confidence, for obtaining this Prayer, is, The Blood
of the Everlasting Covenant, through which he seeks his Petition to be
granted.

THEN, 1. It is CHRIST'S Blood which has ratified the Covenant, and
established our Reconciliation, to endure for ever; because the Virtue of that
Blood is perpetual. 2. It is through that Blood, that every thing is
purchased, for which we can pray. It is the Price of the Purchase of
Sanctification unto us, as well as of Salvation.

Verse. 21. Make you perfect, in every good work, to do His will; working in
you that which is well-pleasing in His Sight, through JESUS CHRIST: To Whom be
Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen. THAT which he prays for here, is, That
they may be made perfect, in every good work, to do the will of GOD.

THEN, 1. Only the doing of GOD'S Will, and what He has commanded, is to
be reckoned for a good work. 2. It is not anough to be given to some sort
of good work; but we must endevoure our selves, to work every sort of good
work; having a due respect unto all GOD'S Commandments. 3. What-so-ever
measure we have attained unto, we must not stand there; but Perfection must
be aimed at; which is still before us, until we come to Heaven.

2. The way how this may be done, he shows, to be, By GOD'S working in
us, that which is well-pleasing in His Sight, even through JESUS CHRIST.

THEN, 1. It is not by any strength of our own, where-by good works are
wrought; but even by the Power of GOD, working in us graciously. 2. It is
through JESUS CHRIST, that this working is procured, conveyed unto us, and made
acceptable unto GOD.

3. He closes his Prayer, with ascrybing of Glory unto JESUS, for ever. Amen.

THEN, 1. CHRIST JESUS, is true GOD, worthy of Divine Glory, FOR EVER. 2. The
Prayer and Praises which we offer unto GOD, must come from so advysed a Mind,
as we may seal the same with Faith, and hearty Affection, imported in AMEN.

Verse. 32. And, I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation: for,
I have written a Letter unto you in few words. LAST of all, he exhorts them,
to take in good part, the Word of Exhortation, from their ordinary Teachers;
who behooved to dilate, and urge, and inculcate these things, even at length,
unto them. The reason where-of, he gives; Because he had written this Letter
but in few words unto them; and might not insist in those poynctes at large,
as they had need of; but behooved to leave this unto their Teachers.

THEN, 1. There is need of Preachers, by the Word of Exhortation, to dilate,
and inculcate, that which the SCRIPTVRE has in short. 2. It is very irksome
for men, to have their sluggishnesse stirred up by EXHORTATION, and the same
things inculcate again and again: But their own Profit should make them to
suffer it patiently. 3. The writing of SCRIPTVRE, praejudgeth not the use of
Preaching; but both keep their own rowme; The SCRIPTVRE serving for a short
laying down of the Grounds to be taught, and Exhortation serving to dilate
and urge the Truth delivered in SCRIPTVRE, as their Case requires.

Verse. 23. Know ye, that our Brother TIMOTHY is set at liberty; with whom,
if he come shortly, I will see you. FROM this learn, first, That the
Deliverie of one TIMOTHY, out of the hands of his Persecuters, should be a
matter of Comfort, and Joy, unto as many CHVRCHES as do hear of it.
SECONDLY: Good News should be spread abroad; and, are a fit Matter for
Christian Epistles.

Verse. 24. Salute all them that have the rule over you; and all the Sayncts.
They of ITALY salute you. FROM THIS LEARN, FIRST, That as it is the mutual
duty of Christians, to send Commendations one to another: So is it a
Christian duty, to carry them; not unbeseeming, even an Apostle.

2. His directing of the People, for to carry his Commendations to their
Rulers, makes it evident, that the Apostle ordained this Epistle, to be first
read unto the People. And, so, was far from their minds, who will not suffer
the SCRIPTVRE to come in the Peoples hands.

Verse. 25. GRACE be with you all. AMEN. THIS closing of the EPISTLE, usual to
the Apostle, TEACHES,

1. That Grace, is the common good of the CHVRCH; vvhere-vnto every Saynct
has entresse.

2, That Grace is all that can be desired: For, if the Fountain of GOD'S
Grace, or Favor, run toward a man, what can the man stand in need of,
which the overrunning Stream of GOD'S Good Will shall not carry unto him.

The Postscript.
WRitten to the Hebrews, from Italy, by Timothy.

SOME inconsiderate hand has put to this POSTSCRIPT, appearinglie: For, this
Epistle was ordained by the Apostle, to carry the News of Timothie's
Liberation, and a promise of his coming unto them, afterward, possibly, as
the 23 verse of this Chapter shows; and not to be carried by Timothy.

And again; The Apostle was bound by this Letter, to come with Timothy, if
he had been to come shortly, after the writing of this Epistle.

And thirdly; Timothy was not as yet come to that place where the Apostle
Paul was, when this Epistle was directed: for, then, had he been certain of
Timothie's purpose; and behooved, if not to go with Timothy; yet to have
written the reason of so sudden a change of his Purpose, and written Promise:
Or, else, to have deleted the Promise of his coming, out of the Epistle, by
writing it over again; or some way else.

WHENCE WE COLLECT, That POST-SCRIPTS are not a part of the TEXT, nor of the
APOSTLES own writing; neither ought they to have such Authority, or Credit,
as the TEXT has, which always agrees with it self, as proceeding from the
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit: To whom, with the Father, and His Son, JESUS
CHRIST, our LORD, be Glory, for ever: AMEN.

FINIS.

