FATA MIHI TOTVM MEA sunt agitanda per Orbem.

Imprinted at London by W. W. for John Barnes. 1611.

THough our particular opinion of the pro^abilitie, that after the vn-blest
endeavors of so many of our Countrymen, sought for the North-west passage,
were reason good enough for our Adventures, to merit (at the worst) by making
known th'impossibilitie, the thanks of future Ages: Yet now, when persons of
more e^inence are interested in the prosecutio^ of that Action; least after
good success, as in like cases, the envy of the world, commend the Fortune
rather then the Judgment of the Undertakers: we are advised to show some such
as you, a little of our Reason; by the sufficience whereof, you (as we wis^)
will judge us, and our Enterprise, though an unlooked for ill e^ent, should
surnish other men with stronger Arguments then yet they have against us.

For yet (setting aside some one* It may be, and that fortified especially with
this) the maine Objection is* that all our modern Globes and Mappes do either
show no pa^sage* or else fo high into the North, and long into the West, that
Cold and Ice, and Fogges, and so forth, will make it of no use.

To which we justly might reply; that it has ever been, the Custom of
Describers of the Wo^ld in remote parts, to set down Land or Sea out of their
own imagination, with Gian^s, Pigmies, Monsters, and miraculous reports of
fabulous Authors. O^ if we list, to let them see how poor it is to trust in
Pictures: could tell them of those Globes that make America and Asia all one
Continent, even under the Tropicke: Or of those Maps that sever them by a small
Fretum only; that since is found to be a vaste and spacious Sea: Or of those
that join America and Grond-land, between which Dau^s, and other of our
Countrymen, discovered a large Passage: Or of those that force the Back of
Brasill by the Streightes of Mag^llan, to trend so strangely Westward, when M.
Cauendish found that Coast to turn immediately up to the North, inclining to
the East: Or of other as gross errors, which later Voyages have mended.

By which, those men might be persuaded from ours, because it is a new
Discovery to rectify their Cards, that make no mention of our Streightes
found in () a Latitude free from fear of danger, cutting through the body of
America 200. or 300. Leagues, unto an open Sea, that showed a great and hollow
Billow, and brought a Flood that rose 5. Faddome. The rather, for that it
agrees justly with the Portingal Card, taken in the late Queens time out of a
Carricke And with the intelligence which Sir Mar^in Furbisher had long since
from a Portingal in Gwinie, that said, he had past it: And with the general
confession of Pilots now at L^shbon, yielding to the news: And with impartial
Stories, telling that the Admiral of D. Garcia G^offroy Loaysa of u^-Real, in
the time of Cha^les the fifth, by the Coast of Bacalaos and (...), went to the
Moluccaes.

But because some (that hold the place, at least of) good Seamen, and Masters
in the study of Cosmographie, deliver their opinion without reasons, that
there yet remain, on the North of America, many hundred leagues for us to
pass: We hold it not amiss to show you why (besides our late experience) we
think not so, in this succeeding short discourse.

OF THE CIRCVMFERENCE of the Earth.
Unlearned men are now at length assured by the renowned Voyages of Sir Francis
Drake and M. Cauendish, and other worthy Persons, that in the last age
compassed the World: As aunciently Mathematicians were by the roundnesse of the
shadow in the Eclipse of the Moon. That the form or figure which God gave
unto the Sea and Earth, when his Wisdom set the Waters and dry Land apart,
was Gloabe-like or Sp^aricall.

Wherein it is agreed there are two Points, correspondent to the North and
South Poles of the Heavens, of ea^ie Creation in a Solid of that Nature, from
which Centers by describing several Circles, we derive our Paralells, whereof
the largest in extent, must of necessity fall just in the midst; the rest
infallibly growing lesser and lesser, as they draw nearer and nearer to those
Poles.

Whereas our Meridians being Circles that do ever meet in both those points
of North and South, and so divide the Orb into just (...), though they be not
aequidistant, yet are ever of one equal Circuit to the greatest Parallel,
which we call the Aequinoctiall.

In which Line, all men observing that the S^nne in four and twenty hours
was carried round; and the most Learned, that one hour took up 300. Leagues,
or 900. Miles. It was concluded, that the Suns whole course was 24. times so
much: so that the common best opinion of the greatest Compass of the World,
became 7200. L or 21600. M.

According to which Computation, Seamen and Trauelers that go directly North
or South, do find their Elevation to alter one Degree of the 360. for 20. L.
of way, and ha^ing sure means to tell how many Degrees or Parts of their
M^ridian they are gone N. or S. They can proportion well enough their Distaunce
in Latitude, to be so many L. or Miles.

But in their course of Longitude, (which is from East to West) for want of
Fixed helps, they are constrained to turn backward, and by reckoning their L.
or M. of way, to make account of so many parts or Degrees of their Parallel:
But having not had due consideration of the above said lessening of Parale^s,
to distribute consequently fewer Miles or Leagues to eac^ Degree, besides the
too uncertain ground; it has fallen out that Lands set forth in Gloabes or
Mappes, from such erroneous Cards or Computations, as touching Longitude or
Distance East and West, are most extremely false, especially in new discovered
Northern and Southern Countries.

For which cause (setting by the authority of Handy-workes) the (...) C^erence
of the Earth is to be looked for in the Histories of such as traueld to describe
the World: Among the which in ancient time, the men that laid the firmest
and most Artificial grounds, and nearest to the best of Modern^, were (...)
Alexandrinus: And he whom (...) confutes Marinus Tyrius, the one of them by a
Heavenly way of Eclips^s, most exact (if well observed) thus argued. Such an
Eclipse happened at M. Hora 8. and at N. at 9. therefore M. and N. differ in
Longitude one hour, that is, the 24. part of the Aequinoctiall, that is, 15.
Degrees, containing every one some 60. Miles. But on the contrary, Marinus
Tyrius proceeded thus: Such a man went from M. to N. Versus occasum, or from N.
to M. Versus exortum 7500. Stadi^, whereof 500. are about 60. Miles, or one
Degree of the Aequinoctiall; from which experience he concluded, therefore M.
and N. did differ 15. Degrees, that is one Hour in Longitude. Which course how
ever M^chanicall as we say; and seldom or never exact: Yet on firm Land, by
small helps given to a Man of ordinary understanding, may easily be freed from
a gross error: Whereas we must confess Ptolomey his learned Method is of
such difficile observing, that error soon creepes in, and every small one
breeds a great mistaking.

And therefore seeing (either way) Geographye depends on the reports of
Trauellours (which Ptolomey cal's Historiam Peregrinationis) and Trauellours be
seldom Math^maticians, but Merchants, Saylours, Soldiers, men that may use
common Rules and Instruments, not subtilties of nice and curious practice.
There are that do profess, they hold P^olomey his way much fitter, from the
relations of Learned men, and Countries where good Arts are flourishing, to
rectify precedent observations, then to delineate or set down by hearsay,
the distances from East to West, of far remote newly discovered Countries.
Nay, that confess (under correction of the Learned World tha^ has received
it) they are not yet so fully well persuaded of (...) his bounding the old
World of Europe, Africa, and Asia, between a Meridian of the (...) (...), and
12. hours or 180. Degrees, but rather do approve Marinus Tyrius his
extending Asia into the East, as far as 15. Hours, and that for these
reasons.

If those men conceive a right, that First.
guess that (...) for his aboade in (...), did Style himself Alexandrinus, in
emulation of Mari^, called Tyri^, from the Town of Tyr^. It cannot be denied
but the Merchants of that Port were fellows unto Princes, and had in those
days greater Trade then any; so that Marinus living there, was like to have
much better information then an other in an other corner; especially being more
ancient, and nearer to the Ass^ian and Persian Monarchies, to the Iourneys of
Alexander, Hercu^, and Bacchus, and the business then most into the East. He
could not but have better helps then Ptolomey, that lived when all went
Westward.

The Merchauntes then traueling over firm Land, through plain and 2. ly.
open Countries by directions of the Heavens, wherein the men of those Times
and Territories were best read; they were the better able to make perfect
Iournals of their way, and consequently Marinus truer Computation of the
Longitude of Plac^s.

Since (...) himself confesses, that the Lands from the F^tunate 3. ly.
Islands, to the passage of the River Euphra^es through H^apolis, were rightly
laid by Tyri^s, being gathered from Men's voyages Westward over Seas, and
through the Wooddie, Mountanous, baren and then Barbarous parts of Europ^: why
should we not think his informatio^ was as good, and more frequent from the
Eastern richest Countries of the world; and so believe as well of his account
Ad Turr^^ Lapideam, and thence Ad Sinar^m Metropolim? Nothing doubting what
ever Ptolomey conjecture, his care to examine men's Relations, ere he gave them
^redite, since though his work unhappily appear not; yet out of his Confuters
mouth, we hear he did reject Phil^rs forged tale of (...) greatness.

How confidently soever Ptolomey, Fourthly.
with stronger Arguments then those against his Longitude, condemn Marinus
Tyrius for forcing Africa, as touching Latitude to reach beyond the Tropick^ of
Capricorn* whereas he will allow it to extend to not full 17. parts: Yet now
infallible experience has taught us, that Marinus in that then most difficult
point, was much the better informed, a fair occasion to doubt P^olomey, and
trust him in the other.

5ly. That Ptolomey was strangely abused in his understanding of those parts,
appears plainly, by his making Asia to turn down to the South, and winding
round to join with Africa, conceiving our great Sea of Zur, for that he heard
but of a piece to be a Bay or Sinus, which indeed he termed Magnus; but
reported to be less then either (...) or Persicus.

Last of all, seeing that although (...) Mela, and other of the Ancient,
besides the late discovered Truth it self, make A^ia to reach unto the Sea;
yet Pt^mey does bound it Eastward Terra incognita: Why might not Marinus
proportion more Degrees or Hours, were it but for that Land unknown* sure we
are, P^olomey his fardest Meridia^ does leave a great part of China East, his
Sinus Magnus being but a piece of our South Sea, between Malacca and the
Moluccaes, and his Aurea Chersonesus, in truth no other then the Modern
Sumatra, though by some Learned men mistaken for his Taprobane: and thus
unhappily we fall upon another Paradoxe; yet for the Trueths sake, can not but
deliver our opinion, that, that which he called Taproban^, was our now Ce^lam.
Not because Barrius, or Corsalus, or Varrerius, or at last Or^elius conceived
so; nor yet for the plenty of Elephants, and other Riches which Ptolomey gave
to his Tapro^ane, and are in truth in our C^lam: Nor for the nee^nesse of the
sound or name of the ancient Inhabitants of Taprobane, called by him Salaj, and
his opposite Promontory in Jndia tearmd C^ry, to our Ceilam, and the neighbor
C. (...): but for these, as we think unanswerable reasons.

The Latitude (wherein as (...) First.
and other, rightly judge (...) erred least) of our C^ilam being about 10.
degrees Northerly, agrees much better with Ptolomey his Tapro^ane, then
Sumatra, that like his Aurea Chersonesus, lies under the Line.

2 ly. The Sholes and drowned Lands about our Ceilam show that perhaps it has
been greater, if any should too strictly urge Pliny his Magnitude of
Ta^robane, which Ptolomey places but a few degrees Eastward from his River
Indus, over against that part of Jndia where the Bracmanoj Magoj lived: and so
is our Ce^lam now situate, from that River, and opposite to the Jndians; whose
Priests are called Bachmenes.

3 ly. Before his Taprobane, Ptolom^ places. 1300. little Islands an unusual
Seamarke, no where in the world but before our Ceil^m, to wit the Isles of
Mald^uar.

4 ly. Ptolomey his Tabrobane lay between the Mouths of the Rivers Jndus, and
Ganges, almost indifferently, as our C^lam now does, whereas Su^atra not only
is beyond the River Ganges, but our Go^pho de Bengala, his Sinus (...).

I but the Learned Merca^or was of other mind, whose sentence Maginus and
other Geographers approve: He taken Su^tra to be Taprobane, and our Iapan for
Au^ea Chersonesus, etc.

The truth is, in his Universal Map, a^ in the quarter Cards which Ho^dius
drew from thence, the labor is so great to fit the new discovered Countries
in those Seas, to P^olomeys old names: That he that will but read Iudiciously
Ptolomey himself, be it of Merc^tors own edition, shall soon perceive the
errors which we wish that learned Man had not committed: For, for a taste,
what can be weaker, then to deny Sumatra to be Chersonesus, because it is not a
Peninsal^, although the broken Grounds about it, and the neere^esse to the
Maine witness perhaps it was: And although the Latitude and other
circumst^nces accord; when the same hand does make J^pan that has no color,
no resemblance of an Jstmos, lying far from the Continent, in 36. Degrees, of
N. Elevation to be Ptolomey his C^rise o^ Cherso^sus that wa^ under the
Aequinoctiall.

I but according to Ptolomey Cherso^sus, must lie beyond the River Ganges, as
Taproban^ on this side: and therefore Mercator finding the River Cantam to be
Ganges, had reason to reconcile P^olomey unto himself, etc.

Surely Mercator had small reason, besides will, so worse and worse to lime
himself: The particular Narrations of Soli^s, and other describers of those
parts, from the Persi^us sinus and Island of the Sun to Carmani^, so to
Jndus, then Jn^ia intra Gangem, then (...) extra Gang^m, and so ad Ser^s, as
well as (...) his enumeration of the Rivers, Mountains, Towns, and
Head-landes, with their distances, show plainly, that his River Ganges was
nothing near so far from Indus: and if that mighty Continent between In^s
and Can^ were but India intra Gangem, China it self must then be India extra
Gang^m; and so unless the Sea have eat it up, we cannot guess what is
become of Sin^rum Regio, that P^olomey so often mentions to lie Eastward from
India extra Gange^. And surely if the River of Bengala (which Linschot says
the Indians do call Gueng^) be not Ga^ges, falli^g out into a Sea so well
known, and being of that breadth and deapth and length that the Indians
superstitiously conceive it comes from Par^dise, it had ill luck to escape the
mention of our M. Ptolomey.

In a word, the several Mouths of Ptolo^y his G^nges, especially the most
distant, lay in the same Latitude, which is impossible for Cantam falling
Eastward, and not full South into the Sea. Neither has Ca^am a Bay like Golpho
de B^ngala to answer Sinus Gangeticus; neither can there be, if Cantam were
G^ges, beyond it Eastward any trending of Land (as Ptolomey writes) so far to
the South, that there were Aethiopes: Neither is there beyond Cantam any Town
within the Tropicke, whereas Ptolomey in his 8. Book of Caelestiall
Observations, or Rectifications, reckons all the Cities of India extra Gang^m,
and some of Sinarum Regio too, to have Sole^ in vertice bis in anno: All which,
do well agree with our opinion. But why do we pursue Mercator any further,
whose first mistaking, notwithstanding all his wit and labor, brought him at
last to place Cattigara si^ arum statio, in 60. degrees of Northerly Latitude,
which Ptolomey expressly lays beyond the Aequinoctiall.

The clearer truth is, that the River Indus, of Ptolomey, by the universal
consent, falls into the Ocean near Camb^, from whence proceeding Eastward,
you come to his Promontory Cory our Cape Comorj, over against which lay his
Taprobane our Ce^lam, from thence to his Sinus Gangeticus our Golpho de
Bengala* so to his River Ganges the Indian Guenga* then to our (...) his Chrise
or Chersonesu^, and last of all to his Sinus Magnus, a piece of our South Sea
between Peg^ or Si^m and the Islands of Spices, into some Port whereof, the
coming of some Sinae to trade, occasioned his conceit of Ca^gara Sinarum St^o:
All which against Mag^nus, and such as so easily swallow Mercators Conjectures,
may be much better justified then their Positions.

Now then, by this that has been said, it may appear, that P^lomeys
Hem^sphere reached little beyond Sumatra and Siam; so that not only China,
which by them that know it best, is ^ayd to trend from 2^. Degrees of Nor:
Latitude 700. Leagues North-east ward, but a good part of Cauchin-China too,
remaynes for P^olomey his Terra incognita, to make up the 3. Hours, or 45.
Degrees more of Marinus Ty^ius: upon whose Computation, Columbus especially did
found his so happy and renownedent erprize.

I, but how comes it to pass, that all our modern Maps contract even
Ptolomeys Hem^sphere, and make Sum^tra to extend to little above 150. Degrees?

Why surely by the general mistaking of his Ta^robane; and in particular, by a
trick of the Portinga^es, the first and chief frequenters of those parts,
they having by the Popes authority, fixed a Merd^an at the Islands of Cape
V^rde, from which Westward the Castilia^s should have all to 180. Degrees as
themselves, the other Moytie Fastward: It fell out that the riches o^ the (...)
called the Islands of Spices, set them both at odds, and the (...) finding a
short and easy passage from America thither, not only challenged those
Islandes, but some part of India too, to ^al within their limits: for
prevention whereof, to bring the (...) within their Hem^sphere, the Portin^ales
in probability shortened their Cards: For at the meeting at Ba^os and Yelbes,
between them, there was lost a 7. th parth of the world, and the (...) were
they that shunned the trial: But the Emperors occasions compelling him to
yield to them, that else, (as the r^cordes declare) had little right: the World
has since received the d^lineation of those parts from P^rtingal account.

But there is reason to imagine, that ere long, our skillful frequenters of the
East Ind^es, by observation of some on^ Eclipse, will teach the truth; mean
time, let us ageee with the Spaniards the Masters of those parts, and the
Computation of our Masters the old Geographers.

If therefore from the Meridian of the Fortunate Islands, in the Parallel of
37. (which is chosen as most eminent and fit to reckon on) we may account to
the farthest parts of C^ina, over against (...), lying in the same height 225.
Degrees, or 15. hours, according to the Additions unto Gemma Frisius Tables:
there then remain but 9. hours, or 135. Degrees, to make up ^he Complement;
which being over Seas, we know both difficult and uncertain: But the best
experience, from the coast of China to the most Eastern part of (...), sets
down 200. L. From thence to the Back of America in 37. where Sir (...) Drake
his Noua Albion should be; you have, by the estimate of Fran: (...) 900. more:
in all 1100. L. whereof by the Dutch Computation 12: by the Spanish 14: by the
English 16: in that Parallel make one Degree, which last as surest, though
worst for us, we follow, and do find from China unto Noua (...) 69. Degrees.

Now from the Meridian of the (...) Westward to (...), or to keep our Parallel
to Uirginia by several Eclipses, observed by several men, there has been
found a difference of near 60. Degrees or 4. Hours: so that the Remainder of
the 135. is about 6 Degrees, or 300. English Miles between Virginia and Noua
Albion.

For Confirmation whereof, let us remember that the India^s in (...)
continually assure our people, that 12. days journey westward from the Fa^s,
they have a Sea, where they have sometimes seen such Ships as ours. Let us
remember how Uasques de Coronado, sent to discover the North of Ameri^a by the
Viceroy; A^onio d^ M^ndoza, laboring in his letters to persuade the Emperor
what a large and ample Continent there was to inhabit, writes, that at
C^bola, he was 150. L. from the South Sea, and a little more from the North.
Let us remember how plainly Sir Francis Drake his Iornal, proves that his N^a
A^bion can be very little further Westward then (...); whereby see but how great
a part of the Back of America, is clean wyp't away?

But if any yet do doubt, let him look into the Spanish Voyages, or
Coll^cttions of Antonio de Herrera the Coronist^ (...) for the King, and
Contraction house, in whose description of those parts the particular
distances and bounds of Guadalaiara, Zacat^cas, Nueu^, Viscania, Cinaloa,
Cibola, and the rest, from Compostela, Purification, S. Sebastian, on the South
Sea, as from Mexico, and from (...) on the North, too long to set down here
do plainly show, that Continent is nothing broad, how ever it be painted.

Now if any judge we have not altogether proved Asia to extend as far as
15. Hours, let him consider for a supplement, of what may want thereof, that
the Spaniards reckon 20. Degrees more then we have done here, to the
West Indies; and on the other side, from Noua Spagna, to the Philippinas 1700.
L. as our Sir Francis Drake and Master Cauendish do above 2000. far beyond
ours of Francis Gu^lle.

If therefore our Streights had been discovered about Virginia, to run
Westward, 200. or 300. L. unto a flowing Sea, we think it might have probably
been judged the Mar del zur: But lying in a Parallel more Northerly, (whereby
those Leagues will take up more Degrees) the Northern back of America, by the
Card of Antonio de (...); by the Voyage of Juan de Fuca, a Pilot that lived
^ourtie years in those Countries; and by the relation of some Dutehm^n;
besides the Map of Gemma Frisius, appearing to trend North Eastward.

And for any thing we yet can hear, no one Voyage to the contrary, we see
not but we may conclude, that the Fludde our People met, came from the
Southern Sea, and till we hear more Authentical reasons then of fear,
gronnded on false Cards; bele^ue that our Industry, by Gods grace, may this
next Voyage manifest the Prophecy of Ba^ista Ra^usius, touching the Northwest
Passage.

FINIS.

