DIRECTIONS GIVEN BY THE PATENTEES, how their Compounded stuff is to be used
in Dying.
IMPRIMIS all Colors to be made or finished with the said Stuff, are to be
wrought upon good grounds of Woad, according to the lightness or sadness of the
colors that are intended to be made.

Item, the Cloth, Kersey, Bays, or whatsoever else to be dyed, is first to be
boiled with Allom and Argall as they use to do for grain colors in half
water, and half liquor or Float, and then to be landed, and very well cooled.

The same must be finished in new float or liquors of Branne and water (such as
ordinarily are used for grain Colors) not above one day old, In manner
following:

First, the Lead or Copper being prepared and filled with a quantity of the
said Float or liquor proportionable for such things as are purposed to be dyed,
the Cloth or whatsoever else must be mathered, having an allowance of Mather,
as follows.

For A Cloth for a French Russet of 60. l. weight, being a sad azure in woad,
-- Four pound. For A Violet of the like weight, being a sad watchet in woad,
-- Three pound. For A Purple of the like weight, being a light watchet in woad,
-- Three pound. For A Tawney of the like weight, being a light Azure in woad,
-- Eight pound.
And so proportionably for any colors to be dyed according to ye lightness or
sadness of their Woads, Provided always, that they be high enough in woad for
the colors purposed to be made.

Then being mathered as aforesaid, they are to be very clean washed, and the
Lead or Copper to be prepared with one third part of water according to the
quantity of Clothes or other things intended to be finished, And then a
quantity of our Compounded stuff to be allowed, as follows.

For A French Russet of the weight of 60. l. -- Five pound. For A Violet of the
like weight. -- Two pound and a half. For A Purple of the like weight. --
Two pound. For A Tawney of the like weight. -- One pound.
Which Stuff is to be put into the said third part of Water in the Lead or
Copper, stirring the same continually till it boil, which it must do half an
hour, and then put to the water, twice as much Float or liquor of a day old, or
a day and a half at the most, this liquor must be sweet, and not made upon
stale grounds.

Then your Lead or Copper being at a moderate or mathering heat, stir about
the liquor that the Stuff may not lie at the bottom.

1 Then shoot in your Clothes putting in the saddest Colors first, for
example, first a French Russet giving Violet giving it one or two ends in like
sort, Then a Purple etc. when any of the aforesaid Clothes come to their height
or sadness, they must be landed, and very well cooled, continuing the fire till
the Lead be ready to boil: 2 Their stir about the Liquor and

Having thus finished any of the foresaid Colors, there may be dyed in the
same Liquors (being refreshed with a little water or Float) Lauender colors,
Silver colors, Ash colors, or such like upon very light Woads, the same
being boiled in Allom as aforesaid, and not washed out of their Boiling.


