GREEN IN CONCEIT.

New raised from his grave to write the Tragique History of fair Valeria of
London.

WHEREIN IS TRVLY DISCOVERED the rare and lamentable issue of a Hu^bands
dotage, a wives lewdness, and childrens disobedience.

Received and reported by I. D.

Veritas non quaerit angulos, vmbra gaudet.

Printed at London by RICHARD BRADOCKE for William Jones, dwelling at the sign
of the Gunne near Holborne conduit. 1598.

To my dear friend, Master Thomas White of Corffe in Dorsetshire.
THough in the springtime of cur lives year, there be no depth nor durance
of resolution, because sound judgment our reasons ripenes, is then but in the
budde; yet the affection which I bear you, whereto your own hopefulll
forwardness did first give life, and your many courtesies add strength,
albeit it were the child of my childhood, conceived where we both received the
first grounds of learning, was even then so deeply rooted, that neither length
of time, distance of plase, nor discontents of mind, have been able, I will
not say to abolish, but to diminish it: for an instance whereof, I have
entitled to your name this naked humor, a Present not so worthy as I would, or
as perhaps I could afford if some clouds were cleared: Yet howsoever this toy
may prove, I presume, of your acceptance, both in regard of that affection
that (I hope) you still d^e bear me, which may impetrate a toleration wh^re no
liking may be looked for: or of that well-meaning wherewith I offer it unto
you, since strangers of strangers, and greatest Princes of meanest peasants have
taken in good worth as worthless things, because presented with good will. And
I would that I might but half so far^e pr^uaile with others, of whom some (I
sear) will not only charge me with that which justly they may, but also aster
the ^eading of my title and Proemium, deem me one of those against whom
Horace does well exclaim, Oimitatores servum pecus, yet I protest that never
anything was further from my thoughts, and that the rest was finished before
that humor was suggested But I should grossly offend in troubling you with a
long Epistle, whom I trouble with so long a toy. I will therefore conclude
with this conditional promise, wherein I join with you the courteous Reader,
whose patience I urge too much with my youths follies, that if my life be
capable of riper years, and my state of better fortune, my labors shall not
be wholly barren of dese^t: till when, and ever I rest,

Yours assured, John Dickenson.

An advertisement to the Reader.
WHen night (f^iend to melancholy) had run the third part of her course,
besp^inkling the drowsy earth with Lethes dew, I sitting solitary in my
chamber, reading with some pleasure Luc^ans Timon, on a sudden f^lt mine eyes
heavy, and immediately all my powers were violently surprised by a slumber;
whe^into I was no sooner entered, then me thought I saw standing before me, the
shape of a well-proportioned man suited in deaths livery, who seemed to write as
fast as I could read. This ghastly object did much astonish me, and (as fancy
in such cases is a fruitful nource of superstitious fears) my amazeme^t was
the greater: being thus taken in the reading of that Author, who, besides his
other impieties, is the greatest ^ffer of apparitio^s. But when I had well
noted the others mild countenance, my courage did soon recall it self, and I
growing somewhat bold, demanded both who he was, and why he came: whereto he
gently answered thus I am he, whose pen was first employed in the advancement
of vanity, and afterward in the discovering of villainy. Join these two, and
they will serve thee for the Periphrasis of my name. In the former of which, I
confess I have offended, yet who knows not, that Fiction the godmother of
Poesy makes her the shadow of Philosophy; which if not sweetened by this
heavenly mixture, may well have reverence, but small regard. This moved the
Poet to write, and me to use for my familiar mo^to that que^t verse, Omne tulit
punctu^, qui misc^it vtile dul^. But admit it as the most will have it, yet
dare I boldly affirm, that my later labors have made a large part of amends
for those former vanities. Here (me thought) I could no longer contain my
self f^o^ going to embrace him, as both reason and humani^e required.

Sod frustr^ comp^nsa manus eff^git imago
Par levibus ven^ ^olucr qu^simillim a somno.
Whereat being no less amazed then before, and casting back mine eyes, I
espied him standing in like order at the othet end of the chamber, when with a
critical smile he thus proceeded: Have thou tossed over ^o many Authors, and
know not yet that ghostes are shadows? But to omit this which ^impute to
thine astonishment, and to answer the other part of thy demand, first, for thy
better conceiting of my intent, know, that it is my wont to walk much from
Elysium toward the mouth of Or^us, the cause whereof is this: Diogenes,
Menippus, and all the ancient Cynicks, with as many of our modern humorists as
have ^umpt with them in their sour ^ain, do mightily frequent that place, who
though of several countries and times, yet are so thoroughly acquainted e^h
with other as if they had lived all together. Their order is, when any ghosts
ariue, to run presently unto them, peer in their f^ces and board them
currishly with a question touching their estates and fortunes while they lived:
if they gather by their answers that any of them have flourished in the world
for pomp, wealth, beauty, or whatsoever other like transitory gift, and that
therein they have reposed their sole delight, oh then they soundly frumpe and
bait them for their welcome with such bitter scoffs, that this new corrosiue
added to their other yet-bleding sorrow, makes them altogether impatient but
if they find that their lives greatest part has been d^stresse and care,
then they comfort them, bidding them rejoice in death. Marry this their comfort
serves to small purpose, for I have heard the chief Seniors of this society
often solemnly protest, that for I know not how many hundred years, not three of
all those wretches (though the number has been infinite) have thanked them for
their comfort but all bitterly exclamed on death, and wished themselves again
alive, with thrice as many miseries as they had endured: yet many of them dyed
so old, that their sight, their taste, and generally all their senses and
powers had of themselves failed them; so that the weakness of their spent nature
could no longer have bin capable of any pleasure: others so poor, that for pure
(...) and no devotion, they had fasted to death: some so grieved with Aches that
they had longlaine bed^idden, or so peppered with diseases, that in many years
they could reckon few days of rest: some had been rotted in prison, some new
skipt from the gallows; others blind, many cripples, all miserable, which
caused me deeply to marvel what secret deceit of nature made men thus dote
on life. Sed ad propositum. walking there not long since, while those
aforesaid odd companions were questioning with other ghosts, I sa^one (and it
was a woman's Ghost) pacing demurely, and with so se^led a countenance, that as
it argued no joy, so it made show of little sorrow. Wondering at such
moderation in so frail a sex, I went toward her, and in going eyed her so
exactly, that in the end, though death had much desaced her, I knew who she
was, and remembered that when I dyed, she lived at London in flourishing estate
and as ^ewde a dame, as any in that City. This much increased my former
admiration, who demde it rare, that any of that sex, wealth, and wantonness
could with such patience brook the loss of life. Being in this humor I
discovered my self unto her, and earnestly requested her to show me the cause
of this her more then manly courage: whereto she ge^tly replied, that since my
death her fortune changed by her folly had quited the former plenty and
pleasures that she had (...) enjoyed, with a far greater measure of want and
woe; and for she saw me extremly desirous to hear the manner of this change
and sequel, she imparted that likewise unto me, concluding that since death
had rid s^ir from distress, it were madness to lament, much more to desire
life. this said, she lef^e me in a strange humor: for I wished my self
alive again, were it but for two days.

Laughest thou? So might thou well have done, if this my wish had been the
Ape of common error: but the only aim and end of my desire, was the good of
those that live; for whose admonition, even in so small a time (for my wit
was never long in performing such a task) I would have pende in manner of a
caveat, alarge discourse both of her former lewdness which my self had
known, and of her following miseries which she had then related. But finding
my desires full accomplishment herein impossible, after long thought I
conceipted a likely course, for the effecting thereof in part; and this it
was^ To sue to Mercury that by the virtue of his charming rod qua manes
euocat ^co, this my bodies bloudlesse remnant might reuisite the earth, to
find some one who receiving from me the plott and groundworke of this rare
subject, might perform thereon in my behalf, that which by reason of deaths
defects my self now cannot. In this resolution I gave long attendance, before
the leisure of that busy God, (which as thou know is heavens Herald, and
hels carrier,) did afford me any opportunity: But in the end having purchased
access and audience, I preuailde so far with him, that either for his good
opinion of my intent, or for the love he bears unto Poetry wherein himself, as
he is the God of eloquence, has no small interest, he fully granted my
desire, but with this prouiso, that I should dispatch within an hour, by which
time he will have ready a fresh conuoy of ghosts for his return. To be short;
I was with a tryce in sight of London, whether running for joy in headlong have
as the way led me, I have by chance lighted on thee, and thereby know that
this subject is reserved for thy pen. Listen then to my relation. Here he
somewhat pawsde: then with a deep sigh sorrows true preface, he began his
sad discourse therein comprising the several branches that I have handled;
this done, he thus concluded: Thou have now heard the sum of all, which I
had once begun to write, meting by good hap with pen, incke and paper on
the way; but the shortness of my time warns me to resign the office of my
pen unto my tongue. Suffice it that I despeire not of thy memory, nor doubt
thy forwardnes. This only I will add, let the world know it coms from me, that
they who since my death have unkindly blamd me, may henceforth ce^sure more
charitably of me. Hereto (me thought) I thus replied: The chargethat thou
imposest, is (I fear) greater then I can well discharge: for neither the
nature of my vein is like to thine, neither is it in suo genere so sufficient.
Besides none will believe this, but rather deem it a blind devise of mine to
beg a title for my book, and to pick up some crummes of credit from
another table. Some again will charge me that I have stolen this conceit out
of Lucian. And many marvel, that I who have a while forborne the press (save
only in some slight tra^slations of general novelties.) because justly
sea^ing the over deep and piercing censures of this judicial age, should now
in so bold an humor grow thus confident^ Lastly there are sundry others both
better known to t^ee and of far more sufficiency. Tush (quoth he) thou art too
scrupulous; this is not mod^y, but mopishnesse: leaving therefore these vai^e
excuses, perform what ^equest: and thereto I conjure thee by the reverence
thou bear'^ unto the sacred Mules. Well (quoth I) since thou have so deeply
charged me, I will perform it, and do thou likewise in requital grant me
one demand, that I will make. I mean: nay (quoth he) I know thy meaning and
the humor that boyles now to thy bra^es, (...) dare not play the blab again:
for who would willingly fry in Phlegeton? Besides, the time does fly and the
power of Mer^s cadu^eus ^rawes me hence, farewell and fail not in thy promise:
with these words me thought he vanished, leaving me extremely discontented;
for I had ready a mint of questions. As first, how each hagge and fiend does
take his place, when they are summond to any assembly, Al rauco suon^ de^a
tar^area tromba. How ^erberus in these late years of dearth has shifted for
his diet, coming so ost short of his fee: for it is unlikely that they which
being alive could not get themselves a dry crust, but sterued miserably, for
want of food, can after death be able to give him a soppe: Whether the gredy
Corne-hoorders be not generally cursed, even there also, for pluming so the
silly ghosts before hand, that when they come thither they are not able to
discharge the duties of the house, viz. to the Ferriman, the porter etc.
Whether Charon do still cry out against gonnes for determining the fortune of
battles before they come to hand-strokes, and thereby cutting of the best
part of his doings; whether Democritus do laugh still, and whether it be true
that Heracli^us who while he lived, wept for the vanities of men, do now laugh
at himself for having been so foolish; whether it be likewise true that
Aretine hangs by the tongue for having blab'd abroad the secrets of dame
Lecheries dearlings, what monsters were brought sorth of late, and which of the
old haggs, are most in favor with Hecat^. These and infinite other demands I
would have made, had not his sudden vanishing prevented me, whereat in a rage
I clapped my hand on the table and therewith did awake, having my brains so set
on work by this strange slum. ber, that I could sleep no more all that night.
The next morning, the plot being fresh in my memory, I went in hand with it,
proceeding therein at times of leisure till I had finishedit, which (Gentlemen)
Inow present unto your favors the only wished harbor wherein this my weathe^
bearen vessel may rest safely shrouded from the tempest of disgrace.

Besides sundry seapes of the Press in Orthography, and some more
extraordinary of whole words mistaken, though in the fewest coppies; these
four are general: secrets for sorrows. p. 18. these, for those, p. 20.
intent, for content. p. 21. deem' for doomed. p. (...)

GREEN IN CONCEIT: New raised from his grave, to write the Tragique story of
fair Ualeria of London.
PEace fraught with plenty, waiting on the Scepter of a gracious Sovereign,
had now seated her self in Albion, whence at her ariuall, rough-fac'd Bellona
the nursse of broils, writing in blood, her bailefull tryumphes, fled
disconsolate to foreign coasts, and there sounded her Tragique summons. At
whose departure all things recovered their former quiet: As when the year
haueing shaken of stormy winters Ice badge, grows young again, greeting the
earth with gladsome tidings of the Flower-clad springes approach. Silly
Sheepeherdes haunted securely with their harmless flocks, the western
plains, chanting by turns sweet Roundelayes, or tyring with long play their
Oaten pipes: Toyling husbandmen ioyde freely in the issue of their hopes,
reaping haruests plenty the guerdon of their winters pains. Each season had
his success, each state his solace. In which tranquillity of time and truce
of fortune, their lived in the famous city of Troinouant an ancient gentleman,
son to a wealthy Citizen, who dying ^ulde, left him not young, his only
child, sole heir of his goods, which, (besides money and other moueables)
yealded him an ample revenue of yearly rents. Giraldo, (so was he named)
haueing enough, deemed it follye to toil for super fluous store, or not to
use, what his ^ncestors succesfull industrye had already afforded him.

He therefore conformed his life to luch a course, as might equal his
calling, and not Impair his credit, or procure his discontent. Living thus at
quiet (the more to Augmeut his ease,) love he esteemed so little, and marriage
less, that he passed y^ most part of his time without ^ wife, in which
Stoicall humor he determined to persiste, stiffely refusing many great offers,
moved to him by sundry of good account and known sufficience; whether the
care of housekeeping and fear to match with a mate of unlike conditions, had
dismaide him; or the sweetness of a single life through long use besotted
him; Howsoever this resolution seemd easy in regard of his years, yet did the
sequel largely show, that no time, no temperature is exempted from loves
tyranny; nor ought less to be trusted, then affections try all: The Sun often
shines not, til nere his setting. Cinthia filles not her circle, til fardest
from her brothers Sphere. Smothered Cinders may breed a flame, where we least
suspect a fire; and winter fruits in growth less forward, are in lasting
most forceable. The purest goulde has his dross; the clearest Wine his
dregs; sweetest Roses their pricks; sowrest Stoickes their passions. Love
has his change of Arrows, his choice of obiectes, to entice every eye, to
entangle every Age.

It chanced in a fatal ho ^er, that Giraldo with sundry his familiers was
invited by a gentleman of the country (his dead Fathers approved friend.) to
accompany him home, and pass with him some days of pleasure at his house,
situate in a gallant soil fruitful of all delights. They agreeing to his
friendly motion, left the City, and arriving where he dwelt, found there such
entertainment, as might assure their welcome, and warrant his goodwill: They
were richly feasted, and frollike royally in all gentlemanlike disportes,
hunting, hauking, with what soever pleasant recreation their thoughts could
aim at, and the country yealde. Thus far lasted Giraldos comedy: but here
(though in a borrowed hue) stepped in his Tragedies sad Proem masking his
following sorrows in outward semblance of a^luring sweetness: Such are the
wiles of love and fortune, there first to smile, where they intend last and
most to lower. This gentleman besides two sons of rare towardness, had one
daughter, her name Valeria, young and fair, in discourse witti^, but in life
wanton; the fault and cause thereof, her education: for being the fathers ^oy
the Mothers Jewel, their last borne, and therefore most beloou'd, she was
trained up by her parents in all liberty, and taught, not that which best
beseem'd, but which most delighted her; In stead of sowing, she could sing,
write, dance, and sweetly touch her Iuory Lute, with whose weltuned stringes,
her fingers were more acquainted, then with her needle: Breefely what could
she not, which least she should, and all more exquisitly, then was meet for a
modest virgin? If then the strongest Marble be in time worn by weak drops
of rain, the hardest Adamant, (though otherwise impenetrable) pearc'dby Goats
warm blood: what marvel is it, that these so mighty inforcements, wrought so
effectually on her, whose few years, frail sex, and slight education made
the couquest easy? Yet rau he headlongforward, not heeding how she was
inclined, nor weighing as he should have done, the issue of his attempt, which
these so many, and so manifest likelihoodes did forethreaten: Such was his
blindness enen when he first beheld her, to whom nature had leut a look so
alluring, a tongue so enchanting, that it restes doubtful, whether her
countenance could more intrappe, or her words entangle. To those that never
saw the Ocean, narrow straights may seem large seas ^he which till now had
never viewed with curious regard, any such besotting object, demed Valeria the
western prragon. His greedy ever gazing eyes, fed like hungry Guestes en her
faces beauty, yet never glutted; for the more he looked, the more he looued;
Affection was no sooner bred, then winged; no sooner warm, then flaming; (a
thing in nature marvelous, but in love no miracle,) she was the only subject
of his conceit, the only aim of his content: If she spoke, his partial
ears deemed her voice more then Angelical; if she smiled, he was ravished: if
she frowned, even frowning she seemed fairer, and her anger a^iable. Thus
were her words his ears music, her fair countenance his eyes harbor, her
self, his transported sowles supposed solace, while he though old, yet a
Nouice in the schole of fancy fed his vain thoughts, with vainer hopes: But
when beginning his wooing with signs, he saw portraide on her looks, a deep
misliking of his age, threatening a sequel of many sorrows, a Centurie of
sowltyring passions, then somewhat rowsing his charmed senses, he began sadly
to confer his former course of life, with his present crosses in love,
weighing how before he joyed in content, now ioylesse through discontent,
then free from faucie, now slave to beauty: And so far he waded in this
pensive meditation, that sealing with many sighs, each clawse of his
complaints, he wished too late, than he had not come, or coming, had not
seen; or seeing, had not affected; or affecting, had not so extremely doted.
But finding moan a bootlesse method, a slight medicine to cure hearts maladye,
he resolved to seek some surer remedy: which, (as he thought) was immediately
to depart; hoping that absence should work his ease, and that his eyes not
having whereon to gaze, his thoughts should want wherewith to grieve him.

In the heat of which humor, he abruptly took his leave of the gentleman his
friend, and the other his familiars, feining sudden and extraordinary
occasions of business, which drew him thence. They no less beleening his
words, then loath to hinder his weighty affairs, did not importune his
tariance, yet urged with much entreatie his spedy return, which he promising,
though then not entending, left them; bnt could not leave so his sorrow, for
in him self he carried his own wound, the euer-fresh and perfect Idea of
Valerias far peircing beauty, a more inseparable companion to his thoughts,
then the shadow to his body: the one waiting without, the other working so
forceably within, that by how much the more he strove to alay his passions, by
so much the more he increased his pains: concluding by his own experience,
that to attempt the quenching of love with absence, is to cherish fire with
oyse. For as the course of a strong current, counterchekt by a bar of earth,
seeks with greater violence another issue, and having past his bounds, tornes
the pleasant meadows, into unpleasant marshes: As the slowest flame, somewhat
dau^ted by water, gathers immediately double force and brightness: so the
frenzy of a lovers fancy, is then most outrageous, and feels greatest lack
of wonted ease, when the eyes do want their wonted object. Giraldo therefore
finding in the city less comfort then in the contrye content, wandered in
this labyrinth of woe, feeling his souls agony howerly augmented: In the
day, he could not rest; in the night, he could not ^leepe; if he sat, he
sighed; but sighs yealded him no solace: often he walked to out we are his
sorrow, but often walking could not work it: At the table he sat a cipher; nor
is it marvel, for how could he have any stomach to digest his meat that
wanted ^rength to disband his melancholy, which was so fruitful in afflicting
him, that not Hydra, foggie Lernas foul guest, could faster renew her seven
heads, with seauenfoulde increase, then his each-passion doubled his
perplexity, making his unquiet life, the perfect man of a lovers misery: His
friends and neighbors mused much what might be the cause of his discontent,
supposiug nothing less, then that love had been the occasion.

Among this number, one of like years and long acquaintance, did on a time so
far importune him, that Geraldo (though loath to utter his affection, yet
able to deny him nothing, because he loved him dearly) discoursed the whole
at large, peremptorily concluding to have with all speed possible (if his
speding might be possible) a marriage between Valeria and himself: For (quoth
he) as Telephus wounded by Achilles spear, could not be cured but by the rust
of the same spear: And they which are stunge by the Serpent Dipsas, feel an
unquenchable thirst in the midst of water: so stands it with me, which have
surfeted, yet am not satiate: but being wounded with Telephus, must likewise
with him derive my help, whence I received my hurt^ which word he had no sooner
uttered, then his amazed friend deeming this humor in those years, the eight
miracle; addressed himself to divert him from so fond a thought, and after some
pawse began thus: Were I as wise, as I am willing to discharge the duty of a
friend, then would I with mighty Arguments dissuade you from a purpose so il
beseeming: Can it be y^ Geraldo so stale a batcheler, so strict a follower of
the Stoichs philosophy, is in the wain of his age become a woer? He which
laughed at love, and scornd fancy, now droupe for love, and dote through folly:
resembling in repugnance to nature, the stone Gagates, whereon if water be
powered it kindles fire, if oil, it does quench the flame: Two things I have
noted in many, and find both in you: the first rare and commendable, the
second ridieulous, yet common: A young man wise, an old man wanten. Weigh yet
with your sefe, what your friends will say, and the world censure, hearing of
this sudden change: If marriage be a course so requisite, they will demand
why you have so long deferred it; if not to be respected, why you should now
determine it? know you not that love in old men is no less vnsermely and
unseasonable, then frost in April, snow in Summer, Ice in the entering of
Autumn? But admit it necessary, yet this have is needless: Rash beginnings
have ruful ends: ripe counsels right success. The Elephant breeds not often
in age: The Phoenix (as some affirm) takes life from Ashes, but once in six
hundred and sixty years: the one how mighty a beast? the other how
matchless a bird? In Samos stood a Temple of Hymen, over whose door, on the
outside, was set the portrature of a Snayle, to admonish the beholders, that
with slow pace and deep advice they should proceed to a matter of such
waighte, importing their extraordinarye weal or woe, Apelles drawing the
picture of Folly, gave her wings, but not eyes; her ears stopped, thereby
intimating, that fond men run headlong forward, not seeing what they do,
nor hearing others, which fortell them, the issue of their vnheedfull actions.
It greeues me Geraldo to think, that fondly gazing on fair looks, which do
commonly shroud false hearts, you are taken in beauties trappe, entangled like
y^ fish, which leaping at the Sun beams, gilding the waves, plays
therewith, until the net have made him prisoner. Had you fancied some modest
Matron, not for beauty a fading bliss; but for virtue a lasting value, your
have had been yet more hopeful; nor might any justly have accused your
abstinence in youth, or your affection in age. But at these years, when the
prime of fancy is past, to be won by a want on glance, to dote on a silly
Gerle, whose continence or constancy you know not, how far unfit? The Cretans
had a law made by Minos their just King, that if a youngman matched with an
old woman, or an old man wedded a young maid, they both should forfet
whatsoever they possessed, and the elder of either sex so offending, lose the
reverence due to their age. Well saw he, that true affection could find no
residence, where the desires wereso different; the one aiming wholly at youths
delights, the other dull to wonted daliance, whence follows breach of
wedlock. What is your Valeria that you so dote on her? say you she is young?
then wavering: gravity is seldom in green years. But were she well
inclined, yet might ill company corrupt her: Early buddes are soon blasted;
young sprigs do with the wind bend every way. The flower-rith spring is
natures ^thorne, but not heir of Autumnes ripeness. Say you she is fair?
then proud, for as the herb Fesula taken in wine, causes the veins to
swell: so beauty in women does enhance the thoughts. I omit to infer her
store of fauorits, which will not fail to seduce her, if coin or counsel
may subdue her. Is she witty? then wily; fraught still with new devices to
circumuent you. But she can dance, singe, finger a Lute, and all excellently:
do not these argue her wanton education, or can you for these so highly fancy
her? then what other instance need I save your self, to prove that love is
blind? Love, which has the power of Lethe to induce oblivion, the windinges
of a Labyrinth to entrappe the mind, the shape transforming iu^e of Circes in
chanting cups, to change thoughts, as she could alter bodies: Love which
for a minute of pleasure, yealdes a million of pains; for a dram of Hunny,
an ounce of gall, resembling that tree in America, whose Apples are to the
sight exceeding fair but to the taste, deaths food. Cease then betimes
friend Giraldo, least you repent to late, and sigh in vain, to think on my
sayings, when your supposed joys shall be smothered in surmising Jealousy. There
is for every sore provided a salve, yet no simple for hearts sorrow: But as the
bay tree alone is never hurt by lightning, so wisdom ever unstained by
wantonness, which is in you the ground of that woe. Against poisons we have
preservatives: Storme-beaten seamen, wrestling with the furye of winds and
waters, joy in the sight of Ledas twins: but thought sick lovers have only
reason their sovereign refuge: divine reason the sole physic to cure loves
follye, which straies from it so far, that where the one reigns, the other
cannot rest: For Amare and sapere vix deo conceditur.

Here he paws'd and Geraldo thus replide: your counsel savors much of good
will, little of conceit: yet for your courtesy I thank you, and for your
kindness, I will think of you, as of a well entending friend. You deem it
strange that I thus old, (though not so old as you urge) should now resolve
on marriage, haueing before shaped a contrary course of life. True it is, that
whilome my sole delight was to live single, but who knows not, that old
opinions are often concealed by new occasions? Must I be etter ill advised,
because once not well advertised? Is love in oulde men so unseasonable, in
youth only, (if at all) commendable? or rather as the herb Moly tempered with
new wine does much distemper the brains, and infeeble the whole body; the
same mingled with old wine, does sooner effect the contrary, and relieve the
over charged senses: So is affection in green years full of perils, urging
youngmen to extremes, which cannot moderate their passions; but in riper years
does cheer the thoughts, glad the heart, awake the senses half dull and
drooping. Admit the wants, the weakness, and whatsoever disabling defects
incident to age. Tell me (I pray you) who more needs comfort then they which
want it; or what greater comfort to men then kind women? How can you then
with reason deny that to age; which does ease the toylfull burden of age, or
term that needless, which is so necessary, but you growing to farther
dislikes, condemn mine haste, which resolve with speed to dispatch my
purpose, know you not that delay is fraught with dangers, that occasion is
balde behind? that they which defer, are often prevented, and so
circumuented? Such as observe not there times, do justly fail in there
deserved cryalles. On the lilie-garnisht banks of Cephisus there springes a
flower of rare effects, yet merely forcelesse, if not applide at the instant,
when Phoebus does in fiery majesty touch the meridian. In like sort, young
virgins fancies, prone to affection by years and nature, must be assailed
while time ^oth serve: for their favor once rooted (a thing easily performed)
can never be recal^e by threats of parents, or worlds of pr^ffers. Speaking
then betimes, I may perhaps speed: but deferring the one, I must despair of
the other. Good wine needs no Juic bush: Faier women want no woers. hereto you
reply that you condemn not so much my age as Valerias youth: to have woe ed and
wedded an ancient woman, had been a match more meet: and this equality of
years, carried more likelihood of mutual love. For answer to which objection,
I cra^e no greater instance then your own experience, y^ widows are wily and
wilful; that many scarce wholesome morsels, do often usurp the attire and
gestures of honest matrons: here is a Lerna of evils, a sea of dangers; which
to encounter, I have no courage: to conquer, no fortune: But in one yet never
matched, how can deceit be settled, or how is she acquianted with wiles, which
thoroughly knows not the world? That Valeria is young, I yealde, nor am I very
old: but you will say that though a while I may entertain her with delight,
yet I shall be past begetting, when she is in the prime of bearing: hereon you
urge, that gifts and pleasures are mighty tempters, women and they young,
frail vesseles, and therefore weak resisters. Yet doubt not I, that with a
gentle mind, the known kindness of a loving husband, shall more prevail,
then the doubtful counsels of deluding strangers. That she is fayer, I
grant also; that therefore proud, I deny. It suffiseth not with Ovid to say
partially, fastus inest pulchris, sequitur que superbia formam, unless you
learn of Aristotle to prove the consequence, by a stroug coherence: It
follows not that all are faulty, because some offend: but rather as the bird
Rintaces bred in Persia, liueing by air and deawe only, has no excrements:
so natures perfections polished by virtuous education, brook no excess.

For where should inward graces be more resident, then where outward gifts
are most resplendent ^ That she is wittye, in discourse, expert in dancing,
singing, and well fingering of a Lute, I confess: that therefore wilye, or
more apt for wantonness, I may in no sort grant. The best things may be
wrested to bad uses: Such recreations not misintended, hinder melancholy, and
hurt not modesty. Thus have I answered what you objected, showing reason the
ground of my affection. Say then my friends what they list, censure the world
what it will, I am resolute to attempt, nor doubt I to attain that, for which
my^ soul does long, and my heart languish. Stoics are stocks; senseless
teachers that publish their own follies, by denying that to wise men which the
senses work in all men. Till now I knew not what it was to live, because I
felt not the power of love. Have not Planets their con^unctions the elements
their mixtures, both their cooperant motions, which argue that nothing can be
of it self sufficient? Say that sickness should enfeeble me, who could so
kindly comfort me, or would so willingly attend me, as a loving wife: which
would sit by me, sigh for me, share with me my sorrows, and use all means to
procure my safety? If death should seize on me wiuelesse as I am, and
childelesse, leaving my goods to unkind, or unknown heirs, with what
discontent should I breath out my drooping spirit? But to your self I appeal
which have in part experemented this facility, what joy it were, ^uen in
death, to behoulde, the fruit of my own body, the continuer of my name,
liueing to possess what I leave: know you not that beasts void of reason
do perpetuate, their several kinds by procreation? and shall men iuriched by
reason, be herein exceeded by beasts? if all were such as you counsel me to
continue, where were the hope of posterity: And that taken away, where the
spur of virtue? deserts guerdon, the task of fame, sounding to succeding
times true honors trophes in everliving notes? I omit to allege, that nature,
and my country claim marriage of me as a debt: The Sparta ns among other laws
made by Licurgus, had this one, that the younger sort should at all times and
in all places, reverence there elders: But to those of great Age wanting issue,
this preueledg was not due: So that Brasidas a valient chiefetaine never
married, laden with many years, but honored through more victories, passing by
a young man, which sat still, not using to have any show of reverence, by
moving his body, or his bonet, and deeming it a great indignity, received
this answer: Thou have not quoth he a son which may do the like to me, if
living to thy age. But whether run I, in so large a field of mighty
reasons, warranting my resolution beyond all compass of contradiction? Since
then to marry it is not only seemly for any, but likewise necessary for all:
in dissuading me from it, you highly injury me. That I have hitherto
abstained, it was my fault; To persist in like humor, were deeperfolly, Better
is little, then nothing; late then never; not to be, then in vain to be.
Nascitur is frustra, per quem non nascitur alter. Having thus said and fearing
to be urged with a fresh reply, he brake of there conference, by a feined
occasion of business, leaving his well wishing friend in a deep amasement,
no less petying his danger, then wondering at his do^age. But no sooner had
Aurora in her next vprise moystn'd with her early tears, transformed Adonis,
and cherisht the forward springing of other flowers, then Giraldo mounting on
his horse, gallopt on the spur in that gladsome season of the year, toward
his hearts wished harbor, where Valeria, (whom leaving, he so languished,) made
her residence: By whose father (his asured friend) he there alighting, was by
so much the more lovingly welcomed, by how much the less, his coming was then
looked for, which yealded in outward show, no other likelihoode of conjecture,
but to be a bare journey of recreation: till he impatient of all delay did
fully (though in feawe words,) deliver the soomme of his desire, which was to
espowse Valeria; whereto the sooner to induce her father, to whom only he now
communicated his affectious secrets, he promised to make her a large ioynter,
craueing of him no other dowery, then what himself would willingly assign.
Theodoro (such was the others name) haueing much vsed-the father, and long
known the son; of whose virtue, (besides his breath,) he was no less
certain, then of his wealth assured: and perhaps somewhat moved by the
voluntary offer of so large a ioynter: yealded him his full consent: promising
moreover, to work herein so effectually with his daughter, (adding to his
words the weight of a fathers authority) that she likewise, whom it most
concerned, should grant his demand, or deny her duty: Which promise he faild
not to perform, moueing the matter to Valeria in such sort, that the wily
gerle which could by little gather much, and by a syllable co nceiue a
sentence, was nothing ignorant of his intent herein, whom fearing to displease,
and hoping by this match to reign as Mistrisse of all (for well she knew the
myldnesse of Geraldos nature) though at the first for fashions sake somewhat
sticking at his age, concluded her answer with the offer of her obedience, in
yielding her self wholly to her fathers disposing. To be short, Giraldo and
she were solemnly contracted, Valerias dowry assigned, her ioynter set down,
all things confirmed, and they soon after openly espoused. Now seemed he to
himself infinitely happy, solacing in an earthly heaven of imaginary joys,
a Paradise of thought-exceeding pleasures. But between seeming and being,
there has ever been a large difference: Cadmus seemed happy, but his lives
sequel dashed his felicities vain Hourish with a Chiliade of cross Fortunes.
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera foelix. Had great Pompey with his third
triumph finished his then-victorious life, he had not famous'de Pharsalia
through his foil, nor made Egypt fatal through his fall. Had Giraldo been
extinct in this the prime of his seeming happiness, he had not afterward
dyed most happelesse. But to proceed, the Nuptials being ended, and Giraldo on
his return unto the City (whither he purposed to take with him his beauteous
Bride) at the instant of their departure, Theodoro (whose misgiuing heart did
make him heavy) taking aside his daughter, thus gravely bespake her.

Valeria, thou now must leave me, and learn with all another course of life
then thou have led with me: thou must with thy estate change thy thoughts,
no less earnestly now endeavoring to please thy husband, then erst warily
shunning to displease thy father. Oh let it not be said of thee, which is too
truly said of many, That living under their parents awe, they make show of
admirable virtue, but being exempted from that obedience, they unmask their
abhorred vices, resembling in this change the Coral, which growing under the
water, is of exceeding softness; but taking once the Air, takes therewith a
stone-like hardness. These may to their shame learn duetye of silly creatures
wanting reason. Young Storkes feed their old dammes, which else should
famish: The Turtle having lost her mate by death, joys not in the company of
any other. Lo, in the one a precept of piety to the parents; in the other, a
myrrour of love and loyalty toward the husband. And think withal, that
naked beauty not adorned by virtue, is like the Tree Daphnoides, whose leaves
are white, but the berries being ripe, are black. Presume not then on the
fairness wherewith GOD has sufficiently graced thee: that must fade, being
only the bodies gift: but if, while it flourish, it be ill applied, what more
is it then a painted tomb, a golden sheath closing a leaden Sword, or wherein
is it more esteemed by the wise, then wisdom by the foolish; From the Country
(a place of small resort) thou must now into the City, where thou shall find
sundry sorts of company and customs, as in a large plot among wholesome
herbs, unwholesome weeds: The wounded Heart flies to the Forest, cropping
Dictamnum to cure his hurt, knowing it by the smell among infinite other
plants. The little Be (Natures great miracle) can suck sweet Honey out of
the most unlikely flowers. I could wish in thee such distinguishing skill and
knowledge, in discerning and using company; nor doubt I it, yet give me leave
even without cause to fear, for therein likewise am I a father. All young
Eagles can not steadfastly behold the Sun: All that seem virtuous, are not
so: whom though by their looks thou caust not know, yet if for a trial thou
temporize a while, the issue of their actions shall discover them. Shun these
Valeria, least they shame thee: Join acquaintance and use familiarity with
them only, whose company may advance, or at least not impeach thy credit: And
strive thou rather to merit this rare title of extraordinary praise, that
being young in years, thou art old in manners, then to be noted of this common
imperfection, that thy manners are as thy years, light I mean, what more
should I say then this only, that on the hope of thy behavior, my life and
joys depend: So that in thee it restes by thy well doing to cherish them, or
by thy ill demeanor to cut them off: if thy intent be good, then may these
words suffize, if otherwise far more should be to few. This said, he often
kissed her, bid wing plentionsly her fair cheeks with fathers tears; then
committed her to her husbands government, and both to the almighties guidance,
through whose favor, they with their train, after some small journey arrived
insafetye at Troinouant: Ask not whether Giraldos friends and neighbors
mused to see him thus married: They were all in an extaste of admiration: but
the roughest tempest is over blown: the greatest wonder lastes but nine days,
and when the date of this was cleene expired, he not feeling the least scruple
of discontent, lived in the pleasures of love, seeking by all means to content
his young wife, which hitherto rendered him like kindness, whether her thoughts
were yet pure, until corrupted through bad company, or her natural humor of
wantonness slept only, until awaked by ill counsel, (a thing to common in
our age:) she bare him some pretty children, a deper pledge of her yetduring
loyalty: But alas it had to slight a permanence, for no sooner were three
years past, then this vain flourish became frutles, and she contemptuously
neglecting or burying in careless oblivion, her fathers counsel, was
thoroughly settled in forbiden acquaintance. Pitch if touched defiles, Bad
company corrupts good conditions: warm wax is apt for any impression, green
thoughts soon led to any opinion, but most commonly to embrace the worst, for
where virtue has one affecter, vice has many factors.

Among sundry of her own sex, with whom Valeria did a^t converse, there was
one which in wit and wickedness did far exceed. She thought it not enough
her self to offend, unless through her, others also became faulty. So that
(as making a conscience of imp^etie) she strove more earnestly to seduce the
simple, then many to reduce the sinful: and she had so cunningly demeaned her
self, that Giraldos wife (circumuented by her ouer-reaching wiles) deemed her
a dear friend, communicating with her the chiefest of her thoughts. They had
many meetings, especially at gossips feasts, where always (the banquet being
ended) while others held chat in common, they (somewhat withdrawing themselves)
conferred in secret: and whereon soever they discoursed, this one point of her
discontent, through daily feeling of more defect in her husbands declining
years, was by Valeria slightly touched; yet so touched, that the other might
well conceit her intent. Even to be absolutely wicked, it requires time and
use. No marvel then that she having not yet entered into an habit of sin,
was not so wholly impudent as to express her meaning in plain terms, though
still expecting when the other would take the occasion by her presented. They
often met, often talked, and Giraldos wife would still harp somewhat on that
string: and having scarce begun, with a slight sigh, abruptly ceasde. Now was
the path well trodden, and they meeting soon after in like place, on a day of
great solemnity, used like matter of discourse, with the same occasion again
offered. The other knowing her time, would not omit the advantage, but taking
firm hold thereof, thus whispered to Valeria a Sirens tale. Should it then be
thus, or have I thus deserved, that languishing through want of solace, you
conceal from me your hidden secrets? I have often heard, that f^ every sore,
Nature has planted a simple; that against every sickness, Physic has
possibility of expulsive force. But well I wot, that reason contains no
remedy for car^ and discontent, save only the company and counsel of a
friend: such am I to you, and more I am, for your disease is to me known,
though not by you disclosed: I know your youth, your husbands many years; your
affection, his inclination; your desires, his defeets; your loss of time, his
abuse of time. This only I fear, least your faint courage bar you from
accomplishing what you most covet. But listen with attention to my discourse,
setting light by such suggestions: What is beauty, the sweetness thereof not
tasted? What more is it to those which having it, can not use it, then to
Tantalus the deceiving fruit and food: what more is it to those which admiring
it, can not enjoy it, then music to the deaf, pictures to the blind,
delicious meat unto the dead? Beauty is no eternal bliss: but as the spring
has his date, so has she her durance limited by time: and (aye me) too
short a time. Sweetest flowers, if not gathered, wast or wither even on the
ground, whence they were cherished. These glories which now do grace us, must
(if we live) receive the disgracious impression of wrinckled age: And therefore
twice-rauisht Tindaris the wrack of Troy, long after her last recovery,
beholding in a glass her aged face, did justly sigh, witnessing in her tears,
how transitory a flourish her bodies late fairness did contain. To the
Sun, the measurer of time, Poets have assignd a chariot drawn by four
winged horses; thereby intimating, that our lives days post on each minute
with irremorable precipitation. Time the father of Occasion, is (as his
daughter) bald behind, and has one only lock before, whereon unless yon
speedily lay hold, you shall for ever miss your hold. But why do I term
it yours, which if not used by you, can not be yours? Hereto you reply, that
Giraldo is your husband, and you bound to him by the laws of God and men. True
it is, had you bound your self: but as enforced oaths are by many deemed
merely forcelesse, so compelled matches are not by few thought nothing so
material, as where both parties yield a mutually free consent. Oh how
preposterous is the care of parents, which aiming more at goods then at their
childrens good, weigh not on what rocks of danger through incontinencie and
reproach they cast them whom they couple with those that abound in coin,
though having naught else of worth: Far more nobly minded was Themistocles,
which in bestowing his daughter, preferred the virtuous and able poor, before
the sottish impotent rich: whereof being demanded the cause, he made this
generous answer: I had rather (quoth he) choose a man without money, then money
without a man: wherein doubtless, he meant not only, that he is worthy the
name of a man which imbraceth virtue, but also that he is not to be thought a
man, which can not perform the act of a man where it justly is required.

What can be more unnatural, then such inequality of years and inclination?
which granted, how (I pray you) can that be pleasing to God, which is so
directly repugnant to the course of nature, whom he at first created in most
absolute perfection of proportional regard, and has ever since, and will
till the end of this worlds times, preserve fron^ confusion by upholding this
equality? Think you that Myrobolan Trees, brought from Sunne-scorcht Susa,
can prosper, if planted in frozen Scythia: or that the Northern pride of Flora
can diaper the Southern fields? Would you deem that gardener skillful, whom
you should see setting Colewortes near the vine, which shunnes them so much by
nature, that it winds another way and soon does wither? Can that match be
less unmeet, where green youth is yoakt with groaning age? I have heard that
Licurgus the Spartane Lawgiuer, did not ouely permit, but command it (as a
service much meritorious to the Commonwealth) that a vigorous man knowing an
able woman matched with an husband impotent through years or some natural
defect, might lawfully demand and no less lawfully use her company to raise
up issue in the others behalf, which he must acknowledge as his own. Had
Giraldo and you been Spartans, living in these times, then had you enjoyed this
pleasing privilege, your husband being now past procreation: and he, if
discontent, in vain had muttered: who if he would needs marry, should have
wedded some ancient matrone, the widow of two or three husbands, which might by
custom know how to fit the humor of his years, and brook quietly the
loath some accidents of his age, by feeling in her self like insufficiency,
baiting his ears with counter-coughes, and presenting to his eyes like nastie
objects of filth and phlegm. Breach of medlocke had been in her a crime
inexpiable: but where the state and person of the offendour is changed, there
likewise the quality of the offense is altered: nor can the crime be so
directly pertinent to you, (which being a child must obey) as to Theodoro,
which (being your father) might and did command.

Bethen courageous boldly to imitate the infinite examples of former times: nor
are you now alone, which have for presidents me, and such my friends, as seek
with me abroad what is not afforded us at home: If herein you consort with us,
you shall likewise share with us your part of pleasures; you shall be furnished
with store of favorites, each of gallant and goodly personage, and (which most
is) of rare agilitie in acting that secret sweet service, which we most
affect. This only is required, that you remunerate with coin the authors of
your intent, bolstring up with your bags their impouerishing braueries.

Here Valeria half weeping, half wishing her self unwedded, seemd doubtful
whereon to resolve: but the other following her aduautage, gave not over till
she had assured ye conquest. To be short, there was a time and place determined
for entering Valeria into y^ order: mean while the whole crew was summoned,
there to assemble at the day appointed, being likewise thoroughly acquainted
with the cause. The meetest corner for this covent was thought a gardin-house,
having round about it many flowers, and within it much deflowring. Were not
this age fruitful in stranger miracles, I should have deemd this an high
marvel, that so small a plot of ground, could be so deuowring a gulf of some
men's gettings: yet who knows not that extortions fruit has seldom fayrer
end? But I proceed; the day presign'd being come, no default was through
absence made by any: there met they with their mynions, each having stopped her
husbands mouth with a feined talc, coynd extempore, Valeria not slack to such
devotion, came with the first, seeming to her self most fortunate, in becoming
a sister of that society: They had there a costly banquet made at their common
charge, so fraught with dainties, so furnished with variety of choycest
delicates, that by their diet, there dispositions might be well discerned; for
this is the fuel which feeds and cherishes the fire of lust: Sine Cerere
and Libero friget Venus, When they had stoutly carowsed and thoroughly pampered
themselves, with these provoking preparatiues, the table being now uncovered,
they fell from quaffing to discoursing; then one of the dames and she most
impudent, (if this their excess admitted any such degree of difference) calde
for her lute, which fingering too fitly, for so unfit a purpose, she accorded
thereto with her voice, and bewrayed (as follows) in a Canzon, the occasion of
there meeting.

Happy lot to men assigned
Hearts with hearts in love combinde:
Love the some of earthly sweetes,
Where with mutual love it meets:
Not consisting all in looks,
Like to Idols, laymens books;
But who tryes, this true shall prove;
Action is the life of love.
Why slack we then to bath in sweet delight,
Before our day be turned to endless night?
Fairest things, to nothing fade,
Wrapped in deaths eternal shade:
Hence I prove it beauties crime,
Not to reap the fruits of time;
Time which passes swift as thought;
Time whose bliss is dearly bought;
Dearly bought so soon to fail us;
Soon, that should so long avail us.
Why slack we then to bath in sweet delight,
Before our day be turned to enlesse night?
Love and beauty fade together,
Fickle both as changing weather:
Age or sickness wastes the one,
That does fail, when this is gone:
Let us then while both does last,
V^e them both, ear both be past.
Sport we freely while we may,
yet a while it will be day.
Oh but this day draws on to endless night,
And with our life, still wears our loves delight.
Soon ah soon was Adon slain,
Bashful boy how fair in vain!
Framed by nature to be loou'd:
Framed, but why, himself not moved?
Did he not in prime of youth,
Prime of beauty, pray to ruth.
Dye he did, himself preventing;
Sort, unworthy all lamenting.
Oh think on him which changing safe delight,
For certain danger, turned his day to night.
But me thinks I talking see,
How each minute slippes from me.
Loss I deem the least delay;
Have we then to this sweet play,
Whence is sucked the sap of pleasure,
Such as love by time does measure:
Love that gardes his mothers forte,
Peeping often to see the sport:
A sport how rare, how rich in sweet delight?
But we how dull, how nere our day to night!
Scarce had she ended, when they began, whose courages too prompt by custom,
were by wine whet on to wa^tonnes. Caetera quis nescit? we may more then guess
what was the sequel, by noting the precedence, both bad, but the latter a
wrong inexpiable to y^ right of wedlock: a matter so offensive to modest ears,
y^ even impudence might blush relating it: but thoughts blush not to whom I
refer it. Lust stain to love, bane to beauty, path to shame, wanted here no
effects: for Valeria thus entered into this exercise, like the game so well, y^
thenceforth she could never leave it. Boldness bred by use grew so absolute,
in being dissolute, that it seemed in her a second nature: who committing sin
with gredines, by offen^ing in one, became faulty in many. For most vices are
linked together in such an union of affinity, and cleave so sister-like in one
knot, (each mutually depe^ding on y^ other) that never any is employed alone.
This lustful dame not liking her native beauty (though sufficient) would
needs augment it with artificial braueries, leaving no device vnplotted, no
deceit unpracticed, to make gracious her graceless self: And I fear she
has herein too many followers, which spoil there stommacks with unsavory
myxtures thereby to seem eye-sweete, though scarce hartsounde; or repair
their ruinous faces, by ouerlaying them with a false gloss of adulterine
fayrenesse, whereas chaste beauty scorns acquaintance with Apothecaryes boxes.
But why talk I of chastity, treating of a subject so unchaste; wherein
whatsoever conceit, or custom might afforde, she faild not to apply
effectually: And y^ more to garnish these bastard glories, she ware always
such ouersu^ptuous attire, that many in desert, and dignity far exceeding
her, were in this, as far behind her. No common fashion could please her
fancy, but it mu^t be strange, and stately, drawing many eyes to gaze on her,
which ayi^'d wholly at singularity, glorying to be peerless in her pomp,
Never was any to her power more lavish in variety of wastefull vanities: never
any so perverse in pride, and with such difficulty to be pleased: For were the
least stitch in her Atyre not as she would have it, though the garment most
fair and costly, the Tailor most rare and cunning, yet would she furiously
fling it from her, with purpose never to wear it; so that the sillye workman
set at his non plus, lost both her custom and the creedit of his
workmanshippe. Next I note her glutt^nous appetite, not in the quantity, but
in the quality of of her fare, which was so delicate and over dainty, that
this lust-pampering diet, was no decorum in her husbands state. To prevent ill
smelles, she always furnished her house and garments with choice perfumes, her
eyes deigned no tryuiall objects: without music no meat would down, so
mightily was this modest creature troubled (forsooth) with melancholy. Thus
every sense, had his excess, and (which more is) her gylefull looks shareing
with the Adamant his attractiue power, could by an odd trick whereto she had
inured them, work petty wonders. If pacing in the streets she had seen any,
whose outward semblance, might argue his inward sufficience, she would court
him with a glance, whereto if he answered with the like, then was the match
half made, and they neded but one meeting to assure the bergaine. Deem you
this not wonderful, to plead passion in dumb action; to speak in silence,
and speed by signs? oh why was sin thus Ingenious, to excogitateso close a
method for the furtherance of misdoing, or why should wantons exceed in wit,
thereby to spur on there unbridled wills? Thus you see that nothing wanted,
save only the cloking of her crime, with the show of holiness and religion,
whose outward pretext is now a practice of great import, and a mighty pillar
of such carnal devotion. Sin appearing in his owue collors, should soon be
known. A smoth habit of hipocresie is definde by some, an intellectual
virtue, though a moral vice. But the hanting of private conuenticles being
then not heard of, this policy could have no ground. Yet Valeria though
wanting, so great an help, wanted no favorites, whose number by other means
she still augmented: they strayning lustely their power in all sorts possible,
(if any possible at full to please her) were often enforced for supply of their
exhausted pith, to diet themselves with drugs, and trot daily to th'apoticaries
for such trash. Of this crew the chief competitor was named Arthemio, whose
advantage the wily Dame dissembling, did so temper hit intemperate looks, and
thereby held him in such suspense, y^ though she so^what gracd him above the
rest, because loath to leave him; yet could he not gather by her countenance
any assurance of his content. Her policy was, by concealing his prerogative,
to retain her soueraintie: Her fear, that by disclosing it, she should arm
his thoughts with insolency, and he shake off that subjection wherein now she
had him: Arthemio which looked for a better market by Giraldos death, then
present maintenance in his life, failde not to embrace all likely means, to
make use of all occasions, to apply cach opportunity for the attaining and
assuring of Valerias favor to himself; still doubting his desires
accomplishment, because not privy to his own desert. After many thoughts,
he deemed this course the best, to seem ravished by her beauti^; for well he
knew, that herein to flatter women was highly to please them: In effecting
which resolution, he did so quaintly counterfeite the drouping lover, both in
his looks, and other gestures, that her wit bli^ded thr^ugh selfe-concei^t,
was by his wiles far over reached. At sight of her he would seem so fillde
with joy, as if her presence, wear his only pleasure. when she left him, he
would sigh, and ^aine such sorrow, as if his comfort began and ended with her
company.

Thus had he his sookes at such conunaundment, as women have their tears: when
she talked he listued with such attention, as if her voice had been
inchantingly melodious: often, (but on purpose when she fawe him) he would
steal a broken look on her: then (as loath that she should note hint) cast
down his eyes, and fourthwith raise them to reuewe her. He would inuit her
to sumptuous banquets, often solicit her with amorous couceipts, of which so
many, I have related two as instances of the rest, wherein you may clearly see
her blindness, with his bo^ldnesse.

In the prime of their acquaintance it chanced that Arthemio was earnestly
entreated to make one in a mask, for the gracing of a marriage; which request
he sa^e granted, knowing that Valeria (though with her husband) should be
there a guest, to whom intending some odd toy in writing, because assurd that
without suspicion he could not there employ his tongue, and for that cause
would not presume to much on his visard, he pende immediately some feawe
extemporall lines, with purpose there to deliver the^ which might fully
intimate his forged affection. The time came; the maskers in their disguise
appeard, when Arthemio having first taken his mystris to the measures, and then
withdrawing her the dance being ended, briefly whispered in her ear his
name, and conveyed in to her hand these lines: which done, he left her. She
finding that night an opportunity (for she could command occasions, haueing
her husband at controlement) perused his slight passion which follows thus.

As when a waue-bruisd bark, long tossed by the winds in a tempest
Straies on a foreign coast, in danger still to be swallowed,
After a world of fears, with a winter of horrible objects,
Heaven in a week of nights obscured, day turned to be darkness,
The shipmans solace, faier Ledas twins at an instant,
Signs of a calm are seen, and seen are shrilly saluted:
So to my drooping thoughts, when sorrow most does await me
Your subduing looks in fayrenesse first of a thousand,
(Stain to the brightest star, that gildes the roof of Olimpus)
Calmed with a kind of aspect, vouch safe large hopes to releue me:
Such is your bewty, which makes your bou^ty so powrful;
Such to me your beawty, which makes your bounty so blisful;
Whose each worth to relate, my worthless pen is unable:
Hairs of a goldlike hew; (not purest gould so refulgent)
Pearle-like piercing eyes (not purest pearls so relucent)
Cheeks of a maiden dye, with a snow white circle adorned:
That rosy-redde as a rose, this Lilly white as a lillye;
Not such a red, such a white, to be seen in a Rose or a Lilly.
Every part so repleat with more then could be required,
That to behold her work, even Natures self was amassed.
Muse not then that I love, but muse that I live, if I love not:
Muse that I draw my breath, mine eyes, not drawn by thy bewty.
Yet, shall I love in vain, in vain such bewty beholding,
Deem'so to love, so to look, that lok^s and love be rewardles:
Better it is to be dead, by death from cares to be cleared;
Cares the records of love, sour love when slightly regarded.
Grant me then (o fairest) assurance so to be fancied,
That nor I droope dismaide, nor doubt, not fully resolved.
Valeria having red this toy, smilde to think how he which had on her so
mighty a^ advantage, was held by her at such a bay, because not priu^e ^o his
own prerogative. Thus did they both dissemble; he in feining great affection
where little was, she in making show of little, where much was. Upon occasion
of this toye Valeria at their next meeting thus saluted him. Servant you are
welcome from the Sea: what news (I pray you) among shipmen? Arthemio smelling
her drift, and liking well the motion, but dissembling it, replyde thus:
Mistres it were strange he should be welcome from the sea, which never ^aw
the sea: But more strange (quoth she) that land men should in storms be
driven to expect aid from stars; since to them the greatest tempests are
mere trifles, if we weigh the seas huge tossing. Yet (quoth Arthemio) such may
the storms be, and such the stars, that the one may be as ruthful, and the
other as requisite: That you mean (quoth she) by the sandy sea, where men are
often drownde in dust, and their bodies remnants become drugges. But it seems by
your short return, and sound complexion, that you were not a passenger in
those pa^s.

Hereto Arthemio thus answere^: the sea wherein I yet do sail, ready still to
sink, if not supported by your favor, is no less strange then that of ^and;
for amidst the flambe I freise: (such are my fears) amidst the floode I flame
(such is the feruor of my affection,) my ship floats, yet not on water; the
waves which beat on it are sobbes: It sails, yet on no fea; the winds which
breath on it are sighs. But by your leave (replied Valeria) are you still a
seaman, and not yet o^ shore? then was my welcome ill bestowed, before your
self were well arrived: but to unmask this mystery, me thinks your sea is
very me^aphoricall, and I muse that where the lymi^s are so ^raight, the danger
can be so extreme: It is (quoth he) generally observed, that the floode is
roughest, where most restrained. And no less generally noted (quoth she) that
the Sea is of Elements the most uncertain, whose waves are by each gale of
wind raisde in billows. If then your application hold as general, I rather
commend your Metaphors conceit, their your (...) constancy. But it were (said
he) injustice to charge the Patient with the Agents fault. Although my
thoughts (my fancies Sea) tossed twixt vain hopes and fears, plunge my heart
in dire perplerities: yet that my silly ship, ranging in this rockey Ocean
of despair, though not having still one Current, strives still to keep one
course: and amidst so many changes, remains unchanged, though tirde with
troubles, which are (some say) loves surest trialls. Accuse not then, much
less condemn that of dissoyaltie, whereto life shall sooner fail then it to
love: and which sooner may by death be broken, then break those (...) bonds,
wherein your beauty making through mine eyes a breach, holds it inthrald. But
why talk I as if in me it rested to repeal my passions, which do share with
the stone Abeston his retentiue virtue? For as that being once hot is never
after cold, so my fancy fettered in affections chains by your
souleintangling fairness, is now not capable of liberty. Or rather (quoth
Valeria) your thoughts masked under your deceiving looks disguise, resemble
the Camelion; and as that can in a moment be clad with any color, but retains
none; so your fancy can at the view of every pleasing face, forge new
passions, but persist in none.

Hereat Arthemio guilty to himself, did bite the lip, because knowing she
spa^ the truth; yet comforted, in that she meant it not a truth, but only as
terms of course, whereto as he would have answered, other company brake off
their conference: and they with the rest fell from loose talk to (...) toying:
dreading nothing less, then that their lewdness could be discovered.

His second humor was this: Against Valerias birthday he had of purpose pend
this following Dittie, and on the very day sent it her by that trull, through
whose counsel she was first seduced, and into whose familiarity he had of
late insinuated, because knowing how much Valeria did love and trust her. She
coming as a friend and neighbor, and being with all a notable hypocrite, had
both easy access and private conference without suspicion: for it seemd a
thing not to be doubted of, that the subject of their talk was only some
gossips matter, as among women it is ordinary. Being thus alone with her,
after a large preface of Arthemios deep affection (for so had he before
concluded) she delivered her on his behalf this welcomepresent, which Valeria
forthwith unfolding, read as follows.

Let others use what Calenders they please,
And celebrate their common holidayes;
My rules for time, my times of joy and ease
Shall in my zeal blaze thy perfections praise:
Their names and worth they from thy worth shall take;
And highly all be honored for thy sake.
That day shall to my thoughts still holy be,
Which first vouchsafde thy beauty to mine eyes;
That day when first thou deigndst to favor me,
And each from some peculiar grace arise:
But among them all, my duty shall attend
This more then all, on which they all depend.
Hail happy day, to whom the world does owe
The blissful issue of that influence,
Which from the force of best aspects did grow,
In luckiest house of heavens circumference:
Hail happy day that first did show this air,
To her whom Fairenes self does yield more fair.
Nere be thy brightness dimd by wind or rain;
No cloud on thee forestall Hyperions light;
On thee no doom pronounced of death or pain;
No death or pain endurde; no bloody fight:
But be thou peaceful, calm, and clear for aye;
Let feasts and triumphs choose thee for their day.
On thee I vow to rest from all affairs,
To give large alms to poor distressed men;
Not to profane thy joy by fretting cares;
To send my saint some tribute of my pen;
And when thou dawn'st, devoutly still to say,
Hail happy, holy, high, and heavenly day.
Such and so long may be to me her love,
As I Will this vow religiously maintain;
So may my plaints her heart to pity move,
As from my heart I speak: let false hearts feign.
Hail happy day; but then how happy she,
Who makes this day thus happy unto me!
Gentlemen, you need not doubt that Valeria, whose ouersoothing humor made her
interpret flattery for truth, was no less proud of this then of the former,
howsoever she dissembled her inward content, even to her sins own secretary
and chief directour, least Arthemio should by her means lay hold on that
assurance, which by himself he could not gather. But mark (I pray you) how
thick a mist of dotage Giraldos good nature had cast before his eyes. As the
trull was ready e^ depart, he would neede^ force her to tarry dinner, telling
her merrily that this was his wives birthday, whereon he had provided an
extraordinary dish, and thought none so meet as her self to taste thereof,
being so kind and loving a neighbor, requesting her withal to repair
oftener to his house, to visit and pass away the time with his wife, and when
she walked abroad, to bear her company. They hearing these words, did in
their looks argue each to other their high content, grounding (though falsely)
on his simplicity, the safe continuance of their delights, as being thereby
exempted from all dread and danger os discovery. But the highest flood has
the lowest ebb, the hottest Summer pre^ignifies the coldest winter; tempests
in the prime of Autumn, are least dreaded, but most dangerous. Shame sins
guerdon, is then nearest, when through selfe-soothing security, the fear
thereof is fardest. And as the fish Remora, though little, can stay the
greatest ship: and the Crocodile though in the shell one of the least,
proves afterward the greatest Serpent that haunts the shore os Nilus: so not
seldom in this worlds accidents the detecting of deepest crimes, springs
from the lightest and most unlikely occasions: for proof of which assertion, I
need no farther instance than this subject whereon I entreat.

Giraldo among other servants, had one named Iockie, a silly boy borne in the
North of Albion, and employed in basest errands, such commonly as concerned the
kitchen: It chanced on a time, that as Valeria had left the house, gone forth
of purpose to sport with her companions, immediately after her departure, this
Iockie was sent abroad, when (straying in a boyish humor to gaze on the gayest
objects in some other street) he espied suddenly his Mistress before him, and
stepped back as half amazed; but recalling forthwith his courage, and noting
more exactly one of her company, whose lewd and dissolute life was commonly
known, he began knau^hly to suspect, that eeh of her other mates were likewise
of the same mould. To confirm or confute which imagination, he followed them
aloof; yet so warily, that he saw them housde, himself not seen: and
closely houering near the door, espied their minions entering in order, with
other such apparent likelihoods, as he now no longer suspected, but certainly
believed, that Giraldo his master was as soundly armde for the head, as either
Capricorn or the stoutest hornd sign in the Zodiac. Having made this
trial, he departed, doubtful what to determine: for on the one side, he
foresawe his own most assured danger, in revealing what he had discovered,
since well he knew that one of his mistres words could ouerweigh, one of her
tears wipe out a volume of accusations by him produced: which granted, what
then might follow but this, that the guerdon of his tongues lauishnes, should
be laid on his shoulders? Besides, his Mistress by this means
irreconciliable, for women which by nature embrace extremes, being therein
only constant, persist not so in any as in malice: and what mischief that
might effect, he though young, had for his own part experience enough. But on
the other side well he saw, that his Masters credit already stainde, and
his disgrace daily augmented, would spread so it self, still gathering force
by going forward, that if not now restrained, it must needs at last to his then
greater shame, and incurable sorrow, either by others be detected, or of it
self break forth: for never yet was sin long in league with secrecy.
Tender twigges may with ease be bowed: the full grown tree sooner broken, then
bent. The now-detecting of Valerias crime, might recall her, and prevent
Giraldos future reproach, but her offense if longer cherished by sin-noursing
silence, would in the end become inexpiable. In regard hereof Iockie
courageously resolved to ouerpeaze the fear of danger with the care of duty.
In which vain returning home, and ^eeing accusde of loytering by such as sent
him, he appealed to his master, by whom likewise being sharply demanded y^
cause of his long taria^ce, he revealed to him in secret what he had seen, and
proou'd to himself a true prophet, in receiving for his thanklesse service,
that guerdon which before he justly feared. For Giraldo aiming amiss at his
inclination, deemed this a villainous device forg^e by the boy to breed discord
between him and his wife: whereof this was no slight presumption, in that
Valeria was ever sharp to him. But when lockie (which would not cowardly give
over having thus entered) continued his discoueries, still furnished with more
friendly opportunities, and did often constantly offer upon the hazard of ye
whip, to make his master eye witness of that, whereof his ears deignd no
accepta^ce; Giraldo at last deeply reuoluing in his pensive thoughts the boys
large proffer, and much desirous to know at full the state of his own forehead,
wherein he seemd to feel already some alteration, agreed to his request,
waiting a convenient time; and being then by him conducted, saw what he sigh d
to see, and for ever sorrow'd to remember. Now jealousy (of all hags most
hellish) whose never closed eyes in number infinite, shun truce with sleep,
whose tongues and ears equalling her eyes are still imploid, these in
listening, they in whispering. This ^end (I say) shedding her self into his
thoughts, and pouring into every vain her venime, did by continual torturing
of his caretired soul, gather up ye losses other long delay: now wrought she
on his entangled wits as on an anuill, hatching in his brains vnw^nted horrors.
He y^ erst weighed not his friends words dissuading him from marriage, did now
more then admire his truth presaging wisdom, and much bewaild his own folly, in
not crediting such good counsel: he that erst doted in blindness, seemd now as
cleere-sighted in discovering Valerias fault, as far-seeing Linceus in
discrying the Punique fleet. He that erst deemd all gospel which his wife
spoke, did now dread deceit in every syllable, and mistrusted her each step,
each look, each sigh, each smile: briefly, whatsoever by her was done, he deemd
misdon. But how in nature could earthincinerating Aetnas womb big swollen with
flames, brook enclosure, nor enforce an issue through violent eruption? The
world circling Ocean, threatening in his fomie source a second deluge, if not
let blood in hollow Cauernes, and thence sucked up by the thirsty earth, would
ouerflow the contiue^t: air restraind breaks forth in whirlwinds: wronged
loves restles (if once raisd) suspicio^, the thoughts burning Aetna, boiling
Ocean, and euer-blustring whirlwind, piercing tho^ough the ears unto the
heart, must be in words expressed, or the drooping mind by wosupprest Giraldo
therefore, that he might disburden his ouerburdened self, no longer able to
sustain his sorrows weight, faild not to embrace y^ first oc^asion; chose his
time, made his trial, and thus sadly breaking silence he bespake Valeria.

Wife, I had thought until experience proou'd it false, that outward gifts were
ever linkt with inward graces; but now I find, y^ in the sweetest fruits worms
are soonest bred; that the finest cloth is so onest eaten with consuming
mothes; the freshest colors soonest tainted by defacing spots; even front
fairest roses, spiders suck their fatal poison. Trothles Valeria (but I want a
sharper Epithet) when first I saw thee, I affected thee, my love taking life
from thy looks fairenes, yet well hoped I of thy then seeming virtues
forwardnes, which hope long I held; but it now has left me, and I too late
have learnd, that as Iris has many colors but none continuing, Proteus at his
pleasure any shape, but none certain; the sea many calmes, but yet the wary
shipma^ never secure; so thy wit wrested by wantonness, made, how fair a show
of virtue, thy self still nothing less then virtuous! But when the substance
fails, needs must the shadow fade. Time the father of truth, drawing from
before mine eyes the veil of dot age which closde them as in a cloud, has
vnclaspt the legend of thy lives shame, to we are out my life with sorrow. Shame
(I say) which never shall have end; sorrow, which death alone may end. Muse not
if that for which I still have loved thee, be now to me barren of delight, since
y^ which long I hopte in thee, had never harbor in thy thou^hts. O thou of
women the most unwomanly, say and sigh (if not all shameless) wherein have I
deserved this injury? or by what wrong prouokt (if any wrong sufficient to
provoke an honest mind) have thou yielded that to others which by the laws of
God and men thou owe to me alone? Did I ever countermand thy desires, ever
contradict thy designments; ever cross thee, or unkindly thwart thee in thy
commandments? did thou not always go when thou would, whither and with
whom thou would, spend what thou would, rule without controlment,
disposing all things at thy pleasure? Oh therein I wrought thy wrack,
strengthening thy corrupt nature with corrupting liberty. But aye me, my
words work in thy countenance no change. What? have thy cheeks forgot to
blush, thy heart to feel compunction, thine eyes to shed due tears? Tears
they shed such as the Crocodill, to ensnare the silly passenger, not tears to
argue thy contritio^. Thou which art for sin too fleshly, for repentance art
too stony. Oh if thou would but sigh, I should hope of thy amendme^t: but
sigh thou will not, or thou can not: wilt not, in that thou art too wilful;
can not, because long custom has wholly corrupted thee. Here he pausd; for
to proceed grief would not permit him: but Valeria though not looking for
such a lesson, yet bearing it out with a bold face, wherein impudency was
thoroughly settled, after a tempest of rough terms, urged him to produce the
authors of his accusation: which when he had done, naming Iockie and himself,
she standing stoutly in defiance of them both, and renewing her railing vain,
would in the heat of her womanish fury, have silly Iockie thrust out of the
house, as the breeder of their discord: But herein he withstanding her, began
now in vain to use that which of right to him belonged, I mean, the husbands
sovereignty, by her sere so much affected, by her still usurped with most
advantage: for how could he now recover what his long sufferance had to her
confirmed? The fault whereof resting wholly in himself, the effect thereof did
likewise to himself wholly redou^d: which in ouer-fondly manifesting his entire
affection! a secret by husbands warily to be handled ^ armed her im^etie with
impudency, her impudence with impunitie. But while nature slept that ^elosie
might awake, there followed a mighty change: for the mildness in him so much
commended, which appearing from his birth, wanne to him the minds of all those
which conuerst with him, was now vanquished by modyrage; nor such rage to be
condemned, if we weigh the ground whence it arose, They had therefore naught to
marvel at, which saw their former discord, dashed by following disagrement,
his love now, converted to loathing ^th her louc perverted by lust, or his
wonted kindness dying in unkind vpbradings: the cause amply warants the
effect. Giraldo often inueighing, because seeing in her no amendment, yet had
ever the disadvantage: For she openly defying and denying what soever he
ob^ected, hoping to bear out her crime with bouldne^e, thought it not enough
her self to over match him wearying his ears with outrageous scoulding (for
with her tongue she was as tall a warriouresse as any of her sex:) but which
is worst, set on his own children, to revile their silly father: they though
traind up from their ^adle in all boldness and neglect of duty, were herein
impiously obedient, too promptly conceauing and practicing their wicked mothers
death-worthie doctrine. Like examples few ages can afforde, feawe countries
yealde, much less should Albion (pollished so with civility, and native
mildness of well ordered manners) harbor such unheard of heinousness, which
is rare even to the barbarous Getes. Giraldo haueing till then held out in
changing bitter terms with her, was hereat so amated, that he now no longer
wished to live: In his house he had no joy, since there bayted thus by them,
which from his bowels had their being. But when shunning often his home, he
strayed abroad reuoluing in himself with many sighs his infinite fore-passed
cares, present corrosiues, and likelihoode of far greater ensuing grief;
Iockey in his absence never wanted blows, nor (...) a cause, though faulse,
yet seeming just haueing a wit so rich to coin occasions, power so absolute,
and a will so much inflamed with wrath to use them. Thus both the m^er and the
man, the one in mind, the other in body by this Ty^nesse outragiously
afflicted, wished the first never to have weded her; the second yt his master
had herein likewise been by her ouer-mastred, when to thwart her fury, he would
needs retain him still in service; But she not moved by her crimes discovery,
proceeded daily in misdoing, with so stoborne unrelenting wilfulness, that
sooner might the sun melt with his beams, the ever ysie bulk of waylesse
Caucasus, over whose snow manteled shoulders they glance without reflection;
Then her sinfrozen thoughts melt with true sorrow, or (which is less) her
he^delesse ears, admit (though slightly) wholesome counsels; ears more deaf
to friends repro^uinges, then are the wrack rich Libique rocks, or the
guestlesse ship swalowing Sirtes, to the cries of dying mariners: such force
has custom even against nature: Then (...) ^cible where backed (as here it
was) by (...)? When Ulysses matesturn'd from men to beasts through the taste
of Circes potions, had it afterward in their own choice, whether they would
so remain, or reasuming their former shapes, return from beasts to men
again; they would in no sort be (...), aleadging, that in this there brutishe
state, they were far more exempted from hart-gnawing grief, far more
secure, then when their bodies were with humane shape invested: which fiction
moralized as Homer meant it, does not only note our lives troubles fraught with
infinite distressing dangers, but likewise, that when reason is by affection
ouerruled, and the soul our better part, (...) to the bodies tyr^ye, our
baser parts, such as are charmed with the love of sen^uall delights (wherein we
wholly communicate with beasts and degenerating from our states decorum,
participate (...) their nature, which is altogether led by (...)-bred appetits)
are then so deeply be witcht with wantonness, (...) they will sooner dye for love
of it: then while they live, in any sort assent to leave it: but as the biting
of the Aspicke, brings death as in a slumber, y^ a^ult thereof not being felt;
so where defiling lust does reign at full, they whose thoughts it has
polluted, have no feeling of their destroying follyes, till plungd in the mi^st
of their desorued pains. When the stood is at his highest source then takes
the (...) his turn, Valerias crime fostered through (...) conc^ing, was now
subject to (...) desteny (...) is, to be as openly discovered, as it was
before closely covered: Her offense erst privately reueald to her wronged
husband, did soon after become public; and with her, the partnours of her
impyetie shard like fortune, for what can be more just, then that they which
(...) together, (...) participate the shame thereof together? And thus it was;
After many meetinges, many mischiefs perpetrated by that troop of trulles, it
chanced that in one of their fleshly synods, news were toul^ of a great
solemnity, which within few days was to be celebrated, with much royalty at
the court: whereupon at Valerias motion, they immediately resolved, that suited
in men's attire, they would meet there in a mask, there fauorits; which
promis^ without farle there to find them, and after one sport acted by
themselves, to act on them another, with so much the more safety, by how much
the farther they should be from their husbands: whose noses growing now with
their horns somewhat long, could smell shrowdly any thing at hand. Was then
there laying out of curled hear, (^uing often the wants of their almost
hearelesse scalpes) so light a crime? their buskes, and that great humme of
Paris, that veil of lechery, so slight a sin, (being so sovereign a remedy
for big bellyes, which often at a pinch help forward the worlds increase
with swelling zeal,) were there other former faults such venial offenses,
that to exceed them all, and hererein only able to exceed them, they must
thus disguise there sex? But why marvel I at their desire to seem men, since
they so mightily affected men? yet could they not conueigh their ill contrived
intent with such secrecy, but that sundry knew thereof (for amongst so many
how could all be silent?) passing thus from one mouth to an other it came in
the end to the heering of certain courtiers, of which one, the greatest in
account, deeply abhorring so odyous an enterprise bouldly reueald it to the
prince of those times, who desiring to see the issue of their impudence,
(though deeming it almost impossible, that any of that sex should be so
shameless) commanded general silence, and such semblance, as if nothing were
discovered. They going forward with their attempt, fayld not to assemble at the
day assigned, each being cas^ in her mynions best attire: then using the
benefit of the dark, which is gilty of many mischiefs, they came to the
court, and there suing for farther access, obtained it, thinking of nothing
less, then that they were intrapt: But to dispatch the matter breefely; In the
midst of their iolitie, they were by the princes commandment all forceably
(...), standing then before her, as stony Images, not blushing ought at this
bewraying of their lewdnes, though enuirond, and like monsters gazd on by many
eyes, nor making any show of sorrow, for their soueraigns sharp rebukes,
which conceiving no hope of their amendment, seut them home with open shame
unto their husbands. The grief whereof pinched Giraldo so nere the heart, that
he fell through sorrow into a grievous sickness, which wasted so his infeebled
body, that all remedies failing, his last music was the sertons unison, (...)
him with a doleful sound, to make ready for his longest home. When no ^esse
defirous of death, then disparing of life, he causd all in the chamber to
withdraw, ( Valeria excepted) whom calling to him, he thus bespake: Might
these last words work that remorse in thee, which my former speeches never
could effect: I should deem my self not wholly unhappy. That I am sick,
thou see: that dangerously sick, I feel: the cause thy folly: long have we
lived together, in little joy, less agreement; our iarring grounded on thy
falsehood, not my fault; unless it were a fault, with too much love to foster
thy too much liberty: But I cease to relate former injuries, at thought
whereof I may justly wish with Augustus, that I had lived wiuelesse, and died
childlesse: be it a full amends for all these misdemeanors, heedfully to
observe and follow, that which I now shall speak, not as a husband, (though
in that name I should command) but as a friend, no less careful of thy
soul, then thou careless of my safety: First, if thou caust contain thy
lust, live still a widow; for who heareing of thy looseness, will mary thee
for love; and to whom is not thy shame known? if then he wed thee for wealth,
finding (as needs he must) thy sin grounded on my too much sufferance; how
slavish shall thy life be under him? I omit to urge thy childrens hinderance by
an unadvised match. Next I counsel thee in no sort to change thefeat of thy
aboade; for what else should that argue, then a mere despair of recovering thy
lost good name? continue then where now thou art, earnestly endeavoring to
wipe out the blemish of thy former leawdnesse, by imbraceing henceforth, and
persisting to the end, in an honest course of life: so shall the same place
and persons that saw thee vicious, see likewise thy return to virtue; the
report whereof received from others might justly be doubted, but their own
witness to themselves must needs be authentical. Believe me Valeria thou
can not otherwise wear out the impression of thy shame; nor can it in such
sort be so curde, that no scarre will remain: This for thee: and thus
breefely for thy ch^ren? since the shortness of my time, w^nes me likewise to
be short in talk: God lent us three all sons, one of which he has taken
again unto himself: that the happiest: Two he has left to us, and I leave to
thee: Reform them with thy self; see them well instructes, taught to embrace
virtue, and abhor vice: Such hitherto has (...) their education, that I
grieve to remember it: but thou may joy to better it: Liberty is the bane
of youth; not for a time, as the honny of Colchos, which does inebriate those
that taste it, and distract with one days madness those that greedelye do
eat it: But this soule-contami natinge poysson, strengthened by custom, grows
incurable: Purge then from this infection their tender thoughts, while they yet
are each way flexible. That thou love the^ I doubt not, but that thy love
will cherish their leawdnesse, I justly dread, and therefore do thus warily
admonish thee; be thou as wary and willing to perform what I requier, tending
so greatly to their good: In hope whereof I leave to thee, and after thee to
them what so ever I possess: And on condition hereof I forgive both them and
thee all the wrongs which you have done me: But if you f^ile herein; then,
when my soul shall at the seventh Angels sound, take again this my body
and you be cited before the impartial Tribunal of y^ divine majesty, I will
accuse you as guilty of them all chiefly of my death, whereof you jointly are
the causers; death which I embrace so willingly, that could Nature for my
words disclame her due, and the inexorable destinies, for my laments reuerse
their dome, limiting to my days a longer date; yet would I enforce death, by
not suing for longer life: And dye I must, for now I fainte even unto death;
now fail my powers: now does each sense deny his service; And gracious
heaven seeming to exhale my soul, will resume it whence I received it:
farewell Valeria, think on my words, as God shall think on thee. This said
he, and sealed it with a sigh; then after many groans yealded the ghost:
rendering his spirit to his maker.

But his body was no sooner ^thlesse, then Iockey was turned to his shifts:
whose good service, had not his kind master secretly guerdonized before his
death, doubtless his estate had been very hard. Valeria, though having
cleene forgotten her husbands words, which she markte no longer, then while
he spoke them, provided yet for his burial in the best sort; and so much the
rather, because in his decease she io^ed the fullness of her own desires.

His corpse was with funeral pome conveyed to the Church: And there sollemnly
enterred; nothing omitted which necessity or custom could claim; A sermon,
^ banquet, and like observations. Haueing thus laid him, where she wished him
long before, ^hee was now a lusty widow, and courted by that crew of
gallantes, whose braueries in her husbands lifetime she had vpheld, dreining
out the quintessence of his bags to garnishe with gay robes their backs. But
Arthemio whose harvest of far greater hopes then these, was now come, which
he so long had loockt for, and in regard thereof would not with the rest make
profit of her former prodigality: seeing now time and occasion smyling on
him, ^acked not his affairs, but to prevent the first in forwardness, and
sooner then in reason he should, immediately on Giraldos burial, sued for
access, which finding as he expected, and for his more incoragement veweing
in his mistress countenance, no clouds of discontent, he thus began his wooing.

It is a custom still in use with christians, to attend the funeral of their
deceased friends with whole (...) of choice quire-men, singing solemnly before
the^: but behind follows a troop all clad in black, which argues mourning:
much have I marueled at this ceremony, deeming it till now, some hidden
paradox, confounding thus in one, things so opposite as these signs of joy and
sorrow. But your late good fortune, inforst me to cancel this fond opinion:
for if singing do with most right belong to ioying, who may then so justly as
your self, set on work a world of fingers, to celebrate the day of your
recovered liberty, from the tirannous controlement of a ielous (...)? To
gratulate which your good hap, I have thus adventured, nor less to prosecute
my own hopes, doomed to live or dye at your disposing; herein resembling
transformed Clitie, which as the angry Sun does rise or set, opens or shuts
(silly Nymph) her saffron-coloured breast: Since then the making or marring of my
hopes, does wholly rest in you: deigne rather to quicken them by a gracious
regard, then to kill them by a disgratious repulse: make me rather the mirror
of your clemency, then the martyr of your cruelty. If you fancye any worthier
then my self, I shall droope for my defects: if any meaner then my self, you
shall (...) from my deserts: But ay me, what deserts have I to allege, if
true affection be no deserte? This said, he pawsd, as feeling some deeper
passion: but Valeria no longer able to dissemble, thus with a smile replide
(for weeping was already out of season) Servant (quoth she) that true
affection merits favor, reason grants; that not ever barren of desert, thy
fortune shall yealde sufficient proof; whose desires I have hitherto dieted
with dismaying doubts, thereby to make trial of thy constancy: which finding
each way faultlesse, I will not that through me it should be frutlesse: But to
make amends for tyring so thy (...) with long suspense, and to remunerate thy
fancies loyalty, with more then looks, I yeald wholly to thy disposing, my
self, (...) substance, and whatsoever to me is dearest: Thy coming was to
speak, thy good hap to speed both of love and living, largely able to equal
thy desires with thy deserts, and be this the earnest of my true intent: here
she concluded her words with kisses, sealing on his lips her loves assurance:
which kindness he requiting, did answer them with tenfold interest: Thence
stepped they to the next degree of lovers daliance, and so forward while lust had
force. But having finished, and Valeria being now in the vein, Arthemio deeming
it (...) to strike when the iron was hot, least fortune should not ever rest
so friendly, left her not, till before sufficient witnesses, they had each to
other solemnly made themselves sure: Immediately after which contract, their
marriage was in a morning betimes, hastily hudled up at a lawless Church: whose
leaning Pulpit (a monument of many years, but of less use then a Cipher in
Arethmetique) had fallen so far at odds with preaching, that, whether
through age or ignorance I know not, it had long been like a bell without a
clapper. The wedding thus dispatched, she vaunting to her self, her souls
delights, (...) this her Comedies Catastrophe, changing all former discontents
into the fullness of her desires accomplishment. But how much she was deceived,
let the sequel show. Fame the swiftest evil and lavish spreader of most
unwelcome news, had now (...) to Theodoros ears Giraldos death, his daughters
lewdnes, her late public infamy and second match: The hearing of which report
pearsed so his heart, that he likewise full of sorrow, yielded his care-weakened
body to the bed, and thence breathless to the grave: when at the instant of
his departure, he employed some friend in writing, what himself thus with a
fainting voice did utter, and as his last to her, intend.

DOuble murderesse, erst of thy husband, now of thy father, read what I write,
and may thy heart be rent with reading, as mine through thee is rent with ruth.
Is this the memory which thou will leave, wherein thy name shall live to
et^nall obloquy? Is this the issue of my hope when last I left thee; or of thy
mothers joy, when she had borne thee? Oh what floods of tears would she have
shed, had she lived to have seen thy lewdness? or if the dead know what the
living do, how does her soul mourn for thy sins excess! deeply art thou
bound to Nature which shortened herdaies by death, and so prevented thy causing
likewise of her untimely end. Had thou an infant sucked some fierce Hircanian
Tygresse, or bee^ fostered on the ridge of Pholoe by some ravenous Liones, yet
could thou not have thus degenerated from thy kind, in more then brutish
misdemeanour. Vipers dig their way to life, thorough the bowels of their dams,
and of them the females do in conception kill the males; both which to do, it
is their nature. But thou against the rites of nature, and thereinfar worse
then vipers, quitst him with death, to whom thou owe thy life: and have
likewise before brought to his end thy harmles husband, to take into thy bosom
the defiler of his bed: fatal to you both be your embraces, and thou in thy
g^eatest need enforst to rely on those for succor, whom thy present injuries
do most justly exasperate against thee: Oh whether has passion carried me? It
beseemes not dying men to ban, much less fathers: yet how can thou term me
herein cruel, being thy self my deaths contriuer? But whereto wast I my
words in vain, which will slightly pass thine ears like the weightles
Cumaean writings tossed each way by the dallying winds? striving to reform an
hopeles reprobate, I sow with succesles labor on the sand, and will therefore
refer the issue to heavens execution, whose justice, in making him the
instrument of thy woe, whom thy self have made the subject of thy lust, is now
imminent and will fall with greater force, then had it been before inflicted:
yet wish I as a father thy speedy amendment or speedy end, that thy evils may
be the less. And so I leave thee to thy deserts, if thou leave not thy lewd
desires.

Thy dying father slain by thy fault, Theodoro.

This subscription himself did write, whose (...) hand another guided: scarce
had he written what he would, when he breathed out his enfranchised soul,
ending almost at one instant his life and letter: which Valeria receiving, read
without remorse, hearing likewise the manner of his death by the messenger
discourst at large, yet were her eyes still tearelesse: much it was that this
could work in her one hour of melancholy, for she deemd it no decorum to
blemish her yet-during pleasures with not auailing sorrow. But had Theodoros
life been longer and his writing later, then could not his words have
perished thus wholly without effect: for soon after the receiving of this
letter, her preimagined joys failing by degrees, grew daily less: and she
too late, seeing in the present issue of Arthemios former promises, naught but
deceit, wished her self again at her own will, which now she justly wanted:
nor so staid her fortunes change, for to have wanted only herein her wish, it
had been well; or howsoever, not wholly ill: But (which was worse) she beheld
apparent likelihoode of far greater imminent distress, then were her woonted
outward delights. He knowing well her humor by his own so long experience,
thought it better to graffe horns on another head, then himself to bear the
impression: in preventing which misfortune he used this method: To reform her
lewdness, he restraind her liberty.

That was a day of favor wherein she might freely walk about the house, for
commonly she was mewde up in her chamber: her loose-taild gossips which first
intic't her to folly, were warnde from approach: especially that arch-queane
her greatest counselor, to whose kindness himself also had been indebted.
Those gallant yonkers which long had fed her humor, by serving her insatiate
lust, were ^ard from access. This was some corosiue to a wilful wan^on, whose
desire could erst brook no contradictio^: but these are trifles, if we note her
following troubles, so many and so mighty, that it past a woman's patience to
endure them, if any way able to redress them. Although her walks were watched
thus narrowly (as many eyes attending her steps as had Argus guarding
transformed Io) yet he most lauishly addicted to (...), romd abroad at
pleasure, wasting his own body and her substance on troops of truls, whom
he gorgeou^y maintained. Riches lightly gotten, are soon leudly gone, for who
weighes aright the worth of them, being not wearied with pains in gathering
them? Pearls did then grow most in price, when they were first purchased with
the dangers of many storms. His mind being thus wholly on feasting his
Minions with sumptuous bankets, it needs must follow, that Gluttony made way
and work for her sister Lechery, which without her furtherance were almost
forcelesse. They having Sirens tongues and Crocodiles tears, thereby enticed
him to entangle him, and prevailed: for as the Hemlocke of Attica tempered with
wine, is of all compounded poisons the most deadly: so of all enticements that
is most dangerous, where wit and beauty lodged both in one subject, are so
employed.

All this while sat poor Valeria at home, surcharged with sorrow, not
ruminating as yet, so much on repentance of former wantonness, as drooping
through despite of present wants: for now wrathful heaven setting wide open
the gates of vengeance, showrd down on her sinful head heaps of deserved
evils, infinitely exceeding the number of her years, yet not equalling her
dire-offences, whose estate was not herein only hapless to be (as erst)
restrained from company, and from the liberty of her woonted walks, but
likewise in each respect most abiectly miserable: her allowance in attire, and
at the table, scarce the shadow of what it was, and hardly fitting the
baseness of her present fortune, her lust dieted with troubles leauings: her
earst-imperious humor set all on sovereignty, stoopt to the lowest step of
slavery; and she that whilome control^ the master, was now subject without
redress, to the checks and taunts of her own servants, which thereto
authorized by Arthemios order, limited so straightly her very looks, that had
she glanced her eye on any, though the meanest object, it forth with bred
suspicion; and that no small complaint, yet must she in no sort (if loving her
own case) cast on them an angry countenance to argue her offended mind, much
less bewray in words her deepe-setled discontent, least he in a fit of
fury thundering forth an Alphabet of ugly oaths, should amaze her with his
affrighting menaces: nor did he so contain his outrage, but often martyring with
blows her tender body, left on her bruised limbs for lasting monuments the
irremooueable characters of his barbarous cruelty; so to verify the tenor of
his threats, and repay with heaped measure those her marks of thanklesse
remembrance, which she (earst-mercilesse) had lent, and laid on silly Iockies
shoulders. I omit the daily obiecting of former lewdness, and Giraldos death
continually vpbraided. At the memory of which so many miseries, the silly
wretch did in sighs and tears discourse her sorrows, lamenting justly the
fortune of her change, but more the f^lly of her second choice. Now thought
she on her husbands words which then she weighed not, when he spoke them.
Now felt she in her self the issue of his too true prediction: and as the
weary Mariner seeing from far a storm, known by the seas loud rore, and
flocking together of birds, prepares himself with courage and patience to
entertain the peril: so she, whose mind weande thus from wantonness,
reuolu'd with restless motion forepassed woes, and in her fortunes map viewd
the yetclouded tracts of following troubles, addressed her self to ^eare
quietly these deserved crosses, and made nature scholar to necessity, but as
yet woman's frailty could not fully digest the sower precepts, of such
saint-like patience, which that she might the less endure, he slackt not his
endeavor, still devising by what means he most might vex her; and had
therefore changde his former custom into an order far more impudent: for in
stead of banketting his harlots abroad, he now feasts them at home. She was
the drudge to prepare their dainties, and scarce thought worthy of the lowest
room, when all their delicats were served in. Then would he in her sight
kiss his queanes and toy with them, thus daring her to impatience, that
thereon he might coin some seeming cause to tyrannize with his fist: for well
he knew, that the tongue the hearts herald, women's chief instrument of
revenge and ease, could then hardly or not at all by her be bridled. Continuing
this custom, he once invited his most affected Trull, to feast her privately
with extraordinary cost; when after the banquet ended and the table uncovered,
taking his Lute, he sang to a pleasing note this following dittie, more to
cross his wife, then to content his wanton Mistress.

Waue-tossing winds characterizing fear
On marblefurrowes of the threatfull deep,
Rousde from their caves the lowering air to tear,
And force the welken floods of showers to weep:
(Though stormy blastes do scatter common fire)
Burn midst their stormy blastes in hot desire.
Wind-tossed waves which with a gyring course
Circle the Centers ouerpeering maine,
And dare heavens star-bright turrets in their source,
Can yet not ease their finnie regents pain:
But though the flood, the fire in nature quench,
They burn amidst the floods which them do drench.
Oh whereto then in drooping hearts distresfe,
Shall I a silly man my thoughts conform,
Which can no more themselves, themselves redress,
Then may some guidelesse Pinnace in a storm
Encounter safely barking Scillas rock,
And safely dare Chari^s to the shocke.
Where force does fail, the weaker needs must yield,
Seeing submissiue that his smart may cease:
Yet may thou gain a ^arre more glorious field,
Deigning to grant my care-fraught hearts release.
The conquest this, t'excell in saving one,
Loves irrelenting God, which saves none.
Here Valeria all enragde and scarce able to forbear so long, flew on y^
others face, taking with her hands such sure hold, that the blood trickled down
amain: which seeing and at sight there of insulting, she adds this bitter
scorn. Now jolly mistres vanc if you list your beauties conquest. Are you that
dainty piece the rival of my right? this the face that has wrested my
husbands fancy? Then turning to Arthemio she thus proceeds. Bonster of
inhumanitie, speak (if thou can without remorse) wherein have I deserved
these many injuries, this of all the most intolerable? was it for loving thee?
yea therein chiefly have I deserved them, yet not from thee, which have thence
received thy making. Can thou: but here Arthemio interrupted her words with
blows: then pausing he thus replide. Slanderous strumpet, say if thou can
without blushing (but that thou can too well) what greater wrong herein
sustainst thou, then thou have offered to thy other husband? How then dare thou
term justice iuiurie: but since this sight is so offensive, I Will hereafter to
grieve thy heart, glut thine eyes with more abhorred objects, and now tame so thy
tongue and deuilish fingers, that henceforth thou shall have cause to curse the
use of them. This said, he fell again to blows, nor ceast he from beating,
till she had ceast from shrewish answering. Soon after, to effect his first
menace, and therein to effect the second, he proceeded more insa tiatly in
heaping wrong on wrong, even to y^ carnal using of his wh^ before her face,
whose presence he enforced, making her the unwilling baud unto their
beastlines: yet she remembering his late outrage, the marks whereof she had
yet still to show, bare more quietly this the greatest injury, then those
other which he before had offered. Now had she learnd to smooth her looks
with signs of mildness, although her care-worne heart were big with malice:
now did she account patience her only gain, knowiug well that by speaking she
could not only not purchase any remedy, but rather make her sorrows thereby
more remediless, his delight being still in doing that which most did vex
her, beside the penalty of her prating, set by him soundly on her shoulders.
Lo here an instance proouing it not wholly impossible to ouer-master for the
time the miraculous valubilitie of a woman's tongue: which though not fearing a
brauado of blows, yet shuns the brunt of a maine revenge. But howsoever
Valeria bridling nature by necessity, could in her husbands sight dissemble her
deep sorrows, yet being alone she could not so contain her passions, but at
thought of this so dire a wrong (matter enough to have moved a saints
patience) she would often thus unrip them. O Valeria, of all the unhappiest,
thouwantest many tongues to express the many torments which wear thy body and
weary thy mind: did thy stars bode thee these miseries, or thine own amiss
breed thee these misfortunes: ah blame not them, accuse not heaven of
injustice, but blame thy self, thy sin, thy vicious living; accuse thy
self, thy lust, thy unlawful loving: weigh wretched woman with thy distress,
thy deserts: in the one thou shall find thy sorows inerplicable, thy shame
infinite: both known, neither pitied: thy self pointed at by passers by, if
thou be seen abroad: baited with rebukes and blows, if thou remain at home:
thy goods lauishly wasted to maintain the braueries of truls usurping thy
right, and insulting on thy ruth: thy children likewise sharing with thee their
portion of deserved punishment: but in the other thou shall see these thy
miseries far less then thy misdeedes: what then may thou expect: ease of
these evils? no no Valeria; but till death, think that thy cares shall never
end: And that they then may cease, nor thou be doomed to eternal woe, sue
while thou live with ceaselesse intercession, else shall thy suit be vain:
remission, if not purchased ear life be past, is sought too late.

The bodies each-sicknesse may be expelled by choice of symples: mercy only
saught with true penitence, can salve the sin-sicke soul. But what talkest
thou of penitence which nere would lend one minutes listening to those that
thereto would persuade thee; nere humili ate with hearts contrition, thy minds
haughtiness? Now is the morning past, the sun declining, the evening shadows
have beset thee: Oh but despair not, leave that to those whose hopes have left
them; Thy hopes are many; Had thou lived and died in wonted ease, lulde so in
deep security, then had thy state been wholly desperate: But these crosses
are gentle summons to recall thee, directions to reduce thy straying steps,
wounds which heal and so intended: Learn then thy use of these afflictions,
since to be happy, thou must be hapless. Tufh fond Valeria thy talk is
vain; will thou preach of abstinence to pyning Tantalus, of wealth and pleasure
to dyiug men, of patience, to thy impatient self: Think on thy husband and on
thy father, dead through thee: on thy kindre^ iustlye hateiug thee: on thy
children which still do live, but through thee have nothing left: After these
think on thy self, thy sins, thy sorrows: Sins and sorrows innumerable,
infinite, intolerable: What is now thy Theme of patience? Where thy hopes, or
whence thy help? Here would she stop amidst despair, making that her
passions periode, then in the silence of tears and sighs, act anew her souls
distress. Once in the depth of her meditation, somewhat to recreate her
care-duld spirits, she took her Lute, and thereto warbled with a fainting
voice, this ^eight ode.

Having long reuolu'd in thought,
Long unto my self lamented,
Since I first to sin assented,
All the ill my sin has wrought;
Enforc'st I am with sighs to say,
Mine eyes did plot my souls decay.
These all heedelesse of the harms,
Guilfull Sirens had intended,
In like saults with them offended,
Listening to their luring charms:
Whereby inforst, with sighs I say,
Mine ears did first my soul betray.
Then began each other sense,
Taught by them to wrest his use,
Reauing me of all excuse,
Sought to shadow sinues pretense,
Whereby enforc'st with sighs I say,
Mine ears did first my soul betray.
Instruments of grief and shame,
Sundering Isthmus of true pleasure
Chaste delights unspotted treasure,
Wrack and death of my good name;
Why force you me with sighs to say,
That you did first my soul betray?
But oh cease fond wretch t'accuse,
Done, undone things cannotbee:
More it now concerns thee,
Other mind and means to use:
Least thou too late with sighs do say,
Thy sins have wrought thy souls decay,
Thus did she then express her humor, and often i^ other sort: mean while
Arthemio, which set not his mind on mourning. kept on his riot after such a
rate, that Giraldos substance was sone consumed; and had his power matched y^
hugeness of his desires, not an India of wealth might have suffizd. Now were
his lands all morgag^ which with the fairest and most worth of his household
furniture, as also his own, and her attire, fell through forfeits into the
hands of brokeing Usurers. Oh what a banquet was this for the^, whose chief
making, springs from the marring of such unthrifts; their rising, from the
ruins of silly men! These are they whom (to omit their other titles) we may
justly term the devils forerunners, preparing his ways before him. For when
they have left a man as bare, as he left Job, of whose goods by Gods
permission, he made large havoc, then takes he his turn of entrance, to
dispatch the tragedy, which these his factors (coheirs of his infernal
kingdom) have set so forward. His first plotte is to induce the silly
wretches thus turned out of all, to doubt of divine providence. Heereon he
suggestes motions of despair, teaching them to number their crosses with
curses, and in this humor packes them away, some to the beam, some to the
water, each to a desperate end. If he meet with lighter spirits, not thus
incombred through melancholy, nor setting their misfortunes so near the heart,
but resolute to live maugre fortunes frowns, These he fashions for his purpose
in another mould, fitting them with a method for unlawful shifts: under such
a Tutor working wonders even on leaden wits, how can there be a dearth of bad
directions, or not plenty of deuillish practices, whereto he sharpens their
conceits and corages beyond their natural promptness? of this second forte
Arthemio within few months became a member; Lo here the issue: for sone
after, his house growing queasie stomacht through a long consumption of the
moueables, did in a general vomit spewe out the master, the mystris, and all
their train, Oh whereto in this distress should poor Valeria betake her
self? Money she had none, should she borrowe, who would lend her, or
vouchsafe her one nights lodging? such was y^ rumor of her leauonesse: should
she beg? who would give her? I omit her native hautinesse, her education and
former state, all abhorring so abject a profession. But necessity which tames
the mightiest, had sone mastered her afflicted mind, enforcing her to crave of
those, which before had craved of her: yet found she none, which would in
words, pity her woes; A slender comfort, but such as other wretches have. O
you whom sin charming with security, veiles from your eyes the sequels of
your shame and sorrow: you which trace Valerias steps in all lasciviousness,
hither I summon you to read with sighs, in these her fortunes sad records,
your own fore-threatned ruin. This is the looking glass which more beseemes
you, then that whereon you daily poor, practicing your alluring looks, and
marshalling your bodies pride, thereby toattract more gazers on your
garishnesse. Had I the mellisluous vein of Orpheus, rich in divine conceit;
and garnisht with the spoils of Helicon, whose rauishing virtue, he held
prisoner to his enchanting Hymns and harmony: Then should I with sweet
passion treat this subject, and, or win your from your wantonness by
displaying to the full Valerias woes: or prove your hearts to be more frozen
then the winter mantle of Thracian Hebrus, melting through his melody; more
stobburne then the lofty trees baring Hemus and high Rhodope to wait on him;
more brutish then the savage beasts attending him, more stony then theflinty
rocks which followed him, for all these he moved: but move he could not those
brain-sicke beldames of your sex; which confounding his harmonyous notes, with
^owling noise, tare peecemeale the silly Poet: These only in not relenting
should you resemble. Look on the crosses of this wretched creature, and by
them look to your selves, turning so her evil to some good: Weigh in what
mizery she needs must live, whose costly robes were now changd to rags, her
dainty fare to hard crustes, her chambers richly furnished, to base corners, her
beauties flourish blasted, more by cares then years. She which whilome scornd
to look, and almost to tread upon the ground; Now durst not raise thence her
blubbred eyes, fearing to look to wards heaven, such was her sin: blushing
to look on men, such was her shame. She which erst on highest days would
keep the house, judging her attire for such times to mean (how costly soever)
did now shame to be seen on any day. But when night (the veil of earthes
vanities) had drawn her sable curtains over the welkin, in this general hue
of horror, bereauing eyes and ears of days objects: See of all the most
unhappy and now wholly the guest of darkness. wander^ alone making music to
her mones, with deepefetche sighs: nor bewaild she only her own estate, but
lamented likewise her childrens distress, justly feared although not known:
for they not accompanying their careful mother, shifted for themselves, but
where or how, she knew not. After many days of such distress many wekes of
woe, many months worn out in misery, it was her hap to here of her man
Iockeys aboade and fortune, which having married a pore widow, kept a simple
victualling house in an out part of the city: At the heereing of which news
she was long and much perplexed, wavering in uncertainty of resolution: For
when she weighed the caussesse wrongs, which she had offered him in words
and blows: How she had often incenso her husband, often others, injuriously to
revile and beat him, nor ever granted him one hour of quiet; See could no
less then fear that her repair to him, should rather aggrauace her present
grief, in receiving some reproachful answer, then any way attain desired
case. But weighing the extremity of her need, and well knowing that not
imploring his relief, she could not any way better her estate, but that it
still grew worse, the silly woman thus on all sides beset with sorrows, chose
rather to prosecute the slightest hope, then to continue the certainty of her
ill hap: Having thus resolved she went to seek him, and sue to him for
succor; him whom she so much had i^ured: Lo here the issue of her dying
fathers ^ecration; which by the way calling to mind, at thought thereof, she
streamed down from her pyned cheeks, showers of salt tears.

Coming and finding him, (which grieved to see her in such a plight turned
somewhat aside his troubled countenance) she thus bespake him. Ah Iockey deigne
yet to look on me, and in one vewe, take thy full revenge of all the wrongs
that I have done thee: See her miserable, which was immodest: See her humbled
at thy feet, acknowledging with tears her causlesse fury ^ft inflicted on thy
giltlesse body: ah shun me not: I was thy mistrisse, nor scorn me that once
gave thee bread, though now thou see me baser then the meanest servant, nor
refuse I that degree if thou vouchsafe so to receive me. What greater triumph
on such a foe can thou desire, then to have her subject to thy checkes, and
within the compass of thy controlles, which with (...) controlles and checkes
(those the lightest injuries) has often wearied thy glowing ears? But since
heaven does thus avenge on me thy cause, let that suffice thee: oh add not to
my ruth thy rancour, Cut not my heart with dire reproaches, heart so already cut
with deep cares, that almost nothing may be added to my woes. If time or
troubles have not wrested from out thy memory Giraldos name, then for his sake
deigne thou to suc cour me, and by his example, whose kind affection my faults
could never so extinguish, but that it lasted while he lived. Wretch as I am,
how am I blinded thus to plead against my self? loving him, thou needs must
loath me, through whom he led a ioylesse life, and dyed sorrowing for my
sin: Whereon then shall I rely, but on the mildness of thy nature? If this
hope do likewise fail me, then whereto live I? why are my days prolonged to
draw on my lives distress. In uttering these last words, she cast down her
countenance, (...) her eyes ^dfastly on the earth: but Iockey unable to
contain his tears, therein showing how deeply her plaints had pierced him
with remorcefull passion, did thus gently comfort her.

Had mine ears received from the report of others, that which mine eyes do now
assure me of, I should never have believed it. Good God, could such former
wealth end in such present want? such plenty in such penury, such bravery in
such baseness, such pleasure in such pinching woe? O Lord how righteous are
thy judgments: Yet Mistress, (for so I Will still call and account you, nor shall
your fortune, or former injuries cancel my duetye) I could wish, (if I might
wish it without impiety) that this example of Gods justice had been showed on
any other: But we must think that whatsoever he in his wisdom does
determine is doubtless for the best If you can make true use of his
correction, you shall be happy in your unhappiness and these your miseries be a
step to your felicity.

That I am fory to see you in this state, my words and countenance may
witness, and my grieved heart does feel: But since it is so, I yet rejoice that
I am able by releeuing you, to show how dear to me the name and memory of
my deceased master is: I accept you therefore as a welcome guest, assuring you
of such entertainment as I can afforde; and touching the wrongs that you have
done me, I will strive so to forget them, as if I never had sustained them.
This said he, nor said he more, then he performed, for immediately he took
her into his house, where all the time of her abode with him (which was so long
as her self would tarry) she had such relief as his poor estate could
yealde, afforded without grudging: nor did he ever grieve her, with the least
vpbraiding of former wrongs, nor suffer, (while he was present or knew of
it,) that she should take the ^eightest pains, more then in her own
affairs: But in his absence often, to ease and please his wife, she would play
the tapster, and voluntarily address her self to help her in all kind of
drudgeries. While in this sort she lived, not altogether so hapless asbefore,
Arthemio no longer able to continue his shifting, since he had thereby
endangered his life, made this his last shifte, closely to shifte him self
away: sense when he was never seen about the city, nor almost heard of; Only
some obscure reports have past, of his long scouring the western plains for
pursses, and that being afterward apprehended, he dyed miserably in a common
(...) before his public araignment, so preventing the open scandal of an
ignominious death. How so ever this be likely in regard of his former wicked
life, yet not being thereof assured, I will suspend my censure, nor
presumptuously descant of the unknown proceedings of the almighty. But Valeria
after long residence with Iockey, at last, whether hoping on some better place,
or loath continually to trouble him, since no way able to requite his kindness,
fondly left him and thereby rep^ung'd her self into her former miseryes,
falling in the end to little better then open beggary: from which so abject
state of life, she nere recovered till death gave truce to her distresses:
death wherein only she was not hapless; But if to wretched people the
preventing of any sorrow may be termed good hap, then so was hirs, in
notsecing her suruiuing childrens miserable ends, such as their dissolute
bringing ^y, did ever threaten, and their leaud courses justly merit: of these
the elder flying for some offense beyond the seas, and there following arms in
the civil tumults of distracted Belgia, but soon staining the most honorable
profession of a soldier by playing the traitor, had his deserts paid with
the halter, and therein leaping desperately from the ladder, he took his
journey into the other world. The younger confirmd so in the love of headstrong
liberty through his corrupt education, that he could not long brook any
service: succourd by none, because d^sdaining subjection to a^l; died in the
fields, and there lay a loathsome spectacle; for his stinking carcass had no
other couerture then he auens vast circumference, and his unburied limbs were
seized on by ravenous birds, who therewith glutted their carrion gorges.
Somewhat before his last gasp with an often interrupted voice, he faintly groned
out these bitter mones. O whither shall I turn me, whereon shall I hope, or
what shall I desire? my bones ache, my bowels gnawe, my feet rot, each limme
does shiuer, and my whole body is full of pain: life I loath thee, life when
lea^ thou me? death why dallie^ thou with these delays? why come thou in
such degre^s of torments? thy messengers are more terrible then thy self: yet
come not death, least in exchange of these my present wees, thou plunge me in
eternal woe.

O sin, how sweet is thy beginning, how sower thy end? O father, but enough
of thee, for thy name does cut my soul anew. O mother, but too much of thee,
cruel through immoderate kindness: O vnhapie brother, but happy in respect of
me: for though thy end were likewise shameful, yet was thy carcass covered
with earth: but mine must lie still in this stinking place, to pollute the
air, and feed the ravenous fowls: yet help me some good man who passing by
may hear my mones: give me at least some shelter from this injury of the
weather; unkind men, will none relieueme? yet not unkind, because Gods justice
hardens their hearts: oh that is it, whereon when I do think, I wish that I
had been borne a beast, that with my life all my miseries might end: yet
help me, O my God, since men forsake me: though hell look for me, and I dare
not look on heaven: though my offenses be innumerable, yet is thy mercy
infinitely greater: mercy sweet Lord, father of mercy, mercy it self: O
that my mother had taught me to pray, when she taught me to revile my father:
Alas, I know no form of prayer, save this only which my heart laden with
anguish does thus endite. Mercy sweet Lord, let my soul embrace thy mercy,
let thy mercy embrace my soul. But aye me, my pains increase, life and death
do combat in my breast: this their strife doubles my torments: ah, but helles
torments are far greater. From them and these, sweet Lord deliver me, for in
thee: Here as he feign would have proceeded, life failing, made these his last
words imperfect, with whose death I end this dolorous discourse.

THus (Geutlemen) have you heard briefly related the the Tragique issue of
Giraldos wooing in age, and Valerias wantonness in youth: Had I entitled this
discourse, A looking Glass, the Metaphor had not been wholly immateriall: for
herein may all sorts of readers note sundry points of weight: husbands, the
danger of too much doting: wives in her fall, the end of lustful folly:
parents, the mighty peril of soothing their children in check-free
licentiousness: children, the fruit of disobedience and undutiful dem^r: rash
proceeders, the great difference of good and bad counsel, of honest and
dishonest company: with the danger of not embracing the one, and not shunning
the other: and that the rather, since the force of compante, has in the
effecting of either such exceeding force, according to the Italian proverb,
Dimmi con chi tu vai, and sapro quel che fai. Ictus piscator sapit, but if we
account him wise, which being once hurt, does shun a second hazard: how much
more justly may we commend their wisdom, who being not hurt at all, but
learning heedfulnes at others costs, govern warily themselves by noting the
issue of their indiscretion: which foresight and good fortuue I wish unto you
all.

FINIS.



