A MOST EXCELlent exploit performed by Monsieur de Diguieres, the French
Kings Lieutenant, upon the Popes Army which was under the conduct of Earl
Hercules the Popes Nephew.

With the taking of Saint Esprite, and the mutiny in Paris.

Together with A Discourse of the overthrow of the Duke of Sauoyes army
defeated by the Lord de Diguieres, in the plain of Pont-Charra, near to Castle
Bayard, in the vale of Gresiuodan the eighteenth of September 1591.

Printed at Toures by James Mattayer Printer to the Kings Majesty, and truly
translated into English, according to the same copy.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, 1591.

A MOST EXCELLENT e^ploite performed by Monsieur de Diguieres, the French
Kings Lieutenant, upon the Popes Army, which was under the conduct of Earl
Hercules the Popes Nephew.
With the taking of Saint Esprite, and the mutinye in Paris.
IT is commonly known because it is the general plague of Christendom, how
that usurper of Ecclesiastical power, abuser of Kings, and misleader of
souls, I mean the Pope, rages as a whirlewind through Europe, mustring rebels
and fugitives, nursing traitors to God and their country, and sending them out
into the world to trouble the quietness of kingdoms and overthrowing al, only
to support himself.

Amongst others (besides the business of his great Son the Spanishe King)
he has sent a power of his own, under the conducte of his own Nephewe at
least, the Earl Hercules, furnished in all points to the proof, laden with
the blessings of the Pope himself, and the spoils of their own Churches,
royally, rich, and resolute enough, and in this pride they march down into that
massacred country of France, with great purpose of most wonderful
conclusions.

But Mounsieur de Diguieres being there for the king, gathered a head of expert
soldiers by disgarisoning the neighbor Towns, and welcomed these gallants
of Italy with so hot an encounter, that in less then two hours, two thousand
and five hundred of them were overthrown, and almost as many taken prisoners,
eight hundred of which were slain in the fury, and four hundred kept
prisoners, the rest (more to qualify the pride of their hawty natures) were
first solemnly sworn by Mounsieur de Diguieres never more to bear Arms
against the French king, and then shamefully sent home disarmed, saving only
white wandes in their hands in scorn of their weapons.

The General and his company were well apaide of this service: for whereas
before they lay in Garrison and lackt money, now these brave Romanists brought
them a necessary exercise, an honorable victory and rich spoils, for amongst
them they found in chains of gold, rings, jewels, and armor, as much as was
valued at more then two hundred thousand French crowns, besides three hundred
great horse for service, God send him and all his friends, many more such
banquets.

Besides Saint Esprite, sur Rue has been taken by some of the kings side,
which does mightily hinder those of Abeuile, and Amyens from having succor by
sea.

It is moreover known for certainty, that they in Paris are at intolerable
mutiny amongst themselves, the people against their governors, and the great
ones against them, and so much have the people prevailed that they have hanged
up their chief Governor, God send all their Leaders and fauorits so good an
end.

A discovery upon such accidents as have happened in the French King his Army,
sithence the first day of October, until the fifte of the same month.
THe King departing on monday morning from Attigny, with a thousand French,
three thousand Ritters, and five hundred Harquebuziers, all on horse, intending
to engage fight, and to know what his ennemies forces were, and with what
resolution they would endure the brauado, if any should be given; was by
diversity of informations led into so many douts, that he would not altogether
unadvisedly hazard his troops, till such time as with better advantage and
more certain intelligence he might try the Fortune of such an assault, as
might both make his Majesty be held in an honorable estimate for his
wisdom, and his followers be animated with so resolute a zeal to the
perfourmance of their enterprise, as might cause a continual report, and make
good their warlike endeavors.

Thus minding to persist in the effecting of some exployt, about two of the
clock in the after noone, he with these four thousand foot and five hundred
horse, arrived at Grandpre, a place distant seven Leagues from whence he was
departed, where he understood that the Lord of Amblize, with the troops of
horse which belonged to the Duke de Lorain, and all the strangers of the Duke de
Mayn, were quartered, about a Town called Mountfaucon, bordering upon Lorayne
which was not distant above five Leagues from Graundpre, which news chanced
to the Kings great joy: After animating his troops with such words as might
best beseem so brave a General, set spurs, and in all have made toward
Mountfaucon, where he arrived before night. But those Leaguers which were
lodged in the Town either without intelligence of his Majesty's intended
assault, or any Alarm at al, were departed from thence to lodge betwixt
Stenay and Villefranche, having intended the day following to give some brauado
on such companies as his Majesty had left about Aulmont, upon which doubtless
they had executed some notable stratagem, had not information of the Kings
aryuall apalde them in such sort, as they were forced to plot grounds for their
own safety, and desist from their enterprise.

His M. being quartered near to Mountfaucon, a Forte well furnished with munition
and soldiers, thought best to undertake the trying of the Popes forces: yet
notwithstanding maugre the sconce and the Leaguers which were therabout, lay
there all that night, not without a general terror to the pore rebels which held
the place. Notwithstanding that they had two hundred horse, and many fine
sallyes for aduantaging themselves.

The next morning he determined to make for Verdun beiond the river Meuze, where
the Popes forces lay, under the conduct of Don Octaui^ Chezis: whereupon the
next day his troops being in readiness marched directly to la Meuze, where he
found a squadron of horse, which upon his M. approach carried news to the
leaders of the Popish Army, who upon advise were sent to guard the passage, but
they half dead for fear, began to quake as soon as they perceived what a
number came swarming round about them, thought it better to get within the
walls, or at leastwise to live themselves with some companies that might bear the
blows: but whilst they stood thus scanning their neckeverses without book,
they betook them to their heels, and so saved themselves harmless.

This cowardice not giving any small occasion of admiration to the Kings powers,
who to their no little dishonor, began to shout at the^, was not alone an
ap^aling of those which were after to encounter, but so prosperous an accident
to the incoraging of his M. resolute followers, that they almost esteemed it as
dishonor to combat with such Cowes. But the King now perceiving it high ^ime to
give notice to the world of his magnanimity, began thus to lay the platform of
his valor.

First he sent Mounsier Fournier and le Sieur de Giury with 50. horse to engage
the fight, but seeing how these at one place had given the alarm, and that
therefore it was hard to surprise them, turned right toward Amblize whom he
hoped to encounter with either on the way, or resting themselves: Meanewhile
diverse forragers of the kings met with twelve lances which guarded chariots and
conuoyes of the leagues, and about the same time three Carbines of the kings
gave him to understand how they had seen Amblize mounted with all his troops,
march right to Dampuilliers: Upon which information he thought it good to go
and lie in the way to cut them off, and for the more speed aduanst himself
in person, and took the nearest way which lay through a forest bounding on
Lorraine, and Luxembourg, and by this means adventured so far as he came
within Cannon shot of Dampuilliers, where he found they had not yet passed.
Wherefore seeing the day began to fail, provided for the lodging of his men,
because being in arms, the distance and the great pace they rode, made them
weary: The meanewhile his Majesty, as his natural disposition is, not
sleeping above three hours, spent the rest in premeditating on the sequel of
his enterprise, but never ceassing to think how he might circumuent his
great enemies, commanded that the day following the rendezvous should at the
furthest by ten of the clock be appointed, at his court of Guard that was
furthest aduanst, and from thence intended to make for verdun to give the
battle, which being done he approached within a league of the town, where he
made a stand, looking till a wonderful great tempest was allaid: which
notwithstanding his Majesty impatient of the least delay, accompanied only
with thirty horse: came within the sight of the town, whence not seeing any
body come forth, and the rain and wind rather increase, then give over, gave
order to the Baron Byron, that his squadrons might be lodged half a league
further off, to prevent any sally, and to send to him 150. horse, being chosen
some out of every troop: whereupon the Prin^^ d'Enhal^ came in person with
thirty Alman horse and other Nobles to the number of an hundred and fifty.

Now when the weather began to break up, there sallied out of the town fifty
Lances, which seemed at the first as if they would have come to render
themselves to his Majesty's favor: but like traitors pretending nothing less,
being within musket shot of the walls, made a stand, having for their
General the Lieutenant of Don Ottauio Chezis, which is the first company
under the Popes Nephew: these having diverse Carbins in their company, made
them scout up and down, to epsy if any ambushe were not laid near the town,
in performance of which they spent two hours, whereby their good devotion,
either to submit themselves to the kings mercy, or the fortune of the day,
proved so could, as his highness could but smile at their simple endeavors, But
whilst they were in this squadron, neither daring for fear come out of the
shot, nor for shame return into the Town, his highness sent le Sieurs de
Praslin, la Curee and de l'Hargerie to counter brave them, but with 20. horse,
giving them in charge, that the first pace that they should see the enemy
retire, as they were natural Friends and honorable subjects, they should
charge them what mishap soever should befall, and the more to annimat them,
promised new supplies: whereupon on their allegiance, promised to perform
what his Majesty should please to command, and so set forward. The king
perceiving with what loyal affection and resolute hardiness, these few
submitted their lives to his pleasure, prising their loss above any esteem,
willed the Baron Byron to be ready on one side with 40. and le Sieur de la
Chappelle aux Vrsins, with 20. horse on the other side, as well to succor the
assailants if need should be, as to see if any troops came not behind, or were
laid in ambush to cut them off: not contrary to an expected cowardice, at the
ra^ging of these squadrons, they so betook them to a gallop, but not with such
have, but that six of those 20 being the best mounted, entered the backs of
them, and began to make their Ensign fly. In this skirmish was slain the horse
that Le Sieur de la Curee had under him, which the ennemy perceiving turned,
and set upon them being not passing 5. or 6. (the rest not being so well horst
could not enter the reregard so soon) yet having no more then these 6. they
behaved themselves in such sort, as although they were in the midst of the
throng, yet every several man could have showen his ennemies head on his
lances point, wherein they showed the magnanimity of right loiall subjects,
and yet not thus content chaste them even under the walls of the town, slew 8. of
their horses, and brought away two prisoners where they stood, and fronted
three squadrons of horse, privily salied out of the town, which making show to
charge them scarce almost above a hundred paces were content to make a stand,
and see their fellows rifled, amongst who^ was the Lieutenant and Captain of
the guard aforesaid.

Thus valiantly having made an impression of their true and notable affection
toward their sovereign they returned, Le Sieur de Praslin having received
three several blows of a lance in his cloak, and a Pistol which perced his
curase, bruised his flesh but rested in his doublet. Wherefore his M. perceiving
the night to draw on, and that his enemies retired themselves unto their holds,
commanded a retreat should be sounded, and such as in his adventures once had
worthily behaved themselves, he received with such princely and honorable
entertainment as might stand with his M. honor and their own deserts. There
was one of those prisoners which were taken in this skirmish, which upon
friendship he received at the hands of Le Sieur de Saint Gouard one of the
kings side, discovered the whole number of the Popes forces: which upon his
honor he avouched not to be above 800. lances, 1200. Italian footmen, and
three thousand Switzers, the rest being either well beaten, run away, or dead
with eating of grapes.

Thus whilst his M. had lain a league and a half from Verdun without any
alarm, seeing the Leaguers would not budge out of the walls: he left them to the
mercy of a second assay: and thence went to Montfa^con spoken of before, which
he took, and from thence went to Grandpre and so to Attigny, where after a little
soiourne, he meant to assemble new forces and once more to try whether they
would come out of their holes.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE overthrow of the Duke of Sauoyes Army, defeated by the L.
de Diguieres, in the plain of Pont-Charra, near to Castle Bayard in the Vale
of Gresiuodan, the eighteenth of September, 1591.

Printed at Toures by James Mattayer, Printer to the Kings Majesty, and truly
translated into English, by E. A.



LONDON, Printed by John Wolf, 1591.

A Discourse of the overthrow of the Duke of Sauoyes Army, defeated by the
Lord de Diguieres in the plain of Pont-Charra, near to Castle Bayard, in the
vale of Gresiuodan, the 18. of September, 1591.
AFter the taking of the Town of Luz in Province, the Lord de Diguieres
meaning to take the benefit of the time, and to employ it in the Kings
service, while his Majesty's army lying at the siedg of Graneson, was by the
Duke of Sauoy restrained from tending else where, determined with the small
forces, wherewith he had reduced the Town of Luz into obedience, to go and
besiedge Digne, and to that intent he departed from Mesine the 24. of August.
Upon his arrival near the said Town, which lies within two musket shot of
the said Digne, and upon his deliberation to put his enterprise in execution,
there was certain news of the army of Sauoy, consisting of seven hundred
horses, and seven thousand harquebuziers (a matter well known to all men,
confirmed by diverse aduices, and since found true) this army I say, being
lead by the Lord Amedee Olliuaro and the Marquis of Treny, had besiedged
Morester, which was lately fortified to cover Grenoble from the border of
Sauoy. Upon this new advise, he was necessarily to change his purpose, and in
lieu of assailing, to succor and defend, yea even to use great diligence, for
that the place was not so well fortified and provided, as was to be wished, as
a matter enterprised and put in execution in four days space, whiles the
said Lord de Diguieres remained upon the frontier to discover the Popes army,
as it passed by Montmellion, to the end thereof to give advise unto the King,
and withal to keep it from raunging and wasting the valley of Gresiuodan; as
undoubtedly it would, had it not been for the bar and troop of the said Lord
de Diguieres cast in their way, and finally, to provide against the siedge
wherewith the said army threatened Grenoble.

The 25. and 26. of the said month, the said Lord de Diguieres having left
some of his companies in Corbon, until such time as the Lord of la Valette had
taken order as he thought good, departed out of Province, without licensing or
disbanding of any of his troops, whom he caused to take the way ^hither where
necessity required. From that day until the twelfth of September, the said
Lord de Diguieres labored to gather together his friends, so that the same day
he lay at Grenoble, and the villages round about, accompanied with the Lords
of Mcures, Briquemant, Marges, Pra^ant, and other Gentlemen and Captains, with
three hundred horse at the most, and two thousand seven hundred harquebuziers.
The enemy understanding of the arrival of these troops, whose numbers he
knew not, raised his siedge, which in truth he had not laid very near to
Morester, and took his lodging at Pont-Charra, half a league above the said
place, and there he labored to entrench and barriquade the ways to his
lodging, setting a countenance as if he would keep it, and lodge some troops
in houses therabout. But as for the said Lord de Diguieres troops, the footmen
took up their lodging at Chelais, and the horsemen at Gouselay and Ransin, so
as the rest of that small army, was but half a league from the enemy.

The fifteenth day was spent in the discovering of the enemies lodging, and the
sixteenth attending the coming of the said Lord de Diguieres, who staid at
Grenoble sick of a rheum that held him four days the Lord of Beliers with
some harquebuziers on horsbacke, pie^ced the guard of one company of horsemen,
struck into their lodginges, and utterly ouerthrewe them, so that there
remained on the place some twenty men, and there were won some twenty seven
horses of service, with cassackes, lances and other furniture.

The said sixteenth of the said month, the Lords of Meures and Morges, being
loath to lose any time, departed with some twenty of their companies, to take
so near a view of the guard of the army, that they entered it pesse-messe, and
cast it upon the arms of the said army, so that had it not been that the
narrow way being pestered with three or four horses that were fallen, and
stood the fliers in stead of Barriquadoes, they had followed further: some
enemies were there slain, and good horses taken. The said Lord de Diguieres
arriving the same day, forgot not to spend the seue^teenth day about a perfect
view of the enemies lodging, wherein also he considered of the situation of
such places as might favor them, or be any help to them, in case he should set
upon them. All which he took so certain notice of, that every thing fell out in
manner as he had premeditated and described on a leaf of paper.

The next day being the 18. the enemy set himself in battle array, observing
the order that follows. His head was turned toward Crenoble: on the left hand
stood his footmen in a round upon also all hillocke of vines; on the right
hand under castle Bayard ran the river of Lizere, and between the river or
the hillocke stood his horsemen in three squadrons, within the medows that lie
near the Lord of Beumons house: and before the said horsemen stood some 40.
horse in a field on a row, where they had a valley or downfall that debarred
our men from coming at them in battle array. This order did the enemies take,
because they had a far off discovered the L. de Diguieres troops coming
toward them: who being come without two musket shot of the enemy, he caused
them to make a stand in a bottom near the river, where they were shadowed
with trees, to the end they might not be discovered. In the mean time the
Lord of Prabant with 1500. Harquebuziers followed the hill on the right hand in
two troops, whereof the one kept the top, so to displace those that stood on
the side, and the other marched on the lower way, so to displace the footmen
that favored the enemies horsemen. And in the mean time while the Lord of
Prabant either favored, or made show of any footmen in the field, where the
enemies guard was set, a troop of horse which contained not above twenty,
being led by the lord of Verasse lieutenant of the Lord of Baquemands company,
marched directly to the said guard, which had no mind to stay, but forsook
their ground, and retired to the main battle. The L. de Diguieres marking
this countenance, as also that footmen had begone to shake the enemy that
stood on the hillocks, caused his troops to march on into the enemies field,
which they had chosen, which also was the same, where the enemies Guard had
been set before. The footme^ also led by the L. of Probant, keeping the night
hand, aranged themselves like wise, as did also the Lord of Miz^les with a
battle of footmen on the left hand upon the edge of the river: The horsemen in
the midst aranged in three squadrons, each at another heels, among whom we do
not comprehend the light horse, making as it were an advantage, led by the Lord
of Brigmant. The squadron that followed next was led by the Lord of Morges,
then the second Cornet of the said Lord de Diguieres, led by the Lord of
Poligny: and the last, which was the white Cornet, together with 52. great
horses, who seemed nevertheless to be some, five hundred, by reason they had
following them at the heels, 120. Harquebuziers on horseback, and the varlets
with every one a sword in his hand, which greatly danted the enemy: upon the
left hand of the said white Cornet stood an other battle of footmen to favor
the same that served for an arriergard. Being thus aranged at the same time
that the skirmish waxed warm on either side, and that the enemy began to
abandon his lodging, we charged their horsemen, who at the first coming, set
a reasonable good face on the matter, and bard out the said charge, entering
somewhat into our vauntgard, who seeing themselves supported, returned and
broke the enemy, who had already joined all his squadrons in one, so to fly
the sooner: yet fetched they a compass in the meadows, that belong to the
said lord of Beumons house, and stayed until our vauntgard came within the
Spear length, and then began to fly. The chase held on to Montmelliun,
whether all the fliers did notretire, for some lay dead in the place, and
others fled at randon toward Rochette Arguebelle Miolans and the woods. The
number of the dead amounted unto above 2500. There were taken above 300. horse.
Also some prisoners, most of them Captains, lieutenants, or ancient-bearers.
Also 18. Ancients bearing the red cross, and one Cornet. The lord Amedee saved
himself at Miolans, the lords Marquize of Treny and Otiuare, were lost in the
Wood 36. hours, and afterward saved themselves at Montmelion. The baggage was
taken fully and whole. Most of the heads of the enemy are lost. This
happened the 18. of September, and upon the 19. of two hundred Romans, and
Mil^nars, who had saved themselves in the Castle of Aualon with their leaders
the Galatine and Beliogeuse yealded at discretion: But the fury of the
soldiers could not pardon six or seven hundred, who were cut in pieces: and
the rest, every one with a white staff in his hand, having promised to
repair to their own houses; and never to fight any more against the king,
were by the said Lord de Diguieres safeconducted into a place of safety. This
victory is so much the more notable, because we lost never a man of name.
Also that after the muster of the Companies, there wanted but one light horse
belonging to the Lord of Brigmant, and two soldiers that were slain: and the
Lord of Valleure, and two soldiers wounded. The bootle was not so small, but
that it amounted unto above 200000 crowns, the most part in chains, Iewelles,
Gold and Silver coined, Silver Vessel, and rich Garments, and the rest in
horses and armor. It seems that the memory of the great captain Bayard, in
his time, so affectionat unto France, would not suffer her most ancient
ennemies, should receciue any better entertainment about his house which
himself builded.

To God be the glory, and to the kings servants, the contentation hereof.

FINIS.

