A PROBLEM, PROPOVNDED by Francis Dillingham, in which is plainly showed,
that the holy scriptures have met with Popish Arguments and opinions.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life. LONDON, Imprinted by WILLIAM JONES, and are to be sold by ED. WEAVER.

TO THE MOST REverend Father in God, George by the Divine providence,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of England, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, Grace and peace.
THE Apostolical times, from the Apostolical doctrine (Most Reverend) have
incited me to write this Problem. It may seem strange to some, that future
heresies should be thus prevented: but howsoever it seem strange to some, it
is not strange to the enlightened and sanctified: for first, he that knew what
was to come, endited the holy scriptures: he I say that knows (...) etc. Quae
sunt, et erunt, quaeque ante fuere.

Secondly in those times in which the holy Scriptures were written, there were
the same wits, the same corruption, the same enemy of mankind, namly the
devil, which are in our times: therefore no marvel, if there be the same
opinions, The heathen philosopher said that the same opinions in philosophy
were renewed and so it is in divinity. the Anabaptists have renewed the
opinions of the Enthusiastes. the Libertines defend Pelagius his opinions. and
have not the Vbiquitaryes also brought Eutyches his opinion again upon the
stage? Cut off Hydras heads, and more will spring up. I will not answer this
point in any more words. It remains then that I crave pardon, for that I
have troubled your Grace with so small a Treatise: but your Lord-shipe knows
that (...). If therefore Been be in this book, and Well be in this work, it
is certain that much is in the same. But this I leave to your Grace to judge
of, as I do also to the Church of God. The spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets. The Lord of Lords multiply his graces upon you to the
good of his Church, and your everlasting Salvation.

Your Graces in all duty: FRANCIS DILLINGHAM.

A Problem propounded by Francis Dillingham, in which is plainly showed, that
the holy Scriptures have met with popish arguments and opinions.
Of reading the holy Scriptures.
THe papists will not have the lay people, to read the Scriptures, because
they may take hurt by reading of them. Bellarmine lib 2. de verbo dei cap. 15.
the words of Bellarmine are these, quid quod populus non solum non caperet
fructum ex scripturis, sed etiam caperet detrimentum, acciperet enim facillime
occasionem errandi, tum in doctrina fidei, tum in praeceptis morum. The people
not only receive no good out of the Scriptures, but hurt, for they would easily
take an occasion to err, both in the doctrine of faith as well as in the
doctrine of manners. Let us see how the Scriptures meet with this sottish
objection. Revel: chap: 22. v. 10. And he said unto me, seal not the words of
this prophecy, for the time is at hand. Now some men might say, the unjust
will abuse this prophecy S. John answers, he that is unjust let him be
unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be filthy still. Hence it is plain
that the cavil of Papists is met withal, who thus dispute, they which will
abuse the scripture must not read the same, the lay people will abuse the
scripture, ergo they must not read the same. S. John answers by a
distinction, some will abuse it some will not. He that is filthy, let him be
filthy, he that is holy, let him be holy still. But I desire to know of the
Papist, if the learned also will not abuse the scripture, it cannot be denied,
it is but bad arguinge from the abuse of a thing to take away the lawful use
of the same. Many abuse meat and drink to surfeiting and drunkenness, yea the
Sun and Moon to Idolatry, must these things therefore be taken away? Images
are abused to Idolatry, yet will not the Papists take them away, which is a
shameful thing. Nocturne vigils, were abused, being but the devise of men.
therefore they were taken away: I wish the Papists would do so with Images,
which are men's inventions, and not take away the reading of the Scriptures
which is Gods ordinance.

A second objection answered.
A Second objection against reading of the Scriptures is taken from the darkness
and obscurity of the same: thus do the Papists argue. The Scriptures are
obscure, therefore the lay people ought not to read them. This argument is
answered by the Apostle, 2. Cor: 4. chap: 3. v. If our gospel be then hid, it
is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds, that is of the infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel, should
not shine unto them. Thus stands the objection. Many hear the gospel, yet
are they not enlightened thereby, therefore the doctrine is not so clear as thou
Paul make it. Paul answers the fault is not in the Gospel, but in men
themselves and the Devil who blinds their minds. Excellently writes Picus
Mirandula, Scriptura affibilitate parvos nutrit, altitudine superbos irridet,
profunditate attentes terret, veritate magnos pascit, the Scripture does
nourish those that are small, by affability, it scorneth the proud by the
loftines, by the depth it terrifieth those that are atteent, and by truth it
feeds great ones.

Of prayer in an unknown tongue.
THe Papists teach and practice prayer in an unknown tongue. The Apostle has
prevented this error, 1. Cor. 14. chap. v. 15. what is it then, I will pray
with the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with
the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also. The objection answered
is this. Is it not therefore lawful to pray with the spirit. S. Paul answers
it is lawful if it be understood. Now by spirit as every man knows, is meant
a strange tongue which the spirit did endite, So then, the Apostle has plainly
prevented the cavil for praying in a strange and unknown tongue; directly
affirming that men must not so pray except they understand the tongue.

Of works of Congruitie, that is, deserving of Congruitie.
HO, every one that thirsts says Esa. 55. v. 1. come ye to the waters, and
ye that have no silver, come bye and eat: come I say bye wine and milk
without silver and without money.

All that are a thirst are here called to the waters, that is to Gods graces.
Now they might say we have no merrits or deserts, ye that have no silver
(says the Lord) come bye and eat, I say bye wine and milk without silver and
without money. Touching this text thus writes Bellarmine lib. 5. de insti. ca.
5. Wine and milk signify not everlasting glory, but, the grace of this life:
we do confess, that the grace of God is not gotten by our merits, but freely
given, although not without our work and labor, for to come and to bye, note
our labor, without money and without change, note that reconciliation is not
due but flatly free, O Bellarmine why then do thou teach merits of
congruitie lib. 1. cap. 21. I end this point with the Lords speech Esai 43. v.
25. I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for my own sake, and
will not remember thy sins.

Of meriting Heaven.
They Papists teach, that a man by his good works may deserve heaven, behold
how the Scripture has anticipated this ungodly opinion psalm 130. thus does
the servant of God pray, Lord hear my voice, let thine ears attend to the
voice of my prayers, the Lord might say unto him, thou art not worthy to be
heard, it is true says he, for if thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities,
who shall stand, but mercy is with thee that thou might be feared, to
proceed, thus likewise does David pray psalm: 143. Hear my prayer O Lord, and
harken unto my supplication, answer me in thy truth and righteousness. The Lord
might say unto him thou have no merits, nor deserts, it is true says he
therefore I pray, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall no man that lives be justified. Here some may say, if good works
deserve not heaven, what is the use of them, the scripture is plain for the
use of the^, 2. Ephe: 10. v. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that
not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Now the Ephesians might have said,
we acknowledge thus much, but do not our works coming from grace deserve? No
says the Apostle, not of works least any man should boast himself, what is
then the use of good works? it follows, for we are his workmanship created
in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk
in them. To this suteth the speech of Barnard, Opera sunt via regni, non causa
regnandi, Good works are the way to the kingdom of heaven, not the cause. S.
Peter also excellently sets out the use of good works, 2. Pet. 1. v. 10. In
these words, Wherefore brethren give rather diligence to make your calling and
election sure; for if these things be in you, you shall never fall: for by
this means an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. And christian reader, what need
the Papists plead for merits, seeing Bellarmine writes thus, lib. 5. de
iusti. ca. 14.Ius habemus, We have right to an everlasting inheritance, before
we begin to do good works? further, Infantes Baptized, by that grace alone
before all good works are saved, and therefore Christ has merited for us the
inheritance, seeing he has merited for us the grace of regeneration and
adoption. And again in the 17. chap. Infants merit, not by the merits of
works, but by the merits of the person. Now what are infants merits but Gods
mercies, as Barnard says, Meritum meum miseratio Domini, My merits are the
Lords mercyes? I conclude this therefore with the saying of S. Barnard, 68.
sermon. in cant. Nam et de meritis ecclesia quid sit sollicita, cui de proposito
Dei, firmior suppetit securiorque gloriandi ratio, why should the Church be
careful touching merits and deserts, seeing it has a more firm and sure
matter to boast of, to wit the purpose of God?

Of fulfilling Gods commandments.
THe Papists teach, that a man regenerate may fulfill Gods commandments: the
Apostle takes it for granted, that no man can do so. Gal. 3. v. 10. For as
many as are of the deeds of the law are under the curse, for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them. In which words the Apostle does thus reason,
They which cannot fulfill the law are under the curse: but no man can fulfill
the law, ergo by the sentence of the law every man is under the curse: If this
be not the Apostles Assumption, the Galathia^s might have answered Paul, that
they could fulfill the law, and so cut the sinews of the Apostles reason. To
this argument Bellarmine in his 4. book of iustifi. and chap. 14. answers,
that this is the Apostles Assumption: No man by his own strength without faith
and grace can keep the whole law: but alas, in the 2. chap. and last verse,
thus does the Apostle reason, If righteousness be by the law, then Christ dyed
without a cause. Now if the Galathians clean iustled out Christ from
justification, then it had bin no absurdity for the^ to have said, Christ dyed
in vain, for by nature we can do these things which the law requires. Again,
who knows not that the Galathians were Christians? chap. 6. v. 1. and chap.
3. v. 3. therefore would they utterly exclude Christ from justification? It is
impossible to believe. In the same place, it is worthy to be marked, that this
text being objected, In many things we offend all. Bellarmine confesses that
Vega and those that hold venial sins to be against the law, cannot answer
this argument: therefore he says, that venial sins are not against the law,
but besides the law. But I would know whether venial sins be sins or no.

Sin is every breach of the law. Venial sin is sin. Ergo It is a breach
of the law.
Bellarmine himself in his first book of the loss of grace chap. 9 proves
venial sins out of these words in the 5. chap. of Matthew, He that is angry
with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of judgment. Now our Savior shows,
that these degrees of anger are forbidden in the commandment of murder. Hence
I thus dispute: That which is forbidden in the commandment of murder, is
against the law. But this venial sinue of anger is forbidden in the
commandment of murder. Ergo It is against the law.


Christian reader, I desire thee to read the 4 book and chap. 10. there he
confesses out of Augustine that venial sins are forbidden in this
commandment thou shall not covet, This commandment commands perfection, for
says he, Eius generis est, vt simul media et finem comprehendat, It is of that
kind that it co^prehendeth both the means, and the end. Again, These things
are spoken according to Augustine his mind, who in the precept, Thou shall
not covet, does understand that all motions of concupiscense are forbidden,
even those that are not voluntary after a sort.

Of Images.
THe Papist teaches, that Images of God are not forbidden, Bellarmine de
sanct. Imag. lib. 2. cap. 8. and that they are means to put us in mind of
God. Let us see how God preventeth this remembrance. Deuteronomy: chap: 4. v: 23. Take
heed lest you forget the covenant of the Lord your God which he made with you.
Now might the people say, we will not forget, for we will make an Image of God
to remember him: this cavil is cut off in the next words, And lest you make
you any graven Image or likeness, of any thing as the Lord thy God has charged
thee: and in the 15. verse, Take heed to your selves, for ye saw no Image in
the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire. Now
where as God (says Bellarmin) may be painted imperfectly I would feign know
how God can be so painted, seeing he has revealed himself in the blessed
Trinity. Thus writes Bellarmine, vbi tamen notandum etc. Where notwithstanding
it is to be noted, that such Images are not to be multiplied, neither is it to
be suffered that Paynters dare of their own heads feign Images of the
Trinity, as when they paynt one man with three faces, or one man with two
heads, and in the midest of them a Dove. These are monsters, and do rather
offend by their deformity, then help by their similitude. Thus far
Bellarmine: and truly by the same proportion so are all other Images of God,
wherefore I say with Durand, lib 3. distinct: 9: quaest: 2. It is impiety to
Paynt that which is Divine, and if any man say that the holy Ghost did appear
in the form of a Dove, we must say, that those forms were not taken into
unity of person, wherefore no reverence is due to them. This has Durand
written with many more words, which I have omitted for brevitie sake. God teach
us to remember him aright and to detest our own inventions. I deal only with
the scriptures, and therefore I meddle little with humane testimonies.

Of persevering in grace, whether faith and righteousness be proper to the
elect, and whether saving faith being once had, may be wholly and finally lost.
The papists hold that it may be lost. Bellar. lib. 3. de iustif. ca. 14.

SAint Peter in his first Epistle cap: 1. v. 3. Thus writes; Blessed be God
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy
has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, unto an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you. Thus far S. Peter. Now some might object and
say as the papists do, we may leese this hope and inheritance. Nay, says S.
Peter, in the next words and verse it is not so, we are kept by the power of
God thorough faith, unto salvation, which is prepared, to be showed in the last
time, So then, the power of God preserves us thorough faith, if our Salvation
were suspended upon our own selves, then no doubt we might leese the same. The
same S. Peter in his 2 epistle 1 chap. 10 verse. exhorts the dispersed Jews
to make their calling and election sure. Some might say and cavil, it cannot
be so, for we may wholly and finally fall: nay says S. Peter, that cannot be,
For if you do these things ye shall never fall: He does not mean they shall
not sin, but they shall not wholly or finally fall from grace: all the Saints
sin, yet a true Saint cannot totally and for ever fall from grace. And as S.
Peter has met with these cavills, so likewise has S. John, 1 epist. chap. 2.
v. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, some might say that it
is not so, for they might be both: nay says S. John, that is not so, For if
they had been of us they had remained with us, but this comes to pass that it
might appear they were not of us. In the same Epist. cap. 3. v. 9. it is thus
written, Whosoever is borne of God sins not, for his seed remains in him.
I but (says the papist) it is true, so long as charity is in him, but he may
lose it: nay says S. John, Neither can he sin, because he is borne of God.
And whereas they say, faith is not peculiar to the elect, I marvel that they
will not see these plain scriptures. Titus 1. v. 1. Paul a servant of God and
an Apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of Gods elect. And Act. 13.
v. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

Of Purgatory.
THe papists teach Purgatory, a place after death, in which the godly must be
purged from their sins, having not perfectly satisfied in this life. Now let
us see how the Scripture meets with this conceit: In the 7. chap: of the
Romans, Paul cries out after this manner, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Some might say, Paul, if thou be so miserable, then thou art in the
state of damnation; mark how the Apostle answers this doubt: Now then, there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the
fleesh but after the spirit. Nay says the Apostle, though I am miserable in my
self, yet am I happy in Christ Jesus, and not only I, but all that are godly.
And here by the way let us observe a point in Divinity we teach that sin is
every breach of Gods law deserving the curse. This must be understood with this
exception, except a man be in Christ Jesus: sin of it self deserves the
curse, but in Christ it is taken away. To proceed, as this place preuenteth
purgatory, so does another place also in the 2. of the Cor. 5. Chap. 1. verse.
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have
a building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in
the heavens. In the 17. v. of the former chapt. these are S. Paul his words:
For our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent and eternal weight of glory. Some man might demand, when shall
we have this glory? the Apostle answers, when our earthly tabernacle is
dissolved. But here some will say, why did the Fathers pray for the dead?
although I have answered this objection in another treatise, yet here I will
speak somewhat of it. Hildebert in his 4 epistle being exhorted by his friend
to pray for a Queen, says that he did prevent his exhortation: Oratis (says
he) quidem orari pro ea, sed credimus eam plus posse suis adiuuare, quam agere
nostris precibus adiuuari. We believe that she rather helps us by her
prayers, then that she need be helped by our prayers. Yet (says he) Vestram
tamen praecessimus exhortationem, We prevented your exhortation, ergo, they
prayed for those that were in heaven. Alcuinus in his book De diuints
officiis, cap. 43. has these words, Aliquibus in locis generaliter pro omnibus
defuncttis omni tempore, exceptis Penticostes et festis diebus, oratur in
officio vespertinali. At eve^ing prayer in some places they pray generally for
all the dead at all times, except the days of Pentecost and festival days.
Ergo, prayer for the dead being made for all, establishes not Purgatory; for I
am sure all the dead are not placed by Papists themselves in Purgatory.

Of satisfaction for sin.
SAtisfaction for venial sins, is stoutly maintained by papists. Let us see
how the holy Scripture has prevented this fearful doctrine. My babes (says
S. John) 1. epist. 2. chap. v. 1. these things write I unto you, that you sin
not; Now they might say, alas, we cannot choose but sin; what must we do
then? must we despair? must we make satisfaction for our sins? No, says S.
John, we have a remedy against both these. For if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just. We need therefore neither
despair nor satisfy. This resolution of holy scripture is firm and sure to
all true Logitia^s and Rhetoricians, wherefore, I doubt not to call this text
the hammer of Popery, and a wire whippe, to scourge the doctrine of
Satisfaction.

Of Transubstantiation or turning the bread into the body of Christ.
IT is held by Pseudocatholiks, that the substance of bread is turned into the
body of Christ, and there remain only accidents and shows of bread. The
Scripture rightly resolved, meets with this monstrous fantasy. Math. 26. v.
26. When they had eaten Jesus took bread, and when be had blessed it, he brake
it, and gave it to his Disciples saying, take, eat, this is my body. The
Disciples might have said, We have supped, what should we do with bread?
Christ answers, this bread is not ordinary bread, but it is my body: now
bread cannot properly be the body of Christ, Ergo it signifies the body of
Christ: the same likewise may be said of the Cup, for this is my blood (says
Christ) when he had said, drink ye all of this. They might have replied, what
need that, seeing we are not thirsty? we have lately supped; Christ answers,
this Cup is not ordinary wine, but it is my blood, namely, the blood of the new
Covenant which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. Christ answering
thus plainly signifies, that he does not give them drink, to quench corporal
thirst, but to quench spiritual thirst. Wherefore, although the Papists would
exclude all tropes out of the supper, yet mark how many they make, first eat,
there is one: for Christ's body cannot properly be eaten. To this Bellarmine
answers, that eating is nothing but conveying from the mouth to the stomach,
by natural instruments, for else old men and children should not eat. I
answer, then let drinking be eating; for drink is conveyed to the stomach by
natural instruments: and touching children and old folks, although they chew
not with teeth, yet their solid meat is somewhat chewed with their gums, and
their liquid meats are not properly eaten, but conveyed to the stomach, being
(as I may speak) drinkable meats. Secondly, they cannot deny but the Cup is
put for the contents in the Cup. Thirdly, thus does Bellarmine expound these
words, This is my body, Under these shows is my body. Fourthly, Do this in
remembrance of me, that is, says Bellarmine, in remembrance of my passion and
death. Christ is put for the death of Christ. Thus are they constrained to make
tropes, and yet they will not allow the Protestants any.

Of the Sacraments.
THe Papists teach, that the Sacraments give grace of the work wrought. Mark
how the Apostle meets with this error, Romans 4.9. Came this blessedness then
upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? For we say, that
faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness. How was it then imputed? when
he was circumcised, or when he was uncircumcised? not when he was circumcised,
but when he was uncircumcised. Some might demand, to what end then was he
circumcised? Paul answers in the next verse, After he received the sign of
circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had. Now
whereas the Papists reply, it is not so in our sacraments as it was in
circumcision; they bid open war and battle to the Apostle who does thus
dispute, As Abraham was justified, so are all men justified: But Abraham was
justified without the Sacraments: Ergo all men are so justified.
What then is the use of the holy Sacraments? They serve to confirm and
strengthen our faith. I might allege another place of Scripture to this
purpose, but I study for brevity, therefore I omit it.

Of prayer unto Saints.
THe Papists teach, that a man may call upon and invocate Saints departed: the
Scripture clean overthrows this opinion, Psalm. 65.2. Because thou hear
the prayer, says David. What then, some men might say? He answers as
follows, Unto thee shall all flesh come. The occasion why all flesh shall
come to God, is, because he hears prayers. Hence I thus conclude: He to whom
all flesh comes, he hears the prayer. But only to God all flesh must come.
Ergo only God hears the prayer of all flesh.
Christian Reader, give me leave here to answer an argument of the Papists: The
living do invoke the living; Ergo they may call upon the dead. This argument
(says Bellarmine) the adversaries cannot answer. I pray thee therefore
Christian Reader, let me answer it. The Saints living before the coming of
Christ, did desire the prayers one of another, yet did they not pray to the
dead. Furthermore, one Saint living may not invocate another. Thus do the
Papists pray to the virgin Marie: Marie the mother of grace, the mother of
mercy, defend us from our enemies, and receive us at the hour of death. I
but, says Bellarmine, the meaning is, that Marie is the mother of grace by
prayer only. Alas, could simple people that prayed in Latin, thus distinguish?
They knew not what they prayed, and could they thus distinguish? Though
Bellarmine a cunning Sophister can so distinguish, yet I think some scholars
amongst the Papists cannot. Yea what blasphemy may not men thus excuse? We may
call the virgin Marie God, and thus excuse it, because she was (...), she
brought forth him that was God, namely Christ Jesus who is both God and man,
and therefore she may be called God. But I would feign know how this prayer may
be salved: O felix puerpera, no strapians scelera, iure matris impera
redemptori: O happy virgin that purgest our sins, command the redeemer by the
right of a mother.

Of the Popes temporal dominion.
THe Popes temporal dominion is known to the world; the Scripture has flatly
forbidden it, Math. 20.25. Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have dominion
over them, and they that are great, exercise authority over them, but it shall
not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
servant. Bellar. lib. 4. de To. Pont. c. 10. answers, that the Lord does
institute merely Ecclesiastical Princes, and teaches them that as they are
such, they ought to rule, not after the manner of Kings, but after the manner
of fathers and shepherds: as though Kings ought not to be fathers and
shepherds to their subjects. The speech of Cyrus in Xenophon in his eighth
book, is excellent, (...), etc. the works of a good shepherd and good King
are very like. And I am sure a King in Homer, is called (...), the shepherd of
the people. Let us hear Langius a Papist concerning the Popes temporal
dominion: Eodem anno, says he, The same year, namely 1407. the Romans
offered to Innocentius the Pope the keys of the City, with branches of
Palms, and granted him all the temporal dominion of the city of Rome; but
unjustly and vncommendably: for the store of temporal things do no little
hurt to spiritual. With many more words to the same purpose. Secondly says
Bellarmine, Christ forbids tyranny. for the word is (...). I answer, S.
Luke has met with this cavil; for he uses the word (...) without any
composition: yea the compound is with force and power to rule men whether they
will or no, not with wrong and injury to oppress them. But let us hear
Bernard lib. 2. de consid. ad Eugen. Planum est, Apostolis interdicitur
dominatus: i ergo tu and tibi vsurpare aude aut dominans apostolatum, aut
apostolicus dominatum; plane ab alterutro prohiberis: It is evident that rule
is prohibited the Apostles, go thou therefore and usurp, if thou dare, being
a ruler the Apostleship, or being an Apostle rule; thou art plainly forbidden
one of them. Again, in his first book he has these words, In criminibus, non
in possessionibns potestas ves^ra, Your power is in crimes, not in possessions;
for them and not for these, you have received the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, excluding sinners, not possessors of lands. In his third book, thus
boldly speaks he, Pro libitu agere, quid tam bestiale? To do all things after
his own pleasure, what is so beastly as this? To conclude, in his fourth book
says he, In his successisti non Petro sed Constantino: In these things thou
have not succeeded Peter but Constantine. But it may be the Popes authority
will prevail, let Gelasius therefore speak, tom. 2. Council. page 442. Some
were before the coming of Christ, Kings and Priests typically, but when the
true King and high Priest came, then neither does the Emperor take to himself
the name of an high Priest, neither does the high Priest challenge royal
authority. Many mo words he has to the same purpose. The same thing in effect
has Pope Nicolas the first, in his Epistle to Michael the Emperor. Cassiodore
upon the fiftieth Psalm thus writes, Si quis de populo errauerit, and Deo
peccat and Regi: nam quando Rex delinquit, soli Deo reus est, quia hominem non
habet qui eius facta diiudicat^; merito ergo Rex, Deo tantum se dicit peccasse,
qui solus erat qui eius potuisset admissa discutere: If any of the people err,
he sins against God and the King: when the King sins, he is guilty only
to God, for he has no man that may judge his deeds: worthily therefore does
the King say, that he sinned only against God, because he alone could discuss
his offenses. To conclude, That which the Apostles requested, is forbidden
them. But they requested temporal dominion. Ergo it was forbidden them.
I do not deny but they were somewhat ambitious in asking temporal dominion,
but mere ambition was not forbidden them, but temporal rule, as I have made
manifest and plain.

Of sinning necessarily.
THus do the Papists dispute touching sin, Aut peccatum est necessarium, aut
voluntarium, sin is either necessary or voluntary: if it be necessary,
then it is no sin. The Apostle Paul, Romans 9.19. has cut the sinews of this
argument: Thou will say then, Why does he yet complain? for who has resisted
his will? The Apostle answers, But O man, who art thou that pleadest against
God? To lay open the objection, thus it stands: He that cannot resist the
will of God, is not to be blamed. But a hardened heart cannot resist the will
of God. Ergo a hardened heart cannot be blamed.
The Apostle denies the proposition by a reprehension, O man who art thou that
pleadest against God? And here, by the way, Christian Reader, judge of their
argument who thus dispute touching Adams fall: If God decreed Adams fall, then
he fell necessarily, and so God was the cause thereof. O man, what art thou
that disputest with God? I beseech thee, Christian Reader, adore the mysteries
of election and reprobation, search them not curiously, but lay thy hand upon
thy mouth and be silent, be not a querist, but let God be righteous, and let
the whole world perish: wonder that God should choose any one to salvation:
wonder not if thousands be damned: better far is faithful ignorance, then
rash knowledge. Paul calls them unsearchable ways of God: and will thou
search them? Whosoever is not satisfied with this answer, let him seek for one
better learned then I am, but let him take need that he find not a more
presumer. Thus much may suffice for this argument of sinning necessarily. Here
I might enter into the question of Freewill, but I say with Augustine
concerning this point, Ser. 2. de verbis Apostoli: Work your salvation, says
the Apostle. Now lest they should attribute any thing to themselves, it
follows, It is God which works in you both the will and the deed, of his
good pleasure.

Of Justification.
THus does the Apostle reason touching Justification: If Abraham were justified
by works, he has therein to rejoice, but not with God. The Papists answer,
that S. Paul speaks of the first justification. This answer the Apostle
takes away in the next words: Abraham believed in God, and it was imputed or
counted to him for righteousness. This testimony is alleged out of the
fifteenth chapter of Genesis. And if there were any second justification, it
must needs be understood of the same: for Abraham was justified before. In the
12, 13, and 14 chapters, the notable works of Abraham are recorded, as that he
obeyed God in going out of his country, that he built an altar, that he talked
familiarly with God: besides Heb. 11. the Apostle puts this amongst the
praises of Abraham, that by faith he went into a place which he knew not. And
if S. James speak of a second justification, then does S. Paul likewise: for
S. James alleges the same text chap. 2. ver. 23. But this vain distinction
is also prevented by S. James, who alleges the example of Rachab, verse. 25.
Likewise, was not Rachab the harlot justified through works, when she received
the messengers, and sent them out another way? It is certain that Rachab was
an infidel, until that time that she received the spies: wherefore by her
example it is evident that S. James nor S. Paul knew any second justification.
I conclude with Bellarmine his speech lib. 2. de iustif. cap. 7. Si solum
vellent, nobis imputari Christi merita, quia nobis donata sunt, et possumus ea
Deo Patri offerre pro peccatis nostris, quoniam Christus suscepit super se onus
satisfaciendi pro nobis, nosque Deo Patri reconciliandi, recta esset little
sententia: If they meant only this, that Christ his merits were imputed to us,
because they were given us, and because we may offer them to God the Father for
our sins, seeing Christ took upon him the burden to satisfy for us, and to
reconcile us to God the Father, their opinion was right. Thus far Bellarmine.
Now let us mark how the Apostle reasons: Romans 5. v. 10. For if when we were
enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Excellently writes Bernard, Fateor
non suum dignus, nec propriis possum meritis, regnum obtinere caelorum; ceterum
Dominus meus, duplici iure illud possidens, haereditate patris, et merito
passionis, altero ipse contentus alterum mihi donat. I confess and acknowledge
that I am not worthy, neither can I obtain by my merits the kingdom of
heaven, but my Lord possessing it by a double right, by his Fathers
inheritance, and by the merit of his passion, being content with the one
himself, gives me the other. Thus Christian reader I have showed thee, how
the holy scriptures meet with popish cavills, in the weightiest controversies
betwixt them and us. God almighty open men's hearts to see the clear truth
which in great brevitie and simplicity, I have here propounded. I doubt not
but other learned men may add much unto this small Treatise which I have
written, to excite men to study the Scriptures. and eschew popery. And as I
have written it with this mind, so I doubt not, but that God will give a
blessing to it. Amen Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

