The Surueye of the World, or Situation of the Earth, so much as is inhabited.

Comprysing briefly the general parts thereof, with the names both new and
old, of the principal Countries, Kingdoms, Peoples, Cities, Towns, Ports,
Promontories, Hills, Woods, Mountains, Valleys, Rivers and Fountains therein
contained.

Also of Seas, with their Clyffes, Reaches, Turnings, Elbows, Quick sands,
Rocks, Flattes, Shelues and Shoares.

A work very necessary and delectable for students of Geographie, Sailors, and
others.

First written in Greek by Dionise Alexandrine, and now englished by THOMAS
TWINE, GENTL.

Jmprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1572.



To the right worshipful master William Louelace Esquire, Serieant at Law,
Tho. Twine wishes health, long life, with daily vauntage of woorship.
BEnefits bou^tifully received, make thankful hearts always to think on
requital, vvhervvith having bin so plentifully endued at your hands (right
vvoorshipfull) as none more, far beyond deserte, howbeit according to your
peculiar custom of courtesy to all men, although to me (I confess) in more
ample wise extended: I have beaten my brains in contriuing some devise,
vvherin I might yield you thanks, and after my simple sort, make you part of
a recompense. Which purpose of mine, by no other means being able to
accomplish: nevertheless I judged it not convenient in any point to quayle,
vvherin I might declare my good vvil, but am now so hardy as to present your
worship with Dionysius, a vvorthie gentleman of Alexandria, whose noble
work of the Situation of the habitable World, I have put of late into
English: requiring most humbly your friendly acceptance and patronage of the
same. Whereof I do partly already assure my self, recompting your worships
accustomable favor, whereby you are most courteously provoked, not only to
the aduauncing of learning, and such as seem to have any small taste therein,
but also of other virtues and commendable qualities, having professed your
self a refuge and rampire unto two sorts of people, I mean the godly and
poor, as your daily and late practices do testify. And partly for that I
have marked, for what great benefits, how small or none the recompenses are
which you have received. Wherefore being my self a like disabled detter, I
crave but acquittaunce for semblable payment, to wit, your courtesy in well
accepting that, which an heart fraught with good vvil, of duty offers:
which is altogether the thing that I look for in this behalf. Doubting not
but you shall receive singular delight in the reading hereof, when vacant
leisure from vveightier affairs shall license you, and I thereby shall be the
more emboldened to enterprise the like attempt, if God permit me grace and
life. Leaving thus any farther to trouble you, with my dutiful co^mendations,
and daily intercession to the Almyghtie, for the happy estate of your
worship, and the good gentlevvoman mistress Mary Louelace your loving wife.

At London the.xv. day of May. ANNO. M. D. LXXII. Your worships most bounden
THOMAS TVVYNE.

To the friendly Reader.
IF now by my means (friendly Reader) yet in thy behalf, Dionisius may be
understood in english, as I judge, and hope, thou can not be thereat offended.
It is long sythence he wrote in the Greek tongue, and has bin translated into
Latin of late years, by diverse. In whose commendation, if he had needed other
than his own, purchased by just deserte, since he first wrote, I would not
have wanted to have done my endeavor. But for so much as he is accounted of
all antiquity, the old writer, for compendiousnesse and breuity in that he
took in hand: sufficient it shall be in praise or authority to have yealded to
him his own, and no more. Which what it is read Pliny, and there understand
how that the author of this work being borne in Alexandria, a city in
Eegypt, descended of a most noble family, abounding in great wealth and
authority, wrote not only this work, which we have interpreted, The
Surueye of the habitable World in Hexameter verses, being as yet but very
young: but also many other, both learned and eloque^t. Who afterward resorting to
the court of Rome, was sent by Augustus the Emperor, to surueye and report
the state and situation of cuntries in the east parts of the world, when his
eldest son was upon expedition into Armenia, to the Parthians, and Arabians.
What shall I say, that there have bin many other worthy men of that name, who
have be^ supposed to be the authors of this book? howbeit, falsely in my
opinion, as by farther discourse (at this present) not necessary, I could
declare. In my translation, I trust I have observed all requisite conditions,
expressing (so well as I could) the intent of the Author. And for thy
commodity adjoining to the names of countries and other places, in old time
frequented, the usual names also whereby they are known by all trauailers at
this day, not omitting of certain words, which were always Latin, and so
used, to make them English for orders sake, not knowing any cause to the
contrary. As because out of Europa, we term commonly Europe: so likewise to
say for Asia, Asie, and for Africa, Afrike, with such like what ever. Accept
this the travail of us both thankfully: and if thou receive any pleasure or
commodity thereby, then have I for my part, atteyned to my desire.

Fare you well.
A general division of the Earth in to three parts.
THe whole Earth The earth almost an Island.
being compassed almost round with the Ocean Sea like a great Island, yet is
not altogether round like a boule, but ryseth somewhat on both sides toward
the course of the Sun, and makes semblance of a certain mistie cloud. This
earth, although it be one, notwithstanding our ancients divided it into three,
whereof they called one Lybia, sometime subdued by Libes, Libya of Libes.
Aphrica. Europa. Asia. The shore Gaditanum. Nilus. Egypt.
or Aphrica, because it is without sharpness of cold. An other Europa of a
lost woman. And the third Asia greater than the other twain. Lybia is severed
from Europe on the one side, by y^ shore Gaditanum otherwise Gibraltur, on the
other by y^ mouth of Nilus, chiefly where the northsyde of Egypt runs along,
and the glorious temple of Canopus Amyclaeus Canopus Amyclaeus. Tanais.
is builded. The river Tanais, now Tana disioyneth Europe from Asie, and so
washing the coasts of them both, Sauromatae.
runs northerly by the Sauromates, called also Sarmatae or Poloni, into
Scythia, and into the fennes Maeotides now El mar negro. But in the southe, the
first Hellespo^tus.
bound is toward Hellespontus, and the mouth of Nilus, which is more southerly
than Helespontus, now El far de Gallipoli, and Brachium S. Georgu.
Notwithstanding, some affirm, that the earth is four square, which being
enuironned with the two straytes of Caspium, The earth compassed by the seas
Caspium, and Euxinum.
and Euxinum: the Greeks called it (as every like narow piece of land lying
between two seas) Isthmus, and that it is compassed about with them both.
There were some also, that said there was an other Isthmus, which reachyng
Isthmus what it is. Arabia.
likewise toward the Southe, cutteth off the Gore of Arabia, and Egypt,
which diuydeth Lybia from Asie. Since therefore, the whole Earth is with
these bounds divided into three: no man ought to doubt, but that it is
compassed with the Oceane. Which Ocean being but one, as also the earth is,
yet is distinguished by diverse names, according as it dyuersly intrencheth,
and diuydeth the parts of one body. For near unto the furthest parts of the
World, from whence the Western wynd blows, and the mighty Hill Atlas,
called now Maiust, ryseth, Atlas.
it is called no more the Oceane, Hesperia. Hesperum.
but of the further Hesperia now Bernie, whereby it passes, the sea Hesperum,
or of the hill Atlas, Atlanticum. By higher, Atlanticum
to the north, where the savage nation of y^ Arimaspi, having only one eye in
their Arimaspi.
forheade, do dwell, for so much as the Sun by his far distance from them
ryseth late, and shyneth fayntely, and the country is enclosed with high
hills, whereby it is always covered with dark clouds, and congealed with
hard frostes: what part of the Ocean lies about those quarters of the ycie
water, they call Pontus Glacialis, or the Frozen Pontus glacialis. Mare Mortuum.
sea: Or else because the waves there seem to die, Mare mortuum, or the dead
sea: also for that it stands ever quietly without m^uing: Saturnium or
Saturnus Saturnium mare. Eoum mare Indicum.
sea, where the sun ryseth Eoum, and also the same Indicum, from whence
immediately it runs to the south, and is called the red sea, or Mare,
Aethiopicum, Mare Aethiopicum or the red sea.
chiefly running forth by a certain wast desert, and an inhabitable soil of
ye earth, always tossed with extreme heat. But out of the Oceane, many arms
rise on every side, which pa^^ing through the mids of the earth, are termed of
our cou^trymen, Inland seas, but of the Gretians Inlande seas.
(...), proprely signifying bosoms or hollow roomths such as ar within the
vdders of beasts. Whereof Hesperum Hesperum.
is first, because it passes by the ends Hesperia. Libya. Pamphilia.
of Hesperia and Lybia* and runs to Pamphilia. The other (though it be
less) yet is it more profitable. For it issues out of that Sea, which we
called Glaciale* Glaciale Saturnium.
or Saturnium, on the side that Caspia lies, and the fierce northeaste blows
Hircanum.
and makes the sea* Hircanum. Both other twain, running from the south, the
Persis.
higher flows forth into Persis* against the sea called Caspium, and makes
the Caspium.
crook Persicum, and the other Arabicum, Persicum.
which breaking forth by little, and little, at last draws together into
Euxinum and of the Arabicum, cha^geth name into Pontus Euxinus. Arabicum.
Euxinum.
There be also many m^ reaches and turns: howbeit because they be unknown, and
of small account, neither searched out by any of our men, I leave them as dead
and untouched. But I think it best to return to those which we have thus
divided, which I said before, were four, that we may plainly declare what
they be, what course they observe, and what countries they run by. And that I
may begin with the Ocean* the The Ocean. The nooke Hesperius.
nooke called Hesperius, which in wideness, and length of course, surpasses
the rest, passing by many countries, cities, and towns, and enuironing
diverse Ila^ds and high Mountains: fills all places with great store and
variety of al manner provision, and engenders great abundance every where.
And this is it, at the entrance whereof, the hugie pillars (as common report
goes) set up by Hercules Hercules Pillars* Gades.
do stand, chiefly about the top of Atlas, and the extreme part of Gades,
now Caliz, whereof, at this day one is to be seen, made of massy brass, and
erected Note.
of such height, that it appears to reach above the clouds, and (that is
more marvel) to touch the sky. At this place begins the sea Hibericum, and
therefore The sea Hibericum.
it is said that at that mark, as at a new beginning, Hercules began to
sweat, Hercules sweat.
who conquered al ye countries therabout. But that sea, after that, flowing
betwixt Libya, and Europe, gives knowledge of beginning of them both. For ye
pillars are erected in such manner, on each side the shore, yt the one shows
where Europe is, and ye otherwher Libya or Aphrica: Aphrica.
Afterward, passing forth along, and bounding shortly on the coaste of France,
at France.
length by many goares, and crooks turns to Massilia, where loosing the old
Massilia.
name, is afterward called the French The french sea. Liguria. Where Italy
begins. Ausonia.
Sea. Then runs* it forth by Liguria, now terra de Genoua, where Italy
begins, and the country Ausonia, and approaches diverse cities thereof,
chiefly toward the North, and therehence is called Ligusticum, of Liguria,
whose shore Ligusticum.
it washes. From thence it higheth anon to Leucopetra, which is oueragainst,
and Leueopetra.
is washed with the Sicilian Sea, now elfar The Sicilian sea. Cirnus* Corsica.
Sardinia Sardinium mare. Tyrrhenia. Mare Tyrrhenum. Thuscum. Sicilia.
de Mesina. So unto Cirnus, that is Corsica. Thence flowing to Sardinia, now
Sardegna, is by and by called Sardinium mare. Anon it flows south, by the
coaste of Tyrrhenia, and is called Tyrrhenum, or Thuscum. But afterward, when
it bends to the rising of the sun, and runs about Sicilia, which the
Sicilian sea encompasseth, and glyding by the Mount Pachynus, now Cabo Pacino*
and Crete now Candy, environed wholly with the Sea, where then it waxes very
wide, and ample, immediately discovers Gortina Gortina.
famous, both for religion, and antiquity, and also Phaeston, although it lie
more wtin Phaeston.
the land, and rising upward crokedly, after the manner of a Rams head: is
called The rams head. Iapygium.
the Rams head by ye inhabitants. The^ceforth it proceeds to Iapygiu^* where
it wideneth toward ye north, and there is Adriaticum.
called the sea Adriaticu^, now la Canal de Venetia. So be^deth it to ye hither
Hesperia, and makes mare Ionium, where by and Ionium.
by, two countries, each over against other are descried. Whereof one, which
lies on ye right hand, at entrance, is called Illyrica, Illirica.
now Sclauonia, the other on the left, Ausonia, which of it self is as it
were Ausonia.
in manner of a great lithmus, stretching for the along the continente, enclosed
round (almost) with three Seas, namely the Tirrhenum, the Sicilian, and that
which we spoke of last Adriaticum. Whereof every one is moved with his own
wind, that those which trafficque with other countries, may safely fall
therewith out of their havens. For the Tyrrhene searequireth a west wind, What
winds these seas require.
and the Sicilian a southe, Adriaticum the southeast. But that which of
Sicilia is called Siculum, breaking forth toward Libya, ouerfloweth the southe
Syrtes, Syrtes.
now Baxi, or Banqui de Barbaria, and runs forth into another Sea, which
though it be bigger, and wyder, yet seems to devour and destroy it quite.
That which is inner, having entrance but very weak, receiving the waves of
another issuing in a far off, rolleth in sometime with such force, that the
fluddes which come along the hills of Sicile, and pass forth by Crete, are
beaten back again eastward, to the top of Salmonis, which (they say) is the
highest Salmonis.
part toward the East of al Crete. But chiefly these two Seas seem to strive
and rage, when they be moved with the northeast wind of Thracia, which often
breaks* forth secretly, and discovers first of all the Sea which the
Mariners call Pharium, reaching to Pharium. Casius. Sidonium.
to the furthest point of the hill Casius, next Sidoniu^, which stretching
forth by North and East into the main land, and wetting the country Issica
now ^ssica. Issicum.
^aiassa, is called- Issicum. And thence running not much further, turns
nygh Sicile, and so rests. Then running forth a shosh, northerly windeth it
self like a Serpent, and making many elbows, at length ^^ydeth by the coaste
of Pamphilia* Pamphylia.
But when it is approached the The Islands Chelidone.
Chelidone Islands, it takes part of the west, and brings to view the top
of Patareis a far off. Again toward the Patareis. Aegaeum.
north it makes the Sea Agaeum now Arch^pe^ago. Whose broken course, by
reason of many Islands in it, causes such roaring and raging of the water,
that it is thought there is no Sea more troublous, nor more dangerous, nor that
rayseth more noise from the botom. From thence it goes to Tenodus, and Tenodos.
there (as it were) makes an end, being (as who say) ashamed of his
accustomed wydenesse, and forgetting his wonted fierceness, keeps with in a
narrow channel, and gyneth a new show, and so obtayneth a new name. For
neither is it longer called Aegeum, neither Pamphilicum, neither Cilicum, but a
certain narrow Sea, until it come to the mouth Bosphorus in Thracia, now el
far de Bosphorus in Thracia.
Constantinopoli, where (as report goes) Io harlotte too Jupiter, when she
The fable of lo.
was transfourmed into an Heckfer by Iunos advise: swamme cross the water,
wherefore it was called Bosphorum mare, that is to wit, the Sea Bosphorum
mare.
where over the young Cow was carried.

But so soon as it falls into that narrow channel, running a little
toward the North: at length breaks forth into the continente as far as
Propontis, near which many kingdoms Propontis.
of Asie do lie here and there within the land, and bends to the Southe
butting forth in length and breadth lykest an Isthmus. But when it is come too
Bosphorus, it gathers it self together in a narrow form, and makes the
narrowest Sea of all. In the which is to be seen a strange sight. Certain
great rocks swimming A strange fight.
upon the top of the water, which when they meet, cause a great and
terrible noise, thence running forth toward the East, anon grows into a
great Sea.

And there are seen also diverse small branches thereof, partly running to the
East, partly toward the North, twixt two Promontaries rising from Two
promontaries.
one root, whereof the one toward the Southe is called Charambus, the
Charambus.
other which bends to the North, toward Europe, for the roughness and
raggedness thereof, is called the Rams The ram^^^ head.
head. These Promontaries although they stand right over against other, and
appear a far off, as though they grew nightogither, yet stand they so far
a sunder, as a ship is able to sail Their distance.
between in three days in the spring of the year. After that this Sea
seems to be cut, and fashioned into the manner of an halfecircle, and runs
one way into Pontus, another into Maeotis, Pontus. Maeotis. Charambus.
now el Ma^negro The middle is Charambus at whose right hand, the way lies
open to those that travel into Po^tus. At the left hand, the head or brow
which there ryseth, shows plainly into Maeotis, which croking like a pair of
Maeotis. The horns why so called?
horns, not altogyther unlike the horns of a bow, is not amysse called by
that name, and for naught appears not into Maeotis, being continually beaten
with his waves. This is that same ^en, about whom the Scythes do dwell, The
Scythae. The mother of Pontus.
and which they call the mother of Pontus, chiefly because from thence much
water runs thereinto, which for the Cimerius Bosphorus.
most part comes forth of Cimerius Bosphorus, and many other places, which
do so fill the marish, that it is not able to conteyne it. About which also
many nations of Cimeria inhabit, which are directly under the cold foot of
Taurus. Cimeria.
Taur' cold.


The description of Lybia or Africa.
AFtter that we have entreated of the threefold division of the earth, and of
the measure and circuit of the Oceane, with his bounds and diversity of
names: hereafter we purpose to speak of the situation and form of the
earth, beginning first (as before) with Libya. Libya. The form of the earth.
Libya.
therefore lies forth toward the south, and east, in the likeness of a
certain table, beginning at Gades, now Caliz, where the Ocean is most mayn and
deep, Gades.
and stretches forth to the Arabike sea, and approaches nigh that country,
which is in the uttermost part of Asia, and brings forth partly the
Ethiops or Moors, partly the Erembes. This country, Aethiopes. Erembes.
because it brings forth men spotted like Lybardes, of sundry
dispositions, the Grecians called it Pardaler, that is to say a Libards skin,
it is for the greater part of it, a very dry and roughe countreye, and in
diverse places covered with black spots like seals. But the other vain,
which reaches unto the Columns of Mauritania, Mauritania.
is much more civil and plentyfull: Next unto that is Numidia, then the
Numidia.
kingdoms of Massilians. by whom (report goes) the City Massilia was
builded: Massilia.
A savage kind of people, and altogether inexperte of Husbandrye, not knowing
what a Plowe does mean, but wholly wandryng in wooddes and Forrestes, do live
by maste, and praying on Venyson, after the manner of wild beasts. Too these
join the Carthagians, bendyng in like a bow, Carthagians.
whose noble City, as men say, was builded by Dido, when that she Dido of
Carthage. Phoenicia. Syrtes.
departed out of Phoenicia, by the compass of an Ox hyde. So forth next lie
the Syrtes, within the main land. But more toward the East, are seen the
shelfes of Asie, far larger than the other, and much more dangerous with
heaps of sands. Where as, when the Tyrrhene sea once has raged, and is
caulmed again, there are found such heaps, as though great mountains of
sand were brought thither by the water. In the midst almost, of which
Sands, there stands a City, which the Greeks, in fore time called
Neapolis, now Mahometa, Neapolis.
and inhabited by the people that were called Lotophagi, now Los Lotophagi.
Chelbens, a Nation very friendlye too strangers, which in times past
received Ulysses with very gentle and Ulysses.
courteous entertaynmente.

About this Countreye are found many deserte and forlorn dwellynges, after
that the Nasamonij were Nasamonij* why destroyed.
thoroughly destroyed, the which sometime did there inhabit, and were slain,
as some writers affirm, by Ausonius, the son of Jupiter, whose father
Ausonius.
they had contemned.

The Asbystae be borderers to these, Asbystae.
inwards to the continent land, where within the thickest of the Sands
stands the Temple of the god Lybicus, The god Lybicus.
commonly known. Also the city Cyrene, commonly Corena, the brooder of good
horses: and the ancient seat of the people Amyclaei nere whom the Marmaridae do
Amyclaei. Marmaridae. Getuli. Negretae. Pharusij. Caramentes. Aethiopes.
lie, toward Egypt, and the Getuli, and their borderers the Nigretes. Then the
Pharusij. now Asenagi and the Garamantes not far from them. And last of all
the Aethiopes lying hard to the Ocean, and almost extreme in temperature. But
over against them where the Blemij Blemij.
inhabit, there rises an hill, whereout Nilus runs, and so forth
proceedyng Nilus rises.
eastward, toward the Aethiopes, is termed of them Syrus. Afterward, running
Syrus.
into Egypt, when it is come to the city Syena is first called Nilus by the
inhabitants Siene.
there. From thence it runs into the north, and at length divides it self
into many parts, and flows into the sea, with seven streams ouerflowing al
Egypt by the way, and replenishing it with great and wonderful fertility.
And truly there is no one river in that part of the world comparable with
that, A notable commendation of Egypt.
either in wideness, plenty of water, or other commodities. This same is the
bound which parts half Affrike from Asie. leaving Affrike on the southe
side, and Asie on the East. This is the same Egypt which has always brought
forth notable men of sundry and incomparable wits. For as antiquitic does
record, the Egyptians were the first men, and The Egyptians first men.
they first prescribed the form and discipline of life and manners, who first
also found out the use of the plough, plowing of the land, and sowing of the
seed. The same were they which first took Fynders out of Astronemy.
the measure of Heaven with an instrument, and invented the oblyque course of
the Sun and Moon in the Zodiac, and which first found out this
knowledge of Cosmographi^, whereby the country has deserved no small
commendation. Besides all this, there is no land which surpasses it in
plenty of all things, either in abundance of herbage and corn, or in
greatness, or beauty of building. The form whereof is caused by the lying
of the sides, for it is br^^de and wide toward the North, but narower in the
East and butteth forth ^^opewise to the Syenes. and entrenched Syenes. Nilus.
with two hills, between whom Nylus runs. This is the same Egypt, which
in times past ^ nourished up so many noble and, (...), so many puissant
princes, and that chief is, in whom stood that most ancient city Thebes,
with hi^ hundred gates. Where Thebes
it is also said, that Memnon the wise king was went to salute his mother
Aurora. Memnon.
Which nourishes also them which Aurora. Heptapolis.
inhabited the Inlande, Heptapolis and those which do dwell on the coast of the
south sea; toward the marish Serbonis, Serbonis.
where on the west, lies the most famous city, sometime founded by Alexander
Alexander.
king of Macedoma, called Alexandria. And where that wonderful temple
Alexandria. Sinopita.
of Jupiter of Sinopita* stands* much spoken of, and hery ^^^^ou^^y builded,
with m^^^ preci^^se metals, of al kinds. Touching this city, it is constantly
adnouched; that there is none in the earth, of more excellency, none more
worthy admiration, none richer, or more happy for all things Where also, the
goodly high ^ops of Pallenis* from whence ^^uellers Pallenis.
coming a far of^ may be espied, be di(...), nere the rockye Hills (...),
the Town Cassiotis.
Peleus, is erected, whose inhabitaunts Peleus.
^^e s^ expert in the art of sailing, that ^^ the other people of Libya, they
be reputed rather Gods than men. These dwell about the mouth of seuenfolde
Nilus. There be moreover many other peoples, and nations, diversely dispersed ^^
that country, whereof some be cast back (as it were) to the Oceane sheare,
^^^^e dwell within the la^d, replenishing ^^s same with many excellent fair
buildings. Diverse a^^ inhabit the shore of the lake Triton, which runs
also Triton.
through ye midst of Libya into the sea.

The Situation of Europe.
HEreafter ensues the situation of Europe, which differs not much in form
from Libya, but that it bends a little to the north, and likewise retourneth
again, and joins to the end of South Libya, and butte both in one ^^nner
sort on Asie, the one reaching forth to the extreme part of the North, the
other to the South. But to speak more plainly, how it lies: it is so, that
at the head it seems sharp poynted, like the point of a triangle, waxing
always narrower toward the West, and increasing in widnesse much in the East.
By understanding whereof, we shall y^ better perceive what bounds it has, how
far they stretche, and what dominions, and countries it co^te^neth.
Wherefore, I will begin at the ^^per side, which reaches forth to Hercules
Hercules Pillars. Hiberi.
pillars, where first of all, the Hiberi dwell, a people very proud, and high
minded. Next toward the North, are the Britannes then the Germans, whose
bodies Britannes. Germans.
are white, and fair, and naturally given to wars, possessing the country
The forest Equinus. Boia.
next to the forest Equinus. And not far off, Boia appears, both large and
wide, so called, of the likeness it has to an Ox hyde. So tourning to the
Mountes Pyrrhenaei. Eridanus. Celtae. Heliades. A fable. Phaeton.
mounts Pirrhenaei, toward the flood Eridanus, the Celtae inhabit, where (as
fables testifye) the sisters Heliades, being oppressed with immoderate sorrow,
for the death of their brother Phaeton, continued so long in weeping, that so
con^i^^^ed with heaviness, they were all converted into a precious kind of
A^^er trees, still sheading tears. Which ^^ares, are often, and diligently
wyped away by the Celtae, there dwelling, and are turned into Amber like Gold,
and a^ hard as a stone. After, ensues Tyrrhenia Tyrrhenia.
at the North side whereof the Alps begin to arise, forth whereof, the Rhyne,
a great and large stream, issues, The Rhyne.
But before that I pass to Tyrrhenia. I must first speak of the river
Rhenus, or the Rhyne, whether he passes to the bounds of Europe. The Rhyne
therefore, rising, as we have said, out of the Alps, first seuereth the
Celtae from the Germans, and runs Celt^. Germans.
into the Northern Oceane, with a large channel. But before that he come ^ighe
the Sea, out of his springs, he engenders the river Ister among the Sueui,
Ister. Swe^i.
which makes all that cuntrie nauigable, for trafike of merchandise. This
river Ister running toward the east, is increased with many other waters, and
so runs forward fomie and misty, nere Pe^ce, through (...) ^ightie ch^^^^l^
into the sea (...) the north: it (...) ^iue (...) countries, vntil^ it* (...)
to the ^oot^^* of fen^e Maeous. ^ For first it (...) the* Germans, and after
^^^i^^th (...) Sarmatae now^ (...) ^^ p^sseth Sarmatae. Getae. Basterne^.
by the Ge^es, and Bast^^^^s* which ^^^ toward the O^ean^* ^* fulfilleth* the
country of Dacia with plenty, (...) Dacia.
ningth roughe the mi^^^st of the Alani Alani. Tauri.
and T^uri, gives ^^^sage for shippe^ through the (...) land (...) ^yche
^^u^^ inhabiting that hye country, ^o^* time part of (...) race, possess^* a
A^chilles.
na^o^^, howbeit ^ ^o^g* pi^^^ of land* stretching to the ^^o^^ ^^ the (...)
whose ^eig^bour^s (...) the Alan^ as ^e have said, (...) ^^ (...) ^^^^
Melanchleni Hippemologi. Neuri. Hippopodes. Gelones. Agathyrsi.
with horses. Vnt^ t^^se* (...) the* Melan^^leni, the H^ppemolo^i* the Ne^^^*
the Hippopodes* the Gelones* and A^^^^^^si* with more, in ^i^w^ whe^^^ of it is
stra^nge to s^^ how that* al^ most infinite of nations possess that utter
part of Europe, from whence* the Borysthenes.
river Borystenes gliding forth within a kenning of the Rams browe, directly
over against Cyane, falls into the Cyane. Aldelcus.
sea Euxinum, also Aldescus, and Penticapes, with great murmur and noise, fall
Penticapes.
down from y^ hills Rhipae^, whose streams Rhipaei.
running near to the frosen sea (for thither they run) carry down with them an
orient kind of metal, half gold, half amber, in color not unlike to the
purple Amber found
glyttering beams of the moon when the first rises: they engender also the
diamond. This water also washes the Diamondes found.
shore of the Agathi^^^, which of the rest are most northerly, but on ye south
side are the Gerrae, and Norici: also the Pannonij, Gerrae* Norici* Pannonij.
Mysi. Thraces.
the Mysi and Thraces, but the Mysi lie more to the north than the Thraces
which dwell scattred here and there in a wide country, partly inhabiting the
S^a coa^t of Propontis, partly cast Propontis. Hellespontus Agaeu^. Pallenae.
forth to* Hellespontus and partly also to Agaeu^, where about the tops of
Pallenae, which flows with honey, the precious stome of great price, called
Asterius, does Asterius*
grow, nothing inferioure in show to a glyttering star, or a flaming fire,
by (...)nt whereof it was ^o named. moreover, there lie many other countries
under this heavenly constitution* or in this tract of the earth, dwelling all
nigh to Ister called also Danubius receiving Ister. Danubius.
great commodity by traveling on the water, whose names were superfluous to
recite. It remains therefore now that we speak of another part of Europe,
which lying forth in thr^^ shoares, reaches forth into the East, whereof
the Hiberi possess part, the Greeks part, the Italians part. The Hiberi.
Greks. Italians. Hiberia. Libes. Tartessus.
furthermoste ^id^ of Heberia, lies to the Ocean, there where one of the
pillars is to be seen, set in by Libes, erected beneath the mount Tartessus,
the country where about is very rych and plentiful unto whom the Cempsi be
adhere^t Cempsi.
dwelling at the foot of the mountains Pyrrhenei. Consequently we come to
Pyrrhenei. Hills. Italy.
Italy, whom a great hie hill stretching forth, and cutting it through
straight, high in the middle, and low on each side, after the manner of the
beam of a pair of balence, co^passeth in about round, to y^ great beutifying
and wonderful strengthening of the country. There can no man that is skillful
in building, when be sees it, deny, but that it was a marvelous Italy framed
by Minerua.
piece of work framed by Minerua, for ornature and strength of the country,
being compassed therewyth as with a crown. The inhabitants call it the hill
Apoeninus, which rising at the Alps Apoeninus. Lumbardy. Heluetia.
which deuideth Lumbardie from Heluetia, runs forth toward the North, as
far as y^ Sicilian* Sea, wtin which, many countries and peoples do dwell,
whose names I cannot easly rehearse. But the first of them are Tyrrheni,
dwelling on Tyrrheni.
the side which lies twixt North and Pelasgi.
West, together with the people Pelasgi, which running into Italy out of
Cylene, Cylene.
ar reported to have settled with the Tyrrheni in the same place. Ne^te to these
Latini.
are the Latini, a glorious kind of people, very plentiful with goodness of
soil and excellency of wits, through the myddle whereof, the river Tyberis
runs, Tyberis.
watering all the country about, and is at length received into a calm
bosom of the Sea, at the town called Hostia, the head and principal river
of Hostia.
al other, dividing the noble and mighty City Rome, the chief sea and
dwelling Rome.
place of our kings, and head of all the world. Then follows Compania* a
Campania.
pleasant country, and of other most plentiful, where the temples of
Parthenope. Parthenope.
are to be seen, who (as fame goth) was friendly received out of that strayt
sea* Toward the south, under the hill Serenis Serenis. Silarus. Lucani. Bretij.
Leucopetra.
runs the river Silaris of Surrhentu^ now Sur^ento, where the Lucani and
Bretij dwell, so far as Leucopetra, from whence northerly, and by west somewhat,
the Locri be planted, who long ago coming Locri. A^^ica.
forth of A^^ica into Italy, and being in love with the plesantnesse of the
country, joined (as is said) in fellowship and friendship with the people of
that place, building a city there, which they called after their own name,
whose stock a^ yet remain th^near unto y^ river Alex* Alex. Metapontini.
Beyond them lythe Metapontini* whose city is now called Relie^^, and notsar
off them, the flourishing city Crotona now Crotona.
Cr^tone* ^igh to the river Sarum, where the renouined temple of Juno, of
Lacinia Juno of Lacinia. Sybaris.
now Cabo do Colone is builded: and vnfu^tunate Sybaris, is reported to have
mourned, because of Jupiters displeasure against her citizens, for using
reproachful words in the sacrifice of Alpheus* Alpheus. Samnites. Marsi.
Tarentini
But the Samnites are more within the land, and the Marsi, which in running are
very quick of foot. The Tarentini whose country now Taranto, stand^ nearer
y^ shore, possessing there a town, founded in times past by destruction of the
Amyclaei. To whom ^oyn the Calabri Amycle^. Cal^br^ of apex stock. Hyrus.
of the stock of Iapix, reaching forth* ^^ Hyrus, which lies to the sea. And
the ^^^. Adriaticum begins to increase ^^* Aquilia, now Algar castelium* and
the city* Aquilia. Tergestini.
of the Tergestini now Trieste* lying at y^ extreme (...), but when it turnet^
eastward thence, first it li^keth the shore Liburni.
of the Liburni* and afterward beats on all that country* oppressed with
great darkness, which lies nigh (...), and Istm^^. Bulemei.
so running to the shore of y^ Bulemei, so^^nly stretches forth with a very
large ^hane^ and (...) y^ Illirici* now Sc^auoni, Illirici. Ceraunij.
and (...) y^ high mountain Ceraunij* in which place are seen certain ancient
monuments after the manner of spires or pinacles, set up as is taught by The
fable of cadmu^.
Cadmus, and Hermione his wife, who Cadmus.
being both come to extreme old age, departed thither from Ismenus, where
Ismenus.
they were transformed into serpents. There is also seen in the same place, an
other strange wonder. For there be two pillars set, directly each against
other, A vvonder.
who so soon, as any danger approaches the people dwelling nigh, do both
meet, whith such violence, as though they fought. At the south, a little on
this side Thracia, and beyond Horitia, a part Thracia. Horitia. Hellas.
of Graecia, that part called Hellas, enters with an hard rising, and a
dangerous access, by reason of two sharp Seas Aegaeum, and the straighte
Siculum. As also for two winds, unto whom it lies very bleate, the Hesperian
or Sicilian wind, which is West, and the Southeaste, which blows from the
sea Aegaeum. Hereafter ensues Pelops Island, called also Peloponesus, now
Pelops Island
^a Moren, which differs not much in form from a Plain tree leaf. For it
is broad in the beginning, and ends with a sharp corner. At the farthest
point toward the north, it resembles a certain narowe Isthmus, and is (as it
were) joined and fastened to Hellas, and entrenched Hellas.
round on every other side, with the sea, Triphylis.
where on the west part, the land Triphylis lies, continually moystned with
the pleasant streams of the river Alpheus. Alpheus.
Which being as it were cut of, by the waters Mes^enius, and Eurotas, do
Mes^enius. Eurotas.
seem neither of them to flow out of any sea, but rather to spring out of
the inner bowels of the earth. Alpheus parts the land of the Clij. Eurotas
passes Clij. A miclaei. Erymanthus. Arcades. Melas. Crathis. Iaon. Ladon.
Argiui. Lacones.
through the Amyclaei. In the middle of the Island, in a valley, at the foot
of the hill Erimanthus, dwell the Arcades, From which hill Melas, Crathia, and
Iaon, three rivers do fall, and also ancient Ladon. Next unto these, are the
Argiui, and Lacones, whose countries lie, one to the east, an other to the
southe. The sides of this Isthmus, as is well known, are beaten with two seas,
one on the East part, an other on the West, until it draw nearer, and
narower about the places called Sacronida. But in syghte Sacronida.
of this same Isthmus, called Pelopone^us, and toward the east side thereof,
boundeth the noble kingdom of A^^ica. A^^ica.
the n^urce and mother of renoumed ^^, and excellent wits, whom the divine
water Ilisus passes by, where sometime Ilisus. Boreas and Orithya. Boetes.
Locri. Thessalia. Macedonia. Emeus. Epirus Dodonea. Aetolia.
(as Poets do fable) Boreas, state away his lover Orithya There do the Boetes,
and the Locri inhabit. After this Thessalia and Macedonia are discovered,
the^e where the snowye tops of Emeus, in Thracia may be seen. Over directly
against that, toward the Weste Epirus Dodonea butteth forth, very long and
large, and so do the Aetolia toward the South, through whose middle flows
Achelous. Tinacria. Echinadae l^an^s. Cephalleni. Phocis.
the river Achelous with his silver sands into the straytes of Tinacria,
dividing the Islands called Echinadae, near unto the cities of the Cephalleni.
Eastward, lies the country Phocis, which stretches alo^g to the North, unto
the mouth of the Thermopylae, under the top of Thermopilae Parnaius. Zephisus.
snowy Parnaius. Out of whose middle, the river Zephisus runs forth of a
rock, and feeds the country nigh, with perpetual moisture. Then follows
the land Phiton, wonderously abounding Phiton.
with diverse ^^ straunge^dori^erous favors. Where the Dragon of The dragon of
Delphos.
Delphos at Diotripodes, lies slain, within the walls of the temple, at this
day, horrible to be seen, for multitude and greatness of scales. Where Apollo
Apollo.
as often as occasion served him to travail from the Isles of Miletum, now
Miletum Clarum.
Melasar, or Clarum, was wont to rest himself, and put off his golden quyuer.

And thus much is sufficient to have declared, as briefly as we could, the
situation, and countries of Europe, and how the same lies, in respect of
other parts of the world.

Of the Islands in Europe.
OVre purpose now, is to entreat of the Islands which be in Europe before y^
we come to any other part of the world, to describe it, which in wideness
contains almost the other twain. Wherefore, to begin where Europe f^^^^e
lifts up his head, and Hercules pillars be erected, and divide Libya from
other parts, ye Ocean running between: Gadira, Gadira.
first comes to hand. For that being in times past possessed by the
Phoenices, Gadira.
which worshipped Hercules, was called of them Gadira, for before it was called
Phoenices.
not Gadira, but Contimissa, by the Hiberi. Ne^te follow the Isles Gimnesiae,
the nearest whereof is called Bausus. The Contimissa. Hiberi. Gymnesiae.
Bausus. Baleares.
other twain are called Baleares, for stinging, wherein the people there are
much exercised. Whereof the one and bigger now Mallorea, has in it the city
Tirracona now Tarragona, the other and lesser now Menorca, ye city Barcilona
now Barchino lying to the North. Then follow Tarracona.
Sardinia now Sardegne, and near Barcilona.
to that Cirnus lying both almost direct over against Ostia, whereof the one
which Sardinia.
is Corsica, stands a great deal higher Cirnus. Ostia. Corsica.
and is mere inacce^^ible, environed partly with high and craggy clyffes and
rocks, partly with a mighty roughe wood, both of them very good, for
fruitfulness of soil, and plenty of diverse commodities growing in the
country. Consequently, there appear certain Islands, standing round, which
being once in ye hands of king Hippota, which dwelte there, a most friendly
king unto strangers, were by him named Aeolides. Aeolides.
The same, for the excellent virtues wherewith he was endued, (for be
surmounted in godliness, and curtefie) was reported to have obtained of the
gods, that he should not only be lord over those Islands, which are seven in
number, but also be ruler of the winds, where ever they blew, on any nauigable
sea. These Ila^ds also be called Plociae of the Greks. Plociae.
But there is none nearer unto these, than Tinacria, called also Sicilia,
standing Tinacria. Sicilia.
in sight of Italy, and defended with three famous promontories, whereof one is
called Pachynus, now Cabo Pacino, standing Pachynus.
to the East, and has at the foot, the noble city Syracuse, now Saragosa
Syracuse.
de Sicilia, in foretime, a great and stout seat of tyrants. The other is
called Pelorus, Pelorus.
which stands northerly, and looks to Italy, to whom the city Messana
Messans.
now Missetia, adioyneth. The third promontorie is Lilybaeus, arising against
Lilybaeus.
the surges of the west wind, and sea, where stands also a city of the
same name. But as touching, sailing from Pelorus, which lies toward Italy:
it is very dangerous, and almost present death: for the course is very narrow
and crooked, and the sea kept within the strait not without great force and
violence: for the stream is there swallowed up in void and deep caves (which
as some say) were made by Eonius and Neptunus, Eonius. Neptunus.
and there roreth and rages with most horrible bellowings. Forth of Sicilia
Southerly is the passage into Lybia at the beginning of one of the Syrtes. The
other is quickly perceived, in looking toward the shore of Italy: In sight
whereof, we may epsy two Islands, one Menix, the other Gortina, which are in
Menix. Gortina.
manner of an haven into Lybia. In the elbowe of the sea Adriaticum, at the left
hand toward Iapygium, ryseth an Island, Iapygium. Diomedes.
wherein because Diomedes sometime had builded, and possessed it, was Diomedea.
called of him Diomedea. Whether (as the fame goes) that valiant gentleman
being driven in a flaw, by force of wind and tide, with certain prisoners of
the Hiberi, continued there through the enticement of a wicked woman, called
Aegialaea. Aegialaea.
Toward the East afar off, is there a course open to the Islands of Absyrtes.
Absyrtes.
where (as report goes) certain men, which trauayled from Colchos, Colchos.
Medea.
brake in, while they pursued Medea, then running from them. Near unto these,
the Lyburnides are planted. And Liburnides.
toward the Southe, behind the crags of the Mount Ceraunius, there are
certain Ceraunius.
Islands discovered, which they call Amphraciae. There is also Corcyra, now
Amphraciae. Corcyra.
Corfu, to be seen, a rich and plentyfull Island, the noble and renoumed
kingdom of aunciente Alcinous, and near Alcinous. Neritia. Ithaca ulysses
country.
neighbor to Neritia in Ithaca, a pleasant lay and country to Ulysses, with
diverse other lying here and there, which the River Achelous, while he passes
Achelous. Chaleis.
from Chalcis, compasses and waters.

There be many also toward the North, whereof Aegyla is one and Aegyla.
Cythera. Caluaria. Carpathos. Creta.
Cythera an other, and Caluaria and on the other side toward the Weaste,
Carpathos. Also Creta, now called Candia, which lies not far off, a goodly
Island, and a plentyfull, and nurse to the great god Jupiter, abunding in fruit
and pasture, and flowing with excellent good witness, in which stands the
famous wood Ida. flourishing with Ida.
odiferous and soote cypers trees. It contains many fair cities, and also
provinces not a few, which in foretime were al governed by that good old king
Minos. King Minos Rhodos.
Over against that lies the Island Rhodos; which was also builded by the
Egiptians, and sometime a worthy colonie Ialisij. Chelidoniae. Patareis.
Cyprus. Pamphylia. Venus Dodo nea. Phaeoicia. Dyados. Suniados. Abantes.
Salamina. Aegyna.
of the Ialisij. But at the East lie the Chelidonlae, these be three, lying
against the top of Patareis, now Patera. Also Cyprus in the bosom of
Pamphilia, sometime the acceptable kingdom of Venus Dodonea. And not far from
Phaenicie stands Dyados, within the large widnesse thereof, and in sight of
the hi^ Sunrados, above y^ Abantes, Salamina may be descried, and so may
Aegina* where the Sea Aegaeum is found to be of a marvelous depth, although
there be in it an innumerable sort of Islands, diversely dispersed, disposed in
such strange order, that they seem almost there rather planted by art than by
nature. They reach forth unto Hellespontus, Hellespontus.
now el far de Gallipoli, where as on the left hand at the end of Europe,
stands Sestos, and on the right hand oueragainste Sestos. Abydos.
it Abydos where Asie begins both toward the North, places very much
renoumed^ or two Lovers, Leander and Hero, who dwelled there, Leander, and Hero.
whose earnest desire could not be quenched in so small a stream, but that
Le^ander must often attempt, escaping also as often the danger, to swim over
that narrow cut by night, until at last he was offered a woeful present to
his sorrowful lovers eyes, miserably cast up dead upon the shore. Now to
Europe ward stands Macris, in old Macris. Scyros. Peparenthos. Lemnos.
time builded by the Abantes, then Scyros, and Peparethos, very much object
to the wind. And not far thence Lemnos, now Sidrio Vulcanes kingdom, and
ancient Thasos, now Taxo, that Thasos. Ceres. Imbri.
worshippeth Ceres. Then the Imbri, now Stalimin, from whence the famous
Thracia, is immediately discovered. And Samos now Samo, an ancient Samos.
Lyrbantes.
colonie of the Lyrbantes. But they which possess the veris first entrance
and brow of Asie, dwelling round about Delos, because they stand in such Delos.
^^euite, are termed by the Grecians Cyclades, who all are dedicated to Apollo,
Cyclades. Apollo.
making sacri^^ee unto him, and leding daunces, chiefly at the entrance of the
spring, when the Nyghtingale begins to sing upon the top of the hills. These
Islands stand so scattred, showing themselves here and there in many places of
the Sea, like brighte shyning stars in the clear sky, unto which the
Ionides, now surquestan be borderers, Ionides. Caunos. Samos.
where also Caunos stands, and Samos now Samos, the most pleasant seal of
^uno Pelasgos. Next stands Chios now Chio at the foot of the high Chios.
hill Pelmeus. Then appear y^ clyffes of Pelmeus. Aeolus Ila^ds Lesbos and
Tenedos.
Aeolus Islands, Lesbos now Metelina, and Tenedos now Tenedo, raised a great
height out of the water, forth of whom rise two ryuers Melas and Colphus,
Melas. Colphus. Propontis.
and run into Hellespontus, and there about to the North, the Sea Propontis
is enlarged and wydned on every side, and there at the entrance of the Sea
Euxinum, toward the left hand A fable.
there is an other famous Island seen, which in times past was an ancient
dwelling of noble and worthy Gentlemen. For the report goth, that the soul of
Achilles and other valiant men, do wander in the deserts and craggie places of
those huge mountains, having obtained for a reward of the Gods, in
consideration of their excellent virtues, to be immortalized, for so much as
virtue is immortal, and needs must obtain immortal glory. This Island of
which we entreat, because it brings forth cattle al white, the Grecians call
it Leuca. And there is an other not Leucus.
far from the same, large and of a great circuit, which unto those that sail
the rea die way into Cimerius Bosphorus, Cimerius. Bosphorus.
appears before the rest over against the fennes Maeotis, lying on the right
hand.

The same is it in which Phenagora Phenagora. Hermonassa Ionij.
and Hermonassa, two Cities are builded, which the Ionij who builded the^ do
possess. And these be al y^ Islands which are of any name or renoume, lying
with the Leuant Seas, so far as we could have any understanding of them.
Notwithstanding, for as much as in the large Ocean, there are many contained in
bignes^e, commodities, or ^ame nothing inferior to ours: I thought it unseemly
to pass them over with silence.

Of the Islands in the Oceane.
Wherefore I will first speak of that The Atlanticum sea. Erythia.
which lies in y^ middle of the Atlanticu^ sea, called of ye Grecians Erythia,
now Berlingas, a very fair Island, and aboundyng with cattle, endued with
such benignity of air, that it preserves the lives of men unto very many
years, and makes them almost immortal. The Ethiops, which be nygh, inhabit
Aethiopes.
the same, who came first thither (as they say) after that Hercules had s^ayne
Hercules. slevve Gerione.
the Giant Geryone, But at the very top of Europe, which the inhabitants call
Sacrum, that is to say holy, the famous Islands, called Hesperidum insulae,
are Hesperidum insulae.
descryed: Of whom it is not altogether fabulously spoken, that they yielded
every year golden apples. Since of truth they be very rich, in plenty of
gold, and bring forth welnigh, all kind of metal, in great abundaunce. The
Hiberi, their Hiberi.
neighbors have them in possession. And not far off but somewhat more toward
the north, the Isles of Britannia are Britannia praised. Rhenus.
seen, over against the mouth of Rhenus, or Rhine, very large, and surpassing
the rest in wydene^se: neither is there any one, to whom it is inferior in
any kind of wealth, store of cattaile, or variety of people. There is also
found in veins of the earth, moynes of tin, lead and brass of diverse sorts.
Also ple^tie of gold and silver, with iron, brimstone, saltpeter, bitumen, and
such like. And among many kinds of cattaile and rudder bea^tes, whereof they
have plenty, certain beasts of so soft and fine a fleese, that it may be
easily drawn so small, till it be comparable to a spyders web. They breed
also many horses, not unapt for labor. But where it bends more to the weast,
turnyng (as it were) a brow or point to Hiberia, which Hiberia. Hibernia
commended
is now called Hibernia, that is Ireland, inhabited once by the people Hiberi.
The same brings forth more store of horses, and th^se of such nature, that
they seem rather naturally to have learned to walk with a pleasant and seemly
pace, and to move themselves forward with protestation and state after the
manner of and guise princes. Within the earth is found a lumpie mass of mould,
mixed with sulphur, much like to coal, which the Smithes and generally all the
cou^tr^e* and their borderers nigh unto the^, do use for their fire. The
country brings forth no venomous beast, nor fostreth any. The people are
very stout, and apt to wars, who being of body fair and tall, sturdie of
lym, and beutifull of hue, are no deal behind in wit, and promptness of tongue.
There are also not far distant from these other Islands, as namely the
Amitae, worshippers Amitae.
of Bacchus, in which the wines of ye most worthy and substanciall men, being
crowned with garlandes of ^uie, with the b^rries hanging down in knots about
them, do ^sape and spring, as though they were aprehended with fury, crying on
Bacchus with a loud voice, Bacchus.
and doing him sacrifice in the night, according as ^s the custom. For the
inhabitants on ye shore of the lake Biston Biston.
in Thracia, do call accustomably on their God Bacchus, in no more solemn
sort. Neither the Indian children, at the river Ganges do dance with more
Ganges.
shryll noise, than these women of who^ I speak, do clatter, shout, and sing
when they celebrate the feasts of Bacchus, and say their devotions while they
be dancing. But not far from this Island there lies an other, which is
called the farthest Tile, where as when Tile.
the hot summers Sun approaches to the northern Pole, their nyghtes be like
unto perpetual day, in fairness and brightness, until he return^ again
to the South. From thence if a man sailing toward Scythia turn his ship to
the East, he shall find Chrysia, Scythia. Chrysia.
which is an other Island of the Ocean, in the which also the Sun shyneth
very clearly: then if he return him contrary to the ^outh, immediately he
shall discover Taprobana, a great and Taprobana.
large Island, and plentifully replenished with all manner riches, and a brooder
of many Elephants, which from thence are transported into Asie. This same is
especially dedicated to Venus, and to her does sacrifice. They lie directely
under the line of Cancer, which is over their Cancer.
heads, a very hot and burning sign, continually turning about, and almost
burning up the countreye with heat. They have whales in their seas, and fyshes
Whales and great fishes.
of inestimable bigness, which feeding first in the red sea, afterward do
come thither, monstrous things in deed, and of such greatness, that they
come to the shore like great mountains. Their backs are very sharp, with
long rewes of finnes. They be very hurtful unto children, if they chance to
meet any upon the shore: And not unto them only, but unto others also. For
none can well escape their iaws, if they may once see them. Whose deformed
mouths are of such wydenesse, that diverse times they devour whole shyps with
men and all. Which woeful plague is thought to chance unto men for none
other cause: but God plageth diverse ways.
only for our offenses and wickedness, which while we live wandering in this
vale of misery, God does revenge with such horrible monsters.

Besides this, there is also an other Island, Aeoli. Ogyris. King Erythrax.
Carmanis.
called by the Aeolij, Ogyris, an ancient monumente of king Erythrax, lying
over against the Promontorie Carmanis, from which, if a man turn northerly,
and to y^ Persicu^ sea, he shall by and by Icarus. Tauropola.
find Icarus, wherein Tauropola, the fair temple of Diana, is to be seen,
wondrous for antiquity, but more marvelous of A strange sight.
the strangeness of a sight therein. For there ryseth always a smoke
without any fire at all, very dampishe, and hurtful to those that come near
it. And these be also the Islands which are of any name in the Oceane.
Howebeit I deny not, but that there be many mo there, whereof some be in the
reach Lybicum, some in the sea Asiaticum, also about Europe, and within the
Oceane. Whereof howebeit many be habitable, and yield pleasant harbor
sometime to ships that sail that way: ye^ because, they have continued
vnrenowmed and unknown unto our countrymen, it was not only hard for me, but
also seemed superfluous to declare either their names or situation. Wherefore I
will now speak of Asie.

The description of Asie.
THe plateforme of Asie, being as some men say, of one fashion, and as other
say of another: yet is it well known, that it resembles very much a wedge.
For it begins with a certain large bases, or foundation, and so goes
forth along to the end, where the pillars of Dionysius which was borne at
Thebe, Dionysius. Indi.
are seen standing, and where the Indi, which dwell in those vttermoste parts:
are reposed within the hills. And also where the river Ganges, with his white
Ganges.
streams, falls down to the banks of Nyseum, nigh a large channel. The same
Nyseum. Taurus.
is divided from the mount Taurus, which is the nearer, and not thought
co^parable in bigness to the other, neither in show like unto it. The same is
it, which has the sea flowing into it, and bearing superiority therein. The
other, which is the wyder, is much mingled with y^ Ocean: which boiling forth
three streams, makes three seas, Per^icum, Hircanum, and Arabicum, whereof the
last twain, lie forth to the south. The other reaches toward the north, and
the sea Aphricu^ to Euxinum, where as there dwell kinds of people almost
innumerable, forasmuch as between them both, there lies a great Isthmus,
containing a very large plot of ground. But the mount Taurus which as I have
said divides the whole through the middle, begins at Pamphilia, Pamphilia,
and stretches forth to the Indie, which rising in some places into greater
height than other, and turning on both sides, much like the crookes of a
Bulls horns, which is greedy of his food, is by similitude thereof called
Taurus, that is to say, a Bull. Out of this mount there do arise almost
infinite springs and waters, whereof some run East, some West, some North
some Southe, which by reason they pass by diverse countries, are called also by
diverse names. Also the mount it self, during the spac^ of continuance thereof,
is not always termed one, the Indi call it Hiamos, the Hiamos. Praenyphates
Cragus
Parthi, praeniphates, the pamphyli, Cragus, and where it rises in greatest
height it is named Caucasus. But it is no easy Caucasus.
matter to declare both the names of it, whereby it is notified in diverse
languages, or of the waters therefore flowing. That care take they who inhabit
the near places, it only remains to me, to declare those ryuers and
nations, whereof we could attain any light of understanding. In recytal
whereof, I will not quail so far as my poor ability shall serve me.
Wherefore the people of Maeorae, and Sauromatae, Maeotae. Sauromatae.
which possess the uppermost part of Asie, which looks to the north, come
now first unto hand, that I must needs prefer them in this beadroll before
all others. These be they which dwell about the fennes Maeotis, and descended
lineally (as is said) from the Amazones, for the report goes, that Amazones.
when they ran away from their country, and had pytched their tents near
the river Thermodon, they companied Thermod^.
with the Sauromati, to the intent that the children that were then begotten,
should be stout men, and warlike, and so they always continued. They dwell in
the midst of a vast and huge wood, full of thycke and bushye trees, through
y^ middle thereof, the river Tanais Tanais.
now Tana, runs forth, and falls into the fenne near thereto. The same
is the water which also parts Europe from Asie, leuing Europe at the West,
and Asie at the East. Forth of it run many springs and streams, which falling
down upon the rocks and valleys of Caucasus, do cause a great Caucasus.
murmur. But the larger river which glydeth forth through Scythia, and
increases The miseries of Scythia.
much toward the North, with wind and water, carries down with it great
store of Ise, and much anoyeth the near dwellers, making the^ altogyther
unfortunate. For so soon as the northern wind begins to blow, and the cold
to increase, immediately they see before their eyes their horses and Mules fall
down dead, and their rudder beasts frosen to death, and their cattle which
wander in the woods, myserably bidding their Masters farwell, with their h^eles
upward. The men themselves can scarce abide safe within their inner dens and
houses under ground, but starve together with their beasts, unless they
observed a time, and joined their wagons, and departed in have into some more
temperate country, leaving their own to the furious North wind. Such manner
of people are they, which are allotted to the countries nigh Tanais, but the
people which Tanais.
dwell near to the Sauromatae now Sarmatae, are called Sidi, and Cimmerij and
Sidi. Cimmerij. Cercetij. Oretae. Xanthus. Simois.
Cercetij, with Oretae, near to the Sea Euxinum. Also those who as they say,
de parting from the river Xanthus, and Simois, which runs nigh Abydus, after
y^ destruction of Troy* were carried thither by contrary winds, and drove the
Achaei thence, Achaei. Eniochi. Zigij. Pelasgi.
unto who^ y^ Eniochi and Zigii are neighbors, which came also thither from
among the Pelasgi. And at the uttermost extremity of the sea lie the
Tyndaridae, and Tyndaridae. Colchi.
ye Colchi, which join to Caucasus, who before time came sorth of Egypt, where
Caucasus ryseth alofte with high tops, near to the streyghts of Hyrcanu^, where
the river Phasis glyding by the back of Phasis. Circeum.
Circeum now Circellum, turns to the Sea Euxinum. But at first it ryseth out
of the hill Armenus, which passing Armenus.
forewarde between the North and East, makes a certain Isthmus, included
within the Seas Caspium, and Euxinum, which the Iberes of late have Iberes*
possessed, those I mean which departing once from the mountes Pyrrhenaei,
Pyrrhenaei.
brake into that part of the East, menn^ given to warlike affairs, and very
hurtful to the Hyrcani their neighbors, with Hyrcani.
whom before they have had cruel wars. Then the Tamaritae, who not
Tamarit^.
only received Bacchus when he returned with victory which he had over the
Indians, but also appointed unto him Indi.
solemn sacrifice, dancing roundes about their wine presses, until they
foam with new wine. They are girded with thonges of lether, and wear on them
buck^kinnes, crying out, eho Bacchus, eho, like mad people.

The Sea Caspium comes near unto them, which I trust easly and with
expedition to discribe if God will give me grace, not as one that has seen
those places (by traueling* thither to view the platfourme or situation of
the^, as many men have accustomed to do, which think there is none other
felicity, but to heap up riches by wandering about the world, thereby to deck
themselves up with Gold, to glyster with Pearls and precious stones, to
adorn their Palaces with sumptuous buildings, for so much as I was never
instructed by my Parents in trade of merchandise,) but like him who from his
tender years, has been brought up in study of good learning, whereby it
comes now to pass, that those things which are very far distant, I do
behold as present, and can conceive every place thoroughly in my mind and
cogitation without any error.

Of the Sea Caspium.
THe form and fashion of the Sea Caspium is such, that it lies almost
round like a circle, for it is most sure that it rysethe from the Ocean, which
at the North side, beats upon the shore of Scythia from whence running
Scythia.
forth, at first through dese^^es and places uninhabited, stretches forth to
the Southe in very narrow streits, until that increasing more and more in
wydenesse, at length it approaches to y^ foot of mount Caucasus. This Sea is
Caucasus.
nauigable, and in that respect very commodious to the countries nigh altimes
of the year, excepting three months only, in the which when the North
wind blows, the coast of the Ocean Sea ryseth against it with wonderful
(...). It brings forth many things of great price and admyratio^, for among
diverse other which come from thence, are the Crystal and Jasper Crystal
and Jasper stones
stones, which being of the color of a ch^^h^eass, is thought to be good
against vain fantasies and fears in the night. There dwell nations about it,
almost in number infinite. But to begin at that side which lies to the
north, the first that come to knowledge are the Scythae, now ^artar^; and those
Scythae.
especially which lys to the sea Saturnium, toward* the mouth of Caspium.
Next the Vn^ then the Caspij themselves, Vni. Caspij. Albani. Cadesij.
and the Albani* who are all of nature wild and savage, and greedy of war
and bloodshed. The Cadesij dwell among the sharp mountains, whose neighbors
are the Mardi, and so the Hyr^^^ Mardi. Hyrcani. Appi. Mardus.
and Appi, whom the river Mardus flowing forth along by, and moystning with
his gentle stream, waters also the Dercebii and the Bactrae; running
between Dercebij. Bactrae.
them both, and falling at length into the Sea, Hyrcanum* As for the Bactr^^,
they inhabit the country, which lies at the foot of Parnasus, and ^^ghe
Parnasus. Dercebii.
there about. The Dercebij in an other place, are w^kened with beating of the
Caspium sea waves. Beyond whom, toward, the Cast, on the other side of
Araxis, there dwells a people called, Araxis. Messagetae.
Massagetae, whose study is wholly to weary and consume themselves with
shootyng, very hurtefall to strangers, and not able to keep league of faith
or friendship with their neighbors. They know not the use of Corn, or
Wine, but they drink milk myngled with blood of horses. More to the North
dwell the Chorasmi, next unto Chorasmi. Sundia.
whom ensues the land of Sundia, through the mydst of which runs the
river Oxus, leaving the mount Homolus Oxus. Caspia. Saccae. Iaxarta.
behind, and hastening into Caspia. Then the Saccae, which dwell chiefly
upon the shore of the River Iaxarta, a people also very expert in shooting,
and so ready therein through daily practice, that it seems they can be
overcome or matched by none other. For they thinks it a great shame, if any of
them shoot an arrowe negligently and almost unawares, and hit not the mark.
Then follow the Tochari, Tochari. Phurij. Seres.
and then the Phurij, and the Seres, nations altogyther barbarous, neither
instructed in any kind of learning, neither given to study, or exercise of
any thing, but only wandering in wild and deserte places, do gather a
certain flower, wherewyth they stayn their garments with diverse colors, much
like to ye flowers of nettles, And their garments are wouen with so fine
thread, that it is thought they surpass the spinning of any spider. There be
also many other nations of the kind of Scythians, whose names and manners do
remain unknown, by reason of the sharpness of place where they dwell, and the
uneasy accosse unto them, with the extremity of the air, and bitter cold,
wherewith those countries which lie to the vttermoste part of the earth, for the
most part are molested. And these be the countries, which as we said lie to
the north, about the sea Caspium. Hereafter I will entreat of those, which lie
toward the west from Golchis* and Colchis. Phasis.
Phasis, on this side, and dwell upon the shore of the sea Euxinum, and also
of them which in habit, as far as Traicium, Traicium. Chalcidos.
where the land of Chalcidos lies.

Of countries in the west.
In this rehersall the Byzeres shall be Byzeres. Bechyres. Macrones. Phylires.
first, and next the Bechyres and Macrones, and then the Phylires, who as yet
do retain their aunciente Cities and wooden cotages, which they builded long
since. Unto these do join the Thibareni, Thibareni.
noble shipmasters, next to these sit the Chalybes a very hard people, who
having Chalybes.
obtained a country, which for immoderate drouth, is unapt, for any tillage,
have very much profited in the art which they have learned. For they never
rest from hammeryng and forgyng of weapons and armoure for war. In so much,
that all the country being covered with smoke, seems as though it were on
sire, and clattereth with continual knocking, and bearing of iron. The^re we
proceed to Astyria, which is wat^red Assyria. Thermodo^ Armenus. Amazones.
by the river Thermodo^, falling from the mount Armenus, and from the^^e
runs to the Amazones with a swif^e stream, who as the report goes,
following Sinope. Sopida.
Sinope from Sopida* at commandment of Jupiter, who entirely loving her, had
transported her, though unwilling, out of her own country, and had placed her
nigh within his quarters, and courteously appointed a place, where she might
continually bewail the absence of her parents. In which place, afterward she
builded a city, and called it Sinopaea, Sinopaea.
now Sinopi after her own name. About the banks of this river, there is
crystal Crystal.
hewed very pure and white like ice, and there also is found the Jasper stone.
And Jasper. Iris. Halis.
not very far off, y^ rivers Iris and Halys running along, do make the country
moist and pleasant: and both of them gliding toward the north, from the hill
Armenus, where they Armenus.
issue, ^o lick the land along nigh the hill Carabis. Then next be ye
Paphlagons cast Carambis. Paphlagones
off somewhat near the shore, and so forth to the holy land of y^ Mariandyni:
where (as it is reported) the furious three headed Mariandyni
dog, whom yt hardy hand of valiant Hercules. overcame and led away out of
hell, Hercules vanquished the three headed dog.
vomited forth a certain deadly kind of frothie venime, which poisoned all
the country with infectio^. After ye Paphlagons and Mariandyni, we pass into
Byth^ia, Bithynia.
now y^ great T^urchia, a pleasant country, and fulfilled with all ple^tie, who^
the noble water Rhebas moistneth with his sweet Rhebas.
stream, until he fall into y^ sea, which is at hand, beingin al y^ earth no
water more pleasant, or y^ brings to ye ^^e greter delectatio^. And these be
ye cou^trei^ and people which (as I have said) do inhabit the Weast parts
of the sea. The other, of which I entreated last before, be Scythians, and
lie to the north.

Of the third part of Asie.
NOw I must go through with y^ third part of Asie which boundeth to the sea,
and looks to the south, and discovering y^ entrance into Hellespo^tus,
opens ye southerly course into ye sea Aegaeum, and butteth forth into Syria
and Arabia And first of Syria. Arabia. Chalcedones. Bizantium. Bebryces. Mysia.
Cius. Hylas.
al, the Calcedons apere at y^ very mouth looking over directly to Bizantu^,
whose borderers are Bebryces, and the mounts of Mysia* out of which y^ river
Cius yeldeth forth his pleasant water: where it is said, yt the Nimphs in time
past stale away the beutiful child Hylas being then attenda^t upon great
Hercules. From thence there lies open a great vent into Hellespontus, in
Phrygia y^ less. The one is situate farther Phrygia.
wtin a great deal and is far larger, near to the river Sangarius. And
this, Saugarius.
which is the larger, and lies forth to the east, is very fruitful for corn
and grass, and ^ingeth up great store of good horses. The other which looks
to the west, is descried at the foot of the renoumed Ida, Ida.
having at the one side the noble and famous Troy. Ilium.
city of Troy, called also Ilium, so much spoken of, so large and so wide,
the nourse and brooder of many a valiant Gentleman, builded (as it is thought)
Neptunus. Appollo. Juno. Pallas. Xanthus. Simois. Aeolia.
by Neptunus and Apollo but afterward destroyed by the aduis^ of Juno and
Pallas: planted fast by the rivers Xanthus and Simois of Ida. Hereto lies
Aeolia, nigh above Hellespontus* toward y^ shore of the sea Aegaeum, in which
also y^ Jones be included: and the memorable river Meander glyding thorough
with Meander. Miletus. Prienes.
his gentle stream, parts also Miletus, and wide Prienes. Whereof that which
is in the middle, and lies most to the Ephesus.
north, all that wholly Ephesus does possess, lying to the sea side, sometime
the glorious city of quiuered Diana* and to her Quiuered Diana. The temple of
the Amazones.
de^^^ated* Where (as ^ame tells) in old time the Amazones ^uylded a temple of
wonderful workma^ship upon the sto^k an Elm ^ree, and for that ^ause was had
in great admnation amongst all people, and allages* From this next forth to
the East, lies Meonia, upon a steep rock Meonia. Tmolus.
under the side of the mount Tmolus, out of which the River Pactolus, runs
Pactolus.
with his sand all of gold, and makes therewith the whole country to
glitter. Upon whose banks when once the spring time of the year is come,
there are Swannes herd continually singing, Singing swannes.
which feed there commonly raunging on the rivers side, with such harmony,
that nothing can be more pleasant to the ear, their food daily increasing
upon the shore. And the River also Enister Enister.
spryngeth up, and bestows his water plentifully in diverse places of the
country. Moreover it brings forth very fair women, who many times
according to their custom, having their loins girded with girdles of gold, do
make pastyme among them selves, leadyng strange forms of dancing, cast round
into a ring or circle, chiefly when they celebrate their accustomed feasts of
Bacchus, Bacchus feasts.
once every year, in daunces, and other myrthe: Where wenches of flourishing
years, being mingled with them like wanton kiddes and lambs, dance and play
together, and raise no small pleasure (while they be dau^cing) to ye beholders.
For the wind sometime huffeth up their garments, and their order in dancing
inge^dreth a certain pleasant noise, much deliting ye minds of the hearers. But
let us leave these things to the me^ of Lydia, whose practice and study is on
them, y^ having Lydia.
allotted a country full of pleasures, they may also inte^d to follow ye same,
nothing degenerating from nature, or their country manners. Consequently the
Licij Licii.
enjoy ye next shore, chiefly where ye river Xa^thus comes down, and the
mount Taurus Xanthus.
begins by little to decrease, toward Pamphylia* and to change name, being
no longer called Taurus but Cragus, where Taurus. Pamphylia. Cragus. Eurimedon.
stands also a town by ye river Eurimedon, y^ inahbitants whereof do worship
Venus, and do accustomably offer unto her the blood of swine, and other beasts.
There follow other cities of Pa^philia, as Corycus, Corycu^. Pergae. Phaselis.
Lycaones.
Pergae, and Phaselis, very much through blown with winds. Among the thickest
of whom toward the east: lie the Lycaones men also very fit for war, and
well practiced in shooting. Whose neighbors are the Pi^idei, whose principal
cities be Pi^idei. Termesus. Lyrbae. Selgae. Amyclaei.
these, Termesus, Lyrbae, and Selgae, which they say, was of aunciente time
founded by the Amyclei. From thence, when toward the east, the sea comes in
with a round reach like a circle, all the land that lies near thereto, must
neads also resemble the same shape, and for that cause it is not much unlike
to the sea Euxinu^. In that nooke be the Cilices, very far Cilices.
into the East, the aunciente records of antiquity since our forefathers
days, called that place, the straights of Asie. The streits of Asie.
That country is much moystned, with many rivers, not all rising there, but
coming from other places, whereof there be three chief, Pyramus, Pinarius,
Pyramus. Pinarius. Cydnus. Tharsus.
and Cydnus, which only amongst the rest running through y^ midst of Tharsus,
deuideth y^ city with his comfortable stream, a city most noble for beutiful
buildings, where they say long ago, the famous horse A fable. Pegasus. Tharson.
Bellerophon
Pegasus left his hoof, and thereof y^ city was called Tharson* And also where
(ye report goth) Belleropho^ was cast down by him, and so departed to Jupiter,
whereby y^ place beca^ renoumed where he had co^tinuedlo^g before, sequestered
from all company of man. There are to be seen also many other cities of
Cilicia, standing here and Cilicia.
there, among which Lyrnessus is one, Lyrnessus. Malos.
and Malos, by the sea side. Diverse also there are which stand partly within
the land, and partly on the shore. The land Comogena, is near hereto, and
Comogena. Syria.
the cities of Syria now Suria, a large country and wide, reaching unto the
Sea, but the side which lies to the West, stretches to the foot of mount
Casius. Who so understands well the Mount Casius.
situation and form hereof, with study and diligence shall soon perceive
how the other parts of Asie lie. For the form thereof consists of four
angles, the part that lies easterly, surmounteth the other in multitude. We
declared how that all Asie was divided into twain, and that it stretched
forth to the mount Indus, which Mount Indus.
is one of the bounds thereof, especially where it lies to the North, and
Nilus Nilus.
an other where it runs to the west. The Ocean stands in stead of the
rest, which is called Indicus, on what part it looks to the East, and
boundeth at south on the read sea, called Mare Rubrum Mare rubrum.
But Syrie, whereof we speak but now, being thrust, as it were almost into
the mids and bowels thereof and touching the sea both at East and south, has
within it that way many cities. Which because it stands low, and is
enclosed with two very high hills, Casius, at the west side, and Libanus at
the Casius. Libanus.
east: y^ inhabitaunts call it in their tongue, a valley. And because it seemed
unto the^ more commodious, and far more fruitful than any other, for grass,
corn, and such like, and easy to be passed unto by ship: many noble me^, and
such as were of great ability, chose that place to dwell in, building there
cities, and towns, and distinguishing them by diverse names. For those which
dwell more within the conunent land, are by one name called Sirij But they
which lie nigh the Sea Syrij. Phoenices. Erytheri.
side, are Phoenices* which in times pa^^e, coming from the Erytheri: are
thought to have bin the first, which assayed the Sea with ship, and invented
the trade of merchandise, whereby men might be pronoked to conetousnesse, and
desire of riches. And first also, which found out the motions of the heuens,
and course of the stars, with the supernall bodies, by the excellency of
their wit and industry. These are the inhabitours of Ioppes now Iaffa, Gaza
and Elicides, and Ioppes. Gaza. Elicides. Tyrus.
which of long continuance, have possessed the fair and aunciente city
Tyrus, now Sur, builded from the beginning. Then they which founded the watery
city yblon. Sydon. Bostrenus. Tripolis. Orthosides. Marathon. Laodex.
Neptunus. Daphne. Apamia.
Byblon now Gae^a and windy Sidon now Sidoni, upon the bank of the calm
river Bostrenus, who possess also Tripolis now Tripol de la Suria, Orthosides,
and Marathon now Maugath, and the noble city Laodex now Lyche, builded as
they say, by Neptunus, where Daphne was weaned. Also the people of Apamia
within the main land where the river Orontes, now Tarfaro, running Orontes.
Antiochia.
toward the East, parts Antiochia in twain. And generally all Syria is
very rich, and plentyfull, abounding with corn and pasture for grazyng of
cattle, at whose inlande parts, which are to the Southe most adjacent, lies
the entrance to the sea Arabicum, which washes the shoares of both Arabia and
Syria continually: howbeit by little and little turning to the east, approaches
the Elani, where as the Arabes lie, possessing Elani. Arabes.
a country of all other most rythest and precious. It stands high, and is
environed with two seas, Persicum, and Arabicum, and lies also open unto two
wynds. For the Arabicum requires a Western wynd, and Persicum an Eastern. But
that part of Arabia which lies to the east and south, is washed also with the
Red sea, called Mare rubrum.

Of this countreye I will speak somewhat, because it conteyneth many regions,
whose power and wealth, all other do wonder at, and are amazed to behold
their great store and abundaunce.

And I will not omit, that being very much delyghted with Sacrifice, there
is no one part of all the country but does smelle of Parfume and Myrrh, and
of soote smellyng Calamus, which are cast into the fire to burn. Who will
not take it for an undoubted truth, that Jupiter, being father to Dionysius,
took him forth of his thinghe, at Jupiter father to Dionysius.
the celebration of whose nativity, he replenished the whole country with
fragrant odoures? And that those sheep, wherewith Arabia abounds, obtained
that gift, that while they were feeding, they should be clad in thick and fine
fleeses? and the pondes and waters swarm with variety and multitude of
Fishes? And that so many flocks of birds forsook the deserte, and came thither,
bringyng with the^ boughs of precious Cinamom wherewith that country now is
wonderfully stored? Moreover, that this Dionysius after that he was borne, and
somewhat sprung up, wearing on the skin of a young Goat, and having his
locks tressed up with yuie, and vine leaves, and his belly full of good wine,
went wandering about all the country, rather pouring forth vnmeasurablye,
than bestowing moderatly great riches, and sowing gold like seed, to bring
forth fruit which should never perish? And for that cause all that region
until this day is thought to abound with such commodities, that the very
hills yield forth gold, and the Rivers silver, and their shores and banks
balm and soote herbs, and the inhabitants be very rich, and wear none other
garments than of pure gold, or fine silk. They which dwell upon the browe of
the hill Libanus, the same Libanus. Nabathaei. Chalbasii. Agrees. Chatramis.
Persis. Minaei. Sabae. Cletabei.
be those, which they call Nabathaei: And those which join to them Calbasii,
and Agrees, and next, the land Chatramis, which lies in sight of Persis. But
the Minaei, and the Sabae, lie on the red sea shore, and the Cletabei, nighe
unto them. And these be all the kingdoms and nations in Arabia, which I
supposed to be worth memory. Howebeit, there be some more rude, and altogether
without any fame, and neither for manners, nor learning, worthy to be accounted
among the Arabes. For toward the Weast, and vttermoste side of Arabia, dwell
a people called Erembi, a roughe Erembi.
and wild nation, dwelling upon the hills and mountains, and have none
other houses than dens, and ragged hollow rocks, going all naked, and
having no kind of felicity, or happiness that aperteyneth to man, and being
dried up with sharpness of living: have burned their skin with black
color. And if there happen unto them any trouble: they betake not themselves
to armor, not to their arrows, not to their weapons as other do, but like
wild and savage beasts, run through woods over hills and dales, not like the
other Arabians, whom nature has endued with such and so many benefits. But on
the other side of Libanus, which lies to the Libanus.
East, there opens another part of Syria, butting forth to Sinopes now
Sinopi, Sinopes.
which boundeth on the Sea coast. In the midst whereof the Cappadoces, me^
truly Cappadoces.
who for the stoare of fine horses which they have, and continual exercise of
ryding thereon, do become therein very perfect, and singular. The Assyrij, lying
to Assyrij. Thermodon
the sea, do keep the mouth of Thermodo^. Forth of whose hills, and chiefly to
the north, the noble river Euphrates breketh up, first falling from the mount
Armenus. Euphrates.
But when it has continued a long time there, running among the hills of
Assyria, toward the south, and afterward turning to the east, washes through
the midst of Babylon, and last of all, licketh Babylon. Theredon.
the city Theredon, and makes have into the sea Persicum. And not far in the
east, the river Tigris flows forth not altogether Tigris.
so big as Euphrates but incomparable swifte. For it runs so fast, that in
one day it riddeth so much ground, as any swifte man is able to run over in
seven. And so gliding forward, not far, till he come into a plain ground,
where like as he were weary, and willing to rest himself awhile, gathers
together into a round circle like a boule, and there abides, which place the
nigh dwellers call Thomitida. Yet does he not long Thomitida.
continue so, but rising (as it were) from sleep, and being ashamed of so
much idleness: suddenly rises up, and begins a great deal swifter course
tha^ before. The la^d which lies between Euphrates, Mesopotamia.
and Tigris, is called Mesopotamia of the Grecians, now Halapia, which is of
such sort and nature, that there is no sheapheard, or grazer, what ever he
be, though he were of counsel with Pan the god of shepherds, can in any part
find fault with that country for goodness of pasture: nor any planter
justly condemn the fruits which grow there wild in the hedges and woods,
either for lack of store, variety or pleasantness of verdure. For there is
such plenty of all thing growing, and such abundaunce of herbs and flowers,
that the country is accounted blessed and very acceptable to the gods. Also
the country which is next, lying to the north, is very good and rich, the
Armenei possess it, which dwell in Armenei. Euphrates.
sight of Euphrates, a people very stout and hardy, very expert in feats of
chivalry, abounding in wealth and riches. At the South stands Babylon, of
whom Babylon.
we have spoken, which as histories do report, Semiramis ye queen of ye Medi,
when Semiramis.
she had conquered the whole country, being delited with the pleasantness of
the place, environed it with an vnpregnable wall, and within the toures and forts
of the city builded strong and warlike houses, wrought curiously with fine
gold, silver and Iuorie: the country is right noble and fruitful. It brings
forth dates, sweter than are in any other place. It has also in it the stone
called Berillus, Berillus.
more precious than gold, which grows chiefly about the top of the hill
Ophietis. Ophietis.
But above Babylon toward the north, dwell a people called Cissi. And Cissi.
Massabate^. Chaloni^ae.
near unto them, the Massabateae and Chalonitae. About ye hills Armeni,
toward the East, lie the Tempea (which are Tempea.
pleasant woods, with waters running through them) of the Medi, whereof they at
north are called Geli: and the Mardi, Geli. Mardi. Atrapatini.
and Atrapatini are there at hand. And at the south side, who ever of the
Medi, at any time flourished, do dwell there, or that procured themselves
empire, or founded cities. For they say, that these descended of the noble
family of Heriona, Heriona her history daughter to Osta. Pandion. Illisius.
a famous gentlewoman, and daughter to Osta the good king. Howbeit she is not
clear without spot, for she slew her son Pandion* with strong poison, at
the shore of the river Illisius, her own self. For which fact, being
very much ashamed, she ran from thence privily, and came into that country,
which is called now by her name, being not far from Colchis, and never durst
return home again to behold her Parents weeping eyes, whose wrath she
much feared. Wherefore the people there until this day, are much inclined
to Magic, Witchcrafte, and Sorcerie. The country is very large, and has in
it many Hills and Mountains, wherein the precious stone Narcissites
Narcissites.
is found, being somewhat of color and and having veins in it like an Iuie
leaf. But some chose rather the plain to dwell in, being delyghted with
pleasant pastures and flocks of cattle, which reaches forth until we come
to the gates Caspiae, which look to the East, and lying beneath under the high
Mountains, do open the passage for travelers into the North and South. For
at the one side lies the way Hircana, on the other The way Hyrcana. Parthi.
the Mounts of Persia, under whose feet dwell the Parthi, a warlike nation,
and very expert in shooting, of whom I think it not amysse to say somewhat,
for they are such as never learned to dig or plowe the ground, or otherwise to
til it, nor yet to pass by Sea into any other country, or to get any thing by
trafique of merchandise. Neither is there any among them that follows or
feeds any heardes of cattle. But so soon as ever they be of any years,
either they take a bow in hand and learn to shoot, or else they practice
running on foot, or horseback, until they become marvelous ready therein.
For that country is always rattling and crackling with Darts, broken lances,
or strokes of arrows. There is also continually heard the noise which fierce
and courageous horses do make when they meet and fight together. And it is not
lawful for any there to go to supper before that with such like exercise all
his body be in a sweat. They live chiefly by hunting, which they follow,
darting or shooting, in which and also for their savage demeanoure, howbeit
they seem invincible, yet being overcome by y^ Romain Captain, were compelled
to obey the Fasces, being a few rods bound about The Roman Fasces.
an axe, and so borne before y^ officer, ye peculiar scepter of y^ Roman
Empire. But I will now declare into how many kinds of people that kingdom is
distinguished, and with what Rivers moystned, and with what hills environed.
They only and first had among them the title and honor of a king. And they
only surpassed all other in power and strength, after that they had ouerrunne
Meonia and Sardinia now Sardengne, Meonia. Sardinia.
and sacked them, for after that time they used in wars, armor and weapons
of gold, with golden brydles and trappings, with other furniture for their
horses, and shoed them with silver shoes, bringing such treasure away with them
in y^ conquest, that every one ^lowed in riches. Persia is entre^ched on every
side Persia. Portae. Caspiae.
with high steep mountains, beginning (as I said) at the gates Caspiae,
where the way lies to the south, and reaching to the Sea which is of the
country called Persicum, it is inhabited especially in three places. For there
are some that dwelt toward the North, cleaning unto the dark and shadowy
hills of ye Medi: Others in the middle which possess Medi.
the inlande country, and some contrariwise in the Southe nighe to the Sea
Persicum, of which I spoke right now. The first are the Sabae, nere unto whom
Sabae. Passagardae. Tasci.
lie the Passagardae, and the Tasci and many more, whose country is washed with
diverse rivers which run forth in many turnings and crooked channels. On the
one side runs Corus, an other Choaspes, Corus. Choaspes. Susa.
which rising out of the River Indus, and watering the city Susa, shows the
precious stone called an Achate, lying An Achate.
white as milk, among the sands, long and round, after manner of a Cilinder,
which the stream brings down from the hill to the plain: fruits be there
always green by reason of the temperatayre. But now I must entreat of the
other parts of Asie, which lie to the east, and cloase up the bounds and ends
thereof. Wherefore about the shore of the Sea Persicum, which is Eastwarde, the
Carmani are planted, possessing two Carmani. Persis.
countries not far from Persis, for some have desired to dwell near the sea
coast, which other mislyking, have rather chosen to inhabit farther with in
the land. Among which the Gedrossi now Turquestan, Gedrossi.
which lie easterly, are nigh to the Oceane, and be also borderers unto those
Scythia^s, which I said were south, nigh the river Indus, that runs into
the read Sea, over against it, with two mouths. But before that it fall into
the sea, it passes by many towns, and regions, and wandreth along and crooked
way. It rises forth of the mount Caucasus Caucasus.
toward the north, but it turns to the south and embraces the I Will
Patelenes, Patelenes.
with two arms, and after that converting his course to the west: deuideth the
Oritae and Erebes, and the Arachotae, which Oritae. Erebes. Arachotae.
Satraide. Parpausus. Arieni.
wear none other than linen garments. And so, forth it runs to the
Satraidae, and to all those people, that lie about the mouth Parpausus, who are
all called by one name Arieni. These inhabit a very wild, and uncivil
country, the mould being very sandy, and not meet for any tillage, having
notwythstandyng some singular gifts and commodities of Nature. For there are
found commonly Coral stones of all kinds, and Coral stones Sapphires.
Sapphires are dug out of the veins of the hills, lying in mouldes like
shelles, of a brownishe yelowe color. In the East lies the country India,
India.
which although it be the farthest and last, yet it is of all other most
pleasant, and is as it were between the lyppes of the Ocean. Which so soon
as ever the Sun begins to rise and lift up his head out of the Ocean
Sea, is the first land that it touches with his beams, making the people
black and gross of nature. They have very thick woods, and trees not much
unlike to a Iacint in color. But because they dyg there in many places for
Gold, diverse of them become great gayners thereby. Others weaue linen cloth,
some shave and cut Elephantes teeth, many search the channels of Rivers, loking
if they can epsy either a Berill glittering in the Berill. Diamond. Jasper.
Topase. Amatist.
sand, or a Diamond, or a Jasper, or a wheyish Topase, or light on an Amatist
being of color purple, or like blood.

These are their practices for the most part, for the country is full of
Rivers, which makes them very rich in such Jewels. There are also Gardens
and meadows very fair and fruitful, which are green through out the year,
some flourishing with goodly woods, with red boughs and twigs, some bearing a
grain called Myllet. But I must Myllet.
now speak of the form and situation hereof, with what Ryuers it is washed,
with what hills environed, and finally how many nations it has in it.

The description of India.
IT consists of four angles, which run almost into the fourm of a
Triangle, whose sides do meet, and so it becomes well nigh round. The River
Indus, of whom I spoke, runs at the Indus. Ganges. Caueasus.
West part thereof, and Ganges at the East. Caucasus lies to the North atthe
going down of the Bears. Many noble and worthy men have dwelled in this
country, not in one place, nor of one name. For some went to one side, some to
an other, as nature, custom, and desire moved them. Some planted them selves
nigh Indus, which are called Dardanes, Dardanes. Hydaspis.
where the River Hydaspis receives into his bosom Acesma, an other Acesma.
River rising hard by out of the rocks. For Hydaspis is a very wide and deep
stream, able to bear any ship, and washing that part of the West whereto
the River Cophes is near, and moystneth Cophes.
the same with milk white water, between whom the Sabae lie, and the Toxili,
with the Scodri. Then the countries Sabae. Toxili. Scodri. Peucanei.
Gargaridae. Hypanis. Megaros.
of the Peucanei, and the Gargaridae, which worship Bacchus, where Hypanis, and
Megaros, carry down gold, two the most rychest Ryuers of all other. These
rise out of the mount Haemodus, and run toward the coast of Ganges, at last
bending to the South, near the I Will Colidos, which stands in the Ocean,
Colido^.
falls into the Sea. This I Will stands so high and steep, that no birds
will fly thither, and therefore is called of the Grecians, (...), to say,
without birds. And it was called Colidos, because it is dedicated to Venus.
Not far from thence toward Ganges also, there appears an other place,
counted holy of the inhabitants for a strange chance A Fable of Bacchus.
which befell there. For on a time when Bacchus was mad, he came thither and
abode, suddenly turning the Vine leaves where with they which followed him, were
clad into aspes, their spears into iron, their girdles which were made of
tender shootes of vines, into fierce and puffing Dragons, because the people
there abhorring his manners, had contemned his sacrifice. Who being thereat
much afraid, called the way first of him Nysea, Nysea.
and determined that they together with their children, would offer sacrifice,
being crowned with Garlandes of Iuie. Which being done, when he had thus
subdued those nations, immediately he ascended to the Mount Haemodus, on
Haemodus.
whose foot the East Ocean beats, and there over their heads as it were at
one end of the earth, he erected two pillars, following the example of his
countrima^ Hercules, and at length went down Hercules and Bacchus con^^^men.
like a conqueroure to the banks of the River Ismenus. These be all the
countries and nations which possess the whole Earth, especially such as we
could understand to be of any fame or excellency. Howbeit I confess that
there be many more lying in diverse quarters, partly fleeting and having no
certain place of abode, partly blind and obscure, remaining unto this day
without name, which I thought not much to be esteemed, and of no man able to be
recited but of God only, God knows al things.
who sees and knows al things. For it is he which laid first the foundations
of the world, and disposed it in this goodly order, who discovered to men the
paths and entrance into the wide sea, and gave unto us all the commodities of
this life, as health, riches, honors, and prefermentes: Who also distributed
unto every star and planet what power and influence he list. Inclining
thereby some men to tylling the Earth, thereby to gather riches, some to
traffic the Sea, either to get their living by fishing or changing
merchandise, others to study Philosophy and other Sciences, whereby they may
rise to renoume and honor. And granting unto diverse the gift, with power and
authority to rule and govern other. Wherefore it is no marvel, if me^ have
not only diverse fortunes, but also natures, seeing y^ there is like variety
among countries, some bringing forth men as white as milk, some more brown,
some ta^nie, and some burnte cole black, like unto the manyfolde flowers which
Assiria breeds. For Assiria.
so God has ordained, that men as well as other things, should be of sundry
natures and dispositions, and that every one should be content with his own
The conclusion.
chance. Wherefore O all ye Lands, and Islands of the Earth, which lie unto
the Sea, now fare ye well. Also ye Waters of the Ocean, and surging waves of
the noble Sea, with Rivers, fountains, springs, and hills, fare ye well
likewise. I have sufficiently discoursed on you all, which have obtained any
fame or renoume among men. And I pray God, that for this my travel, if it
please him he will requite me with some reward.

FINIS.


Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight riders street, at
the sign of the Mermayde.

ANNO. 1572.

And are to be sold at his shop at the Northwest door of Poules Church, at the
sign of the three Wells.


