A GODLY AND LEARNED SERMON CONCERNING THE MAGISTRATES duty and death,
preached at the Court, and now published for the common good, by Francis
Dyllingham bachelour in divinity.

Magnum non est praesse, magnum est prodesse. It is no great thing to rule, it
is a great thing to rule well. Magnum non est vivere, magnum est pie mori. It
is no great thing to live, it is a great thing to die well. HINC LVCEM ET
POCVLA SACRA ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA

printer's device of John Legate

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINter to the University of Cambridge. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, wise, and virtuous Ladies, the Lady Anne Fleetwood,
and Elizabeth Luke, grace and peace.
THe days and times being evil (right worshipful and religious Ladies)
require preaching, they require also printing. Preaching and printing, so
desperate is the case of many, will not prevail. A great and maine cause of
this deluge and flood of iniquity is the negligence of Magistrates who will
not adioyne the sword to defend the word. The Lord in his rich mercy toward
us has sent forth many worthy Ministers, who preach in season and out of
season, yet oaths abound, the Lords Sabboths are profaned. And why so?
because these sins escape unpunished. Caput audaciae, and maxima illecebra
peccandi est impunitatis spes: The hope of impunity is an exceeding bayte unto
sin. Wherefore I nothing doubt but that if Magistrates would faithfully
execute their office, we should not have such bold and presumptuous sinners as
swarm amongst us. Now that the Magistrate may execute his office according to
Gods will, he must know the same: for which cause I thought good to publish
this sermon, that those which will learn, may both know and practice. And as
in this sermon is set out the Magistrates duty, so likewise in the same is set
out the Magistrates death. The consideration of which should move all Officers
to do their duties. The Lord without all controversy will call them one day
to an account. And what account can many Magisters make? no doubt many can make
an account of their debts accruing by ungodly usury: Others may count their
bribes. But how many can count and number the souls of men which have reaped
benefit by their government! magistrates have no greater thing then this, that
they can punish sinners: they have no better thing then that they will. Which
if they would do, no doubt many sinners might be converted and brought unto
God. Not to proceed any further in this point, as I have published this sermon
which concerns the Magistrates duty, and his death: so I have dedicated the
same to your Worshippes, whose virtues shine like the stars. If I should
speak all things answerable to your virtues, I might peradventure seem to
some to flatter: If I should conceal some things I might be thought of others
envious, as Hierome speaks in the like case. Wherefore to leave this matter
of co^mendatio^, I humbly desire ye both to accept this my labor, as an
argument of my duty and hearty affection which I bear to each of you: the great
favors which I have received at your hands, I confess deserve a greater
work: But you are wise to know that in great things there are not always good
things, but in good things there are always great things. Trusting then to the
goodness of the subject matter, which is Gods word, I present this labor to
your Worshippes. The Lord of his infinite goodness grant that the good course
which ye have begun, ye may keep fast unto the end. And in so doing, as he
has highly advanced you in this world, so will he advance you in the world to
come.

Your worshippes ever bounden, Francis Dillingham.

Psalm 82. v. 6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, and ye are all children of the
most high:

But ye shall die as common men; and ye Princes shall fall like others.


THese words contain two parts: the first is an Exaltation; the second is an
Humiliation. The exaltation is in these words, I have said ye are Gods, etc. In
which two things are to be considered: first, a proposition: secondly, the
proof of it. The proposition is in these words, Ye are all Gods, etc. The
proof taken a testimonio divino, from Gods testimony, is in these words, I
have said. Touching the Humiliatio^, two things are likewise to be considered:
first, what this humiliation is, to wit, death: secondly the manner of it, l^ke
unto common men; for so does the Hebrew word signify, as it is plain and
evident out of the 49 Psalm. v. 2.

Concerning the Humiliation, Death must needs be a great humiliation unto
Princes. For as Ecclesiasticus says, 41. cap. v. 1. O death, how bitter is the
remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, unto the
man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all things, yea
unto him that is able to receive meat. Therefore Adrian asking what death was,
received this answer, namely, that it was pavor divitum, the terror of rich
men, and it seems indeed so to be by Adrian his own speech: for he being
ready to die, uttered these words, Animula vagula, blandula, non vt soles
dabis io^os: O my darling, now thou shall not jest and scoff as thou wast wont
to do. In death, as Job says, chap. 3. v. 19.
there are small and great: and the servant is free from his master.

Having thus resolved this text of holy Scripture, I am now to deliver the
doctrines that arise from the same. Before I take this thing in hand, this
question may be moved, How Magistrates can be called the children of the high
God, seeing it may be truly averred that all of them do not fear God, all of
them are not regenerate and borne of the holy Ghost? To this question this
answer is to be suited, namely that the children of God are so called in a
double respect. First, in respect of regeneration, 1. Ioh. 3.1. and so
magistrates are not here called the sons of the most high God. Secondly, in
respect of honor and duty: and so they are here called the sons of the most
High, because God has greatly advanced them, and so by duty they are bound to
fear him. The word in the Hebrew phrase will bear this construction: The
sons of the high, that is, high. As psalm. 29.1. The children of Gods, that
is, Gods. And Amos 9.7. The children of the Aethiopians, that is, the
Aethiopians. So speaks Homer, (...), the children of the Grecians, that is,
the Grecians.

This question being thus assoiled, I proceed to the doctrines. Magistrates
are called Gods, not that men should imagine that omnis Deorum potestas est ad
illos translata, aut saltem cum illis communicata, Tullic.
all the power of God is conferred, or at least wise communicated unto them.
This was the pride of Alexander and Domitian, who would be called Gods. But
they are so called to teach us, first, that such should be chosen Magistrates
as do excel others in godliness, like unto gods amongst men. Even as Gods
attributes are in him (...), in an excellency; so should virtue be in
Magistrates in a kind of eminency. A Magistrate must be (...), a perfect man
without fault. Well said the heathen man Aristotle in the 7. book of his
Ethic. chap. 1. (...), virtue is not in God, but a more divine thing. As
Magistrates must not be only liberal, but they must be also magnificall: so
they must not content themselves with ordinary virtues, but they must have
virtue in an high degree; not that they can equalize Gods attributes: for Dei
potestas est infinita, Regum praefinita: Dei potestas immens^, R^gum dimensa:
Gods power is infinite, the power of Magistrates prefinite; Gods power is
immensurable, the power of Princes may be measured.

If Magistrates did thus excel in virtue, this benefit would come thereby unto
subjects, namely, that they should be virtuous also. Of Joshua his time this is
recorded, Iosu. 24.1. that Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua. And
Iustine writes that ante Philippum and Alexandrum in Macedonia tam clarorum
virorum proventus non floruit; before Philip and Alexander there was not such a
floorish of famous men. For such commonly are subjects as their governors are.
Actions are visible words, (...), 10. Ethic.
words will not so soon be received as actions. Swearing, lying, covetous,
and whorish governors make like people. And thus much of the first point.

Secondly, Magistrates are called Gods, to teach us, that we should obey them
as in Gods stead: Romans 13.2. He that resists the higher powers, resists the
ordinance of God. (...), obedience is the mother of well doing: nothing can be
well done without obedience. And therefore subjects should not strive to excel
one another in riches, honor, and preferment, but in obedience. What then may
Magistrates conceive of Papists, who hold this position, Bell. lib. 5. de bono
Pont. cap. 7. that, licet spirituali principi imperare principibus, and de
eorum bonis temporalibus disponere, it is lawful for the Pope to command
Princes and to dispose of their temporalities. Until they recant and
relinquish this position, how can Papists be good subjects? yet for a thousand
years, says Langius out of Otho Frising. non lego aliquem regno privatum, I
do not read any deprived of his kingdom. The same is testified by Gotfridus
also. Behold the antiquity of Popery: now touching the obedience of subjects:
it must be first grounded upon knowledge: secondly, it must be voluntary:
thirdly, it must be constant and continual. Touching knowledge, obedience
cannot be voluntary and constant, except it be founded upon knowledge: for
voluntatis obiectum est bonum cognitum, the object of the will is a known
good. To effect this, a learned and godly Ministry must be placed in every
parish: for where the dumb ministry resideth, men are neither taught their
duty toward God, nor allegiance toward the Prince, nor love toward one
another. If it be objected, that there are not learned and godly Ministers
enough: I answer with Gratian and Thomas Aquinus, that prae^tat pa^^os habere
dignos Ministros, quam plures inutiles: it is better to have a few worthy
Ministers, then many that are unprofitable. Secondly, obedience must be
voluntary. This may be effected by the Magistrates clemency and mercy
toward his subjects: amariqui vult languide regnet, he that will be loved,
must reign remissely: yet as severity must be mild, so clemency must not be
dissolute. Artaxerxes his speech is worthy to be followed of magistrates, magis
honorificum est opulentes facere, quam opulentem fieri, it is more honorable to
enrich then to be enriched. And Galba his practice is to be abhorred, who would
make his citizens siccissimas spongias, most dry sponges. Thirdly, obedience
must be constant and continual; which will then come to pass, when it
proceeds of conscience. The benefits that subjects receive from their
Governors are continual, therefore their obedience must be continual. O that
Papists and Athists would consider of this! But as Herodian says, tenax est
memoria iniuriarum, the memory of man keeps fast an injury, it easily
forgets benefits.

Again, Magistrates are called Gods, to teach them that they should not fear
the faces of men; as God himself judges without respect of persons, so should
magistrates. This duty is commanded Joshua, in the first chap: Fear not (says
the Lord) be of a good courage, and I will be with thee: There are two
arguments to move magistrates to courage: one is a recept; the other is a
promise. Magistrates must be like unto Appius, of whom Liuy reports this,
that non minae plebis, the menaces of the peole could not put him from his
mind. Iustum and tenacem propositivirum, non ciuium ardor praua iubentium, non
vultus instantis tyranni mente quatit solida; a righteous and constant man is
not driven from his mind either by the fury of people, or by the countenance of
a tyrant. A Magistrate must have courage to resist bribes. Phillip was wont to
say, that Nulla ciuitas tam munita est, quin si asinus auro onustus ingredi
possit, expugnari queat, No city is so well fensed, but if an ass laden with
gold can enter in, it may be vanquished. So it is to be feared that golden
asses will enter into offices, except magistrates have courage to resist
bribes. Buying and selling of offices is the ruin of church and common wealth.

Fourthly, Magistrates are called Gods, to teach them that they should honor
God, as God has honored them by investing them with his own titles. Wherefore
they must remember that they be not the servants of the flesh, or of Satan, or
of the world. Magistracy is not immunitas, but munus, not an immunitie, but a
duty: It is not vacatio, but vocatio; not a vacation but a vocation. To effect
this, magistrates must have godly men about them. The Aegiptians will have a
king (says one) to be most sincere; therefore they place excellent men about
him, that by the sight of them, he himself may be excited to virtue. Psalm.
101.7.
There shall no deceytfull person dwell in my house, says the prophet David
and he that tells lies, shall not remain in my sight. O that magistrates
would have a care to reform their families, as good Joshua had, who says, that
he and his house will serve the Lord. But are not many magistrates men swearing
swaggerers, and swaggering swearers? are they not profane dicers, dauncers,
and dronkards? Secondly, if the Magistrate will honor God aright, he must not
suffer two religions in a land. Solomon says, that the king that sits upon
his throne, 20. Prou.
with his countenance disperseth all evil. The Angel of Pergamus is
reprehended, Revel. 2.
because he suffered the doctrine of the Nicolaitans. The good kings are noted
in scripture, because they took not away the high places; O rem miseram!
Dominum far non potuimus, seruo seruimus, O woeful case; we could not abide
the master, now we serve his servants. Papae mortuo parebimus, quem viuum
far non potuimus? shall we obey the Pope, being dead, seeing we could not
endure him alive?

Fifthly, magistrates are called gods, to teach them that they should execute
gods judgments upon such as God will have punished. God will have Blasphemers
to be punished: so likewise should the magistrate punish them. Does not this
land (as Jeremy says) mourn for oaths? 23. 10.
is not swearing the language of many? what other tongue can many speak? It is
not only a courtly, but also a country sin. Ludouicus (as one reports)
when he heard one swear, seered his lips with an hot iron. If all swearers
as they deserve were thus handled, they would not so horribly abuse the name of
the great god of heaven and earth. O worm thou that art but dust and ashes,
how dare thou use the name of God without reverence? Assure thy self God
will take vengeance upon thee without repentance. Again God will have
Adulterers to be punished: so likewise should Magistrates punish them. Parthi
(says Iustine) nulla delicta grauius puniunt quam adulteria: the Parthians
punish no sin more grievously then adultery. How they are punished with us I
appeal to men's own consciences. The Locrians pull out the eyes of Adulterers:
the Arabians punish them with death. The devil gains many souls by this
sin: two at the least every time, besides the baud. Again, the Lord will
have Idolaters to be punished Deuter. 13.9. So should Magistrates punish them.
and it seems to me that Magistrates by the consideration of their own
estates should punish this kind of men. Can a king abide one that would be a
fellow ruler with him? Can an husband suffer any one to be a fellow-husband
with him? God is the king and husband of his people, and Idolaters rob him of
his honor. Therefore magistrates must have an especial care to punish this
kind of men. Lastly, the Lord will have prohaners of his Sabboths to be
punished: so should magistrates punish them. The three first commandments are
negative, the fourth is affirmative; teaching us, that to keep the sabbath, is
a means whereby men may keep the other three. The sabbath day is the market
day of men's souls; yet what careless provision men make for their souls, let
the world judge.

Sixthly, magistrates are called gods, not that they should be so saluted, or
that they should usurp divine authority. As for example we may not say to a
judge, this is my God. What then shall we conceive of the blasphemous Popes, of
whom some write thus, Papa est vicarius Dei, expressius Deus, the Pope is Gods
vicar, more expressly, God himself. Again, constat papam a nemine iudicari
posse, quem constat a pio Principe appellari Deum, it is manifest that no man
can judge the Pope who verily was called of the godly Prince Constantine, God.
Many such blasphemies could I recite, but I come to the vsurpatio^ of Divine
authority. The Lord says. 2. Corinthians. 6.14 Be not unequally yooked with
infidels: therefore to marry with infidels is unlawful, by Gods own verdit:
Yet (says Bellarmine) the Pope may dispense in this matter, is not this to
usurp divine authority? should not the Pope keep Gods laws: Is he not a
servant of the same? yet he may dispense with them which evidently shows that
he usurps divine authority. Again, the Lord says, that which he has
joined together, let no man separate, Math. 19.6. yet says Bellarmine,
ratified marriage may be dissolved by the Pope. To proceed; God says, Honor thy
father and thy mother: Yet says (Bellarmine) it is lawful for some to become
monks and Nuns without their Parents consent. God says, Drink ye all of
this: But the Pope says, ye shall not drink all of this. God says. None
shall come near to any of the kindred of his flesh: yet says the papist, the
Pope may dispense within the degrees forbidden of God himself. Many such
contrarieties to Gods word might I recite, which plainly prove that the pope
usurps divine authority. Every man should be a doer of Gods law, not a
judge of the same: yet the Pope will judge Gods law, and so shows himself a
lawless man. By which every man may see that he is the man of whom Paul
prophesyeth 2. These. 2.8. One thing more I will add, and so conclude this
point. In the year of our Lord 1471. says Wernerus, the Iubily was changed,
in which the Pope gave pardons to men for their sins; that where sin does
abound, there grace may abound. If this be not to usurp divine authority,
what is it to usurp the same? Thus much touching the proposition, now I come
to the proo^e.

I have said:) From whence we learn this doctrine, namely that magistrates
hold their authority from God: so says wisdom, Prou. 8.15. and 16. By me
Kings reign, and princes decree justice: By me princes rule, and the nobles,
and all the judges of the earth. Therefore it is a proud challenge of Adrian to
say: Ecce in potestate nostra est imperium, vt demus cui volumus, behold it is
in our power to give the Empire to whom we will. As Adrian spoke prowdly, so
likewise did Hildebrand, who used this speech, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
diadema Rodulpho.

Christ gave the crown to Peter, and Peter to Rodulphe. If Popes challenge
authority to translate kingdoms, how can men think that Papists should be
good subjects, if they may take kingdoms from Princes, and give them to whom
they will? Do we not think that they may discharge subjects of their
obedience unto their lawefull magistrates? Consider this point al ye that are
Governors, consider also that God says, ye shall dye like men. God I say, who
cannot lie; and with whom there is no change, nor shadow of change. Nec verbum
ab intention dissentit, quia veritas est: nec factum a verbo, (...) ^^tus est:
his word does not disagree (...) his meaning, for he is truth: nor (...)
actions from his word, for he is power Assure your selves all ye magistrates
tha^ ye shall dye; God said, let there be light, and there was light: God
says, Magistrates shall dye, and dye they shall. Thus I have finished the
doctrines that arise out of the exaltation. Before I end the same, some man may
move a question, and say, Are not ministers called Gods? Yes, as it appears
Acts. 23.5. compared with Exodus 22.28. Yea, in the prophecy of Obadiah they are
called saviors. Therefore I may say, O praeclarum ministerium! quo id non
gloriosius Magistratu? O excellent ministry more glorious then any magistracy.
What then is the reason why ministers are so contemned? The reasons are many.
First, many ministers themselves dishonor god, and therefore it is just with
God to dishonor them. The Lord says 1. Sam. 2.30. Them that honor me, I will
honor them, and they that despise me, shall be despised. Are not many ministers
dissolute in their lives? so that for their sakes others are contemned. Propter
pauc^s spreti sumus omnes, for a few we are all contemned. Secondly, Ministers
are poor (...) ^abet infoelix paupertas durius, (...) ^^diculos homines facit;
poverty (...) ^^^ng more woeful then this, that (...) men ridiculous. This to
be a (...) ^ause of the contempt of the Mini^^^^^ ^f God, all men see with
their eyes. ^^^^gh they are singularly learned, and ^^^e in them excellent
gifts, yet so blind ^^e people, that they regard not these things. Riches and
honor are highly respected, but learning and piety have no reverence. Is it
not woeful that Gods ministers should be in want, when as heathen men have
provided for their Priests, in great abundance; as I might prove out of
histories? Thirdly, flattery is a great cause why Ministers are contemned: who
is so base as a flatterer? and most worthily: for though a flatterer be in
appearance a pearl, yet in biting he is a viper, and in killing rank poison.
How many ministers now a days sing placentia, and sow pillowes under men's
arms for their gain? Fourthly, ministers are contemned thorough ignorance:
for men knowing not the excellency of that calling, how should they reverence
it? Scientia neminem habet inimicum praeter ignorantem, ignorant men are the
only enemies to knowledge. Therefore not to be over long, I say with Paul, 1.
Cor. 4.1. Let a man so think of us as of the ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God. Fifthly, ministers are contemned, because they
have no authority in their hands: only they have the bare and naked word of
God. If this were guarded with authority, it would make men subject themselves
unto Gods ministry. It seems strange to me, that ministers should be
sheepheards, and have neither hook nor dog to keep their sheep. But I
leave this to the wisdom of those that are in authority. Sixthly, ministers
are contemned, because of ridiculous sermons. It is now a days an odious thing
to be no preacher: and therefore many are so pulpit hungry, that they will
step into the pulpit, though very unable to handle Gods word aright. Which
thing has not a little disgraced ministers. I wish these men would either
amend, or else as they are pulpit hungry, so they might be fed with the
pulpit. Many other causes of contempt, as the plenty of Gods word, and the
malice of Satan, might I have recited, and enlarged these that are named: but
I hasten to the second part of my text, which is the Humiliation of
magistrates. Out of which we learn that magistrates are in great danger of
pride, because the Lord after he has exalted them, immediately sets down
matter of humiliation. This might be proved by many examples, as
Nabuchadnetzar, and Herod; but I pass by them. Philip, as one reports, would
be put in mind of this, that he was a man, and therefore he would not come out
of his chamber before one had cried thrice, O Phillip, thou art but a man. By
which example, every man may see that magistrates are very prone to forget
themselves. A magistrate should remember 3 things, which may abate his pride.
First, that he rules men: secondly, that he rules them by laws: thirdly,
that he shall not rule long. These three things well digested, may abate the
hautie spirit of many magistrates. Now Governors are in danger of pride:
first, in respect of their birth and parentage. They are nobly borne, but
basely proud, as if parentage was not their ancestors good. Our stock and our
Ancestors are not our own, but the things that we do our selves, they are
our own. Why then are men puffed up with that is not their own? Secondly,
magistrates are in danger of pride in respect of education; for they are
nicely brought up without the precepts of humility, and so must needs be
haughty. For education is a special means to frame a man's manners: nature is
much, so is education also. Thirdly, magistrates are in danger of pride in
respect of their wealth and their riches: Diuitiae superbiores homines reddunt,
riches make men proud. Charge rich men (says S. Paul) that they be not high
minded. Fourthly, magistrates are in danger of pride in respect of flatterers.
The magistrate has usually three sorts of men about him: the flatterer, the
slanderer, and the crafty fox. The Philosopher moves a question, whether a
man needs friends more in adversity, then in prosperity? He determines
that friends are more necessary in adversity, then in prosperity: and it is
a truth in some respects; yet in some respects friends are more necessary in
prosperity then in adversity. For true friends often admonish men in
prosperity, that they be not haughty; which seeing magistrates want, needs
must they be in danger of pride. This doctrine teaches the magistrate two
duties: the one is prayer, the other vigilancie. Concerning prayer, the
magistrate must pray with David, Psalm. 36.11. that the foot of pride come not
against him. And how can that magistrate be but proud, that is not much in
prayer? for prayer teaches him whence he has received all things. No marvel
then though magistrates are so haughty, seeing they practice prayer so little.
Concerning vigilancie, the magistrate as he must pray against pride, so must he
watch against this sin: for pride creeps even into good actions. It is like
the Iuie which grows up with the tree, and in the end kills it: so pride
grows up with good actions, and at the length destroieth them. And so I
proceed to death, which is the magistrates humiliation. Xerxes (as Herodotus
reports) beholding his army, thought himself happy; but by and by he wept.
Then Artabanus asked him this question: O king, why do thou such strange
things? Xerxes answered, It pittieth me to think of the estate of these men;
for where shall any of the^ be within this hundred years? Lo into what
passions the consideration of death brings kings! And needs must death be a
great humiliation to magistrates, for they know that they shall not rule in the
life to come, as they do in this life. Hecuba says, It grieueth me to be a
servant amongst the dead, seeing I was a Queen upon earth. Must it not needs
then grieve magistrates to think that they shall be no better then other men
^n death? yea, to think that they may be damned, howsoever they have lived
gloriously in this world? Wherefore I desire all magistrates to remember three
things: first, whence they came, from the earth: secondly, whither they shall
go: to the earth: and before whom they shall give an account: before the
great God of heaven and earth. Let the magistrate imitate the mariner, who that
he may guide his ship, sits in the hinder part thereof, and not in the
former part: So should the magistrate look to the hinder part of his life. The
godly man is like to the partridge which is pe^secuted in her life, but being
dead she is brought to great men's tables. The wicked man is like unto the
hawk, who in her life time sits upon men's fists, but being dead, she is
cast upon the dunghill.

Omnia Caesar erat, sed gloria Caes^ris ^sse
Desiit, and tumulus vix erat o^t^ pe^^^m.
-- Caesar was all in all, and now is ^^t;
A tomb of 8. feet long is all he has got.
Now I will speak one word of the manner of magistrates death, and so
conclude. They shall dye like ordinary men: first, in respect of the sudden
death. Rex Epi^otarum tegula percussus de equo decidit: the king of the
Epirotians stricken with a tile fell from his horse. Alphonsus king of Spain
in a journey dyed under a tree. Many such examples of sudden death might I
reckon up. Secondly, they shall die like ordinary men in respect of murder;
for they may be murdered as well as common men.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte tyranni.
Concerning magistrates few of them to grave do go,
Without great misery and dreadful woe.
Thirdly, they shall die like unto ordinary men, in this respect, because they
may murder themselue, as well as ordinary men do. Histories abound with
examples of great men who have offered violence unto themselves. Lastly, they
shall dye like unto ordinary men, in respect of diseases; for they are subject
to the same diseases that common men are. Yea they are also subject to the same
terrors of conscience. All which do declare the truth of this text of
Scripture. The Lord of his infinite goodness give magistrates grace to live the
life of the righteous, that they may dye the death of the righteous. Amen.

(...).
