TO MY VVORTHY-HONEST FRIEND, Mr. BENEDICT WEB, THAT TRVE PATRIOT.
SIR,
THere be two things necessary for this life, Food and Raiment. For Raiment
you have much travailed to the public good, by adding to our Old Draperies,
the making of Perpetuanaes, Spanish Clothes, etc. And lastly, by bringing Rape
Oil to the use of Clothing: whereby you have exceedingly well deserved of the
Commonwealth. For Food, that other and greater necessary, The New Invention
for Fertiling and Enriching of Areable Grounds, the Argument of the ensuing
Treatise, must acknowledge you as the first Author; So to have been by your
self, and others by you directed, the prime Experimentors of the certainty
and realitie thereof: Then which, I scarsely know, whether any thing has been
Invented of more great and general use. Yet have you not so busied your self
about many things with Martha, as to neglect that one necessary of necessaries,
Mary's good part, which has the blessing of both lives: which your often
praying, frequent hearing, much reading, and meditating of the best things,
well testify: But hereof enough. This Book of Direction, being your own, and
for the maine, framed out of your tried directions, desires to pass into the
world underthe protection of your credit, and name: Until by approved
experience it shall have gained credit unto it self, and returned credit unto
you; mean while, it shall rest contented with that old Motto:

Try, and Trust.

A DIRECTION TO THE Husbandman, in a new, cheap, and easy way of Fertiling
and Enriching Areable Grounds, etc.
WHereas the Kings Majesty, upon the humble Petition of Charles Mowet, Edward
Keeling, and Nathanael Waterhouse Gent' on the behalf of themselves, and
partners, by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date
at Westminster the first day of March, in the ninth year of his Reign, of his
especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, Has given, and granted
for him, his Heirs, and Successors, unto the said Charles Mowet, Edward
Keeling, and Nathanael Waterhouse, full and free Liberty, License, Power, and
Authority, that they, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, their and every
of their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by themselves, and their
Deputies, Servants, Factors, Workmen or Agents, and none other, should and
might at all and every time and times hereafter from time to time, during the
Term of Fourteen Years next ensuing the Date of the said Letters Patents,
use, exercise, practice and put in use, within His Kingdoms of England,
Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, at every of their wills, and pleasures, the
Mystery, Art, way and means, of fertiling and enriching of Areable Grounds,
by a mixture in a small quantity, of certain native Materials with the Seed;
farther signifying that His will and pleasure was, and by the said Letters
Patents, of His more especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, for
Him, his Heirs and Successors, straightly charging and inhibiting all and every
other Person and Persons whatsoever, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition, he
or they, or any of them be, that none of them, other then the said Patentees,
and the Survivor and Survivors of them, their and every of their Executors and
Administrators, Substitutes, Deputies, Workmen, or Assigns, or any of them,
do or should, during the said Term of Fourteen years, use, or practice,
directly or indirectly the said Art, way or means for fertiling and enriching
of Areable Grounds, without the License, Consent, and agreement of them the
said Patentees, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or some, or one
of them, first had and obtained; And has by the said Letters Patents for Him,
his Heirs, and Successors, willed and commanded all and singular Majors,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughes, and other
Ministers and Subjects of Him, his Heirs and Successors, that they and every
of them, be from time to time during the term aforesaid, helping and assisting
to the said Patentees, the Survivor and Survivors of them, their and every of
their Executors, Administrators, Deputies, and Assigns, in all things in and
about the accomplishment of His pleasure therein declared, and in the exercise
and execution of the same; And that they nor any of them do at any time
hinder, molest, or interrupt the said Patentees, or the Survivor or Survivors
of them, their or any of their Executors, Administrators, Deputies, or
Assigns, or any of them, in any wife concerning the Premises, as they tender
His pleasure, and would avoid the contrary at their peril, as in and by the
said Letters Patents more at large appears.

In which Letters Pattents, the particular naming of the said Materials, the
Preparations of them, the proportions, and manner of mixture, and application
of them, as well to the Seed, as to the Ground, and many other incidents, were
wittingly omitted, as reserved to the ensuing discourse, purposely intended for
a full Direction of the Husbandman in the use, exercise, and practice of the
said new Invention.

Wherein although the Composition, hereafter described consist of ingredients,
endowed with qualities so specificall, and powerful, in the fruitfulling and
enriching of Areable Grounds; and the manner of application thereof both to the
Seed, and Ground, so proper for the endeaymed at; as it might well hope upon
the very reading of the same, to gain belief amongst the ingenious and
judicious Husbandmen, without further proof; yet because many things in
discourse, and reason so concluding, as convince most understandings, fall out
oftentmes to fail in the practice, it desires no further faith or acceptance
from any, then such, as a Demonstrative, experimented successful truth shall
wrest from the most incredulous.

Which experiment that it may be made without any the least error or
mistaking, the Instructions following are set down in such plainness, and so
distinctly in the materials, preparation, proportion, applycation, and all
other requisite particulers, as none (not too carelessly negligent) can possibly
err.

FIrst then, the Soil being supposed to be such, as with the usual
Husbandries of Dunging, Marleing, Lyming, Foulding, etc. will return in some
good measure in his season a multiplied Cropp of the Grain therein sowed; you
must give unto it the ordinary Tillage, according to the Nature of the Sone,
and use of the Country.

Your Seed being Wheat, Rye, Barley, or of what other sort soever, must be well
chosen, and cleansed from light Corn, and whatsoelse mixture of any Damagefull
thing, with an abatement of the fourth part of the Seed, you usually gave in
your former courses of Husbandry, and yet you shall (by the blessing of God)
find your Corn as thick and strong, as if you had given the whole proportion
of Seed.

Upon every Bushel of Winchester measure, containing eight Gallons, being laid
upon a Table or Course sheet Bedwise, power (as on a Bed of Wool) so much of
Rapeseede Oil, as will well moysten the said Seed, stirring and tossing the
Corn so oyled to and fro, until it be well moistened and made fit to receive
and join it self with any dry matterialls, which shall be added thereto, in
Flower or powders.

A Bushel of seed will take about a quart of Oil.

Then take one Quart of the Flower of Beans, being first M^ulted. One quart of
the powder of Rapeseede Cakes after the Oy^e is pressed out; One quart of burnt
Lyme new from the Kilne, quenched with Urine, and sifted; or so much of each of
them in equal parts, as may well cover and encompasse the said Seed.

The Flower and Powders aforesaid must be very well stirred and mingled
together one with another, which done, strew them upon your Bushel of Oyled
Corn, tumbling and tossing them and the grain one with another, or shaking
them together upon the said course sheet, until the Corn have licked upp,
and united it self with the Flower and Powders, which will soon be done.

Your Seed thus ordered, and (as it were) clothed with the Flower and Powders
aforesaid, may presently be sowed, or kept unsowed, Ten, Fifteen, or Twenty
days, before it will grow, or take other harm, as has been tried.

In, on after your sowing, if your ground be poor, and you have plenty of the
said dry Materials, you may strowe or throw upon one Acre of Ground about
two Bushels more or less of the said Flower and Powders, as you conceive your
Ground better or worse.

This mixture aforesaid, employed as here described with the Seed, and upon
the Ground, will really alone perform the intention without any further
addition, as has been often experienced.

But that the Husbandman may be fully furnished with all such experimented
helps, as tend to this end. And because, for the present, there may be in
some places want of the said Materials, or some of them; let him further know,
that in lieu of them (though not so powerful) may be used the materials
following.

As in want of the Oil, you may use so much of the strongest Woort.

In stead of the Flower of Beans, so much of the Flower of Barley Malt ground
very small; and for your Powder of Rape Oil Cakes, as much of the powder of
Pigeons dung dried and sifted, or of the powder of Sheep Turdles dry: or so
much of your Kilp Ashes, or Berillia, where it may be had; or so much of Pot
Ashes; or where Woad is set for dying of Wool, so much of Woad past dry and
brought into Powder: these in equal proportions mingled all or some of them,
with all or some of the former first described Flower and Powders, may be
succesfully used, either in the dressing of the Oyled Seed, or in the strowing
the ground sowed therewith, as aforesaid. But the Sheep Turdles must be thus
prepared.

Take so much of the said Turdles as you purpose to use, and lay them bedwise
in such a thickenesse, as being moistened lightly with Urine, it may gather a
heat, and grow inclinable to Putrefaction or Rottenness; and so let it rest,
until it become somewhat dry. Then with a Rake, or some other fitting
instrument, stir and toss your bed well, and being again laid Bedwise,
moysten it with Urine as before, and let it so rest until it grow again dry:
then stir and toss it again, and lay it as before Bedwise, and moisten it
with Urine. So continuing from time to time this course of moistning, drying,
and stirring the said Bed, until the Turdles be thoroughly putrifyed and
rotten; so as they fall into powder: then let them dry, and take the powder
for your use. The elder and more rotten the Turdles be, the more effectually
they work.

So much of the aforesaid Materials as be necessary, are every where to be
had, though in some parts further of, and dearer then in other.

That which may seem most difficult to be got in some places, is the Rape Oil
and Rape Cakes, which yet by the late dispersing of that Husbandry into most
Shires, is not hard to be had. But if it be found any where lacking, any
wealthy Husbandman may (hiring of a servant from some of the Oil Works)
Convert some of his Greenesword to that use, and so furnish himself, and
neighbors abundantly, and cheap, and to his own very great profit; and in
the mean time, some other of the former Ingredients may be used in stead
thereof.

And this may suffice for Direction.

The skillful Husbandman by what has been said, will take occasion as
experience shall guide him, to fit and accommodate things, as he shall find
most behoofefull, though now and then varying from what is formerly prescribed.

There be sundry other Materials which are known to be of great force in
the fruitfulling of Areable Grounds; and might be easily drawn to this
employment, whereunto the former Flowers, Ashes, and Powders be applied. But
because these are to be had but in small proportions, and but in few places,
they are purposely omitted, as not answering the universality of this
Intention.

There be other moystures to supply that of Rape Oil, or of the Woort, for
moystening the Seed, and other Ashes and Powders for clothing the Seed, and
strowing upon the Ground, which prepared according to Art, are upon no light
prosumptions, conceived as powerful in fruitfulling and enriching Areable
Grounds, as the other formerly named: But because as yet they have not been so
far, and fully experimented, as to be offered as a certainty, their mention
is now forborne; but shall (God willing) upon some further trials, be
communicated for the public good.

Although by that which has before been said by way of Direction in this new
Course of Manuring, the Husbandman cannot but observe many benefits arising
thereby, above those growing by the ordinary Tillages used; yet shall it not be
amiss to say something in particular of that also.

In this way, the trouble of Foulding, the labor of carrying great quantities
of Dung, Lyme, Marle, etc. and the spreading thereof is spared, and the
fetching of some of them diverse miles, and at great prices; Whereas the
quantities of these Materials used in this way are so small, as will cost
little, and so light as the carriage will be easy, and the applying them to
the Seed and ground, asks little more trouble then the very sowing of the
Seed it self.

The Dunging, Foulding, Marling, Lyming, etc. formerly bestowed upon the Arable
Grounds, may now be converted to the fruitfulling of the Greenesword.

A fourth part of your Seed is saved, which will near, if not wholly,
countervaile the charge of the Materials.

The Flowers, Ashes, and Powders encompassing the Seed, moistened as aforesaid,
defends it from the devouring of Foul, Mise, Worms, etc.

The poorer sort, who want Cattle to breed, and money to buy Soil, shall in
this course, with little or no charge supply that want.

In this husbandry, you may Sow the same Ground every year, and so spare the
more to Meadow and Pasture.

Besides the general good to the Common wealth, it will better all Tithes of
Grain, to the benefit of Incumbents, and others to whom the Tithes be due.

A few years experience will (no doubt) bring to light many other Commodities
arising by this invention, not now thought of, but for the present these may
serve.

For Conclusion, when you have carefully and exactly followed the Directions
aforesaid, and (it may be) in some things bettered them, take heed you do not
so depend upon these outward means, though never so good, as to forget the
Cause of Causes.

Sacrifice not unto your Nett, nor burn Incense unto your Dragge, etc.

Habak. 1. 16. Trust not in your way.

Hosea 10, 13. But look up unto God, from whom all good, for a blessing upon
your Labors; and know that rebelling against him, all things will rebel
against you

Heaven will be as Iron, and your Earth as Brass.

Levit. 26. 19. Deuteronomy. 28. 23. The Rain will be made to your Land as Powder and
Dust.

Deuteronomy. 28. 14. The Seed shall rott under their Clodds, the Garners lie
desolate, etc.

Joel 1. 17. He shall give your increase to the Caterpiller, and your labor to
the Locust.

Psalm. 78. 46. Whereas if you obey, all the good blessings of God shall come
upon you, and overtake you.

He will give you the first and the later rain in due season, and the Land
shall yield her Increase.

Levit. 26. 3. 4. Deuteronomy. 11. 14. and 28. 12. He will hear the Heavens, and they
shall hear the Earth, and the Earth stall hear the Corn.

Hosea 2. 21. 22. You shall be blessed in the Field, blessed in the fruit of
your Ground; blessed in your basket, and in your store.

Deuteronomy. 28. 3. 4. 5. He shall restore to you the years that the Locust has
eaten, the Cankerworme, and the Caterpiller, and the Palmerworme, his great
Army which he sent amongst you.

Joel 2. 25. Break up your Fallow Grounds, and Sow not among Thorns; Sow to
your selves in Righteousness: Reap in Mercy: For it is time to seek the
Lord, till he come and rain Righteousness upon you.

Ier. 4. 3. Hosea 10. 12. FINIS.

