A brief collection of some part of the exactions, extorsions, oppressions,
tyrannies, and excesses toward the lives, bodies and goods of prisoners, done
by Alexander Harris Warden of the Fleet, in his four years misgouernment,
ready to be proved by oath and other testimonies.
Murder.
1. AFter known quarrels and fightings between two prisoners, lodging them in
one chamber, where quarelling and fighting again, and notice to him thereof
given, and of likely further mischief, this notwithstanding continuance of
them together, until the one murdered the other.

Felony.
2. Removing a prisoner out of his chamber, having 51. lib. 1. s. hid under his
bed, which the prisoner required he might go to his chamber to dispose of,
which was denied, and he thrust up in another room close prisoner, until the
Warden and some of his servants rifled his bed of that money.

Robbery.
3. 11. lib. 6. s. taken out of the Trunk, and by violence from the person of a
close prisoner sick in his bed, by the Warden and his servants.

Infidelity.
4. After engagement of faith, soul and all under hand and seal, contrary
thereto detaining a prisoner, having liberty by his Majesty's writ, to his
great prejudice.

False imprisonment.
5. False imprisonment of men discharged, offering to pay all due fees, for
diverse months.

Close imprisonment
6. Close imprisonment of many without order, warrant or law, by months and
years.

Cruel imprisonment.
7. Close and cruel imprisonment, chaining, manicling, and bolting of them with
irons, some of the degree of Knighthood, without cause or warrant.

Staruing close prisoners.
8. Staruing of men close imprisoned, guarding them from meat, drink, etc. and
that after command of authority to the contrary.

Seizing and detaining prisoners goods*
9. Breaking of prisoners chambers, having first removed them, opening their
Trunks, seizing their goods, and still detaining them.

Robbing the poor men's box^.
10. Where an order gives upon every days going abroad by one that is not in
execution, 8. d. to the Wards box, the orders exemplified under the great
Seal, has a da^h over the word wards, to make it Wardens box; by which
practice and under color thereof he continually robs the poor of that 8.
d. a day, which is yearly a great matter.

Robbing his poor servants of their dues.
11. Where the same order gives 12. d. a day to the keeper that goes abroad
with such prisoner, he robs his servants of that also, forcing the prisoner
besides to content his keeper.

12. He has Warrant Dormants under some of the Councels hands, not naming any
particular person, by which continually in all countries he seizes upon his
Majesty's subjects, Abusing of the Councels Warrant Dormant.
forces them to give bonds to be his prisoners, exacteth intolerable fees,
and compositions, etc. where these apprehensions ought to be by the Sheriffs
of the Shires, without such vexation or charge to the subject.

Excessive rates of chambers.
13. Where by orders no man ought to pay for any chamber, the Warden allowing
bed and bedding, above 2. s. 4. d. a week, he exacteth 8. s. 10. s. 13. s. 4.
d. and of some twenty shillings a week without bedding.

Exacting for lodging in Common wards and Dungeon.
14. Where before his time nothing was paid for lodging in the Common Wards,
he exacteth as if they lay in private chambers, upon his bedding; yea for the
very Dungeon also.

15. He exacteth after those high rates chamber rents of men having no
chambers, but lying abroad by the Kings writ or otherwise. Exaction for
chambers, not having any.


16. He exacteth for diet whole commons of men that take none of his meat or
drink: a thing never demanded before his time. Exactions of diet, taking none.


17. He lays impositions upon meat and fuel, and forces prisoners to pay
them, as 2. d. a joint, 3. s. 4. d. for a load of b^l^ets, Impositions upon
meat and fuel.
etc. and forces prisoners to pay 12. d. a bushel for charcole, which are to
be bought for 12. d. a sack.

Horrible exactions upon such as go abroad by the Kings writs.
18. Where men be whole vacations abroad by Habeas corpus, he forces them to
pay him 20. d. a day for outgoings, their chamber rent and diet, horrible
exactions, never had or demanded by former Wardens.

Excessive exactions for his favor to go upon the Kings writs.
19. Of men having the Kings writs to go about their businesses, he exacteth of
them for his leave, of some 40. s. 3. lib. 5. lib. 10. lib. or more in money,
or other bribes, a daily trade never done by any before: and without yielding
these foul exactions, they are stayed, and lose their occasions.

The foul exactions, extorsions, and base vsages toward prisoners, by Robert
Holmes the Clerk, Henry Cook the Porter, Richard Mansell, and other M.
Wardens worthy instruments, servants, and Affidavit men, would ask a volume,
and is reserved for a larger discourse.

There be many other great grieuances, which for brevity are omitted, all
which will directly be proved, and most of these above be in the particular
accusations delivered in Parliament, with the witnesses names annexed, ready to
be verified upon oath, as they have already bin verbally attested before the
honorable Committee, at four several meetings in the Fleet.

Proverbs 1.19.
Such is the ways of every one that is greedy of gain: he would take away the
life of the owners thereof.

